4*  % 


£*.« 


<K 


,0    -7-  <     O 

^TrO.  *     n      „     O      •  O   . 


'of 


o  V 


' 


V 


o  V 

°o 


.,-. 


"* 


'V 


,.'■/...■ 


<#*v-  °.  y'    ^;v*  V  ,     ,<;#;iv-.  "...  ^    .  -    -"-  %  ,°  o* 


^  %  vvv,v'    "  y  W:v^  ^'  %  -a& 


^^     vx;--  %y 


:       . 


THIRTY-FIFTH  ANNUAL  REPORT 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


SECRETARY  (IK  THE  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION 


1913-1914 


IN  TWO  PARTS— PART  1 


X*Cl 


'V 


km 


■^^FF;     'i.f     J 


WASHINGTON 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 

1021 


.•luno^rap;, 


LETTER  OF  TRANSMITTAL 


Smithsonian  Institution, 
Bureau  of  American  Ethnology, 

Washington,  D.  C,  August  15,  1914. 
Sir:  I  have  the  honor  to  submit  herewith  the  Thirty- 
fifth  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology 
for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914. 

With  appreciation  of  your  aid  in  the  work  under  my 
charge, 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

F.  W.  Hodge, 
Ethnologi,st-in-Charge. 
Dr.  Charles  D.  Walcott, 

Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution. 


CONTENTS 


REPORT  OF  THE  ETHNOLOGIST-IN-CHARGE 

Page- 
Systematic  researches 9 

Special  researches 23 

Manuscripts 29 

Publications 31 

Illustrations 34 

Library 34 

Collections 35 

Property 36 

Miscellaneous 36 

Recommendations 37 

Note  on  the  accompanying  paper 39 

ACCOMPANYING    PAPER 

Ethnology  of  the  Kwakiuth,  by  Franz  Boas 41 


REPORT  OF  THE   ETHNOLOGISTINCHARGE 


THIRTY-FIFTH  ANNUAL  REPORT 

OF    THE 

BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


F.  W.  Hodge,  Ethnologist-in-Charge 


THE  operations  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology 
for  the  fiscal  year  ended  June  30,  1914,  were  con- 
ducted in  accordance  with  authority  granted  by  the 
act  of  Congress  approved  June  23,  1913,  making  appro- 
priations for  the  sundry  civil  expenses  of  the  Government, 
and  with  a  plan  of  operations  submitted  by  the  ethnologist- 
in-charge  and  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian 
Institution.  The  provision  of  the  act  authorizing  the  re- 
searches of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  is  as  follows : 

American  ethnology:  For  continuing  ethnological  researches  among 
the  American  Indians  and  the  natives  of  Hawaii,  including  the  exca- 
vation and  preservation  of  archieologic  remains,  under  the  direction 
of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  including  salaries  or  compensation  of 
all  necessary  employees  and  the  purchase  of  necessary  books  and 
periodicals,  including  payment  in  advance  for  subscriptions,  842,000 

SYSTEMATIC  RESEARCHES 

The  systematic  researches  were  conducted  by  the  regular 
staff  of  the  bureau,  consisting  of  nine  ethnologists,  including 
the  ethnologist-in-charge  and  several  special  investigators. 
These  operations  may  be  summarized  as  follows: 

Mr.  F.  W.  Hodge,  ethnologist-in-charge,  was  occupied  dur- 
ing most  of  the  year  with  the  administrative  affairs  of  the 
bureau.  Considerable  attention,  however,  was  devoted  to 
the  preparation  of  the  annotated  bibliography  of  the  Pueblo 
Indians,  which  is  probably  more  extensive  than  that  of  any 


10  BUREAU    OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

other  group  of  tribes,  as  Pueblo  written  history  commenced 
in  the  year  1539,  and  the  writings  pertaining  thereto  are 
exceedingly  voluminous.  The  bibliography  is  recorded  on 
cards,  the  number  of  which  is  now  about  1,900.  The  cata- 
loguing of  the  vast  amount  of  manuscript  material  bearing  on 
the  subject  has  been  somewhat  simplified  by  the  recent  publi- 
cation of  Bolton's  Guide  to  Materials  for  the  History  of  the 
United  States  in  the  Principal  Archives  of  Mexico,  published 
by  the  Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington,  and  Twitchell's 
Spanish  Archives  of  New  Mexico,  although  without  consulta- 
tion of  the  documents  themselves  it  is  not  possible  to  give 
more  than  the  title  in  most  cases.  In  the  spring  Mr.  Hodge 
made  a  brief  visit  to  the  library  of  the  Presbyterian  Board 
of  Home  Missions  in  New  York  City,  where  he  was  enabled 
to  record  the  titles  of  numerous  published  writings  on  mis- 
sionary efforts  among  the  Pueblo  Indians  of  New  Mexico,  not 
accessil  >le  elsewhere.  In  this  bibliographical  work  he  has  had 
the  assistance  of  Mrs.  Frances  S.  Nichols  and  Miss  Florence 
M.  Poast.  Mr.  Hodge  continued  to  represent  the  bureau  on 
the  Smithsonian  Advisory  Committee  on  Printing  and  Publi- 
cation, and  the  Smithsonian  Institution  on  the  United  States 
Board  on  Geographic  Names. 

Early  in  the  autumn  of  1913  Mr.  Hodge  made  a  reconnois- 
sance  of  a  group  of  ruins,  evidently  prehistoric,  on  a  mesa 
rising  from  the  southwestern  margin  of  the  Cebollita  Valley, 
aboul  20  miles  south  of  Grant,  Valencia  County,  New  Mexico, 
and  only  a  few  yards  from  the  great  lava  flow  that  has  spread 
over  the  valley  to  the  westward  for  many  miles.  While  no 
very  definite  information  regarding  the  origin  of  this  ruined 
pueblo  has  yet  been  obtained,  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that 
it  was  occupied  by  ancestors  of  the  Tanyi,  or  Calabash,  clan 
of  the  Acoma  Tribe,  and  is  possibly  the  one  known  to  them 
as  Kowina. 

These  ruins  consist  of  a  number  of  house  groups  forming  a 
compound.  That  the  structures  were  designed  for  defense 
is  evident,  for  not  only  are  they  situated  on  an  almost  impreg- 
nable height  rising  about  200  feet  above  the  valley,  but  the 
houses   themselves   partake   of   the   form   of   fortifications, 


ADMINISTRATIVE   REPORT  ]  1 

while  the  only  vulnerable  point  of  the  mesa  is  protected  at 
the  rim  by  means  of  a  rude  breastwork  of  stones.  Moreover, 
the  outer  walls  of  the  buildings,  some  of  which  still  stand  to  a 
height  of  several  feet,  are  pierced  only  with  loopholes, 
entrance  to  the  structures  doubtless  having  been  gained  by 
means  of  portable  ladders,  as  in  some  of  the  pueblos  of  to-day. 
The  houses  of  the  great  compound,  consisting  of  four  com- 
pact groups  of  buildings,  were  evidently  "terraced"  on  the 
plaza  side,  the  rooms  facing  this  court  perhaps  having  been 
only  a  single  story  in  height.  As  a  further  protection  to  the 
pueblo,  the  eastern  side  was  defended  by  a  low  wall,  pierced 
by  three  gatewaylike  openings,  extending  from  the  north- 
eastern to  the  southeastern  corner  of  the  compound. 

The  rooms  indicated  in  the  ground  plan  of  the  four  house 
groups  number  approximately  95  (for  the  northern  group), 
58  (eastern  group),  32  (central  group),  and  102  (southeastern 
group),  or  an  aggregate  of  287  rooms.  At  the  time  of  its 
occupancy  the  number  of  rooms  in  the  compound  probably 
approximated  550.  In  addition,  there  are  traces  of  four  or 
five  single-story  rooms  abutting  on  the  defensive  wall  bound- 
ing the  northeastern  part  of  the  compound.  A  short  dis- 
tance from  the  southwestern  angle  of  the  southwestern  house 
group  are  two  smaller  detached  houses,  the  southernmost  one 
consisting  of  24  rooms  in  a  long  tier,  2  rooms  deep,  extending 
approximately  north-northwest  and  south-southeast.  The 
other  structure,  about  55  feet  northwestward,  is  rectangular 
and  contains  11  rooms  in  its  ground  plan.  Four  kivas  are 
traceable  among  the  rooms  of  the  main  compound — one  in 
the  northwestern,  one  in  the  central,  and  two  in  the  south- 
western group.  In  each  case,  so  far  as  is  determinable 
without  excavation,  the  outer  walls  of  the  kivas  are  rectangu- 
lar, while  the  inner  walls  are  circular  and  slightly  recessed  a 
short  distance  above  the  floor. 

About  500  feet  southeastward  from  the  main  compound, 
at  the  edge  of  the  mesa,  stand  the  well-preserved  walls  of 
another  structure,  consisting  of  a  double  row  of  rooms,  the 
outer  wall,  or  that  overlooking  the  mesa  rim,  extending  28 
and  15  feet,  respectively,  beyond  the  northwestern  and  south- 


12  BUREAU    OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY 

western  corners  of  the  building  proper,  in  order  to  give 
further  protection.  The  length  of  this  outer  wall  from  angle 
to  angle  is  about  132  feet.  It  exhibits  one  of  the  finest  ex- 
amples of  masonry  to  be  seen  in  the  ancient  pueblo  ruins  of 
the  Southwest,  for  not  only  have  the  building  stones  been 
dressed  to  shape,  but  their  faces  have  been  finished  by  peck- 
ing,  with  such  labor  as  to  confirm  the  belief  that  the  ancient 
village  was  designed  for  permanent  occupancy.  The  south- 
ern corner  of  the  outer  defensive  wall  is  not  only  curved,  but 
the  stones  of  which  it  is  built  are  rounded  by  careful  pecking, 
a  most  unusual  feature  in  pueblo  architecture.  That  this 
last  structure  was  designed  to  protect  the  most  vulnerable 
part  of  the  mesa  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  outer  wall 
is  without  openings  of  any  kind  and  extends  beyond  the  rooms 
of  the  structure,  and  because  the  adjacent  mesa  rim  is  pro- 
tected by  a  rude  low  wall,  especially  at  such  points  as  re- 
quired ready  defense  against  attack  from  below.  As  already 
noted,  the  walls  of  these  ruins  are  noteworthy  by  reason  of 
the  excellence  of  their  masonry,  special  effort  having  been 
made  to  produce  a  pleasing  effect  in  the  exterior  faces.  Of 
the  inner  walls  so  much  can  not  be  said;  but  as  there  is  no 
question  that  when  the  houses  were  occupied  the  rooms  were 
smoothly  plastered,  there  was  little  need  of  the  elaborate 
finish  accorded  the  exposed  masonry.  Slight  attention  was 
paid  either  to  regularity  in  the  shape  of  the  stones  or  to 
smoothness  of  surface  in  building  the  inner  walls,  nor  was  the 
aboriginal  mason  more  particular  in  bonding  the  inner  and 
outer  courses  than  in  "  breaking"  the  joints  of  the  outer  face. 
It  seems  remarkable  that,  possessed  of  such  patience  and  ex- 
pertness  as  the  buildings  here  display  in  other  ways,  they 
seem  to  have  been  unaware  of  the  necessity  of  avoiding  the 
construction  of  their  walls  in  such  manner  that  in  places  as 
many  as  six  or  seven  vertical  joints  occur  practically  in  line. 
In  this  brief  report  only  mere  mention  can  be  made  of  many 
other  interesting  architectural  features  of  these  ruins,  as  well 
as  of  another  pueblo  ruin,  more  or  less  circular  in  shape, 
situated  a  few  miles  northeastward  on  a  low  mesa  at  the  ex- 
treme head  of  Cebollita  Valley,  which  here  forms  a  small  but 
beautiful  canyon. 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  13 

The  inhabitants  of  the  great  compound  first  described 
obtained  their  water  supply  by  means  of  two  principal 
reservoirs  fed  by  the  drainage  from  the  great  sandstone 
shelf  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  mesa  summit.  These 
reservoirs  are  natural  depressions  in  the  rock,  but  the  capac- 
ity of  the  larger  one,  which  measures  35  by  90  feet  and  is 
about  5  feet  in  maximum  depth,  has  been  greatly  augmented 
on  the  western  side  by  an  artificial  retaining  wall  14  feet 
long  and  10  feet  in  thickness,  with  an  exposed  face  of  2h 
feet  on  the  reservoir  side.  So  well  did  this  reservoir  evi- 
dently serve  the  ancient  mesa  dwellers  that  during  seasons 
of  unusual  rain,  water  still  stands  to  a  considerable  depth 
within  the  depression.  The  smaller  reservoir  is  triangular 
in  outline  and  measures  about  15  by  19  feet.  An  inter- 
esting feature  in  connection  with  the  larger  reservoir  is  the 
remains  of  a  rude  dike  extending  60  feet  along  the  rocky 
shelf  above  referred  to,  built  for  the  purpose  of  diverting  the 
flow  of  rain  water  from  its  natural  course  into  the  reservoir. 

It  is  not  yet  known  where  the  ancients  of  this  pueblo 
customarily  buried  their  dead,  but  probably  the  interments 
were  made  in  the  talus  of  the  mesa,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
Hopi,  of  Arizona,  to-day.  There  was  found,  however,  in  the 
corner  of  the  shallow  cavern  in  the  northern  face  of  the  mesa, 
above  the  talus,  a  small  cist,  formed  by  a  low  and  broken 
wall  of  masonry,  which  contained  the  somewhat  incomplete 
skeletons  of  two  adult  females,  one  incomplete  skeleton  of 
a  boy,  and  the  incomplete  and  defective  skeletons  of  two 
infants.  With  one  exception  these  remains  had  been  greatly 
disturbed  by  rats,  which  had  burrowed  their  way  through 
the  bones  and  their  accompaniments  to  the  bottom  of  the 
cist  and  fairly  filled  the  repository  with  cactus  spines,  excreta, 
and  other  debris  of  nest  building.  The  remains  were  accom- 
panied with  several  pottery  vessels,  chiefly  bowls,  one  of 
which  was  covered  with  a  well-preserved  mat,  plaited  of  a 
fibrous  plant  which  Mr.  Lyster  H.  Dewey,  of  the  Department 
of  Agriculture,  identifies  as  a  scirpus,  and  almost  certainly 
Scripus  validus.  The  ornamentation  of  this  pottery,  as  well 
as  of  the  numerous  sherds  scattered  about  the  ruins,  consists 
of  plain  red,  black  on  red,  white  on  red,  plain  black,  black 


14  BUREAU   OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

on  white,  brown  on  white,  brown  on  red,  and  many  other 
combinations  of  color.  All  the  decorations  noted  were  in 
geometrical  designs. 

On  the  northern  face  of  the  mesa,  but  practically  hidden 
from  view  except  from  one  point  in  the  valley  below,  is  a 
small  house  shelter  of  excellent  masonry,  built  beneath  an 
overhanging  ledge  of  the  cliff  which  forms  the  roof.  This 
shelter,  which  is  provided  with  a  single  small  opening  over- 
looking the  valley  to  the  northward,  was  seemingly  designed 
as  a  lookout  station  either  for  watching  the  crops  or  an  ap- 
proaching foe.  Across  the  valley,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
first  great  mesa  directly  opposite  that  on  which  the  ruins 
are  situated,  is  another  small  cliff  lodge,  now  accessible  only 
by  artificial  means.  Examination  of  the  interior,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  cliff  lodge  above  described,  yielded  nothing  of 
interest.  Farther  up  the  valley,  on  the  northern  side,  in 
plain  view  near  the  base  of  a  mesa,  is  a  larger  cliff  lodge,  filled 
to  a  considerable  depth  with  detritus  from  the  soft  stone 
forming  the  roof  and  side  walls.  Examination  of  the  floor 
of  this  lodge  a  few  years  ago  by  Mr.  Hodge  yielded  a  few 
corncobs,  one  or  two  small  objects  made  of  yucca  leaves, 
and  a  wooden  drumstick  of  a  form  such  as  the  Zuni  now 
employ. 

Dr.  J.  Walter  Fewkes,  ethnologist,  spent  the  month  of 
July,  1913,  in  the  office  continuing  the  preparation  of  his 
monographic  report  on  the  aborigines  of  the  West  Indies, 
especially  describing  the  many  objects  from  these  islands 
in  the  noteworthy  collection  of  George  G.  Heye,  Esq.,  of 
New  York.  He  made  a  visit  to  New  York  toward  the  close 
of  the  month  to  study  recent  additions  to  this  collection  and  to 
supervise  the  preparation  of  the  illustrations  for  his  report. 
It  became  necessaiy,  in  order  to  make  this  memoir  as  com- 
prehensive as  possible,  to  investigate  types  of  the  Guesde 
collection,  now  owned  by  the  Museum  fur  Volkerkunde  in 
Berlin.  Accordingly  Doctor  Fewkes  went  to  Europe  at  his 
personal  expense  and  spent  August,  September,  and  October 
studying  these  types  and  also  many  undescribed  Porto  Rican 
and  other  West  Indian  objects  in  various  museums.  Draw- 
ings of  about  140  specimens,  many  of  which  have  not  been 


ADMIKISTRATIVE   EEPOET  15 

described,  were  made  during  the  course  of  these  studies  in 
Berlin.  He  also  visited  the  museum  at  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark, which  contains  many  old  specimens  from  the  Danish 
West  Indies  and  some  rare  types  of  prehistoric  objects  from 
Porto  Rico,  all  of  which  were  either  drawn  or  photographed. 
West  Indian  objects  were  found  also  in  the  museum  collec- 
tions of  Leipzig,  Dresden,  and  Vienna.  Some  time  was 
given  to  an  examination  of  the  dolmens  and  megaliths  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Berlin  and  elsewhere  in  northern 
Germany,  and  of  the  numerous  mounds  and  prehistoric 
workshops  on  the  island  of  Rugen  in  the  Baltic  Sea. 

Doctor  Fewkes  spent  his  vacation  on  the  shore  of  the 
Mediterranean,  which  he  crossed,  visiting  the  most  striking 
ruins  in  Egypt,  penetrating'  as  far  south  as  Assouan,  and 
making  special  studies  of  the  remaining  evidences  of  neo- 
lithic man  at  Abyclos  and  El  Kab  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile. 
He  had  always  in  mind  a  study  of  prehistoric  irrigation  in 
this  region,  with  a  view  to  comparing  the  works  with  similar 
remains  in  Arizona.  In  the  museums  at  Cairo  and  Assouan 
Doctor  Fewkes  examined  considerable  material  dating  back 
to  late  neolithic  times  and  found  a  remarkable  similarity 
not  only  in  architectural  features  but  also  in  stone  imple- 
ments, basketry,  bone  implements,  and  other  artifacts  from 
the  valley  of  the  Nile  and  those  from  our  Southwest.  One  of 
the  important  features  of  the  visit  to  Egypt  was  a  study  of 
methods  of  excavation  and  repair  of  ruins  adopted  by  Egyp- 
tologists. On  his  return  from  Egypt  Doctor  Fewkes  passed 
through  Greece  and  southern  Italy  and  was  able  to  acquaint 
himself  with  the  method  of  excavation  and  repair  of  ancient 
ruins  in  these  countries,  especially  those  on  the  Acropolis 
and  at  Pompeii. 

Doctor  Fewkes  arrived  in  Washington  in  April  and  imme- 
diately resumed  work  on  his  report  on  the  aborigines  of  the 
West  Indies,  which  was  continued  during  April  and  the 
greater  part  of  May.  In  the  latter  month  he  again  took  the 
field  and  spent  the  whole  of  June  in  archeological  research  in 
the  Mimbres  Valley,  New  Mexico.  In  this  work  he  was  able 
to  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  the  distribution  of  pottery 
symbols  and  to  add  important  collections  to  the  National 


15  BUREAU    OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY 

Museum.  The  Mimbres  Valley  is  practically  the  northern 
extension  into  the  United  States  of  an  inland  basin  known  in 
Chihuahua  as  the  Sierra  Madre  Plateau.  The  fact  that  its 
drainage  does  not  connect  with  any  stream  that  flows  into 
the  Atlantic  or  the  Pacific  Ocean  imparts  a  peculiar  character 
to  its  geographical  environment.  On  the  southern  part  of 
this  plateau,  as  along  the  Casas  Grandes  River,  mounds  and 
ruins  of  large  size  are  well  known,  from  which  have  been 
taken  some  of  the  finest  pottery  in  the  Southwest;  but  the 
archeology  of  the  extension  of  this  plateau  into  New  Mexico 
has  never  been  adequately  examined.  In  his  brief  recon- 
noissance  Doctor  Fewkes  collected  evidence  that  the  prehis- 
toric culture  of  the  Mimbres  Valley  was  strikingly  character- 
istic. The  decorated  pottery  from  the  ruins  in  this  valley  is 
unlike  that  of  any  other  region.  It  consists  mainly  of  mor- 
tuary food  bowls,  which  the  prehistoric  inhabitants  were 
accustomed  to  break  or  "kill"  and  place  over  the  heads  of 
the  deceased,  who  were  buried  beneath  the  floors  of  the 
houses.  About  60  specimens  of  beautiful  pottery,  more  than 
half  of  which  are  ornamented  with  painted  figures  of  human 
beings  and  animals,  were  found  or  purchased.  As  these  are 
the  first  examples  ever  brought  to  the  National  Museum  from 
this  region,  the  results  are  gratifying.  They  afford  through 
their  geometrical  ornamentation,  and  especially  because  of 
the  life  forms  which  predominate,  an  interesting  insight  into 
the  ancient  culture  of  the  Pueblo  region  to  the  north  and  in 
the  Gila  Valley  to  the  west.  It  is  Mexican  in  type,  and  some 
of  the  fragments  are  practically  identical  in  form  and  orna- 
mentation with  the  beautiful  pottery  from  Casas  Grandes. 
Chihuahua. 

During  the  year  Doctor  Fewkes  added  about  350  pages  of 
manuscript  to  his  report  on  the  aborigines  of  the  West 
Indies,  which  was  approaching  completion  at  the  close  of  the 
year. 

Shortly  before  the  close  of  the  preceding  fiscal  year  Mr. 
James  Mooney,  ethnologist,  proceeded  to  the  reservation  of 
the  East  Cherokee  Indians  in  western  North  Carolina  for  the 
purpose  of  continuing  the  translation  and  elucidation  of  the 


ADMINISTRATIVE   REPORT  17 

large  body  of  sacred  formulas,  written  in  the  Cherokee 
language  and  alphabet,  which  he  had  obtained  from  the  native 
priests  and  their  surviving  relatives  some  years  ago,  and 
about  one-thiixl  of  which  he  had  already  translated,  with  ex- 
planatory notes.  In  connection  with  this  work  a  large  num- 
ber of  plants  noted  in  the  formulas  as  of  medicinal  or  other 
value  were  collected  and  transferred  to  the  division  of  botany 
of  the  National  Museum  for  scientific  identification.  In  this 
collection  were  several  specimens  of  the  native  corn  of  the 
Cherokee,  still  cultivated  as  sacred  by  a  few  of  the  old  con- 
servatives. On  examination  by  the  experts  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Agriculture  this  corn  was  found  to  be  a  new  and 
hitherto  undescribed  variety  of  special  food  importance  under 
cultivation.  Return  was  made  from  the  field  early  in 
October,  1913. 

In  June.  1914,  a  brief  trip  was  made  into  Prince  Georges  and 
Charles  Counties,  Maryland,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating 
the  status  and  origin  of  some  persons  of  supposedly  Indian 
descent,  concerning  whom  several  inquiries  had  come  to  the 
bureau.  Mr.  Mooney  found,  as  he  had  supposed,  that  these 
people,  numbering  in  all  several  hundred,  weie,  like  the 
Pamunkey  of  Virginia  and  the  so-called  Croatan  of  North 
Carolina,  a  blend  of  the  three  races,  Indian,  Negro,  and  White, 
with  the  Indian  blood  probably  predominating.  They  con- 
stitute and  hold  themselves  a  separate  caste,  distinct  from 
both  white  and  negro.  They  probably  represent  the  mongrel- 
ized  descendants  of  the  Piscataway  tribe,  and  are  sometimes 
locally  distinguished  among  themselves  as  "We-Sort,"  that 
is,  "Our  Sort." 

On  June  22,  1914,  Mr.  Mooney  again  started  for  the  East 
Cherokee  to  continue  work  on  the  sacred  formulas,  with  a 
view  to  speedy  publication. 

His  time  in  the  office  during  the  winter  and  spring  was 
occupied  chiefly  with  the  extended  investigation  of  former 
Indian  population,  together  with  routine  correspondence  and 
replies  to  letters  of  inquiry.  On  request  of  the  Department 
of  Justice  he  prepared  an  extended  deposition  on  tribal 
ranges  and   Indian   depredations   in   northern   Mexico  and 

75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 2 


18  BTJBEAU   OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

along  the  Rio  Grande,  which  was  officially  characterized  as 
one  of  the  most  important  and  interesting  that  had  ever 
come  before  the  department. 

In  pursuance  of  his  investigations  of  the  Creek  Indians 
and  allied  tribes,  Dr.  John  R.  Swanton,  ethnologist,  pro- 
ceeded to  Oklahoma  early  in  July  to  attend  the  busk  cere- 
monies, and  was  present  at  those  of  the  Eufaula,  Hilibi, 
Fish  Pond,  and  Tukabachi  Creeks.  Notes  were  taken  on 
all  of  these  and  photographs  obtained  of  various  features  of 
all  but  the  last.  At  the  same  time,  with  the  valued  assist- 
ance of  Mr.  G.  W.  Grayson,  of  Eufaula,  Doctor  Swanton 
gathered  further  ethnological  information  from  some  of  the 
old  people,  and  continued  this  work  after  the  ceremonies 
ceased.  Somewhat  later  he  visited  the  small  body  of  Indians 
in  Seminole  County  who  still  retain  a  speaking  knowledge  of 
Hitchiti,  and  added  about  40  pages  of  text  to  that  previously 
obtained,  besides  correcting  a  portion  of  Gatschet's  Hitchiti 
vocabulary.  He  made  an  arrangement  with  an  interpreter 
by  which  100  pages  of  additional  text  were  received  after 
his  return  to  Washington. 

While  some  time  was  devoted  to  studies  of  the  Alabama, 
Hitchiti,  and  Choctaw  languages,  most  of  Doctor  Swanton's 
attention  while  in  the  office  during  the  year  was  centered  on 
two  particular  undertakings.  One  of  these  was  the  proof 
reading  of  the  Choctaw-English  section  of  Byington's  Choc- 
taw Dictionary,  and  the  compilation,  with  the  efficient  help 
of  Miss  M.  C.  Rollins,  of  an  English-Choctaw  index,  which 
will  comprise  about  350  printed  pages,  to  accompany  it. 
The  other  was  work  on  the  first  draft  of  an  extended  report 
on  the  Creek  confederacy,  of  which  the  historical  part,  con- 
sisting of  300  typewritten  pages,  is  practically  completed. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  Mr.  J.  N.  B.  Hewitt,  ethnolo- 
gist, undertook  the  work  of  editing  and  copying  the  Seneca 
text  " Shagowenotha,  or  The  Spirit  of  the  Tides,"  which  was 
recorded  by  him  in  the  form  of  field  notes  in  1896  on  the 
Cattaraugus  Reservation,  New  York.  This  particular  piece 
of  work,  forming  a  text  of  3,692  native  words,  was  completed 
in  August,  1913.  The  task  of  making  a  literal,  almost  an 
etymological,  interlinear  translation  of  this  text  was  next 


ADMINISTBATIVE   REPORT  19 

undertaken  and  was  completed  in  November,  yielding  an 
aggregate  of  11,411  English  words  in  the  rendering.  The 
other  of  the  two  native  texts  in  Seneca,  "Doadanegen  and 
Hotkwisdadegena,"  which  was  recorded  in  the  form  of  field 
notes  by  Mr.  Hewitt  in  1896,  was  next  edited  and  copied; 
this  work  was  completed  by  the  close  of  December  and 
consists  of  4,888  native  Seneca  words.  The  literal  inter- 
linear translation  of  this  text  then  taken  up  was  completed 
in  February,  1914,  making  14,664  English  words  in  the  ren- 
dering. 

On  finishing  these  translations  Mr.  Hewitt  commenced  the 
reading  and  digesting  of  the  Seneca  material  of  the  Jate 
Jeremiah  Curtin  for  the  purpose  of  providing  notes  and 
explanations  to  the  stories,  a  task  that  was  made  the  more 
difficult  by  the  fact  that  Mr.  Curtin's  field  notes  of  explana- 
tion and  identification  are  not  available.  One  of  the  longest 
of  the  stories  collected  by  Mr.  Curtin,  "Doonogaes  and 
Tsodiqgwadon,"  comprising  149  typewritten  pages,  required 
144  notes  varying  in  length  from  three  or  four  lines  to  sev- 
eral pages;  but  this  story  is  of  exceptional  length.  The 
entire  Curtin  material  has  now  been  reread  and  annotated. 
Mr.  Hewitt  also  completed  the  notes  for  his  introduction  to 
the  "Seneca  Myths  and  Fiction,"  and  the  final  writing  was 
almost  finished  by  the  close  of  the  year. 

As  opportunity  offered,  Mr.  Hewitt  continued  to  work  on 
a  sketch  of  the  Iroquois  language,  and  he  has  now  in  hand 
about  75  pages  of  manuscript,  in  addition  to  a  considerable 
body  of  notes  and  diagrams  for  incorporation  into  final  form. 

Mr.  Hewitt  also  made  a  week's  study  of  the  voluminous 
manuscript  "  Dictionary  of  Words  that  have  been  Made 
Known  in  or  Introduced  into  English  from  the  Indians  of 
North,  Central,  and  South  America,"  compiled  by  the  late 
William  R.  Gerard,  with  a  view  of  ascertaining  its  value 
for  publication  by  the  bureau.  This  examination  was  made 
difficult  by  the  fact  that  the  compiler  of  the  dictionary  had 
access  to  many  works  which  were  not  available  for  Mr. 
Hewitt. 

Unfortunately  the  work  summarized  above  was  often 
interrupted,  owing  to  the  need  of  frequently  calling  on  Mr, 


20  BUREAU    OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY 

Hewitt  for  the  preparation  of  data  for  replies  to  correspond- 
ents, whose  inquiries  pertained  to  linguistic,  historical, 
sociological,  and  technical  matters.  In  connection  with  this 
work  there  were  prepared  110  letters,  rarely  exceeding  a 
page  in  length,  although  some  occupied  several  pages  and 
required  considerable  study  and  research  in  gathering  the 
needed  data  for  reply. 

During  the  year  Mr.  Francis  La  Flesche,  ethnologist, 
recorded  the  rituals  and  accompanying  songs  of  five  addi- 
tional Osage  ceremonies,  known  as  Wawatho",  Wadoka 
Weko,  Y\razhingao,  Zhingazhinga  Zhazhe  Thadse,  and  Wex- 
thexthe.  Of  these  the  Wawatho11  is  complete;  the  record 
fills  about  150  pages,  including  songs,  diagrams,  and  illus- 
trations. This  ceremony,  which  is  of  religious  significance 
and  is  reverenced  by  all  the  people,  has  been  obsolete  for 
about  20  years,  and  there  now  remain  only  two  men  in  the 
tribe  who  remember  it  in  most  of  its  details.  It  was  a  peace 
ceremony  that  held  an  important  place  in  the  great  tribal 
rites  of  the  Osage,  for  through  its  influence  friendly  relations 
were  maintained  among  the  various  gentes  composing  the 
tribe,  and  it  was  also  the  means  by  which  friendship  with 
interrelated  tribes  was  established  and  preserved.  Early 
French  travelers  mention  this  ceremony  as  being  performed 
by  the  Osage  in  one  of  the  tribes  of  the  Illinois  confederacy 
during  the  second  decade  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Unlike 
the  Osage  war  ceremonies,  which  are  complex  and  composed 
of  several  steps  or  degrees,  the  Wawatho"  is  simple  and 
complete  in  itself.  The  "  pipes, "  sometimes  called  calumets, 
which  are  employed  in  its  performance,  consist  of  a  number 
of  sacred  symbolic  articles,  each  of  which,  with  its  attendant 
ritual,  was  in  the  keeping  of  a  certain  gens  of  the  tribe. 
The  assembling  of  these  articles  formed  an  essential  part  of 
the  ceremony,  for  it  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  ritual, 
which  explained  both  the  significance  of  and  the  precepts 
conveyed  by  the  sacred  articles,  had  to  be  recited.  This 
Wawatho11  ceremony  resembled  that  of  the  Omaha,  Pbnca, 
Oto,  and  Pawnee  tribes,  differing  only  in  minor  details.  To 
the  intelligent  thinking  class  the  aims  and  purposes  of  the 
ceremony  are  clear,   but  there  are  among  the  Osage,  as 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  21 

among  other  tribes,  those  who  can  not  comprehend  fully 
the  deeper,  broader  teachings  of  such  a  rite,  and  because  of 
this  restricted  view  superstitious  beliefs  regarding  it  now 
prevail  among  the  lower  classes. 

The  record  of  the  Wadoka  Weko,  one  of  the  seven  war 
ceremonies,  consists  of  89  pages  of  manuscript,  with  32 
songs.  This  rite,  which  is  the  sixth  degree  of  the  war 
ceremony,  is  divided  into  eight  parts,  exclusive  of  the 
introductory  rites,  and  consists  of  rituals  and  songs  per- 
taining to  the  ceremonial  cutting  of  the  scalps  for  distribu- 
tion among  the  various  gentes  for  their  sacred  packs.  One 
of  these  parts  has  to  do  with  the  odon,  or  "  honors, "  won  by 
the  warriors  in  battle.  While  this  ceremony  is  recorded 
completely,  it  is  not  yet  ready  for  publication,  since  it  is 
one  of  seven  interdependent  degrees  the  study  of  which  is 
not  yet  finished. 

Wazhingao,  the  bird  ceremony  for  boys,  is  another  of  the 
seven  degrees,  and  is  regarded  as  important.  It  has  been 
transcribed  in  full,  but  the  notes  thereon  have  not  yet  been 
elaborated  for  publication. 

Zhingazhinga  Zhazhe  Thadse  (naming  of  a  child),  a  cere- 
mony that  bears  no  direct  relation  to  any  other,  is  regarded 
as  essential  to  the  proper  rearing  of  a  child,  and  is  still  prac- 
ticed. This  ceremony  has  been  recorded  in  its  entirety,  but 
still  lacks  the  descriptive  annotation  necessary  before  publica- 
tion. 

The  Wexthexthe,  or  tattooing  ceremony,  the  last  of  the 
five  recorded  by  Mr.  La  Flesche,  was  taken  down  from  its 
recitation  by  one  of  the  men  who  had  participated  therein. 
This  transcription  is  still,  in  a  measure,  fragmentary,  but 
enough  has  been  obtained  to  give  a  fair  idea  of  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  tattoo  designs  employed.  The  notes  on  the 
Wexthexthe  are  not  yet  prepared  for  publication,  as  there 
is  still  a  possibility  of  recording  the  ceremony  in  its  entirety. 
A  set  of  the  implements  used  by  the  Osage  in  tattooing  have 
been  obtained  for  illustration  and  have  been  deposited  in 
the  National  Museum.  There  has  also  been  placed  in  the 
museum  a  ivaxdbetonga,  or  great  sacred  pack,  which  once 
belonged   to  Wacetonzhinga,  a  prominent  man  of  the  tribe, 


22  BUREAU    OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOJ.ni,\ 

who  died  in  1910.  After  much  persuasion  his  widow  re- 
luctantly consented  to  part  with  this  sacred  article,  together 
with  its  buffalo-hair  and  rush-mat  cases.  This  pack  consists 
of  the  skin  and  plumage  of  a  white  pelican,  the  bird  which 
in  Osage  mythology  revealed  through  a  dream  the  mysteries 
of  tattooing  and  provided  the  implements  therefor. 

All  the  above-described  ceremonies  studied  by  Mr.  La 
Flesche  have  still  a  strong  hold  on  the  Osage  people;  this, 
together  with  the  fact  that  every  initiated  person  acquired 
his  knowledge  at  great  expense,  has  made  it  almost  impossible 
to  record  the  ceremonies  in  full  from  those  who  have  been 
induced  to  speak  about  them. 

Mrs.  M.  ('.  Stevenson,  ethnologist,  continued  her  studies  of 
the  ethnology  of  the  Tewa  Indians  of  New  Mexico,  devoting 
special  attention  to  the  pueblo  of  San  Ildefonso,  with  a  view 
of  elaborating  her  memoir  on  this  group  of  tribes,  which  con- 
sists of  about  400  pages  of  manuscript,  material  relating  to 
almost  every  phase  of  Tewa  customs  and  beliefs  having  been 
added  in  whole  or  in  part  during  the  course  of  the  year. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  new  data  gathered  by 
Mis.  Stevenson  on  these  interesting  sedentary  people  relate 
to  their  ceremonies  with  respect  to  human  sacrifice.  The 
conservatism  of  the  Tewa  and  the  secrecy  with  which  most 
of  their  numerous  rites  are  conducted  make  them  a  difficult 
subject  of  study  and  one  requiring  considerable  time.  Mrs. 
Stevenson's  memoir  had  reached  such  a  stage  of  completion 
thai  at  the  close  of  the  year  she  was  making  final  arrange- 
ments for  acquiring  the  materials  still  needed  for  illustrations. 

Shortly  after  the  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  Dr.  Truman 
Michelson,  ethnologist,  proceeded  to  Tama,  Iowa,  to  renew 
his  researches  among  the  Fox  Indians.  After  successfully 
commencing  these  studies  he  proceeded  to  Tongue  River 
Reservation  in  Montana  for  the  purpose  of  studying  the 
remnant  of  the  Sutaio  Tribe  incorporated  with  the  Cheyenne. . 
It  seems  that  some  ethnological  information  can  still  be 
obtained  in  regard  to  specific  Sutaio  matters,  but  little  of  the 
language  remains.  Doctor  Michelson  compiled  a  fairly  large 
Sutaio  vocabulary,  but  fewer  than  a  dozen  words  are  funda- 
mentally different  from  the  corresponding  Cheyenne  terms. 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  2.3 

Such  grammatical  forms  as  could  be  obtained  indicate  that 
Sutaio  sheds  little  or  no  light  on  the  divergent  Algonquian 
type  of  the  Cheyenne  language. 

Returning  to  Tama  to  renew  his  Fox  studies,  Doctor 
Michelson  succeeded  in  elucidating  the  social  organization 
almost  to  completeness.  It  appears  that  the  two  major 
divisions  of  the  tribe  are  not  purely  for  rivalry  in  athletics, 
but  rather  are  ceremonial.  Doctor  .Michelson  was  successful 
also  in  obtaining  the  very  long  myths  of  the  culture  hero  and 
the  Mother  of  all  the  Earth.  It  is  evident  that  the  actual 
Fox  society  still  corresponds  in  a  measure  to  that  given  in  the 
myths. 

In  October  Doctor  Michelson  proceeded  to  Kansas  to  in- 
vestigate the  Sauk  and  Fox  of  the  Missouri.  A  reconnois- 
sance  only  was  made  here,  and  some  of  the  Fox  material 
obtained  at  Tama  was  translated.  In  November  he  re- 
turned to  Washington,  and  in  January,  1914,  visited  the 
Carlisle  Indian  School  for  the  purpose  of  studying  special 
points  of  grammar  and  phonetics  with  some  of  the  Sauk 
and  Fox  pupils.  Thence  he  made  a  trip  to  New  York  City, 
taking  with  him  one  of  the  pupils  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
sulting Dr.  Franz  Boas,  honorary  philologist  of  the  bureau, 
on  certain  mooted  points  pertaining  to  the  Fox  language. 
While  in  New  York  a  few  tracings  were  made  with  the 
Rousselot  apparatus. 

In  May  Doctor  Michelson  again  visited  Carlisle  for  the 
purpose  of  making  a  translation  of  the  story  of  a  sacred 
bundle  of  the  Fox  Indians,  which  he  has  recently  procured. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  Doctor  Michelson  de- 
voted some  time  to  the  problem  whether  the  Yurok  and 
Wiyot  languages  of  California  were  Algonquian,  as  had  been 
recently  claimed,  and  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  existing 
evidence  does  not  justify  such  a  classification 

SPECIAL  RESEARCHES 

Work  on  the  Handbook  of  American  Indian  Languages 
was  continued  under  the  personal  direction  and  editorship  of 
Dr.  Franz  Boas,  honorary  philologist.  Part  2,  which  is  in 
preparation,    is    to    contain    grammatical    sketches    of   the 


24  BUREAU    OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

Takelma,  Coos,  Siuslaw,  and  Alsea  languages  of  Oregon; 
the  Kutenai,  of  Montana ;  and  the  Chukchee.  The  Takelma 
sketch  was  published  in  advance  in  separate  form  in  1912. 
During  the  present  year  the  printing  of  the  sketch  of  the  Coos, 
by  Leo  J.  Frachtenberg,  which  forms  pages  297-429  of  part 
2,  was  finished.  The  manuscript  of  the  Siuslaw,  also  by 
Doctor  Frachtenberg,  was  completed  and  revised,  and, 
except  for  a  small  part,  is  in  galley  form.  The  Chukchee 
sketch  likewise  has  been  set  up  in  galleys  and  revised,  and 
new  material  on  the  dialects  of  the  language,  having  become 
available,  has  been  added.  The  printing  of  the  sketch  pro- 
ceeded necessarily  slowly,  since  the  notes  had  to  be  read  by 
the  author,  Mr.  Waldemar  Bogoras,  who  lives  in  Russia. 
A  full  treatment  of  this  grammar  is  particularly  desirable, 
since  it  serves  to  define  the  relationships  of  the  American 
languages  toward  the  west.  Doctor  Frachtenberg,  a  fuller 
report  of  whose  work  will  follow,  has  made  progress  with  his 
studies  of  the  Alsea.  The  grammatical  material  and  the 
texts  have  been  extracted  and  studied,  and  the  latter,  which 
are  to  form  the  basis  of  the  sketch,  have  been  copied  for  the 
printer.  Dr.  A.  F.  Chamberlain,  a  valued  collaborator, 
whose  untimely  death  we  lament,  furnished  a  sketch  of  the 
Kutenai  language.  It  was  necessary  to  make  a  detailed 
study  of  this  sketch.  This  was  done  by  Doctor  Boas  partly 
during  the  winter  in  New  York  with  the  help  of  a  Kutenai 
boy  and  partly  during  the  month  of  June  among  the  In- 
dians of  Montana  and  British  Columbia.  The  report  on 
this  sketch  was  completed.  A  certain  amount  of  prepara- 
tory work  for  the  sketch  of  the  Palish  language  was  also 
done,  more  particularly  a  map  showing  the  distribution  of 
the  Salish  dialect,  based  on  researches  by  James  Teit,  was 
completed.  The  expense  of  the  field  work  for  this  map, 
which  has  occupied  four  yours,  was  met  by  Mr.  Homer  E. 
Sargent,  of  Chicago,  to  whose  lively  interest  in  the  Hand- 
book and  related  subjects  we  are  deeply  indebted.  The 
vocabularies  on  which  the  map  is  based  are  in  an  advanced 
stage  of  preparation.  Much  time  was  devoted  by  Doctor 
Boas  during  the  year  to  the  preparation  of  a  report  on  the 
mythology   of  the  Tsimshian  Indians,  based  on  material 


ADMINISTRATIVE   EEPOET  25 

written  during  a  period  of  10  years  by  Henry  W.  Tate, 
himself  a  Tsimshian.  Owing  to  his  recent  death  it  was 
necessary  to  close  the  collection,  the  expenses  of  which  have 
been  defrayed  from  private  sources.  The  monograph  was 
completed  and  is  in  type  for  publication  in  the  Thirty-first 
Annual  Report. 

Brief  reference  to  the  researches  of  Dr.  Leo  J.  Frachtenberg, 
ethnologist,  has  been  made  in  connection  with  the  preparation 
of  part  2  of  the  Handbook  of  American  Indian  Languages. 
The  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  found  Doctor  Frachtenberg 
in  the  field  in  Oregon,  where,  from  June  to  September,  he  was 
engaged  in  linguistic  and  ethnologic  work  on  the  Kalapooian 
family.  During  these  months  he  collected  a  number  of  gram- 
matical notes  and  nine  texts  in  the  dialect  of  the  so-called 
Calapooia  Proper,  but  owing  to  lack  of  sufficient  means  for 
continuing  this  field  work  he  was  compelled  to  discontinue  it 
in  October.  The  linguistic  researches  into  the  Kalapooian 
family  brought  out  a  number  of  interesting  points,  of  which 
the  most  salient  are  as  follows:  Phonetically  the  family  is 
related  closely  to  the  Lutuamian  (Klamath)  and  Sahaptin 
groups.  Certain  pronominal  forms  and  a  few  numerical 
terms  are  identical  with  the  Klamath  and  Sahaptin  forms. 
In  all  other  respects,  chiefly  morphological,  Kalapooian  bears 
close  resemblance  to  the  Coos,  Siuslaw,  and  Yakonan  stocks. 
A  particularly  close  affiliation  exists  between  this  and  the 
Coos  family  in  the  phonetic  structure  of  words.  While  the 
phonetics  of  both  languages  are  divergent,  both  are  what  may 
be  termed  vocalic  languages  and  are  practically  free  from  any 
difficult  consonantic  clusters.  The  Calapooia  texts  thus  far 
obtained  deal  chiefly  with  the  Coyote  cycle  and  are  identical 
with  myths  found  among  the  Coos,  Molala,  Klamath,  Maidu, 
Chinook,  Alsea,  Takelma,  Salish,  and  other  tribes  of  the 
Pacific  area.  The  mythology  as  a  whole  is  typical  of  that 
region  in  the  absence  of  true  creation  myths  and  in  the  multi- 
tude of  transformation  stories. 

A  survey  of  the  linguistic  phase  of  the  Kalapooian  stock 
shows  it  to  embrace  the  following  dialects :  Calapooia  Proper 
(also  called  Marysville),  Chelamela,  Yamhill,  Atfalati,  Wa- 
pato  Lake,  Ahantsayuk,  Santiam,  Lakmayut,  and  Yonkallat. 


26  BUREAU    OF    AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY 

These  dialects  show  certain  degrees  of  interrelationship, 
which  may  be  formulated  as  follows:  Calapooia,  Santiam, 
Lakmayut,  and  Ahantsayuk  form  one  closely  related  group; 
another  group  embraces  the  Yamhill  and  Atfalati  dialects, 
while  Yonkallat  seems  to  constitute  a  group  of  its  own.  No 
information  as  to  the  Chelamela  dialect  could  be  obtained. 

In  July  Doctor  Frachtenberg  received  what  seemed  to  be 
trustworthy  information  that  some  Willapa  Indians  were  still 
living  at  Bay  Center,  Washington,  but  on  visiting  that  point 
he  found  the  reputed  Willapa  to  be  in  fact  members  of  the 
Chehalis  tribe,  thus  proving  conclusively  that  the  Willapa 
are  entirely  extinct. 

Doctor  Frachtenberg  returned  to  New  York  late  in  October 
and  was  engaged  until  the  beginning  of  December  in  the 
preparation  of  the  Siuslaw  grammatical  sketch  for  the  Hand- 
book of  American  Indian  Languages,  additional  work  on 
which  became  necessary  because  of  the  fact  that  during  his 
stay  in  the  field  he  had  received  further  information  con- 
cerning this  extinct  stock.  In  December  Doctor  Frachten- 
berg took  up  his  duties  in  Washington,  becoming  first  engaged 
in  supplying  references  from  the  Siuslaw  texts  in  the  gram- 
matical sketch  of  that  language.  At  the  close  of  the  year 
this  sketch  was  in  type.  Doctor'Frachtenberg  also  prepared 
for  publication  a  Siuslaw-English  and  English-Siuslaw  vocab- 
ulary, containing  90  typewritten  pages.  He  furthermore 
prepared  an  English-Coos  glossary,  which  may  be  utilized  in 
the  near  future,  as  it  has  been  found  desirable  to  add  such 
a  glossary  to  each  volume  of  native  texts. 

On  completion  of  this  work  Doctor  Frachtenberg  com- 
menced the  preparation  of  the  Alsea  texts  collected  by  Dr. 
Livingston  Farrand  in  1900  and  by  himself  in  1910.  These 
texts,  consisting  of  31  myths,  tales,  and  narratives,  and  com- 
prising 195  typewritten  pages,  will  be  submitted  in  the  near 
future  with  a  view  to  publication  as  a  bulletin  of  the  bureau. 

At  the  close  of  the  fiscal  year  Doctor  Frachtenberg  was 
preparing  for  another  field  season  in  Oregon,  with  the  view 
of  finishing  his  studies  of  the  Kalapooian  stock  and  of  con- 
ducting similar  researches  among  the  Quileute. 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  27 

Mr.  W.  H.  Holmes,  of  the  National  Museum,  continued  his 
work  on  the  preparation  of  the  Handbook  of  American  An- 
tiquities for  the  bureau,  reaching  the  practical  completion  of 
part  1  and  making  much  headway  in  the  preparation  of  part 
2;  progress  in  this  work,  however,  was  necessarily  delayed 
owing  to  the  pressure  of  many  duties  connected  with  a  head 
curatorship  in  the  National  Museum. 

During  August,  1913,  Mr.  Holmes  made  a  visit  to  Luray, 
Virginia,  for  the  further  study  of  an  ancient  village  site  near 
that  place  and  the  examination  of  certain  implement-making 
sites  in  the  vicinity.  In  June  he  visited  Missouri  for  the  pur- 
pose of  studying  certain  collections  owned  in  St.  Louis  and 
for  "the  reexamination  of  an  ancient  iron  and  paint  mine  at 
Leslie.  It  was  found,  however,  that  recent  mining  opera- 
tions had  been  carried  so  far  that  traces  of  the  aboriginal 
work  at  the  mine  were  practically  obliterated,  and  besides  the 
mine  was  found  to  be  filled  with  water,  making  effective 
examination  impossible.  From  St.  Louis  he  proceeded  to 
Chicago,  where  studies  were  made  of  certain  collections  with 
a  view  of  obtaining  data  necessary  to  the  completeness  of  the 
Handbook  of  American  Antiquities. 

In  her  studies  of  Indian  music  Miss  Frances  Densmore  made 
two  trips  to  the  Standing  Rock  Reservation,  South  Dakota 
(one  in  July  and  August,  1913,  and  one  in  June,  1914),  where 
she  engaged  in  investigations  at  Bullhead,  McLaughlin,  and 
the  vicinity  of  the  Martin  Kenel  School.  This  research  com- 
pleted the  field  work  for  the  proposed  volume  of  Sioux  music, 
the  material  for  which,  subsequently  prepared  for  publica- 
tion, consists  of  323  pages  of  manuscript,  98  musical  tran- 
scriptions of  songs,  20  technical  analyses  of  songs,  and  33 
original  illustrations. 

The  practical  use  which  musical  composers  are  making  of 
the  results  of  Miss  Densmore's  studies  is  very  gratifying.  Mr. 
Carl  Busch  has  adapted  for  orchestral  purposes  four  of  the 
songs  rendered  by  Miss  Densmore  and  published  by  the  bu- 
reau, as  follows:  (1)  Chippewa  Vision,  (2)  Farewell  to  the 
Warriors,  (3)  Love  Song,  (4)  Lullaby.  Mr.  Heinrich  Ham- 
mer, of  Washington,  has  composed  a  Sun  Dance  Rhapsody 


28  BUEEAU    OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

and  a  Chippewa  Rhapsody.  Mr.  Charles  Wakefield  Cadman 
has  composed,  for  the  voice,  two  of  the  Chippewa  songs, 
"From  the  Long  Room  of  the  Sea"  and  "Ho,  Ye  Warriors 
on  the  Warpath."  Mr.  S.  N.  Penfield  has  harmonized  two 
vocal  quartets,  "Manitou  Listens  to  Me"  and  "Why  Should 
I  be  Jealous?"  For  the  violin  Mr.  Alfred  Manger  has  pre- 
pared a  "Fantasie  on  Sioux  Themes,"  and  Mr.  Alberto  Bim- 
boni  has  well  advanced  toward  completion  an  opera  bearing 
the  title  "The  Maiden's  Leap."  Certain  of  the  orchestral 
arrangements  have  been  played  by  the  Chicago  Symphony 
Orchestra  (formerly  known  as  the  Thomas  Orchestra) ,  as  well 
as  by  the  symphony  orchestras  of  Washington,  Minneapolis, 
and  Kansas  City.  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  demand  for 
Sioux  themes  in  advance  of  their  publication.  These  have 
been  furnished  in  manuscript  as  far  as  possible  to  those  de- 
siring them  for  specific  and  legitimate  use.  Two  of  the  com- 
positions in  the  foregoing  list  are  based  on  such  themes. 

Work  on  the  volume  of  Sioux  music  is  approaching  com- 
pletion. This  will  be  larger  than  either  of  the  bulletins  on 
Chippewa  music,  and,  while  the  same  general  plan  has  been 
followed,  there  will  be  much  that  is  neAv,  both  in  subject 
matter  and  in  style  of  illustration. 

During  the  year  work  on  the  Handbook  of  Aboriginal 
Remains  East  of  the  Mississippi  was  continued  by  Mr.  D.  I. 
Bushnell,  jr.,  under  a  small  allotment  from  the  bureau,  and 
ipproximately  90,300  words  of  manuscript  were  recorded 
on  cards  geographically  arranged.  The  entire  amount  of 
manuscript  now  completed  is  about  321,000  words,  and  the 
bibliography  thus  far  includes  306  titles.  As  a  result  of  the 
notes  received  from  the  Wisconsin  Archeological  Society, 
through  the  courtesy  of  its  secretary,  Mr.  Charles  E.  Brown, 
of  Madison,  every  county  of  that  State  will  be  well  repre- 
sented in  the  Handbook.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  more 
information  regarding  aboriginal  remains  is  not  forthcoming 
from  certain  other  parts  of  the  country  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
especially  the  New  England  States,  which  at  this  writing  are 
not  adequately  represented.  The  bureau  is  indebted  to 
Mr.  Warren  K.  Moorehead,  of  the  department  of  archeology 
of  Phillips  Academy,  Andover,  Massachusetts,  for  the  gen- 


ADMINISTRATIVE   REPORT  29 

erous  use  of  original  data  gathered  by  him  in  Maine  in  ad- 
vance of  its  publication  by  the  academy. 

Mr.  James  Murie,  as  opportunity  offered  and  the  limita- 
tions of  a  small  allotment  made  by  the  bureau  for  these 
studies  allowed,  continued  his  observations  on  the  ceremonial 
organization  and  rites  of  the  Pawnee  tribe,  of  which  he  is  a 
member.  The  product  of  Mr.  Murie's  investigation  of  the 
year,  which  was  practically  finished  but  not  received  in 
manuscript  form  at  the  close  of  June,  is  a  circumstantial 
account  of  "  The  Going  After  the  Mother  Cedar  Tree  by  the 
Bear  Society,"  an  important  ceremony  which  has  been 
performed  only  by  the  Skidi  band  during  the  last  decade. 

In  the  last  annual  report  attention  was  directed  to  a 
proposed  series  of  handbooks  of  the  Indians  of  the  several 
States  and  to  the  arrangements  that  had  been  made  for 
such  a  volume,  devoted  to  the  tribes  of  California,  by  Dr. 
A.  L.  Kroeber,  of  the  University  of  California.  The  author 
has  submitted  sections  of  the  manuscript  of  this  work  for 
suggestion,  and,  although  his  university  duties  have  delayed 
its  completion,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  when  the 
material  is  finished  and  published  it  will  form  an  excellent 
model  for  the  entire  series.  It  has  been  hoped  that  the 
pecuniary  means  necessary  for  the  preparation  of  these  State 
handbooks  would  be  provided  in  accordance  with  the  esti- 
mate of  an  appropriation  submitted  for  this  purpose,  but 
unfortunately  the  desired  provision  was  not  made. 

Prof.  Howard  M.  Ballou,  of  Honolulu,  has  submitted  from 
time  to  time  additional  titles  for  the  List  of  Works  Relating 
to  Hawaii,  compiled  in  collaboration  with  the  late  Dr. 
Cyrus  Thomas.  The  material  for  this  bibliography  is  in  the 
hands  of  Mr.  Felix  Neumann  for  final  editorial  revision,  and 
it  is  expected  that  the  entire  manuscript  will  soon  be  ready 
for  composition. 

MANUSCRIPTS 

The  large  collection  of  manuscripts  in  possession  of  the 
bureau  has  been  in  continuous  charge  of  Mr.  J.  N.  B.  Hewitt. 
A  few  noteworthy  additions  were  made  during  the  year 
besides  those  prepared  or  which  are  in  process  of  preparation 


30  BUREAU    0E   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

by  members  of  the  staff.  Among  these  may  be  mentioned 
the  "  Dictionary  of  Words  that  have  been  Made  Known  in 
or  Introduced  into  English  from  the  Indians  of  North, 
Central,  and  South  America,"  by  the  late  William  R.  Gerard, 
a  work  requiring  many  years  of  assiduous  labor.  The  manu- 
script was  acquired  for  a  nominal  consideration  from  Mrs. 
Gerard,  and  it  is  the  design  to  publish  the  dictionary  as 
soon  as  it  can  be  given  the  customary  editorial  attention. 
Before  his  death  Mr.  Gerard  presented  to  the  bureau  an 
original  manuscript  of  31  pages,  with  21  diagrarrs,  on 
"  Terminations  of  the  Algonquian  Transitive  and  Indefinite 
Verbs  and  their  Meanings,"  to  which  Dr.  Truman  Michelson 
has  appended  a  criticism. 

Additional  manuscripts  worthy  of  special  note  are  the 
following: 

J.  P.  Dunn:  Translation  of  Miami-Peoria  Dictionary,  Part  2,  Alter 
to  Assomtr.  The  original  of  this  dictionary  is  hi  the  John  Carter 
Brown  Library,  of  Providence,  through  whose  courteous  librarian, 
Mr.  George  Parker  Winship,  the  bureau  has  been  provided  with  a  pho- 
tostat copy. 

J.  P.  Duim:  Translation  of  the  History  of  Genesis,  second  chapter, 
from  the  Miami-Peoria  Dictionary  above  cited. 

Cyrus  Byington:  Manuscript  notebook,  1844-1848  and  1861. 
Kindly  presented  by  Mrs.  Eliza  limes,  daughter  of  this  noted  mission- 
ary to  the  Choctaw. 

James  A.  Gilfillan :  Chippewa  Sentences.  A  small  quarto  notebook 
kindly  presented  by  Miss  Emily  Cook,  of  the  Office  of  Indian  Affairs. 

Parker  Marshall:  Various  memoranda  on  the  location  of  the 
Natchez  Trace. 

H.  A.  Scomp:  Comparative  Choctaw  and  Creek  Dictionary,  con- 
sisting of  1,0.54  sheets,  20  by  36  inches. 

Francisco  Pareja:  Confessionario,  in  Spanish  and  Timuqua.  Pho- 
tostat copy  furnished  by  the  courtesy  of  the  New  York  Historical 
Society. 

Francisco  Pareja:  Catechismo,  hi  Timuqua.  Photostat  copy  fur- 
nished by  the  courtesy  of  the.  New  York  Historical  Society. 

Francisco  Pareja:  Explicacion  de  la  Doctruia,  hi  Timuqua.  Pho- 
tostat copy  furnished  by  the  courtesy  of  the  New  York  Historical 
Society. 

V.  C.  Fredericksen :  Origin  of  the  Eskimo  and  their  Wanderings, 
with  photographs.  (The  author  is  a  Danish  missionary  in  Green- 
land.) 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  31 

From  time  to  time  the  bureau  has  been  put  to  considerable 
expense  in  having  photostat  copies  made  of  unique  manu- 
scripts and  of  excessively  rare  books  indispensable  to  its 
researches.  It  is  therefore  fortunate  that  the  opportunity 
was  afforded,  late  in  the  fiscal  year,  to  acquire  a  photostat 
apparatus  which  has  since  been  in  constant  service.  The 
urgent  need  of  such  an  instrument  was  made  especially  mani- 
fest when  the  Rev.  George  Worpenberg,  S.  J.,  librarian  of  St. 
Marys  College,  St.  Marys,  Kansas,  generously  accorded  the 
bureau  the  privilege  of  copying  a  number  of  valuable  original 
linguistic  manuscripts  in  the  archives  of  the  college,  pertain- 
ing chiefly  to  the  Potawatomi  and  including  a  dictionary  and 
a  grammar  recorded  by  the  late  Father  Maurice  Gailland. 
Manuscript  copies  of  these  voluminous  linguistic  works  could 
have  been  made  only  after  infinite  labor  by  an  expert  and  at 
an  expense  far  exceeding  the  entire  cost  of  the  photostat  ap- 
paratus. By  the  close  of  the  year  the  making  of  the  fac- 
simile reproductions  had  been  commenced  by  Mr.  Albert 
Sweeney,  under  the  immediate  direction  of  Mr.  De  Lancey 
Gill,  illustrator. 

An  opportunity  was  afforded  at  the  close  of  the  year  to 
replace  the  wooden  partition  and  ceiling  of  the  manuscript 
room  with  terra  cotta  and  to  install  a  fireproof  door  and 
window  coverings,  thus  giving  for  the  first  time  adequate  pro- 
tection to  the  bureau's  large  collection  of  priceless  unpub- 
lished material. 

PUBLICATIONS 

The  editorial  work  of  the  bureau  has  been  continued  by 
Mr.  J.  G.  Gurley,  editor,  who  has  been  assisted  from  time  to 
time  by  Mrs.  Frances  S.  Nichols.  The  following  publications 
were  received  from  the  press  during  the  year: 

Bulletin  .53,  '/Chippewa  Music — II,"  by  Frances  Densmore. 

Bulletin  56,  "  Ethnozoology  of  the  Tewa  Indians,"  by  Junius  Hen- 
derson and  John  P.  Harrington. 

"Coos:  An  Illustrative  Sketch,"  by  Leo  J.  Frachtenberg.  Extract 
from  Handbook  of  American  Indian  Languages  (Bulletin  40,  part  2). 

The  status  of  other  publications,  now  in  press,  is  as  follows : 

The  proof  reading  of  the  Twenty-ninth  Annual  Report,  the 

accompanying  paper  of  which,  entitled  "  Ethnogeography  of 


32  BUREAU   OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 

the  Tewa  Indians,"  by  John  P.  Harrington,  is  an  exhaustive 
memoir  presenting  many  technical  difficulties,  was  nearly 
completed  during  the  year.  About  two-thirds  of  the  memoir 
is  in  page  form. 

The  Thirtieth  Annual  Report,  comprising  originally,  in  ad- 
dition to  the  administrative  section,  three  memoirs:  (1) 
"Tsimshian  Mythology,"  by  Franz  Boas;  (2)  "Ethnobotany 
of  the  Zuni  Indians,"  by  Matilda  Coxe  Stevenson;  (3)  "An 
Inquiry  into  the  Animism  and  Folk-lore  of  the  Guiana  In- 
dians," by  Walter  E.  Roth.  Extensive  additions  to  the 
first-named  memoir,  received  after  the  report  had  been  put 
into  type,  necessitated  the  division  of  the  contents,  and  ac- 
cordingly this  section  was  transferred  to  the  Thirty-first  Re- 
port. Approximately  two-thirds  of  "Tsimshian  Mythology" 
has  been  paged,  and  the  Zuni  memoir  also,  now  the  first  ac- 
companying paper  of  the  Thirtieth  Annual,  is  in  process  of 
paging. 

To  the  Thirty-second  Report  will  be  assigned  a  memoir 
entitled  "  Seneca  Myths  and  Fiction,"  collected  by  Jeremiah 
Curtm  and  J.  N.  B.  Hewitt  and  edited  with  an  introduction 
by  the  latter,  the  manuscript  of  which  is  about  ready  for 
editorial  revision. 

Bulletin  40  (pt.  2),  "Handbook  of  American  Indian 
Languages."  The  work  on  this  bulletin  has  been  carried 
along  steadily  under  the  immediate  supervision  of  its  editor, 
Doctor  Boas.  Two  sections — Takelma  and  Coos— have  been 
issued  in  separate  form  (aggregating  429  pages),  and  two 
additional  sections,  dealing  with  the  Chukchee  and  Siuslaw 
languages  respectively,  are  in  type,  the  former  being  "  made 
up"  to  the  extent  of  about  50  pages. 

Bulletin  46,  "A  Dictionary  of  the  Choctaw  Language," 
by  Cyrus  Byington  (edited  by  John  R.  Swanton  and  Henry 
S.  Halbert).  The  first  (Choctaw-English)  section  of  this 
work  was  completed  during  the  year  and  is  practically  ready 
for  the  press.  The  manuscript  of  the  second  section  (English- 
Choctaw  directory),  comprising  36,008  entries  on  cards,  was 
sent  to  the  Printing  Office  April  30  to  June  13,  but  no  proof 
had  been  received  at  the  close  of  the  year. 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  33 

Bulletin  55,  "Ethnobotany  of  the  Tewa  Indians,"  by 
Wilfred  W.  Robbins,  John  P.  Harrington,  and  Barbara 
Freire-Marreco.  After  this  bulletin  was  in  type  it  was 
found  advisable  to  incorporate  a  considerable  amount  of 
valuable  material,  subsequently  gathered  and  kindly  offered 
by  Miss  Freire-Marreco.  The  change  involved  recasting  in 
a  large  measure  the  original  work.  The  second  galley  proof 
is  in  the  hands  of  Miss  Freire-Marreco  for  final  revision. 

Bulletin  57,  "  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Maya 
Hieroglyphs,"  by  Sylvanus  Griswold  Morley.  The  manu- 
script and  illustrations  of  this  memoir  were  submitted  to 
the  Public  Printer  the  latter  part  of  April.  Engraver's 
proof  of  the  illustrations,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  pieces 
of  color  work,  have  been  received  and  approved.  Owing  to 
the  heavy  pressure  of  public  business,  the  Printing  Office 
had  been  unable  to  furnish  proof  of  the  letterpress  by  the 
close  of  the  year. 

Bulletin  58,  "  List  of  Publications  of  the  Bureau  of  Ameri- 
can Ethnology."  The  page  proof  of  this  bulletin  is  in  the 
hands  of  the  printers  for  slight  correction,  preparatory  to 
placing  it  on  the  press. 

The  total  number  of  publications  of  the  bureau  distributed 
during  the  year  was  12,819,  classified  as  follows: 

Eeport  volumes  and  separate  papers 2,810 

Bulletins 9,943 

Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology 22 

Introductions 5 

Miscellaneous  publications 39 


Total 12,819 

As  during  several  years  past  the  extensive  correspondence 
arising  from  the  constant  demand  for  the  publications  of 
the  bureau  has  been  in  immediate  and  efficient  charge  of 
Miss  Helen  Munroe  and  Mr.  E.  L.  Springer,  of  the  Smith- 
sonian Institution,  assisted  by  Mr.  Thomas  F.  Clark,  jr. 
The  distribution  of  publications  has  been  made  in  accord- 
ance with  law  and  with  entire  satisfaction  by  the  office  of 
the  Superintendent  of  Documents  on  order  of  the  bureau. 

75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 3 


34  BUREAU    OF    AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

The  preparation  of  the  illustrations  for  the  publications 
of  the  bureau,  the  making  of  photographs  of  the  members 
of  delegations  of  Indians  visiting  Washington,  and  the 
developing  and  printing  of  negatives  made  by  the  staff  of 
the  bureau  during  the  prosecution  of  their  field  work  have 
been  in  charge  of  Mr.  DeLancey  Gill,  illustrator,  assisted 
successively  by  Mr.  Walter  Stenhouse  and  Mr.  Albert 
Sweeney.  In  addition  the  numerous  photostat  copies  of 
manuscripts  and  books,  aggregating  about  2,500  exposures, 
have  been  made  under  Mr.  Gill's  supervision,  as  elsewhere 
mentioned.  Of  the  visiting  deputations,  representing  17 
tribes,  79  photographic  exposures  were  made;  92  negatives 
of  ethnologic  subjects  were  required  for  reproduction  as 
illustrations;  512  negatives  made  by  the  members  of  the 
staff  in  the  field  were  developed  and  381  prints  made  there- 
from; 105  photographs  were  printed  for  presentation  to 
Indians  and  627  for  publication,  exchange,  and  special  dis- 
tribution. In  addition  to  the  photographic  work,  which 
constitutes  the  major  part  of  the  illustrative  material 
required  by  the  bureau,  54  drawings  were  made  for  repro- 
duction. 

The  series  of  photographs,  representing  55  tribes,  which 

had  been  exhibited  by  the  New  York  Public  Library  and 

the  Public  Library  Commission  of  Indiana,  was  borrowed 

in  June  by  the  Providence  Public   Library   for  a  similar 

purpose. 

LIBRARY 

The  reference  library  of  the  bureau,  which  consists  of 
19,240  books,  about  12,894  pamphlets,  and  several  thousand 
unbound  periodicals,  has  been  in  continuous  charge  of  Miss 
Ella  Leary,  librarian,  assisted  by  Mrs.  Ella  Slaughter.  Dur- 
ing the  year  708  books  were  accessioned,  of  which  143  were 
acquired  by  purchase  and  137  by  gift  and  exchange,  the 
remaining  428  being  represented  by  volumes  of  serials  that 
hitherto  had  been  neither  bound  nor  recorded.  The  peri- 
odicals currently  received  numbered  629,  of  which  only  16 
were  obtained  by  purchase,  the  remainder  being  received 
through  exchange.     Of  pamphlets,  150  were  acquired.     Dur- 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  35 

ing  the  year  1,195  volumes  were  sent  to.  the  bindery,  and  of 
these  695  were  bound  and  returned  to  the  bureau. 

The  endeavor  to  supply  deficiencies  in  the  sets  of  publica- 
tions of  institutions  of  learning  has  continued  without 
remission.  Among  the  more  important  accessions  of  this 
kind  during  the  year  were  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fur 
Erdkunde  zu  Berlin,  20  volumes;  Institute  Geografico 
Argentino,  Boletin,  10  volumes;  and  Konigliches  Museum 
fiir  Volkerkunde,  Veroffentlichungen,  8  volumes. 

The  librarian  has  prepared  a  monthly  bulletin  of  accessions 
for  the  use  of  the  staff,  and  has  furnished  information  and 
compiled  bibliographic  notes  for  the  use  of  correspondents. 
In  addition  to  the  constant  drafts  on  the  library  of  the 
bureau  requisition  was  made  on  the  Library  of  ( Jongress  dur- 
ing the  year  for  an  aggregate  of  300  volumes  for  official  use, 
and  in  turn  the  bureau  library  was  frequently  consulted  by 
officers  of  other  Government  establishments. 

An  appropriation  having  been  made  by  Congress,  in 
behalf  of  the  Institution,  for  installing  modern  steel  book- 
stacks  in  the  eastern  end  of  the  large  exhibition  hall  on  the 
first  floor  of  the  Smithsonian  building,  and  provision  having 
been  made  for  affording  the  proposed  increased  facilities  to 
the  library  of  the  bureau,  which  for  four  and  a  half  years 
had  been  installed  in  the  eastern  galleries  of  the  hall  men- 
tioned, the  books  therein  were  removed  in  February  to  the 
gallery  and  main  floor  of  the  western  end  of  the  hall  and  the 
eastern  galleries  were  demolished.  Although  this  work  of 
removal  occupied  two  weeks,  it  was  done  without  confusion 
and  practically  without  cessation  of  the  library's  activities. 
The  new  stacks  were  in  process  of  erection  before  the  close 
of  the  fiscal  year. 

COLLECTIONS 

The  following  collections  were  acquired  by  the  bureau  or 
by  members  of  its  staff,  and,  having  served  the  purpose  of 
study  were  transferred  to  the  National  Museum,  as  required 
by  law. 

Eight  fragments  of  ancient  British  pottery.  Gift  to  the  bureau  by 
Rev.  Robert  C.  Nightingale,  Swaffam,  Norfolk,  England.     (55735.) 


3G  BUREAU    OF    AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY 

Potsherds,  fragments  of  human  bones,  and  three  heads.  Gift  to 
the  bureau  by  Mrs.  Bruce  Keid,  Port  Arthur,  Texas.     (55758.) 

Parts  of  five  skeletons  (three  complete  skulls  and  fragments  of  two 
skulls)  from  a  burial  cist  in  a  cave  about  20  miles  south  of  Grant, 
New  Mexico.  Collected  by  F.  W.  Hodge,  Bureau  of  American  Eth- 
nology.    (56134.) 

Thirty-one  ethnological  objects  from  the  Cherokee  and  Catawba 
Indians.  Collected  by  James  Mooney,  Bureau  of  American  Eth- 
nology.    (56312.) 

Six  photographs  of  Aztec  antiquities.  Purchased  from  W.  W. 
Blake,  City  of  Mexico.     (56609.) 

Stone-  phallus  from  Mesa  Verde,  Colorado.  Gift  to  the  bureau  by 
II.  C.  Lay,  Telluride,  Colorado.     (56719.) 

Arrow  point  found  on  the  north  fork  of  Roanoke  River,  about  3 
miles  from  Blacksburg,  Virginia.  Gift  to  the  bureau  by  Prof. 
Otto  C.  Burkhart,  Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute,  Blacksburg,  Vir- 
ginia.    (56679.) 

PROPERTY 

The  principal  property  of  the  bureau  consists  of  its  library, 
comprising  approximately  35,000  books  and  pamphlets,  a 
huge  collection  of  manuscripts  for  reference  or  in  process  of 
preparation  for  publication,  and  several  thousand  photo- 
graphic negatives.  With  the  exception  of  a  portion  of  the 
library,  this  material  could  not  be  duplicated.  In  addition, 
the  bureau  possesses  a  photostat  apparatus  with  electric- 
light  equipment,  several  cameras,  dictagraphs,  and  other 
appliances  for  use  in  conducting  scientific  research  in  the 
field  and  the  office,  necessary  office  furniture  and  equipment, 
and  a  limited  supply  of  stationery,  supplies,  etc.  Also  under 
control  of  the  bureau,  but  in  immediate  custody  of  the  Public 
Printer,  as  required  by  law,  is  a  stock  of  numerous  publica- 
tions, chiefly  annual  reports  and  bulletins. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Quarters. — The  only  improvements  made  in  the  quarters 
occupied  by  the  bureau  in  the  Smithsonian  building,  as  set 
forth  in  the  last  report,  have  been  those  incident  to  the 
reconstruction  of  the  library  and  the  fireproofing  of  the 
manuscript  room,  above  alluded  to,  and  the  painting  of  the 
walls  of  four  rooms,  made  necessary  partly  by  inadequate 


ADMINISTRATIVE    REPORT  37 

lighting.  In  addition  to  the  space  previously  occupied,  a 
room  on  the  fourth  floor  of  the  eastern  end  of  the  Smith- 
sonian building  was  assigned  temporarily  to  the  bureau  for 
the  use  of  two  members  of  its  staff. 

Office  force. — The  personnel  of  the  office  has  remained 
unchanged,  with  the  exception  of  the  resignation  of  one 
messenger  boy  and  the  appointment  of  another.  It  has 
been  necessary  to  employ  a  copyist  from  time  to  time  in 
connection  witli  the  editing  of  Byington's  Choctaw  Dic- 
tionary. The  correspondence  of  the  bureau  has  been  con- 
ducted in  the  same  manner  as  set  forth  in  the  last  annual 
report  and  as  hereinbefore  mentioned. 

EECOMMENDATIOXS 

The  chief  needs  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  lie 
in  the  extension  of  its  researches  to  fields  as  yet  unexploited. 
Attention  has  frequently  been  called  to  the  necessity  of 
pursuing  studies  among  Indian  tribes  which  are  rapidly 
becoming  extinct,  or  modified  by  their  intimate  contact  with 
civilization.  These  researches  can  not  be  conducted  unless 
the  means  are  provided,  since  the  present  limited  scientific 
corps,  with  inadequate  allotments  of  money  to  meet  the 
expenses  of  extended  field  investigations,  is  not  equal  to  the 
immense  amount  of  work  to  be  done.  Unfortunately  many 
opportunities  for  conducting  these  researches  which  were 
possible  a  few  years  ago  have  passed  away,  owing  to  the 
death  of  older  Indians  who  alone  possessed  certain  knowledge 
of  their  race.  Much  can  still  be  done,  however,  if  only  the 
means  are  afforded. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  repeat,  in  connection  with  this 
general  recommendation,  the  estimate  for  an  increase, 
amounting  to  $24,800,  in  the  appropriation  for  the  bureau 
and  the  brief  reasons  for  urging  the  grant  of  this  additional 
sum,  inasmuch  as  these  items  will  be  found  in  the  printed 
Estimates  of  Appropriations,  1915-16. 

F.  W.  Hodge, 
Ethnologist-in-  Charge . 


NOTE  OX  THE  ACCOMPANYING  PAPER 

A  paper  of  considerable  importance,  edited  by  I>r.  Franz  Boas,  of 

Columbia  University,  is  appended  to  this  report.  The  material  for 
the  paper  was  collected  and  recorded  by  Mr.  George  Hunt,  a  mixed- 
blood  Kwakiutl.  of  Fort  Rupert,  British  Columbia,  who  is  respon- 
sible for  the  accuracy,  the  authenticity,  and  the  character  of  the 
contents  of  the  paper.  Mr.  Hunt  also  collaborated  in  a  similar  way 
with  Or.  Boas  in  a  former  work,  entitled  "The  Social  Organization 
and  th.e  Secret  Societies  of  the  Kwakiutl  Indians"  published  in  the 
Report  of  the  United  Stales  National  Museum  for  the  year  ending 
June  30,  1895. 

The  accompanying  paper,  entitled  "Ethnology  of  the  Kwakiutl,'' 
deals  with  the  arts  and  industries,  the  methods  and  devices  employed 
in  hunting  and  fishing,  the  methods  and  means  of  gathering  and 
preserving  other  kinds  of  food,  the  recipes  for  preparing  food  for 
consumption,  and  the  beliefs  and  customs  of  a  group  of  several 
tribes  or  peoples,  more  or  less  closely  related,  who  dwell  on  the 
Pacific  coast  of  North  America,  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Rupert,  on 
Vancouver  Island,  British  Columbia,  and  are  called  the  Kwakiutl. 

The  languages  spoken  by  these  tribes  belong  to  the  Wakashan 
linguistic  stock,  which,  as  constituted  by  Powell,  is  composed  of  two 
large  groups  of  fundamentally  related  languages,  to  one  of  which 
the  name  Kwakiutl  is  applied,  and  the  name  Nootka  to  the  other. 
In  1(104  the  Kwakiutl  group  of  dialects  was  spoken  by  2,173  persons 
a  number  which  is,  however,  gradually  decreasing. 

The  name  Kwakiutl.  in  its  original  and  more  restricted  sense,  was 
applied  to  this  group  of  tribes,  consisting  of  the  Walas-Kwakiutl 
(Great  Kwakiutl),  Komoyue,  Guetela,  and  Komkutis.  But  in  time 
the  Komoyue  camped  at  Tsaite,  and  a  portion  of  the  Kwakiutl  who 
emigrated  from  their  congeners  are  known  as  the  Matilpe.  By  enu- 
merating the  Matilpe  and  the  Komoyue  apart  from  the  other  tribes 
or  septs,  the  Canadian  Department  of  Indian  Affairs  limits  the  name 
Kwakiutl  to  the  Guetela,  Komkutis.  and  the  Walas-Kwakiutl  (Great 
Kwakiutl ). 

The  Kwakiutl  are  essentially  a  fisher  folk,  and  so  to  them  all 
other  gainful  pursuits  are  of  secondary  importance. 

Many  Indian  tribes,  distinct  in  physical  characteristics  and  dis- 
tinct also  in  languages,  but  who  are  one  in  culture,  occupy  the 
Pacific  coast  of  America  between  Juan  de  Fuca  Strait  and  Yakutat 
Bay.     This  they  are  because,  in  large  measure,  their  industries  and 

39 


40  BUEEAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 

arts,  their  beliefs  and  customs,  differ  so  markedly  from  those  of  all 
other  Indian  peoples.  Notwithstanding  this  great  uniformity  of 
culture,  however,  a  closer  study  of  the  elements  of  it  discloses  many 
things  that  are  peculiar  to  single  tribes,  which  show  that  this  cul- 
ture is  the  natural  result  of  a  gradual  and  convergent  development 
from  several  distinct  sources  or  centers,  every  one  of  these  tribes 
having  added  something  peculiar  to  itself  to  the  sum  of  this  develop- 
ment. 

The  territory  occupied  by  these  tribes  is  a  mountainous  coast, 
deeply  indented  by  numerous  sounds  and  fiords,  which  encompass 
many  islands,  both  large  and  small.  Travel  along  the  coast  is  very 
easy  by  means  of  canoes,  but  access  to  inland  places  is  quite  difficult, 
rugged  hills  and  dense  forests  rondering  travel  here  very  trying,  even 
forbidding.  A  few  fiords  deeply  indent  the  mainland,  and  the 
valleys,  opening  into  them,  make  possible  access  to  the  center  of  the 
high  ranges,  separating  the  highlands  of  the  interior  from  the  coastal 
lands,  establishing  an  effective  barrier  between  the  people  of  the 
coast  and  those  of  the  interior.  These  barriers  have  forced  these 
tribes  to  occupy  a  rather  isolated  area,  and  thus  they  have  devel- 
oped a  culture  peculiar  to  themselves,  without  marked  traces  of 
intrusive  influence. 

The  following  are  Kwakiutl  groups  and  subgroups  of  peoples: 
Haisla  dialect — Kitamat  and  Kitlope.  Ileiltsuk  dialect — Bella- 
bella,  China  Hat,  Nohuntsitk,  Somehulitk,  and  Wikeno.  Kwakiutl 
dialect:  Koskimo  suhJialtrt  -Klaskino,  Koprino,  Koskimo,  and 
Quatsino;  Nawiti  siibdialed  -Nakomgilisala  and  Tlatlasikoala;  Kiva- 
Jciutl  subdialect — Awaitlala,  Goasila,  Guauaenok,  Hahuamis,  Koek- 
satenok,  Kwakiutl  (including  Matilpe),  Lekwiltok,  Mamalelekala, 
Nakoaktok,  Nimkish,  Tenaktak.  Tlauitsis,  and  Tsawatenok.  The 
Hoyalas  subdialect  formerly  constituted  a  Kwakiutl  division  or 
group,  which  is  now  extinct  and  whose  affinities  are  unknown. 

Among  the  Kwakiutl  proper  there  is  a  •'ceremonial  of  cannibal- 
ism" which  is  the  most  important  part  of  the  ritual  to  which  it  be- 
longs. It  is  the  belief  of  the  living  Kwakiutl  that  cannibalism  was 
introduced  among  them  from  the  Heiltsuk  about  1S30.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Tsimshian  claim  that  they  acquired  this  revolting 
custom  from  the  Heiltsuk  about  1S20.  This  would  seem  to  indicate 
that  cannibalism  was  limited  for  a  time  to  the  comparatively  small 
habitat  of  the  Heiltsuk.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that  it  originated 
with  the  Heiltsuk. 


ACCOMPANYING  PAPER 


ETHNOLOGY   OF  THE   KWAKIUTL 

BASED  ON  DATA  COLLECTED  BY  GEOBGE  HUNT 

By  FRANZ  BOAS 


PREFACE 

The  materia]  contained  in  the  following  pages  was  collected  partly 
in  connection  with  the  work  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition, 
partly  after  the  close  of  the  expedition,  largely  with  funds  provided 
by  friends  interested  in  the  scientific  work  of  the  Department  of 
Anthropology  in  Columbia  University. 

After  winking  with  me  in  1893,  1897,  and  1900,  during  which  time 
he  gained  much  practice  in  writing  the  Kwakiutl  language,  Mr.  Hunt 
spent  several  weeks  in  New  York  in  1901.  During  this  time  the  gen- 
eral plan  of  work  was  decided  upon,  and,  following  instructions  and 
questions  sent  out  by  me,  Mr.  Hunt  recorded  data  relating  to  the 
material  culture,  the  social  life,  customs,  and  beliefs  of  the  Kwakiutl 
Indians.  So  far  as  accuracy  and  contents  are  concerned,  he  is  re- 
sponsible for  the  material  contained  in  this  book.  It  will  be  noticed 
that  a  number  of  data  have  been  recorded  several  times,  generally 
at  intervals  of  several  years,  and  the  agreement,  of  the  statements 
is  a  guaranty  of  the  accuracy  of  the  record.  Much  of  the  information 
in  regard  to  cookery  was  obtained  by  Mi'.  Hunt  from  Mrs.  Hunt, 
who  was  born  in  Fort  Rupert,  and  who  was  thoroughly  familiar  with 
the  duties  of  a  good  housewife.  In  1900  I  had  the  opportunity  of 
obtaining  a  considerable  amount  of  information  from  her,  which  will 
be  recorded  in  a  general  ethnological  discussion  of  the  material  con- 
tained in  these  volumes. 

I  have  classified  the  material  according  to  contents,  an  undertaking 
which  has  sometimes  led  to  the  necessity  of  breaking  up  a  record 
containing  data  relating  to  material  culture,  customs,  and  beliefs. 

Mi-.  Hunt  has  taken  pains  to  make  his  descriptions  as  accurate  as 
possible.  This  procedure  has  given  rise  to  a  certain  amount  of 
repetition  that  could  not  be  eliminated  by  the  editor. 

The  order  in  which  the  material  contained  in  the  present  volume 
was  written  by  Mi-.  Hunt  is  indicated  in  the  critical  remarks  at  the 
end  of  Part  2  of  this  work. 

In  accordance  with  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  report  on  tran- 
scribing American  languages,  adopted  by  a  committee  of  the  American 
Anthropological  Association  and  printed  by  the  Smithsonian  Insti- 
tution, I  have  adhered  to  the  alphabet  used  in  the  previous  publica- 
tions on  the  Kwakiutl. 

Franz  Boas. 

November,  1916. 

45 


EXPLANATION     OF    ALPHABET    USED     IN     RENDERING 
INDIAN  SOUNDS 


i  e,     i,     i\     a,     6,     o  u 
I  e,    e,    a,    a,    el,     6  u 

e      obscure  e,  as  in  flower. 

i  e    are  probably  the  same  sound,  intermediate  between  the  continental  values 

of  i  and  e. 

i        i  in  hill. 

e       e  in  fell. 

a       has  its  continental  value. 

6       German  o  in  I  oil 

o  it  are  probably  the  same  sound,  intermediate  between  the  continental  values 

of  o  and  it. 
e       a  somewhat  doubtful  sound,  varying  greatly  in  its  pronunciation  among 

different  individuals  between  e  and  el. 

a       German  a  in  Bar. 

&       aw  in  law. 

«       indicates  that  the  preceding  consonant  is  pronounced  with  u  position  of  the 

mouth. 


■Sonant 


Fortis 


Spirant 
surd 


Velar 

Palatal 

Anterior  palatal 
Alveolar 

Labial 

Lateral 

Glottal  stop 


9, 

</(»■) 

9' 
d 

idz) 
b 


k(w) 


{ts) 
P 


h!(w) 

t! 
t! 

its!) 

pl 

l! 


x(w) 


In  this  whole  series  the  sonant  is  harder  than  the  corresponding  English  sound.  The 
surd  is  pronounced  with  a  full  breath,  while  the  fortis  is  a  surd  with  increased  air 
pressure  in  the  oral  cavity,  produced  by  muscular  pressure  of  tongue,  palate,  and 
cheeks,  accompanied  by  glottal  or  lingual  closure,  which  shuts  the  lungs  off  from 
the  oral  cavity.  This  produces  great  stress  and  suddenness  of  articulation.  The 
sonant  is  so  strong  that  it  is  easily  mistaken  for  a  surd. 

The  velar  series  are  k  sounds  pronounced  with  the  soft  palate,  x  corresponds  to  ch 
in  German  Bach.  The  palatal  series  corresponds  to  our  g  (hard)  and  k.  x  is  like  r,  but 
pronounced  farther  forward,  g'  and  k'  sound  almost  like  gy  and  ky  (with  consonantic 
y);  x'  is  the  German  ch  in  ich.  d,  t,  and  s  are  almost  dental,  l,  l,  and  z!  are  pro- 
nounced with  tip  of  tongue  touching  the  lower  teeth,  the  back  of  the  tongue  extending 
transversely  across  the  hard  palate,  so  that  the  air  escapes  suddenly  near  the  first 
molars.  The  sounds  are  affricative.  In  I  the  tip  of  the  tongue  is  in  the  same  posi- 
tion, but  the  back  of  the  tongue  is  narrower,  so  that  the  air  escapes  near  the  canine 
teeth;  the  sound  is  purely  spirant.  /  is  the  same  as  the  English  sound.  £  is  a  very- 
faint  glottal  stop.  The  exclamation  mark  is  \ised  throughout  to  indicate  increased 
stress  of  articulation  and  glottalization. 

■47 


CONTENTS 


I.  Industries 

Page 

The  making  of  dishes 57 

Dish  for  pounding  salal-berries 59 

The  making  of  boxes 60 

The  making  of  oil-boxes 82 

Sewing  with  cedar-withes 93 

Care  of  canoe 94 

Wooden  sail 97 

Mat  sail  and  mast 100 

The  making  of  horn  spoons  (1) 102 

The  making  of  horn  spoons  (2) 104 

Cedar-bark  breaker 109 

Bag  of  sea-lion  hide 109 

Spruce-roots  and  cedar- withes Ill 

Cedar-withes 115 

Spruce-roots  (1) 116 

Spruce-roots  (2) 118 

Cedar-withes 120 

Cedar-bark  (1) 120 

Cedar-mats 125 

Shredding  cedar-bark • . . .  126 

Yellow  cedar-bark 129 

Cedar-bark  (2) 130 

Shredding  cedar-bark 132 

Open-work  basket 134 

Cedar-bark  basket  (1) 136 

Basket  for  viburnum-berries 138 

Basket  for  wild  carrots _• 139 

Cedar-bark  basket  (2) 139 

Huckleberry-basket 140 

Box  for  picking  salmon-berries 140 

Tump-line 141 

Back-protector 142 

Belt 143 

Implement  for  peeling  cedar-bark 143 

Spade 144 

Digging-stick  for  clover 140 

Digging-stick  for  roots 149 

Digging-stick  for  cryptocbiton 150 

Hook  for  devil-fish  (1) 151 

Hook  for  devil-fish  (2) 152 

Spear  for  sea-eggs 154 

Hook  for  picking  elderberries 155 

Pole  for  gathering  eel-grass 155 

Flounder-spear 157 

Fishing-tackle  for  llounders 157 

75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 4  49 


50  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS  |eth.  ann.  3:, 


Fish-trap  for  perch 159 

Net  for  sea-eggs L63 

Staging  for  drying  roots 166 

Frame  for  drying  berries KIT 

Rack  for  holding  baskets 171 

II.  Hunting,  Fishing,  and  Food-Gathering 

Goat-hunting 173 

Sealing 174 

Catching  flounders 17S 

Fishing  kelp-fish 181 

Fishing  perch 18'! 

Gathering  herring-spawn 1 84 

Catching  devil-fish 1S5 

Gathering  seaweed 185 

Digging  clover 18G 

Digging  cinquefoil-roots 188 

Digging  sea-milkwort 194 

Digging  bracken-root 195 

Digging  fern-root 195 

Gathering  fern-roots 196 

Digging  erythronium 197 

Digging  lupine-roots 198 

Digging  carrots 200 

Digging  lily-bulbs 201 

Picking  elderberries 204 

Picking  salal-berries 205 

Picking  currants 208 

Picking  huckleberries 209 

Picking  s  dmon-berries 211 

Picking  crabapples 213 

Picking  viburnum-berries 210 

Picking  chokecherries 218 

Picking  dogwood-berries 220 

Picking  gooseberries 221 

III.  Preservation  of  Food 

Cutting  dog-salmon 223 

Roasted  old  salmon 223 

Middle  piece  of  salmon 225 

Backbones  of  salmon 226 

Split  salmon. 227 

Fresh  roasted  backbone 229 

Pectoral  fins  of  dog-salmon 230 

Dog-salmon  cheeks 23 1 

Roasted  dog-salmon  heads 234 

Dog-salmon  spawn  (1) 235 

Dog-salmon  spawn  (2) 235 

Quarter-dried  salmon 236 

Spawn  of  silver-salmon 237 

Sockeye-salmon 238 

Old  sockeye-salmon 239 

Roasted  silver-salmon 241 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS  51 


Halibut 241 

Dried  codfish 253 

Herring-spawn 254 

Preserving  roots 255 

Elderberries 255 

Salal-berries : 264 

Salal-berries  and  elderberries  mixed 269 

Currants 275 

Viburnum-berries 281 

Crabapples 286 

Qotlxole 290 

Qotlxole  mixed  with  oil 291 

Curing  seaweed  (1) 292 

Curing  seaweed  (2) 295 

Boiled  huckleberries 296 

Viburnum-berries  with  oil 300 

The  first  dog-salmon  of  the  season 302 

IV.  Recipes 

Roasted  salmon 305 

Blistered  salmon '.....  30S 

Scorched  salmon 309 

Preserved  brittle  salmon 310 

Cold  roasted-salmon 312 

Old  salmon,  roasted 313 

Boiled  salmon 313 

Old  dried  salmon 315 

Fresh  dried  salmon 316 

Green  salmon 316 

Soaked  green  salmon  (1) 318 

Soaked  green  salmon  (2) 319 

Salmon  preserved  in  cellars 322 

Middle  part  of  salmon ,  cold  or  boiled 323 

Split-backs 325 

Soaked  backbones,  boiled  or  blistered 325 

Fins  and  tails 327 

Salmon-cheeks 329 

Fresh  salmon-heads 331 

Preserved  salmon-heads 332 

Steamed  salmon-heads 334 

Boiled  salmon-heads 336 

Mush  of  boiled  salmon-heads 338 

Milky  salmon-spawn 339 

Salmon-spawn  with  salmon-berry  sprouts : 342 

Sticky  salmon-spawn 343 

P.oasted  salmon-spawn 344 

Boiled  spawn  of  silver-salmon 345 

Sockeye-salmon 346 

Silver-salmon 34S 

Sun-dried  salmon  (Gwasila) 350 

Boiled  silver-salmon 353 

Boiled  salmon-guts 355 

Fresh  halibut-heads  and  backbone 357 

Halibut-tips 359 


52  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS 


Dried  halibut 360 

Halibut  skin  and  meat 361 

Blistered  half-dried  halibut 363 

Boiled  dried  halibut 364 

Scorched  halibut-skin 365 

Poked  halibut-skin : 367 

Boiled  halibut-edges 368 

Roasted  halibut-edges 370 

Dried  halibut-head 371 

Dried  halibut-stomach,  boiled  and  soaked 373 

Soaked  dried  halibut- fins 375 

Halibut-spawn 377 

Middle  piece  of  halibut 378 

Fresh  codfish  (1) 379 

Fresh  codfish  (2) 382 

Tainted  codfish 386 

Codfish-head 388 

Roasted  codfish 390 

Another  kind  of  roasted  codfish 391 

Red  cod 392 

Black  cod.- 392 

Kelp-fish  (1) 393 

Kelp-fish  (2) 397 

Kelp-fish  (3) 400 

Broiled  dried  kelp-fish .' 402 

Split  kelp-fish 403 

Boiled  kelp-fish  gills  and  stomachs 405 

Roasted  kelp-fish 408 

Perch 410 

Roasted  perch 413 

Flounder 413 

Flounder  eaten  with  spoons 417 

Steamed  flounder 418 

Fresh  herring-spawn  on  cedar-branches 422 

Soaked  herring-spawn 422 

Half-soaked  herring-spawn 424 

Eating  herring-spawn 425 

Herring-spawn  with  kelp 426 

Herring-spawn  with  salmon-berry  shoots 428 

Mountain-goat  butchering 428 

Stomach-fat  of  mountain-goat 432 

Mountain-goat  brisket 436 

Steamed  mountain-goat  meat 439 

Cooking  mountain-goat  meat 441 

Roasted  mountain-goat  meat 443 

Mountain-goat  skin 443 

Boiled  mountain-goat  meat 445 

Porpoise 446 

Seal  butchering 451 

Steamed  seal-meat 461 

Seal-head 462 

Whale 464 

Boiled  whale-tail 468 


boas]                                                 TABLE    OP    CONTENTS  53 

Page 

Boiled  devil-fish 470 

Scorched  devil-fish 472 

Devil-fish  with  oil 473 

Steamed  devil-fish 474 

Boiled  sea-slugs 475 

Roasted  sea-slugs 479 

Baked  sea-slugs 480 

Roasted  chiton 480 

Boiled  chiton : 483 

Large  chiton 484 

Baked  large  chiton 486 

Boiled  large  chiton 487 

Raw  and  roasted  sea-eggs 488 

Boiled  sea  eggs 491 

Raw  sea-eggs 493 

Flat  sea-eggs 494 

Picking  flat  sea-eggs  off  the  rock  at  low  water 496 

Blue  sea-eggs 498 

Barnacles 499 

Another  way  of  preparing  barnacles 504 

Cryptochiton 506 

Baked  cryptochiton 50S 

Winkles 509 

Eel-grass 510 

Seaweed 514 

Powdered  seaweed 515 

Salmon-spawn  with  seaweed 516 

Clams  with  seaweed 516 

Fern-root  (1) 517 

Eating  fern-roots 523 

Fern-root  (2) 524 

Fern-root  (3) 526 

Cooking  clover 527 

Another  way  of  cooking  clover 531 

Baked  clover-root 533 

Raw  clover-root 534 

Cinquefoil 535 

Erythronium 544 

Boiled  erythronium 547 

Raw  and  baked  erythronium 548 

Boiled  lupine-roots 550 

Steamed  lupine-roots 552 

Carrots 553 

Sea-milkwort 557 

Lily  560 

Boiled  lily-bulbs 563 

Elderberry  cakes 564 

Unripe  elderberries 567 

Salal-berry  cakes 569 

Raw  salal-berries 571 

Cakes  of  currants 572 

Raw  currants 575 

Mashed  currants  and  salal-berries 577 


54  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS 


Huckleberries 580 

Mashed  huckleberries 581 

Cleaning  huckleberries 582 

Viburnum-berries  with  water  and  oil 583 

Ripe  sucked  viburnum-berries 585 

Steamed  viburnum-berries 586 

Brittle  rrabapples 593 

Ciabapples  and  oil 594 

Mashed  steamed  crabapples 594 

Salal-berries  and  crabapples 594 

Bunch-berries 596 

Gooseberries 597 

Currants 601 

Solomon's  s  -al 601 

V.  Beliefs  and  Customs 

Signs 603 

Body  feelings  as  signs 603 

Cries  of  the  Raven 606 

Eating 607 

Picking  huckleberries .  607 

Customs  relating  to  sealing 607 

Customs  relating  to  porpoise-hunting 608 

Customs  relating  to  salmon-fishing: 

Dog-salmon 609 

Silver-salmon 610 

Sockeye-salmon 612 

Customs  relating  to  fish  traps 613 

Customs  relating  to  sea-eggs 614 

Beliefs  relating  to  the  devil-fish 614 

Customs  relating  to  canoe-building 615 

Customs  relating  to  fern-roots 616 

Customs  relating  to  currants 616 

Customs  relating  to  cedar-bark 616 

Customs  rslating  to  the  felling  of  trees 617 

Prayers 619 

Prayer  to  young  cedar 619 

Weather  charms 620 

Hunting  taboos 637 

Means  of  having  children 644 

Birth 649 

Treal  ment  of  infants: 

Washing  the  new-born  child 656 

Forming  the  head  of  the  child 657 

Cradling  the  child 658 

Treatment  of  the  infant '. .  666 

Twins 673 

Cauterizing 694 

Cripples 696 

Navel-string 697 

Maturity 699 

The  sweat-bath 702 

Death 705 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS  55 


The  ghost  country 710 

The  soil  of  man 713 

Shamanism 728 

K-!almodelanaga 733 

The  initiation  of  one  of  the  Ts!6ts!ena  of  the  Awa£ilEla 742 

VI.  Social  Customs 

Customs  relating  to  eating 750 

Distribution  of  porpoise 750 

Distribution  of  seal 750 

Feast  of  currants 751 

Huckleberry  feast 754 

Viburnum-berry  feast 755 

Salmon-berry  feast 760 

Crabapple  feast 762 

Feast  of  salal-berries  and  crabapples  mixed 768 

Feast  of  qotlxole 775 

Social  position  and  marriage  laws 776 

Chief's  daughter 776 

Chieftainess 779 

Endogamy 781 

Marrying  outside  of  one's  tribe 782 

The  eagles 784 

Names  and  crests  of  the  Maamtag'ila 785 

Names 786 

Speeches  delivered  in  feasts 78S 

Swear-words 793 

Index i 


I.  INDUSTRIES 

The    Making  of  Dishes.  —  The    dish-maker    takes  |  along   his    ax     1 
when  he  goes  into  the  woods.     When  he  |  reaches  a  patch  of  alder- 
trees,  he  picks  out  a  good  one  |  that  has  no  knots  and  that  is  not 
twisted,  for  he  is  ||  careful  that  it  is   straight  when   it  is  split  in    5 
two.     After  he  has  found  |  a  good  one,  he  chops  it  down.     It  must 
be  six  spans  |  around  at  the  bottom.     When  it  falls  down,  he  chops 
off  |  one  fathom  length  from  the  tough  part  at  the  butt,  |  and  he 
measures  off  four  spans  in  length  and  ||  chops  it  off  there.     After  it  10 
has  been  cut  off,  he  splits  it  in  two  j  straight  through  the  heart  of 
the  wood.     After  it  has  been  split  in  two,  he  chops  off  |  the  heart  of 
the  wood,  so  that  the  block  is  one  span  thick.   |   He  chops  it  off 
carefully,  so  that  it  is  level  and  that  it  has  no  twist,  |  for  the  heart 
of  the  tree  will  be  the  bottom  of  the  dish.     When  this  is  done,  ||  he  15 
chops  out  the  sides  so  that  they  are  wide  in  the  middle.     The  dish 
is  one  span  wide  |  at  each  end,  and  it  is  one  span  and  four  |  fingers 
wide  in  the  middle,  for  it  bulges  out.   |  The  bottom  part  of  the  end 
is  one  short  span  long,  |  and  the  height  is  one  hand-width,  ||  including  20 
the  thumb.  |  The  bottom  is  one  short  span  |  wide  and  three  span^ 


The  Making  of  Dishes  (Loqwelax-:  loqlwe). —  Wa,  hi- Em  daaxusa  i 
loqwelaenoxwaxa    loq!wes   sobayowaxs     lag   laxa  SL!e.     Wa,  gil- 
£mese  lag"aa   laxa    l lasmadzEXEkulaxs    lae    doq!iix£idxa  eketElaxa 
k!ease    LlEiiak'a.     Wa,    he£mesexs    k- !esae    kMllpsla    qa£s    he£mae 
doqwasoseda     naqlEqe    lax    kiixsEntsE£we.     Wii,     g-fPmese    q!axa  5 
ekaxs  lae    soplExodxa    q  !el  !Ep  !EnX'seesta   liixEns  q !waq !wax"ts !SL- 
na£yex,   yix  wag'itlEXLaasas.     Wa,   g-il£mese   t!ax-£IdExs  lae  tEm- 
k'odxa  £nEmp!Enk*e  laxEiis  baLax  qa    lawayes   t!Eingults!EXLa£yas. 
Wii,  la  biil£Idxa    mo]i!Enkas   wasgEmas  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!ana- 
£yexs    lae   tEinxusEndEq.     Wa,    g-il£mese   laxsExs   lae   kuxsEndEq  10 
naq!Eqax     domaqas.     Wa,     g-ihmese     kiixsaakiixs      lae     sopalax 
domaqas     qa    enEmdEnes    lawoyas     hayaqaxa    domaqe.     Wii,     lit 
aekMa  sopalaq  qa  nEqEles.     Wii,  hefmis   qa  k'leses   sElgwasnokwa 
qaxs  he£mae   awabEwesa  loq  !wes  domaqe.     Wii,  gil'mese  gwalExs 
lae  sosEbEnodzEiidEq  qa  lexoyowes  yixs  £nEmdEnae  wiidzExg'iwa-  15 
sasa  oba£yasa  loqlwe.     Wa,  la    modEnbaleda    £nEmp!Enke    laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  £wadzEgoyiiwasa  laxes  k'akilxalaena^ye. 
Wii,  la    oxsg'iwa£yas    £iiEmp!Enk-6sta  laxEns   ts!Exuts!ana£yaxsEns 
q!wiiq!wax-ts!anafyex.     Wa,  laEmxLa  laxs  £wiJlaEn  q!w5q!wax-ts!a- 
naeyex  le£weiis  qomax  yix  £w;ilagiik  ilasas.     Wii,  la  riiEmp!Eng-a,pa  20 
awabayasexEns  ts!Exuts!ana£yasEns  q !waq !waxts !ana£yex  yix  £wii- 
dzEgabasas.      Wii,    lii    modEn     laxEns     q !waq Iwaxts !ana£jTes   yix 

57 


58  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Ietii.  ann.  35 

and  I  four  finger -widths  long.  |  This  is  the  size  of  the  large  feasting- 

25  dish  when  a  feast  is  given  to  many  tribes.  ||  When  the  sides  have  been 
chopped,  it  is  |  in  this  way:  \<-~^~  ^~>Then  he  puts  it  right-side 

up  and  chops  out  the  inside.    [  so  that  it  is  hollow.  |  The 

bark   is  still  on   that   partWC^; ^_>  that  will  be  the  inner  side. 

Now  he  chops  it  off;  and  |  he  only  stops  chopping  it  when  it  is  two 

30  finger-widths  ||  thick  all  around  and  at  both  ends.  Then  he  carries 
it  I  home  on  his  shoulder,  and  he  puts  it,  down  in  his  house,  |  takes 
his  adz,  and  adzes  the  bottom  so  that  it  is  level.  |  When  this  is 
done,  he  adzes  the  outside.     It  |  is  adzed  well.     Then  he  also  adzes 

35  the  ends  well  ||  on  the  outside;  and  when  this  is  done,  he  adzes  along 
the  sides  |  so  as  to  make  them  thin,  lie  just  feels  the  thickness.  | 
After  this  has  been  done,  he  take-  his  small  crooked  knife  and  j 
scoops  out  two  grooves  on  the  outer  side.     When  this  is  done,  he  | 

40  takes  spawn  of  the  dog-salmon,  chews  it,  and  spits  it  into  ||  his  paint- 
dish.  He  takes  coal  and  rub3  it  in  I  the  place  where  is  the  salmon- 
spawn  that  has  been  spit  out.  When  it  is  really  |  black,  he  takes  his 
paint-brush,  dips  the  end  of    the  |      ^^-^-j^-^^    paint-brush 

into  the  black  color,  and  paints   all  ify^-- ^~t^|  :ll',,ull(l    I 

the  rim    of  the  dish,  in    this  way:  D  0  When   this 

45  is  done,  ||  he  puts  it  away,  mi  that  it   V^T "^^  dries.  Then 

it  is  done.  |  ^~-±*c±£^z^z^-^ 

23  mamoplEnk'Elayas  laxEnsq!waq!wax"ts!ana£yex  yix  EwasgEmabasa. 
GaEinxat!    l5q!iisa    £walase    klwelasxi  qleqtegala  k!wel  lelqwala- 

25  Laeya.  Wii,  gll£mese  gwal  sopalax  ewanodza£yasexs  lae  g"a 
gwalega  (fig.). 

Wa,  lii  hangaElsaq  qa£s  sobslEg  Indeq  qa  lobEg'ax^des.  LaEm 
axale  XEklumas  lax  ogug-a£yas.  Wa,  heeme  la  sop!etso£se.  Wii, 
al£mese  gwal  sobElEglqexs  lae  mahlEn  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaeyex 

30  yix  wagwasas  ha-stala  i.E="wis  waxsbElExse.  Wii,  la  wektlaqexs 
lae  na£naku  laxes  gokwe.  Wa,  la  hangalllas  laxes  gokwaxs  lae 
ax'edxes  k-!imLayowe  qa£s  k!trnl£Idex  awaba£yas  qa  nEqEles. 
Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  k!iml£ldEx  ewanodza£yas.  Wa,  laEm 
aekMaxs    lae    klimLaq.     Wii,    lii    aek'Ia    k-!tml£idEX    oxsg'iwa£yas 

:?5  laxa  L!asadza£yas.  Wii,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  k" KmLElEgEndEq 
qa  pElsgEmx£ides.  Wa,  laEm  aEm  plexwax  wagwasas.  Wii, 
gil£mese  gwabsxs  lae  ax£edxes  ama£ye  xElxwala  klwedaya  qaes 
k!wet!edexa  malts  !aqe  lax  6xsgiwa£yas.  Wii,  g'IFmese  gwalExs 
lae   ax£edxa    ge£niisa  gwaxnise    qa£s   malex£wideq   qa£s   kwets  lilies 

40  laxes  k!at!aase.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  dzEgute  qa£s  yildzEltsIiile  lax 
la  qlotslEwatsa  kwesdEkwe  ge£na.  Wa,  gil£mese  la  alak'lala  la 
tslultoxs  lae  ax£edxes  habayowe.  Wii,  lii  hapstEnts  oba£yasa 
hftbayowe  laxa  tsloltowe  gElyaya  qa£s  k-!at!edes  lax  awrstiis 
6guliixta£yasa   loqlwe  g'a  gwaleg-a  (fig.).     Wa,    g'iPmese   gwalExs 

45  lae  gexaq   qa  lEmx£w!des.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  59 

This  size   of   dish  is  used  at  a  feast   by  six  men.  |  If    it  is  three  46 
spans  |  long,  then  two1  guests  eat  out  of  [  one  dish.     It  is  used  in 
lesser  feasts.  ||  The  dish  for  a   feast    to  the   host's  own   nuniaym2  50 
is   two  spans   and   a  half  long.  |  It   is  used   by   three  guests.  |  A 
dish  two  spans  long  |  is  used  by  husband  and  wife  |  and  their  chil- 
dren; and  those  that  are  one  span  and  four  finger-widths  ||  long  are  55 
used  for  the  chief's  daughter  |  and  the  chief's  son.     Two  (a  man  and  j 
his  friend)  eat  out  of  it  tooj  |  and  the  dish  for  a  woman  whose  hus- 
band is  away  is  |  smallest.     It  is  one  span  long.  |  It  is  only  for  one 
person.  ||  That  is  all  now.  |  "0 

Dish  for  pounding  Salal-Berries. — The  husband  !  of  the  woman 
first  goes  to  get  a  good  piece  of  cedar-wood  without  knots,  three  | 
spans  long  and  |  four  spans  |]  wide  and  one  short  span  high.  |  He  65 
takes  his  ax  and  chops  out  |  the  inside,  until  it  is  hollow  and  like 
a  box.  When  j  it  gets  thin,  he  takes  his  hand-adz,  turns  it  bottom- 
side  up,  |  and  adzes  it  over  finely  at  the  bottom  and  the  ends,  ||  so  70 
that  it  does  not  slant;  and  after  he  has  finished  the  outer  side,  | 
he  puts  it  bottom  downward  and  he  adzes  it  inside,  so  that  there  are 

Wa,  heEm  qlELlalasosa  k!wele  bebEgwanEme  £wala£yasa  loqhve.  46 
Wa,  glFmese  yudux"p!Enk'e   laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!anaEyexylx  £was- 
gEmg  ig'aasasa    loqlwaxs    lae    maema£leda    k.'wele  bebEgwanEmxa 
£nal£nEmexLa  loqlwa.     Wa,   laEni  la  laxa  gwasa^ye   klwelasa.    Wa, 
he-'mis    loqlQsa     khvelasaxes     £nE£memota    babELalas    £wasgEmgi-  50 
g'aase  loqlwa.     Wa,  laEni   yaeyudoxulasosa  khvele  bebEgwanEma. 
Wa,  heemisa  malplEiike  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaeyex  yix  -'wasgEm- 
g'ig'aasasa     loqlwe.      Wa,     laEm      helExstalilats  !esa     hayasEkala 
LE£wis  sasEme.     Wa,  he£misa  modEiibalaxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex 
laxa  £nEinp!Enkas  £wasgEing  igaase  helExstalil  liUogiiinsa  k!edele  55 
uriiin  LaWElgEma£yasa  g'IgEma£ye.     Wit,  laEm  maltaq  LE£wis  £iie- 
mokwe.     Wit,  he£mis   loqlusa  tstedaqaxs    laasnokwaes   hvwuiiEnui 
ama£yinxa£yasa   leloq!weda  £nEmp!Enk-as  £\vasgEmg"ig'aase  laxEns 
q!wiiq!wax-ts!ana£yex.     Wa,    laEm   helExstallltsa    £nEmokwe.     Wa, 
aEin  £wl£la  laxeq .  60 

Dish  for  pounding  Salal-Berries. — Wa,  heEm  gil  ax£etso£s  hVwuiiE- 
masa  tstedaqa  ek'e  klwaxLawaxa  k*  lease  iJEnaka.  Wa,  lit  yuduxu- 
plEnk'  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!fin;ryex  yix  £wasgEmasas.  Wa,  la 
modEnbaleda  £nEmp!Enk'e  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yix 
wadzEwasas.  Wa,  lii  ts!Ex"ts!iina£ye  £wiilasgEmasas  laxEns  q!wa-  65 
£q!wax'ts!an;«£yex.  Wa,  lit  ax£edxes  sobayowe  qa£s  sopledex 
5ts!aLas  qa£s  loptslodeq  qa  yuwes  gwex'sa  gildase.  Wa,  gll- 
£mese  la  pElsgEinxs  lae  ax£edxes  kllmLayuwe.  Wa,  lii  qEp!Elsa- 
qexs  lae.  aek'!a  k' IiniLEltsEmdEq  LE£wis  awaba£ye  LE£wis  oba£ye 
qa  kleses  senoqwa.  Wa,  gpil£mese  gwalxa  osgEma£yaxs  lae  70 
hangaElsaq     qa£s     k' limLElEgindeq  qa    k"  leases    tEuxtslas.      Wa, 

1  Evidently  a  mistake,  instead  of  four. 

"  A  numiym  is  one  of  the  subdivisions  of  the  tribe.    See  pp.  795  et  seq. 


60  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [hth.  ann.  30 

72  110  lumps.  I  After  he  has  finished  this,  he  takes  his  straight  knife 
and  I  his  bent  knife,  and  he  cuts  all  around  the  corners  with  the 
straight  knife,  |  around   the  inside  of  what  he  is  working  at;    and 

75  after  he  has  done  so,  ||  he  takes  his  crooked  knife  and  shaves  out  the 
inside  until  it  is  very  |  smooth.  This  is  the  box  for  pounding  salal- 
berries,  and  it  is  |  just  like  a  box  after  it  is  finished.  Now  the  box 
for  pounding  salal-berries  is  finished,  |  for  it  is  called  that  way.  | 
1  The  Making-  of  Boxes.  —  Now  1  will  talk  again  |  about  her  husband, 
who  has  to  make  a  box  for  the  lily-bulbs.  | 

He  takes  his  wedge-basket,  |  his  stone  hammer,  and  his  ax,  and 
5  he  goes  to  a  ||  patch  of  cedar-trees  in  the  woods,  looking  for  a  good 
tree,  |  the  bark  of  which  runs  straight  up  and  down,  without  a  twist. 
When  |  he  finds  one  of  this  kind,  he  chops  the  cedar-tree  |  down 
on  the  side  on  which  the  branches  are,  so  that  it  falls  on  its  back  | 
when  it  falls.     When  he  passes  the  heart  of  the  tree  while  chopping, 

10  he  goes  around  ||  and  chops  the  smooth  side;  and  .when  it  falls,  it 
goes  down  on  the  side  where  it  has  been  chopped  in  |  deeply,  and 
falls  on  its  back.  Now  the  cedar-tree  lies  on  its  back;  |  and  the 
smooth  side,  which  is  the  best  side,  is  on  top.  He  chops  it  off  two  | 
fathoms  from  the  foot  of  the  tree;  and  when  |  he  has  chopped  down 

15  to  the  heart  of  it,  he  measures  ||  eight  spans,  beginning  at  the  place 


72  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  nExx'ala  k'lawayowa  LE£wis 
XElxwala  k'lawayowa.  Wii,  la  xiitse£stalasa  nExx'iila  k'lawayo 
lax    ewanuxuts!awases    eaxElasE£we.     Wa,    g'IFmese    gwalExs    lae 

75  ax£edxes  xElxwala  k'lawayowa  qa£s  xElxiilEg  indes  lfiq  qa  alak'la- 
les    qese     ogug'a£yasa     lEg'atslaxa    nEkliile.      Wa,    la    yiiEm    la 
gwex'sa  g'ildasaxs  lae  gwala.     Wa,  laEm  gwala  lEg'atslaxa  nEk lu- 
te qaxs  he£mae  LegEmse. 
1       The  Making  of  Boxes. — Wa,  la£mesEn  edzaqwal  gwagwex-sx'£IdEl 
lax  la£wunEmas  yixs  lae  xEselax-£id  x'okumatsleLe   xaxExadzEma. 
Wa,  heEm  ax£etsoses  qlwaatslases  tet  lEX'SE£yase  LEmlEmgn£ya. 
Wa,  he£mises  pElpElqe  LE£wis    sobayowe.     Wa,  la  qas£ida  qa£s  la 
5  laxa  wllg'ixEkiila  laxa  aLle  alax  ek'etElasa  welkwe.     Wa,  heemisa 
nEqEmg'ustawas     ts!ageg'a£yexa    k'lese    k'!ilplEna£ya.       Wa,    g'il- 
emese   qlaxa   he  gwex'se,    lae  hex'£idaEm  s5plExodEq  gwek'lotlE- 
xawa£yes    sop  !Ex6tsE£we     laxa     LlEnxk'  !6tlEna£yas    qa    tlexilses 
qo  t!ax'£idi.o.     Wa,  g'il£mese  laklodile  sobela£yas  lae  lak'lotlExoda 

10  qa£s  sopk' laedzEndeq.  Wa,  la  gwagwaaqaxs  lae  t!ax'£ld  laxa  wun- 
qElas  sobele  laxa  awig'a£yas.  Wa,  la£me  tlek'lEsa  welkwe.  Wa, 
laEm  ek- lEk' laesala  yixa  wllEmas.  Wa,  la  tEmx£wldxa  mal- 
plEnk'e  laxEns  ba^ax  g'ag'iLEla  laxa  oxLa£yas.  Wa,  g'il£mese 
lalaqe   tEmkwa£yas    lax    d5maqasexs   lae  bal£Itses  qlwaqlwax'tsla- 

15  na£ye    qa  malgiinalplEnk'es  £wasgEmasas   g-agiLEla   lax    tEmkwa- 


r^      ^~o 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  61 

where  he  |  chopped  into  it;  and  when  he  has  chopped  down  to  |  the  16 
heart  of  the  tree,   he  chops  off  more  chips,  in  order  to  |  spread  it 
wider  for  the  wedges  to  be  put  in.    When  |  the  wedges  can  lie  on 
the  sloping  chopped  side,  he  drives  them  in  in  this  way:  The  first 

one  ||  that  he  drives  ha  is  the  longest   one  of  20 
the  board  wedges  at  |  the  far  side  from  where 
he  stands.1     He  takes  the  next  shorter  one  |  next  to  it  and  drives 
it  in  close   to  the  one   that  he  has  driven  in,   and  |  he  takes    the 
next  shorter  one  and  drives  it  in  |  close  to  the  one  that  he  drove 
before;  and  ||  the  seven  wedges   are  one  shorter  than  the  other  as  25 
they  are  driven  into  the  end  of  the   tree;  and  the  one   nearest  | 
to  the  workman  is  the  shortest  wedge.     Then  he  |  strikes  the  top 
of  each  once  while  he  is  striking  them  with  his  stone  hammer,  |  and 
he  strikes   them    backward   and    forward.  |  As  soon   as   the  wood 
splits,  he  pries  it  off  so  that  it  falls  on  its  back,  and  he  marks  || 
on  the  end  the  thickness  of  two  fingers.     Then  |  he  takes  his  ax  30 
and  drives   it  in  on  the   mark   that  he   put   on   the  wood.  |  After 
he   has    done  so,   he  again  takes  up  his  wedges    and  |  puts    them 
in  as  he  did  before  when  splitting  out  the  block.  |  He  continues 
doing  this  as  he  keeps  on  splitting  them  off.     Only  ||  the  first  (board)  35 
that  he  splits  off  is  thick.     The  next  one  is  only  one  |  finger-width 
thick  I  if  the  cedar  is  very  good,  for  generally  the  first  one  split  off 


£yasexs    lae   tEmx£wldEq.     Wa,    g  il£mese    lalaqe    tEmkwa£yas   lax  16 
domaqas  lae    sag  ililaxes  tEmkwa£ye  qa   qwesglles  saostowa  qaxs 
LEmgasilae   qaes  LEmlEmg'ayowe.     Wa,  gtFmese  kelak'lale  i.Em- 
lEmgayas    la    dex£widayo   laxa    ga    gwaleg'a     {fig-)    lae    he    g'il 
degwIlbEndayowa     g'ilt  !Eg'a£yases      latlayowe     LEnig'ayowa      lax  20 
qwesot  !Ena£yases    Laxwalaase.      Wa,    la    ax£edxa    ts  !ats  lakwalaga- 
wa£ye  qa£s  dex£waLElodes  laxa  mak'ala  laxa  la  degwilba£ya.     Wii, 
laxae    ax£edxa     ts!ats!akwalagawa£yas     qa£s     dex£waLElodes    laxa 
mak'alaxat!  laxa   la    dedegwilba£ya.     Wa,    la£me    ts  !Egu£nakuleda 
aLEbotslaqe    LEmlEmgayoxs    lae   dedegwilba£ya.      HeEm    mak'ala  25 
laxa    lat!aenoxweda    ts  !Ek  !waga£yasa    LEmlEmg'ayowas.      Wa,    la 
£nal£nEmp  lEiixtodalases    pElpElqaxs     lae     pElgEtE£weses    pElpElqe 
laxa    LEmlEmg'ayowe.      Aeiii    aedaaqi£lalaxs    pElgEtayaaq.      Wii, 
gil£mese  xox£widExs  lae  k!wet!edEq  qa  nELaxes.     Wa,   la   xiildEl- 
bEndxa  maldEiias  wagwase  laxEiis  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.     Wii,  lii  30 
ax£edxes    sobayowe    qa£s    maelbEndes    nEgElEnexa    la    xtildEkwa. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwalEXs   lae   et!ed    ax£edxes    LEmlEmgayowe.     Wii, 
heEmxaawise    gwiile    gwalaasdasexs    liixde     latlodxa     tEmgikwe. 
Wa,     axsa£mese     he    gwegilaxa    la    hanal    lat!aso£s.      Wii,    laLa 
£nEm£Em   wakweda   g'aloyas    qaxs    a£mae   la    £nal£nEmdEn   laxEiis  35 
q!waq!\vax"ts!ana£yex.    yix     wagwasasa    la    memakila    lat.'alayos 
yixs    Lomae   eka   welkwe  qaxs  hemEnala£mae  pei>ax£wideda  gale 

'See  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  328,  fig.  54.    The  figure  shows  the 
order  of  the  wedges.    The  split  is  placed  vertically,  not  horizontally  as  described  here. 


62       .  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  86 

38  runs  outward:  |  therefore  the  first  one  that  is  split  off  is  thick.  | 
As  soon  as  it  has  been  split,  he  carries  the  boards  out  as  he  is  going 

40  home;  ||  and  when  he  has  carried  them  all  out,  he  takes  his  adz  | 
and  adzes  them  smooth.  When  he  has  finished  |  one  side,  he  turns 
them  over  and  adzes  the  other  side  also;  so  that  they  all  have  the 
same  |  thickness.     When  they  are  half   a  finger-width    thick,  |  they 

45  are  done,  and  he  puts  them  on  edge.  Then  he  adzes  down  ||  one 
edge  to  make  it  straight ;  and  after  that  has  been  done,  he  puts  them 
down  flat,  |  takes  a  piece  of  cedar-stick  and  splits  it  so  that  it  is 
thin,  and  |  he  takes  his  straight  knife  and  cuts  off  the  end  so  that  |  it 
is  square  at  the  end.     He  measures  one  span  |  and  a  short   span, 

50  beginning  at  the  end  that  he  cut  off,  ||  and  there  he  cuts  it  off.  He 
uses  this  as  a  measure  for  the  width  |  of  the  box  that  he  is  making. 
He  puts  it  down  and  takes  his  |  straight  knife,  and  again  puts  on 
edge  the  board  out  of  which  |  he  is  making  the  box.  Then  he  shaves 
off  the  edge  smooth,  so  that  it  is  very  |  straight  and  smooth;  and 

55  when  it  is  really  [|  straight,  he  puts  it  down  Hat.  Then  he  takes  his  | 
cedar-stick  measure  and  puts  it  down  on  one  end  of  the  box  |  that 
he  is  making.  The  end  of  the  measure  is  (lush  with  the  |  straight 
edge  that  he  has  shaved  off.     He  marks  with  his  knife  1  the  other  end 


38  latodayowa.  Wii,  he£mis  lagitas  wakwa  g'ale  latoyos.  Wa, 
gtl£mese  wIweIx'sexs  lae  yilx£ult lalaqexs  lae  na£naku  laxes  gokwe. 

40  Wii,  gil£mese  £wllolt!axs  lae  hex'ldaEm  &x£edxes  k"!imLayowe 
qacs  k' iiniLEldzodeq  qa  neiiEmadzowes.  Wa,  giPmese  gwala 
apsadzE£yaxs  lae  lex£IdEq  qa£s  k'  liniLEldzodexaaq  qa  '"nEinokwes 
wagwasas.  Wa,  gil£mese  la  k'lodEne  wagwasas  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana£yex  lae    gwala.     Wa,  la    klottelsaq   qa£s    k!Enil£Idex 

45  apsEmxa£yas  qa  nEqEles.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalEXs  lae  paxElsaq 
qa£s  ax£edexa  klwaXLawe  qa£s  xox£wideq  qa  wllEiies.  Wii,  la 
ax£edxes  nEXxala  klawayowa  qa£s  k'!imtodex  oba£yas  qa 
£nEmabes  6ba£yas.  Wii,  lii  bal£Itses  q!waq!waxts!ana£yaxa  £nEm- 
plEnke   he£mesa    ts!Exuts!ana£ye    giig-iLEla    laxa   k!imtba£yasexs 

50  lae  k'  IlmtodEq.  Wa,  laEm  mEnyayonoxuLEs  qa  £wiidzE£wasLEses 
WElasE£weda  XEselasE£was.  Wa,  lii  kat!Elsaq  qa£s  ax£edexes 
nExx'iila  klawayowa.  Wii,  laxae  etled  k- lot !Elsaxes  WElasE- 
£weda  xEselasE£was.  Wii,  aekla  k!ax£wldxa  awEnxa£ye  qa  ala- 
k'lales  la  nEqEla.     Wii,    he£mes    qa   qeses.     Wa,    gil£mese   la   ala- 

55  k'lala  la  iiEqElaxs  lae  xwelaqa  paxElsaq.  Wii,  la  ax£edxes  klwax- 
Lawe  niEnyayowa  qa£s  k'adEdzodes  lax  apsba£yases  wulasE£weda 
XEselasE£was.  Wii,  laEm  £nEmabale  msnyayas  LE£wa  nEqEnxa- 
£yas  ylx  lax'de  k'laxwasos.  Wii,  lii  xiiltletses  kliiwayowe  lax 
£walalaasas  6ba£yas    mEnyayas.       Wa,    -la    'laxa     apsba£ye.      Wa, 


lio.-.s]  INDUSTRIES  63 

to  which  the  measure  reaches,  and  he  goes  to  the  other  end  of  the 
board  ||  and  does  the  same  thing  there,  in  this  way: 


n 0- 


f>0 


(1)  is  the  measure  at  the  one  end,  and  (2)  when 
he  moves  it  to  the  other  end;  and  |  he  marks  it 
with  his  knife  at  (3),  as  he  did  before,  and  at  (4);  and  |  after  he 
finishes  measuring  it,  he  takes  his  hand-adz  and  |  adzes  off  (5). 
Now  he  splits  it  off,  so  that  the  width  is  greater  than  ||  the  height  65 
of  the  box  which  he  is  going  to  make ;  and  he  takes  |  the  piece  that 
he  has  split  off  from  the  edge  of  the  box  that  he  is  making,  and 
shaves  |  one  edge  off  with  his  knife  so  that  it  is  straight;  and  when 
it  is  quite  ]  straight,  he  places  it  on  one  end  of  (3),  and  he  places 
the  |  straight-edge  on  the  mark  that  he  has  put  on,  and  he  also 
puts  it  ||  at  the  other  end  of  the  mark  that  he  made  at  (4),  and  70 
he  marks  with  his  straight  |  knife  along  the  straight-edge.  As  soon 
as  |  the  mark  that  he  makes  is  plain,  he  takes  off  the  straight- 
edge and  puts  it  away,  and  |  he  takes  his  hand-adz  and  adzes 
down  toward  the  mark  that  he  put  on,  |  as  far  as  its  end.  As  soon 
as  he  finishes  adzing  it,  and  when  ||  he  comes  close  to  the  mark  that  75 
he  has  put  on,  he  puts  down  his  adz  and  |  he  takes  his  straight 
knife  and  shaves  it.  |  He  shaves  it  off  smooth  and  straight.  |  After 
he  has  finished  it,  he  shaves  off  the  other  end,  so  that  all  the  |  chop- 
ping-marks  come  off;  and  when  the  rough  end  has  been  finished,  || 
he  takes  up  his  straight-edge  and  another  piece  of   thin  split  cedar-  go 


heEmxaawise  gwex£IdEq  ga  gwiileg'a  (fig-)-  Wa,,  heEm  mEii-  qq 
yayose  (1)  laxa  apsba£ye.  Wii,  he£mis  (2)  yixs  labEnd  laq  qa£s 
xfdt!edeses  k-!awayowe  lax  (3)  laxes  gwex,£idaasax  (4).  Wa, 
gil£mese  gwal  mEnsaqexs  lae  ax£edxes  k"!hnLayowe  qa£s  k!im- 
Lodex  (5).  Wii,  laEm  xowsyodEq  qaxs  awila£mae  £wadzogawa£ye 
wulasE£was  lax  £walasgEinasLasa  xEtsEmLe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  65 
xowEyowe  liix  awEnxa£yases  wulasE£we  qa£s  k"  !ax£wldeses  k'!a- 
wayowe  lax  apsEiixa£yas  qa  nEqEles.  Wii,  gil£mese  la  alaklala 
la  nsqElaxs  la  kadEdzots  apsba£yas  lax  (3).  Wa,  laEm  hex- 
sta£ye  nEgEnosEliis  lax  xulta£yas.  Wa,  laxae  kadEdzotsa 
apsba£yas  lax  xulta£yas  lax  (4).  Wa,  la  xflltletses  nExx'ala  70 
k-!iiwayowe  lax  awEnxa£yasa  uEgEnose.  Wii,  g'tl£mese  la 
awElx-se  xult a£jTasexs  lae  axodxes  nEgEnose  qa£s  lii  g'exaq.  Wa, 
la.  ax£edxes  kliniLayowe  qa£s  kliniLale  lalak' lEnaxes  xulta£ye 
hebEndalax  oba£ya^.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwal  k'limLalaq  yixs  lae 
ex-ak-!Endxes  xulta£yaxs  lae  gigalllaxes  kliniLayowe.  Wii,  la  75 
ax£edxes  nExxala  k'lawayowa  qa£s  k'!ax£wideq.  Wa,  laEm 
aek'laxs  lae  k"!axwaq  qa  nEqEles;  wa,  he£mis  qa  qeses.  Wa, 
gil£mese  gwiilExs  lae  k'!ax£widEx  apsba£yas  qa  lawayes  sopa- 
£yasxa  le£noqwa.  Wa,  giPmese  £wl£lawa  lenoxba£yasexs  lae  etled 
ax'edxes   nEgEnose    LE£wa   ogu£lamaxat!   xoku   wil£En   klwaxxawa.  go 


64  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  SB 

81  wood,  |  and  he  cuts  off  the  end  of  the  cedar-stick  that  he  took  up  last.  | 
He  measures  it  off  three  spans  long.  |  There  he  cuts  it  off,  and  with 
it  he  measures  the  board  |  at  which  he  is  working,  in    this   way, 

85  slanting: As  soon  ||  as  he  finds  the  end  of  the  measure, 

he  marks  j_  vj    it  |  in  the  middle  of  the  board  with  his  knife, 

and  he  |  measures  it  with  his  cedar-stick,  in  this  way: 

He  is  trying i__^  to    find    the    middle;    |   and    as    soon    as 

he  has  found  (~~  "j  the  middle  of  the  board,  he  marks  it  with 

his  |  knife  in  the  middle,   and   he    takes    a    cedar-stick 

90  and  ||  he  cuts  off  again  one  finger-width.  |  Then  he  takes  his  drill  and 
drills  through  the  end.  As  |  soon  as  the  drill-hole  goes  through,  he 
puts  it  on  the  board  out  of  which  he  is  making  a  box.  |  He  tries  to 
put  the  end  of  the  drill  as  the  end  shows  at  the  |  under  side  of  the 

95  cedar-stick  measure  at  the  mark  in  the  middle  of  ||  the  board  at 

which  he  is  working,  in  this  way:  i 1  As  soon  as  |  the 

end  of   the  drill  goes  in    a   little  1 1 1  at  the  middle  of 

the  board  at  which  he  is  working,  he  bevels  |  the  other  end  of  the 
measure,  and  he  marks  along  it  at  the  end  of  the  beveled  meas- 
ure, |  on  the  edge  of  the  board  at  which  he  is  working;  and  he 
100  turns  ||  the  free  end  which  has  been  beveled  so  that  it  goes  to  the 
other  edge,  and  |  he  marks  its  end.  After  he  has  done  so,  he  takes 
off  |  his  beveled  measure  and  he  takes  his  straight-edge  and  |  puts 

81  Wa,  la  k'ltmtbEndxa  aiagawa£ye  ax£etsos  klwaxLawa.  Wa,  la 
baHdxa  yuduxup!Enke  lfixEns  qlwilqlwax'tslana^Ox  laxa  xf>kwe 
khvaxxawaxs  la?  k'limttslEndEq.  W:'i,  1:1  mEns£IdEs  laxa  wQlasE- 
£was    g*a    gwalcg'a    (fig.)-      Wa,    laEm    senoqwala.     Wa,    g"ilsmese 

S5  qliix  £walagilasas  oba£yasa  mEnyayaxs  lar  xultletses  kliiwa- 
yowe  lax  nEgEdza£yasos  wulasE£wG  xEselasE£wa.  Wa,  Li  mEn- 
s^Itsa  klwaxLawe  ga  gwalega  (fig-).  Wa,  laEm  q!aq!aax  nEgEdza£yas 
(1).  Wa,  g-il£mese  qlaxa  nEgEdza£yasexs  lae  xultletses  k-!iiwa- 
yowe     laxa     nEgEdza£yas.       Wa,     lii      ax£edxa      klwaxLawa     qa£s 

U0  etlede  klimtodxa  £nEmdEnr>  lax  Oba£yas  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!a- 
naeyex.  Wii,  lii  axeedxes  sElEme  qa£s  sElx*sodex  oba£yas.  Wii, 
g]l£mese  lax'sawe  sEla£yas  la<~  kadEdzuts  laxi"s  wulasEewe  xesc- 
lasE£wa.  Wa,  laEm  nanaxstE£was  obafyasa  sElEmax  nelbalaf-  lax 
bEnadzE£yasa   mEnyayowf'    klwaxLawa   laxa  xulta£ye   lax  nEgEdza- 

95  £yas  wulasE£was  XEsrlasE£wa  g'a  gwaleg"a  (fig.).  Wa,  g"iiemese 
nEXstodEq  laC-  xaiJEx^d  sELx£Ida  qa  xaLlEbEtes  oba£yas  sElEmas 
lax  nEgEdza£3rasrs  wulasE£we  xEsrlasE£wa.  Wii,  lii  senogiidzots 
apsba£yas  qa£s  xult!?dex  wulgllasas  oba£yasa  sendgudza£yr'  mEn- 
yayo  lax  apsEnxa£yases  wElasE£we.  Wa,  laxat"  mElbax-£idEq 
100  qa£s  senogudzodes  qa£s  gwebax,£Ides  laxa  apsEnxa£yi\  Wa,  laxae 
xult!i~dEx  wulgllasas  oba£yas.  Wit,  g!l£mese  gwfdExs  laf-  ax£aLE- 
lodxes  sOnogwayowo  mEnyayowa.     Wii,  lii  ax£C'dxos  nEgEnose  qa£s 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  65 

it  down  on  the  thin  mark  on  each  |  edge.  He  wants  the  measure 
to  lie  ||  on  the  end  of  the  beveled  mark  (1).  |  The  straight  edge  of 
his  measure  is  turned  towards  the  rough  end  of  |  the  board  at  which  he 

is  working,  in  this  manner,  .  and  he  marks  it  with  his 

straight  knife.    |   Now  he   ~^>  takes  off  the  straight-edge 


and  he  puts  it  down,  and  |   r  "*  he  takes  his  straight  knife 

and  cuts  along  with  it  at  ||  the  mark,  so  that  the  end  is  smooth  |  and  10 
so  that  it  does  not  slant.     As  soon  as  the  rough  end  has  been  cut 
off,  |  he   takes  the  cedar-stick  and  splits  it  so  that  it  is  thin  and 
square.  |  It  is  another  measure.     He  splits  out  two  pieces,  and  he 
measures  |  them  so  that  one  of  them  is  two  spans  long  ||  where  he  15 
cuts  it  off  with  his  straight  knife  and  puts  it  down.     Then   |   he 
takes  up  one  of  the  square  split  cedar-sticks  and  cuts  off  |  one  end 
of  it  square,  and  he  measures  it  so  that  it  is  |  one  long  span   and 
one  short  span  |  long;  and  he  cuts  it  off  with  his  knife.  ||  The  cedar-  20 
stick  two  spans  in  length  |  is  to  be  the  measure  for  the  long  side 
of  the  box,  and  the  measure  for  the  short  side  |  is  one  short  span 
and  one  long  span.     First  he  takes  |  the  shorter  measure  and  puts 
it  down  on  one  edge  of  |  the  box  that  he  is  making,  beginning  at 
the  place  where   he   cut   the   edge  smooth.    ||    He   puts  down   the  25 

kadEdzodes  lax  WElba£yases  xulta£ye  laxa  apsEnxa£ye  LE£wa  awun-  3 
xa£yasa   &psEnxa£ye.     Wii,  laeme    £nex-    qa  £nEniEnxiiles   nEgEnosa 
lo£  oba£yasa  senogudz:i£yf>  xulta£ya  lax  (1).     Wa,  laxae  guyinxaeya  5 
nEgEnodza£yas  nEgEiidsas    laxa    lenoxba£yas    wulasE£was  xEselasE- 
£wa.   Wa,  lit  g'a  gwalega  {fig.).   Wa,  la  xult!etses  iiExxiila  kMawayowe 
laq.     Wii,    laEin  ax£aLElodxes    nEgEudse   cia£s    lcatlahleq.      Wii,    lit 
ax£edxes    UExxala    klawayowa   qa£s   xiildElEiia£yes    laxes    UEqEla 
xiiltay£a.    Wfi,  laEin  xultaqexs  lae  xultodEq  qa  qeses  oba£yas.     Wa  10 
hecmis  qa  k"  leases  senogwats.     Wa,  giPmese  lawiiye  lenoxba£yas  lae 
ax£edxa  klwaxLawe  qa£s  xox£w!deq  qa    wTlEnes  k-!EWElx£una  ogu- 
daEinxae  lax  mEnyayiis.     Wii,  lii  maltslaqe  xii£yas.     Wii,  lii  bal£Itses 
q!waq!wax-ts!ana£ye  qa  malplEnk'es  £wasgEmasasa  £nEmts!aqas  lae 
k-!imtts!Entses   liExxiila   klawayowe  laq.      Wii,  lii  k-at!alllaq  qa£s  15 
ax£edexa  '"iiEmtslaqe  xoku  k-!EWElx£un  klwaxLawa  qa£s  k!imt5dex 
dba£yas  qa  £iiEmabes.     Wii,  laxae  bal£itses  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£ye  laq 
qa  £iiEmp!Enk'es  laxEns  g"ilt lax  bata.     Wii,  he^misa  ts!Ex"ts!ana£ye 
esEg'iwa£yasexs  lae  k!imtotses   k-!awayowe  laq.     Wii,  beEin  iueii- 
yayoltsexa   g  ildolasLases  wi!lasE£we  xEselasE£wa  malplEnk'as  £was-  20 
gEmase  klwaxLawa.     Wii,  h(';£mis  mEiiyayoltsexa  ts!Eg-olixsa  esEg'E- 
yowasa  ts  !Exuts  !ana£ye  k!waxLawa.     Wii,  he£mis  g  Tl  a,x£etso£seyedf 
ts!Ekwagawa£ye   mEnyayowa    qa£s    kadEdzodes  lax    apsEnxa£yases 
wfdasE£we  giigiLEla  laxa  la  aek-!aak"  xuttslaakwa.     Wii,  laKin  £de- 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 ,"> 


66  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

25  measure  at  the  end  of  the  board  at  which  he  is  working  in  this 
way: |  and  he  cuts  in  a  little  with  his  straight  knife 
as  far  |  as  |  the  end  of  the  cedar  measure  goes.  After 
hehas  done  so,  |  he  takes  off  the  measure  and  puts 
it  down  on  the  other  edge,  |  in  this  way:  i= and  he  marks 

30  the  end  with  his  knife.  ||  After  he  has  •= done     so,    he 

takes  off  the  measure  and  puts  it  down.  |  He  takes  his  straight- 
edge and  lays  it   down  along   |    the  ends  of  the  measures,  in  this 

way:         n .  After  he  has  put  down  |  the  straight-edge  al  the 

marks,  | he  cuts  along  it  with  his  |  knife  on  the  board 

that  he       U  is  working.     After  doing  so,  he  puts  down  || 

35  the  straight-edge  and  he  takes  up  the  longer  cedar-stick  |  measure 
and  he  puts  it  down  on  the  edge  of  the  board  on  which  he  is  working.  | 
He  puts  the  end  of  his  measure  on  the  mark  which  he  made  |  for  the 

short  end,  in  this  manner, and   lie  makes  a  small 

mark  |  at  its  end.     After  be  has  done  so,  he  takes 

40  off  the  measure  ||  for  the  long  side   and  puts  it 

down  on  the  other  edge,  and  he  |  does  the  same  as  lie  did  before 
when  he  measured  it.  After  |  he  lias  done  so,  he  takes  off  the  measure, 
puts  it  down.  |  takes  his  straight-edge,  and  puts  it  down  along  the 
marks.     Now    |    he    turns    the   straight-edge    along    the    two    marks 

When 


45  that  he  has  made  ||  on  the  board,  in  this  way: 
the  straight-edge  is  |  on   the  marks  on  the 


_  board, 


9_  mabaleda  mEiiyayowe  lo£  oba£yasa  W&lasE£was  ga  gwalega  (fig.). 
Wii,  lii  xfu.h'.x  £id  xutletses  iiK.xxiila  k'.awayowe  lax  -walalaasas  oba- 
£yasa  niEivyayowe  klwaxLawa.  Wii,  gil'mese  gwahexs  lac  ax'ai.i:- 
lodxes  mEiiyayowe  qa£s  lii  k"adEdzots  laxa  apsEnxa£ye  ga.  gwii- 
lega  i  fig.)-  Wa,  laxae  xul<  letses  k"!awayowe  lax  £walalaasas  oba£yas 
Wii,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax'ai.Elodxes  mEnyayowe  qa£s  katlall- 
leqexs  lae  ax£edxes  nsgEnose  qa£s  k-adEdzodes  lax  £walaiaasdas 
oba£yasa  mEiiyayowe  g-a  gwiileg-a  (jig.).  Wii,  giFmese  la  nExstave 
nEgEiiodza£yas  nEgEiiosas  lax  xiilta£yasexs  lae  xQldElEneses  k!a- 
wayowe  laxes  wulasE£we.  Wii.  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£aLElodxes 
nEgEiiose  qa£s  kat  lallleqexs  lae  ax£edxa  giltagawa£ye  k!wax£En 
menyayowa  qa£s  k'adEdzodes  lax  awiinxa£yases  wiilasE£we.  Wii, 
laEin  MiEinahale  oba£yasa  mEnyayowe  LE£wa  la  xiddEk"  qaeda  ts!E- 
i'-olaLe,  g'a  gwalega  (fig.).  Wii,  lii  xiliJEx-ld  xiiltledEx  £walag"i- 
lasas  oba£yas.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£aLElodxes  mEnyoyaxa 
n  g ildola  qa£s  kadEdzodes  laxa  apsEnxa£yas.  Wii,  laxae  heEin 
o-wex£ldqes  gwex-£idaasaxa  g-ilx  £Ide  mEns£Itso£s.  Wii,  gilmiese 
GwalExs  lae  ax£aLElodxes  mEnyayowe  qa^s  geg'allleqexs  lae 
&x£edxes  nEgEimse  qa£s  kadEdzodes  laxa  lii  xuldEkwa.  Wii,  laEm 
gwenodza£ya  nEgEnodza£yas  laxa  male  xwexulte  lax  wax'SEnxa£yas 

45  wulasE£was  ga  gwaleg'a  (fig.).  Wii,  g-fPmese  liEqEmstaya  HEgEnose 
lax  xwexultEivxa£yas  wulasE£wasexs  lae  xuldeteneq    yises  nExxala 


EOASJ  INDUSTRIES  67 

he  cuts  along  it  with  his  straight  |  knife.  After  doing  so,  he  takes  47 
off  his  I  straight-edge  and  puts  it  down.  He  takes  the  measure  for  | 
the  short  side  and  puts  it  down  on  the  edge  of  the  hoard  on  which  he 
is  working,  starting  at  the  ||  mark  which  he  put  on,  and  he  puts  a  50 
small  mark  at  the  end  of  1  this  measure.  He  takes  off  the  measure 
for  the  short  side  and  |  puts  it  down  on  the  other  edge  (of  the  hoard), 
and  he  does  as  |  he  did  before.  After  he  has  marked  it,  he  takes  it 
off  I  and  puts  it  down.  Then  he  takes  his  straight-edge  and  puts  it 
down  ||  on  the  r 
this  manner:     L 


hoard  at  which  he  is  working,  in  55 
He  takes  his  straight  |  knife  and 
cuts  close   along  the   straight-edge,  and  |  he  takes  it  off  after  he 
has  finished  and  puts  it  down.     Then  he  takes    |   his  measure  for 
the  long  side  and  lavs  it  down  along  the  edge  from  |   the  place  that 
he  has  marked,  and  he  puts  a  small  mark  at  its  end.  ||  Then  he  takes  60 
it  off  and  puts  it  down  on  the  other  edge  of  the  |  board  at  which  lie 
is  working,  and  he  makes  a  small  mark  at  its  end.     Then  |  he  takes 
his  measure,  puts  it  down,  and  takes  his  |  straight-edge  and  lays  it 
on.     As  soon  as   the  straight-edge  has  been   placed  j  on    the  small 
marks,  he  takes  his  knife  ||  and  marks  along  it.     After  this  has  been  65 
done,  he    measures    the  |  thickness   (l)1  of    the  end  by  means  of    a 
split  cedar-stick;  and  when  he  has  found  |  the  thickness,  he  lays  it 

klawayowa  laq.      Wa,    g'il£mese  gwalEXs    lae    axsai.Elf>dxes    nsgE-  47 
nose  qa£s  katlallleq.     Wa,  laxae  et!ed  ax£edxes   niEnvayaxa    ts!E- 
g'ola  qa-s  kadEdzodes  lax  awunxa£yases  wulasE£we  gagiLEla  luxes 
xultexde.      Wa,    laxae    xaidEX'^d    xultledEx    '"walalaasas    oba£yas  5Q 
niEnyayas.       Wa,     laxae    ax£aLElodxes    niEnvayaxa  ts.'Eg'ofa     qa£s 
k'adEdzodes     laxa     apsEiixa£ye.        Wa,    laxae    heEm     gwex£Idqes 
gwex£idaasaxa  g'ilx'de.     Wa,  g'il£mese  gwfd  xfdtaqexs  lae    ax£aLE- 
lodEq  qa-s  k'atlaliles.      Wa,  lii  ax£edxes   nEgEnose    qa£s    k'adEdzo- 
des liixes  wfdasE;we  ga  gwaleg'a  {fig.).  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxes  QExxala  55 
kMawayowa  qaes   xultledes  laxa    magilEna£yaxes    nEgEnose.      Wa, 
la  ax£aLEl(3dqexs  lae  gwala  qa£s  gig-alileq.     Wa   la   ax-'edxes  niEn- 
vayaxa   g'ildola    (ia£s    kadEdzodes    iaxaaxa    awunxa'ye    g'flgiLEla 
laxes  xulta£ye.     Wa,    lii   xai.!Ex-Id    xultledEx  fwalalaasas  6ba£yas. 
Wa,  lii  axeaLElodEq    cia£s  lii  kadEclzots    laxa    apsEnxa£yases  wula- 60 
sE£we.     Wa,   laxae  xaL!Ex'ld  xultledEx  £walalaasas   oha'yas.     Wa 
lii  ax'"aLElodxes  niEnyayowe  qa£s  g-eg-alileq.     Wa,   lii  ax£edxes  nE- 
gEnose   qa£s  k'adEdzodes  laq.     Wa,  g'il£mese  iiEciEmstode  nEo-Eiio- 
dza£yas    laxa    la  xaL!aaku    xfddEkwaxs    lae  ax'edxes    k'lawayowe 
qa£s  xuldElEna£yeq.       Wa,   g'iFmese    gwalExs    lae    niEiis-IdEx    wa-  65 
gwasas  (1)  xa  6ba£ye  yisa  xokwe  klwaxLawa.     Wii,  g'Jl£mese  qlalax 
\vfiL;wasasexs  lae  kadliEntsa  klwaxEne  niEnvavo  lax  £waxsEnxa£ya 

1  See  flKure  on  p.  68. 


68  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  AKN.S5 

67  off  at  the  end  of  the  board  with  Ins  cedar-stick  measure  on  the  two 
edges  |  (5),  starting  from  the  mark  that  he  made  between  4  and  5'.  | 

70  He  marks  each  end  with  the  straight  knife,  and.  after  ||  doing  so,  he 
takes  off  his  measure,  puis  it  down,  takes  I  his  straight-edge,  and  lays 
it  down  between  (4)  and  (5);  and  '  when  the  straight-edge  is  on  the 

marks,  lie  marks  |  it  with  his  straight  knife.  ^_^ Then 

he  cuts  off  the  end  so  1  that  it  is  in  this  way:  |      i|        g|     j|       1\  After 

75  he  has  done  so.  he  takes  his  ||  straight    knife  and 

outs  straight  into  the  cutting  at  il  I  across  the  whole  |  width  ot  the 
board  at  which  he  is  Working;  and  after  he  has  cut  through  half  the  | 
thickness  of  t ho  hoard  t  hat  is  being  n  ade,  he  cuts  at  (2),  and  |  cuts,  it 
to  the  same  depth  as  he  cut  the  first.     Then  he  cuts  in  at  (3);  and  | 

80  after  he  has  cut  halt  through  the  thickness  of  the  board,  ||  he  cuts  at 
(4),  and  when  he  has  cut  half  through  he  stops.  |  Then  he  goes  hack 
to  (1).  He  takes  his  straight-edge  and  lays  it  on  |  the  board  at  which 
he  is  working.  He  measures  the  width  of  half  a  little  |  finger  from  the 
mark  at   (1)  and  marks  it,  and  |  he  docs  the  same  at  the  other  edge. 

85  After  doing  so,  he  takes  his  ||  straight-edge  and  lay-  il  down  on  ther.e 
marks  and  cuts  along  on  the  right-hand  ^^^__^_^__^  side  of 
the  first  mark  which  he  pu1  on,  in  this  way:  |  '[[  '||  s||  <||  and  he 
also  j  marks  on  the  right-hand  side  of   (2)  and  on 

the  right-hand  side  of  |  (3);  and  after  do.ing  so,  he  takes  his  straight- 
edge and  |  puts  it  down.   Then  he  takes  his  whetstone  and  sharpens  his  || 

68  (5),  g'ag'iLEla  lax  xultacyas  lax  a£wagawa£yas  (4)  lo£  (5).  Wa, 
lii  xulxultbEndBq  vises    nExxiila    kMawayowe  Iaq.      Wa,    g"]l£mese 

70  gwalExs  lae  axeaLElodxes  mEnyayowe  qa£s  g'igallleqexs  lae  ax£- 
edxes  nEgEnose  qa£s  lii  k'adEdzots  lax  awagawa£yas  (4)  lG£  (5).  Wa, 
giPmese  nEqEmstode  iiEgEnod/.a-yas  lax  xulta£yasexs  lae  xuUeIe- 
neses  nExxiila  k'lawayowe  laq.  Wa,  laEm  xultslEndEq  qa  lawa- 
yes  qa  g"asgwaleg-a  {fig.).     Wa,  gil£mese  gwahexs  lae  ax£edxes  iiex- 

75  x'iila  klawayowa  qa£s  nExbEtEnde  xultledEx  (1)  labEndEX  ^wadzE- 
wasases  wulasE'Ve.  Wa,  gil£mese  nEg5yode  £walabEdasas  xulta- 
£yas  lax  wagwasasa  wiilasE£wasexs  lae  et  led  xiitledEx  (2).  Wii, 
hfeEmxaawise  £walabEte  xuta£yas  laqexs  lae  et  led  xut  ledEx  (3).  Wa, 
g-il£Einxaawise  nicxsEnde  xutaeyas  lax  w&gwasases  wiilasE£waxs  lae 

80  xiitledEX  (4).  Wa,  gil£mese  nExsEnde  xuta£yas  laqexs  lae  gwala. 
Wii,  lii  aedaaqa  lax  (1).  Wii,  laEm  ax£edxes  nEgEnose  qa£s  kadi:- 
dzodes  laxes  wiilasE£we.  W'ii,  la  mEns£idxa  MiEindEiie  laxEns  ssltla- 
x-ts!ana£yex  g-ag"iLEla  lax  xuta£yas  (1).  Wii.  lii  xultledEq.  Wii.  la- 
xae lieEin  gwex-£idxa  apsba£yas.     Wii,  g"il£mese  gwatexs  lae  ax£edxes 

85  nEgEnose  qa£s  kadEdzodes  laxa  la  xuldEkwaxs  lae  xuldElEneq  lax 
helk'ldt  lEiuryases  g-ilxde  xulta\ya,  xa  ga  gwaleg'a  (fig.).  Wii,  laxae 
etled  xultled  h<lk  lot!Eiia£yas  (2).  Wii,  laxae  xiilt  ledEx  hehV!ot!E- 
na£yas  (3).  Wii,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£aLElodxes  iiEgEnosEla  qa£s 
g-ig"alileq.     Wii,    lii  ax£edxes   tlesEme  tlegayowa  qa£s  t!ex'£alabEn- 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  69 

straight  knife-  so  that  it  is  very  sharp.     When  the  knife  is  very  |  90 
sharp,  he  cuts  into  the  last  line  that  he  puts  on.  |  The  knife  is  held 
(with  the  hand)  slanting  |  to  the  righl  ;  and  when  the  cut  reaches 
the  bottom  of  the  cut  that   has  been  made  j  straight  down,  a  tri- 
angular piece  comes  off.  ||  Then  he  shaves  it  out  clean,  so  that  the  95 
kerf  is  smooth.     Now   (1)  |  has  been  cut   out.     Then  he  does  the 
same  at  (2)  as  he  |  did  at  (1);  and  after  he  has  done  so,  he  does  it 
at  (3),  I  and  he  does  what  he  did  at  (2).     After  he  has  |  done  so,  he 
splits  off  one-half  the  thickness  of  I  he  board  at  (4)  with  his  ||  knife,  200 
and    then    he    splits   it    off.     Now    he    shaves   it    off    so   that    it    is 
smooth  and  |  very  straight,  so   that   the  joint    is  smooth,  for   that 
is  I  the  name,  of  (4).     As  soon  as  he  has  finished, 

it  is  in  this  way:  '      "       '/=^  After  |  this  has  been  done,  he  turns 

over  the  board  at  which  he  is  working.     He  takes  his  j  straight-edge 
and  puts  it  on  the  board.     Then  he  lays  it   on  the  back,  ||  just  over  5 

the  . — ^ r p   groove  that  he  cut  at  (1).    When  it  is  in  this 

way,  1234    I  he  marks  straight  over  the  groove  along  the 

side  of  this  straight-edge.  I  He  wants  the  board  to  be  thin  between 
the  kerf  |  and  the  mark  on  the  hack  at  (1 );  and  he  does  the  same  [ 
at  (2)  and  (3).     As  soon  as  this  is  done,  he  takes  his  crooked  ||  knife  \q 
and  sharpens  it  on  the  whetstone;   and  when   |  it  is  very  sharp,  he 


dexes  nExxala  klawavowa  qa  alak"!ales  exba.  Wa,  giFmese  la  ala-  90 
k!ala  laexbe  iiExxala  k!awayase\s  lae  xut  ledxes  ale  xulta£yn.  Wii, 
laEm  oliile  5xta£yas  xiida-yas  k'  !awayowa  gwagwaakales  oxta£ye  la- 
xEns  hi'lk' !otts!ana;'yex.  Wa,  g"il£mese  laxte xut !etsE£was  laxa  6xi>a- 
£yasa  nExbEta  xiitas  lae  aicm  k-atwults!owe  xwatmotas.  Wa,  laEm 
aEmaek'!axs  lae  k-!ax£w!dEq  qa  qestowesa  xiita£yas.  Wa,  heEin  (1)  95 
g'ale  xut!etsos.  Wa,  lii  et!edEX  (2).  Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex£IdEq 
laxes  gwex'£idaasax  (1).  Wa,  g'iFmese  gwatexs  lae  etledEx  (3). 
Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex-£IdEq  laxes  gwex-£Idaasax  (2).  Wa,  gil- 
miese  gwatexs  lae  naq  fegEndalax  wagwasas  (4)  vises  xiidayowe 
k'lawayowaxs  lae  pak'lodEq.  Wa,  laEm  aek-!axs  lae  kMaxwaq  qa  200 
alak"!ales  nEqEla.  Wa,  he£mis  qa  qesesa  sakoda£ye  qaxs  he£mae 
LegEms  (4).  Wa,  g'iTmese  gwalExs  lae  g'a  gwaleg'a  {fig.).  Wa,  g'il- 
£rnese  gwalExs  lae  lex'Ehlaxes  wulasE£we.  Wa,  la  axeedxes  nEgE- 
nose  qa£s  kadEdzodes  laxes  wulasE£we.  Wii,  la  kadegints  lax 
nExsawasa  la  xudElts JEwakwa  lax  (1).  Wii,  giPmese  la  g'a  gwaleg'a  5 
(fig.)  la  UExsasa  xudElts  .'EWakwaxs  lae  xaxjEX^Id  xiddElEnexes  iie- 
gEnosEla-  Wa,  a£mese  gwanala  qa  pElbida'wesa  awagawa£yasa  xihIeI- 
tstewakwe  LE£wa  xudek-a£ye  lax  (1).  Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex£I- 
dEx  (2)  lo£  (3).  Wa,  g  iTmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  XElxwala 
kMawayowa  qa£s  t  !ex£Ideq  laxes  t!eg'ayowe  t!esEme.  Wit,  gil- 
£mese  alak'lala  la  exbaxs  lae  xElxuldzodEX   modEne  laxEns  qlwa 


10 


70  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  AN.V.  35 

12  shaves  off  four  finger-  |  widths  on  the  upper  side  of  the  cut  that  he  has 
just  made.  It  is  two  |  finger-widths  that  he  shaves  off  on  each  | 
side  of  the  mark  that  he  put  on,  in  this  way:  , — ^ ., R  ,      As 

15  soon  as  the  hack  ||  at  (1),   (2),  and   (3)  has  been 

hollowed  out,  and  |  they  have  all  the  same  thickness,  he  stops  shav- 
ing it  off.  Then  lie  |  takes  well-splitting  red-pine  wood  and  splits 
it  |  like  tongs.     The  pieces  are  four  |  spans  long  and  three  linger-  || 

2"  widths  thick.  They  are  split  out  square.  There  are  |  two  pieces. 
Then  he  puts  them  down  n  on  the  hoard  at  which 

lie  is  working,  in  this  way:  so  |  that  the  ends  of 

the  board-protector  pro  j  eel  u  equally  on  both  sides 

of  the  |  board.  As  soon  as  the  board  is  in  the  center  of  the 
board-protector,  lie  marks  |  the  edges  of  the  board  at   which  he  is 

25  working.  After  doing  so,  ||  he  takes  off  the  board-protector.  He 
takes  his  straight  |  knife  and  cuts  out  a  notch  at  the  place  where 
he  made  a  mark  for  |  both  edges  of  the  board.  Then  he  adds  to  it 
one  |  finger-width,  so  that  it  is  a  little  longer  than  the  width  of  the 
plank,  |  and  he  shaves  the  wood  out  between  the  two  marks,  so  that 

,30  the  part  removed  is  half  the  ||  thickness  of  the  plank  at  which  he  is 
working,  and  he  puts  it  down.  Then  he  takes  up  the  other  piece,  and 
he  |  measures  it  by  the.  part  t  hat  he  has  -   finishe  ' 

and   he   imitates   what    he    has    done  |__f— grr=|— |- I        befai 

As  soon  |  as  it  is  done,  it  is  in  this  way:  ' U "— 

the  board-protector  when  it  is  finished.  | 


This    is 


12  q!wax-ts!ana£yex  lax  nEXEna£yases  ale  xult.rva.  Wa,  laEm  mae- 
maldEn  laxEiis  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  xElxuldzotsE£was  lax 
wax-sot!Ena£yasa  xfildF.kwexa  ga  gwaleg'a  {fig.) .    Wa,  gil'niese  la 

15  xulboyfile  (1)  yix  awlg;ryase\s  lae  ogwaqax  (2);  wa  la  et!edEx(3). 
Wa  g'il£mese  la£nEmf>kwe  wlwSgwasas  lae  gwal  xElxiildzE£waq.  Wii, 
la  ax£edxa  wiinagulexa  eg'aqwa  lax  x&sE£we.  Wii,  lit  xox£wIdEq  qa 
yowes  gwex-sa  tslesLalax.  Wa,  la  moplEnke  £wiisgEmasas  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex.        Wii,    lii    yfidux"dEne    £wagidaasas   laxEns 

9n  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  laxes  k!Ewfilk!wena£ye.  Wii,  lit  hexsEiidEq  qa 
maltsles.  Wii,  lii  kadF.d/.ots  laxes  wiilasE£we  ga  gwiilega  {fig.)  qa 
k' leases  g"iltagawes  oba£yasa  L!EbEdza£ye  lax  waxsEnxa£yases  wula- 
se£w6.  Wii,  g'tl£mese  nalnaqEloyaleda  L  !EbEdza£yaxs  lae.  xiiltletses 
nExxiila   k'lawayo    lax   walEnxa£yases   wiilasE£we.      Wii,    gil£mese 

•>c  trwalExs  lae  ax£aEElodxa  LlEbEdza£ye.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxes  nExxala 
k'.awayowa  qa£s  k- limtbEtEndexes  xwexiilta£ye  lax  wulg-Ilasas  wax- 
sEnxa£yases  wiilasE£we.  Wii,  laEm  g  inwasa  £nEindEne  laxEns  q!wa- 
ci!waxts!ana£yex  cia  g'fig  llstiiles  lax  £wiidzEwasases  wulasE£we.  Wii, 
lii    k'.ax'wldEx   awagawacyases    k"  !imtbEtEnda£ye   qa    iiExsEndesex 

•mi  wii»wasases  wiilasE£we.  Wii,  lii  gigalilasexs  lae  ax£edxa  apsEX'se  qa£s 
mEns£!des  laxa  la  gwala.  Wii  lii  nanaxts tewax  gwiilaasas.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  gwabsxs  lae  ga  gwaleg'a  {fig.)  yixa  LtebEdzayaxs  lae  gwala. 


boas  J  INDUSTRIES  71 

As  soon  as  it  is  finished,  he  takes  twisted  cedar-withes  and  he  ties  33 
them  |  to  the  ends  of  (1)  and  (2)  and  ties  them  on  tightly;  and  he  twists 
them  on  so  that  ||  the  hoard-protector  can  not  get  out  of  shape.     Then  35 
he  puts  the  hoard-protector  on  the  hoard.  |  After  doing  this,  he  takes 
up  another  piece  of  red-pine  wood  and  j  splits  it  so  that  it  is  two 
finger-widths   in   thickness,  |  and   it   is   also    square.     He  takes   his 
straight  knife  |  and  shaves  it  off  on  one  side  so  that  it  is  straight; 
and  when  ||  it  is  very  straight,  lie  shaves  off  the  under  side,  |  which  40 
is  to  lie  flat  on  the  plank.     When  this  is  also  |  straight,  he  puts  it 
down  on  the  plank  on  which  he  is  working.     This  will  he  the  instru- 
ment  for  bending  the  corners  |  when   he  bends  the  corners  of  the 
board  at  which  he  is  working.  |  After  he  has  done  so,  he  goes  to  get 
driftwood  for  heating  stones;  ||  and  when  he  has  the  driftwood,  he  45 
piles  it  up  in  a  heap  close  |  to  the  tire.     He  takes  a  basket,  goes  down 
to  |  the  beach  in  front  of  the  house,  and  puts  medium-sized  stones  into 
it;  |  and  when  he  thinks  he  has  as  many  as  lie  can  carry,  he  carries 
them  up  the  beach  |  into  the  house  in  which  he  is  making  the  box. 
He  pours  ||  them  out  by  the  side  of  the  fire.     Then  he  goes  down  to  50 
the  beach  again,  j  carrying  his  basket,  and  he  puts  more  stones  |  into 
it   (some  Indians  call  this  "  putting  stones  into  the  |  stone-carrying 
basket");  and  when  he  has  as  many  as  he  thinks  he  can  carry,  he  | 


Wii,  gil£mese  gwala  lae  ax£edxa  sElbEkwe  dswexa  qa£s  qEx£aLE-  33 
lodes  lax  (1)   eo£  (2).     W&,  laEin  lalak!ut!axs  lae  mElg-aaLElots  qa 
kMeses  qlwequleda  LlEbEdza£ye  qo  lal  LlEbEdzodLEs  laxa  wulasE'we.  35 
Wa  g'iPmese    gwalExs    lae    ax£edxa    6gu£la£maxat !    wunagula    qa£s 
xox£wIdexa  maldEne   laxEns   q  !waq  !waxts!ana£yex  yix  wagidasas. 
Wa,    kiEmxae    k!EWElx£iina.      Wa,    lii    ax£cdxes    UExxiila     klilwa- 
yowa  qa£s  aek'le  k"!ax£wid    apsot  !Ena£yas   qa   nioqEles.      Wa,    gil- 
£mese  fdaklala   la    nsqElaxs    lae    etled    k!ax£wIdEx    DEnk- lot  hsna-  40 
£yasxa    kadEdzayayoi.as    lax    wulasE£was.     Wa,    g-il£Emxaawise    la 
nE(|Elaxs  lae  k  adi'.dzots  laxes  wrdasE£we.     Wa,  heEm  kogwayuwe 
qo  lal    kox£widElxes    wiilasE£wexa     k!EWElx£une    wunagula.     Wa, 
giFmese  gwalExs   lae   hex£idaEm  anex£edxa  q!exaele  qa£s    tleqwa- 
pEla.     Wii,  g  ihniese   Ialxa    q!exa£laxs   lae   mogwalllas    lax    mag  in  45 
walisases   lsgwlle.      Wii,    lii    ax£edxa    lExa£ye   qa£s    lii   bants  !es    lax 
L!Eina£isases   g'okwe.      Wii,  lii    xE£xuts  lalasa    ha£yal£a    tlesEm    laq. 
Wii,   giPmese   gwanala    ldk"sexs  lae    k!ox£usdcsElaq   qa£s  lii    k-!o- 
gwlLElaq  laxes  wule£lase  gokwaxes  willasE£we  gokwa  qa£s  lii  gugE- 
nolisas  laxes  lsgwlle.     Wii,  lii  xwelaqEntslesa  laxa  L!Ema£ise  k!5x-  50 
klotElaxes  t!:igats!e  lExa£ya.     Wii,  laxae  etled  t  liixts  lalasa  tlesEme 
laq.     Wii,  la  Enekeda  waokwe  baklumas  XE£xuts lalasa  tlesEme  laxes 
xEgwatsle    tlesEma.       Wii,    g  iPEmxaawise    gwanala     l5k"sexs    lae 
k-loqidisaq    qa£s    lii    k' !ox£usdesElaq     qa£s    lii    klogwlLElaq    laxes 


72  ETHNOLOGY   OF   Tl IK    KWAKIUTL  [bth.aNS.3b 

55  takes  (the  basket)  up  the  beach  and  into  the  ||  house  in  which  he  is 
making  the  box,  and  he  ,uoes  and  empties  it  out  by  the  side  of  the 
lire.  When  |  he  thinks  he  has  enough,  he  builds  up  the  fire  with 
driftwood,  |  piling  it  on  crosswise;  and  after  building  the  lire,  lie 
puts  on  |  the  stones  on  the  crossed  driftwood;  and  when  he  has  put 

Gi  on  |  the  stones,  the  box-maker  takes  the  basket,  :;  carries  it  down  to 
the  beach,  and  gathers  dulco,  which  |  he  throws  into  his  basket.  When 
it  is  full,  |  he  carries  it  on  his  back  up  the  beach  and  puts  it  down 
close  |  to  the  fireand  stones,  lie  empties  it  out  on  the  floor,  which  he 
is  going  to  dig  out  to  |  put  the  red-hot  stones  in.     Then   he  takes 

65  his  ||  basket  again,  goes  down  to  t  he  beach,  carrying  his  basket,  and  | 
brings  up  dead  eel-grass  from  the  high-water  mark.  He  puts  it  |  in 
the  basket;  and  when  it  is  full,  |  he  carries  it  up  the  beach  on  his 
back,  and  he  puts  it  down     near  t  lie  pile  of  dulce.     After  he  has  done 

70  so,  he  takes  his  ||  drib1  and  well-splitting  cedar-wood  and  puts  them 
down  S  close  to  the  basket  with  eel-grass;  and  he  takes  the  board  |  at 
which  he  is  working  and  put-  it  down  on  a  level  place  on  the 
floor  of  the  house.  Then  |  he  takes  his  wife's  digging-stick  which 
-he  uses  for  diguing  clams,  | and  he  pushes  the  point  of  the  digging--!  ick 

75  into  the  floor  at         ;        j      3  each  end  ||  of  the  grooves  on  the 

edge  of  the  board   [~  ~|   at    which    he    has    been    work- 

ing, in   this  way,         *         i      {  from  (1  I  to   |  (4),  and  also  from 


55  wfilldasaxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  la  gugKnolisas  laxes  lsgwlie.  Wa,  gil- 
smese  kotaq  laEm  helalaxs  lac-  lEqwelax,£Itsa  q!exa£le.  Wa  laF.in 
gayi£lalas.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwal  lEqwelaxs  lae  t  laqEyindalasa 
t  !csF,me  laxa  gayidalakwe  q!exa£la.  Wa  g  ihniese  wIlkEyindeda 
tlesEmaxa  lEgwIlaxs  laeda  wu£lenoxwe  k'loqiilllaxa  lE\a£ye  qa£s  la 

60  k!oqunts!esEla([  laxa  L,!Ema£ise  qa£s  le  klidgilaxa  LlEsidEkwe  qa£s 
la  lExtslalas  laxes  idEsidEgwatsIe  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gil£mese  qotlaxs 
lae  0XLEX'£ldaq  qa£s  lii  oxLosdesr.laq  qa£s  la  o.XLEg'alilas  lax  onali- 
sases  t!eqwapa£ye  lEgWlla;  wa,  qa£s  gux£al!les  laxes  £lap lalilasLe  qa 
xE£x"ts!Ewasltsa  xix'ExsEmala  tlesEma.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  dax^Idxes 

65  lE.xa\ve  qa£s  lii  xwelaqEnts !es  laxa l !Ema£ise  k'  loqulaxes  lExa£ye.  Wii, 
lii  ax£edxa  ts  !ats  Issmote  laxa  ya£xumotasa  yExwa  qa£s  Isxtslales 
laxes  tsats '.EsmSdats !e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gil£F.mxaawise  qotlaxs  lae 
(").\i.Ex-cIdEq  qa£s  lii  oxLOsdesElaq  qa£s  lii  oxLEgalilaq  lax  magin- 
walilasa  niEwele  LlE-i.lF.kw a.      Wii.  g  lFmese  gwalExs    lae  ax£edxes 

70  sF.lF.me  LE£wa  egaqwa  lax  xasEwe  klwaxLawa  qa£s  lii  gigalllas  lax 
mag  inwalilasa  ts  !ats  hrssmodats  !e  lExa£ya.  Wii,  laxae  fix£edxes  wula- 
sEeweqa£s  pax£aliles  laxa  EnEmaele  lax  awlnagwflases  gokvve.  Wii, 
lii  ax£edEX  klflakwases  gEiiEme,  ylx  dzegayowasexa  giiweqlanEme. 
Wa,  IB,  ts!ExubEtalllas  oba£yasa  k'lilakwe  lax  wax-sba£yasa  xwexti- 

75  ta£ye  lax  wax-sEnxa£yas  wiilasE£wasxa  ga  gwaleg'a  (Jig.)  lax  (1)  lo£ 
(4)'.    Wii,  lii  etiedEX  (2)  i,o£   (5);  wii,  laxae  §t!edEx  (3)  lo£  (6).      Wa, 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  73 

(2)    to   (5),  and  also  from  (3)  to  (6).     As  soon  |  as  he  has  made  77 
the  holes  straight  down  at  each  end    of    the  grooves,    |   he  takes 
up  the  board  at  which  he  is  working,  and   he    puts  it   down   on 
edge  in  the  corner  of  the  house.  [  Then  he   digs   up   the   sod  from 
(1)   to   (4)   four  fingers  ||  wide  and  a  short   span      deep:    and   when  SO 
it  is  deep  j  enough,  he  digs  up  from  (2)   to    (5),   doing  the   |  same 
as  before;  and  after  doing  so,  he  digs  it  up  from  (3)  to    |   (6);  and 
when  it  is  deep  enough,  it   is   this  way.1   ||   This  hole    is  called  the  85 
"  steaming-place  of  the  box-maker  for  t lie  box-board."  '  After  lie  has 
dug  them,  he  takes  his    tongs,    |   picks  up  the  red-hot  stones,  and 
puts  them  into   |    (1) ;    and  when  he  has  covered  the  whole  length  of 
the  hole  and  it  is  nearly  |   filled,  he  does  the  same  at   (2),  putting 
in  the  red-  ||  hot  stones ;  and  when  it  is  also  nearly  full,  he  puts  [  90 
red-hot  stones  into    (3);    and   when   |   that    is    also   nearly    full,   he 
puts  down  his  tongs,   takes  the   |    dulee,  and    places  it  on  top  of 
the  red-hot  |  stones;  and  he  does   not  stop   putting  on   dulee  until 
it  is  level  with  the  ||  floor.     He  does  this  in  the  two  holes  beside  95 
the  first   one  into  which  he  |    put   dulee.     As   soon   as   he  finishes 
with    the    dulee.   he    takes     eel-grass   and   puts  it   over  the  dulee; 
and    after    this  is.  done  |  in   the   three   holes,    he    takes  |  the  board 
at  which  he  is  working  and  places  it  on  top  of  it,  laving  the  ||  kerfs  300 

g-iPmese  ewl£la  la  kwaxukuwlle  nEqEla£s  wax'sba£yasa  xwexutaAaxs  77 
lae  ax£alilaxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  la  k"  !ox£>vahlas  lax  onegwilases  gokwe. 
Wa,  la  gagilil  Laplidxa    ttek'a  lax   (1)   lalaa    lax    (4)   xa  modEiias 
£wadzEgas    laxEns    q!waq!waxts!ana£yex.       Wa,   la  ts  !Exuts  !ana£ye  SO 
£walal)Etalilasas  laxEns  q !waq !wax-ts !ana£yex.     Wa,  gil£mese  hela- 
bEtalllExs    lae   et led  'laplklEX  (2)  lalaa   lax  (5).     Wa,  laxae  hSEm 
gwex"£IdEq.     AV:i,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  etled  Elap!ldEX  (3)  lalaa  lax 
(6).     Wa,    g'l^Emxaawise    helaliEtalllExs    lae    g'a    gwaleg'a.1      W'ii, 
heEm  LegadEs  klalasasa  wrwu£lenoxwaxs  xEselaaxa  xEtsEme,  yixa  85 
la  £lal>Egwelkwa.     Wa,  g  JPniese  gwal  '"lapaxs  lae  axfedxes  klipLalaa 
qa£s  k'!ip!ldes  laxa  x'lx'ExsEinala    tlesEma    cja's  lii  k"!ipts!ots    lax 
(1).  Wa,  g'iFmese  mEgugiltslaxte  Elapa£ya  loxs  lae  halsElaEm  k'!es 
qot!a;  wa,  laxae  et IccIex  (2).    Wa,   laEinxae  kltptslalasa  xlx-exse- 
mala  t  !esEm  laq.    Wa,  g-il£EmxaawIse  Elaq  qot  laxs  lae  et  led  k!ip!id-  90 
xa  xixExsEmala  tlesEma  qa£s  la  k"!ipts!alas  lax  (3).     Wa,  g'il£Em- 
xaawlse  Elaq  qotlaxs  lae  k'at lalllaxes  k'lipLalaa  qa£s  la  tEX£ed  laxa 
LlESLlEkwe  qa£s  lii  lEXEltsIaxstalas  lax  okiVya'Aasa  x'lx'ExsEmala 
t  lesEma.  Wa,  al£mese  gwal  hsxasa  1. !esi. lEkwaxs  lae  £iiEm;'ig-as  LE£wa 
awlnagwfle.   Wa,  la  hastaEm  gWEx-£idxa  matdzEqe  ogu£la  lax  g-ilxde  95 
lExts!utsd£s.     Wa,  g"il£mese  gwaltsa  L !esl lEkwaxs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!a- 
tslEsmote  qa£s  lExEvindes  laxa  LlESLlEkwe.    Wa,  laEinxae  enaxwaEm 
he  gwex£Idqexs  yudux"dzEqae.     Wa,  giPmese  gwabexs  lae   ax£ed- 
xes    wulasE£we    qa£s    paqEyallles    laq.      Wa,    laEm    nanaxstE£wasa 

1  The  ditches  here  described  are  dug  from  points  indicated  by  the  numbeis  on  the  sketch  on  p.  72. 


74  ETHNOLOGY   OF  THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.S5 

300  over  the  places  where  the  steam  comes  out;  and  when  the  kerfs 
are  right  over  |  the  places  where  he  put  the  red-hot  stones,  he  |  takes 
the  eel-grass  and  throws  it  on  top  of  the  |  board  at  which  lie  is 
working,  right  over  the  kerfs,  in  tins  way;1  and  when  it  is  |  piled 
5  on  thickly,  he  takes  his  bailer,  tills  it  with  ||  water,  lifts  up  one 
end  of  the  board,  and  |  pours  on  the  water  into  the  three  holes 
where  the  |  box-maker  is  steaming  the  board.  After  he  has  poured 
on  |  the  water,   he   puts   down   the   board   so   that   it   lies  on  the   | 

10  steam.  He  takes  his  tongs,  picks  up  red-hot  j|  stones,  and  places 
them  on  top  of  the  eel-grass  |  which  he  put  on  last  along 
the  three  kerfs;  and  !  when  he  has  put  the  red-hot  stones  close 
together,  he  takes  eel-grass  |  and  throws  it  on  top.  Then  he  puts 
down   his  tongs,  ]  takes  his  bailer,  fills  it  with  water,  and  pours  it 

15  along  ||  the  three  rows  of  red-hol  stones  which  are  covered  with  |  eel- 
grass.  After  finishing  this,  lie  takes  more  eel-grass  j  and  throws  it 
over  the  red-hot  stones  as  the  steam  is  coming  out.  |  Then  he  takes 
his    straight     knife    and   |  splits    cedar-wood     into    thin     pieces.      lie 

^)(l  shaves  them  oil'  ||  so  thai  they  are  sharp,  and  measures  them  so  thai 
they  are  four  finger-widths  |  long;  then  he  cuts  them  off.  When  | 
he  has  made  many  of  these,  lie  stops.      These  will  be  the  pegs  for  the  | 

300  xuta\ve  laxa  la  k!ah:la.  Wa,  g"il£mese  la  enaxwa  nEqEmsta£ya 
xwexiilta£ye  laxa  la  xexE£xuts!EWaxusa  xix-ExsEmala  tlesEmxs  lac 
ax£ed  laxa  ts  !ats  lEsmote  qa£s  texEdzodes  lax  ek"  !adzE£yases  wiilasE- 
£we  lax  iiExsawasa  xwexulta£ye,  ga  gwiileg  a.1  Wa,  g  il£mese  la 
wakwa  ts  !ats  tesmStas  lae  ax£edxes  tsalayowe  qa£s  tsex'£icles  laxa 
5  Ewape.  Wa,  la  l !Elg"ostodEx  apsba£yases  WElasE£we.  Wa,  he£mis 
la  gugELEyindaatsesa  £wape  maxwa  laxa  yuduxudzEqe  k"!alasasa 
wewirienoxwaxs  xEselaaxa  xEtsEme.  Wit,  gilmiese  gwal  gflqasa 
Ewape  laqexs  lae  paqaxotses  wulasE£we  qa£s  paqEyindes  laxa  la 
kMfilr.la.     Wa,  la  ax£edxes  k"  lipL&laa  qa£s  k- lip  lides  laxa  xix  exse- 

10  mala  tlesEma  qa£s  k- ItpEyindales  laxa  lEXF.dza've  ts  !ats  tesmota 
IfdiEiid.dax  DEgElEna£yasa  xwexulta£ye  laxes  yudux"ts!aqae.  Wa, 
g-il£mes.e  la  tas&leda  x'ix"ExsEmala  tlesEmxs  lae  Sx£edxa  ts!ats!ES- 
mote  qa£s  lEXEyindales  laq.  Wa,  la  g"ig"alllaxes  k-!ipLalaa  qa£s 
ax£edexes  tsalayowe  <|a"s    tsex-£Ides  laxa  £wape  qa£s  tsadzElEna£yes 

j 5  laxa  yuduxuts!agE£nakula  xixExsEmfila  tlesEma  la  tetexEyalaxa 
t  ^atslEsmote.  Wa,  g  iHmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  waokwe  ts!ats!ES- 
niota  qa£s  lEXEyindales  laxa  xIxExsEmala  tlesEmxs  lae  k'laMda. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax^edxes  nExxiila  k'lawayowa  qaEs 
xox;wides  laxa    klwaxLawe   qa    wIswEltowes.     Wa,    la    k!ax£w!dEq 

90  qa  wIsWElbes.  Wa,  la  mEns£idEq  qa  modEnes  laxEns  qlwaqlwax- 
ts!ana£yex  yix  awasgEmasasexs  lae  k- limtts tendEq.  Wa,  gil£mese 
qlenEme  k!axwa£yasexs  lae  gwaia.      Wa,  hi'i-.m   i.abEmltsexes  xEse- 

1  That  is,  over  the  kerfs  as  indicated  in  the  figure  on  p.  72. 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  75 

box   that  ho  is  making.     After   this   is   finished,    he    takes   up   the  23 
well-splitting  |  cedar-wood  and  splits  it  not  quite  as  thick  as  the  || 
little  finger.    He  splits  up  much  of  this.    When  |  this  is  done,  lie  takes  25 
a  long  cedar-bark  rope  and  putsil  into  |  the  water  in  order  to  soak  it. 
He  dips  it  up  and  down,  so  that  it  gets  |  soaked  quickly;  and  when 
it  is  soaked,  he  takes  it  out  of  the  water.     He  shakes  off  |  the  water 
and  lays  it  out  straight,  so  that  it  does  not  get  tangled  when  lie  puts 
it   around  ||  the  box  that  he  is  making  when  he  bends  the  corners.  30 
When  everything  is  ready,  |  he  takes  the  board-protector  and  the 
instrument  for  bending  the  corners,  |  so  that  they  are  also  ready. 
Then  he  |  takes  the  tongs  and  picks  up  the  hot  eel-grass  and  the  |  hot 
stones  that  are  on  top  of  the  box-board.     He  ||  puts  them  down  at  a  35 
place  not  far  from  where  the  box-board  is  being  steamed;  |  and  when 
they  are  all  off  from  the  hoard,  lie  takes  the  |  board-protector  and 
puts  it  over  the  end  of  the  board,  in  this  way:      djT_fri  |  Now 

the  board-protector  is  near  the  end  of  the  J  box- 

board.     Then  |  he  takes  the  implement   for      {jtnlj^  bend- 

ing the  corners  (1,  4),'  and  puts  it  on  towards  the  side  of  kerf  [|  (1,  4),  40 
very  near  to  the  body  of  the  kerf.     He  steps  |  with  both  feet  on  the  ends 
of  the  bending-tool  at  |  (1,4).-'    Then  he  takes  hold  of  the  |  endsofthe 
board-protector  with  his  hands,  anil  he  pulls  it  up,  to  bend  the  corner  of 

lasE£we.     Wii,  g'ih'inese  gwatexs  lae  et!ed  ax£edxa  egaqwa  k!wax-  23 
Lfrwa  lax  xiisE£we  qa£s  xox£wideq.     Wii,    la  halsElaEin  wiswEltoga- 
wesens  sElt!ax"ts!ana£yex.     Wii,  laEmxae  qleiiEme  xayas.    Wii,  gil-  25 
£mese  gwfdExs  lae   ax£edxa  gilt  !a  dEnsen  dEiiEma  qa£s  lExstEndes 
laxa   £wape   qa   pex£wides.     Wii,  laEm   dzobEltalas   qa  hamakweles 
pex£wlda.     Wii,  gTb'mese  pex£wldExs  lae  axwiistEndEq  qa£s  k'telalex 
£wfibEk!Ena£yas  qa£s  L!ax£allles  qa  k\'eses  xoHkIeI  qo  lal  qEx'SEmdEl 
laxes  wulasE£WE  qo  lal  k-5x£wklLEq.     Wii,  g'iFmese  la  maxwa  gwalT-  30 
Iexs  lae  ax£edxes   LlEbEdza£ye  qa  gilxes  gaela  LE£wa  k'ogwayowe 
qa  g'iixes  ogwaqa  gaela.     Wii,  g'iTmese  maxvva  gwalllExs  lae  ax£- 
edxes    klipLalaa  qa£s  k!?p!ldes    laxa  tstelqwa  ts!ats!Esmota  LE£wa 
ts!Elts!ElxsEme  tlesEma  lax  ek'  !adzE£yases  xEselasE£we,  qa£s  k!ip!a- 
lilEles   laxa    k'!ese    qwesalalrl    laxes    nEg'asaxes    xEselasE£we.     Wii,  35 
giFmese     £wdg  Eldzowe      xeselasE£wasexs     lae    dax£idxes     LtebE- 
dzir'ye  qa£s  q!ox£waLElodes  lax  oba£yases  xEselasE£we  ga  gwiileg'a 
(fg.).    Wii,  laEm  maxba£ya  L!EbEdzii£ye  lax  xEselasE£was.    Wii,  laxae 
dax"£idxa  k'ogwayowe  (1,  4)  qa£s  k'adEdzodes  laxa  gwek'!otsta£ye 
lax  (1,4)  xiita'ya.     Wii,  laEm  max'£Enex  xilta£yas.      Wii,  lii  t!epa- 40 
lases  waxsoltsedza£ye    gog  ignyo    lax    waxsba£yases    k'ogwayowe 
(1,4).     Wii,  lii  diidEbEntses  wax-sdlts!ana£ye  lax  wax'sba£yasa  l!e- 
bEdza£ye.     Wii,   lamie    gElqostodEq   qa    kox£w!des    k'losiis    xesela- 

'  These  are  the  kerfs  in  order:  1,4;  2,  5;  3,  6.    See  figure  on  p.  72. 
2  That  is,  the  ends  of  the  tool. 


76  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Iktii.  ann.  35 

the  box  I  that  he  is  making;  and  when  he  lias  bent  it  over  enough,  lie 

45  takes  off  the  board-protector  ||  and  puts  it  on  the  other  end  at  (2,  5): 
and  |  when  it  is  near  the  kerf  at  (2,  5),  he  stops  the  board-protector, 
and  he  [  takes  off  the  instrument  for  bending  the  comer  and  puts  it 
down  at  (2,  5).     He  |  steps  on  the  ends  with  his  feet,  |  takes  hold  of 

50  the  board-protector  with  his  hands,  and  pulls  it  upward;  ||  and  he 
only  stops  pulling  when  it  is  bent  up  enough.  Then  |  he  places  the 
board-protector  at  the  <>t  herside  of  (3,  6),  and  |  he  docs  as  he  did  before 
when  he  bent  with  it.  Now  the  |  three  kerfs  are  bent,  forming  the 
corners  of  the  box  that  he  is  making.     As  soon  as    |    this  is  done,  he 

55  takes  the  long  cedar-bark  rope  and  tit's  it  around  ||  the  box  that  he  is 
making,  which  has  now  the  shape  of  a  box.  Then  he  puts  together 
the  j  two  end  joints  of  thi'  box  that  he  is  making  to  iit  them;  and  he 
pulls  the  |  cedar-bark  rope  tight,  twisting  it  around.  He  winds  ll 
around  many  times,  |  so  that  the  box  that  he  is  making  does  not  get 
twisted.      After  doing  so,  ]  he  takes  his  drill  and  drills  holes  through 

(ill  the   two  ends,   in  this  way:      ^-^s.  I  After  he  has  put    the  drill- 

holes through,  he  pulls  out  fxl  ^>  the  drill,  puts  it  down,  |  and 
takes  up  one  of  the  cedar  \  };  J  pegs  which  he  shaved  to  a 
point,  |  puts  it  into  the  inouth  xt^  to  wet  it  with  saliva  so  j  that 
it  is   |   slippery;    and   when   it    is   wet    all   over  with  saliva,    he  puts 

(15  it  into  the  drill-hole  before  it  gets  dry  ||  and  drives  it  in  with 
a  round  stone;  and  when  [  the  peg  does  not  go  in  any  farther  wdien 

SE£was.     Wa,  g'iPmese  hehtle  k-o<|W;ryas,    lac  ax;T>dxes   r. !F.l>K«l/.;i\  e 

45  qa£s  la  <|  !ox-waLElots  Iaxa  apsbaeye  lax  (2,5).  Wa,  g-il£mese  exa- 
klEndEX  xiita£yas  (2,  5)  lac  walases  LlEbEdz.rAe.  Wa,  la  ax£a- 
i.Elodxa  kogwayowe  qa£s  la  katstots  lax  (2,5).  Wa,  laxae  t!et!E- 
bEntses  gogEguyowe  lax  waxsba£yasa  k'ogwayowe.  Wa,  la  dadE- 
bEiitses     wiixsolts!ana£ye     laxa      i,!i:bE(l/.;i;\axs    lae    gElqostodEq. 

50  Wa,  laEmxac  ah'Em  gwal  gElqaqexs  lne  helalc  k"oqwa£yas.  Wa, 
la  aEm  kax£aLEl6dxa  LlEbEdza£ye  lax  apsot  !Ena£yas  (3,6).  Wa, 
laxae  aF.m  nEqEingilt F.wcxes  gale  k'oqwasos.  Wa,  la£me  £wl£la 
k"5gEkwa  yuduxuts!aqe  xiita£ya  lax  xEselasE£was.  Wii,  g'il£mese 
gwalExs    lae    ax'cdxa    g-ilt!a    dEnsEii    dEnEma    qa£s    qExsEmdes 

55  laxes  xEselasE£waxs  lae  q lolatsEmala.  Wa,  la£me  aeklax  sako- 
da£yases  xEselasE'Ve  qa  bEnbEgales.  Wa,  lii  ta:k!wet  !edxa  qEX"SE- 
ma£ye  giltla  dEnsEii  dEnEma.  Wa,  heme  q!ep!ene£steda  qEXSE- 
ma£ye  qa  kleses  qhveqflle  xEselasE£was.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwala  lae 
ax£edxes  SElEme  qa£s  sElEmxodesxa  sakodaexa  ga  gwiilega  {fig.). 

t;o  Wii,  g  il£mese  laxsawe  sEla£yasexs  lae  lexodxes  SElEme  qa£s  kat  !a- 
lllesexs  lae  dagilllaxa  £nEmts!aqe  laxes  k'!axwa£ye  Lit  bEm  khvax£- 
Ena  qa£s  hamklEndeq  qa  klfinxElaleses  k!uneL!Exawra£yas  qa 
tsax-£Enes.  Wii,  g  il£mese  la  haniElxEnfdaxa  k!iineL!Exawa£yaxs 
lae  hayalomalaa  dexostots  laxes  si;la:yc  yixs  k'!es£mae  lEmxeunx£- 

65  Ida.     Wii,  laEm  deqwasa  loxsEine  tlesEm  laq.     Wa,  g  il£mese   gwal 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  77 

he  drives  it  in,  he  drills  another  hole  at  the  other  corner,  ]  and  when  the  67 
drill-hole  goes  through,  he  pulls  out  the  drill,  |  puts  it  down,  and  takes 
up  another  cedar  peg,  and  |  does  as  he  did  before  with  the  first  one. 
He  drives  it  in  ||  with  a  round  stone:  and  after  doing  so,  he  measures  |   70 
three  finger-widths,  beginning  with  the  first  |  peg  that  he  drove  in, 
and  he  drills  another  hole  through  it;  |  and  when  it  is  through,  he 
pulls  out  his  drill  and  puts  it  down.  |  He  wets  the  peg  with  saliva, 
and  I  drives  it  in  with  the  stone.     He  continues  doing  this  |  in  all  the  75 
holes  which  he  makes  at  distances  of  three  finger-widths  apart,  |  and 
there  is  one  cedar  peg  in  each  of  them.  |  That  is  the  way  in  which  in 
ancient  times  the  people  |  pegged  the  corner  joint  of  a  box  with  cedar 
pegs.  The  present  Indians  ||  sew  them  togetherwith  twisted,  thin  cedar-  SO 
withes,  which  arc  soaked  for  four  days  in  |  urine  to  make  them  soft, 
and  so  that  they  do  not  |  rot  quickly,  for  they  have  a  red  color.     Only 
two  J  finger-widths  apart  are  the  drill-holes  for  cedar-withes  |  on  the 
corner  joint  of  the  box  that  is  being  made.    After  the  pegging  ||  has  85 
been  finished,  the  box-maker  unties  the  cedar-bark  rope  with  which  | 
he  kept  it  together,  and  he  puts  it  away.     Then  he  takes  the  board 
that  will  be  the  bottom  of  |  the  box,  and  his  adz,  and  he  puts  them 

sEx"ts!eda     LabEm     deqwaxs    lae     et!ed     sElxsodxa     apsEnxa£ye.  66 
Wa,  g  il'Emxaawisc  laxsawe  sElaJyasexs  lae  lexodxes    sElEine  qa£s 
gigalilesexs  lae  dag"illlaxa  £nEints!aqe  k!wax£En  LabEma.     Wa,  la 
hcEinxat!    gwex"£idqes    g'ilxde    gwex"£idaasa.      Wa,    la    dex£wltsa 
loxsEine    t!esEm    laq.      Wa,    gilmese     gwalExs   lae    niEns£aLElotsa  70 
yuduxudEne     laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex    giigrLEla     lax  giLxde 
Lap !ltso£sesa  k!wax£Ene  LabEma.     Wii,  heemis  la  et!ed  sEbr£Itsosf\ 
Wa,    g-il£mese    laxsaxs    lae   lexodxes   sElEine  qa£s  g'igahles.     Wii, 
laxae    et!ed    khmx-Eiidxa    LsibEine    laxes     k!uneL!Exawaeye     qaes 
etlede     dex'wltsa     t!esEme     laq.       Wa,    ax-saemese    he     gwegilaq  75 
lal)Endales  sEla£yexa  yuduxudEnes  awalagalaase  laxEns  q!waq!wax-- 
ts!ana£yex.      Wii,     he-'mis    la    qhvalxostalaxa    klwax'Ene    LabEma. 
Wit,  heEm  gwegilatsa    gildzEse  bEgwanEinaxs   Lapaasa  k!wax£Ene 
LabEm  lax  sak'oda^yases  xEselasE^we.     Wii,  laLoxda   alex  bakhim 
t  !bmt  tegotsa  sElbEkwe  wll£Eii   hapstalll   mop!Enxwasses  enala  laxa  SO 
kwatsle  qa  alak'lales  la  pekweda  dEwexe,     Wii,    he£mis    qa    kMeses 
gEyol  c[!uls£idExs  lae  L!aL!Ex£iina.     Wii,  laLa  hamaldEngala  laxEns 
q!waq!wax"ts!anaeyex   yix   awalagalaasasa   sEla£ye  qaeda  dEwexaxs 
t  !Emt  !Egoyaaxa  salroda£yasa  xEsela.     Wii,  g'iFmese  gwal  Lapaqexs 
lae    qwelklwetEndxa     qEX'sEma£ye     gilt!a     dEnsEn    dEnEina    qaEs  85 
qEs£edeq  qa£s  lii    g'exaq.     Wa,    lii    ax£edxa  paq lExsdeLases   xEsela- 
sE£we    LEewis  k'liniLayowe.      Wii,    lii   pax£alllaq  qa£s    k'limLEldza- 


78  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  Leth.ann.sb 

88  ( Ic  iwn  flat,  and  he  adzes  off  the  flat  side  |  to  make  it  smooth.  When  it  is 
very  smooth  and  level,  |  he  turns  over  what  is  to  be  the  bottom  of  the 

90  box,  for  that  is  its  name,  and  ||  he  adzes  it  again.  After  he  has 
adzed  it,  he  takes  |  split  cedar-sticks  and  the  box  that  he  is  making, 
and  he  puts  it  down  on  the  floor,  in  this  way :  i  |  Then  he  takes 

one  of  the  split  cedar-sticks  and.  measures  il  /  ^v  |  crosswise  at 
the  four  corners.     He  firsl  puts  the  j  cedar    N.       S    measure  in   at 

!*5  (1),  going  across  to  (2),  and  he  pushes  the  7  end    ||    of    the 

measure  into  the  inner  corner  at  ('_'),  and  he  marks  the  distance  of 
the  corner  j  on  the  measure  from  (1).  Then  he  takes  his  measure  | 
and  puts  it  crosswise  at  (3),  and  pushes  the  measure  |  into  the  corner 
at  (4);  and  when  the  distance  of  the  corners  from  (3)  [to  (4)  is  the 
same  as  the  distance  of  the  corners  from  (1)  to  (2),  then  the  box  is 
400  not  awry  ||  that  is  made  by  the  box-maker.  Then  he  takes  his 
straight  |  knife  and  cuts  oil'  his  measures  where  he  has  marked  them,  | 
and  he  takes  another  split  cedar-stick  and  |  puts  it  down  so  that  the 
end  is  equal  to  the  end  that  he  has  cut  off,  and  he  |  cuts  them  to  the 
o  same  length;  and  he  does  the  same  to  the  two  other  ||  cedar-sticks,  so 
that  they  have  the  same  measure  in  length.  |  After  he  has  done 
so,  he  puts  one  end  of  the  cedar-stick  in  the  [  corner  of  the 
box  that  he  is  making,  close  to  the  upper  rim,  and  he  puts  the 
other  |  end  of  the  (same)   stick  in   the  upper  corner  at    (2),  in   this 


ss  yeq  qa  EnEmadz6x£wides.  Wa,  g'il£mese  alak'Iiila  la  £nEmadzoxs 
lae  le.vEhlaxa  paq  texsdayalase  qaxs  he£mae  LegEmse   qa£s  ogwaqe 

90  k-  IimLEldzodEq.  Wii,  g"il£mese  gwal  k'imi.F.ld/,E£weqexs  lae  ax'edxa 
xokwe  klwaxi.awa  LE£vvis  xEselasE£we.  Wa,  la  hang'alilaq  {fig.). 
Wa,  la  dax'Idxa  £nEmts!aqe  laxa  xokwe  klwaxLawa  qa£s  niEnsi'liiles 
laxa  mowe  kMeklosa.  Wa,  bfeEm  g-il  k-at  laLElodaatsesa  mEnya. 
yowe  klwaxLawe   (1)   la  hayosEla   lax  (2).      Wa,   laEin    sEkale  oba- 

95  £yasa  mEnyayowe  lax  oneqwas  (2).  Wii.  lii  xult'.edEX  WElgllasas 
laxa  mEnyayowe  lax  oneqwas  (1).  Wii,  lii  ax£aLElodxes  mEnyayowe 
qa£s  lii  kat  laLElots  lax  (3).  Wii,  lii  sEkale  oluryasa  mEnyayowe 
lax  oneqwas  (4).  Wii,  gih'mese  arcm  UExstode £wadzEqaw!lasas  (3) 
lo£  (4)  lax  £wadzEqawllasas  (1)  l<V  ('_')•  Wa,  laEin  k'les  k!we£xusE- 
400  male  xeselasE£wasa  WE£lenoxwe.  Wii,  &£mese  la  dax'ldxes  nExx'iila 
k'lawayowa  qa£s  k- limttslEndexes  mEnyayowe  nExstodxa  xuldE- 
kwe.  Wii,  lii  etled  dax'Idxa  ogu£la£maxat !  xoku  klwaxLawa  qa£s 
kakEtodes  qa  £nEmabales  LE£wa  la  k!imtts!aakwa.  Wii,  lii  klimt- 
tslEndaxaaq  qa  £nEmasgEmes.  Wii,  lii  etledxa  malts laqe  ogu£la 
5  klwaxLawa  k" limk' limtts lalaq  qa  -ne'namasgEmes  LE£wa  mEnyayo- 
we. Wa,  gil£mese  gwfila  lae  k"it lalts lots  oba£yasa  klwaxxawe  laxa 
k'losiises  wiilasE£we  laxa  mag'ixsta£yas  otsl&was.  Wa,  lii  cp^t  lal- 
ts lots  apsba£yas  liixa  nEqawa  (2)  klosaxa  ga  gwSlega  {fig.).     Wa,  lii 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  79 

way:  i  Then  |   he  takes   the    other   measured    split    cedar- 

stick       /l\       and    puts  ||  one   end   in    at   (3),   and   the  other  end  lo 
at  (4)  3\^      /     Now  |  it  is  this  way.  JL  He  does  the  same 

with  y[         two  split  |  measured      /    _V      cedar-sticks  at  the 

other  side  ui  the  box  that  he  is  making.    \.       /     |  lie  takes  his  drill 
and  drills  through  the   two   joints  of  Y^         the  box  that  he  is 

As  soon  as  he  has  drilled  through,  he 
cedar  peg,  pulls  out  his  drill,  and  |    15 
the  place  where  his  drill  was  before.  | 


making,  |  in  this  way 
takes  ||  a  well-shavcc 
puts  the  cedar  peg  ii 

Then  he  takes  up  the  "^  stone  with  his  right  hand,  |  and  he 

drives  in  the  cedar  peg.  When  the  peg  does  not  go  any  farther,  |  he 
takes  his  drill  and  drills  a  hole  at  a  distance  ||  of  three  finger-widths,  20 
beginning  at  the  hole  which  he  drilled  first;  |  and  when  the  drill  has 
gone  through,  he  pulls  out  the  drill  and  |  puts  a  cedar  peg  in  the  place 
where  the  drill  had  been,  [  and  he  takes  the  stone  and  drives  in  the 
cedar  peg.  |  He  continues  doing  this  until  he  finishes  driving  in  the 
pegs  ||  in  the  box  that  he  is  making.  When  it  has  been  pegged,  he  25 
takes  some  of  what  was  left  |  when  he  split  the  boards  for  making  the 
box.  He  takes  a  |  broad  short  board  and  puts  it  down.  He  takes 
his  |  adz  and  adzes  it  all  over  so  that  it  is  level;  and  |  when  the 
ridges  that  were  on  it  have  been  adzed  off,  he  turns  it  over  and  || 
does  the  same  on  the  other  side.     When  the  ridges  that  were  on  it  30 

tied  dax'£Idxa  £nEmts!aqe  xox"niEneku  kfwaxLawa  qa  kit  lalts  lodes 
oba-yas  (3)k-!osas.  W&,  la  qEt  lalts  lots  apsba£yas  lax  (4).  Wa,lag-a  in 
gwalaxs  lac  gwala  (fig-).  Wii,  laxae  heEm  gwex£Itsa  malts !aqe 
xdxuniEiiEk"  k'waxLawa  laxa  epsana£yases  wulasEewe.  Wii,  la 
ax-edxes  sidEine  qa£s  sElx"sodexa  wrwaqoda£yas  oba£yases  wttlasE- 
ewexa  g'a  gwalega  {fig.).  Wii,  gilmiese  lax'sawe  sida-'yas  lae  ax'edxa 
aeklaakwe  k!;ik11  klwaxLawa;  wii,  la  lexodxes  seIeuic.  Wa,  la  15 
L  layogwaaLElotsa  k!wax£Ene  LabEm  lax  k"  lEqwalaasdases  SElEme. 
Wa,  lii  dax£Itses  helk"  lolts  !ana£yo  laxa  tlesEme.  Wii,  lit  de£x£- 
wits  laxa  k!wax£Ene  LabEma.  Wii,  gih'mese  gwal  sE-x"ts!a  de- 
qwe  LabEmasexs  lae  etled  dax-Idxes  sElEme  qa£s  sElxsodes 
laxa  yuduxudEne  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  g'iigir.Ela  lax  g'ale  20 
SEles.  Wit,  g'ilmiese  laxsawe  SEla£yas  lae  lexodxes  SElEme.  Wii, 
lii  l  layogwaaLElotsa  k  !wax£Ene  LabEm  lax  k' lEqwalaasdases  SElEme. 
Wii,  laxae  diix'idxa  tlesEme  qa£s  dex£wides  laxa  k!wax£Ene  LabEma. 
Wii,  ox-sii£mese  he  gwegila  IabEndalax  Lapax  £wadzosgEmasases  wu- 
lasE£WE.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wi£la  la  LabEkwa  lae  ax-edxa  g'ayole  laxes  25 
latlanEme  yixs  laxde  latla  qa£s  xeselasE£wa.  Wrii,  la£me  ax£edxa 
wadzowe  tslEgudzo  latlaakwa  qa£s  pax£alileq.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxes 
k  limi.ayowe  qa£s  k'liniLEldzodes  laq  qa  £nEmadz6xewides.  Wii, 
giFmese  £wi£la  klimLiilax  t  let  !Enxdzaeyas  lae  lex'IdEq  qa£s  hexat! 
gwex,£ldEX  apsadza£yas.     Wii,  g-£ilEmxaawise  '"wFlawe   tletlEnxdza-  30 


80  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  akn.  36 

31  have  also  been  adzed  off,  |  he  adzes  it  on  the  surface,  so  that  it  is 
level;  and  after  |  he  has  finished,  he  turns  it  over;  and  after  |  he  has 
done  so,  he  takes  the  box  that  he  is  making  and  puts  it  on  the  |  bottom 
board  of  the  box  that  he  is  making,  in  this  way, .  and 

35  he  marks  it  all  round  with  the  straight   knife  \\    r  \    \       ||  on 


the  outside  of  the  box  that  he  is  making.     As    \\  '  '    \    soon 

as  his  marks  go  around,  |  he  takes  off  the  box      "  ■■  ■'    that 

he  is  making  and  puts  it  down,  and  he  takes  up  again  |  his  straight 
knife  and  cuts  off  the  edges  along  |  the  mark  that  had  been  made;  and 
when  it  has  been  cut  off  all  along  the  mark,  |  he  cuts  off  the  ends  along 

40  the  marks;  and  when  the  two  ends  are  off,|j  he  takes  up  again  the  box 
that  he  is  making  and  puts  it  on  again.  Then  |  he  marks  along  the 
inside  of  the  box,  |  on  the  bottom  board  of  the  box  that  he  is  making; 
and  |  when  he  has  marked  all  around  it,  he  takes  off  the  box  that  he  is 
making  and  puts  it  down.  |  Then  he  takes  his  straight  knife  and  cuts 

45  along  ||  the  mark  that  he  put  on  first;  and  when  he  has  cut  half  the 
width  of  the  little  finger  j  in  depth  all  around  the  bottom  board  of 
the  box,  he  |  cuts  it  off  and  removes  it.  As  soon  as  he  finishes,  it  is  in 
this  way: 
puts  it  on 

50  he     takes 


□ 


|  Then  he  takes  the  box  that  he  is  making  and 
|  so  that  the  inside  tits  well  to  the  bottom.  Then 
his  ||  drill  and  drills  in  a  slanting  direction  in 
this  way:  /  Sx  A  |  turning  the  box  that  he  is  making  upside 
down.  He  f  "■•■■■  •■  ■  <-  I  puts  one  foot  |  on  the  bottom  board  of  the  box 
that  he  is    I  /    making;    and    when    his    drill  comes  through,  | 

,jl  eyasexs  lae  eEkla  kliniLEldzodEq  qa  £nEmadzowcs.  Wa,  giFmese 
gwala  lae  lex'-IdEq  qa£s  hexat !  gwex-'Idxa  apsadzE£yas.  Wa,  g  il£- 
Emxaawise  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  handzodes  laxa  pa- 
qlE.xsdei.as  wulasE£was  (fig.).     Wa,  la  xultse£stalases  HExxala  k'  lawa- 

3,5  yowe  lax  L !asadzEeyases  wulasE£we.  Wa,  gil£mese  lii£sta  xiilhrya- 
sexs  lae  ax£aLElodxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  hfmg'allles.  Wa,  laxae  dax£Id- 
xes  nExxida  klawayowa,  qaes  k!ax£wldex  ewunxa-yas  lalak'lE- 
naxes  xulta£ye.  Wa,  g'Hemese  laklEnde  k-!axwa£yas  laqexs  lae 
xults!F,ndEx  waxsba'vas.     \V;i,  g-iHmese  £wl£lawa  wax-sba£yaxs  lae 

40  xwelaqa  dax£Idxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  handzodes  laq.  Wa,  laxae 
xuldioltslalax  otslawases  wQlasE£we.  Wa,  laEin  xultstrstalax  £wala- 
laasas  otslawases  wfdasE'we  laxa  piiq lExsdeLases  wulasE£we.  Wii, 
gil£mese  l;'i£ste  xidta£yasexs  lae  ax£aLElodxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  hang'a- 
lileq.     Wa,  la  dax£idxes  nExxala  k"!awayowa  c[a£s  xuldElEmryexes 

45  gilx'de  xiilta£ya.  Wa,  gikniese  klodEn  laxEns  sElt!ax"ts!ana£yex 
yix  £walabEdasas  xulta£yas  lax  &we£st;isa  paqlExsdeLas  wfllasE£was, 
lae  k'laxalaq  qa  lawiiyes.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  g'a  gwaleg'a 
(Jig.).  Wii,  lii  dax-£Idxes  wulasE£we  qa£s  handzodes  laq.  Wii,  gil- 
Mnese  bEnale    otslawas  laxa  paq!Exsda£ye    lae  hex'£idaEm  ax£edxes 

50  sElEine  qa£s  masLlEk-alae  sElEmasexs  lae  sElx£idEq  g'a  gwiileg-a  (Jig.) 
lax  qEpalaena£yases  WElasE£we.  Wa,  la  t  !ebEdzE£weses  apsoltse- 
dza£ye  laxa   paq !Exsda£yases  wElasE£we.       Wii,    g'il£mese     lax'sawe 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  81 

he  takes  a  cedar-stick  and  his  straight  knife  and  |  cuts  it. 
making  a  peg.  When  he  has  finished  many,  he  ||  puts  the  pegs  in  the  55 
whole  number  of  holes  that  he  has  drilled.  When  he  has  done  so, 
he  |  takes  the  other  cedar  board  that  he  split,  which  is  one  hand- 
width  thick.  |  He  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  he  is  working, 
takes  his  stone  hammer  and  his  |  wedges,  and  marks  a  line  on  one 

end  with  his  marker,  that  is  a  short  blunt-ended  wedge,  |  in 

this    form:    |__^    As  soon  as  he  finishes  marking  the  endjhe    60 
takes      his  wedges  and  drives  them  along  the  line  that 

he  made  on  the  end.  [  The  wedges  are  close  together  as  they  are  stand- 
ing on  the  end  of  what  he  is  splitting.  |  Then  he  strikes  them  lightly 
with  his  stone  hammer,  striking  them  one  at  a  time;  |  l\     and 

when  he  has  split  off  the  piece,  then  it  is  in  this  form,  '  '     as  he 

had  planned  it  |  for  the  cover  of  the  box  that  he  is  making.    When  this 
is  done,  |[   he  takes  his  adz  and  adzes  it  well  all  over  on  both  sides;    65 
and  |  when  all  the  ridges  have  been  adzed  off,  he  adzes  the  top  side  | 
of  what  will  be  the  top  of  the  cover  that  he  is  making.  | 

When  the  cover  has  been  finished,  he  t  akes  his  small  crooked  |  knife, 
turns  the  box  that  he  is   , making  on  its  side,  and  he  cuts 


grooves  on  it  in  this  way :  || 
round, he  has 
When    it     is 
cedar -bark 
in  this  way: 


and    when    his   grooves   go    all     70 
finished  his  box  for  lily  bulbs.  | 
done,    his    wife    takes    iwisted 
rope     |     and    puts    it    around 


sElEmas,  lae  ax£edxa  klwaxLawe  LE'wis  nExxahi  kMawayowa  qa£s    53 
k"!ax£wideq.     Wa,  laEm  Lapelaq.     Wii,  gih'mese  gwala  qlenEine  la 
k"  laxwes  lae  Lapllts  lax  £waxaasases  sEla£ye.    Wa,  g  il£mese  gwala  lae    55 
ax£edxa wakwe  klwagEdzo  latlaakwaxa  amxLas wagwase.     Wa,  gaxe 
pax£Elsas  laxes  g'Edase.      Wa,  lii    ax£edxes    pElpElqe    LE£wis    LEm- 
lEmg-ayowe.     Wa,  la  maelbEntses  maelbanowe  ts!Ek!wa  LEmgayo 
laqxa   ga   gwidega  {fig.).     Wii,  g-il£mese   gwal   maelbEndqexs   lae 
ax£edxes  LEmlEmg-ayowe  qa£s  dexustodales   liixa   maelba£ye.      Wa,     GO 
laEm    niEink'ale    LEinlEmg'ayasexs  lae   q!waelba'"ya  lax    latoyoLas. 
Wa,  la   hfilsElaEin  degutEweses  pElpElqe  laxes  enal£nEmp  lEnxtoda- 
laena£yaq.     Wa,  g'ih'mese   lawaye   latoyas  lae  g'a  gwiile  senataseg-a 
(fig.)  yix  yikuyexasa    xE_selasE£was.      Wa,    g'iPmese    gwalExs    lae 
ax£edxes  k'liniLayowe  qa£s  aek'le  k' IimLEldzodEX  wawax-sadza£yas.     65 
Wa,  g-il£mese   £wi£lawe  t tent  !Enxdza£yasexs   lae    aek"!a  k-  limh'ldEx 
ek"  !adzE'"yasa  yikuyeLasa  xEselasE£was. 

Wii,  g  il£mese  gwala  ylkwayaeyaxs  lae  ax="edxes  klwedayowe  ame 
xElxwala.   Wa,qox£waMaxes  xEsela£ye  qa£s  aek- !e  k!wet!edEq  (fig.). 
Wa,      g'iPmese    la£sta  k!weta£yas    lae  gwfila    x-6gwats!e    XEtsEma.    70 
Wa,  ^•Jl£mese  gwala  lae  gEnEinas  ax£edxes  mEla£ye  dEnsEn  dEiiEma 
qa£s  wElxsEindes  laq  (fig.). 

75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 6 


82  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [HTH.  AN.V.85 

1  The  Making  of  Oil-Boxes.  I  have  forgotten  to  talk  about  the  meas- 
uring [  of  the  oil-boxes.  The  husband  of  the  |  woman  who  picks 
viburnum-berries  takes  his  seven  wedges  and  his  ]  hammer  for  split- 
5  ting  boards  in  the  wedge-bag  of  sea-lion  skin.  ||  He  carries  these  on 
his  back  and  goes  into  the  woods,  carrying  his  ax  |  in  one  hand. 
He  is  going  to  a  place  where  he  knows  of  a  cedar-tree  which  has 
moss  on  its  back,  and  which  has  been  lying  on  the  ground  for  a  long 
t  ime ;  j  for  the  box-maker  looks  for  this  kind  of  a  tree  when  he  wants 
to  make  an  oil-box,  |  because  it  bends,  and  it  does  not  split  easily, 
although  |  the  heat  strikes  it  for  a  long  time  when  they  are  trying 

10  out  the  oil  at  Knight  Inlet.  As  soon  ||  as  he  comes  to  a  trunk  that 
has  no  branches  or  knots,  he  puts  his  wedge-bag  down  on  the 
ground  |  and  chops  into  the  log  near  the  top  of  the  cedar-free. 
When  |  the  place  chopped  out  is  a  little  over  one  span 
deep,  |  he  measures  three  spans,  |  making  more 

15  room  for  starting  his  chopping,  in  this  way:  Q  ~w       ~J  ||    As 

soon  as  the  new  notch  has  the  same  depth  as     | 

the  first  one,  he  chops  out  the  block  between  the 

t  wo  notches.  |  When  it  comes  off, it  is  this  way :  I  ^^~^) The 

long  slanting  place  that  he  has  chopped  out  is  | 

the    place    where    he    will    put    his    wedges    in.      Now    he    starts 

20  where  he  |  cut  in,  and  measures  off  ten  spans  ||  and  four  finger- 
widths.   |   There   he   chops   into    the    tree,    and    the    chopping    at 

1  The  Making  of  Oil-Boxes.  -Wa,  hexoLEn  LlElewesE£wa  niEiisa- 
£yasa  dEngwats  !emote.  Wa,  heEin  gil  ax£etsos  la£wuiiEmasa  t  felts  !e- 
noxwe  tstedaqes  latlayowe  aLEbots!aq  LEinlEmg'ayowa  LE£wes 
lat!Ex"SE£yase  pElpElqaxs  q!wats!ae  laxes  q!waats!e  iJexEns- 
5  gEma.  Wii,  laEm  oxLalaqexs  lae  aL6£sta  daklotElaxes  soba- 
yowe.  Wa,laEm  lal  laxes  q!atsE£wa  p!Eldzek-ila  la  ge£s  t!a£s  i.rl" 
welkwa,  qaxs  he£mae  alaso£sa  £wI£wulenoxwaxa  dEngwats  !eLe, 
qaxs  tslExae;  wa  he£mesexs  klesae  tslEtaxs  wax£mae  la  gala 
tslElqwasosa    idesalasa  sErnxdEma    lEcjIiisxa  dzaxune.      Wa,    gll- 

10  £mese  lag'aa  laxa  ek'etElaxs  lae  hex-£idaEm  oxLEg'aElsaxes  q!wa- 
ats!e.  Wa,  la  tEmx£w!dxa  gweba£ye  laxa  6xta£yasa  welkwe.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  esEg'Eyowe  la  £walabEdats  sopa£yas  lilxEns  qlwaqwax-- 
ts!ana£3rex  lae  bal£idxa  yuduxup!Enk,e  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!a- 
na£yex  lae  sagilila  sop  led  g-ag"lLEla  laxes  g'ale  sopa£yaxa  g-a  gwa- 

15  lega  (Jig-)-  Wa,  gil£mese  la£nEmale  £walabEtsas  ale  tEmkwes  LE£wis 
g'ale  sopa£yaxs,  lae  kiigELElodEx  awagawa£yases  tEmkwa£ye.  Wa, 
g-tlemese  lawaxs  lae  g'a  gwaleg"a  (fig.)-  Wa,  heEm  q !w<IlaasLEs  LEm- 
lEmg'ayowasxa  la  g'lltsto  senoqwala  sopes.  Wa,  la  g'ag'lLEla  laxes 
tEmkwa£ye  (1),  lae  balndxa    nEqap!Enke    laxEns    q!waq!wax-ts!a- 

20  na£yex.  Wii,  he£misa  modEiie  laxEns  cjlwaqlwaxtslana-'yaxs 
lae    sobEtendEC[.      Wii,     la£me     gwagwaaxstale     senoqwalaena£yas 


uuasJ  INDUSTRIES  83 

this  place  slants  toward  |  the  base  of   the  cedar-tree.     This  place  is  22 
not  as  wide  open  as  the  one  which  he  chopped  out  iirst.  |  but  it  is 
much  deeper  than  the  one  that  he  chopped  out  at  the  top,  |  at  (1). 

When  it  is  deep  enough,  it  is  this  way:    Then  ||  he  takes  25 

his  wedge-bag  and  takes  out  his  wedges  1/  and   his    |    stone 

hammer,  and  he  puts  them  down  at  (1)  at  the  top  of  the 

cedar-tree.  |  Then  he  drives  in  the  wedges  with  his  stone  hammer.  | 
He  hammers  on  each  one  at  a  time.  |  The  seven  wedges  are  all 
close  together.     When  the  top  piece  comes  off. 

he  turns  it  on  its  back.  ||  Then  he  measures    (^  ^     Q   30 

the  thickness  of  one  finger,  |  which  he  will  split 

off  from  the  top  piece.  He  take-  (lie  short  marking-wedge  and 
drives  it   into  the  login  this  way:  ^^~^^^      Then   |  he  takes 

a  straight-edged  cedar-stick  and  s<^  J^2)  phices  it  on  the 
end  of  the  piece  that  had  been  v^-^^^^^  wedged  off  from 
the  I  cedar-tree  at  (1),  as  far  as  (2),        — J2-^  and     he    marks 

along  it.  After  he  has  done  so,  ||  he  takes  his  marking-wedge  and  35 
his  stone  hammer,  and  puts  his  |  marking  wedge  into  the  line  that  has 
been  marked  out,  and  drives  it  in  with  his  hammer,  [  so  that  the 
wood  splits  a  little.  Then  he  pnlls  it  out  again  |  and  puts  it  in  at  the 
end  of  the  place  where  he  drove  it  in  before,  and  he  pulls  out  his  | 
marking-wedge  and  strikes  it  again  with  the  hammer.  He  ||  does  so  40 
along  the  whole  length  of  the  line  that  lias  been  marked  with  his  mark- 
ing-wedge.   Then  I  he  takes  his  wedges  and  drives  them  into  the  line  that 

sopaEyas  laxa  oxi.a'yasa  welkwe.      Wa,  laEin  k'les  lexstowe  sobela-  22 
£yas.     Wa,  Urine  klwayala  wunqElagawes   gale  sobeles  laxa  oxtsVye 
lax  (1).     Wa,  g'IFmese  helabEtaxs   lae  g-a  ejwaleg'a  (Jig.).     Wa,  la 
ax£edxes  qlwaatsle,    qa£s     Lox£wultsalexes     LEmlEmg-ayowe  LE£wis  25 
pElpElqe,    qa£s    qKvaelbEiides   laxa   wllEta£yasa  welkwe    (1).     Wa, 
la£nie    degtitEweses    pElpElqe  Iaq.     Wa,  la-me   £nal£nEmp  lEnxtoda- 
laxs    lae      deqwases     pElpElqe    laxa     LEmlEmgayowaxs    niEinkE- 
wakwaeda   ai.Ebots!ats!e    (Jig.).     Wa,   g"il£mese  helewc  apsodilasa 
wilkwaxs   lae   mEns£Idxa    -'nEmdEne    laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  30 
yix  wagwasa  la  latoyoLEs  laxa  apsodlle.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tslEklwa 
maelbano  LEmgayowa  qa£s  maelbEndesxa  g'a  gwaleg'a  (fig.).     Wa, 
la-me  ax'edxa  iiEgEiiosEla  klwaxLfiwa,  qa£s  k'adelbEndes  laxa  apso- 
dlle welkwa  lax  (1)  la  lax  (2).      Wa,  la  xiildElEneq.     Wa,  giPmese 
gwalExs  lae  ax'edxes  maelbanowe  LE£wis  pElpElqe.    Wa,  lit  Lak-  lEiitses  35 
maelbanowe  LEmg'ayowe  laxa  la  xuldEkwa,  qa£s  dex£wideses  pEl- 
pElqe laq,  qa  xaiJEx'Ides    xoxwax'Ida.     Wa,  lanaxwe  xwelaqa  lex- 
£widEq,  qa£s  xwelaqe  Lax-£Ides   lax  oba£yases   lax'de  lex£widaasxes 
maelbanowe    LEmg'ayowa,    qa£s    et!ede    dex£wIdEq.     Wa,    al£mese 
gwalExs    lae    labEnde    maelba£yas    laxa   xuldEkwe.      Wa,   la    ax£-  40 
edxes    LEmlEmg'ayowe,    qafs    degu)naeyes   laxa    maelba'ye.      Wa 


84  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [bth.  ANN.  85 

12  lias  been  marked  out.  |  As  soon  as  the  board  that  he  splits  out  turns 
over,  he  does  the  |  same  as  he  did  before;  and  when  he  has  enough,  | 
he  carries  the  boards  that  lie  has  split  off  and  puts  them  down  flat 

45  outside  of  his  house.  ||  Then  he  takes  his  hand-adz  and  adzes  them 
all  over.  After  he  |  has  done  so,  he  turns  them  over  and  adzes  the 
other  side,  |  adzing  it  all  over  nicely.  After  this  has  been  done,  he 
puts  the  board  on  edge  and  |  adzes  off  the  edges  so  that  they  are 
straight.     When  |  this  has  been  done,  he  puts  it  down  flat.     He 

50  takes  a  cedar-stick  and  splits  it  in  two  so  ||  that  it  is  the  thickness 
of  our  little  finger.  He  cuts  off  one  end  |  square,  and  from  this  point 
he  measures  off  |  three  spans.     Then  he  cuts  it  off.     Now  the  cedar- 

55  stick  is  |  three  spans  long.  |  This  he  lays  on  the  ||  other  end  of  the 
box  out  of  which  he  is  making  an   oil-box.     He  marks  as  far  as  | 

its  end  in  this  way:    i After  doing  so,  |  he  takes  off  the 

cedar-stick  measure   I  I   and  puts  it  down  at  the  |  other 

end  of    the  oil-box  that  he  is  making,  and  he  does  the 

GO  same |  with  the  straight-edge  as  he  did  before:  he  marks  its  end ;  and,  || 
after  doing  so,  he  takes  a  straight-edged  cedar-board,  |  puts  it  down 
lengthwise,  on  the  oil-box  that  he  is  making,  |  flush  with  the 
straight  line  that  runs  from  one  mark  to  the  other  on  |  each  end  of 
the  oil-box  that  he  is  making,  and  he  marks  along  it  |  the  whole 

65  length.     After  this  has  been  done,  ho  puts  it  on  edge,  takes  his  ||  hand- 

42  giPmese  nEL&we  tatoda£yasexs  lae  etleda;  wa,  la  aEmxat!  he 
gwex'Ides  g"ilxde  gwegilasa.  Wa,  g il£mese  heloLExs  gaxae  wix-- 
wQltlalaxes  latlariEme,  qa£s  la   pax£Elsas  lax  l  !asana£yases  g'okwe. 

45  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  k-iiniLayowe,  qa£s  k- UmLEldzode.  Wa,  giFmese 
gwalExs  lae  lex-£IdEq  qa£s  etlede  kliniLEdzodxa  apsadzE£ye  laxes 
aek'laenae  k'iniLaq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  kox£ulsaq,  qa£s 
k" IlmLEnxEiidex  awunxa£yas,  qa  nEqEnxEles.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwa- 
lExs lae  pax£Elsaq,    qa£s  ax£edexa  klwaxLawe,  qa£s   xoxusEndeq,  qa 

50  yiiwes  wag'itEns  sElt!ax'ts!ana£yex.  Wa,  la  k!imtodEx  6ba£yas, 
qa  £nEmabes.  Wa,  he£mis  gagiLElaxs  lae  bal£Itses  q!waq!wax-ts!a- 
na£yaxa  yuduxup!Enkaxs,  lae  k!imts!EndEq.  Wa,  laEm  yuduxu- 
plEnke  £wasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  yix  £wasgEma- 
sasa    k!wax£Ene     mEnyayowe.     Wa,    he£mise    kadEdzodayos    lax 

55  apsbaeyasa  wulasE£wa  dEngwats!e.  Wa,  la  xutlaLElodEx  £wa- 
lagilasas  obaeyasxa  ga  gwaleg'a  {fig-).  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
flx£aLElodxes  mEnyayowe.  k!waxLawa,  qa£s  laxat!  k-adEdzots  laxa 
a]isba£yases  dEngwats!egilasE£we.  Wa,  laEmxae  heEm  guyinxEn- 
dale  nEqEnxa£yas.     Wa,    laxae    xtit  laLElodEx    oba£yas.     Wa,    g'il- 

G0  £mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  nEqEirxEla  nEgEnosEla  klwaxLawa  qa£s 
kadEdzodes  aotslaqala  LE£we  wulasE£we  dEngwatslii.  Wa,  la£me 
nanaxtE'was  UEqEirxa£yasa  nEgEnosEla  laxa  x\vexulta£ye  lax  wax's- 
ba£yas  wulasE£was  dEngwats!axs  lae  xuldElEndEq  hebEndalax 
£wasgEmasas.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  k"!6x£ulsaq,  qa£s  :ix£edexes 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  85 

adz,  and  adzes  along  the  mark  that   he   has  put  on.     When  he  |  G5 
nearly  reaches  this  line,  he  stops.     Then  he  takes  his  straight  |  knife 
and  cuts  off  so  that  everything  comes  off  down  to  the  mark.     After  | 
the  board  has  been  cut  smooth,  he  lays  it  down  flat  again  and  puts  it 
on  the  other  edge,  |  and  he  cuts  the  other  edge  also  so  that  it  is 
straight;  and  |[  after  doing  so,  he  puts  it  down  flat.     Three  spans  |  is  70 
the  width  of  the  oil-box.     He  |  takes  the  cedar  measure  and  cuts  off 
its  end  so  that  it  is  square.  |  He  measures  it  off  so  that  it  is  two  spans 
long,  |  and  cuts  it  off.     Then  he  lays  it  on  the  ||  middle  of  one  end  of  75 
the  oil-box   that  he  is  making,  and  marks  it.  |  After  doing  so,  he 
measures  with  his  cedar  measure  |   to  find  out  the  center  of  the 
box  that  he  is  making.     When  he  has  found  it,  |  he 

marks  it  and  measures  it  in  this  way:  [\J  i/j        Now     the 

cedar-stick  is  beveled  so  that  he  may  U^l       1     r^-J  find  out  which 
way  it  slants.  ||  As  soon  as  he   finds  that  it  is  not  so 

square,  he  takes  his  straight-edge  |  measure  and  lays  it  on  the 
end  of  the  box  that  he  is  making,  and  ]  he  marks  along  it; 
and  after  he  has  finished,  he  takes  Ins  straight  j  knife  and 
cuts  across  the  grain,  cutting  off  the  slanting  end.  |  As  soon 
as  this  is  done,  he  takes  another  cedar-stick  ||  and  splits  it  so  that  §5 
it  is  flat  and  one  span  wide.  |  It  is  very  thin.  He  cuts  off  |  the  end 
so  that  it  is  square,  and,  after  doing  so,  lie  measures  |  it  so  that  it  is 

k  liniLayowe  qa£s   k!imLElEiia£yexa   xuldEkwe.     Wa,  gil£mese    la-  55 
k-!End     Elaq    laqexs     lae     gwala.     Wa,     la     dax,£Idxes     nExxala 
k'lawayowa,  qa£s  k"!ax£wldeq,  qa  £wi£lawesa  xiilta£yas.    W;i,g'tl£mese 
la    aek'Ia  k'lakuxs   lae   pax^Elsaq,   qa£s    xwelaqe    k-!ox£ulsaq,    qa£s 
k-!iix£wldex    &psEnxa£yas,     qa      ogwaqes     nEqEla.     Wit,    g-il£rnese 
gwalExs    lae     et!ed    pax£Elsaq.     Wa,      laEm     yuduxup!Eng'adzowa  70 
wuliisE£was     dEii^watsle     laxEns     q!waq!wax"ts!ana£ye.     Wii,     lii 
ax£edxa     khvaxLiiwe,     qa£s     k-!lmtodex      olnr'yas,     qa     '"nEmabes 
oba£yas.     Wa,  la    bab'ldEq    qa    malp!Eiik-es     £wasgEmasas    liixEns 
q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex     lae     k!imtodEq.     Wii,    la    k'iidEdzots  lax 
!iEgEdza£yas  apsba£yases  wulasE£we   dEngwatsIa.     Wii,  lii  xultbEn-  75 
dEq.     Wii,   giFmese  gwalExs  lae   mEnsi'liilases   klwaxLawe  mEnya- 
yowa,  qa£s  q!ii£stex  nEgEdza£yases  wtiliisE£we.     Wii,    glb'mese  q  la- 
qexs lae  xut!aLElodEq.     Wii,  lii  niEnsrlalaq  g'a  gwaleg'a  (fig.).     Wii, 
laEin  senoqwaleda  klwaxLawe  mEnyayowa,  qa£s  qliistex  senogwas- 
laxas.     Wa,  glPmese  q!ii£stax  senoqwalaxs  lae  ax£edxes  UEgEnosEla  on 
klwaxLiiwe    mEnyayowa,    qa£s    k'atbEndes    liixes   wulasE£we,    qa£s 
xilldElEiiayeq.     Wa,     gil£mese     gwalExs     lae.     ax£edxes     nExxala 
k'lawayowa,  qa£s  gEgex-sale  k-!ax£widEq,  qa£s  klaxalex   senoqwa- 
eyas.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  klwaxLawe  ogu£laEmxat!, 
qa£s    xox£wideq    qa    pEx£Enes,    qa    £nEmdEiies    £wadzEWasas   laxEns  05 
q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.     Wii,  la    pEldzowa.     Wa,  laxae    lrllmtodEx 
oba£yas   qa   £nEmabes.     Wii,    g-lFmese    gwalExs    lae    bal£IdEq,    qa 


86  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKItJTL  [eth.ann.S5 

throe  spans  long.  |  Then  he  cuts  it  off.     Then  he  measures  two  spans 
90  and  two  ||  finger-widths  for  the  end  (of  another  one),  which  he  also 
cutsoff.  I  Next,  he  places  the  shorter  |  measure  on  theedgeofthe  bos 
that  he  is  making,  beginning  at  the.  |  end,  and  marks  the  end  of  the 
measuring-  |  stick.     Then  he  takes  it  off.     He  puts  it  down  on   the 
95  upper  side  ||  and  marks  its  end  again.     Then  he  takes  the  |  straight- 
edge and  puts  it  down  so  that  it  touches  the  marks,  |  and  he  marks 
along  it.     As  soon  as  he  has  done  this,  he  takes  the  longer  one  of 
the  |  cedar  measures,  puts  it  down  on  the  l>ox  that  he  is  making,  | 
beginning  at  the  last  mark  that  he  put  on,  and  he  marks  its  end;  || 
100  and  he  also  puts  it  on  the  other  edge  and  marks  its  |  end.     After 
this  has  heen  done,  he  takes  his  straight  |  cedar-stick  and  puts  it 
down  close  to  the  marks  thai  he  has  just  made,  and  |  marks  along  it. 
Then  he  puts  it  down  on  the  floor.     He  takes  the  shorter  |  cedar 
5  measure  and  puts  its  end   down  on  the  edge  ||  of  the  box  that  he  is 
making,  beginning  at   the  last  mark  that   he  has  put  on,  and  he| 
marks  its  end.    Then  he  takes  it  off  and  puts  it  down  [  on  the  other 
edge  and   marks  its  end.  |  After  this   lias   heen    clone,  he   takes  his 
straight-edge  and  puts  it  down  on  |  the  box  that  he  is  making  so  that 
10  it  touches  the  marks  that  he  has  put  on,  and  he  marks  along  it ;  ||  and 

88  yudux"p!Eiikes  £wasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yaxs  lae 
k- limtts tendEq.     Wa,  laxae  etled  baHdxa  hamaldEngalasa  malplEn- 

90  k'e  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!fmarvex,  yix  £wasgEmasas  laaxat!  k'.'imt- 
tslEndEq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  katEnxEntsa  tstekwa- 
gawa£ye  mEnyayo  lax  awiinxa£yases  wula,SE£we  g-agiLEla  lax 
6ba£yas.  Wa,  lii  xult  !ax.ElodEx  £walalaasas  oba£yases  mEnyayowe 
klwaxLawa.     Wa,  lii  ax£aLElodEq,  qa£s  la  katEnxsnts  laxa  apsEnxa- 

95  £yas.  Wa,  laxae  xult  laLElodEx  £walalaasas.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxes 
aEgEnose,  qa£s  k'adEdzodes  qa  nExstayesex  xwexultaeyasexs  lae 
xuldEfEneq.  Wa,  g-lPmese  gwabsxs  lae  fix£edxa  g'iltagawa-\e 
k!waxi.awa  mEnyayowa,  qa£S  la  k'at  EnxEnts  laxes  \vuiasE£we  g'a- 
g-tLEla  lax  ale  xultes.  Wa,  La  xult  laLElodEx  £walalaasas  6ba£yas. 
100  Wa,  laxaes  laxa  apsEnxaeye.  Wa,  laxae  xult laLElodEx  £walalaasas 
oha'yas.  Wa,  g"ll£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  nsgEnosEla  klwax- 
Lawa, qa£s  l;i  k-at!aLElots  lax  nEqElasa  xwexulta£ye.  Wa,  lii 
xilldEl-'EndEq.  Wa,  laxae  k  at  lalilaqexs  lae  ax£edxa  tstekwaga- 
wa£ye  klwaxLawa  mEnyayowa,  qa£s  laxat!  kadsdzots  lax  awiinxa- 
5  £yases  wulasE£we  g-ftgiLEla  laxes  ale  xulta-'ya.  Wft,  laxae  xtilt la- 
LElodEx £walalaasas  oba£yas.  Wa,  lii  ax£aLElodEq,  qa£s  la  katEn- 
xEnts  laxa  S,psEnxa£ye.  Wa,  lii  xult  laLElodEx  £wiilalaasas.  Wa, 
gil£mese  gwabsxs  lae-ax£edxes  nEgEnosEla.  qa£s  lii  kaebsdzots  laxes 
wulasE£we.     Wa,  gil£mese  nEqala  lax  xwexulta£yasexs  lae  xuMeIe- 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  87 

after  all  the  places  where,  the  short  sides  are  to  be  bent  have  been  10 
marked,  and  also  |  the  long  sides  of  the  oil-box  that  he  is  making,  he 
takes  the  measure  of  |  the  longer  cedar-stick  and  puts  it  down  on  the 
edge  of  the  |  box  that  he  is  making  so  that  it  touches  the  mark  that 
he  made  last.     He.  marks  the  |  end  of  the  measure,  takes  it  off,  and 
puts  it  down  ||  on  the  other  edge,  and  he  marks  the.  end  of  it  again.  15 
After  this  has  been  |  done,  he  takes  his  straight-edge,  puts  it  down  so 
that  |  it  just  touches  the  marks  along  it.     This  is  |  the  place  where 
t  he  two  ends  of  the  od-box  that  he  is  making  will  meet.     After  he  has 
done  so,  it  is  |  in  this  way.1     Then  he  takes  his  straight  knife  and  || 
cuts  out  the  marks  for  the  bending  of  the  sides,  |  in  this  way.2     The  20 
ends  are  cut  out  in  this  manner.2     After  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  | 
a  basket,  goes  down  to  the  beach  of  the  house  where  he  is  making 
the  box,  and  |  puts  stones  into  his  basket.     As  soon  as  ]  it  is  full, 
he  carries  them  in  on  his  back  into  the  house  in  which  he  is  making 
the  box,  ||  and  he  pours  down  the  stones  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  25 
Then  he  goes  down  again  |  and  puts  stones  into  his  basket.  |  When 
it  is  full,  he  carries  them  on  his  back  |  into  the  house  in  which  he  is 
making  the  box.     He  pours  them  down  by  the  side  |  of  the  fire. 
When  he  thinks  he  has  enough,  he  stops.  ||  He  rakes  up  his  fire  and  30 
puts  the  stones  on  top  of  it.  |  When  this  is  done,  he  takes  the  box 

neq.     Wii,  g  iPmese  £naxwa  xuldEkwa  k!ek!osasa  tslEgola  LE-wa  10 
gildolas  wiilasE^was  dEngwatsla;  wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  mEnyayowasa 
g  ildolasexa  g"fltagawa£ye  klwaxLawala  kadEil/.ots  lax  awunxa£yases 
wulasE£we.     Wa,  laEm  sexeiicx  ale  xultes.   Wa,  la£me  xiit  laLElodEx 
oba£yases  mEnyayowe.     Wa,  laxae  ax£aLElodEq,  qa£s  la  katlaLElots 
laxa  apsEnxaeye.     Wa,  laxae  xult laLElodEx  oba£yas.     Wa,  g  ih'mese  15 
gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxes  nEgEnosEla  klwaxLawa,  qa£s  kadEdzodes,  qa 
nEqales  laxa   xwexulta£ye.     Wit,  la  xudElEneq.     Wa,    heEm  sako- 
deltsa    oba£yas   wulasE£was  dEngwatsla.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwabaxs  lae 
g-a   gwiilega    (fig.).     Wa,    lii    ax£edxes   nExxiila    kliiwayowa,    qa£s 
xuxutsox£widexa  la  xwexuldEkwaxa  g'a  gwiileg'a  (fig,.).     Wit,  hlLa  20 
ga  gwale  xulta£yasa  sak'5da£ye.     Wii,  g'ih'mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa 
lExa£ye,  qa£s  la  lEnts!es  lax  LlEma£isases  wu£lats!e  g'okwa.     Wii,  la 
xE£x"ts!:llasa  tlesEme  laxes  XEgwatslaxa  tlesEme  lExa£ya.     Wii,  gll- 
£mese  qotlaxs  lae  oxLosdesElaq  qa£s  la  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  wu£lats!e 
gokwa,  qa£s  lii  giigEnolisas  Laxes  lEgwlle.     Wa,   la  etEnts!esa,  qa£s  25 
liixat!  et!ed  xE£x"ts!otsa  tlesEme  laxes  XEgwatslaxa  t  !esEme  lExa£ya. 
Wii,  gipEmxaawise  q5t!axs   lae  5xLEx'£IdEq,  qa£s  lii  oxLosdesElaq 
qa£s   laxat!  oxr.aeLElaq  laxes-  wii£lats!e  g'okwa,    qa£s  lii  giigEnolisas 
laxes  lEgwlle.     Wii,  g  il£mese  kotaq  laEm  helalaxs  lae  gwala.     Wa, 
lii  lElq6x£wldxe.s  lEgwlle,  qa£s  xE£xuLalax-£idexa  tlesEme   laq.     Wii,  30 
g  ib'mese    gwiilExs     lae     ax£edxes     wfllasE£we     qa£s    pax£iililes   lax 

1  See  figure  on  p.  68.  2_See  figure  on  p.  69. 


8b  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  axn.  35 

32  which  he  is  making  and  puts  it  down  |  close  by  the  fire.  He  marks 
on  the  floor  a  point  on  each  side  of  the  marks  that  he  has  put  on  |  the 
three  corners  of  the  oil-box  that  he  is  making.     Then  |  he  takes  the 

35  box  away  and  puts  it  down  flat  at  a  place  not  far  from  ||  where  he  is 
working.  He  takes  his  wife's  clam-digging  stick  and  digs  up  |  the 
soil.  The  hole  that  he  digs  is  of  the  same  length  as  the  width  |  of  the 
box  that  he  is  making,  and  the  width  of  the  hole  is  one  span,  |  and 

40  it  is  one  span  deep.  |  As  soon  as  he  has  done  so,  he  takes  the  ||  large 
basket,  goes  down  to  the  beach,  and  picks  off  |  dulce  and  throws 
it  into  a  basket.  |  When  it  is  full,  he  carries  it  on  his  back  up  the 
beach,  I  into  the  house  in  which  the  box  is  being  made.  He  puts  it 
down  at  the  place  |  near  where  he  dug  the  holes.     As  soon  as  this  is 

45  done,  he  takes  good,  easily-splitting  ||  pine-wood  and  splits  it  with 
his  knife  into  thin  pieces.  |  He  cuts  them  round  with  sharp  |  points. 
The  length  of  each  is  four  finger-widths.  |  He  cuts  them  of  the  same 
size  as  the  size  of  his  drill,  and  he  uses  them  to  peg  |  the  ends  of  the 

50  box  together.  (Some  people  sew  the  ends  ||  of  the  box  with  cedar- 
withes.)  I  As  soon  as  he  has  cut  enough  pegs,  he  goes  to  get  his  drill,  | 
and  also  the  tongs,  which  he  brings  and  puts  down.  As  soon  as  this 
is  done,  [  he  takes  his  large  bucket  and  goes  to  draw  fresh  water.  | 


32  maglnwalisases  lEgwIle.  Wa,  la  xultlalllax  wfwax-sba£yases  xwexu- 
ta'ya  yuduxuts!aqe  k-!ek-!osaltsa  dEngwatsle  wQla,so£s.  Wa,  la 
Lequlllaxes    wulasE£we.     qa£s    la    pax£alilas    laxa    k!ese    qwesiilalll 

35  laxes  eaxalase.  Wa,  la  5x£edEx  k'ltlakwases  gEiiEme,  qa£s  £liip!i- 
dexa  d/.Eqwa.  Wa,  laEin  enjEmasgEme  Elapa£yas  lo£  £wadzEwasases 
wulasE'we.  Wa,  lil  £nal-nEmp!En  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,  yix 
EwI£wadzEgasas.  Wa,  laxae  £nfd£nEmp!Enk-e  £wi£walabEtalilasas 
laxEns   q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.     Wa,    gil£mese   gw&texs  lae  ax£edxa 

40  ewalase  lExa£ya,  qa-s  la  lEntslesEla  laxa  LlEma£ise,  qa£s  lii  k!ulg-t- 
laxa  1. !f>i. iF.kwe  qa's  lii  lExts!alas  laxes  LlEgwats!e  lExa£ya.  Wa, 
g'iPmese  qotlaxs  lae  6xlex£I(]f.c|,  qaes  gaxe  oxLosdesElaq,  qa£s  la 
oxLaeLBlaq  laxes  wu£lats!e  g'okwa.  Wa,  la  oxLEg-alllas  laxa 
nExwala  laxes  elapa£ye.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwatexs  lae  ax£edxa  eg'aqwa 

4.5  lax  xasE£we  wfinaguta,  qa£s  x5x£wldeses  klfnvavowe  laq,  qaeswlswul- 
tEwes.  Wii.  lit  k!ax£wldi:q  qa  leElx-Enes.  Wa,  he£mis,  qa  wisweI- 
bes  6ba£yas.  Wii,  lii  maemodEne  awasgEinasas  laxEns  q!wfi(j!wrax"- 
ts!ana£yex.  Wii,  la£me  nanamagit !aq  LE£wis  sElEine  qo  Lap!ldLEs 
laxa  s;lkoda£yases    wul:IsE£we.     Wii,   laxa    t!Eint!Egodeda  waokwe 

50  wiwu£lenoxusa  wIswEltowe  dEwex  lax  sak-oda£yases  wCilasE£we.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  helale  k!axwa£yas  LabEma  lae  k!Engalilaxes  seIeiuc. 
Wii,  he£mise  k!ipLalaa,  qa  g'axes  k-adela.  Wii.  g'il£mese  gwalExs 
lae  ax'edxes  £walase  nagatslii,  qa£s  lii  tsex£IdEX  £wTE£wiip!Ema, 
qa£s  o;'rixe  hang'ahTas.     Wii,  lii  ;lx£edxa  k-!ak-!Ek'!obane  qa  g'axes 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  89 

Then  he  takes  pieces  of  old  mats  and  [|  puts  them  down:  and  after  55 
he  has  done  so,  he  sees  that  the  stones  on  his  |  fire  are  red-hot.     Then 
he  |  takes  his  tongs  and  picks  off  the  red-hot  stones  and  |  puts  them 
into  the  holes  that  he  has  dug.     He  does  not  fill  them  too  full  of  | 
stones;   and  when  there   are  stones  in  every  hole,  ||  he  takes  the  GO 
basket  with  dulce,  takes  out  the  dulce,  and  |  puts  it  on  the  red-hot 
stones.     He  puts  on  a  great  deal  of  it,  so  that  the  \  dulce  in  the 
three  holes  forms  a  thick  layer.     When  this  is  done,  |  lie  takes  the 
box  that  he  is  making  and  puts  it  down  over  the  holes.     He  puts  the 
grooved  side  down,  |  and  he  places  the  holes  just  under  the  grooves.  || 
Then  he  puts  dulce  over  all  the  grooves.  |  As  soon  as  a  thick  layer  G5 
has  been  put  on,  he  lifts  up  one  end  of  the  box  that  he  is  making  |  so 
that  it  does  not  stand  quite  straight  on  edge.     He  takes  his  bucket  | 
and  pours  water  on  the  three  holes  for  steaming.     After  doing  so,  |  he 
puts  down  the  box  that  he  is  making,  as  the  steam  begins  to  come 
out.  ||  He  covers  it  with  pieces  of  old  mats.     After  |  this  has  been  70 
done,  he  takes  well-splitting  pine-wood  and  splits  it  |  so  that  it  is  two 
finger-widths  in  thickness  and  square.  |  He  measures  off  five  spans 
for  the  |  length  of  the  red-pine  wood,  and  splits  it  so  that  it  is  ||  like  75 
tongs.     After  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  split  cedar-strips  |  and 
ties  them  to  one  end,  so  that  the  pine-wood  does  not  split.  |  After  he 


gwallla.     Wa,  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae  dox£wai.Elaxa  XEExuLalalise  laxa  55 
lEgwile     t!esEmxs     lE£mae      -naxwa     meniEnltsEmx£Ida.     Wa,     la 
dax£idxes  k'  lipLalaa,  qa£s  k-  Uplides  laxa  xixExscmiila  tlesEma,  qa£s 
la  k"!ipts!alas  laxes  £lapa£yC\     Wa,   lit  k-!es  helqlalaq  Loma  qotlaxa 
t!esEine.     Wa,    gIPmese    Enaxwa    la   xEqluxLalaxa    tlesEmaxs    lae 
axV'dxa  Ltegwatsle  lExa£ya,  qa£s  lEx£wults!odexa  l !esl !Ekwe.  qa£s  la  60 
lEx£alodiilas  laxa  x  IxExsEmala  t!esEina.     Wa,  awlla£mese  waklweda 
LlEsLlEkwe     laqexs     yudux'Vlzaqae.     Wa,    gIPmese     gwalExs    lae 
ax£edxes  wuliisE£we  qa£s  l&  paqEyints    laq.     Wa,    la£me    bEnsalaxa 
xwexudEkwe.     Wa,    lii    nenEqale    k"  !ek-  lalasas    laxa    xwexudEkwe. 
Wa,    lii  modzodalasa    LlESLlskwe    lax    neiiExsawasa    xwexudEkwe.  65 
Wa,    g  il£Emxaawise    la  wakwa    lae    wuj'EnxEndxes    wfdasE£we,   qa 
halsEla£mes   k'!es   k' !ox£walllExs   lae   ax£edxa   £wabEts!ala  nagats!;i. 
qa£s    tsetsadzElts!axtalexes    ytiduxMzEqe     k'!ek'!alasa.     Wa,    g'll- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  ]iaqEyintses  wiilasE£we  laqexs   lae   k'lfdEla.     Wa, 
lii  ax£edxa  k" !ak" !Ek- lobana  qa£s  lii  LEbegindalas  laq.     Wii,  g"ilemese  7( 
gwalExs  lae   ax£edxa    egaqva  lax  xasE£we   wiinagula,    qa£s  xoxus£- 
Endeq,  qa  maldEne£stalis  laxEns   q!waq!wax-ts!anasyex,  yix  ewagi- 
dasas.     Wa,  lii   b;ll£Idxa   sEk'!ap!Enk!e    laxEns     q!waq!wax-ts!ana- 
£yex,   yLx   £wasgEmasasa   wunagule.     Wii,    la  xox£wklEq  qa  yowes 
gwex-sa  ts!esL;ila.x.     Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  dzEXEkwe  75 
ts!eq!adzo    dEnasa,  qa£s  yiiJEXLEndes  laq  qa  kMeses  hex-sa  xoxusa. 


90  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.an.n.sb 

77  has  clone  this  to  the  piece  protecting  the  sides  of  the  box  when  the 
corners  are  being  bent,  |  he  takes  off  the  old  mat  which  he  had 
spread  over  the  side  of  the  box  that  he  is  steaming,  |  and  he  puts  it 

80  down  a  little  ways  from  where  he  is  working,  and  ||  he  removes  from 
the  box  all  the  dulce  that  has  been  steamed.  |  When  it  is  all  off, 
he  takes  hold  of  one  edge  of  the  box  that  he  is  making,  which  is  now 
pliable.  |  He  lays  it  down  flat  on  a  place  where  it  is  level.  Then  he 
takes  the  protector  of  the  box,  |  he  opens  the  two  legs  while  he  is  ] 
lifting  the  box-board  from  the  floor,  and  puts  the  board  between  the 

85  leys  of  the  tongs.  ||  He  places  this  close  to  the  slanting  side  of  the 
groove  that  he  lias  made  in  the  board.  Then  he  places  both  feel ,  one 
on  |  each  end  of  the  protector.  He  takes  hold  of  the  two  corners  of 
the  box-board  that  he  is  making  and  |  pulls  it  upward.  Then  the 
side  of  the  box  begins  to  bend;  and  |  when  it  is  in  this  way,1  he  moves 
his  protector  to  the  following  J  groove;  and  he  does  the  same  as  he 

90  did  before  when  he  bent  the  first  groove;  ||  and  after  he  has  bent  the 
three  grooves,  he  takes  a  |  long  cedar-bark  rope  and  winds  it  around 
the  box  that  he  is  making.  Now  [  he  pushes  the  one  end  against  the 
groove  that  will  fit  it  at  the  other  end;  and  after  doing  this,  |  he  takes 
his  drill  and  drills  a  slant  ing  hole  through  the  two  ends  that  are  fitted 
together.  |  The  distance  between  these  holes  is  three  finger-widths.  || 

95  When  he  has  pushed  his  drill  through,  he  pulls  it  out  |  and  puts  in  its 
place  a  peg  of  red-pine  wood,  which  he  |  hammers  in  with  a  sj<>ne. 

77  W'a,  glHmese  gwala  L  lEbEdzEWeyasa  k'oqwax  klosases  wulasE- 
£waxs,  lae  ax£edxa  LEpEya£ye  k!ak-!Ek-!6baneses  kiinsasF/wes 
wulasE-we,  qa£s  la   LEplalilas  laxa  qwaqwesala  laxes  eaxElase.     Wii, 

SO  la  xekiildz5dxes  wulasE£we,  qa  lawayesa  la  i.!op  l !esl tekwa.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  £wllgildzoxs  lae  dEnxEiulxes  wrulasE£waxs  lae  peqwa  qa£s 
la  pa\£alllas  laxa  £nEmaele.  Wii,  Hi  dax£idxes  LlEbEdziryasa 
koqwiix  k' losases  wiilasE£we,  qa£s  la  aqfdamasExs  waxsanod/.Exsta- 
'yasexs  lae  wegilllaxes  wulasE£waxs  lae  r.!EbEdzots  laxes  wulasE£we. 

85  Wa,  laEin  he  gwagawa£ya  senoqwala  xuta'vaxs  lae  t!et!EpbEiidxa 
L!EbEdza£yases  g'Sgiguyowaxs  lae  dadEnxEndxes  wuhrsE£we,  qa£s 
gElqostOdeq.  Wa,  he-mis  la  be£nakulatsa  k"!osase  willasE£we.  ^VaT 
g"ll£mese  la  g'a  gwiileg-axs  (fig.)  lae  LeguxElodxes  LlEbEdzoj-e  laxa 
-nEme  xuta£ya.     Wa,  laxae  aEin  aaqEmg'lttowexes  gilx'de  gweg'i- 

90  lasa.  Wii,  glHmese  Ewi£la  la  k"5gEkwa  yudux'dala  xiitas  lae  ax£edxa 
g"ilt!a  dEiisEn  (lEiiEma,  qa£s  qEX'SEmdcs  laxes  wulasE£we.  Wa,  laEm 
sEX'ba£ya  sak'odae  laxa  qEmtba£yas.  Wii.  gilJmese  gwalExs  lae 
axedxes  sElEme,  qas  Lanexalaes  sEla£ye  laxa  siik-oda£ye.  Wa, 
lii   yaevuduxudEn    laxEns  q!wtiq!wax'ts!ana£yex    yix  awalagalaasas 

95  sEla'yas.  Wa,  gtlnaxwa£mese  laxsawe  sicla-yasexs  lae  lex£uLE- 
lodxes  sElEme,  qaJs  L layogwaaLElodesa  wunx'Tme  i.al>Eni  laq,  qa£s 
dex'widesa    tlesEme    laq.     Wa,    g-il£mese    £wl£la    la    LabEkwa.     lae 

1  At  right  angles. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  91 

When  it  has  all  been  pegged  together,  he  |  takes  a  short  board  which  97 
is  the  end  of  the  box  that  he  is  making,  and  |  puts  it  down  flat.     He 
takes  hold  of  each  side  of  the  box  that  he  is  making  and  puts  it  on 
top  of  his  board.  ||  He  takes  his  drill  and  marks  all  round  the  outside  200 
of  the  1  box  that  he  has  made;  and  as  soon  as  he  has  marked  all 
round  it,  he  takes  it  off  j  and  puts  it  down  at  a  place  not  far  from 
where  he  is  working.     Then  he  |  takes  his  straight  knife  and  he  cuts 
the  hoard  until  he  reaches  the  mark  that  he  put  j  round  the  bottom 
of  his  box.     When  he  reaches  ||  the  mark  up  to  which  he  is  cutting,  5 
he  cuts  it  very  smooth  with  his  crooked  j  knife  at  the  place  where  the 
box  is  going  to  fit  on  the  bottom  board  of  the  box  that  he  is  making.  | 
Then  he  pounds  up  charcoal  and  puts  it  into  the  shell  of  a  |  horse- 
clam.     He  pours  some  water  on  it,  stirs  it,  and  |  when  it  is  mixed,  he 
takes  soft  cedar-bark,  dips  it  in,  ||  takes  the  box  that  he  is  making  ln 
and  turns  it  bottom-side  up.  |  When  it  is  in  this  position,  he  soaks 
some  shredded  cedar-bark  in  the  charcoal  mixture,  |  and  paints  it  all 
round  the  bottom  edge  of  the  box  that  he  is  making.     He  lays  the 
bottom  board  |  flat  on  the  bottom  of  the  box,  and  sits  down  on  it,  so 
that  it  is   |  pressed  down  against  the  box.     After  doing  so,  ||  betake-  1° 
it  off,  and  then  he  examines  it  to  see  if  the  black   paint  is  all  over 
the  bottom  board,  |  then  there  is  no  leak.     If  the  black  i-;  in  patches, 
then  there  will  be  |  leaks  at  the  points  without  paint.     He  takes  his 
crooked  |  knife  and  shaves  off  all  the  black  paint ;  and  when  ]  it  is 


ax-edxa  ts!ats!ax"sEme  g'ayol    lax   oba£yases   wulasE£we.       Wa,    la  9S 
pax£ahlas.     Wii,  la  dananodxes  wuhrye.  qa£s  la  handzots  laq.     Wa, 
la   ax£edxes  sElEme,   qa'"s   xutse£stalis    lax   l  !asadza£yas    awl£stases  209 
wula'ye.     Wa,  gih'mese  lirsta  xulta£yasexs  lae  axeaLElodxes  wula- 
-ye.  qa£s  la  han^alllas  laxa   k"!ese  qwesala  laxes  eaxElase.     Wii.  la 
dax-£Idxes  uExx"ala  k"!awayowa,  qa£s  k'!ax£wldeq  lalak- ttnaxes  xul- 
ta£ye   lax   awFstasa    paq  !ExsdE£ye.     Wa,    gil£mese   EwPla    lak"!ede 
k"!axwaeyas    laxa  xwexulta£yaxs  lae    aek"!a    k-!ax£witsa    xElxwata  5 
k"!awayowe  lax  klwadzayaasLas  wula£yas  laxes  paqtexsdeLe.     Wa, 
la'me    q!wei£Iilxa    ts!olna    qa£s    k-!ats!odes   laxa    Ewalase    xalaetsa 
niEt!ana£ye.     Wa,   lii    guqlEcjasa  £wape  laqexs  lae  xwetledEq.     WiL, 
gtFmese  lElgoxs    lae     ax-edxa    kadzEkwe,    qa£s    dzopstEndes    laq. 
Wa,   lii    ax£edxes  wula£ye,    qa£s   ek- laxsdalamaseqexs  lae  qEptesa.  m 
Wii,    lii   dostEiidxa     hapstaakwe    kiidzEk"    laxa    ts!olna="stala   qa£s 
gEltse^tsales  lax  ogwaga£yases  wida£ye,     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  ]>aq!Exsde- 
Las,  qa£s   paq!ExsdEndes   laq.     Wii,   lii     klwadzodEq,    qa    ''naxwes 
q'.EsaLEla.     Wii,  g"iPmese  gwiilExs  lae  ax="aLElodEq.     Wa,  ur  ih'mese 
ax£aLElodqexs  lae  dox'wklEq.     Wii,  g'il-mese  £naxwa  ts!ol£IdExs  lae  ],-, 
kMeas  g-ilx-a  laq.     Wii,    g-tl£mese    lolasaleda     tsloliixs    lae    heEm 
gilxeda    lolasawawa£ye.     Wii,    he£mis   la    ax£edaatsexes    xElxwala 
klawayowa,  qaes  xaLe  k-!ak-!ax£wiiqEwaxa  ts.'olna.     Wii,   gih'mese 


92  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE  KWAKIUTL  [eth.ans.ss 

all  off,  he  takes  some  more  soft  cedar-bark,  dips  it  into  the  charcoal  || 

20  mixture,  and  rubs  it  over  the  edge  of  the  box  that  he  is  making;  then 
tie  puts  |  on  the  bottom  board;  and  when  the  black  charcoal  is  no 
longer  in  patches,  |  he  takes  his  drill  and  drills  |  slantingly  through 
(the  side  and  the  bottom).  When  he  gets  through,  he  pulls  out  his 
drill,  |  takes  one  of  the  pegs,  wets  it  in  his  mouth  with  his  saliva, 

25  and,  ||  when  it  is  wet  all  over,  he  puts  it  into  the  drill-hole.  |  He  takes 
his  stone  hammer  and  drives  it  in.  When  it  is  all  in,  |  he  stops 
hammering.  He  takes  his  drill  and  drills  another  hole  |  three  finger- 
widths  away  from  the  first  one;  |  and  when  that  also  passes  through, 

30  he  wets  another  peg  in  his  mouth  ||  with  his  saliva.  Then  he  pulls 
out  his  drill,  |  changes,  and  puts  the  peg  in  its  place  in  the  drill-hole. 
Then  he  takes  the  |  stone  and  drives  in  the  peg,  as  he  did  before. 
He  |  continues  doing  this,  going  around  drilling  and  putting  in  pegs; 
and    |  when  he  has  pegged   all  round    the    bottom,  the  oil-box  is 

35  finished;  ||  for  the  time  when  he  makes  the  box  is  when  the  |  winter 
is  over  and  just  before  the  olachen  run  in  Knight  Inlet.  |  Oil  has  to  be 
put  in  the  oil-box  first,  in  order  to  make  it  tight  |  by  filling  the 
pegged  edge  of  the  bottom  with  oil.     When  |  the  time  for  picking 

40  viburnum  berries  comes,  the  oil  box  is  empty.  ||  Then  the  berries  are 
put  in;  and  now  the  juice  of  the  viburnum  berries  will  not  runout,  | 
although  they  leave  it  in  the  box  for  a  whole  winter.  |  That  is  all. 

nvFlaxs  lae  etled  ax£ustEndxa  kadzEkwe  dz5pestalaxa  ts !olna£stala 

20  £wapa,  qaes  laxat!  gEltseestalas  lax  awe£stas  wulaeyas.  Wa,  lalaxae 
pax'aLElotsa  paq !E.xsda£ye  laq.  Wa,  g'il£mese  k-!eas  lolasawa£ya 
tslohiiixs  lae  hex'£idaEm  ax-edxes  sslEme,  qa£s  sElx£Idexa  Lane- 
xalexs  lae  laxsa.  Wa,  gil-mese  liixsaxs  lae  lex£wldxes  seIeiiic,  qa£s 
dax£ldexa  £nEmts!aqe  LabEma,  qa£s  mElx£undeses  k  liineL  !Exawa£ye 

05  laq.  Wa,  giPmese  k!unx£Enalaxs  lae  Lastots  laxes  sEla£ye.  Wa  lii 
dax£idxa  t!esEme,  qa£s  degutodes  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  laxLaxs  lae 
gwal  deqwaq.  Wa,  lii  et!ed  dax£ldxes  sElEme,  qa£s  sElx-£ldexa 
yuduxudEne  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  gagiLEla  laxes  g'ale 
sEla'ya.     Wa,  gll'Emxaawise  lax'saxs  lae  mElx£iintses  kluneLlExa- 

30  wa£ye  laq,  qa  k!unx£Enalisex  lae  lex£widxes  SElEme,  qa£s  L!ayo- 
gwaaLElodeses  LabEme  la  Lastots  laxa  sEla£yaxs  lae  dax£Idxa 
tlesEme  qa£s  degutodes  laqexs  lae  dexubEtEndEq.  Wa,  :ixusa£mese 
he  gwe'nakulaqexs  la£stalae  sElenakula,  qa£s  LabE£naktileq.  Wa, 
gilemese  lElgowa  Lapa£j'ases   lae   gwale  wula£yas  dsngwatsla,  jrixs 

35  he£mae  wrdx'IdExdEmsexes  wfllasE£we  dEngwatslexs  g'alae  gwal 
ts'awunxa,  ytxs  k'!es£mae  qwaxiillsa  dzaxiine  lax  Dzawade,  qaxs 
he£mae  g'tlts  laweda  L!e£naxa  dEngwatsle,  qa  alaklales  amxaxs  lae 
qoqiit!a£stowe  sakpoda£yas  LE£wes  paq  !Exsda£yaxa  L!e£na.  Wa,  gll- 
£mese  t  '.Elt  Islts  lEnxxa  tlElsaxs  lae  lopts  laweda  dEngwatsIaxa  L!e£na. 

40  Wii,  lii  t!Elts!alaxa  tlElse.  Wii,  la£me  hewaxa  g'ilx'sale  £wapa- 
ga£yasa  tlElsaxs  wax'£mae  lElgogwIlaxa  £nEmxEnxe  tslawunxa. 
Wa,  laEm  gwala. 


uoas]  INDUSTRIES  93 

Sewing  with  Cedar-Withes. — The  man  takes  alongbone  drill  |  and  two 
split  boards  which  he  places  side  by  side.  Then  he  |  drills  close  to  the 
end  slanting,  and  passes  through  the  edges  of  the  |  two  split  boards,  so 
that    the  end    of   the  drill  passes   out  ( ■        on  the 

.  ft  Ta  ST?  ITii  I   |  knife 
cedar- 


other  side  of   the  ||  other  board,  thus: 
as  he  comes  to  the  end,  he  takes  his 
and  cuts  a  groove  into  it,  in  which  the 
withes  he.  |  After  cutting  the  grooves,  he  turns  it  over  and  cuts  a  |  groove 
on  the  other  side,  where  no  groove  has  been  cut  (on  the  upper  side). 
When  he  gets  to  the  end,  |  he  takes  the  twisted  cedar- withes  andputs  the 
thin  end  through  (1 ) .  ||    He  pulls  it ;  and  when  it  reaches  the  thick  end,  10 
he  takes  |   a  cedar  stick  and  cuts  it  so  that  it  has  a  sharp  point,  and 
drives  it  in  |  alongside  of  the  cedar- withe.    Then  the  end  of  the  cedar- 
withe  comes  out  at   (2).  |      He  pulls  it  tight  and  twists  it,    and 
pushes  it  in  |  at  (3),  and  it  comes  out  at  (4).  He  pulls  it  tight,  and||  15 
hammers  it  with  a  diabase  pebble  so  as  to  |  drive  it  mto  the  groove, 
while  another  man  is  pulling  |  the  cedar- withe,  for  it  always  requires 
two  men  to  work  at  boards.     He  twists  the  |  cedar-withe  tight  and 
smooth  and  pushes  the  thin  end  mto  (5),  |  and  it  comes  out  at  (6). 
He  pulls  at  it  and  hammers  it  with  the  stone;  ||  and  when  it  hes  in  20 
the  groove,  he  twists  the  cedar- withe  and  |  pushes  it  into  (7),  so  that 
it  comes  out   at  (8);  and  |  he  does  the  same  as  he  did  before;  and 


Sewing  with  Cedar-Withes. — Wa,  la  axeedxa  gilte  xax£En  sElEma.  1 
Wa,    la  &x£edxa    miilExsa  ladEkwa.     Wa,    la    gwasodEq.      Wa,    la 
sEbr£Idxa  max'ba£ye  iiinexales  sEla£ye  la  hex'sala  lax  ewiinxa£yasa 
malExsa  ladEkwa  qa£s  la  neTlde  6ba£yasa  sElEme  lax  apsadza£yasa 
mEinxsa  g'a  gwalega  {jig.).     Wa,  giPmese  labEndExs  lae  &x£edxes  5 
kMawayowe  qa£sxuxutadzEndeqyix  lane  katbEclatsa  dEwexe.    Wa, 
gil£mese  gwal  xuxiideqexs  lae  lex'idEq  qa£s  etlede  xiixudex£IdEx 
iiExs;lwrasa  k' !ese  xudEk"  laxa  apsadzE£ye.     Wa,  gil£mese  labEndExs 
lae  &x£edxa  sElbEkwe  dEwexa  qa£s  nexsodes  wilba£yas  lax  (1 ).     Wa, 
la  nex£6dEC[.     Wa,  gil'mese  lagaa  lax  LExuba£yasexs  lae   ax£edxa  10 
k!\vaxLa£we  qas  k!ax£wideq  qa  wllbes.     Wa,  la  degunodzEnts  laxa 
onodza£yasa  dEwexe.     Wa,  laEm  nel£ede  6ba£yasa  dEwexe  lax  (2). 
Wa,  la  nex£edEq  qa£s  lEk!ut!ideq.     Wa,  la  sElpledeq  qa£s   nexsodes 
lax  (3).     Wa,  g-axe  hexsala  lax  (4).     Wa,  la  nex£edEq  qa£s  lEk!u- 
tledeq.     Wa,  lEdzeg-intsa  qetsEme  ts!Eq!iils  t !esEm  laxa  dEwexe  qa  15 
t!Ebeg'es  laxa  xuxudeka£yaxs  lae  nexaleda  EnEmokwe  bEgwanEinxa 
dE\\rexe  qaxs  ma£lokwaeda  eaxalaxa  ts  !ExusEme.    Wa,  laxae  sElp  !idxa 
dEwexe  qa  lEklutsowes   sElpa'"yasexs  lae  nex'sots  wilba£yas  lax  (5) 
qa  las  nel£ld  lax  (6).     Wa,  laxae  nex£edqexs  lae  lEdzegintsa  t!esE- 
me  laq.     Wa,  g  il£emxaawise  tlEbegaxs  lae  sElpledxa  dEwexe  qa£s  20 
nexsodes  lax  (7).     Wa,  gaxe  nelbax£id  lax  (8).     Wa,  aEmxaawise 


94  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ietii.  ANN.  35 

23  be  continues  to  the  end  of  all  the  holes  |  up  to  (22).  Then  he  drives 
in  the  point  of  a  cedar-stick  at  its  sides.  | 
1  Care  of  Canos. — I  forgot  t  his  when  I  was  talking  about  |  the  canoe- 
builder,  who  spreads  open  the  canoe,  making  a  small  canoe.  When 
I  it-  |  pours  water  into  it,  and  the  stones  are  nearly  red-hot,  |  he 
5  pours  four  buckets  of  water,  ||  and  there  is  one  bucket  of  urine  which 
he  |  pours  into  the  canoe,  ami  lu;  carries  four  more  buckets  of  water,  | 
pours  them  into  it,  and  he  also  carries  one  bucket  of  urine  |  and 
pours  it  into  the  water  in  the  |  small  canoe.     Then  eight  buckets  of 

10  water  ||  have  been  poured  into  the  small  canoe,  and  two  buckets 
of  urine,  |  so  that  it  may  not  be  split  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  after  the 
canoe-builder  shall  have  finished  it.  |  That  is  the  reason  why  they 
put  urine  into  it.  As  soon  as  enough  |  water  and  urine  are  put  into 
it,  he  puts  red-hot  stones  into  the  canoe.    |   When  the  canoe-builder 

15  finishes  this,  ||  he  takes  a  rush  mat  and  a  dish  or  a  small  steaming- 
box|  and  perch-oil  (that  is  the  oil  obtained  from  |  perch-liver).  He 
places  the  stearning-box  by  the  side  of  the  fire  of  his  house,  and  |  he 
takes  the  rush  mat  and  puts  it  into  the  fire.  |  As  soon  as  it  burns,  he 

20  places  it  on  the  side  of  the  steaming-box,  so  that  ||  the  charcoal  falls 
into  the  box.     When  he  thinks  he  has  enough,  |  he  takes  his  hammer 


22  aaqEmg'Staxes  gegilasaxa  g-ag-ili£ye.  Wa,  la  labEiidalax  £waxaasa 
lag'aa  lax  (22)  x's  lae  dex£wltsa  wllba  klwaxuiwe  lax  onodza£yas. 
1  Care  of  Canoe. — Wa,  g-a£mesf>n  L'.ElewesoxgOn  lex'  gwagwexs£ala 
laxa  Leqlenoxwaxs  lae  LEpaxes  Leqa£ye  xwaxwaguma  yixs  lae 
gux£alExsElasa  £wape  hlqexs  lae  Elaq  memEnltsEmx£Ideda  tlesEine. 
Wa,  heinaaxs  lae  gux£alExsasa  mowexLa  nagatsle  £wiipa  laxa 
5  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  la  £nEiue.\La  nagatsleda  kwatsle  la  gflgegin- 
dayoseq.  Wa,  laxae  et  led  tsex£Idxa  mowexLa  nagatsle  £wapa  qa£s 
laxat!  gux£itlExsas.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  tsex£ld  laxa  kwatslexa 
£nEmexLa  nagats'.a  qa£s  la  gugeglnts  laxa  la  toxs  £wapsa 
xwaxwagume.     Wa,    gil£Em    malEXLagiyo     nagats!eda    £wape    la 

10  "•ux£;UExdzEinsexa  xwaxwagumaxs  lae  malEXLa  nagatsleda  kwatsle 
qa  k'leses  ts!at!alExs  l  !esasE£waasa  LlesEla  qo  gwalamasLa  Leqle- 
noxwaq.  Wa,  heEm  lag'ilasa  kwatsle  laq.  Wa,  g  il£mese  helaleda 
£wape  LE£wa  kwatslaxs  lae  k'liplalEsElasa  x'lx-ixsEmala  tlesEm 
laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwatamaseda  Leqlenoxwaxa  xwaxwagumaxs  lae 

15  ax£edxa  kfileye.  Wli,  he£mesa  loqlwe  loxs  amayae  cjlolatsles 
ax-etsE-we;  wa,  he£mesa  dzeklwese,  yix  tsEnxwa£yas  Lewuliisa 
g-6maga.  Wit,  la  hanolisasa  qlolatslo  laxes  lEgwllases  g-okwe.  Wa, 
la  ax£Sdxa  kuleye  qa£s  axLEndes  laxes  lEgwllases  g-okwe.  Wa, 
g-il£mese     x!x£edExs    lae  axiiglnts    laxa    q!5lats!e    qa    tex£alts!ale 

20  tslotslalmotas  laxa  qlolatsle.  Wa,  g-il£mese  kotaq  laEm  helalaxs 
lae  ax£edxes  pElpElqe  qa  lEsElgayes  lexba£yas  laq  qa  qlweqlultsles 


boasj  INDUSTRIES  95 

and  crushes  the  charcoal  with  the  striking-head  into  dust,  |  so  that  22 
it  becomes  like  flour.     After  this  has  been  done,  he  pours  the  |  perch- 
oil  into  it.     Then  he  stirs  it;  and  when  it  becomes  a  |  thick  paste,  he 
turns  the  canoe  bottom-side  up,  takes  an  ||  old  mat  and  tears  off  25 
enough  to  squeeze  it  in  his  hand.     Then  he  puts  it  into  |  the  mixture 
of  oil  and  coal  and  blackens  the  outside  of  the  |  small  canoe.     He 
rubs  it  well,  so  that  it  will  penetrate  the  cedar  wood;  |  and  when  it  is 
all  covered,  he  finishes  at  the  end  of  the.  canoe.  |  Therefore  they  do  not 
put  a  sun-protector  on  the  outside  of  the  small  canoe  when  it  is 
blackened  ||  outside  with  oil  mixed  with  charcoal,  for  the  heat  of  the  30 
sun  does  not  go  through.   |  They  do  this  way  with  small  canoes  and 
with  |  big  canoes.  | 

As  soon  as  this  is  finished,  the  canoe  is  turned  right-side  up,  and 
supports  of  cedar-wood  are  put  on  each  side  of  the  bow  and  on  each 
side  of  the  stern.  ||  Short  boards  of  cedar-wood  are  placed  on  the  35 
seats;  and  when  |  it  is  all  covered,  the  man  pours  fresh  water  into  it 
so  as  to  [  keep  the  inside  of  the  canoe  cool.     When  the  weather  is 
hot,  |  he  takes  a  dipper  and  sprinkles  water  so  as  to  wet  the  inside 
of  the  canoe.  |  in  the  morning.     When  the  owner  of  the  canoe  has 
no  short  boards,  ||  he  cuts  off  branches  of  young  cedar-trees  and  |  40 
places  them  on  the  seats  of  the  canoe  the.  whole  |  length  of  the  canoe, 
so  that  neither  the  sun  nor  the  |  cold  winds  of  winter  pass  through, 

qa  yuwes  la  gwexsa  quxex.     Wii,  gIPmese  gwalExs  lae  giiqlEk-asa  22 
dzeklwese     laqexs     lae     xwetledEq.     Wii,      gil'mese    lElgoxs     lae 
gEnk  a.     Wii,  la    qEplalisaxa  xwaxwagumaxs  lae  axfedxa  klakMo- 
banaxs  lae  kwapodxa  aEm  helalalax  qlwetsEmesE-'waxs  lae  axstEnts  25 
laxa    qlEltshuqEla   ts!6lna.     Wii,    lii  qlwoxsEmts   lax  osgEma-'yasa 
xwaxwagiime.     Wii,  hi  dzEkak'ats  qa  alaklales  lalaqa  k.'waxLawe. 
Wa,  gil£mese  haemElxsEmdqexs  lae  gwala  lo£  obaeyas.     Wa,  heEm 
lag'itas  hewaxa  t!ayasE£wa  5sgEma£yasa  xwaxwagumaxs  q!waexusE- 
makwaasa   q'.EltslEqEla   tslolna   qaxs  wlxsaeda   tslElqwiisa  LlesEla  30 
laq.       Wa,  la  MiaxwaEm  he   gwegilasE£weda    xwaxwagiime  LE'wa 
awawe  xwaxwak !una. 

Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  t!ax£alidzEma  qa£s  qeqEdEnoLEnitsE- 
£wesa  klwaxi.awe  LEewis  waxsanoL!EXLa£ye.  Wii,  lii  paxealExdzE- 
ma  ts!ats!Exusame  lax  ek- !ot !Ena£yas  LeLEX'Exsas.  Wii,  giPmese  35 
Emtslaxs  lae  giigExsalasa  £WEJwap!Eme  laq  qa  hemEnala'mese 
wudaxsa  oxsasa  xwakluna.  Wa,  glPmese  ts!Ets!Elgusa  £naliixs 
lae  ;ix£edxa  tsexi-a  qa£s  xodzElExsElesa  £wape  laxa  oxsasa  xwakhl- 
naxa  gaala.  Wii,  g IPmese  k-!eas  ts!ats!E£xusEma  xwiigu-adasa 
xwak!unaxs  lae  tsex£idxa  ts!ap!axasa  dzadzaxniEdzEme  qa£s  40 
lii  L5x-iindalas  lax  LeLEx'Exsasa  xwakluna,  lElbEndEX  ewas- 
gEmgigaasasa  xwakluna.  Wii,  laEm  wIxsEwatsa  L.'esEla  LE£wa 
yoyiixa  ts'.awiinxe  qaxs    he^mae  xEHLEla  hoxwamasa  yoyaxa  xwa- 


96  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.sb 

for  the  cold  wind  |  cracks  the  inside  of  the  canoe;  for  when  the  cold 

45  winter  wind  is  coming,  the  canoe-owner  ||  bails  out  the  water,  so  that 
it  is  dry  inside.  He  takes  |  coarse  cedar-bark  mats  and  spreads  them 
over  the  seats,  |  and  he  covers  over  the  sides  and  each  end  |  so  that 
the  cold  wind  does  not  go  through.  | 

Alter  the  canoe  has  been  finished,  he  goes  to  split  from  a  cedar- 

50  tree  ||  narrow  boards.  These  are  one  span  |  wide  and  one  [  finger 
thick.  |  Their  length  is  one  and  a  half  |  fathoms.    If  they  are  split  out 

55  for  a  small  canoe,  |  four  of  these  are  made  for  bottom-boards;  and  ||  for 
a  large  traveling-canoe  twenty  |  are  split  out  for  bottom-boards. 
He  does. the  same  as  ho  does  when  splitting  out  |  roof-boards.  The 
only  difference  is  that  they  are  not  adzed.  When  |  the  owner  of  the 
large  canoe  goes  traveling,  he  first    |  lays  down  on .  the  beach  the 

60  boards,  beginning  at  the  bow  of  the  canoe,  and  ||  he  places  them  more 
than  a  fathom  apart,  in  this  way.1  |  This  is  called  "place  over  which 
the  traveling-canoe  is  pushed  down."  When  |  they  have  all  been 
put  down,  many  men  take  hold,  one  on  |  each  side  of  the  thwarts 
and  also  one  |  on  each  side  of  the  bow,  pressing  their  backs  against 
the  sides  of  the  bow  so  that  they  lift  it  up  and  that  it  does  not  shove 

65  the  boards  out  of  place,  and  ||  also  one  on  each  side  of  the  stern,  who 

k!una,    yixs  gil£mae   yowe£nakulaxs    lae   hex-£ida£ma  xwagwadasa 

45  xwak!Qna  tsalax-£ldEq,  qa  lEinxuxses.  Wii,  heEni  la  ax£edaatsexa 
awadzoledEkwe  glldsdzo  lewa£ya  qa£s  la  LEplEndalas  lax  l<jle- 
x'Exsas.  Wit,  laEin  aEmxaq  lax  wax'saneguxsas  LE£wa  wax'sba- 
£yas  qa    k!eses  lax'sawa  yoyasa   ts!&wunxe   laq. 

Wa,  g-il£mese   gwala    xwaklunaxs    lae   lat!Ex£idxa  welkwe  laxa 

50  ts!elts!Eq!a  ladEkwa,  yixa  £naxwa£me  £nal£nEmp!Enk-  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  awadzE£wasas.  Wii,  la  £ne£nEmdEn  laxEns 
q!waq!wax-ts!anasyex  ylx  wiwagwasas.  Wii,  la  nEqlEbode  esEg'i- 
wa£yas  laxEns  bai.aqe  awasgEmasas.  Wii,  g'IPmese  xwaxwa- 
gume  lat  !ag-ilasexs   lae    moxsEme    lat!a£yas   qa    paxts.     Wii,  g-11- 

55  £mese  £walas  mElexatsle  xwaklunaxs  lae  maltsEmgnstaxse  lat!a£yas 
qa  paxts.  Wa,  laEm  heEm  gweg'ilaxs  latlaaqe  gwegilasasa  lat.'iixa 
saokwe.  Wii,  lex-a£mes  6gu£qalayosexs  heyadzae.  Wii,  g11£mese 
mElexElaLa  xwagwadasa  £walase  xwakluniixs  lae  lieEm  gll  la  paxa- 
lisElayowa  ladEkwa  giigilis  lax  ag'iwa£yasa  xwakluna,  yixs  haya- 

60  qaaxa  £nal£nEmp!Enke  laxEns  baLiiqe  awalagoledzasas  g'a gwiilega.1 
Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  wi£xudEmaxa  mElexatsle  xwakliine.  Wii,  gtl- 
£mese  £wilgalisExs  laeda  qlenEme  bebEgwanEm  q !walxokii IndEX 
wax"sba£yas  LeLEX'Exsas  lie£misa  waxsanoLEma£ye  tetEglnoLEinex 
ewan6LEma£yas  qa£s  waleq  qa  kMeses  klqEdzEwexa  wi£xudEma.  Wii, 

65  laxae  waxsodEXLa£}ra   ma£lokwe  wiq!wiixLa£ya.     Wa,  lada   £nEmo- 

1  Laying  them  down  parallel,  as  a  runway  for  the  canoe. 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  97 

push  ahead.     Then  one  |  man  shouts,  "Wo!"'  and  then  all  the  |  men  65 
push  together  at  the  stern  and  pull  on  each  side  |  at  the  ends  of  the 
thwarts.     Those  pull  with  the  right  hand  at  the  ends  of  the  thwarts, 
holding  [  with  (lie  left  hand  the  side  of  the  canoe,  who  stand  on  the 
left-hand  side  of  the  canoe.  ||  And  those,  pull  with  the  left  hand  on  70 
the  ends  of  the  thwarts  |  who  stand  on  the  right-hand  side  and  hold 
with  the  right  hand  the  side  of  |  the  canoe.     When  they  have  taken 
it  down  to  the  sea,  they  take  |  the  split  boards  and  place  them  in  the 
bottom  of  the  canoe;  and  when  they  are  |  all  in,  they  put  the  cargo 
on  top  of  the  boards.     When  ||  the  canoe  has  been  loaded,  they  start  75 
bow  first ;  and  when  they  arrive  |  at  the  place  where  they  are  going, 
they  go  ashore  stern  first  as  they  go  to  the  beach.  |  The  steersman  is 
the  first  to  go  ashore.     He  pulls  up  the  stern  |  of  the  canoe.     When 
the  crew  is  ashore,  they  unload  |  the  cargo;  and  when  everything  is 
out,   they  take  ||  the  bottom-boards  ashore  and    put  them  down,  Mi 
beginning  at  the  stern  of  the  canoe:  and  they  j  lay  them  down  up  to 
the  place  where  they  will  put  the  canoe  on  the  beach.     They  pull  it 
up  |  over  the  boards,  and  leave  it   at   a  level  place  on  the  beach. 
Then  they  |  gather  all  the  split  boards  and  put  them  over  the  seats, 
so  that  j  the  heat  of  the  sun  does  not  strike  the  canoe.     That  is  all.  || 

Wooden  Sail. — Now  I  will   talk    about  the   sail    of    the  |  ancient  l 
people,  which  was  sewed  together  of  boards.     First  they  |  look  for  a 

kwe   bEgwanEm  hasEla£lae  woxa.     Wa,  he£mis  la  £nEmax£Idaatsa  66 
bebEgwaiiEme  wl£xuwld  laxa  oxi.a£ye.     Wa,  laxa  gElqeda  waxsaxdza- 
£yas   oba£yasa   LeLExEXse   ylses   helk- lotts  !ana£yaxs    dag'aga£yases 
gEmxolts!ana£ye  laxa  ogwaga£yasa  gEmxaxdza£yasa  xwakluna.    Wa, 
la   he    gElqe    gEmxolts  !iina£3rasa   he   gwaxdza£ya   helk'  !6tiiga£yaxa  70 
LeLEx-Exse.     Wa,  la  dagageyeses  helk  lotts  !ana£yas  laxa  6gwaga£yasa 
xwakluna.     Wa,  gu£mese  laxstalisaxa  dEmsx'axs  lae  fix£edxa  wl£xu- 
dEma  ladEkuxs  qa£s  la  paxsas  laxa  xwakluna.     Wa,  gll£mese£wllga- 
alExsExs  lae    modz5dalases   mEmwala    laxa    paxse.     Wa,  gil£mese 
£wI1xsexs    lae    £nEqagiwalaxs   lae   sEpleda.      Wa,   gil£mese  lagaa  75 
laxes  lalaaxs  lae  aLaxLax£Ida  qa£s  k' !ax£alisexs  lae  lagallsa.     Wa, 
he£mis  galoltaweda   LEnxLa£yasexs    lae    lalta    qa£s    wawatlEXLBn- 
dalexes    ya£yats!e.     Wa,    lawisLe   hox£wultawe  le£lotas  qa£s  molto- 
dexes  mEmwala.     Wa,  glFmese  wlloltawe  niEmwalasexs  lae  axwul- 
todxa  paxse  qa£s  paxalisEles  gag'iles  lax  oxLa£yasa  xwakluna  qa£s  80 
la  paxpEges  lalaa  lax  ha£nedzaLas.     Wa,    lax'da£xwe  watEldzodEq 
laxa  wi£xudEma  qa£s  la  hangallsas  laxa  £nEmaese.     Wa,  la  q!ap!e- 
g'illsaxa   ladEkwe   paxsa  qa£s  la    paklindalas  laxa  LeLEXExse  qa 
kleses  Llesasosa  LlesEla.     Wa,  laEmxaa  gwal  laxeq. 

Wooden  Sail. — Wa,  la£mesEn    gwragwexs£alal  lax  yawapE£ya£yasa  1 
gale   bEgwanEmaxa    gwasEWakwe   ts!ExusEma.     Wa,  heEm   gil  la 
75052—21—3-")  eth— pt  1 7 


98  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [ETH.ANN.36 

3  thick  moss-covered  cedar-tree  that  has  been  lying  on  the  ground  [or  a 

long  time.  When  |  it  has  hern  found,  one  and  a  half  fathom-lengths  are 

5  split  off.  ||  Each  piece  is  two  spans  wide  j  and  one  finger-width  thick.  | 

I  do  not  know  how  the  edges  are.  fitted  together.  |  They  are  well 

adzed   .   .   .     Then  |  he  takes   a  long  bone  drill,  and   he   takes  two 

10  pieces  of  the  boards  ||  and  lays  them  side  by  side.  He  drills  near  the 
end  in  a  slanting  direction  |  through  the  edges  of  the  two  split 
boards,  so  that  the  point  of  the  drill  comes  through  |  on  the  other  side 
of  flie  other  board,  in  this  manner.1  .  .  .  When  |  this  is  done,  he 
takes  another  (board)  and  places  it  alongside  of  the  last  one,  and  |  he 

15  drills  it  in  the  same  way,  and  sews  it  together  as  he  sewed  ||  the  first 
one;  and  he  only  stops  adding  to  it  when  it  is  two  fathoms  |  wide. 
Then  he  takes  a  split  hoard  half  |  a  finger-width  thick  and  four  | 
finger-widths  wide.     Its  length  is  equal  |  to  the  width  of  the  boards 

20  that  have  been  sewed  together.  He  places  it  on  top  ||  of  one  end  of 
the  sewed  boards,  lie  takes  his  |  drill  and  drills  through  it  one 
finger-width  |  from  the  edge  of  the  piece  of  wood  that  forms  now  the 
straight  |  crosspiece  of  the  short  hoards  that  have  been  sewed 
together.     He  drills  straight    |  through,   and   at   a  distance  of  three 


3  alasoseda  LEkwe  plElsEnala  la  ge£s  k'attes  welkwa.  Wa,  giFmese 
qlaqexs  lae  tat!lx,£Idxa  nEq!EbodasesEgiwa£yelaxEns  baLax.  Wa,  la 
5  enaxwaEin  maemalplEnk-  laxEns  q!vvaq!wax-ts!ana£yex  yfx  awadzB- 
wasas.  Wa,  la  £nal£nEmdEn  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yixwlwa- 
gwasas.  Wa,  la£mEn  k-!es  qlaLElax  gweg-ilasasexs  lae  bEnax 
eEwagawa'yas.  Wii,  laxaa  aniEmayastowe  k-!tmLa£yas.  .  .  .  Wa, 
la  fix£edxa  gtlte  xax£En  sElEma.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  malExsa  ladskwa. 

lo  Wa,  la  gwasodEq.  Wa,  la  sElx£Idxa  max-ba£ye  Lii£nexales  sEla£ye  la 
hexsala  lax  ewiinxa£yasa  malExsa  ladEkwa  qa£s  la  nel£ede  6ba£yasa 
sElEme  lax  apsadza£yasa  £nEmxsa  ga  gwalega.1  .  .  .  Wa,  lii 
gwalEXs  lae  ax£edxa  £nEmxsa  qa£s  gwasEnxEndes  laq.  Wii,  laxae 
heEm  gwiile  sEla£yas  laq  le£w§  t  !Emt  !Egoda£yase  t!Emt!Egodaena- 

15  £yasa  g-ale  axes.  Wa,  al£mise  gwal  gwasEnxEndalaqexs  lae  malplEn- 
ke '"wadzEwasas  laxEns  baLax.  Wii,  laEm  ax£edxa  ladEkwe  k-!o- 
dEn  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!iina£yex  ytx  wagwasas.  Wit,  la  mo- 
dEn  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!iina£yex  yix  £wiidzEwasas.  Wii,  la  heEm 
£wasgEme  £wadzEwasasa  gwasEwakwe    ts!ExusEma.     Wa,   la    pagE- 

20  dzots  lax  apsba£yasa  gwasEwakwe  ts!ExusEma.  Wii,  If,  ax£edxes 
SElEme  qa£s  sElx£idxa  £nEmdEiias  £wadzswase  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana£yex  g-ag-iLEla  lax  iiwaxa£yasa  la  £nEm2nxaleda 
xwalba£ye  lo£  6ba£yasa  gwasEwakwe  ts!ExusEma.  Wii,  laEm  hex'sale 
sEla£yas    laq.     Wa,    la    yuduxudEn    laxEns    q hvaq Iwaxts !ana£yex 

i  Here  the  method  of  sewing  is  described  in  detail.    See  figure  on  p.  93. 


INDUSTRIES 


99 


finger-widths  ||  from  the  first  hole  he  drills  through  again;  and  then  25 
he  drills  |  other  holes  at  the  same  distances.  The  drilling  continues 
over  the  |  whole  length  of  the  cross  end-piece.  He  also  cuts  grooves 
into  it;  and  after  |  the  grooves  have  been  cut  between  alternating 
pairs  of  drill-holes,  he  turns  the  |  sewed  boards  over  and  cuts  grooves 
on  the  opposite  side,  over  those  (intervals)  in  which  he  did  not  cut  || 
grooves  (on  the  other  side).  After  he  finishes,  he  turns  it  over.  30 
Then  he  takes  |  twisted  cedar-withes  and  sews  them  together  |  in 
the  way  in  which  he  sewed  the  short  boards.  As  soon  as  j  he  has 
finished  doing  this  at  (1),      2 


he  does  |  the  same  as  he 
he  has  done  it,  he  ||  puts 
other  end,  and  he  drills 
does  the  same  as  he  did  at 
finally  he  does  it  at  (4) ; 
the  end,  he  has  finished. 


II 
II 

11 

;  i 
M 

1! 

II 
II 
II 
II 

•  _~LT"_rU~"— "-^ 

. 

he  drills  at  (2),  and 
did  at  (1) ;  and  after 
the  crosspiece  at  the  35 
it  at  (3),  and  J  he 
(1)  and  (2);  and  | 
and  when  he  reaches 
Now,   that  |  is    the 


sail  of  the  ancient  people  before  an}'  white  people  came;  to  wit,  |  short 
boards  sewed  together.  The  canoe-mast  is  short,  for  it  ||  just  shows  40 
above  the  top  edge  of  the  board  sail  when  |  it  is  standing  up  in  the  bow. 
They  just  push  up  one  end,  |  for  the  lower  edge  lies  hard  against  the 
mast  when  |  it  is  standing.  The  wind  just  blows  against  it  and  presses  | 
the  board  sail  against  the  mast  when  the  canoe  is  running  before  the 
wind.     When  ||  it  gets  calm,  they  lay  it  down  flat  towards  the  stern,  45 


ytx  £walalaasas  la  et!ed  sElx£itso£s.  Wa,  laxae  lax-saxs  lae  et!ed  25 
sElx£idxa  hemaxat!  £walale.  Wii,  la  hebEudale  sEla£yas  lax 
£wasgEmasasa  xwalba£ye.  Wa,  laxae xuxiidexeldEq.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
gwal  xiixudekax  eawagawa£yasa  sEla£yaxs  lae  lex£ldxa  gwasE- 
wakwe ts!ExusEma  qa£s  xwexudex£idex  nExsawasa  k-!ese  xwe- 
xtideg  Ikwa.  Wa,  laxae  lex£Idqexs  lae  gwala.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  30 
sElbEkwe  dEwexa.  Wii,  la  heEm  t!Emx-£ldaeneqes  t  !Emalaena£yas 
liix-de  t !Emt 'Egodalaxa  gwasEwakwe  ts!ExusEina.  Wa,  gil£mese 
gwalExs  lae  se1x-£k1ex  (2),  yrxs  laaLal  gwale  (1).  Wii,  aEmxaawise 
HEqEmgiltEwexes  gale  gwegilasEx  (1).  Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae 
pax£aLElotsa  xwalba£ye  laxa  apsba£ye.  Wii,  laxae  se1x-£k1ex  (3).  35 
Wii,  aEmxaawise  nanaxts  lEwaxes  gweg'llasax  (1)  lo£  (2).  Wii,  la 
ElxLalax  (4)we.  Wa,  giPmese  labEndqexs  lae  gwala.  Wii,  heEm 
yawapE£yesa  g-ale  bEgwanEinxs  k"  lesmaol  gaxa  mamalax  ylxa  gwTasE- 
wakwe  ts!ExusEma.  Wii,  la  ts!Ek!we  Lap!eqas  laxa  xwak.'una  ylxs 
halsEla£mae  nelEtala  lax  ek'!Enxa£yasa  gwasEwakwe  ts!ExusEmaxs  40 
lae  Laxs  laxa  ag'iwa£ye.  Wii,  a£mese  Lacjo^stoyiwe  awunxa£yasexs 
laaLal  tEsales  banEnxa£ye  lax  6x-sidza£yasa  yawappleqaxs  laaLal 
Laxsa.  Wii,  a£mise  la  yolayosa  yala  qa£s  la,  tEsp  !ega£ya  gwasEwa- 
kwe ts'.ExusEm  liixa  Lapleqaxs  nEqlEXLalae  laxa  yala.  Wii,  g-tl£mese 
q!ox£widExs   lae   aEm  pax£alExdzEm   gwagwaaqa    laxa  gwiilExsasa  45 


100  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [bts.amn.SS 

46  away  from  |  the  mast ;  and  the  middle  of  the  board  sail  lies  against 

the  mast  as  it  is  standing  on  edge.  |  After  they  have  taken  it  down, 

they  take  down  the  mast  and  put  it  down  |  into  the  bow;  and  they 

push  up  the  j  board  sail  and  shift  it  towards  the  bow,  so  that  it  lies 

50  flat  ||  in  the  bow  of  the  canoe.     The  sail  of  a  largo  |  traveling-canoe 

is  of  this  size.  | 

1       Mat  Sail  and  Mast. — A  woven  mat  was  the  sail  of  I  small  canoes. 

It-  was  made  of  the  middle  part  of  cedar-bark,  for  the  j  weaving  is 

5  made  of  narrow  strips.    Its  length  is  one  fathom  |  and  two  spans,  ||  and 

its  width  is  one  fathom.     There  are  four  holes  in  one  edge,  |  by  means 

of  which  it  is  strapped  to  the  mast,  in  this  way:    |  and  their  is 

top  corner;  | 
end  of  the 
man  peels|| 
for    the    mat 


one  hole  in  each  corner  to  put  the  sprit  into  the 
and  the  hole  in  the  lower  corner  is  for  the  lower 

10  sheet  |  to  pass  through.  When  it  is  finished,  the 
a  young  cedar-tree,  which  is  to  be  the  mast 
sail.  |  He  passes  twisted  cedar-hark  rope  through  the  four  holes 
in  the  side  of  the  sail,  |  and  puts  it  around  the  mast  to  hold 
the  sail.  He  uses  a  small  |  young  cedar-tree  for  the  sprit,  and  he 
uses  |  twisted  cedar-bark  rope  and  puts  it  around  the  mast   below 

15  the  ||  middle  to  hold  the  lower  end  of  the  sprit.  |  Finally  he  takes  well- 
made,  twisted,  thin  cedar-bark  rope,  |  sometimes  five  fathoms  in 


46  Lap  !eqe  laxes  nalnaqEyoyalaena£yaxa  Lap  leqaxs  lae  tsagExsa.  Wa, 
g11£mese  pax£alExsExs  lae  k-  !lgulExsasE£weda  Lap!eqe  qa£s  la  kadEg-i- 
yodayo  laxa  agiwa£e.  Wa,  a-mise  la  Lax£widayoweda  gwasEwakwe 
ts!ExusEm  qa£s  la  xEmx£idayo  laxaaxa  ag'iwa£ye  qa  las  pagEg'iwe 

50  laxa  ag"iwa£yasa  xwakluna.  Wa,  heEm  yawapE£yesa  £walase  mE- 
lexats  !e  xwak  !une  £walayasas. 
1  Mat  Sail  and  Mast. — Wa,  laLa  k'  lEclEkwe  le£wa£ye  ya£wapEya£yasa 
xwaxuxwagumexagayole  laxa  naq!Eg'a£ye  dEnasa,yixs  ts!elts!Eq!ao- 
ledEkwaes  k'!ita£ye.  Wa,  la  malplEnxbala  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!a- 
na£yex  yixa  £nEmp!Enke  laxEns  baLiiqe  £wasgEmasas.  Wii,l  a,  £nEm- 
5  ptenktyowe  £wadzEwasas.  Wa,  la  modzEqe  kwakuxunxaeyas  qa 
nEyimxsalatsa  t!EmqEmk!iniiLasa  laxa  Lapleqe  ga  gwiileg-a  (Jig.). 
Wa,  laxae  kwaxsaweda  dzeg'asLasa  dzeg'inoLEma£ye  laxa  eklinxa- 
£yas.  Wa,  laxae  kwaxsawe  bEiiEnxa£yas  qa  nex-salatsa  wadE- 
notslExsdeLe.     Wii,  gll£mese   gwalExs    lae  ax£edxa    saqlugidEkwe 

10  dzadzaxmEdzEma  qa  yawapleqsa  lekuya£ye  yawabEma.  Wa,  la 
nEyhnx'sotsa  niElkwe  dEnsEn  dEnEm  laxa  modzEqe  kwakuxunxes. 
Wii,  la  tlEmqEmk"  lints  laxa  ya£wap!eqe.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  wile 
dzadzaxmEdzEma  qa£s  dzEkinxEndes  laq.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa 
mElkwe   dEnsEn   dEnEma   qa£s  galop  lEndes    laxa    bEnk- Jolts  !a£3'as 

15  nEgoya£yasa  Lap!eqe  qa  dzegatsa  dzeginoLEma£ye.  Wa,  la 
alElxsdlaxs  lae  ax£edxa  aeklaakwas  mEla£ye  wIIeii  dEnsEn  dEnEma, 
£nal£nEmp!Eiiae  sEk-!ap!Enk'e  £wasgEmasas  laxEns  baLax  qa£s  galo 


INDUSTRIES 


101 


and  he  does  the  same  | 
corner.  That  is  the 
is  finished,  it  is  thus:  | 
The  mast-hole  of  the 
white  people  came  here 
in  the  I  how  of  the  canoe. 


length,  and  |  passes  its  end  through  the  sprit-hole  in  the  upper  corner,  18 

to  the  other  end  in  the  lower 
lowercornersheet.||     When  it  20 

ancient  people    \    before    any 
consisted  of  two  round  sticks 
These  were  three  finger-widths 
apa  1 1 .  |  The  ends  were  sewed  with  cedar-withes.  Then  ||  the  canoe-builder  25 
took  heavy  cedar-withe  ropes  and  small  cedar-wood  |  and  measured  i  lie 
middle  point  for  the  mast-hole.     After  |  he  had  found  the  middle,  he 
marked  off  a  hole  |  measuring  one  finger-width  and  a  half,  beginning  | 
at  the  middle  mark.     He  took  the  same  distance  ||  from  the  middle  on  30 
the  other  side  of  the  mark.  |  Three  finger-widths  is  the  distance  of  the  | 
marks  on  each  side  of  the  mark  in  the  middle.    Then  he  takes  |  the 
heavy  cedar-withe  and  ties  it  around  the  two  bars.  |  After  putting  two 
turns  into  the  cedar-withe  rope,  ||  he  pulls  it  up  between  the  two  bars  35 
and  draws  it  tight ;  I  and  lie  winds  it  between  the  I  crossbars  and  ties 


the  ends.  He  does  |  the  same  on  the 
side.  The  mast  stands  between  the  two 
bars  and  the  |  cedar-withes,  in  this  manner: 
mast  stands  in  (1).  ||  This  finishes  all  I 
about  the  making  of  a  canoe. 


other 
cross- 
The 
know  40 


plaLElodes  oba£yas  laxa  dzeg'asEnxa£ye.     Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex-£Itsa  ig 
apsba£yas  laxa  kwax-sawe  laxa  banEnxa£ye.     Wa,  heEm  wadEno- 
dzExsdese.  Wit,  gtl£mese  gwatexs  lae  g'a  gwaleg'a  (Jig.).  20 

Wa,  hemiesa  kwawoyasa  Lap!eqasa  gale  bEgwaiiEmxs  k!es- 
Emaolex  g-axa  mamalax,  ylxa  malts  !aqe  leElx  In  lexexs  laxa 
ag-iwa£yasa  xwakliina.  Wa,  la  yuduxudEn  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!a- 
na£yex  yix  awalagalaasas  ytxs  lae  t!Emt!Embalaxa  dEwexe.  Wa,  la 
ax£ededa  Leq!enoxwaxa  LEkwe  dEwexa.  Wa,  la  mEnseItsa  £wile  25 
xoku  k!waxLa£wa  lax  nEgoya£yasa  kwa£woyoLasa  Lap!eqe.  Wii, 
glPmese  qlaqexs  lae  xiildoyddxa  malts !aqe  kwa£woya.  Wii,  la 
mEns£Idxa  kModEiiosEla  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaJyex  g'agiLEla 
lax  nEgoya£yasexs  lae  xiiltledEq.  Wa,  laxae  heEmxat!  £walate 
xultaEyas  lax  apsiiLElasa  nEgoya£ye  xultaeyaxs  lae  xfdt!edEq.  Wa,  30 
laEm  yuduxudEn  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!fma£yex  yix  awalagalaasasa 
xwexttlta^ye  lax  waxseLElases  xiiltaJye  lax  nEgoya£yasexs  lae  axeedxa 
LEkwe  sElbEku  dEwexa  c[afs  qaxodes  laxa  malts !aqe  Lei>Ex-Exsa. 
Wii,  giPmese  malp !Ene£staxs  lae  ek!Ebax,EIdEx  obaeyasa  dEwexe 
lax  awagawa£yasa  malts !aqe  LeLExExsa  qaEs  lEk!ut!exs  lae  35 
nex£edEq.  Wii,  lii  k' !ilg'il£Ents  laxa  dEwexe  lax  awagawafyasa 
LeLEXExsaxs  lae  moxwaLElots  obaeyas.  Wii,  laxae  heEm  gwex£- 
Idxa  apsiiLEliis.  Wii,  heEm  LaLagawayaatsa  Lapleqa  awagawaJyasa 
dEwexe.  Wa,  lii  g-a  gwiileg"a  {fig.)-  HiiEm  Lax'salatsa  Lapleqe  (1). 
Wii,  lawIsLa  ewi£la  gwala  laxEn   q!ale   lax   gwegilasaxa  xwakluna.  40 


102  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  85 

1  The  Making  of  Horn  Spoons  (1). — Now  I  will  talk  about  the  |  making 
of  the  horn  spoon,  the  Mack  spoon.  |  When  the  head  of  the  mountain- 
goat  is  taken  off,  it  is  |  kept  in  the  corner  of  the  house  for  four  days, 
5  and  it  is  placed  ||  not  far  from  the  side  of  the  fire  of  the  house ;  and  | 
when  the  heat  of  the  fire  strikes  it,  the  spoon-maker  |  turns  the  head 
over  all  the  time;  and  when  it  gets  warm,  |  he  places  it  nearer  the 
fire.     He  watches  it  all  the  time  |  so  that  it  does  not  get  burnt. 

10  When  he  thinks  it  is  warm  through  and  through,  ||  he  takes  hold  of 
the  head  and  tries  to  pull  [  the  hair  off.  When  it  gets  loose,  he 
knows  that  |  the  horns  are  also  loosened.  He  takes  hold  of  |  the 
horn  with  his  right  hand,  and  with  his  left  hand  he  holds  |  the  nose 

15  of  the  head.  Then  he  twists  the  horn  a  little  and  ||  pulls  it  off.  Now 
the  horn  has  been  blown  off  by  the  steam.  He  |  also  does  the  same 
with  the  other  one.  When  he  has  them  off,  |  he  takes  his  hand- 
adz  and  a  block  of  wood  and  he  adzes  it.  |  He  adzes 
it  at  the  concave  side  of  the  horn.  I  placing  the 
thick    end    on   the   block    of  wood,    in  this   manner:|| 

20  As  soon  as  he  has  it  off,  he  adzes  off  the  "mouth" 
of  the  spoon  so  that  it  is  round,   j   in  this  manner: 
After  he  has  done  so,  he  measures    three    |   finger-    /    \    widths, 
beginning  at  the    |   top  of  the  horn,  and  he  adzes  it    \^J    so  that  it 

1  The  Making  of  Horn  Spoons  (1).  —  Wa,  la£mEn  gwagwexs£alal  laxa 
k'aselax  wiiiJaxasa  £mElxLowexa  ts!ololaqe  katslEnaqa.  Wa, 
he£maaxs  lae  ax£etsE£we  xEweqwasasa  £mElxLaxs  lae  mop!En- 
xwa£se  £nalas  axel  lax  onegwilasa  gokwe,  qa£s  la  ax£alilEm 
5  laxak!ese  XEnLEla  nExwala  lax  onalisasa  lEgwIlasa  gokwe.  Wa, 
laLe  Llesalasos  L!esaliisa  lEgwlle,  wa  liida  kaselaenoxwaxa  k-a- 
tstenaqe  hemEnalaEm  lexi£liilaq.  Wa,  gil£mese  ts  !Elgii£naku- 
laxs  lae  L'.aLlasolElas  laxa  lEgwlle.  Wa,  la  hemEnalaEm  q!aq!alalaq 
qa  k!eses  k!umElx£Ida.     Wa,  gil£mese  la  k'otaq  laEm  tslElxsa,  lax 

10  WEyoq!iiga£yasexs  lae  dax£ldxa  XEweqwe  qa£s  gunx-£Ide  p!Elx£IdEx 
habEtsEma£yas.  Wii,  g-ll£mese  kMBnx^dExs  lae  qlaLElaqexs 
lE£mae  k- linEmgaaLEle  wl\vui.!a\s.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese  dax£Itses 
helk-!otts!ana£ye  laxa  wuiJaxe,  wii  la  dalases  gEinxolts  !ana£ye  laxa 
xi£ndzasa    xEweqwaxs    lae  halsElaEin    sElx£wIdxa    wiiL!axaxs    lae 

15  nexodEq.  Wii,  la£me  t'Ek'oyosa  k!iilEla  lax  awaga£yas.  Wa,  la, 
heEmxat!  gwex-£Idxa  apsodata£yas.  Wa,  gll£mese  lawitxs  lae 
ax£edxes  k!tmLayuwe  LE£wa  tEmg  ikwe  lsqwa  qa£s  k-!imldEmaq. 
Wii,  la  k"  limlodEx  ok!waedza£yasa  wuLlaxasa  £niF.lxLaxs  lae  LlEn- 
qale  LEXuba£yas  laxa  tEmglkwe  lEqwa;  g-a  gwaieg-a    (Jig.).     Wii, 

20  g  il£mese  lawiixs  lae  k-!tml£ldEx  &w5xsta£yas  qa  k  llx-ixstax£ides 
g-a  gwiileg'a  (Jig.)  ■  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  £mEns£idxa  yiiduxudEne 
laxEns     q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex    yix    £wasgEmasas    g'iig'lLEla    laxa 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  103 

is  |  notched  in  this    place,  and  it  is  in  this  way       II      when    he    has  2-'! 
finished  it.  ||  A 

He   puts  away  his    hand-adz    and  takes  his    [^  straight  knife.  |  25 
In  former  times  the  people  rubbed  them  down    (J  with     rough 
sandstone  |  when  they  were  making  black  horn  spoons.      Now 

there  is  water  in  a  dish,  |  and  the  man  puts  it  down  at  his  left- 
hand  side  while  he  is  rubbing  the  horn.     He  |  puts  the  thick  end  info 
the  water,  and  he  holds  it  by  the  small  end  ||  with  his  left  hand.    With  30 
his  right  hand  he  holds  a  rough  |  sandstone  and  rubs  the  horn.  | 
Nowadays  the  modern  men  adz  it.     They  shave  it  down  |  to  smooth 
it  after  they  just  begin  cutting  it.  |  After  all  this,  he  puts  a  small 
kettle  half  full  of  water  over  the  fire,  ||  and  he  takes  two  cedar-sticks,  35 
each  one  span  long  |  and  half  the  thickness  of  a  |  finger.     He  takes 
split  [  cedar-bark  and  ties  the  ends  of  the  cedar-sticks  together  with 
the  cedar-bark.     Then  he  gets  |  another  piece  of  cedar-bark  ready  to 
tie  the  other  end  ||  after  having  put  the  spoon  in  between.     Then  it  40 
is  this  way.1  |  When  the  kettle  boils  up  on  the  fire,  he  takes  the  | 
spoon  and  puts  it  in.     He  does  not  leave  it  in  a  long  time  |  before 
taking  it  out  again.     Then  he  puts  the  spoon  near  its  "mouth," 


niaxba£yas    oxta£yasa    wiiLlaxax    lae    k!iml£idEq    qa£s  kimkirn-  23 
dEnodzEndeq.     Wii,  lag'a  gwaleg'axs  lae  gwal  k'.imLaq  (fig.). 

Wa,  lii  g-exaxes  k!lniLayaxs  lae  ax£edxes  nExx'iila  k-!awaya  yfxs  25 
k!oL!aaLal  dasgEmaku  dE£na  tlesEme  g'ixElasa  gale  bEgwanEmxs 
kaselaaxa  ts!6lolaqe   kpats!Enaqa  q!ots!asE£waeda  toq!wasa  £wape. 
Wa,    la   ha£nel     lax    gEmxagawalllasa   gexiixa   wuLlaxe.      Wit,    lii 
ax'stEntsa  LExuba£yas  laxa  £witpe.     Wa,  lii  dalax   wllEta£yas  vises 
gEmxolts!ana£yaxs   la£e  diilases  helk'!otts!ana£ye  laxa  k-!oL!a  das- 30 
gEmak"    dE-'na    tlesEma.     Wit,    lit   g'ex^Idxa    wuLlaxe.     Wa,    LiLal 
kliniLasosa  iilex  bEgwiinEina.     Wa,  la£me   k!ax£widEq  qa£s  qaqe- 
ts!eq   qa    qes£edes    laxes    haene£me     ales     kMoxiig'ale.      Wa,    gil- 
£mese  gwalExs    lae   hanxLEntsa   ha£nEme    nEgoj^oxsdalaxa    £wape. 
Wa,    lit    ax£edxa    malts  !aqe    k!waxLawa  £nal£nEmp!Enk"e    awasgE-  35 
masas  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.     Wa,  lii  klodEn  laxEnsqlwa- 
q!waxts!ana£yex    yix     awagwidasas.     Wit,     lii    fix£edxa  dzEXEkwe 
dEnasa    qa£s    yaLodex    oba£yasa    klwaxLawasa    dEnase.      Wa,    lii 
gwalllasa    £nEmts!aqe    dEnas    qa£s     yaLSdayolxa    &psba£ye    qo    lal 
ax£aLElaLa  k"ats!Enaqe   laxa   iJEbasaq.     Wa,    laEm   g'a   gwiilega.1  40 
Wii,  gil£mese  niEdElx£wideda  hanx'Lala  laxa  lEgwilaxs  lae  ax£edxa 
k-ats!Enaqe    qa£s    axstEndes    laq.     Wii,  lii    lc!es    alaEm   ge£stalaxs 
lae     axwiistEndEq.      Wii,     lii     fixotsa     awana£yas     ktlx'lxsta£yasa 


1  That  is,  two  straight  sticks  tied  loosely  together  at  one  end. 


104  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [BTH.ANN.  35 

45  between  |  the  cedar-sticks,  in  this  manner,  »         ||  and  he  takes 

the  cedar-bark  and  ties  it  on  near  the  end  /  of  the  spoon- 
spreader  |  into  which  the  spoon  is  put.  ph  He  bends  back 
the  point,  |  and  holds  it  by  putting  it  into  J  W  cold  |  water,  so 
that  it  sets.  Then  it  does  not  bend  back  \Z/  again,  but  is 
kept  in  position  |  as  it  gets  cold.     Next  he  takes  off  the  spoon-opener, 

50  and  ||  he  takes  dried  dog-fish  skin  and  rubs  it  all  over  it,  so  that  it 
becomes  very  |  smooth  inside  and  outside.  When  it  is  quite  | 
smooth,  it  is  finished.  Now  the  black  horn  spoon  is  finished  after 
this. 
I  The  Making  of  Horn  Spoons  (2). — Let  me  first  talk  about  the  |  horn 
spoons,  how  they  are  made.  When  |  the  mountain-goat  hunter  goes 
out  to  hunt,  the  spoon-maker  asks  |  him  to  break  off  the  horns  of  the 
5  goats  that  he  will  get,  for  ||  the  mountain-goat  hunter  only  wants  the 
tallow  and  the  |  kidney-fat  and  the  meat.  He  does  not  want  the 
bones  and  the  |  horns.  Therefore  the  spoon-maker  ]  asks  him  for 
these.     In  the  morning,  when  daylight  comes,  the  \  mountain-goat 

10  hunter  goes  hunting;  and  after  he  has  killed  ||  a  mountain-goat,  he 
takes  off  the  tallow,  [  kidney-fat,  and  the  meat,  and  finally  he  cuts 
the  skin  around  |  the  bottom  of  the  horns;  and  when  he  has  cut  off 

k'atstenaqe  lax  awagawa£yasa  LlEbasak-  ga  gwalega  (Jig.)-    Wa,  lii 

45  ax£edxa    dEnase    qa£s    yll£aLElodes    laxa     apsba£yasa    LlEbase    lax 

laena£yas    LEbEkwa   katslEnaqe,    wa,   la     LlotlExodEx    oxawa£yas 

qa    L!ot!Exales.      Wa,    lii    dalaqexs     lae    axstEnts    laxa    wuda£sta 

£wapa    qa    LlEmx£wides.     Wii,  la£me    xakMalaEm    la    LEpiile    ogu- 

ga£yasexs     lae     wudEx£Ida.     Wa,    lii     axodxa    LlEbase.     Wa,    la 

50  ax£edxa  lEmokwe  xidgwega£ya   qa£s  xiiLxsEmdeq  qa   iilaklales   la 

qesa  ytx  ogug'a£yas  LE£wis  osgEma£ye.     Wa,  gtl£mese  la  alaklala 

la  qesaxs  lae  gwala.     Wit,  laEm  gwalatslololaqe  katslEnaqe  laxeq. 

j       The  Making  of  Horn  Spoons  (2). — Wega£maLEn  gwagwrexsEX£Id  laxa 

tslololaqe  k'atslEnaqExs  lae  kaselasE£wa.     Wii,  he£maaxs  galae  lala- 

eda tEw!£nenoxwaxa  £mElxLowe.    Wii,  la  axk'!iilaso£sa  kaselaenoxwe 

bEgwanEma    qa£s    tEpstlex    wfodaxases    yanEme    £mElxLowa,  qaxs 

5  lexa£mae  iixso£sa  tetEwe£nenoxwaxa  £mElxLowes yExusEina£ye  LE£wa 

mEt!ose  LE£wa  Eldziis.      Wa,  la    k'leiis    ax£etsos   lax   xaqas    LE£wa 

wfiLlaxas.      Wa,    he£mis    lagilasa   kaselaenoxwe    hawaxElaq    qa£s 

&x£edeseq.     Wii,  gil£mese  £nax-£Idxa    gaaliixs    lae    qas£ideda   tEwe- 

£nenoxwaxa  £mElxLowe.     Wii,  lii  tEwex£ida.   Wii,  g  il£mese  tEwe'na- 

20  nEmaxa   £mElxLaxs    lae    h(;x£idaEm     axalaxa   yExusEma£ye    LE£wa 

niEt!ose  LE£wa  Eldziis.     Wa,  lii  alerlxsdalaxs  lae  t  !otse£stalax  oxLa- 

£yasa  wiwuL!axas.    Wa,  g"il£mese  dii£ste  t!osa£yas  lax  k!uts!asexs  lae 


was]  INDUSTRIES  105 

the  skin,  |  he  lakes  a  hammer  and  pounds  off  the  horns.  Now 
they  break  off  from  |  the  bone  core.  He  continues  doing  this  [|  with  15 
nil  the  mountain-goats  that  he  has  killed.  And  when  lie  has  killed 
enough,  he  carries  them  down  |  from  the  mountain  where  he  was 
hunting;  and  when  he  arrives  at  home,  he  |  immediately  goes  and 
gives  the  horns  to  the  spoon-maker,  |  who  at  once  takes  a  basket  and 
goes  down  to  the  beach  |  in  front  of  his  house,  carrying  (the  basket) 
in  his  hand.  He  puts  stones  into  it,  ||  enough  so  that  he  can  carry  20 
them  up  |  and  he  takes  them  into  his  house.  He  puts  them  down 
near  j  his  fire,  and  he  builds  up  the  fire  and  puts  the  stones  |  on. 
"When  this  is  done,  he  takes  a  steaming-box  and  |  places  it  next  to 
the  fire,  and  he  also  takes  his  large  water-bucket  |j  and  goes  to  draw  25 
some  water,  and  he  pours  the  water  into  the  steaming-box  I  so  that 
it  is  half  full.  After  this  is  done,  he  takes  the  tongs  |  and  puts  them 
down,  and  also  his  adz  and  his  straight  |  knife,  so  that  they  are 
ready  on  the  floor  of  the  house;  and  he  also  takes  a  piece  of  fire-wood,  \ 
which  he  places  next  to  the  fire.  When  all  these  have  been  ||  put  30 
down,  he  places  the  stones  on  the  fire  until  they  get  red-hot.  |  Then 
he  takes  his  tongs,  picks  up  the  red-hot  |  stones,  and  throws  them 
into  the  steaming-box  which  contains  water,  and  |  he  continues  put- 
ting in  red-hot  stones.     As  soon  as  the  water  |  begins  to  boil,  he 


diix£Idxa  t!esEme  qa£s  lEg'Ei.Elodexa  wiwfn.laxe.     Wa,la'"me  tEp!lde  13 
klwalaLElasasxa  xaqe.     Wa,   :i£mise    la  he    gwe£nakulaxes  tEwe£niI- 
uEme  £mElxLowa.     Wa,  g  il£mese  IicT'olexs  giixae  oxLaxElaxes  tE-  15 
we£nanEme  laxa  nEg'ii.     Wa,    gibmese   lag'aa  laxes    gokwaxs    lae 
hex£IdaEm  la  tshisa  wuLlaxe  laxa  k'aselaenoxwe  bEgwanEina.     Wa, 
hi;x£ida£mese    ax£edxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  la    k- !oqulaqexs  lae    hci.tslesEla 
lax  l !Enia£isases  gokwe,  qa£s   la   xE£xuts  Ifdasa    t!esEme    laq.      Wa, 
:i£mise  gwanala  qa£s   lokwesexs  lae  6xLEx-£IdEq    qa£s  la  oxLosdesE-  20 
laq,  qa£s  lit  oxLaeLElac^  laxes   gokwe,  qa£s  la  oxLEgalilas  lax  ma- 
g'inwalisases  lEgwIle.     Wa,  lii  lEqwelax£lda,  qa£s  xE£xuLalesa  t!esE- 
me  laxes  lEgwIle.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  q!olats!e,  qa 
gaxes  hanalisEx  lEgwilas.     Wa,    laxae    ax£edxes   £walase   nagatsla, 
qa;"s  la  tsex'£ldEx  £wapa.     Wa,  lii    guxtslotsa  £wape  laxa  qlolatsle,  25 
qa  uEgoyoxsdales.    Wa,    g-il£mese    gwalExs    lae    ax£edxa    tslesLala 
qa    gaxes    kadela.      Wa,    heemises    k'limLayowe    LE£wis   nExxiila 
klawayowa,  c[a    g'axes    gwalel    g'ex'g'aela.      Wit.    h6£misa    teqwa, 
qa  g'axes  k'adel  lax  oniilisases  lEgwIle.      Wa,  giPmese   g'ax  £wl-ia 
gexgaelExs    lae    meniEnltsEmx£Ideda    xE£xuLalal!se    tlesEm    laxa  30 
lEgwIle.     Wa,  la  dax£Idxes    ts!esLala,    qa£s    k!ip!ldes  laxa    xIxse- 
mala  t!esEma,  qa£s  lii  k'  IipstEnts  lax  £\vabEts!;iwasa  ci!olats!e.     Wa, 
lii  banal  k'lipstalasa  xux'ExsEmala  tlesEm  laq.     Wii,  g'il£mese  niE- 
dElx£wIdeda  £w;lpaxs    lae  gwal  k'lipstalaq.      Wii,  lii  dax'£idxa  wiwu- 


106  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.akn.S5 

35  stops  putting  in  stones,  takes  the  horns,  ||  and  puts  them  into  i(. 
He  does  not  leave  them  there  a  long  time,  before  |  he  takes  up  liis 
tongs,  feels  for  the  horn,  and  when  he  finds  one,  |  he  takes  soft 
shredded  cedar-bark  and  puts  it  into  his  hand  |  in  order  not  to  burn 
it  as  he  takes  hold  of  the  point  of  the  horn.  He  strikes  with  |  the 
thick  end  against  the  piece  of  fire-wood  on  the  floor.     Then  the  core 

40  that  is  left  inside  |[  jumps  out.  Now  the  horn  is  hollow.  He  con- 
tinues |  doing  this  with  all  of  them;  and  when  they  are  all  done,  he 
measures  off  two  |  finger-widths  from  the  point  at  the  concave  | 
(belly)  side,  in  this  way:  ^^^  neiiy.  Then  he  takes  his  straight  , 
knife   and   cuts   a    notch  ^SSZZ^^    mto     '*>    slanting     towards 

45  the  ||  thick  end.   Then  he  Back-  puts  down    his     knife    and 

measures  |  three  finger-widths  from  the  point  where  he  made  the 
notch,  |  towards  the  big  end,  and  ho  puts  a  small  notch  there.  |  Then 
he  puts  down  his  knife,  takes  his  |  adz  and  adzes  off  the  horn,  begin- 

50  ning  at  the  first  notch.  He  adzes  off  one-half  ||  its  thickness  between 
the  two  notches.  Then  he  turns  the  horn  over,  |  holding  it  by  the  ( hick 
end,  and  adzes  it  off  so  that  it  is  a  little  rounded,  and  so  that  it  is 
hollow  in  the  middle.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  he  adzes  off  the 
thick  end  so  that  it  is  round;  |  and  when  this  is  done,  it  is  in  this 
way:     (      -\  <?  Then  he  takes  |  red-pine  wood    that  splits 

55  well       ^^=~5Z^^      an(J  splits  it,  in  pieces  of  the  size  of  our  ||  middle 

35  L'.axe,  qa£s  lii  axstEnts  laq.  Wii,  k'!est!e  AlaEin  ge£stalllExs  lae 
ax£edxa  ts!esLala,  qa£s  k-!ap!Eles  laq.  Wii,  gil£mese  liiLxa  £nEine 
q!6lku  wuLlaxExs  lae  ax£edxa  qloyaakwe  kadzEkwa,  qa£s  saxtsla- 
naleqexs  lae  dax-£Its  lax  wilba£yasa  wfuJaxe.  Wa,  lii  xiisEntsa 
T,Exuba£ye  laxa  lEqwa  kadela.     Wii,  he£mis  la  dEx£wiilts<Ewats  go- 

40  gulg'a£yas.  Wa,  la£me  kwakwiix£ldeda  wuiJaxe.  Wa,  axusa£mese 
he  trwegilaxa  waokwe.  Wii,  gd£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  mEns£Idxa  mal- 
dEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£ye  giigiLEla  lax  w!lEta£yas  lax 
ok  !waedza£yasxa  g'a  gwiileg-a  {fig.).  Wii,  lii  dax£idxes  nExxiila 
kliiwayowa    qa£s     klimtbEtEndexa     Liinexala    gwagwaaqala    laxa 

45  LEx"baeyas.  Wii,  lit  g-Ig-alllaxes  klawayowe,  qa£s  etlede  mEns£idxa 
vuduxudEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  g-iigiLEla  lax  k'!imtaeyas 
gwagwaaqa  laxa  LExuba£ye.  Wii,  laxae  xaL!Ex£Id  klimtbEtEndEq. 
\Va,  lii  g'igalilaxes  lrlawayowe,  qa£s  dax-£Idexes  k' limLayowe,  qa£s 
k- !iml£Idexa  g'iigfLEla  lax  gale  k'limtes.     Wii,  lii  nEgoyode  k-!fm- 

50  Laeyas  lalaa  lax  ale  k- Unites.  Wii,  lii  xweHdxa  wiiiJaxe,  qa£s 
dalex  i.EXuba£yasexs  lae  k-!iml£TdEq,  qa  kakElx-ales,  qa  xfdboyoles. 
Wii  g'iPmese  gwfitexs  lae  k-!iml£IdEx  LEk!uxLa£yas,  qa  k'ak'Elxales. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  g-a  gwiileg-a  (fig.) .  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  egaqwa 
lax  xasE£we  wunagula.   Wii,  lii  xoxoxus£EndEq,  qa  yuwes  uwiigwItEns 

55  £nolax-ts!ana£yaxsEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.    Wa,  lii  baHtsa  £nEm- 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  107 

linger,  and  he  measures   off  one  |  span  for  its   length.     Then    he  56 
takes  his  |  straight  knife  and  cuts  it  off,  and  when  he  has  cut  off  | 
the  same    number  and  split  as  many  as  the  number  of  black  horn  | 
spoons    that    he    is    making,  then    he  takes  spruce-root  and  splits 
it  in  two,  ||  puts  it  into  a  small  dish  with  water  in  it  to  soak,  ]  60 
and    ho    takes    his    straight    knife    and   splits    one    end    of    the  | 
pine-sticks  to  make  them  like  a  pair  of  tongs;  and  when  |  the  ends 
of  all  of  them  have  been  split,  he  takes  the  split  roots  and  ties  the 
other  end,  |  in  this  way.1     He  does  this  with  all  of  them;  and  when  || 
they  all  have  been  tied  with  the  roots,  he  builds  up  his  fire,  I  takes  65 
the  stones  out  of  the  steaming-box,  and  puts  them  back  on  the  fire.  | 
When  they  are  all  on,  he  waits  until  they  are  red-hot.  |  When  they 
are  red-hot,  he  takes  |  his  tongs  and  picks  out  the  hot  stones  and 
puts  them  back  ||  into  the  water  in  the  steaming-box;  and  when  the  70 
water  begins  to  boil  up,  |  he  takes  the  adzed  horns  and  puts  them  |  in. 
As  soon  as  they  are  in,  he  takes  the  roots  and  |  puts  them  down  at 
the  place  where  he  is  seated,  and  also  the  split  pine-sticks.     When  he 
thinks  |  that  the  horns  are  hot  enough,  he  takes  his  fire-tongs  and  ||  75 
picks  up  the  horns.     He  takes  one  of  the  |  spoon-moulds,  —the  pieces 
of  pine-wood  tied  at  one  end, — and  puts  the  |  spoon  between  its  legs. 


plEnke  laxEns  q!waq!wax-tsitna£yex  yix  awasgEmasasexs  lae  ax£edxes  56 
nExxala  klawayowa,  qa£s    k' Units tendeq.     Wii,    g-il£mese    £wl£laxs 
]axes  heeneme  waxats!aqa  xokwe  wunagule  waxexLaasasa  ts!ololaqe 
katslEnaqExsos.   Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  LloplEkasa  alewase,  qa£s  papaxsa- 
leq.     Wii  lii  iix£stalas  laxa  £wape  q!ots!axa  lalogume,  qa   pex£wldes.  60 
Wii,  lii  iix£edxes  nExx'iila  k-!awayowa,   qa£s   x6x£wldex    epsba£y'asa 
wiwunagule,    qa   yuwes   gwex-sa    tslesLalax.      Wii,  g'tlemese   £wl£la 
xSbaakwa  lae  :ix£edxa  paakwe  LloplEka,    qa£s  yiHdes  laxa  epsba- 
£yas  g'a  gwiilega.1     Wii,  lii  £naxwaEm  he  gwex£idEq.     Wii,  gih'mese 
£wi£la  la  yaelbiilaxa  l !op Iskaxs  lae  lEqwelax,eIdxes  lEgwile.    Wii,  lii  65 
ax£wustalaxa  t  lesEme  laxa  q  lolats  !e,  qa£s  lii  xExuLEndalas  laxes  lEgwi- 
le.    Wii.  giPmese  £wllxxalaxs  lae  aEm  la  esElaq,  qa  memEnltsEm- 
xJides.    Wa,   gilmese  meniEnltsEmx-fideda  t!esEmaxs  lae   dax,£Id- 
xes  tslesLiila,  qa£s  klipides  laxa  x'ix'ExsEmala  t!esEma,  qa£s  laxat! 
k!lpstalas  laxaax  £wabEts!awasa  q!olats!e.     Wii,  giPmese  mEdElx-  70 
£wideda  £wapaxs  lae  :lx£edxa  la  k'  !hV  !imLEku  wuLlaxa  qa£s  lii  axsta- 
las  laq.     Wii,  g  Tlemese  £wl£lastaxs  lae  ax£edxa  LloplEk'e,  qa  «-axes 
gael  lax  klwaelasas  LE£wa  xokwe  yaelbaak"  wunagula.     Wii,  a£mise 
gwanala,  qa    ts  !ELx£widesa  wuLlaxaxs  lae  dax,£idxes  tslesLala,  qa£s 
k!tp!ides    laxa    £nEme    wuLlaxa.      Wii,     lii    dax-£Idxa    £nEmts!aqe  75 
LlEbEga£yexa    xokwe  yilbala    wunagula,    qa£s    LlEbEg'indes    laxes 
tslololaqe    kats!Enaqaxs    lae    peqwa.      Wa,    a£mise    gwanala,    qa 

'  See  footnote  on  p.  103. 


108  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [BTH.ANN.se 

78  Since  the  born  is  pliable,  he  can  spread  it  |  as  wide  as  he  wants.  Then 
he  takes  root  and  ties  the  |  other  end  of  the  spoon-mould.     After  he 

80  has  done  so,  it  is  in  this  way.1  After  ||  he  has  done  so  with  one,  he 
docs  the  same  with  the  others;  and  after  he  has  |  finished,  he  puts 
some  more  red-hot  stones  in  the  steaming-box;  |  and  when  the  water 
begins  to  boil  up,  he  takes  |  mountain-goat  tallow  and  puts  it  down 
where  he  is  working.     Then  lie  puts  a  dish  \  down  where  he  is  seated. 

85  takes  the  ||  water-bucket  with  water  in  it,  and  pours  the  water  into 
the  dish.  After  |  doing  so.  he  takes  the  spoon  with  the  spoon-mould 
on  it  |  and  puts  them  into  the  boiling  water.  When  lie  thinks  that  | 
they  are  hot  through,  he  takes  them  out  one  by  one,  |  and  rubs  them 

90  .ill  over  with  the  tallow;  and  as  soon  as  ho  has  done  so,  ||  he  throws 
I  hem  into  the  cold  water  in  the  dish.  He  does  this  |  with  all  of  them. 
He  wants  them  to  become  brittle,  |  therefore  he  does  so.  As  soon  as 
they  have  all  been  put  into  the  cold  water  |  in  the  dish,  he  takes 
them  out,  unties  the  roots  which  he  has  tied  j  around  the  mould,  and 

95  takes  dogfish-skin  from  the  back  of  the  dogfish,  and  ||  polishes  the 
outside  and  the  inside.  When  they  are  smooth  both  outside  |  and 
inside,  they  are  finished.  He  continues  doing  this  |  with  all  of  them, 
and  in  this  way  the  horn  spoons  are  made.    |    Now,  that  is  all.  | 


78  ^wadzEgEg'aatsexs  lae  fix£edxa  i,!op!Ek-e,  qa£s  yiFides  laxa  apsba- 
£yasa  L'.EbEg'a£ye.     Wa,  lit  g'a  gwalaxs    lae    gwaleg'a.1     Wii,    gil- 

80  £mese  gwatexs  lae  aEin  he  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe.  Wa,  g  iPmese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  xwelaqa  kltpstalasa  xixExsEmiila  tlesEm  laxa  q!olats!e. 
Wii,  gil£niese  mEdElx£wideda  £wapaxs  lae  iix£edxa  yasEkwasa 
£mElxLowe,  qa  g'axes  gaeta  lax  eaxElasas.  Wii,  la  iix£edxa  lo- 
q!we,  qa£s  g'axe    k'agalllas    laxaaxes    klwaelase.      Wii,  lit  ax£edxa 

85  nagats!e  £wabEts!;ilila,  qass  guxts!odesa  £wap§  liixa  loqlwe.  Wa, 
u;?l4"mese  gwalExs  lae  ;ix£edxa  LlEbEg'aakwe  ts!ets!ololaqa,  qa£s  lii 
:ix-stalas  laxa  maEmdElqula  Ewapa.  Wii,  gil£mese  k'otaq  hiEm 
:ilak!ala  la  ts!ElxEwida,  lae  £nal£nEinEmkaxs  lae  k"!ip£wustalaq, 
qa£s  hamElxsEmde  dsx'sEmtsa  yasEkwe  laq.    Wii,  gil£mese  gwatexs 

90  lae  tslExstEnts  laxa  wuda£sta  fwabEts!alilxa  loqlwe.  Wii,  la  £na- 
xwaEm  he  gwexeidxa  waokwe.  Wii,  laEm  enex-  qa  L!Emx£wIdes 
lag'ilas  he  gwegilaq.  Wa,  g  Tlmiese  £wl£la£sta  laxa  wuda£sta  £wiibE- 
ts!;illlxa  loq!wiixs  lae  ax£wustalaq,  qa£s  qwelalexa  L!op!Ek'e  yaet- 
besa   LlEbEga£ye.      Wa,    la   ax£edxa   xulgweg-a£yasa  xfilgume,  qa£s 

95  xulx£\vldex  6sgEma£yas  le£w§s  6gug'a£ye.  Wii,  g"il£mese  la  qetsEma. 
Wa,  he£misexs  lae  qedzEg'a  lae  gwTala.  Wii,  iixusa£mese  he  gwegi- 
laxa  waokwe.  Wii,  heEm  gwregilatsa  ts lololaqeliixa  tslololaqe 
lratslEnaqa.     Wii,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

See  figure  on  p.  104. 


boas]  INDUSTEIES  109 

Cedar-Bark  Breaker. — The  man  takes  a   (bone    from    the)  |  nasal    1 
bone  of  a  whale,  and  he  takes  a  thin-edged  rough  sandstone  |  and  a 
small  dish,  and  he  pours  water  into  it  so  that  it  is  |  half  full.     Then 
he  puts  it  down  where  he  is  going  to  work  at  a  cedar-bark  breaker.  ||     5 
He  takes  the  bone  and  measures  it  so  that  it  is  |  two  spans  and  four 
finger- widths  in  length.  |  Then  he  puts  the  rough  sandstone  into  the 
water  in  the  ]  dish,  and  he  saws  the  bone  off  so  that  the  end  is  square. 
He  I  does  the  same  with  the  other  end.     When  both  ends  are  square,  ||  K) 
he  rubs  the  edges  so  that  they  are  straight;  and  when  the  edges  are 
straight,  |  he  measures  the  width  of  one  hand  for  its  width,  and  ]  he 
measures  with  a  cedar-stick  to  find  the  center,  in  this  manner.1  | 
As  soon  as  he  finds  the  center,  he  marks  a  fine  across,  and  he  rubs  [ 
on  each  side  of  the  line  to  make  a  hole  through  it,  which  serve*  as 
a  grip.     As  soon    as  he  has  finished  ||    rubbing  the   hole   through  15 
which   serves    as  a  grip,    |   he  rubs  along   the    lower  edge  so  as  to 
sharpen  it.     Now  he  has  finished  |  the  bark-breaker.    | 

Bag  of  Sea-Lion  Hide. — As  soon  as  this  is  done,  he  takes  the  |  skin 
of  a  sea-lion  which  has   been  dried.     He  spreads  it  out,  and  he  || 
measures  two  spans.   Then  he  puts  a  j  straight-edge  of  cedar-wood  on  20 
it  and  marks  along  the  edge,  so  that  it  may  be  straight.    Then  he  |  cuts 
along,  following  the  fine;  and  he  also  lays  the  straight-edge  of  cedar- 


Cedar-Bark  Breaker. — Wii,  lii  ax'ededa  bEgwanEinaxa  xaqe  ga£yol  |     1 
lax  xagelba£yasa  gwE£yirue.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  pElEnxe  k!oL!a  dE£na 
t.'esEina.    Wa,  he£rnisa  lalogum  qa£s  guxts!odesa  £wape  laq  qa  nEgo- 
yoxsdiilesexs  lae  hanga£blas  laxes  eaxElasLaxa  kadzayoLaxa  k'adzE- 
kwe.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  xaqe  qa£s  mEns£ideq  qa  £wasgEinats.     Wa,  la    5 
ha£modEngala  lax  malplEnke  '"wasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ii- 
na£yaxs   lae   &x£stEntsa  k'.6L!a  dE£na  t!esEin   laxa   £wabEts lawasa 
lalogume.     YV  a,  lii  x  ilts!Ents  laxa  xaqe  qa  £nEmabes.     Wa,  la  heEm- 
xat!  gwexudxa  tipsba£ye.     Wii,  g'iPrnese  £ne£namabaxs   lae   g'ex£I- 
dEx  oxwii£yas  qa  £nEniEnxEles.     Wii,  gil£mese  la  £nEmEnxElaxs  lae  10 
baHtses  ts  !Exuts  !ana£ye  q!wiiq!waxts!ana£yex    laq  c[a   wadzEwats. 
Wa,  laxae  mEnsi£liilasa  k  !waxLa£we  lax  nEgoya£yas  g'a  gwaleg-a  {fig.) 
Wii,  giFmese  q !axa  nEg03*a£yaxs  lae  xultaxodEx.     Wa,  lii  g'ex£ldEx, 
wax'sana£yasa  d^-asexa  la  saxusto  kwaxsa.     Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs 
lae  gexsodxa  saxustowe  kwaxsaxa    daas.     Wii,  glPmese  gwalExs  15 
lae  g  exxalabEndEq  qa  6pesx"ii£yes  ex'ba.     Wa,  laEm  gwrala  k'aya- 
yaxa  kadzEkwe. 

Bag  of  Sea-Lion  Hide. — Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  &x£edxa  pEsE- 
na£yasa  L!exEnaxs  lae  lEmokwa.     Wa,   la  LEplalllaq.     Wa,  la  baP- 
Idxa  malplEnke  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.     Wii,  lii  kadEdzotsa  20 
nEgEnose  klwaxLo  laqexs  lae  xiiltledEq,  qa  nEqElesexs  lae  bExE- 
lEndxes  xulta£ye.     Wa,  laxae  ogwaqa  kadEdzotsa  nEgEnose  klwaxLo 

1  See  Ulustrations  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  372. 


110  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  86 

wood  |  on  the  other  side  and  marks  along  it  and  cuts  following    the 

25  line.  |  Now  it  is  two  spans  wide,  ||  and  he  cuts  along  six  spans  |  for 
the  length  as  he  lays  his  straight-edge  of  cedar-wood  down  at  the 
end  of  the  [  six  spans  which  he  has  marked  off,  and  he  cuts  along  the 
line  that  he  has  marked.  |  Then  he  doubles  it  up  in  the  middle  of 
the  long  side  and  bends  it  over,  and  he  steps  on  it,  |  so  that  the  sides 

30  may  be  close  together.  Then  he  punches  holes  through  the  edges  ||  two 
finger-widths  apart.  That  is  |  where  the  cord  will  pass  through  when 
he  sews  it;  and  when  |  it  is  finished,  he  puts  the  straight-edge  of 
cedar-wood  on  a  piece  two  |  spans  wide  and  marks  a  line  on  it,  and 

35  cuts  along  it.  |  This  piece  is  seven  spans  in  length.  ||  It  is  to  be  the 
carrying-strap  for  the  wedge-bag,  and  he  |  puts  on  the  straight-edge 
of  cedar-wood  on  a  piece  half  |  a  finger  wide  and  marks  a  fine  on  it 
and  cuts  along  it.  This  |  long  strip  serves  to  sew  up  the  sides  of  the 
wedge-bag.  |  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  he  puts  it  for  a  short  time  into  || 

40  water,  together  with  the  wedge-bag.  Only  the  carryings-trap  is  not 
put  into  the  water.  |  lie  does  not  leave  it  in  for  a  long  time  before 
he  takes  it  out.  |  Then  he  takes  the  narrow  strip  of  sea-lion  skin 
and  pushes  one  end|  through  the  holes.  Then  he  puts  one  end  of  the 
carrying-strap  to  |  one  side  and  sews  it  on.     This  sewing  goes  down- 

23  lax  apsEnxa£yasexs  lae  xut!ednq.  Wii,  laxae  bEXElEndxes  xulta£ye; 
laEm    malptengadzowe   £wadzEWasas  laxen  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£yex. 

25  Wii,  laxae  baPidxa  qlELlapEnk'e  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  qa 
£wasgEmatsexslaek'adEdzodaxaases  nEgEnose  k'.waxLo  lax£walaasa- 
sa  q!EL!ap!Enkaxs  laexiilt!edEq.  Wa,  laxae  bEXEtendxes  xiilta£ye. 
La£me  gwanax£ldEq  laxes  gildolase  qa  nEgExLiiles.  Wii,  lii  t  !ep  !edEq 
(ja  q!asox="wIdesexs  lae  LlEnqEmsalases  k'lawayowe  lax    ewiinxa£yas 

30  la  hEmaldEngale  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yaqe  L!Enqa£ya.  Wii, 
heEm  g-aylmxsalasltsa  qlEniiLa  qo  q'.Enq!Egox£wIdLEq.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  et!ed  kadEdzotsa  nEgEnose  k!waxLo  laxa  maldEne 
laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yaxs  lae  xfiit!edEq.  Wii,  lii  bExlEndEq. 
Wii,   la  aLEboplEnk'e   £wasgEmasas   laxEns    q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex. 

35  HeEm  aoxLaasLEsa  q  Iwaats  !eLasa  LEmgayowe.  Wii,  lii  et!ed  kadE- 
dzotsa  nEgEnSse  k!waxL6  laxa  kModEnas  £wadzEwase  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana£yaxs  lae  xult!edEq.  Wii,  lii  bExlEndEq.  Wii,  laEm 
o"ilt!eq.  Wa,  heEm  q!Enq!Eq!oyoltsexa  ewunxa£yasa  q  Iwaats  !eLasa 
LEmlEmg'ayowe.    Wii,  gil£mese  gwfdExs  lae  yawas£id  ax£stEnts  laxa 

40  £wape£wi£laLE£waq!waats!eLe.  Wii,  lexa£mese  k'les  la  ax£stanoseda 
aoxLaasLe.  Wii,  k'  lest  !a  ge£stala  laxa  £wapaxs  lae  ax£wflstEndEq. 
Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  q!Enyowe  bEXEk"  pESEnesa  LiexEne  qa£s  £nex-sales 
laxes  L!Enqa£ye.  Wii,  laEm  ax£aLElots  6ba£yasa  a5xLaase  lax  ono- 
dzEXsta£yas.     Wii,  la  q  !aq  lEnkinaq.     Wii,  la£me  haxElame  q  !Ena£yas 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  111 

ward  ||  to  the  bent  bottom  of  the  wedge-bag.     He  does  |  the  same  at  45 
the  other  side.  |  Then  the  wedge-bag  is  finished.  | 

Spruce-Roots  and  Cedar- Withes. — When  the  season  approaches  when  I 
the  huckleberries  are  ripe,  |  the  woman  makes  her  huckleberry- 
basket,  and  |  it  is  ready  when  the  berries  are  ripe.  She  takes  her 
digging-stick  and  her  small  ax,  |  going  to  the  place  where  small 
spruce-trees  are  growing,  and  where  she  knows  that  the  ground  is 
soft.  As  soon  as  ||  she  reaches  there,  she  pushes  one  end  of  her  clam-  5 
digging  stick  into  the  ground  and  |  pries  up  the  roots  of  a  young 
spruce-tree.  As  soon  as  the  roots  come  out  of  the  ground,  |  she 
picks  out  thin  and  small  ones.  She  takes  hold  of  them  and  pulls 
them  out.  |  These  may  be  more  than  a  fathom  in  length;  |  and  when 
she  reaches  the  end,  she  takes  her  small  ax  and  ||  chops  them  off.  10 
The  woman  who  is  getting  the  roots  |  continues  doing  this.  When 
she  has  enough,  she  coils  them  up  and  ties  them  |  with  small  roots 
in  four  places,  so  that  they  are  this  way  :  /0^^^.  I  As  soon 
as  this  is  done,  she  carries  them  in  her  right  W  ^  hand  and  | 
goes  home.     She  puts  them  down  in   a   cool   11  M  corner    of 

the   house.    ||    Then    she    takes    a    mat    and    ^Sas^^  spreads   it  15 
over  them.     As  soon  as  she  has  done  this,  |  she  again  takes  her  small 
ax  and  goes- to  a  place  where  young  cedar-trees  grow;  |  and  when  she 
reaches  there,  she  looks  for  those  that  have  straight  long  branches,  | 
that  are  not  twisted;  and  when  she  finds  a  |  young  cedar-tree  that 

lax  gwanax£ldaasas  oxsda£yasa  q!waats!e.     Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gvvex-  45 
-rIdxa  apsana^ye.     Wa,  la£me  gwala  q!waats!;isa  LEinlEmgayu  laxeq. 

Spruce-Roots  and  Cedar- Withes. — Wii,  he£maaxs  lae  Elaq  gwat  !Enxa     1 
laegegaex£ededa  tslEdaqe,  qa£s  lExile,  qa£s  k"!Elats!ela  gwadEme,qo 
iiEgExLodi.6.     Wii,   la  ax£edxes  k-  '.Elakwe  LE£wis   sayobEmaxs   lae 
laxa  alewadzEmxEkula  laxes  q!ale  tElqliits  t!Eka.     Wa,  gil£mese 
lag'aa  laqexs,  lae  ts  !ExubEtElsas  oba£yases  k"  Islakwe,  qaJs  k  !wet  lEqol-    5 
sElexa  L!eL!op!Ek-asa  alewadzEme.     Wii,  gihcmese  laqolsa  l!cl!op!e- 
kaxs  lae   aleqaxa   nEqEla  wlta,   lae  diiyodEq,   qa£s  HEx£uqolsEleq. 
Wii,  la  £nal£nEinp!Ena  esEgiyo  laxEns  baLiiqe  awasgEinasas.     Wii, 
g'iPmese  lag'aa   laxa   abasemiisexs   lae   dax£ldxes   sayobEme,    qa£s 
tsEX'SEndeq.     Wii,      axusii£mese     he      gweg'ilaxs      L!aL!op!Ekaeda  10 
tslEdaqe.    Wii,  g'il£mese  heloLExs  lae  q!Elo£nakulaq,  qa£s  yael£aLElo- 
dalesa  wiswEltowe  LloplEk-  laxa  mox£wIdalaLEla  laq  xa  g  a  gwiilega 
{jig.).     Wii,  gil£mese  gwfdExs  lae  q!Elxidases  helk-!ots!ana£ye  laqexs 
lae   nii£nakwa.     Wii,  la,   qlElxwalllas   laxa   wiidanegwilases    g-okwe 
qa£s  ax£edexa  le£wa£ye,  qa£s  naxusEmliles  laq.    Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  15 
lae  et!ed    dax-£idxes    sayobEme,  qa£s  liixat!    laxa  dziidzESEXEkula. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  lag-aa  laqexs  lae  alex£Idxa  g'tlsgllt !iis  tEXEme,  ylxa 
£nEmiigitexa    k'lese    sElplEna.     Wa,    g-ll£mese    qlaxa    £nEmts!aqe 


112  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL 


20  has  these,  she  chops  it  down.  ||  When  it  falls,  she  breaks  off  the 
straight  branches;  and  when  |  she  has  enough,  she  puts  the  thick 
ends  together  and  takes  thin  cedar-withes  |  and  twists  them.  When 
this  is  done,  she  ties  them  around  the  thick  ends  of  the  cedar-twigs.  [ 
She  ties  them  ^_j£SS5=j^^l||gK  at  four  places,  so  that  they  are 
in  this  way:  /^^S5S^  ^^%~    |  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she  car 

2.5  ries  them  home  on  her  shoulder;  and  when  ||  she  enters  the 
house,  she  puts  them  down  at  the  place  where  she  always  sits.  | 
There  she  unties  the  cedar-withes;  and  after  they  have  been  taken 
off,  |  she  strips  off  the  branches  of  the  first  one  that  she  takes  up; 
and  after  she  has  taken  them  all  off,  |  she  begins  at  the  thin  end  of 
the  cedar-withes  and  splits  them  in  two  |  towards  the  thick  end,  right 

30  through  the  heart.  After  they  have  been  spht  in  two,  ||  she  puts 
down  the  other  half  and  splits  the  first  half  again  in  two;  |  and  after 
this  has  been  split  in  two,  she  takes  up  |  the  other  half  which  she  had 
put  down  on  the  floor,  and  splits  it  in  two  also.  |  Now  the  cedar- 
withes  have  been  split  into  four  pieces.     When  this  has  been  done,  | 

35  she  takes  up  another  cedar-withe  and  strips  off  the  branches;  ||  and 
after  this  has  been  done,  she  splits  it  in  the  same  way  as  she  did  the 
first  one;  |  and  she  continues  doing  so  with  the  other  cedar-withes;  | 
and  after  sphtting  them,  she  picks  out  the  pieces  containing  the  sap  | 
and  places  them  by  themselves;  and  she  takes  the  remainder  of 


dzEsEq"    ax'Enalaqexs   lae   hex£ida£Eru  soplExodEq.     Wii, giPmese 

20  t!ax£IdExs  lae  dzadzatiiqEwaxa  eketEla  tEXEina.  Wa,  g-tl£mese. 
heloLExs  lae  q!op!exLEndEq,  qa£s  ax£edexa  wile  giltla  dEwexa, 
qa£s  sElpledeq.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalsxs  lae  yil£aLElots  lax  6xLa£yas. 
Wa,  lii  ni6x£wldale  ytLa£yas  laq.  Wa,  lii  ga  gwiilaxs  lae  gwala  {Jig.). 
Wa,  gtl£mese  gwala  lae  wex-sEyap!alaqexs  g"axae  na£nakwa.     Wii, 

25  g  il-mese  laeL  laxes  g'okwaxs  lae  ax£alilas  laxes  hcniEnelase  klwaelasa. 
Wa,  la  qwelalax  yiLEinases  tayaxamanEme.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wi£lawa 
lae xikalax q !wak' !Ena£yases g"ale dax£itsE£\\ a .  Wa, gil£mese £wl;la- 
gilEnxs  lae  giibEndEx  wilEtayasa  tEXEmaxs  lae  paxsEndEq  guyo- 
IeLi  lax  oxLa£yas  naqlEgEndalax  domaqas.     Wa,  g  il£mese  pax'saa- 

MO  kuxs  lae  gigalllaxa  apsodllasexs  lae  etts!End  pax'SEndxa  apsodilasa 
la  gaela.  Wa,  g  il£Emxaawise  la  pax'saakuxs  lae  g'igalllasexs  lae 
et'.ed  dag'ililaxa  aps5delexa  g'ilxde  katlalelEms,  qa£s  paxsEndeq. 
Wa,  laEm  moxuseda  £nEmts!aqe  tExEma.  Wii,  giPmese  gwala  lae 
etled  dag  llilaxa  £nEmts!aqe  tEXEma,  qa£s  x'Ik'alex  q!wiik!Ena£yas. 

35  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  laaxat!  pax'sEndEq  laxes  gweg-ilasaxa  gilx'de 
papEX'salaso£s.  Wii,  axusii£mese  he  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe  tEXEma. 
Wii,  gil£mese  £wl£la  la  paaktixs  lae  mamEuoqEwaxa  ts!ets!Exeg'a- 
'yases  pa£ye  qa  q  lap  '.ales.     Wa,  la,  ax£edxa  paa£ye  qa£s  ytLBmdes  laq 


boas]  INDUSTEIES  113 

what  she  split  and  ties  it  together  [  in  this  way :    ^^^^^-— -,   She  does 
the  same  to   the  inner  part.     As  soon   ||    as    3||i=|^2^      every-  40 
thing  has  been  tied   together,  she   lays    the    *'        ^^^^         withes 
over  her  fire  |  to  get  dry;  for  when  she  splits  them,  the  bark  also 
comes   off.  |  After  this   has    been   done,  she   takes   the  roots    and 
unties  them,    |  and  she  straightens  them  out.     Then  she  takes  good  | 
straight-splitting  red-pine  wood  and  splits  it  like  a  ||  pair  of  tongs.  45 
She  takes  a  thin  root  and  ties  it  at  a  place  j  four  finger-widths  from 
the  unsplit  end;  |  and  after  doing  so,  she  takes  her  straight  knife 
and  |  cuts  off  the  end  of  the  tongs  which  serve  for  stripping  off  the 
bark  of  the  roots,  and  |  thus  the  end  is  sharp.     She  cuts  it  again  at  the 
end  where  she  tied  the  tongs  with  roots.     As  soon  as  this  has  been 
finished,  ||  she  puts  it  into  the  floor  close  to  the  fire,  |  with  the  split  50 
end  upward,  and  the  sharp  end  in  the  ground,  leaning  (outwards)  | 
towards  the  fire,  in  this  way:  m  As  soon  as  this  has 

been  done,  |  she  takes  one  /(u  of  the  long  pieces  of 

root  and  coils  it  up  again.         ffl  Then    |    she   puts   it 

on  the  middle  of  the   fire        » a^&_  takes  her  tongs,  and || 

holds  the  root  with  them.     Then  she   turns  it  until  all  the  bark  has  55 
been  burnt  black.  |  As  soon  as  the  bark  has  been  burnt  black,  |  she 
takes  it  off  with  the  tongs  and  puts  it  down  next  to  the  implement  foi- 
st ripping  off  the  bark  1  of  the  root.     Then  she  takes  the  end  of  it  and 
puts  it  between  the  |  legs  of  the  tongs  for  stripping  off  the  bark  from 

ga  gwalega  (Jig.).     Wa,  laxae  heEin  gwex-£idxa  naq!Ega£ye.     Wa, 
gtt£meseewiela  la  yaeLEmalaxs  lae  LesaLElots  lax  nExstaeyases  lEgwile,  40 
qa  lEmx£wides  qaxs  hirmae  lawalats  xexExu£ima£yasexs  lae  papEX'sa- 
laq.     Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae    ax£edxa    Llopteke    qaes    qwelalex 
yiLEmas.     Wa,  la  daHdsq  qa£s  dal£allleq.     Wa,  la  dax^ldxa  eg'aqwa 
lax  xasE£we    wunagula.     Wa,    la    xox£widEq     qa    yuwes    gwexsa 
tslesLfdax.     Wa,    la    ax£edxa    wile  L!6p!Ek"a,  qa£s  yil£aLElodes  laxa  45 
modEne  laxEiis  q!waq!\vax'ts!ana£yex    gagiLEla  laxa  k!ese  xokwa- 
Wa,    gih'mese    gwalExs    lae    dax£Idxes    nExxala  klawayowe  qaes 
k!ax£wldex     6ba£yasa     xlkala\yax     xEx,,£una£yasa     LloplEke    qa 
exbes  g'iig  iLEla  laxa  la  yil-'Ene  L.!op!Ek-a.     Wa,  g'il'mese  gwalExs    ■ 
lae    ts!ExubEtal!las    obaeyas   laxa     onalisases    lEgwile.     Wa,    laEm  50 
ek!Eba£ya  xokwaxs   laaLal  gebElalllEles  ex-ba£ye  laxes  Llastalae- 
nasye  laxa  lEgwile,  g'a  gwalega  (Jig.).     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
dax'Idxa  £nEints!aqe  giltla  LloplEk'a,  qa£s  xwelaqe  qEs£Idqexs  lae 
L!Ex-LEnts  lax  iiEXLaliises  lEgwile.     Wa,  la  dax£Idxes  tslesLala  qa£s 
k-!lp!ldes  laqexs  lae  lalextLalas  qa  £naxwes  k!wek!uniElk'Eye  xexu£u-  55 
na£yas.     Wa,   g  il5mese  £naxwa  la  k!wek!umElk'Eyax£kle  xEx£iina- 
£yasexs  lae  k!ip!idqEs  k!lp!aliles  lax  mak' !EXLa£yasa  Laele  xukala- 
yax  XEx,1£una-yasa  LloplEk'e.     Wa,  la  dabEndEX  oba£yas  qa£s  k"ak"E- 
todesa   LlaxIaxELalakwe    L!op!Ek'    lax    awagawa£yasa    xika'ayax 
75052—21—35  eth— i-t  1 8 


114  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

60  the  roots  that  have  been  burnt  over  the  fire.  ||  She  takes  hold  of  the 
top  of  the  legs  of  the  tongs  with  the  ;  left  hand,  presses  them  together, 
while  she  pulls  the  roots  through  the  tongs  with  the  |  right  hand. 
Then  the  bark  |  peels  off,  and  the  sap  comes  out.  As  soon  as  all  |  the 
bark  is  off,  she  puts  the  other  end  in  and  strips  off  the  bark  of  the  || 

65  root  that  she  is  holding;  and  she  continues  for  a  lung  time  j  pulling 
it  to  and  fro.  stripping  oil'  the  bark  of  the  roots  by  pulling  them 
through.  She  only  |  stops  doing  this  when  the  root  is  white  all  over, 
for  they  are  dry.  |  After  doing  this,  she  takes  another  |  root  and  does 
the  same  as  she  did  with  the  first  one  with  which  she  was  working;  || 

70  and  she  only  stops  when  all  the  bark  is  stripped  off.  |  Then  she  splits 
them  in  two  through  the  middle,  splitting  the  whole  length;  |  and 
after  splitting  them  in  two,  she  splits  the  halves  into  two  again.  | 
Then  she  splits  each  root  into  four  pieces.     She  continues  doing  this 

75  with  |  all  the  roots;  and  when  they  have  all  been  split,  she  ||  scrapes 
them.  Then  she  takes  her  husband's  straight  knife  |  and  puts  it 
down  at  the  left-hand  side  of  her  foot.  She  takes  |  the  split  root 
with  the  left  hand  and  puts  it  |  against  the  right  side  of  the  heel  of 
her  left  foot.   |  Then  with   the   right  hand  she  takes  the  straight 

80  knife  ||  and  puts  the  back  of  the  knife  against  the  root,  and  presses 
it  down  against  it,  j  and  pulls  the  root  through  with  the  right  hand. 
Then  she  turns  the  root  over,  |  pulling  it  through  between  the  heel  of 


60  xExu£un;Vcyasa  LloplEkaxs  lae  dax£Itses  g  Emxolts!ana£ye  lax  oxta- 
£yas  waxsan5dzExta;yase\s  hie  q  Iweq  Iwasalaqexs  lae  nex£Itses 
hetk-!otts!ana£ye  laxa  LloplEke.  Wa,  ne£mis  la  qusalats  xexu£- 
iina£yas.  Wa,  laxae  saaqale  saaqas.  Wa,  g  ilunese  £wIlgilEnxes 
xEx"£una£yaxs  lae  xweTldEq  qa£s  ogwaqe  xlkodEX  xExu£una£yases 

65  dfdasox'de.  Wii,  lii  geg  illl  aedaaqanaxwa  kak'Etots  laxes  x'lka- 
layax  xExu£iina£yasa  i.lOplEke  qa£s  xwelaqe  nexsodEq.  Wii,  al£mese 
gwal  he  gwegilaqexs  lae  alaklala  la  emElk"!Ena  qaxs  lae  lEmx£un- 
x,£Ida.  Wii,  giPmese  gwralExs  lae  et!ed  (lax'idxa  £nEints'aqe 
LloplEka.     Wii,  laxae  aEm  naqEmgiltilxes  gilxde  gwegilasa.     Wii, 

70  al£mese  gwalsxs  Lie  wiia  la  x  ikEwakwe  >Ex"£una£yas.  Wii,  lii 
naqlEqax  domaqasexs  lae  pax-£idEq  hebEndah.A  awasgEmasas.  Wa, 
gil£mese  maltslExs  lae  ettslEnd  paxsEndxa  waxsodllas.  Wii,  la£me 
moxusEndxa  £nal£nEmts  !aqe  L'.oplEk'a.  Wa,  ax'sirmese  he  gwegilax 
£waxaasasa  L!op'.Eke.     Wa,   g  ihniese    ewPla    la  papEx;saakuxs   lae 

75  kexet!edEq.  Wii,  laEm  ax£edEx  nExxiila  k"!away5ses  la'wiinEme, 
qa£s  dzex£walileses  gEmxoltsIdza£ye  goguyowa.  Wii,  lii  dax-£Itses 
gEmx5its !ana£ye  afyaso  laxa  paakwe  LloplEka,  qa£s  pax£aLElodes 
lax  helk'!otsEma£yas  mEk!iixLax'sIdza£yases  gEmxoltsidza£ye  g'ogu- 
yowa.     Wa,  lii  dax£itses  helk!6ts!ana£ye  laxa  nExxiila  klawayowa 

80  qa£s  kat!Endes  awiga£yas  laxa  LloplEke.  W;i,  lii  tEsalakats  laqexs 
lae  nex£edxa   LloplEk-ases   helk'!6tts!ana£ye.     Wii,   la  xweli£liilaxa 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  115 

her  foot  |  and  the  back  of  the  straight  knife.  Then  she  only  stops 
doing  this  ||  when  the  knife  does  not  get  wet  any  more.  Then  the  85 
scraped  root  is  really  |  white,  because  it  is  very  dry:  and  it  |  is  pliable. 
That  is  the  reason  why  it  does  not  break ;  for  she  is  |  going  to  make  a 
well-made  basket  out  of  it  to  shake  the  huckleberries  into.  After  | 
she  has  done  this,  she  does  the  same  with  the  cedar  withes,  and  |  she 
treats  them  in  the  same  way.  scraping  ||  the  water  out  of  them.  ]  S9 

Cedar- Withes.  —While  the  man    is    making    the    digging-stick  for  1 
digging  |  clover,  his  wife  goes  into  the  woods  looking  for  long  cedar- 
branches  that  |  split  straight,  which  are  the  thickness  of  our  fingers,  | 
and  which  also  have  no  branches.     They  only  have  ||  leaves  on  each  5 
side,   and   these   are   called    |    "cedar-branches."     As   soon    as    the 
woman  finds  the  cedar-branches,  |  she  pulls  them  down  and  breaks 
them  off.     Sometimes  there  are  many  on  ]  one  cedar-tree,  and  there 
are  not  many  on  other  cedar-trees.  ]  When  the  woman  who  gathers 
cedar-branches  gets  enough,  ]|  she  ties  one  end  of  the  branches  which  10 
have  been  put  together  with  twisted  cedar-branch  rope;  and  |  after 
tying  up  one   end,  she  goes  home  carrying  on  her  shoulders  the 
branches  which  she  has  gathered.    |    She  puts  them  down  in  a  cool 
corner  of  the  house.     Then  |  she  sits  down  and  sphts  them  through 
the  heart.     When  |  they  have  been  split  in  two,  she  splits  each  half 
in  two,  and  ||  she  sphts  them  again  in  two,_and  she  sphts  them  once  15 

l  !op  tekaxs  lae  nexsawi£lalaq  laxes  sniEk  !uxLax"sidza£yases  gogtiyowe  82 
lo£  awlg"a£yasa  nExx"ala  klawayowa.  Wa,  abniese  gwal  he  gweg'i- 
laqexs  lae  k'!eas  la  kltingegesa  klawayowe.  Wa,  laicm  alaklala  la 
miEl'mElk' lEneda  kexEk"  L,!op!Ek"axs  lae  lEmlEmx-una.  Wa,  he£mi-  85 
sexs  lae  peqwa.  Wa,  he£mis  lag"ilas  k'les  eai. !ema  <[axs  alak'liilae 
aek!aakwa  lExa'yaxs  k* telats letaxa  gwadEme.  Wa,  giPmese 
gwalExs  lae  heEmxat !  gwex'^dxa  tEXEme.  Wa,  laEinxae  he  gwegila- 
qexs  lae  k'exalax  "wapaga'yas.  Sii 

Cedar-Withes. — Wit,  hemiexs  lae  eaxEletla  bEgwaiiEinaxa  ts  !oyayaxa  ^ 
LEX'sEme,  wa  la  gEiiEmas    la    laxa   ai. !e    tayaxamax  tExEina  laxa 
g'ilsg'ilt!a  nEqEla    tsxEmsa    wilkwexa  yu   awagwItEns  qlwaqhvax"- 
fcs!anacye.      Wa,  heunesexs    kleiisae    LlEnaka,  juxs  a£mae  qwagi- 
lEna'j-a  ts!ap!axniEnexwe    lax   waxsanodza£yas.     Wa,  heEin  Lega-  5 
dEs  tEXEme.     Wa,  giFmese  q!ada  tayaxamaxa  tEXEmaxs  lae  hex£i- 
da£Ein     dzEtaxElax -idi:(|.  yixs    enalenEmp lEnae    cj!exLaleda     'nEm- 
tslaqe  wllxuxa   tEXEme.     Wa,  la  k!es  qlexLaleda  waokwe  wilkwa. 
Wa,  g  ilmiese  heloLa  fcayaxEmaxa  tEXEmaxs  lae  yiLEindxes  tEXE- 
maxs  lae  q !ap !egEinakwa  visa  sElbEkwe  dEwexa.     Wa,  gll£mese  ^wal  10 
ytLEmdqexs  lae  namakwa  laxes  g'okwe   wlkilaxes    tayaxamanEme 
tExEma.     Wa,    la    ax£alilaq     laxa    wudanegwllases     gokwe.     Wa, 
hex£ida£mese  kbvag-allla  qa£s  dzEtledeq  naqiEqax  domaqas.     Wa, 
gil£mese    la    dzEts!aakuxs    lae    paxsEndxa    apsodele.      Wa,  laxae 
ettslEnd    pax'SEndEq.      Wa,    laxae    heloxusEiidaxat '.    paxsEndEq.  15 


116  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [etu.ann.35 

16  more  in  two.  |  Sometimes  the  branches  are  split  into  twenty  pieces, 
if  |  the  woman  who  splits  the  branches  is  expert  in  splitting  them 
into  |  thin  pieces.  When  they  arc  all  split,  she  puts  them  away.  ] 
1  Spruce-Roots  (1) . — Then  she  gets  ready  again  to  go  into  the  woods 
to  dig  spruce-roots  whereshe  knows  that  the  ground  is  soft,  |  and  where 
young  spruce-trees  are  growing,  for  really  long  [  and  thin,  and  without 
5  branches,  are  the  roots  of  young  spruce-trees  in  soft  ground.  ||  When 
she  finds  them,  she  pulls  out  the  ]  root,  as  it  is  showing  half  way 
on  the  ground.  She  pulls  out  the  whole  length,"  |  for  they  are  long; 
and  when  she  comes  to  the  point  where  it  divides,  |  she  bites  it 
off,  so  that  it  breaks  off,  and  she  does  so  with  the  others;  and  |  when 

10  she  thinks  she  has  enough  roots,  she  takes  the  roots  |]  and  coils  them 
up.  Then  she  takes  a  long  thin  root  and  |  ties  it  to  one  side  of  the 
coil.  After  she  has  |  done  so,  she  carries  the  coil  of  roots  that  she 
has  obtained  and  goes  home  to  her  house,  |  and  she  puts  it  down  in  a 
cool  corner  of  the  house.     Then  |  she  sits  down  and  unties  the  tying 

15  of  the  coded  roots;  and  ||  when  the  tying  is  ail  oil',  she  carries  the 
uncoded roots  |  and  puts  them  down  alongside  the  fire  of  her  house. 
She  takes  the  tongs  |  and  ties  a  thin  root  around  its  neck,  so  that 
they  may  not  split  when  she  ]  puff-  oil'  the  bark  of  the  root.  When  this 
is  done,  she  takes  |  one  of  the  long  roots  and  puts  it  over  the  fire,  || 

16  Wa,  la  £nal£nEmp!Ena  maltsEmgustox"seda.  enEmts!aqe  ek'etEla 
tEXEma  laxa  tstedaqaxs  eg'ihvatae  lax  papEX'salaxa  tEXEme  ytxs 
pElspadza£e.     Wa,  g  ih'mese  ewi£la  la  paakuxs  hie  gexaq. 

1  Spruce-Roots  (1). — Wa,  laxae  xwanaHdExs  lae  ai.e;sta  laxa  axle 
qa£s  lii  Llop'.Ekax  L!op!Ekasa  alewase  laxes  q!ale  tElqlus  tlEka, 
ytx  qlwaxasasa  alewadzEme,  qaxs  be£mae  alaklala  gllsgiltlS 
EketEle  wlswule  Lloptekasa  tElqlusas  t  !i;ka  qlwaxatsa  alewadzE- 
5  me.  Wa,  giFmese  q!aqexs  lae  hex£idaEm  gElxiiqolsaxa  LloplE- 
kaxs  neldyiwElsae  laxa  t  hika.  Wa,  la  nexaq  laxes  awasgEinasaxs 
gpilsg'ilsta£e.  Wa,  g-tl£mese  lagaa  lax  qExbax-£idaasasexs  lae  q!Ex-- 
sEndEq  qa  eleIscs.  Wa,  a£mise  la  he  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe.  Wa, 
gil£mese  k'otaq  laEm  heliiles  L!op!Eg-anEmaxs  lae  ax£edxa  Lloplsk'e 

10  qa£s  ciEs£edecj  qa  q!Elx£waiesexs  lae  ax£edxa  wlltowe  LloplEka  qa£s 
yil-'Ides  laxa  apsaneqwasa  la  wElx'ts !Ewaku  L!op!Ek-a.  Wa,  g'iPmese 
gwalExs  lae  qlElxulaxes  L!op!Eg'anEmaxs  lae  naenakwa  laxes  gokwe 
qaes  laxat!  q!Elx£walilas  lax  wudanegwelases  gokwe.  Wii,  la  hexei- 
daEm  klwag'allla  qa£s  rpvelodex  yiLewa£yases  qlElxwala  L!5|)!Eka. 

1.5  Wii,  gil'"mese  -wl'lawc  yii.ewa'yasexs  lae  dalaxa  la  dzakwala  LloplEk'a 
qa£s  la  g'enolisas  laxa  lEijwllases  gokwe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  ts!esLala 
qa£s  ylLlExodesa  wlltowe  Lloptek-  laq,  qa  kMeses  xox£wIc1e1  qo  lal 
xlkalax  xEx£una£yasa  L!op!Eke.  Wa,  g!l£mese  gwalExs  lae  axsed- 
xa  £nEmts!acpl  laxa  gilstowe  LloplEk'a  qa£s  k'ati. Elides  laxa  lEgwlle 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  117 

beginning  next  to  where  it  is  being  held,  and  pulling  it  slowly,  |  until  20 
it  gets  hot  all  over.     As  soon  as  the  bark  is  hot,  |  she  puts  it  be- 
tween the  tongs  next  to  |  where  she  is  holding  it  with  the  left  hand. 
She  squeezes  the  legs  of  the  |  tongs  together  under  it.     Then  she  pulls 
it  through  with  her  ||  right  hand.     Then  the  bark  peels  off.  |  As  soon  25 
as  all  the  bark  is  off,  she  puts  it  down  on  the  |  left-hand  side,  and  she 
takes  up  another  root  and  |  puts  it  over  the  fire,  and  she  does  the  same 
as  she  did  before  |  to  the  first  one  at  which  she  was  working  when  she 
put  it  over  the  fire.  ||  When  all  the  bark  has  been  taken  off  the  roots,  |  30 
she  splits  them  before  they  are  really  dry.  |  She  begins  splitting  at 
the   thin   end   through   the  heart,  |  going   towards    the   thick   end. 
When  it  has  been  split  in  two,  she  takes  |  each  half  and  splits  it  again 
in  two;  and  when  this  has  been  split,  ||  she  splits  it  again  in  two;  and  35 
she  does  the  same  to  the  other  half,  ]  for  the  woman  wishes  to  have 
roots  split  into  thin  strips  |  to  weave  the  basket  that  she  is  making. 
Sometimes  she  splits  eight  strips  out  of  one  |  clean  root  when  she  is 
splitting  it.     When  it  has  all  been  split,  |  she  takes  the  cedar-bark 
splitting-bone  (the  ulna  of  the  foreleg  of  the  ||  deer)  and  grinds  it  40 
well,  so  that  it  has  a  sharp  point  and  also  so  that  |  it  is  thin.     That 
is  the  bone  for  splitting  cedar-bark  of  the  woman  when  she  is  making 
mats,  |  when  she  is  splitting  cedar-bark,  and  when  she  is  making 


g"iigiLEla  laxa  makala  lax  dalasE£wasexs  lae  aoyaa  nex'nakulaq  qa  20 
ek'es  ts  !Elgu£nakulaena£yas.     Wa,  gilmiese  ts!Elx£wid  £naxwe  ogwi- 
da£yas   xEklumasexs    lae    k'iik'Etotsa   niakTila    lax    dalasE£wasexs 
lae  q!wes£itses  gEmxolts  !ana£ye    lax  wax'sanodzExsta£yasa  tslesLa- 
liixs    bEnxtollla.       Wa,    he£mis     la     nexsalatsexa    LloplEk'e    vises 
helk!olts!ana£ye.      Wa,    he£mis    la    qitsalatsa    XExu£una£yas.     Wa,  25 
g'ilmiese  £wl-iaweda  XExu£una£yasexs   lae    k-at!allfas   laxes   gEmxa- 
gawallle.     Wa,  laxae    et!ed    dax-'Idxa    £nEints!aqe    L.'op.'Eka    qaes 
k  atLEndes    laxa    lEgwzle.     Wa,    laEm    aEmxat!    nEcjEingiltEwexes 
gweg'ilasaxes   gllx'de    axsE£waxs    Laxde    LlEx'LEnts    laxes   lEgwlla 
Llopteke.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£la  la  saq !wag"idEkwa  LloplEk'axs  lae  30 
ha£yalo£malaa  jiapEx'sEndqexs    k'!es£mae    alaEm    lEmx£wida.     Wa, 
laEm  he  g  11    pax'^tso^se   wilba£ya   yixs    naqteqaax  domaqas  gwa- 
yolEla  lax  L!Ekuma£vas.    Wa,  gil£mese  la  paxsaakuxs  lae  ax£edxa 
apsodile    qa£s    et!ede.    pax'sEndEq.     Wa,    gil£mese    paxsaakwa   lae 
ettslEndaxat !  pax'sEndaxaaq.     Wa, la  he.Emxat!  gwex'Idxa  apsEX'-  35 
siis  yixs    £nek'aeila  tslEdaqe    qa    pElspslesa    paakwe    L!op!Ek'a    c^a 
k4!ilg'Ems  lExelas.  yixs  £nfd£nEmp!Enae  malEg'iyoxuseda  £nEmts!aqe 
ek'etEla  iJoplEk'axs  lae  paakwa.     Wii,  gib'mese  swi£la   la  paakuxs 
lae  ax£edxa  qlwetanaxa  SEg"tnodza£yas  galEmalg'Iwa£ye  g'oguyosa 
gewase,  yixs   lae    aek-!aak"    g-exEkwa    qa    ex'bes.      Wa,  he£mis  qa  40 
pEldzowes.      Wa,  heEm    qhvetanasa    tstedaqaxs   k-!itaaxa  le£wa£ye 
yixs    lae    papExsalaxa    dEnase    loxs    lae    dzEdzExs£alaxa    dEnase. 


118  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  36 

43  narrow  strips  of  bark.  |  This  she  uses  when  she  is  working  at  the 
roots.     She  stretches  out  |  her  left  foot  on  the  floor,  and  she  takes  one 

45  end  of  the  split  ||  root  with  her  left  hand  and  she  puts  down  a  root  | 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  her  heel.  |  She  takes  hold  with  the  right 
hand  of  the  bone  cedar-bark  splitter  and  she  j  lays  it  on  the  ]  root 
and  presses  the  bone  implement  against  the  root.     Then  |  she  pulls  it 

50  through,  pressing  it  tightly  against  her  heel.  ||  Thus  she  squeezes  out 
all  the  sap  in  the  root.  If  there  is  |  much  water  in  it,  she  pulls  the 
root  through  four  times  its  whole  length  between  her  heel  and  the 
bone.     When  |  all  the  sap  is  out,  the  routs  become  really  white,  flat 

55  split  |  roots.  She  dot's  this  with  all  of  (the  roots).  When  ||  all  the 
roots  have  been  scraped,  she  coils  them  up  and  |  puts  them  away 
for  a  while.  | 
1  Spruce-Roots  (2). — The  woman  takes  her  ax  and  her  |  clam-digging 
stick  and  her  cedar-bark  belt,  and  she  carries  them  |  while  she  is 
going  into  the  woods,  where  she  knows  that  small  spruce-trees  are 
growing  and  |  where  the  soil  is  soft.  When  she  comes  to  the  place, 
5  she  puts  down  her  ax  ||  ami  her  digging-stick.  She  takes  her  cedar- 
hark  belt,  and  she  |  puts  the  corners  of  her  blanket  over  her  left 
shoulder,  and  she  puts  the  cedar-bark  \  bell  around  her  waist  over 
the  blanket.     She  pins  the  blanket  with  a  pin  of  |  yew-wood  shaved 


43  Wii,  he£Em  ax£ets5£sa  Llaxloplsxsllaxa  LloplEke.  Wit,  la  dzex- 
'walllases    gEmxoltsIdza£ye  goguyowa.      Wa,  la  dabEndxa  paakwe 

45  L.'oplEka  vises  gEmxolts!iina£ye.  Wa,  la  k-at lauelotsa  Llophsk-e 
lax  lielk-  !odEnwa£yas  ;mEk !uxLax-sidzaeyases  gEmxoltsIdza£ye.  Wa, 
lit  dax-'Itses  helk'!olts!ana£ye  liixa  qlwetanaxs  lae  k'attents  laxa 
iJoplEke.  Wa,  la  tEsalakatses  qlwetana  laxa  L!op!Ek-axs  lae 
nex£edqexs  lae  t EtslExi.ax  sld/.ex  £mEk!iixLax-sidza£yas  g'5gflyowas. 

50  Wii,  he£mis  la  xlk'alats  ewapagaeyasa  iJopteke.  Wii,  g'tl-'mese 
q !eq laqElaxes  £wapagaeyaxs  lae  moplEna  nexsodxa  iJoplEk'e  laxes 
ewasgEinase  laxes  £mEk!uxLaxsIdza£yases  g-oguyowe.  Wii,  g'IPmese 
£wi£lawe  £wapaga£yasexs  lae  alak'  !ala  la  £mElmadzowa  paakwe 
L!op!Ek-a.     Wii,  lii   he£staEin  gwex-eldxa    waokwe.     Wa,   gil£mese 

55  £wi£la  la  xlg  ikwa  LloplEkaxs  lae  aek!a  q!Elx£w!dEq  qa£s  yawas£Ide 
g'exaq. 
1  Spruce-Eoots  (2). — Wa,  la  axeededa  tslEdaqaxes  sayobEine  LE£wis 
k-  Ulakwe:  wii,  h8£meLes  dEndzEdzowe  wuseg'anowa.  Wii,  lii  dalaqexs 
lae  aaLaaqa  laxa  ai.  !e  lax  qlayasasa  alewadzEme  LE£wis  q!ale  tEl- 
q!iits  tlEk'a.  Wa,  gil'mese  lag  aa  laqexs  lae  gigaElsaxes  sayobEme 
5  LE£wis  k'lilakwe.  Wa,  la  axeedxes  dEndzEdzowe  wuseganowa  qa£s 
t!ElEX'£Idexes  £nEx£iina£yaxs  lae  qEk-iyintsa  dEndzEdzowe  wuseg'a- 
nowe  laqexs  lae  ciEnoyalaq  laqexs  lae  t!EmgExusa  k!axubaakwe 
LlEmqleda   la   t !Emt laqSlax  £nEx£una£yas   lax   gEmxoltsEyap!a£yas. 


boas]  industries  119 

to  asharp  point,  over  her  left  shoulder.  |  After  doing  so,  she  takes  her 
digging-stick,  ||  puts  one  end  into  the  ground,  and  pries  up  the  roots;  10 
and  when  |  the  roots  come  out  of  the  ground,  she  picks  out  straight 
medium-sized  roots  ]  without  branches.     She  takes  hold  of  them  and 
pulls  them  out.  |  When  she  reaches   the  thick  root  from  which  it 
branches  off,  |  she  takes  her  small  ax  and  chops  it  off.     Then  ||  she  15 
goes  back  to  the  place  where  she  started  and  takes  hold  again  of  the 
root  and  pulls  it  out  |  towards  the  thin  end;  and  when  she  comes  to 
the  place  where  |  it  branches  out,  she  takes  her  ax  and  cuts  it  off. 
Then  |  she  coils  it  up.     Some  of  the  wood-digging  women  call  this  | 
qEsHd.     Then  she  takes  the  thin  ||  roots  and  ties  them  in  four  places,  20 
in  this  way; '  and  she  continues  |  doing  so  while  she  is  getting  the 
roots.  | 

As  soon  as  she  has  enough,  she  goes  to  a  patch  of  young  cedar-trees  | 
and  looks  for  good  cedar-withes  which  are  long,  |  without  branches.  || 
She  cuts  off  those  that  are  not  twisted.  When  she  thinks  |  she  has  cut  25 
off  enough,  she  ties  them  with  twisted  cedar-  j  withes  in  four  different 
places,  in  this  way.2  After  |  she  has  done  so,  she  carries  away  what 
she  has  cut  off,  and  she  just  stops  |  to  pick  up  the  roots  which  she  has 
dug,  and  goes  home.  || 

Wa,  g  il£rnese  gwalElsExs  lae  dax£Idxes    k-  lilakwe,    qa£s    ts  !ExubE- 
tElses    6ba£yas    qaes    k!wet!EqalsElexa    LloplEk'e.      Wa,    gih'mese  10 
neEnlEngaElseda  LloplEk'axs  lae  doq!ux£idxa  hayalagite  naqElaxa 
klefise  q!waklEna£ya.     Wa,    he£mis    la    diik'lEiitsos  qa£s  nex£uqfd- 
sEleq.     Wa,   gil£rnese  lagaa   laxa   LEkwe    LloplEka,    yix    qlwaxE- 
wasasexs    lae    dax'Idxes    sayobEme,    qaes    tsExsEndeq.      Wii,    la 
gwii£sta    laxa    gag'ildzasas,    qa£s    etlede    dayodqes    nExeuqalsEleq  15 
gwagwaaqEla  lax  wilbaEyas.     Wii,  gil'"mese  lagaa  lax  q!ets!axbax-- 
£idaasasexs    lae    dax£ldxes   sayobEme,    qaes    tsExsEndeq.     Wa,    la 
q!Elx-wIdEq.     Wii,  la  Jnek-eda  waokwe  L!aL'.op!Ek!aenoxu  tsledaqa 
qES£Ida,    yixs    lae  q!Elx£wIdEq.      Wii,   lii   iix£edxa  wiswfdtowe    Llo- 
plEka, qa£s  qEx="aLElodes  laxa  mox'wldalaxa   ga   gwiilega.1    Wa,  20 
iixus;i£mese    he  gweg-ilaxs  LlaLloplEk'lae. 

Wii,  g'iPmese  heloLExs  lae  etled  qas£ida,  qa£s  la  laxa  dEnsma- 
dzExEkrdiixa  dzEsEcjwe.  Wii,  la;nie  aleqaxa  ex"Eme  tEXEmaxa  g'Tls- 
g'iltla.  Wii,  heemisex  k'leyiisae  q!wak-lEna£ya.  Wa,  he£mis  la 
tsEkaxElasosexes  dogidek-les  klilpEla.  Wii,  g  -ib'Emxaawise  kotaq  25 
laEm  hi''l=es  fcayaxamanEmaxs  laaxat!  qeqEnoydtsa  sslbEkwe  wis- 
wulto  dEwex  laxa  mox£widalaLEla  laq  xa  g'a  gwaleg'a.2  Wii,  g'il- 
£mese  gwalExs  g-axae  wlk-Elaxes  tayaxamanEme.  Wii,  a£mese  la 
dadabalaxes  LlaLloplEk'lanEmaxs    g-axae   na£nakwa  laxes  g-olcwe. 

i  See  figure  on  p.  111.  !See  figure  on  p.   ll->. 


120  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  86 

1  Cedar- Withes. — After  this  is  done,  the  man  looks  for  long  thin  |  cedar- 
withes  in  the  woods.  When  he  finds  them,  he  takes  them  and  | 
carries  them  home  to  his  house.  He  puts  one  of  them  over  |  his  lire; 
and  when  its  bark  is  thoroughly  warm,  he  takes  his  ||  tongs  and  puts 
5  the  thick  end  of  the  withes  between  them,  and  he  bites  it  |  and  pulls 
at  it  while  he  squeezes  together  the  legs  of  the  |  tong^  with  his  right 
hand.  Then  he  strips  the  bark  oif  with  the  tongs.  J  When  it  is  all  off, 
he  twists  it;  and  after  |  twisting  the  whole  length  of  it,  he  puts  it  into 
urine  while  it  is  folded  and  twisted  into  a  piece  ||  one  span  in  length, 

10  being  twisted  together  |  like  a  rope.  When  they  are  all  done  in  this 
way,  he  puts  all  of  them  into  urine  ]  and  leaves  them  there  over  night. 
Then  he  takes  them  out,  and  the  cedar-withes  turn  red  |  like  blood. 
That  is  why  they  are  put  into  |  urine,  that  they  may  not  get  rotten 
quickly.  || 

15  Cedar-Bark(l). — In  the  morning,  when  day  comes,  he  goes,  carrying  | 
his  bark-lifter;  and  when  he  comes  to  a  place  with  many  young  cedar- 
trees,  |  he  searches  for  one  that  has  no  twist  in  the  bark,  and  that  is 
a  good  tree  |  without  branches.  Immediately  he  pulls  off  cedar- 
withes  from  |  another  young   cedar-tree,  and  he  twists  them;  and 

20  after  he  has  ||  twisted  them  from  end  to  end,  he  puts  them  around  the 
butt  of  the  young  cedar-tree  ]  about  half  way  up  to  our  chest,  (half  a 
fathom)  |  above  the  ground.     He  ties  them  on  tightly  and  ties  the 


1  Cedar-Withes. --Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  aliix  gilsgilt'.a  wis- 
wuIeii  dEwex  laxa  axle.  Wa,  g'il£mese  qlaqexs  lae  ax£edEq.  Wii, 
la  dalaqexs  lae  nii£nak"  laxes  g'okwe.  Wa,  la  axxsntsa  £nEmts!aqe 
laxes  lEgwIle.  Wa,  g  il£mese  tstelxsawe  ts  !axEna£yasexs  lae  ax£edxes 
5  ts!esL&la  qa£s  axodesa  LEkuma£yas  laqexs  lae  q!E.x£IdEx  LEkuma- 
£yas  qa£s  nex£edeqexs  lae  q!weq!wasala  witxsanodzExsta£yasa 
tsIesLala  yises  helk!6tts!anafye.  Wa,  hSemis  la  x-Ikalax  ts!axEna_ 
£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wldaxs  lae  sElpledEq.  Wa,  gil£mese  labEnde 
SElpa£yasexs  lae   iixstEnts  laxa.    kwatslaxs   lae   JnEmp!Enk-    laxEns 

10  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,  yix  ewasgEmasasexs  lae  mElkwa  yo  gwex'sa 
dEiiEniex.  Wii,  g"ilemese  ewlela  la  gwalExs  lae  £wiela£stalaxa  kwatsle. 
Wa,  la  xamaslalxa  ganoLaxs  lae  ax£wustEndqexs  lae  L!EL!Ex£"wQna 
dEwexe  he  gwexs  El£Elx£unale.  Wii.  hfiEm  lag-ilas  axstano  laxa 
kwiitsle  qa  k'leses  gEj'oL  q!Cils£Ida. 

15  Cedar-Bark  (l).--Wii,  g'ih'mese  £nax,£idxa  gaalaxs  lae  qas^da  dala- 
xes  Lloklwayowe.  WTii,  gil£mese  liigaa  lax  q!a£yasa  dzEs£Eqwe; 
wa,  la  alex£Idxa  k!ese  k'!ilp!Enes  ts!axEna£ye  loxs  eketElae  yix 
k'.easae  iJeiix  £Ena£ya.  Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  dzEtax5d  lax  dEwexasa 
ogu£lame    dzEs£Eqwa.     Wa,    la    sElp!edEq.     Wii,  giPmese   labEnde 

20  sElpa£yasexs  lae  qExplegF.nts  lax  oxLa'yasa  dzEs£Eqwe.  Wa, 
laanawise    lo£    nEqlEbod    laxEns    baLaqe    wi"dg'osto£wasas    g-iix£id 


BOAS]  INDUSTRIES  121 

ends  together.  |  Now  it  is  in  this  manner:  After   this   he  23 

takes  the  |  bark-lifter  and  pushes  its  end        (!1  in  beneath  the 

twisted  withes  ||  which    are   tied    around  the  cedar-tree.  25 

Then  he  lifts  the  bark  off  the  tree.  x^\y^v^  When  |  he  is 
almost  around  the  tree,  all  the  ends  of  /  '(rA^  the  bark  are 
torn  |  into  strips  up  to  the  cedar-withes  which  are  tied  around 
the  young  cedar-tree,  and  for  this  reason  |  he  put  the  cedar- 
withes  around  the  young  cedar-tree,  so  that  the  splitting  of  the  ends 
does  not  pass  it.  j  The  torn  shreds  are  all  below  the  ring  of  cedar- 
withes,  ||  for  the  women  want  the  cedar-bark  as  broad  as  possible  30 
when  they  peel  it  off.  ]  If  they  did  not  put  the  cedar-withes  around 
the  young  cedar-tree,  |  the  bark  would  come  off  in  narrow  strips,  and 
therefore  |  they  put  the  cedar-withes  around  it.  Afterwards  he 
takes  the  cedar-withes  off.  As  soon  as  they  |  are  "IT,  he  throws  them 
away,  and  he  takes  hold  of  the  bark  and  ||  puts  the  ends  together  35 
although  they  are  split  into  shreds.  Then  he  pulls  |  upward  without 
splitting  it.  When  it  is  whole,  it  measures  |  one  hand  and  three 
finger-widths  in  width.  When  |  he  has  pulled  off  the  bark  the  length 
of  one  fathom,  |  he  steps  back  one  fathom  from  the  place  where  he 
stood  first,  from  the  j|  foot  of  the  young  cedar,  and  he  pulls  backward  40 
as  he  pulls  at  the  cedar-bark,  |  and  he  continues  doing  so.  When  he 
reaches  |  the  branches,  the  far  end  of  the  bark  that  he  is  pulling  off 
becomes  narrow  and  breaks  off;  |  and  when  it  comes  down,  he  turns 


laxa   awl'nakluse.      Wii,    la  lEk!ut!edExs    lae    iuox£wldEx   6ba£yas.  22 
Wa,  laEm  ga  gwalega   (Jig.).     Wii,  g'ilmiese  gWalExs  lae  itx£edxes 
Llokhvayowe  qaes  LlExljEtEndes    lax  banaLElasa    dEwexe,  la  qEX-- 
plegexa  dzEs£Eqwaxs  lae  l !ok !ux£widxa  tslaqEinse.     Wa,  g-il£mese  25 
Elaq    la£ste    L!ok!wa£vasexs    lae    £naxwaEm   quLEme£stale    obaeyas 
lag'aa  laxa  dEwexe  qExplegaxa  dzEs£Eqwe.      Wa,    h'eEm    lagllas 
qEx-p!eg'intsa  dEwexe  laxa  dzEs£Eqwe  qa  kMeses  hayaqeda  dzExa- 
xa    hi    quLEme£stiila    lax    obaeyasa  ts!aqEmse    laxa    dswexe    yixs 
ax£exsdaeda  ts!edaqe  qa    awadzowesa  dEnasaxs  lae    pawalax    ts!a-  30 
geg'a£yas.     Wii,   g'ilcEmlax£wise    k-!eslax    qEX-p!ek'ilalaxa    c1zes£e- 
qwaxa  dEwexe,  lalaxe  ts  lefts  !Eq  last  Glaxa  dEiiase.     Wii,  he'mis  sena- 
talasa  dEwexe.     Wa,  lii  kwelELElodxa  dEwexe.     Wii    g'il£mese    la- 
waxs    lae     ts!EX£edEq     qa£s    dax:£idexa     tslaqEinse.       Wii.     laEm 
q!ap!ex£ldxa    oba£yaxs   wax-£mae    la    quLEme£stala.      Wii,    lii    ae-  35 
k'laxs  lae  qusostodEq.      Wii,    la£me   sEnx£ldExs  lae  niEnekwe  £wa- 
dzEWasas  qa  £nEnip!Enkes  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaeyex.     Wii,  gil- 
^mese  £nEmp!Eiike  '"wasgEmasas  qiisa£yas  laxEns  biiLiixs  lae  £nEm- 
plEnk-  laxEns  baxaqe  nvalalaasas  Liklzasasa  sEnqlenoxwe  lax  oxxa- 
£yasa   dzEs£Eqwe.     Wa,  lii    LlotledExs    lae    qiisostodxa    tslaqEinse.  40 
Wa,  lii  hanal  he  gweg-ilaq.     Wii,    giPmese    lag-aa    laxa    £wiilalaa- 
sasa    L!En3kaxs    lae   wilbax£Ide    sEnganEmasexs    lae    khllbELEla. 


122  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.3B 

it  over  so  that  it  lies  on  its  inner  side,  |  with  the  sap  side  downward, 

45  and  he  pulls  off  another  piece  ||  in  the  same  manner,  and  the  same 
width  as  the  first  one.  He  does  |  the  same  with  that.  As  soon  as 
everything  has  been  taken  off  from  the  good  side  of  the  tree,  |  he 
stops.  ...  I 

This  is  the  size  of  a  young  cedar-tree.     The  bark  of  a  young  cedar- 

50  tree  is  best  |  when  it  is  two  spans  in  diameter  at  the  butt-end  ||  and 
when  the  outside  bark  is  mouldy  color.  Bark  is  good  to  be  shredded  | 
when  it  is  black  outside,  because  the  bark  is  tough,  when  the  bark 
of  the  young  cedar-tree  is  shredded.  |  Mats  and  halibut  fishing-lines 
made  of  the  bark  of  |  young  cedar-trees  last  a  long  time.  If  the  man 
takes    cedar-bark  from   a  |  large   cedar-tree,  it  is    brittle,  therefore 

55  they  do  not  use  it.  || 

When  the  bark-peeler  has  peeled  off  enough  bark,  he  begins  |  to 
take  off  the  outer  bark  of  what  he  obtained,  and  he  just  takes  the 
long  strips  |  of  what  he  has  peeled  off  and  he  measures  three  spans.  | 
Then  he  bends  it  over  |  so  as  to  break  the  outer  bark  towards  the 

60  inside,  ||  and  he  presses  the  pieces  together  on  the  inner  side  in  this 
way.1  This  is  the  place  where  |  the  outer  bark  splits  from  the  inner 
bark,  and  the  |  bark-peeler  lifts  the  broken  end  of  the  outer  bark 
and  |  peels  it  off.     When  it  is  off,  ho  measures  again  the  same  | 

43  Wit,  giHmese  gaxaxaxs  lae  hex-£ida£ma  sEnq!enoxwe  hax£wulsaq 
qa  haqiilElses  sEnganEmaxa    dEnase.     Wit,    lii   et!ed    qusodxa    he- 

45  £maxat !  £wadzowe  yix  £wiidzowasasa  g'ale  qusoyos.  Wii,  laxae  he- 
Einxat!  gwex£IdEq.  Wii,  gil£mese  Ewi*lawe  exk- !6dEna£yasexs  lae 
gwala. 

Wii,  ln"'£mesa  £w5gidasasa  dzEs£r.qwe.  Wit,  heEm  eke  dEna- 
sasa  dzEs£Eqwaxs  malp!Enx-saes  £wagidase  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!a- 

50  na£yex.  Wii,  he£misexs  qiixeg'aes  tsIaqEmse.  Wii,  ht"'£mis  ek"  k'asa- 
lasa  ts!oleg-as  tslaqEmsE,  yixs  tstexaes  dEnase  LE£wa  kasalasasa 
dzEs£Equ.  Wa,  heEm  gegiila  le£wa£ya  LE£wa  logwaana£yaxa  p!a£yexa 
g  ayole  lax  dEiiasasa  dzEs£Eqwe,  Wa,  g-fl£mese  gayola  dEnase 
laxa  welkwe  lae  l!e1r.     Wii,  heemis  liigilas  k"!es  &xsE£we. 

55  Wii,  gil£mese  heloLa  sEnq!enoxwaxes  sEnganEmaxs  lae  ts!a- 
qodEx  ts!ageg'a£yases  sEnganEme  yixs  :i£mae  ax£edxa  gilsg'iltla- 
dzowe  sEnganEms.  Wa,  lii  bal£idxa  yudux"p!Eiike  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!aiia£yex,  yix  awasgEinasasa  sEnganEmasexs  lae  dzox£widEq 
qa  kox£wides  ts!ageg'a£yas  gw^iigwaaqa  lax  5k!waedza£yas.    Wii,  lii 

60  q!asox£widama  ok !waedza£yas  ga  gwiileg-a.1  Wa,  he£mis  xltleda- 
masEx  oba£yasa  ts!ageg-a£yaxs  lae  k'oqwa.  Wa,  a£mesa  sEnqle- 
noxwe  gElx£ldEx  wax'sotsta£yasa  la  k-ogEku  tslageg'exs  lae  pawE- 
yodEq.     Wii,  g  il£mese  lawiixs  lae  et!ed  mEns£idxa  he£maxat!  £was- 

i  That  is,  he  folds  it  over  inward,  so  that  tho  outer  bark  breaks. 


INDUSTRIES 


123 


length  as  before,  and  again  bends  it  over  and  breaks  ||  the  outer  bark;  65 
and  he  lifts  it  up  on  each  side  where  the  outer  bark  |  has  been  broken, 
and  peels  it  off.  He  continues  to  do  this,  |  beginning  at  the  broad 
end  of  the  bark  and  going  towards  the  narrow  end,  so  that  |  the 
broad  end  of  the  peeled  bark  conies  from  the  lower  end  of  the  young 
cedars.  |  The  narrow  end  comes  from  the  top  of  the  cedar-tree. 
After  ||  he  has  peeled  off  the  outer  bark,  he  folds  the  cedar-bark  in  the  70 
places  where  he  broke  it  |  when  the  outside  had  to  be  taken  off, 
in  this  manner:  ^- — =— .^  Then  he  folds  it  so  that  the  |  broad 
end  is  in  the  /<!53EB§jS  middle  of  the  bundle,  and  the  narrow 
end  |  on  the  ^^  ~  -=^  outside ;  and  the  narrow  end  is  used  to 
tie  the  bundle  in  the  middle,  in  this  way.1  When  |  it  is  all  tied  in 
the  middle,  he  places  the  bundles  one  on  top  of  another.  ||  Then  he  75 
ties  them  at  each  end  so  as  to  make  one  bundle  out  of  them,  in  this 
and  after  he  has  done  so,  he  takes  two 
twisted  cedar-twigs  |  and  ties  the  end 
of  the  end 
After  this 
the  pack- | 
of  peeled 
it  stands  80 
his  house.  I 


of    them    X^. 

tyings, 


on  each  side 

in  this  way: 
has  been  done,  he  puts  his  arms  through 
ing-straps  on  each  side  of  the  bundle 
cedar-bark,  and  ||  he  carries  it  home.  Now 
on  end  on  his  back  as  he  is  carrying  it  into 
Then  he  puts  it  down  in  the  corner  of  the  house,  for  he  does  not 
want  |  the  heat  of  the  fire  to  reach  it,  nor  the  light  of  the  sun  to  touch 


gEme  £wasgEmasasa    galaxs  lae    et!ed    dzox£widEq    qa    k'ox£wIdes 
ts!agega£yas.  Wa,  siEmxaawise  gElx£ldEx  waxsotsta£yasa  la  k'6gEku-  65 
tslagegexs  lae   pawEyodEq.      Wa,    :"t£mese    he    gwe£nakul&q    gag  i- 
LEla  Lax  £wiidzoba£yas  sEnganEmas  lag'aa  lax  wllba£yas,    yixs  he- 
£mae  £wadz5bes  sEnganEmaseda  gayole   lax    5xLa£yasa  dzEs£Eqwe. 
Wa,  heemis  wllbes  sEnganEmasa  ek"!Bbaeye.     Wa,  g-il£mese  £wi£la  la 
pawEyakwa  ts!ageg-aeyaxs  lae  asm  la  naqEmg iltEwe  dzoqwa£yasexs  70 
lae  k'  !5x£wIdEq  g-a  gwaleg'a  {fig.).     Wa,  laEmxae  heEm  gil  k!ox- 
£wlts6se  £wiidzoba£yas  qa  las  naq!Egaeya.     Wa,  la  L!asadza£ye  wllba£- 
yas  qaxs  heemae  la  yiLoyodaj'ose  6ba£yase  g-a  gwaleg'a.1     Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  £wi£la  la  yaeLoyalaxs  lae  ax£edxa  la  yaeLoyala  qaEs  pagegmdales 
laxes  £waxaase.     Wa,  la  yaelbEndEq  qa  mats!abEkwes  g'a  gwaleg'a  75 
{fig.).     Wa,  g'ih'mese  g^valExsae  fix'"edxa  malts !aqe  sElbEk"  dEwexa 
qa£s   tlEmcjEmg'aaLElodes  6ba£yas  laxa  ewanodza£yas  qeqixba£yas 
g'agwiileg-a  {fig.).     Wa,  g*ilemese  gwalExs  lae  p!Einx-siises  ox'SEya- 
p!aeyelaxa  aoxLaase  lax  wax'sana£yasa  mats.'abEkwe  sEiiganEms  qa£s 
5xLEx,£Ideq.     Wa,  laEinLawek  ilaqexsg'axae  na£nakwa  laxes  g'okwe  80 
qa£s  la  oxLEgalilaq  laxa  onegwlle  qaxs  k'lesae  helq!olEm  lagaatsa 
L!esElasa  lEgwIle.     Wa,    he£mesa    £naqi11asa   LlesEla    qaxs   gil£mae 

1  It  is  turned  over  the  middle  of  the  bundle,  and  the  narrow  eud  is   tucked  under  the  turns   that 
hold  the  bundle  in  the  middle. 


124  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIITTL  [eth.  ann.sb 

83  it  when  it  is  |  not  covered  and  before  it  is  split.  Then  it  gets  dried  | 
and  stiff ,  and  it  is  difficult  for  the  women  to  split  it  ||  apart.  | 

85  As  soon  as  the  woman  has  given  a  meal  to  her  husband,  ]  she  takes 
her  bark-splitter  made  of  the  fore-leg  of  a  black  bear  or  of  a  |  deer. 
It  has  a  flat  end,  for  it  is  sharpened  on  a  sandstone.     She  goes  |  and 

90  sits  down  where  the  bundle  is.  She  unties  the  ||  end  straps,  and  she 
takes  out  one  piece  of  what  her  husband  has  peeled  off.  |  She  unfolds 
it  and  at  once  covers  the  others  with  a  mat.  ]  Then  she  takes  her 
cedar-bark  splitter  and  with  it  |  she  splits  off  the  outer  layer  of  bark, 
starting  at  the  broad  end.     She  splits  it  off  and  pulls  it  apart,  |  going 

95  towards  the  thin  end.  When  it  is  off,  she  uses  the  splitter  ||  again  to 
remove  the  middle  layer.  Then  she  also  splits  off  down  to  the  | 
narrow  end,  she  splits  the  second  middle  layer,  and  |  finally  she 
splits  off  the  inner  side.  As  soon  as  everything  is  split  off,  |  she  hangs 
it  up  outside  of  the  house,  so  that  the  wind  may  blow  through  it  and 
the  |  sun  get  at  it,  and  it  gets  dry  quickly.  After  this  has  been 
100  done,  she  goes  back  into  ||  her  house  and  takes  another  piece  of  bark, 
and  she  does  |  the  same  as  she  did  with  the  first  one  when  she  spht 
it  into  four  pieces.  |  Now,  after  it  has  been  split  into  four  pieces,  it 
is  called  3mas. 


83  k'les  nax£wlts6xs  k-!es£mae  papEX'saakwa.  Wa,  la  lEmx£wida. 
Wii,    laxae  L!axeeda.     Wa,  la  laxumaleda  tstedaqaxs  lae  papEx-s£- 

85  EndEq. 

Wa,  g'ilnnese  gwiil  LlEXWeleda  tslsdaqaxes  la£wiinEmaxs  lae 
ax£edxes  qlwetana,  yixa  gayole  lax  galEmalg-iwa£yasaL,!asye  i.eavu 
gewase.  Wa,  la  pElbaxs  lae  g-exEku  laxa  dE£na  tlesEma.  Wa,  la 
klwag-aia  lax  axelasasa  matslabEkwe.      Wa,  la    qweltsEindEx   qe- 

90  qExba£yas.  Wa,  la  axe§dxa  enEmxsa  lax  sEnganEmases  la- 
£wfmEme  qa£s  dzoxusEmdeq.  Wa,  h<"'X'£ida£niese  naxusEmtsa  le- 
£wa£ye  laxa  waokwe.  Wa,  la  axeedxes  qlwetana  qa£s  qlwetledes 
laxa  lelEgweg-a£ye  g-agtLEla  laxa  ;wadzoba£yas.  Wa,  lii  pawEyodEq 
labi-.ndEq    laxgs    wllba£ye.      Wa,    g-il£mese     lawaxs     lae    qlwetled 

95  etledEX  ts!ets!Exeg-a£ye.  Wa,  laxae  pawEyodEq  labEndEq  laxes 
wilba£ye.  Wa,  laxae  qlwetled  etledEX  naq!Ega£ye.  Wa,  laEmpax.- 
sEiidEq  lo£  ts  lets  lExedza£ye.  Wii,  g-il£mese  £wi£la  la  paakuxs  lae 
gexulsaq  laxa  L!asanaeyases  gokwe  qa  y:llasE£wesesa  yala  LE£wa 
LlesEla  qa  halabales  lEmx£wlda.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  laeL 
100  laxes  g-okwe  qa£s  etlede  ax£edxa  £nEmxsa  qa£s  etledexat!  nE- 
qEm^iltaxes  lae£na£ye  maemox"salaxs  paakwa  £nalnEmxs.  Wii, 
laEm  la  LegadEs  dEnasaxs  lae  gwal  maemoxusala  paakwa. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  125 

After  it  has  been  drying;  for  four  days  outside  of  the  house,  |  it  is 
quite  dry  and  it  is  stiff.     Then  she  ||  folds  it  in  the  same  way  as  she  5 
folded  it  when  it  was  first  folded  by  her  |  husband  in  the  woods,  and 
the  broad  end  is  folded  first.  |  Then  she  ties  the  middle  with  the 
narrow  end,  and  she  puts  the  cedar-bark  into  a  basket,  |  and  she  puts 
down  the  basket  with  cedar-bark  on  hanging-poles,   so  that  |  the 
heat  of  the  fire  just  reaches  it.  ||  It  never  gets  mouldy  when  it  is  10 
really  dry.  |  If  the  cedar-bark  were  not  thoroughly  dry,  it  would 
become  |  mouldy  at  once,  for  nothing  is  like  cedar-bark  for  getting 
mouldy  when  |  it  is  damp,  for  it  gets  mouldy  at  once.     Therefore  it 
is  dried  for  four  ||  days  in  the  wind  and  sun.     Then  it  is  put  away,  15 
and  she  works  at  it  in  winter.  ] 

Cedar-Mats. — The  broad  strips  for  matting  are  taken  from  the  1 
outer  layer  of  cedar-bark,  ]  which  is  split  into  strips  two  fingers 
wide  |  for  being  made  into  mats  and  coarse  clover-  |  baskets  and  for 
protecting  new  canoes.  The  next  one  ||  is  the  middle  layer  of  bark.  5 
This  is  next  best  for  narrow  strips  |  for  ordinary  woven  mats  and 
ordinary  baskets,  ]  and  it  is  also  good  for  halibut  fishing-lines  |  and 
for  anchor-lines  for  the  halibut-fisher,  j  The  inner  part  is  also  spht 
into  very  narrow  strips  for  ||  twilled  mats  and  for  well-woven  spoon-  10 

Wa,    g-il£mese    moxse    enalas    xilalaxs    Laxa    l !asanaeyases   go-  3 
kwaxs  lae  alak'lala  la  lEinxwa  lae  la  LlasLlExdza.       Wa,  la  k!ox- 
£w!dEq  laEm  asm  naqEmgiltax  k"  loxwayasexs  galae    k- !6x£wItso£s  5 
hVwunEmas  laxa  &L!e.     Wa,  he£Emxat!  g'il  k- !ox£wits6£se  £wadzoba- 
£yas.     Wfi,  la  yiLoyots   wllba£yas.     Wa,    la   g"its!ots    laxa    rdabate 
qa£s  lii  hangaaLElotsa  dEiiyats!e  Llabat  laxa  qtelile   laxa  ek!e  qa 
helales    lagaaLElaena£jTasa    LlesElasa    lEgwIlasa   gokwe  Iaq.     Wa, 
laEm  hewaxa    xklzEx-£IdExs  alak"!alae    lEmx£wida.      Wa,    he£maa  10 
qo  kMeslax   alak'ialalax   lEmxwalaxa    dEnase,  wii,  lalaxe   hex-eida- 
Emlax    x  idzEx£id£lax     qaxs     k'leasae     enEmax-iswuta     dEiiasaxs 
dElx-ae  yixs  hex-£ida£mae  x  idzEx£ida.     Wa,  heemis  lagilas  moxse 
Enalas  x'ilaso£    laxa   y:ila   LE£wa  L!esEla.     Wii,    laEm    g'exaq    qa£s 
eaxEleLEqexa  ts!a£wiinxe.  15 

Cedar-Mats. — Wa,heEm  awadzElsdEkwe  k!ita£yasa  lelEgwega-  1 
£yexa  maemaldEiias  aw;idzEcwasaxs  lae  dzEdzExsaak"  laxEns  q!wa- 
q  Iwaxts  !ana£yex,  yixs  lae  lex\vIlasE£wa  LE£wa  jnbElosgEme  t  lEgwats  !e 
Llabata  LEewa  t!ayolEmasa  alolaqe  xwakluna.  Wa,  la  makileda 
ts  lets  !Exega£ye.  Wii,  heEm  mftk  iliixa  aekaakwas  k-  !tta£ye  ts  !elts  !e-  5 
qaledEkwas  k!at!Einaku  le£wa£ya  LE£wa  k!at!Emakwe  LlaLlEbata. 
Wit,  heemisa  logwaanayaxa  p!a£ye  yixs  he£mae  ek'  dEnEma 
ts!ets!Exeg-a£ye  LE£wa  dEnwayasa  loElq!wenoxwaxa  p!a£ye.  Wa, 
he£misa  niiq!ega£ye,  wii  heEm  alak'lala  ts !elts !Eq laolidEkwe  k  !Ita- 
£yas  sEWElkwe    le£wa£ya  LE£wa   aek'laakwas    k!ita£}ra  k'ek'ayat       10 


126  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ANN.  36 

12  baskets  |  and  twilled  baskets.  None  of  tbe  |  double  twilled  baskets 
are  found  nowadays.  In  tbese  the  |  daughters  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
tribes  kept  their  combs.     The  strong  inner  side  |  is  the  same  as  the 

15  inner  part,  for  it  is  good  for  everything.  ||  They  are  both  the  same. 
You  know  already  how  the  |  woman  measures  the  length  of  the  cedar- 
bark  when  making  mats  and  baskets.  |  Now  I  have  finished  talking 
about  it.  | 

Shredding  Cedar-Bark. — Now  I  will  talk  about  tbe  making  of  soft  | 

20  cedar-bark.  (The  man)  takes  a  small  ax,  for  I  ||  have  finished  talk- 
ing about  the  bark-peeler  which  is  used  on  ]  young  cedar-trees.  He 
chops  around  the  bottom  of  a  young  cedar-tree  |  with  black  bark. 
He  uses  the  small  ax  for  lifting  the  bark  |  from  the  tree  at  the  bot- 
tom, and  he  does  the  same  as  he  does  when  |  he  peels  cedar-bark. 

25  After  peeling  off  ||  the  rough  outer  bark,  he  also  makes  a  bundle  of  it 
and  |  carries  it  on  his  back  into  the  house.  He  puts  it  down  by  the 
side  |  of  the  fire  of  his  house.  Then  his  wife  unties  |  the  strings  at 
the  ends,  and  she  takes  up  one  of  the  pieces  of  bark  for  making  soft 
bark  and  unfolds  it.  |  She  hangs  it  up  back  of  the  fire  of  the  house,  || 

30  and  she  does  the  same  with  all  the  others.  Now  they  are  |  hanging 
there  in  order  to  get  dry  quickly,  for  they  are  very  thick.  |  It  takes 
six  days  before  they  get  dry.     As  soon  |  as  they  have  been  hung  up, 

11  LE£wa  sEWElxusEme  LlaLtebata.  Wa,  he£inisa  k'leasa  laxa  qeqa- 
palola  sesElxusEm  LlaiJEbata,  yix  g'iymits  lEwasas  xEgEmasa 
k' !esk- lEdelasa  g'Igama£yasa  lelqwfdaLa£ye.  Wa,  heEm  ts!ets!E- 
xedza£ye,    heEmxaa    gwexsa   naq!Ega£ye   ylxs  kleasae  k-!es  egats 

15  qaxs  £nEmaxtsae  a£ina.  Wa,  laEmLas  q!a,LElaEmx  gwegilasasa 
tslEdaqaxs  lae  niEnniEntslalaqexs  lexwiliLaxa  dEnase  LE£wa  Llabate. 
Wa,  la£mesEn  gwal  gwiigwexs£ala  laq. 

Shredding  Cedar-Bark. — Wa,  laemesBn  gwagwex"s£alal  laxa  lcasi- 
liixa    kasalase     dEnasa.     Wa,     heLeda    sayobEme    axalas    qaxgin 

20  la£meg-aLal  gwal  gwagwex-s£ala  laxa  L!ok!wayasa  sEnq!enoxwaxa 
dzEs£Eqwe.  Wa,  laEin  tsEX'se£stalax  oxLa£yasa  dzEs£Eqwexa 
tsloleg'iis  tsax£Ena£ye.  Wii,  lii  heEm  Llokluleda  sayobEmaxs  lae 
L!5k!wax-£Idxa  tslaqEmse.  Wa,  lii  aEmxat!  naqEinglltaxes  gwe- 
g'ilasaxs     lae     sEnqaxa     dEnase.       Wa,    gil£mese    gwal     pawiilax 

25  ts!agega£yasexs  lae  heEmxat!  gwex£ldqexs  lae  mats!ap!edEq. 
Wa,  lii  oxLaeLaq  laxes  gokwe  qa£s  oxLEgaliles  laxa  maginwall- 
sas  lEgwllases  g'okwe.  Wii,  hex-id£mese  gEnEmas  gudEsgEmdEx 
qeqixba£yas.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  £nEmxsa  liixa  k'iisalase  qa£s  dzoxu- 
sEmdeq.     Wa,  lii    gex£wits    lax    aogwiwahlasa    lEgwilases    gokwe. 

30  Wii,  la£mes  £wi£laEm  he  gwex£idxa  waokwe.  Wii,  la£me  LesE- 
laLEla  qa£s  halaxts!e  lEmx£wida  qaxs  alaklalae  wakwa.  Wii,  la 
£nal£nEinp !Ena    qlELlExse    £naliis   k'!es    lEm£wumx£Ida.     Wii,    gil- 


boas]  INDUSTBIES  127 

the  husband  of  the  woman  takes  bone  from  |  the  nasal  bones  of  the 
whale,  and  he  takes  a  thin-edged  rough  ||  sandstone.     (Here  follows  35 
a  description  of  the  manufacture  of   the    |  cedar-bark  breaker,  p. 
109.)  | 

She  takes  an  old  yew-wood  paddle  and  places  it  |  edgewise  on  the 
fire  of  her  house,  When  the  edge  is  burned  off  |  on  one  side,  she 
sprinkles  water  on  it,  so  that  the  fire  goes  out.  ||  She  takes  a  rough  40 
sandstone,  |  puts  it  into  water  in  a  small  dish,  and  rubs  off  | 
the  charcoal  and  gives  it  a  sharp  edge  on  one  side  of  the  cedar- 
bark     n holder.  |  When  this  is  done,  it  is  in  this 

way:  |  "  S    She    also   takes   a  punting-pole   and 

measures  off  two  spans.  ||  Then  she  burns  it  off;  and  ]  when  it  is  burned  45 
through,  she  drives  it  into  the  floor  near  the  fire  of  her  |  house.     She 
stops  driving  it  into  the  ground  when  ]  the  length  that  is  standing  out 
is  one  span  and  two  finger-widths.  |  Then  she  takes  cedar-bark  rope 
and  the  paddle,  and  she  places  ||  the  flat  end  of  the  paddle  next  to  50 

the  top  of  the  n    stake,   and  she  ties   it   on 

with    |     cedar     r-^~ — -— ; —  W    rope;  and  when  it  is  finished, 

it  is  tins  way:  |     I  N-       " LL 

When  the  cedar-bark  holder  is  ready,  and  when  |  the  cedar-bark 
is  dry  and  brittle,  the  woman  takes  one  of  the  |  pieces  of  cedar-bark 


£mese  LesElaLElaxs  lae   la£wunEinasa  tstedaqe  ax£edxa  xaqe  g-a£yol  33 
lax  xagelba£yasa  gwE£yinie,  wii,  lii  ax£edxa   pElEnxe  k!oL!a  dEena 
tlesEma.     (Here  follows  a  description  of  the  manufacture    of   the  35 
cedar-bark  breaker,  p.   109). 

Wii,  lit  ax-edxa  sewayomote  LlEmqlEsgEma  qa£s  k'loxLEndes 
apsEnxa£yas  laxa  lEgwilases  gokwe.  Wii,  gil£mese  klwagila 
k!fmiElx£Ide  apsEnxa£yasexs  lae  xos^tsa  £wape  laq  qa  k-!ilx£idesa 
x'iqsla  laq.  Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  k'!oL!a  dE£na  t!esEma  qa£s  40 
ma£xustEndes  laxa  £wabEts!asa  lalogume.  Wii,  lii  gexalas  laxa 
ts!olna.  Wii,  he£mis  qa  ex-bEnxes  apsEnxa£yasa  k'asdEinele.  Wa, 
gIPmese  gwalExs  lae  ga  gwiilega  {fig.). 

Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  dz5meg-ale  qa£s  biil£idexa  malp!Enk-e  laxEns 
ci!waq!waxts!ana£yex,  yix  £wasgEmasasexs  lae  lE£xusEndEq.  Wii,  45 
glPmese  1e£xusexs  lae  dexu£walilaq  laq  maginwallsasa  lEgwIiases 
gokwe.  Wa,  al£inese  gwal  deqwaqexs  lae  la  maldEne  esEgiwa£yas 
laxEns  biiLiixsEiis  q!wiiq!wax"ts!ana£yex,yix  '"wasgEmasasa  la  Laela. 
Wa,  lii  ax,£edxa  dEnsEne  dEnEma  LE£wa  sewayowe.  Wa,  lii  kadE- 
nodzEnts  pExba£yas  laxa  mag-itii£yasa  Laele.  Wii,  la  jil£aLElotsa  50 
dEnEQie  laq.     Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  g'a  gwiileg'a  (Jig.). 

Wii,  laEm  gwalila  kasdEmile.  Wii,  giPmese  alakMala  lii 
lEmxwa  tsoseda  k'asalasaxs  lae  ax£ededa  ts!Edaqaxa  £nEmxsa 
laxa    k'asalase.     Wa,    lii     LEplaLElots     lax    nEqostawasa    lEgwile. 


128  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ass.  36 

55  and  spreads  it  out  just  over  the  fire.  ||  Then  she  takes  a  cedar-stick 
two  spans  in  length  |  and  of  the  thickness  of  our  |  first  finger.  She 
takes  the  narrow  split  cedar-bark  and  |  ties  it  around  one  end  of  the 
stick.     When  this  is  done,  she  splits  j  one  end  like  a  pair  of  tongs, 

0(1  and  this  is  called  ||  "cedar-bark  holder."  When  the  cedar-bark  is  | 
thoroughly  heated,  she  puts  it  between  these  tongs,  ]  the  broad  end 
first.     The  holder  is  four  — ^^^  finger-widths  | 

from  the  end,  in  this  way:  /  J  Thenthewom- 

an  takes  |  the  shredding-  s\  ,jjj     |  — ")   implement. 

She   puts    her    right    leg        ^  '  I'l  llr^^  over  tne   Srip 

65  of  the  j|  paddle  and  sits  on  it,  so  that 

the  tip  of  the  paddle  is    |  between      her 

legs.  She  takes  her  shredding-implement  in  her  right  hand  and  |  holds 
the  cedar-bark  holding-tongs  (in  the  left),  and  squeezes  |  them 
together  so  that  the  stick  fits  close  to  the  cedar-bark.  The  |  tied  end 
is  turned  towards  the  woman  who  is  going  to  soften  it  with  the 

70  shredding-implement.  ||  The  end  of  the  cedar-bark  just  shows  over  the 

edge  of  the  paddle  when  |  she  begins  to  shred  it.     Every  time  she 

strikes,  she  pushes  the  bark  ahead  a  little,  and  she  |  keeps  on  doing 

•    so  untd  she  reaches  the  narrow  end.     As  soon  as  |  she  reaches  the 

end,  she  coils  it  up,  and  she  does  the  same  with  the  other  pieces.  | 

7.")  When  all  have  been  finished,  she  opens  them  out  and  plucks  off  the  || 
rough  strips  that  are  made  in  shredding;  and  when  these  are  all  off,  | 

55  \Y;i,  laxae  ax£edxa  klwaxi.awc  malp!Enke  £wasgEmasas  laxEns 
q!waq!wax"ts!anaeyex.  Wa,  la  yQF.m  wagitdx  wagidasaxsEns 
s!F.inalaxts!an;rcvex.  Wa,  la  ax'edxa  ts!eq!a  dzEXEk"  dEnasa  qa£s 
yil;aLElodes  lax  apsbacyas.  Wa,  gib'mese  gwaJbsxs  lae  xox£wu1ex 
apsba£yas   qa   yuwes    la  gwex'sa   ts!esLalax.     Wa,    heEm    LegadEs 

(SO  LlEbEdzEwesa  kasiixa  kiisalase.  Wa,  la  axaxodxa  kasalasaxs  lae 
alak-!ala  la  tslslx^wlda.  Wa,  la  LtebEdzotsa  L!EbEdza£ye  lax 
£wadzobaJyasa  kasalase  laxa  mOdEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex 
g'aglLEla  lax  obaeyas  g-a  gwalega  (fig.).  Wa,  la,  dax-eideda  tslEdii- 
qaxa  k'adzayo.    Wa,  la  gaxsEqlases  helk- !otsklza£ye  laxa  q  Iwedzasasa 

65  sewayowaxs  lae  k!wak'!EndEq.  Wa,  laEm  LlEnxsale  oxta£yas  lax 
awaga£yasexs  lae  dax-£idxes  k"adzayowe  vises  helk"  !olts!ana£ye.  Wa, 
la  dadEgoxa  L!EbEdza£yasa  kasalase  lax Eqatabaeyas  qa£s  q!weq!wa- 
saleq  qa  bEndza£yesa  L.!EbEdzaeye  laxa  k"asalase.  Wa,  la  gwasax- 
Laleda  yfcLEXLaeyas  laxa  tsbsdaqaxs  lae  kak  a'yaxes  k'asasoLe.    Wa, 

70  halsEla^mese  nelbala  lax  ek' !Enxa£yasa  sewayoweda  k'asalasaxs  lae 
kas£Ida.  Wa,  q!walxo£mese  wrcxuwIdExs  lae  k'as£ida.  Wa,  la 
hex'saEm  gwegilaxs  lae  labEndEX  wilba£yas.  Wa,  giPmese 
labEndEqexs  lae  q  !El5enakulaq.  Wa,  lii  etledxa  waokwe.  Wa, 
giPmese  £wl£la  gwal  kadzEkuxs    lae    dzaxusEmdEq   qa£s  k!ulwalex 

75  kakismotasa  k'adzayowexa  la  mola.      Wa,    g'iPmese    £wi£laxs    lae 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  129 

she  puts  away  in  a  small  box  what  she  has  shredded  off.     This  is  76 
rubbed  |  and  used  for  towels  after  washing  the  face.     Then  |  she 
folds  up  the  cedar-bark  well  and  puts  it  into  her  box.  |  That  is  all 
about  this.  || 

Yellow  Cedar- Bark. — The  same  is  done  with  the  yellow  cedar-bark,  |     1 
which  is  peeled  off  in  the  same  way  as  the  red  cedar-bark.     It  is  also 
dried  in  the  |  sun  and  in  the  wind  outside  of  the  house.     Sometimes  | 
it  takes  six  or  eight  days  ||  to  dry  it  so  that  it  is  thoroughly  dry,    5 
because  it  is  quite  thick.     The  outside  bark  is  |  hardly  peeled  off 
from  it.     When  it  is  dried  thoroughly,  |  the  woman  takes  it  down.  | 

She  puts  it  into  her  small  canoe,  and  she  paddles  to  a  place  where 
there  is  |  a  deep  bay  and  where  it  is  always  calm  inside,  so  that  waves 
never  ||  get  into  it,  and  the  salt  water  is  always  quite  warm.  She  |  10 
lands  on  the  beach  and  puts  the  yellow  cedar-bark  into  the  water.  | 
She  places  it  down  lengthwise  at  low-water  mark  and  puts  |  stones  on 
each  end.  |  After  this  is  done,  she  goes  home.  || 

Then  her  husband  also  goes  to  work  and  looks  for  |  a  whale-rib.  15 
I  do  not  know  how  he  works  it  |  when  he  is  making  the  cedar-bark 
beater.  | 

When  it  has  been  finished,  he  gives  it  to  his   wife.     After  |  the 
yellow  cedar-bark  has  soaked  for  twelve  days,  the  woman  ||  goes  20 


g'exaxes    kliilanEme    laxes    xaxadzame.     Wa,    hcEm    la    qloyasos  jq 
qa£s    dedEgEmyoxs  hxe  gwal  ts!ots!Exudxes  gogiima£ye.     Wii,  liiLa 
aek'!a     k!ox£w!dxa    kadzEkwe    qa£s  la    g'ets!6ts   laxes    xEtsEme. 
Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Yellow  Cedar-Bark. — Wa,  le  heEm£xaagweg'ilasE£weda  dexwaxslae  1 
sEnqasE£wa  lax  gweg'i£lasaxa  dEnase.  Wii,  la£xae  x  ilasoe  laxa 
LlesEla  LE£wa  yala  lax  L!asana£yasa  g'5kwe.  Wii,  le  £n;il£nEmp!Ena 
q!EL!Ep!Eirxwa£se  £naliis  loxs  ma£lgunal[> !Enxwa£sae  xflsa,  qa 
alakliiles  lEm£wumx£Ida,  qaxs  alaklalae  wakwaxa  halsEla£mae  5 
pawEyakwes  ts!agaga£ye.  Wii,  gil£mese  lEm£wumx£ldExs  lae  axa- 
xSdeda  ts!Edaqaq. 

Wa,  le  £moxsas  laxes  xwaxwagume  qa£s  le  sex£wld  qa£s  le  laxa 
q!aq!5xLiillse  laxa  liemEnalaEm  q!oxstalisa,  jixa  k!ese  kwElEllts.'e- 
noxwa.  Wii,  le  hemEnalaEm  tslElxsteda  dEmsxe.  Wii,  le  hanga-  iq 
lltses  £ya£yats!e  laqexs  lae  £ya£stEntsa  dexwe  laq.  Wii,  laEm 
dalallsax  awagEmasasa  g-ilsg11t!a  dexwa  qa£s  t!et!iixbiilisesa  tlesEme 
lax waxsba£yas  oba£yas laxa wulx'iwa£yasa xats !a£ve.  Wit, gil£mese 
£wl£lala  £ya£stfdlsExs  lae  na£naku  laxes  gokwe. 

Wii,  laLa  la£wunEmas  ogwaqaEm'xat !  eaxEla,  yixs  lae  alax  gElE-  15 
masa   gwE£yinie.     Wa,    la£mEn    kMes   qlaLElax   gwTegi£lasasexs   lae 
eaxndxa  t  lElwayaxa  dexwe. 

Wa,  g'il£mese    gwiilExs  lae   ts!as  liixes    gEnEme.     Wii,  gfl£mese 
g'iigiwalaxse  £naliisa  dexwe  la  £ya£stal!sExs  laeda  ts!Edaqe  laxs  laxes 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 9 


130  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL.  [bth.ann.S5 

21  in  her  small  canoe,  carrying  the  bone  beater  and  a  flat  |  diabase 
pebble.  | 

When  she  comes  to  the  place  where  she  put  her  cedar-bark,  she  takes 
out  the  flat  |  stone  and  puts  it  down  on  the  shore.  |  She  takes  her  bone 

25  bark-beater  in  her  right  hand  and  ||  takes  hold  of  the  end  of  the  bark 
with  her  left  hand,  for  the  woman  is  sitting  on  the  |  right-hand  side 
of  the  yellow  cedar-bark,  facing  towards  the  sea.  |  She  does  not  pull 
very  fast  when  she  is  pulling  it  out  of  the  water,  and  puts  it  over  |  the 
Hat  diabase  stone  on  which  she  beats  it.  |  She  first  beats  the  broad 

30  end  of  the  cedar-bark;  and  when  ||  she  reaches  the  end,  she  coils  it 
into  her  small  canoe.  As  soon  as  |  she  has  finished  it,  she  goes  to  her 
home;  and  when  she  arrives  |  there,  she  carries  the  beaten  yellow 
cedar-bark  to  a  place  outside  of  the  house  and  hangs  it  up  |  on  the 
halibut  drying-poles.     When  evening  comes,  |  she  gathers  the  beaten 

35  cedar-bark  ami  spreads  a  new  mat  over  it,  ||  so  that  it  may  not  get 
damp  again.  After  it  has  been  drying  for  four  days,  |  it  is  thoroughly 
dry.  She  folds  it  up  and  puts  it  away  |  in  a  basket.  Now  it  is 
finished,  for  she  works  at  it  |  in  winter-time.  | 
i  Cedar-Bark  (2) . — The  woman  goes  into  the  woods  to  look  for  |  young 
cedar-trees.  As  soon  as  she  finds  them,  she  picks  out  one  that  has 
no  I  twists  in  the  bark,  and  whose  bark  is  not  thick.  |  She  takes  her 


20 


xwaxwagume  dalaxes  xax£Ene  ttelwaya,  p£wa   pExsEme   ts!Eq!uls 
t  lesEma. 

Wa,  giFmese  lagaa  laxes  £yaasaxs  lae  t!iix£ultodxa  pExsEme 
ts'.Eq!uls  tlesEma  qa£s  pax£allses  lax  max'stallse  laxa  dEinsxe.  Wa, 
la  dax£ldxa  xax£Ene  ttelwaya  yises  hclk' !olts!ana£ye.    Wa,  la  dax£i- 

95  dEx  oba£yasa  dexwe  yises  gEmxolts!ana£ye,  yixs  hiie  khvaesa  tslEdaqa 
helk!otagawalisasa  dexwaxs  LlasgEmalae  laxa  Llasakwe.  Wa, 
Li  k!es  aPnakfllaxs  lae  nex£ustalaq.  Wa,  he£mis  la  paqElalats  laxa 
pExsEme  ts'.Eq'.ultsEm  t!esEma.  Wa,  he£me  la  tlElwatseq.  Wa, 
laEm  hcEm  gil  t  lElxwasoseda  £wadzoba£yasa  dexWe.     Wii,  gIPmese 

■JO  hxbEndqexs  lae  qEsalExsaq  laxes  xwaxwagume.  Wa,  gIPmese  £wl£la 
gwalEXS  lae  na£nakwa  laxes  g'okwe.  Wa,  g'il£mese  lag'aaxs  lae 
dasdesElaxa  tlElokwe  dexwa  lax  L!asana£yases  g-6kwe;  lae  gex£wid 
laxa  lEm£wasaxa  klawase.  Wii,  g-ilnaxwa£mese  dzaqwaxs  lae 
q!ap!ex£idxa  tlElokwe  dexwa  qa£s  LEbEglndesa  Eldzowe  le£we£  laq 

qk  qa  k'leses  et'.ed  dElx£ida.  Wa,  g-il£mese  mop!Enxwa£se  £ini\ii 
xflalaxs  lae  lEm£wumx'£ida.  Wa,  lae  k!ox£widEq  qaes  g-exeqexs 
lae  axts'.alaxa  Llabate.  Wii,  laEm  gwal  laxeq  qaxs  eaxEleLaqexa 
laLa  ts  lawfinxa. 

Cedar-Bark  (2). — Wii,  hiiEm  gil  ax£etso£sa  tslEdiiqaxs  lae  laxa  aLle 
aliix  dzEs£EXEkiiliis  Laxxose.  Wii,  gil£mese  q!aqexs  lae  aleqax  k-  !esa 
k'lilp'.Enes  ts!ageg-e.     Wa,  he£mis  qa  kMeses  wax£wuna£ye  tslageg'a- 


boas]  INDUSTEIES  131 

hand-adz  and  .  .  .  cuts  the  back  of  the  bottom  ||  of  the  young  cedar.  5 
She  leaves  a  strip  four  |  finger-widths  wide,  which  she  does  not  cut  when 
she  cuts  around  the  tree,  and  |  she  peels  off  a  strip  two  finger-widths 
wide.  I  This  is  what  the  women  who  get  cedar-bark  call  "making  a 
road,"  I  for  after  that  she  peels  off  a  broad  strip  which  is  to  go  high 
up.  After  she  has  taken  off  the  ||  narrow  strip  which  makes  the  road,  10 
she  begins  to  peel  at  the  lower  end,  starting  with  her  adz  |  at  the 
place  where  she  cut  around.  The  broad  piece  is  one  |  span  wide. 
Then  she  peels  it  off,  and  |  as  it  goes  up  high,  she  steps  back  from  the  | 
place  where  she  stands;  and  if  the  young  cedar-tree  is  smooth  high 
up,  she  ||  goes  far  back.  15 

While  she  is  going  backward,  she  holds  slack  the  cedar-bark  that 
she  is  peeling  off,  |  when  it  falls  back  to  where  it  was  before.  Then 
the  woman  who  peels  the  cedar-bark  pulls  at  it,  |  so  that  it  comes  off. 
What  she  is  peeling  off  becomes  narrower  as  it  goes  upward,  |  and 
it  just  runs  into  a  point  and  breaks  off  when  it  reaches  way  up.  |  Im- 
mediately the  woman  puts  it  down  on  the  ground,  with  the  inner 
side  downward,  and  the  outer  bark  outside.  ||  Then  she  peels  off  20 
other  pieces  as  she  did  |  the  first  one;  and  she  stops  peeling  when  a 
strip  I  four  fingers  wide  is  left  on  the  cedar-tree.  That  is  |  what  the 
people  of  olden  times  refer  to  as  being  left  on  the  young  cedar-tree, 
so  that  I  it  should  not  be  without  clothes  and  to  keep  it  alive.  || 

£yas.  Wii,  la  ax£edxes  kMimLayowe  qa£s  .  .  .  tsEkMEXLEn- 
dexa  dzEs£Eqwe  lax  awlg-a£yas.  Wa,  la,  hamodEngala  laxEns  5 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  ytx  wanEmas  tsEX'se£stEnda£yas.  Wii,  la 
L'.okklxndxa  maldEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£yaxs  lae  saqhvodEq. 
Wii,  heEm  gWE£yosa  sesaq  Iwaenoxwe  tlexila  qa  sExuts!esa  laLa 
et!ed  saqlwoyoLEs  lag'aal  laxa  ek!e.  Wii,  gih'mese  lawiiyeda  ts!e- 
qlastowe  t!exi£layoxs  lae  L!dk!ux£Itses  kMimLayowe  laxa  giig  iLEla  10 
laxes  tsExse£stEiida£yaxa  £wadzowe,  yixs  £nal£nEmp  lEnae  £nemp!En- 
gidzo  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yaqe  £wiidzEwasasexs  lae  saqlwodEq. 
Wa,  gilnaxwa£mese  aek!Egilale  saq !wa£yasexs  lae  klaxEls  laxes 
Ladzase.  Wii,  gik'mese  Lomax'£Id  eketEleda  dzEs£Eqwaxs  lae  k!wa- 
g'ila  qwesgile  k' !a£nakfdaena£yas  k!Esk!Esaxes  saqlwanEme  cIe-  15 
nasa  qa  lils  k!iit!Endxes  axasde.  Wii,  he£mes  lanaxwa  nex£edaatsa 
saq  !waenoxwaq  L!aL!odaaqaq.  Wii,  la  ts!eq!Eba£nakiilaxs  lae  ek!6- 
teleda  saqlwanEme.  Wii,  a£mese  la  eUsIexs  lae  lagaa  laxa  ek!e. 
Wii,  hex£ida£mese  tslEdaqe  hax£WElsaq  qa  elc !adza£yesa  ts!ixqEmse. 
Wii,  lii  etledxat!  saq!wax-£idxa  waokwe.  Wa,  a£mise  niiqEmgil-  20 
tEwexes  gilx'de  gwegilasa.  Wa,  a£mise  hex,£idaEm  gwal  saqlwaxs 
lae  modEnme  nvadzEwasasa  la  ax£Enexa  dzEs£Eqwe.  Wa,  heEm 
gwE£yosa  g'&le  bEgwanEm  ax£alag'iltseqa  tslElgumsa  dzEs£Eqwe  qa 
k!eses  xExanaEma,  wa,  he£mis  qa  qlulayos. 


132  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.sb 

25  As  soon  as  the  woman  has  enough,  she  takes  up  at  the  broad  end 
what  she  peeled  off,  |  and  she  breaks  off  the  outer  bark  |  for'a  distance 
four  spans  in  length.  She  goes  on  peeling  off  the  |  outer  bark 
towards  the  narrow  end,  and  she  continues  doing  this  |  until  she 

30  reaches  the  narrow  end.  When  ||  the  outer  bark  has  been  taken  off, 
she  folds  it  up,  and  she  measures  |  a  length  of  four  spans.  Then  she 
folds  it  over.  In  folding  it,  she  places  the  outer  side  outside.  |  She 
first  folds  the  broad  end;  |  and  after  she  has  gone  the  whole  length, 
she  ties  the  narrow  end  around  it;   |  and  she  does  the  same  with  (lie 

35  others  which  she  has  peeled  off.  As  soon  as  all  ||  have  been  tied  in 
the  middle,  she  takes  a  long  narrow  strip  of  cedar-bark  and  |  puts  it 
around  each  end,  in  this  way.1  After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  | 
another  piece  of  cedar-bark  and  puts  it  on  as  a  packing-strap.  The  | 
two  packing-straps  are  tied  to  the  two  end  ropes;  and  she  just 
measures  it    |    until  it  is  long   enough  when   she   puts    her  hands 

40  through  them  when  she  puts  it  through,  ||  carrying  it  on  her  back. 
After  she  has  done  so,  she  puts  her  hands  through  the  |  packing- 
straps  and  carries  the  bundle  on  her  back.  In  her  hands  she  carries 
the  |  adz,  and  she  goes  home  to  her  house.  | 
1  Shredding  Cedar-Bark.- — As  soon  as  she  has  finished,  she  takes  her 
cedar-bark  |  and  hangs  it  over  her  fire.     She  takes  her  cedar-bark 

25  Wa,  g'iPmese  heloLExs  lacda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxes  saqlwanEine  qa£s 
g"abEnde  laxa  £wiidzoba£ye  qa£s  k"6x£wldexa  ts!agega£yasxa  mo- 
p  tenk'e  laxEns  q  !waq  !waxts  !ana£yex.  Wa,  hi  pawiilaxa  ts  !agega£ye 
gWEyolEla  laxa  £wadzoba£yas.  Wa,  ax-sa£mese  la  he  gwegllaqexs 
labEndalaaq  lagaa  lax  ts!eq!Eba£yas.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wPlawa  ts!a- 

30  q!ega£yaxs  lae  k!6x£w!dEq.  Wa,  laEmxae  baHdEq  qa  mop!Eiik  es 
£wasgEmasas  k!6xwa£yas.  Wa,  laEni  he  L!asadza£ya  makataxa 
ts  !agega£ye.  Wa,  laEmxae  he  g  il  k'  !6x£wItso£se  £wildzoba£yas.  Wa, 
g  Il£mese  labEndEx  £wasgEinasasexs  lae  qEnoyots  wilba£yas.  Wa, 
axsa£mese  he  gwegilaxa  waokM'e  sEnganEms.     Wa,  g  il£mese  £wl£la 

35  qeqEnoyale  sEngaiiEmasexs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!eq!adzowe  dEnas  qa£s 
qeqExbEndes  laq;  ga  gwiilega.1  Wa,  g  IPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa 
ogii£la£maxat !  dEnasa  qa£s  aoxLaas£edeq.  Wii,  la£me  gegalopala  lada 
malts !aqe.  eaoxLaase  laxa  male  qeqExba£ya.  Wa,  a£mese  mEnsala 
qa  hel£asgEmes  qo  lal  plEmx'sases  e£eyasowe  qo  lal  plEmxsal  laq  qo 

40  lal  5xLEx,£idELEq.  Wii,  g-ll£mese  gwalExs  lae  plEmx-sotses  e£eya- 
sowe  laxa  oxLolEme  qa£s  6xLEx£ideq.  Wa,  a£mise  la  dak' !6tElaxes 
k' liniLayowaxs  lae  qas£ida.     Wii,  laEm  nii£naku  laxgs  gokwe. 

Shredding  Cedar-Bark.2 — Wii,  giPmese  gwala  lae  ax£edxes  dEnase 
qa£s   gexust5des    laxes    lEgwlle.      Wa,    la   ax£edxes   kadzayowaxa 

i  See  figure  on  p.  123. 

»  This  follows  a  description  of  the  preservation  of  elderberries,  p.  262,  line  55. 


boas]  INDUSTBIES  133 

beater  |  and  paddle,  and  she  drives  the  longest  one  of  her  wedges 
into  the  floor.  |  Then  she  takes  the  cedar-bark  and  splits  off  a  strip,  fl 
She  takes  the  paddle  and  places  it  alongside  the  wedge  driven  into  5 
the  floor,  and  she  ties  |  them  together  with  the  split  bark.  After 
this  is  done,  it  is  in  this  way.1  |  After  she  has  finished  the  holder  for 
beating  cedar-bark,  she  takes  the  cedar-bark  beater  and  |  puts  it 
down  where  she  is  going  to  beat  the  bark.  When  |  the  cedar-bark 
gets  black  from  the  heat,  she  takes  it  down  and  puts  it  by  her  side.  || 
Then  she  takes  a  cedar-stick  one  span  |  in  length  and  splits  off  one  10 
side  |  of  the  cedar-bark,  and  she  ties  one  end  of  the  stick  at  the  bot- 
tom two  finger-widths  |  from  the  end.  When  that  |  is  done,  she 
takes  her  straight  knife  and  splits  one  end  of  the  stick,  ||  so  that  it  is  15 
like  tongs.  When  she  has  done  so,  this  is  the  holder  |  of  the  bark 
that  she  is  going  to  shred,  and  it  is  like  this  (like  a  pair  of  tongs). 
When  this  |  has  been  done,  she  takes  the  cedar-bark  and  coils  it  up, 
the  narrow  end  on  the  |  left-hand  side  of  the  paddle  on  which  she  is 
going  to  shred  the  cedar-bark.  She  puts  the  bark  on  |  with  the 
broad  end.  It  is  in  this  way.2  Now  the  ||  woman  who  shreds  the  20 
cedar-bark  holds  the  place  where  the  holder  is  tied  up  in  her  left  | 
hand,  and  with  the  right  hand  she  takes  the  cedar-bark  beater.  | 
She  puts  her  left  leg  over  the  paddle  and  |  sits  down  on  it.    The  handle 


dEnase  LE'wa  sewayowe.     Wa,  la  dex£walllasa  g  ilt!aga£yases  leiii-  3 
g'ayowe.     Wa,  la    ax£edxa    dEnase    qa£s   dzExaxode   laq.     Wa,  la 
ax£edxa  sewayowe  qa£s  k'adEnodzEndes  laxa  degwlle.     Wa,  la  yll£-  5 
etsa  dzEXEkwe  dEiias  laq.     Wa,  g'il£niese  gwalExs  lae  ga  gwalega.1 
Wa,  giFmese  gwala  kasdEmelaxs  lae  ax£edxes  kadzayowe  qa£s  lii 
gigalilas    laxes    k'adzasLaxa  dEnase.     Wa,   g'il-mese    la    q!waq!u- 
qiiyax£Ideda    dEnasaxs    lae    gexwaxodEq    qa£s    la   gig'alilas    laxes 
k'adzasLaq.     Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  klwaxLawe  £nEmp!Enk"  laxEns  q!wa-  10 
q!waxts!ana£yex   yix   £wasgEmasas.     Wa,  lii    dzExod  lax  awunxa- 
£yasa    dEnase   qa£s  ytL'.EXLEndes  lax  6xLa£yasxa  maldEnk  e  laxEns 
q!\vaq!waxts!ana\vex     giigiLEla     laxa     6ba£yas.       Wa,     gil-'mese 
gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  nExx";ila  k'  lawayowa  qa£s  xox£widexa  apsba- 
£yas   qa  yuwes    gwex"sa    ts!esLalax.     Wa,    g"il£mese    gwala  k!lbE-  15 
dzayayasa  kasiixa    k  a  IzEkwaxs  lae  g'a  gwalega.1     Wa,  gih'mese 
gwalExs  lae  &x£edxa    dEnase   qa£s  qlElxwallles    ts  !eq !Eba£yas  gEm- 
xagawalllasa   kasdEmile    sewayowa.     Wa,    lit    kMibEdzotsa    k'!ibE- 
dza£}Te  lax  £wadzoba£}'asa  dEnase.     Wa,  la  g'a  gwiileg-a.2     Wa,  laEm 
q!wetsEma£ya    k'atslenoxwax    yiL!EXLa£yasa    k"  HbEdzayases    gEm- 20 
xolts!ana.     Wa,  la    dastE£weses  helk- !olts !ana£ye  lax  daiisases  ka- 
dza£yaxs    lae    gax£Eneses    gEmx5ltsidza£ye    laxa    sewayowaxs   lae 
k!wak!Eneq.     Wa,  laxExusale  gexta£yasa  sewayowe  lax  mEng-asa. 

'  See  figure  on  p.  127.  2  See  figure  on  p.  128. 


134  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Letii.ann.ss 

of  the  paddle  shows  at  her  hackside,  and  |  the  bark  hardly  shows  on 
25  the  right-hand  side  of  the  paddle.     Then  ||  she  begins  to  beat  it,  and 
she  pushes  it  on  with  the  left  hand  every  time  |  she  beats  it;  and  she 
continues  doing  so  untd  she  |  reaches  the  end  of  the  whole  length  of 
the  cedar-bark.     When  she   |  reaches   the  end,  she  puts  down  the 
cedar-bark  beater,  takes  the  broad  |  end  of  the  shredded  cedar-bark, 
30  and  lays  it  down  flat  on  her  knee.     She  ||  keeps  it  in  the  same  way 
as  she  had  it  placed  over  the  paddle,  and  she  peels  off  |  what  came 
off  by  beating  it.     It  is  all  in  strips;   and  when  she  has   taken  it 
off,  |  she  pulls  it  off,  and  she  continues  plucking  off  what  is  on  the 
shredded  cedar-bark;    and  when  |  she  has  plucked  it  off  along  the 
whole  length,  she  splits  it  into  strips  one  |  finger  wide.1 
1       Open- Work  Basket. — She  takes  split  cedar- withes  and  |  picks  out 
four  back  pieces  of  the  split  cedar-withes.     These  |  are  to  be  the  cor- 
ners of  the  flat-bottomed  basket  (the  four  pieces).     Then  |  she  takes 
another  one  different   from  the  four  pieces,  which  is  to  form  the 
5  stiff  ||  bottom  of  the  flat-bottomed  basket.     Then  she  takes  thin  split 
cedar-withes  and  puts  |  them  into  the  bottom,  and  she  takes  split 
roots  and  |  ties  them  together       /////*  vnth  them.     Now  it 

is  tied  crosswise  in  this  way,  |      /////////    »  ||      being    placed     and 
tied      close     together.      The  ^wnltlixz  length  of   the   bot- 
10  torn  is  |  two  spans  and  four     \\\\\V\\  finger-widths ;  ||  that 

is,  where  the  corner  withes  are       «"*  tied   in.    |   As    soon 


Wa,  la  halsElaEm  nelbaleda  dEnase  lax  helk£!odEdza£yasa  sewayo- 

25  waxs  lae  k'as£ldEq.     Wa,    la  qlwalxoEin  wixuw!dEq    yises  gEmxol- 

ts!ana£yaxs  lanaxwae  kas£ldEq.     Wa,  axusa£mese    he  gweg-ilaqexs 

lae    labEndalax  ewasgEmasasa    dEnase.      Wa,    g'irmiese    labEndEx 

£wasgEmasas  lae  g'lg-alllaxes  k"adzayowe.     Wa,  la  dax£Idxa  £wadzo- 

ba£yasa  k"adzEk"  qa£s  paxk'ax'^ndes  luxes  okwaxa£ye.     Wa,  laEm 

30  hex'saEm    banadza£yeda  ftxalaxde  laxa  sewayowe.      Wii,  la  qiisa- 

laxes  kadzEla£yaxs  lae  lenoqwala.     Wa,  g'IPmese  ewllgEldzoxs  lae 

nex£edEq    qa£s    hanale    qiisEldzEJwexes    k-asela£ye.      Wa,    gIPmese 

£wllgEldzo  laxes  £wasgEmasaxs  lae  dzExalaxa  £nalmEmdEne  laxEns 

q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  yJx  awadzEwasas. 

1      Open-Work  Basket. — Wa,  la    ax£edxa   paakwe  tEXEma  qa£s  mEn- 

maqexa    motslaqe    eweg'esa   paakwe  tEXEma.     Wa,  heEm  iJaiJE- 

xEnots !Exsdesa    LEq!Exsde    lExa£ya,  ylxa   motslaqe.     Wa,  la  ax£- 

edxa    £nEmts!aqe    ogucla  laxa  motslaqe.     Wa,  heEm   LlaxEXsdesa 

5  LEqlExsde  lExa£ya.     Wit,  la  5x£edxa    pElspEle    paaku  tEXEma  qa£s 

ka-t!Endes  laxa  l  !axExsdE£ye.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  paakwe    LloplEk'a 

qa£s  k!ilx,£ides  laq.     Wit,  laEm   galopale   k-!ilk-a£yas  ga  gwiilega 

(Jig.)  laxes  mEmk'Ewak!wena£yes   k!ilka£ve  lax  hamodEngalaena- 

£yas  £wasgEmasasa  L!axExsda£ye  lax  malplEnke  laxsns  q!waq!wa- 

10  xts!ana£yex.      Wii,    he£mis     la,     wax-ba£yaatsa    L!aLlEXEnots!Exs- 

'See  Doghair,  p.  1317. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  135 

as  she  finishes  tying  the  flat  |  bottom,  she  takes  the  material  for  12 
twining  round  the  flat-bottomed  basket  and  she  puts  it   |    on  the 
corners,  which  are  bent  upward.    |    The   twining  consists   of  split 
roots,  and  the  crosspieces  consist  of  split  cedar-withes.  ||  She  ties  the  15 
basket  with  the  best  quality  |  of  thin  roots.     She  twines  it  on  as  she 
is  tying  it  on  with  |  the  root  twining,  and  the  sides  of  the  basket  stand 
up  and  down.  |  This  is  called  the  "standing  side  of  the  flat-bottomed 
basket."  |  Other  basket-makers  call  it  "standing  up  straight."     She  || 
continues  doing  this,  moving  upward  until  the  basket  is  one  span  20 
high.  |  As  soon  as  it  is  one  |  span  high,  she  takes  thick  |  split  root 
and  bends  the  tops  of  the  warp-strands.  |  When  all  the  warp-strands 
of  the  sides  are  bent  over,  ||  she  ties  them  into  a  round  coil  around  25 
the  mouth  of  the  flat-bottomed  basket.  |  This  is  called  "the  tying  at 
the  mouth  of  the  flat-bottomed  basket"  |  (what  she  is  tying  now). 
As  soon  as  this  is  finished,  she  takes  the  narrow  split  cedar-bark  |  and 
makes  a  rope,  which  she  puts  on  each  side  of  the  flat-bottomed  basket 
at  |  the  middle,  lengthways.     This  is  called  the  "carrying-rope   of 
the  ||  flat-bottomed  basket."     Some  basket-makers  call    it  |  "piece  30 
for  tying  on  cross-straps."     Now  the  |  flat-bottomed  clover-basket 
is  finished.  I 


da£ye.      Wa,     g-il£mese      gwal      k' !ilx'£aLElodalasa     q!waabaEyasa  n 
oxsda£ye  lae  ax£edxa  xwemasa  LEqlExsde  lExa^ya    qa£s    katlEnde 
laxa    q  !waaba£yaxs    lae    ekhsbala.      Wii,    laEin    paaku    LloplEka 
xweme.     Wa,  la  paak"    tEXEma    q  Iwaaba'yasa  LEqlExsde  lExaeya. 
Wa,    heemis   la    klilkilasa    Isxelaenoxwa    aek'laakwe    paaku    wis-  15 
wultowe     LloplEka.       Wa,    laEin      mElgaaLElodalasa      k'lilg-ime 
L!op!Ek-    laxa    xweme    LE'"wa    la    ek'tebaHda    qlwaaba'ye.      Wa, 
laEm    LegadEs    q !wasgEma£yasa     LEqlExsde     lExa£ya.      Wii,    liida 
waokwe  lExelaenox"  LeqElas  qlwaele    laxa  q !wasgEmasye.     Wii,  la 
hexsaEm   gwegilaq    liilaa    qa    £iiEm]i !Enk"6stawise    EwalasgEmasas  20 
laxEns     q!waq!waxts!anaeyex.      Wa,    gil£mese      hiLEx    ="nEmp!En- 
kostawe  £walasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yaxs  lae  ax^edxa 
LiiLEkwala  paaku  L!op!Ek-a  qa£s  gwagwanagEtodexa  qlwaele.     Wa, 
gil'mese    la  ewi£la  la  gwanagEkwa  oxta£yasa  qlwaele  eklotlEnda- 
laxa  xwemaxs  lae  klilgiiEndEx  awaxsta£yases  LEqlExsde  lExa£ya.  25 
Wa,    heEm   LegadEs    k  IllgixstEndesa    LEqlExsde    lExaeya    yLx    la 
k!ilkaso£s.     Wii,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax^edxa  dzEXEkwe  dEnasa 
qa-s    mElgaaLElodes    lax    waxsamVyasa    LEqlExsde    lExaeya    lax 
nEg5ya£yas    g'ildolasas.     Wa,    heEm    LegadEs    k'!ak"!ogwase    ylsa 
LEqlExsde     lExaeya.       Wii,     liida      waokwe     lExelaenox"     LeqElas  30 
mamadase      laq.       Wii,     laEm     gwala     ts!oyats!eLaxa     LEx-sEme 
lei|  lExsd  lsxa£ya. 


136  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

1  Cedar-Bark  Basket  (1) . — Now  the  flat-bottomed  basket  is  finished.  | 
Then  the  woman  takes  cedar-bark  and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where 
she  is  seated,  |  not  far  from  the  fire  of  the  house,  so  that  the  |  heat  of 
the  fire  just  strikes  it.  She  measures  the  cedar-bark  with  her  hand  || 
5  and  cuts  oft*  a  length  of  five  spans  |  with  her  fish-knife.  When  the 
cedar-bark  has  been  cut,  |  she  splits  it  so  that  it  is  one  |  finger-width 

|  This  will  be  the 
soon  as  all  II  the 


wide  in  the  middle,  in  this  manner: 

10  bottom  of  thecinquefoil-basket.  As 

cedar-bark  has  been  split  in  the  middle,  the  woman  who  makes  the 
basket  takes  cedar-sticks  |  and  splits  them  in  square  pieces  half  the 
thickness  of  the  |  little  finger,  and  she  measures  them  so  that  each  is 
two  spans  |  long.     Then  she  breaks  them  oft.  |  When  this  has  been 

15  done,  she  takes  a  narrow  strip  of  ||  split  cedar-bark,  and  she  takes  the 
two  |  cedar-sticks  that  have  been  measured  and  places  them  together 
crosswise,  in  tins  way:    J  Then  she  |  ties  them  together  with 

the  narrow  split  cedar-  hark.     As    soon    as    this    has    been 

finished,    she    |    takes    f  another  one  of  the  cedar-sticks  that 

have  been  measured  and  puts  it  |  on  the  other  end  of  those  that  have 

20  been  tied  together,  and  she    4  ties    it   on    with   narrow  ||  split 

cedar-bark,  in  this  maimer:  After  this  has  been  done,  she  | 

takes   up    another   one    of  «|  the  cedar-sticks  that  have  been 

measured,  and  she  puts  it  |  on  the  ends  of  the  two  sticks,  and  she  ties 


1  Cedar-Bark  Basket  (1). — Wii,  laEmLa  gwala  LEq  "Exsde  lExaeya;  wii, 
laxaeda  ts'Edaqe  ax£edxa  dEnase  qa£s  ax£aliles  laxes  klwaelase  laxa 
k!ese  alaEm  qwesala  lax  lEgwllases  gokwe  qa  a£mese  helale  L!es£ala- 
ena£yasa  lEgwlle  laqexs  lae  mEnmEnts  lalaxa  dsnase.  Wii,  laEin 
5  bal£Itses  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£ye  laq.  Wii,  sEklap'Enke  b&La£yasexs 
lae  t'otstentses  xwiiLayowe  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£la  la  t!ot!Ets!aa- 
kwa  dEnasaxs  lae  dzEdzExsEndEq  qa  £nal£nEmdEnes  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!wax*ts!ana£yex  ytx  iiwiidzEwasas  yixa  nEgEdza£yas  g-a  gwiileg'a 
(  fig.)  yixa  oxsdeLasa  LEg"ats!eLe  L!abatelaso£s.     Wii,  gll£mese  ewi£la 

10  la  dzExoyEwakiixs  laeda  Llabatelaenoxwe  tslEdaq  ax£edxa  k!wax- 
Liiwe  qa£s  xox£wldeq  qa  k'  !ek'  !EWElx£unes.  Wii,  lii  k'  !odEn  laxEns 
sElt  lax'ts !ana£yex  yix  awiigwidasas.  Wa,  lii  bal£ldEq  qa  maema'p  !eii- 
kes  iiwasgEmasasa  motslaqe  laxens  q !waq Iwaxts !iina£yaxs  lae 
koxsEndEq.     Wa,  g-il£mese    gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!elts.'Eq!astowe 

15  dzEXEk"  dEnasa.  Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  malts  !aqe  laxa  mEnekwe 
k!waxLawa  qa  kak'Etodes  oba£yas  g'a  gwiilega  (fig.).  AVii,  lii 
yaLotsa  ts!Eq!adzo  dzEXEk"  dsnas  laq.  Wii,  g11£mese  gwalExs  lae 
et!ed  «x£edxa  £nEmts!aqe  mEnek"  klwaxtawa.  Wii,  laxae  k'atbEnts 
lax  apsba£yasa  la    yaLEWakwa   qa£s  yIl£aLEl5des  ytsa  ts!eq!adzowe 

20  dzEXEk"  dEnas  laq;  ga  gwiilega  (fig.).  Wii,  gtl£mese  gwTalExs  lae 
et'.ed  ax£edxa  £nEmts!aqe  mEneku  k!waxLawa  qa£s  kakEtbEndes 
lax  oba£yasa  malts  !aqe.     Wii,  laxae  yfiLEmg'aaLElots  waxsba£yases 


INDUSTKIES 


137 


it  to  both  ends.  |  She  just  ties  it  on  with  narrow  split  cedar-bark.  23 
Now  |  it  is  this  way,    a  «    and  it  is  the  stiff  bottom  of  the  clover- 

basket,  for  ||  that  is  If  what  the  cedar-sticks    tied  together  25 

are  called.    Therefore  fl=== ,  au   fcne   I   clover-baskets    are   of  the 
same  size  when  they  =^  are  made  by  the  basket-makers.    One 

is    neither  |    bigger  nor  smaller    than    another,  for    the     bottoms 
are  measured.  |    When  this  is  done,  the    woman    takes  the  cedar- 
bark   that    has    been    split   |    and    measured 
splits  it  again  clown  to  one  end,||  in  this  manner: 
takes   the  stiff   bottom   and  places 
middle  of  the  cedar-bark,  in  this  way : 
weaves  it  like   a  mat  in    |    coarse 


it  is  of  the 
Now  it 
and    it    is 


off,  and  she 
Then  she  30 
it  |  on  the 
and  she 
we  aving, 
ame  size  as  |  the  stiff 
woven      in      this 


into  narrow  strips,  starting  from 
stiff  bottom,  in  this  way: 
split  it,  she  takes  a  long  strip  of 
cedar-bark,  puts  the  end 
ners  of  the  stiff  bottom  into  the 
of   the  basket,  and  she  ties  the 


called   |   "the    bottom 
in  broad  strips;"  namely,  the  bottom  woven 
cedar-bark.       When  the  stiff  bottom    has  35 
covered,  |  the  woman  sphts  the  cedar-bark 
the 


edge  of  the 
After  |  she  has 
narrow  split  | 
through  the  cor- 
||  woven  bottom  40 
I  two  ends  to  the 


alEm  kat!aLEloya  yisa  ts!eq!adzowe  dzEXEkwa  dEnas  laq.     Wa,  la  23 
g'a  gwalaxs  lae  gwaleda   LlaxaxsdeLasa   LEg'ats!eLe  Llabata  (fig.) 
qaxs  he£mae  LegEmsa    yaLEwakwe    klwaxxawa    lagilas  £DEmalasa  25 
LEgats!e   Llabataxs  lae   k'!itasE£wa    ylsa   Llabatelaenoxwe     k!eas 
£walats.     Wa,  liixae  k'leas  amas  qaeda  mEnyayowexa  L!axExsda£ye. 
Wa,  g"il'"mese   gwalExs   laeda   tslEdaqe    ax£edxa   mEnmEnts  laakwe 
dzExoyEwak"  dEnas  qa£s  dzEx£ede  etledxa  dEnase  labEiid  lax  apsba- 
£yas,  g'a  gwiilega  (fig.).     Wa,  lit  ax^edxa  L!axExsda£ye  qa£s  axdzo-  30 
des   laxa  nEgEdza£yas  g'a   gwaleg'a  (fig.).     Wa,    la  k!it!edEq    qa 
awadzolidEkwes.      Wa,   he£mis   qa  £nEmadzoweses  k'!lta£ye  LE£wa 
L!axExsda£ye.     Wii,  laEm  ga  gwiile  k-!ita£yaseg-a  (fig.).     Wa,  hcEin 
LegadEs  k!it'.ExsdE£ye  awadzolldEk",  yixa  oxsdEye,  ytxs  lae  gadzs- 
qaleda  dzExEkwe  dEnasa.     Wa,   gll£mese  haniElgidzowa  LlaxExs-  35 
da£yaxs   laeda    tslEdaqe   heloxusEnd   dzEdzExsEndxa  g'agtLEla  lax 
ewunxa£yasa   L!axExsda£ye   qa  ts!elts!Eq!astowes   (fig.).     Wa,  g  11- 
£mese  gwal  dzEdzExs£alaq  lae  ax£edxa  gllstowe  ts!eq!adzo  dzEXEku 
dEnasa  qa£s  nex'sodes   lax  k'!ek!osasa  L!axExsda£ye   hex'sala  lax 
awadzolldEkwe  k-!it!ExsdEndesa  Llabate.     Wa,  la  mokumgaaLElots  40 
\vaxsba£yas  laxa  k'!ek!osasa  L!axExsda£ye  g'a  gwaleg'a  (fig.).     Wa, 


138  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  (eth.a.nn.36 


42  corners  of   the  flat  bottom,  in  this  way: 
strips  of  spht  cedar-bark  to 
they    cross,  in  this  manner: 


|  Then  she  ties  on 

the  center,  |  where 

As  soon  as  this  is 

done,  |  she  hangs  the  strings       (ffn'i'i'y        tQat  she  has  tied  to  it  to  a 

45  pole  in   the  corner  of  the  ||  house,  and  she  measures 

the  height  so  that  she  may  sit  by  its  side  when  she  is  weaving 
it;  and  |  she  ties  the  cedar-bark  strings  to  the  pole,  and  now  it 
is  |  in  this  way.1  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she  takas  long,  split,  [ 
narrow   cedar-bark,  which  is     called   "woof."     It    is    as   wide    as 

50  this.2  And  she  begins  |  weaving  at  the  corner  of  her  basket  ||  and 
weaves  around  it.  After  she  has  gone  around  once,  she  |  adds  on 
another  strip  and  continues  weaving.  Now  there  are  two  woof- 
strands.  |  After  she  has  gone  around  once,  she  puts  on  another  one 
and  weaves  it  in;  |  and  after  she  has  gone  around  once,  she  adds  on 
still  another  one  |    to  weave  with.     Now  there  are  four  of  them. 

55  Now  she  weaves  around ;  ||  and  as  soon  as  she  has  the  size  that  she 
wants  for  the  height  of  the  cinquefoil-basket,  |  she  twists  in  the  warp- 
strands.  When  this  has  been  finished,  she  continues  [  making  baskets, 
for  sometimes  she  needs  as  many  as  ten  baskets  if  she  has  a  large  j 
cinquefoil-garden.  | 
1  Basket  for  Viburnum-Berries. — You  know  already  all  the  ways  of  work- 
ing |  roots  and  cedar-withes:  therefore  I  will  |  talk  about  the  way  in 

42  lit  moxew!tsa  gilstowe  dzEXEk"  ts!eq!astowe  dEnas  laxa  nExdzawas 
giidzexedaasas  g'a  gwiilega  {fig-).  Wa,  gil£mese  gmllExs  lae 
gexusEq  tentsa    ale    mdx£waLElodayds    laxa    q!EhlEmelaxa  onegwilas 

45  g'okwa.  Wa,  a£mise  gwanala  qa£s  klwanalileqexs  l&Le  k'lltaq  lae 
moxewitsa  tegwelEme  dEnas  laxa  qlEldEmele.  Wa,  laEm  g'a 
gwiilega.1  Wii,  g"il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  g  ilsg-ilstowe  dzEXEk" 
ts!elts'.Eq!astowe  dEnasa.  HeEm  LegadEs  kMtdEina  g'aEm  awadzE- 
watse   g'ada.2     Wii,  lii   k-!it!aLElots   laxa   k'losiises  L!abatelasE£we 

50  qa£s  mEleestalexs  lae  k-!iitaq.  Wii,  glPmese  lii£steda  enEmts!aqaxs 
lae  ginwasa  £nEmts!aqe  kMidEina  laq.  Wii,  la  malts !aqa  k"!tdEma. 
Wa,  gil'Emxaawise  lii£staxs  lae  ginwasa  £nEmts!aqe  qa£s  k-!it!a- 
LElodes.  Wii,  g'ileEmxaawise  la£staxs  lae  g'inwasa  £nEmts!aqe 
k-!idEma.     Wa,    la£me    mots!axse£stalaxs   lae    k- !ittse£stalaq.     Wii, 

55  o- il£mese  lag-aa  lax  gWE£yas  qa  £walasgEmatsa  LEg'ats!eLe  Lliiba- 
tExs  lae  malagExstEndEq.  Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  hanal 
Llabatela  qaxs  £nal£nEmp!Enae  nEqasgEine  L!iibatila£yasa  lexEdzas 
LEgEdzowe. 
1  Basket  for  Viburnum- Berries. — Wii,  laEinLas  qlfiLEla  £naxwa  gweg'i- 
latsexa  LloplEk'e  LE£wa  tEXEmaxs  lae  eaxElaq.  Wa,  hetlEn  liigila 
£nex'  qEn  gwagwexs£iile  laxa  tslEdfiqaxs  lae  lsxelaxa  kloxstano- 

i  See  last  figure.  2  About  6  mm.  wide. 


INDUSTRIES 


139 


which  the  woman  makes  the  basket  |  for  viburnum-berries.    It  is  made 
differently  from  other  baskets.     The  weaving  ||  is  done  in  the  same  5 
way.     The  only  thing  that  is  different  is  that  the  sides  are  straight 
up  and  down,  |  and  the  bottom  is  flat.     It  is  measured  so  as  to  fit  into 
the  |  box  for  steaming  viburnum-berries.    The  bottom  is  bent  square, 


in  this  way 
side.  It  is 
one  long 
short  side. 
two  fingers  | 
loosely  into 
four  ||  spans 


|  There  are  two  handles  to  it,  one  on  each 
two  spans  high,  and  ||  two  spans  long,  and  10 
span  and  one  short  span  |  is  the  length  of  its 
The  box  for  cooking  viburnum-berries  is 
wider  than  this  size,  so  that  the  basket  fits 
the  box  when  it  is  put  in.  The  box  is 
high.  As  soon  as  |  the  cooking-basket  for  15 
viburnum-berries  has  been  finished,  it  is  put  down  at  a  damp  place, 
so  that  |  the  weaving  may  not  get  loose,  for  it  is  not  well  woven  .  | 

Basket  for  Wild  Carrots. — The  wife  makes  a  |  cedar-bark  basket. 
You  know  already  about  the  making  of  ||  baskets,  for  it  is  the  same  20 
as  the  cinquefoil-basket.     The  only  |  difference  is  that  it  is  shallower 
than    the    cinquefoil-basket.    |   The   basket   for  carrots  is  made  of 
broad  strips.  | 

Cedar- Bark  Basket  (2). — You  know  already  |  how  baskets  are  made,  i 
The  only  difference  in  the  basket  for  |  lily  bidbs  is  that  it  is  woven 


waxa  tlElse  lExa£ya,  yix  6gu£qalae   laxwa    laElxa£yex  yixs  ycrmae 
gwale   k!ilka£ya.      Wa,  la    lex'aEm    ogiVqalayosex  heyanae   LEq!- 5 
Exsdae,  yix;  lae  niEnek",  qa£s  a£me  heldzExbEta  lax  laxaltsla  laxa 
q  !6lats  leLaxa  tlElse.     W;i,  la  k-  !ek"  logEkwe  oxsdE-yas  g"a  gwaleg'a 
{fig.).  Wa,  la male  kleklogwasas  lax  wfixsanfr'yas.   Wa,  la  malplEn- 
kostawe  £walasgEmasa  laxEns    q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.      Wa,    laxae 
malplEnk'e  gildolas  laxEn  qlwaq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  yixs  tslExuts!ane-  10 
balaeda  £nEmp  lEnk'e  laxEns    q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex,  yix  ts!Eg-ol;is. 
Wa,    laLe    maldEne    lalexalagawa£yasa  q!olats!eLaxa   tlElse  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  qa  dzEbEciElesexs  lae  hanaxalts !Swa  k'loxsta- 
nowe  lExiixa  tlElse.     Wa,  lit  mop !Enk-ustawe  £walasgEmasas  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,    yixa     q!olats!axa     tlElse.      AYii,     g-ih'niese  15 
gwala  k" loxstanowe  lExitxs  lae  hfinegwelEm  laxa  dElnele  qa  k'lese 
s"!eenakule  k' !ilk'a£yas,  qaxs  k'lesae  aekMaakwe  k*  !ilk-aeyas. 

Basket  for  Wild    Carrots. — AVii,    laLa    gEnEmas    Llabatilaxa    dEn- 
tsEme  Llabata,    qax  lE£maaqos    q!aLElax    gweg-ilasasa    Llabatilaxa 
l '.abate  qaxs  he£mae  gwaleda  tlEgwatsle  Llabata.       Wa,  lexa£mes  20 
6gu£x£Idayosexs  aemae    kwakwatsEmalaga£wesa   tlEgwatsle  Llabata. 
Wa,  laxae    awadzolldEkweda    k!idela£yasa   XEtxEt laats !e    Llabata. 

Cedar-Bark  Basket  (2). — Wa,  laEmLasnaxwa  q  laLElax  gwayi£lalasasa  l 
Llabatila.     Wa,  lexa£mes  ogu£qalayosa  Llabatila  qa£s  x'ogwatslexa 


140  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Leth.akn.m 

flat  and  low,  for  its  length  |  and  breadth  are  two  spans  each  and  it  is 
5  one  |!  span  high.     It  has  |  no  holes  along  the  rim  for  lashing,  as  the 

other  baskets  have,  |  for  lashing  them  when  they  are  being  tied  up. 

The  baskets  for  lily-bulbs  have  the  tops  of  the  sides  bent  backward.  | 

Tli at  is  all  about  this.  | 

Huckleberry- Basket. — As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she  begins  to  make  the 
10  basket  ||  for  shaking  the  huckleberries  into;  hut  I  will  not  |  talk  about 

the  making  of  the  basket,  for  the  only  thing  that  is  different  about 

the  huckleberry-basket  |  is  that  it  has  a  wide  mouth  and  low  sides 

and    narrow    ^ra^wttwjftfc.    bottom,  |  and  that  it  is  very  finely  made 

in  this  way:    jfflBnn^ffi!ffl|  When  |  this  is  finished,  she  makes  another 
15  smaller   bas-   v^ffSSuuW|W»  ket  of  medium  size.  [|  It  is  made  in  the 

same  way  as     ,™ssitti£gip!JPr    the  large  |  swallowing-basket.  | 

Box  for  picking  Salmon- Berries. — Let  me  for  a  while  talk  about 

what  the  hooked  box  for  picking  salmon-berries  is,  |  and  what  its 

sizes  are.     It  is  just  this.    The  box  is  made  of  the  best  kind  of  cedar- 
20  wood,  and  ||  the  hooked  box  is  well  made.     It  is  |  made  as  light  as 

possible,  and  it  is  made  in  the  same  way  |  as  they  make  the  oil-box; 

and  these  are  its  sizes.     It  is  |  one  span  and  a  short  span  high,  and 
25  is  |  one  span  and  four  fingers  long,  ||  and  one  span  wide.  |  It  has  the 

3  x-okiimaxs  pEqElae .  yixs  kiitElae,  yixs  malp!Enkllii£laes  gildolase 
LEswis  ts  lEgola  laxEns  q  !waq  !waxts  !iina£yex.  Wii,  frmesLa  £nEmp  !En- 
5  k'ustawe  £walasgEmasas  laxEns  q!wiiq!waxts!a,na£yex.  Wa,  laxae 
k'leiis  tlEmagatslExstes  he  gwaleda  LlaiJEbataxs  malagExstalae 
qa  nEyEmxsalatsa  t!Emag'imas  yixs  ii£mae  gwagu£nsigEtE£wakwe 
5xta£yasa  awaxsta'yasa  xogwatsle  L!abata.  Wii,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
Huckleberry-Basket.  — Wa,  g  ihcmese  £wria  gwalExs  lae  k'!tlats!eg'I- 

10  laxes  lc!ilats!eLaxa  gwadEine  lExa;ya.  Wa,  laLaLEn  k!es  gwagwex-- 
s£alal  laqexs  lae  lExelaq.  Wa,  la  lexaEin  ogii^alayosa  k"!llats!iixa 
gwadEmaxs  lexExstae;  wa,  la  kiitEla;  wii,  laxae  t!ogwapa;  wa, 
he£misexs  alak-!fdae  t!olt!oxsEma  g'a  gwiileg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  g-il£mese 
.  .  .  gwalExs  lae  et!ed  k'lihitsleg-ilaxa  amaye  helomagEin  k-!ilats!e 

15  b3xa£ya.  Wii,  laEmxae  hcEm  gwideda  £walase  niig'e  k'!llats!e 
lExa£ya. 

Box  for  picking  Salmon-Berries. — Wii  g-a£masLEn  gwagwexs£E- 
x£Id  lax  gwex"sdEmasa  gaLEkwe  li:imyats!exa  qlamdzEkwe,  ylx 
£walayasas  ytxs  lex'a£mae  wulx,£ItsE£wa  alii  la  ek'  klwaxLawa,  qaxs 

20  alae  la  aeklakvva  gaLEkwaxs  lae  wulasE£wa.  Wii,  he£misexs  alae 
k!wak!wayaaku,  qa£s  klutsEme.  Wii,  la  yuEm  gwiile  wiila£jTase 
wCila£yasa  dEngwats!e.  Wii,  ga£mes  £walayatseg-a,  yixs  £nEm- 
plEnkae  he£mesa  ts !Exuts !ana£ye  £walagostawasas:  wii  la  modEnba- 
leda     £nEmp!Enk'e      laxEns     q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex    yix    gildoliis; 

25  wii,     la     £nEmj)!Enke     tsEg'5las      laxEns     q!waq!waxts!ana£yex. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  141 

thickness  of  one-half  of  the  tip  of  the  little  finger,  ]  and  it  is  well  made.  27 
It  is  grooved  all  over  with  fine  grooves,  in  this  manner.1  |  When  it  is 
done,  the  wife  of  the  box-maker  takes  the  very  best  |  cedar-bark  to 
make  a  packing-strap.     The  cedar-bark  is  split  ||  into  very  narrow  30 
strips,  and  each  end  is  twisted  to  a  rope.     In  the  middle  it  is  woven 
like  a  mat,  |  in  this  way:  As   soon    as 

the     forehead-strap     is 
twists  a  small  cedar-bark 

when  she  thinks  |  it  is  long  enough  for  being  tied  around  the  hooked 
box,  she  stops  |  twisting  rope.     She  takes  the  hooked  box,  turns  it 


around,  and  half  way  up  its  height  || 
bark  around  it  as  tightly  as  possible, 
four  times,  |  and  she  ties  the  end  to 
she  has  done  so,  she  cuts  off  the  cedar- 
Then  she  takes  the  part  that  she  has 


she  winds  the  cedar-  35 
She   puts    it    around 
2  (1)  and  (2).     After  | 
bark   rope    |    at    (3). 
cut  off  and  makes  a 


loop  underneath,  passing  over  the  bottom  board,  brings  it  up, 
and  takes  a  turn  |  at  (4).  She  puts  it  around  four  times.  Then 
she  ties  the  end  at  ||  (4).  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she  takes  the  40 
packing-strap  which  passes  around  her  forehead,  and  |  puts  it  on 
with  two  half -hitches  at  the  end  at  (1)  and  also  at  (2).  |  That  is  the 
carrying-strap  for  the  hooked  box.     That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Tump-Line. — As  soon  as  the  basket  has  been  finished,  |  she  takes  1 
cedar-bark  and  measures  off  one  long  fathom  ]  and  two  spans  for  |  its 

Wa,  la  k!odEn  laxEns  sElt!axts!ana£ye  laxa  mak'  temex  ts  !a£yaxs  26 
ylx  waxusEmasas.    Wa,la  aek'  laakwa,  yixs  klwedEkwaega  gwalega.1 
Wii,  g  iFniese  gwalExs  lae  gEiiEmasa  wu'lenoxwe  :ix£edxa  alaxat !  ek' 
dEnasa,   qa£s    q  !alE3T5gwIleq.     Wa,  laEm    ts!elts!Eq!astowe    dzExa- 
£yase    dEnase,  ylxs  lae    niEikwes   wax-sba£ye.     Wa,   la    k  idoyEwa-  30 
kwa     ga     gwaleg-a     (Jig.).     Wa,     gil£niese    gwala    qlateyowaxs 
lae    mElx-£idxa   £w!l£Ene    dEnsen    dEnEma.     Wii,    gil£rnesc    kotaq 
laEm  helala  £wasgEinasas   lax  wElxsEmeses    gaLEkwaxs    lae    gwal 
mElaq.     Wa,  la  iix£edxa  gaLEkwe  qac"s  nEgoyode  £walasgEmasexs  lae 
qExsEmts  laq,   qa£s   lEklutsEmde    qEnoyots.     Wa,  la   mop!ene£sta  35 
laqexs  lae    yll£aLEl6dEx   6ba£yas    lax    (1)    lo£    (2).     Wa,  giPmese 
gwalExs  lae  t!5ts!EndEq.     Wii,  la   galop  lets    oba£yases    t!osoyowe 
lax  (3),  qa£s  lit  xlmaabodalax  paq !Exsda£yas,  qa£s  gaxe  galop !lts 
lax  (4).     Wii,  laEmxae   mop!ene£stax   lae   yll£aLElots    6ba£yas   lax 
(4).     Wii,  g'iPmese    gwalExs  lae  ;lx£edxa   q!alEyowe  qa£s  lii   max-  40 
£waLElots  ;ipsba£yas   lax  (1);  wa,  laxaes   :ipsba£yas    lax   (2).     Wa, 
laEm  aoxxaekwa  gaLEkwe  laxeq.     Wii,  laEm  gwala. 

Tump-Line. — Wii,  g-fi£mese   gwale    k!ilats!Eg-ila£yas    lExa£ya,  lae  1 
ax£edxa    dEnase    qa£s    bal£ideq    qa    £nEmp!Enkes    laxEns    baLxa; 

1  See  figure  below. 


142  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [bth.  ANN.  35 

5  length.  Then  she  takes  the  straight  knife  and  ||  cuts  it  off,  and  she 
puts  the  bark  into  water  to  get  soaked.  |  She  does  not  leave  it  there 
long  before  taking  it  out.  Then  she  |  splits  it  into  narrow  strips ;  and 
after  it  has  been  split,  |  she  twists  it  into  a  rope  three  |  spans  long;  and 
then  she  continues  plaiting  it  like   a  mat,  beginning  with  the  rope 

1 0  that  she  has  twisted.  ||  This  plaiting  is  three  spans  long,  and  serves 
as  a  strap  over  the  forehead  for  carrying  the  basket.  |  When  she 
reaches  the  end,  she  twists  it  again,  beginning  at  the  end  of  the  |  mat- 
ting, and  the  twisted  rope  is  also  three  spans  long.  |  After  it  is  fin- 
ished, |  it  is  in  this  way.1     This  is  called  the  "forehead-strap,"  and  is 

15  tied  ||  to  the  opening  of  the  huckleberry-basket  which  she  has  made.  | 

Back- Protector. — After  she  has  finished  all  the  baskets,  |she  quickly 

splits  cedar-bark  live  spans  in  length;  |  and  when  she  thinks  she  has 

enough,  |  she  takes  some  narrow  split  cedar-bark  and  she  weaves  the 

20  middle   ||    together  in   this   manner,  .     — -,   so  as  to  keep  the 

strands  close  together.     This  is  two  -  -  T— =,    spans  |  in  width. 

As  soon  as  this  has  been  finished,  |  A  she  hangs  it  over 

the  mat-stick,  and  she  sits  down  at  the  place  |  where  hangs  the  cedar- 
bark  that  she  is  going  to  weave,  and  she  begins  weaving  in  the 
middle.   |  When  she  reaches  the  end,  she  puts  in   the  selvage;  and 


3  he£misa  malptenkes  esEg-iwa£yas  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex, 
ytx  wasgEmasasexs  lae  dax-£ldxes  nExx-ala  klawayowa  qa£s 
5  t!5ts!Endeq.  Wa,  lii  hapstEndEq  laxa  £wape  qa  pex£wldes.  Wa, 
k!est!a  gestalilExs  lae  slx£wiistEndEq  laxa  £wape,  qa£s  ts!elts!E- 
q  lastogwilexs  lae  dzEdzExsalaq.  Wii,  g'il'mese  £wl£la  la  dzExEktixs 
lae  aek'Ia  mElx-£IdEq  qa  yuduxup!Enkesa  mElkwe  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana£yex.     Wii,  lii    k'!tt!ed    g'ag^LEla   lax  mElsVyas.     Wii, 

10  la  yuduxup!Enk-£Emxae  £wasgEinasasa  k' JidEdzEwakwe  q!alEyowa. 
Wii,  glPmese  LabEndEq  lae  et!ed  mElx£id  giiglLEla  lax  6ba£yasa 
k' !idE<lzEwakwe.  Wii,  laEmxae  yuduxup!Enke  £wasgEmasas  mEla- 
£yas  laxEns  q!waqwaxts!ana£yex.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
ga  gwiileg'a.1     Wa,  laEm  LegadEs  q!alEyowe.    Wii,  lii  t !EmxeaLElots 

2  5  lax  awaxsta£yases  k"!llats!egilae  lExa£ya. 

Back-Protector. — Wii,  g-ll£mese  gwal  £wi£le  l !abatela£yasexs  lae 
hanax£wid  dzEdzExsEndxa  dEnasexa  sEk-!ap!Enkas  awasgEmase 
laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.  Wii,  g"ll£mese  k'otaq  laEm  hel£a- 
laxs   lae    ax£edxa     tsleqladzowe   dzExEk"    dEnasa   qa£s  yiboyodes 

20  laxes  dzExex'de  g'a  gwiileg'a  {fig.)  qa  qlasaleslax  malp!Enk-!ena£yas 
£wadzEwasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs 
lae  gex"sEq  lEnts  laxa  k'  lltdEmelaxa  le£wa£ye.  Wii,  lii  k  !wag-ahla  lax 
gEwela£sas  qa£s  k-!tt!edeq  giiglLEla  lax  ylboyoda£yas.  Wii, 
g11£mese    labEndqexs    lae    malagEstEndEq.      Wii,    g'il£mese    gwal 

1  See  figure  on  p.  141. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  143 

after ||  she  has  finished  weaving  it,  she  turns  over  what  she  is  weaving,  25 
and  she  again  starts  from  |  the  middle  and  weaves  downward;  and 
when  she  gets  to  the  end,  j  she  puts  in  the  selvage.  After  this  has 
been  done,  |  she  takes  it  down,  takes  her  fish-knife,  and  cuts  off  the 
rough  ends  |  that  are  sticking  out.  When  she  has  cut  them  off  all 
around  the  ||  selvage,  the  back-protecting  mat  for  digging  clover  is  30 
done.  | 

Belt. — She  also  splits  cedar-bark  into  narrow  strips  of  the  same  1 
width  as  the  one  she  used  |  when  splitting  bark  for  the  back-protector 
for  digging  clover.  |  This  is  the  width.1     She  weaves  it  so  that  it  is 
three  fingers  |  wide  and  one  fathom  long.  ||  When  she  comes  near  the  5 
end,  she  lets  it  |  taper;  and  when  it  is  one  fathom  |  long,  the  end  is 
narrow;  and  she  twists  a  rope  out  of  the  same  bark  that  she  used  | 
for  weaving;  and  when  the  rope  is  also  one  |  fathom  long,  she  ties  a 
knot  at  the  end  ||  so  that  it  will  not  untwist.     Now  the  cedar-bark  10 
belt  is  |  two  fathoms  long.     She  uses  it  when  she  goes  to  dig  clover.  | 

Implement  for  peeling  Cedar-Bark. — When  (a  person)  gets  ready  to 
go  |  to  peel  off   cedar-bark  in  the  woods,  he  takes  |  his  small  ax, 
and  he  takes  a  branch  of  pine,  fiat  at  one  end,  four  ||  spans  long,  and  15 
two  finger-widths  |  in  diameter.     He  also  takes  aflat,  |  rough  sand- 


malaqaqexs  lae  xwel£ELodxes  k!itasEJwe  qa£s  giiglLElexat!  laxa  25 
yiboyoda£yas  qa£s  banolEle  k!itaq.  Wa,  g"il£Emxaawise  labEndEx 
6ba£yasexs  lae  malagExstEndEq.  Wii,  gtl£niese  gwalExs  lae 
gexwaxodEq  qa£s  ax£edexes  xwaLayowe  qa£s  tlosalex  6ba£yasa 
qlwadzayaq.  Wii,  g'il-mese  £wl£la  tlosodxa  waxsabala  laxa  niala- 
qa£yas  lae  gwala  LEbeg-eLe  le£wexs  tsloseLaxa  LExsEme.  30 

Belt.. — Wa,  laxae    dzEdzExsEndxa    dEnase    heEmxae    awadzEwe  1 . 
dzExa£yase  dzExa£yas    qaes    LEbeg'eLe   le£wexs    tsloseLaxa   lex-se- 
mexaga   awodzEwega.'     Wa,  la  k!it!edEq  qa  yfidux£dEnes  wadzE- 
wasas  laxEns  q  !waq  Iwaxts  !ana£yex.     Wii,  la  £nEmp  fenke  £wasgEma- 
sas  laxEns     baLax.     Wit,  gil£mese  Elaq  labEndqexs  lae  ts!eq!a£na-  5 
kule  oba£yas.     Wii,  gil£mese  labEndxa  £nEmp!Enke  laxens  baLiixs 
lae  wilba.     Wii,  la  mElx,£idxa  £wile  dEnsEn  dEnEnia  gayolEm  laxa 
k!itasE£wa  qaxs  he£mae    obese.      Wii,  gil£Emxaawise    £nEmp!Enk- 
laxEns  baLiik-e  mEla£yas    dEnsEn    dEnEmaxs   lae    moxubEndEq  qa 
k'leses  qwelaxbax£ida.     Wa,  laEm  malp!Enke  £wasgEmasas  dEne-  io 
dzowe  wuseganos  qo  lal  tslosalxa  LExsEme. 

Implement   for  peeling    Cedar-Bark. — Wii,   he£maaxs   lae  xwanalE- 
leda    la,Le    sEnqalxa    dEnase    laxa    aLle.      Wii,    he£mis    ax£etso£ses 
sayobEme.     Wa,  laLa  pExbaakwa  LlEnakasa  momoxude  moplEnk'e 
£wasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!iina£yex.     Wii,  lii  maldEnxsa£we  15 
£\vaij;idasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  pExsEme 

■  About  6  mm. 


144  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE   KWAKIUTL  [hth.ann.3S 

18  stone  and  places  it  by  the  side  of  the  |  fire  of  his  house.  He  puts  the 
end  of  the  pine-branch  |  into  the  fire;  and  when  it  is  burnt,  he  takes 

20  it  ||  by  the  big  end  and  puts  the  burnt  end  on  the  rough  sandstone,  | 

and  he  rubs  it  on  it  so  that  one      end  of  it  will  become  fiat, 

and  it  is  bent  |  in  this  manner:  "^  When  this  is  done,  he 
does  the  same  to  the  |  other  side.  Then  the  end  is  Hat;  and  he  rubs 
the  corners  off,  |  so  that  the  point  is  rounded,  like  this :   s   As 

25  soon  as  the  point  is  really  sharp,  ||  he  takes  tallow  of   J  the 

mountain-goat  and  chews  it;  |  and  he  takes  the  bark-lifter  wit li  which 
lie  is  going  to  peel  the  cedar-bark,  and  puts  the  [  flat  end  into  the  fire  of 
his  house.  When  it  gets  quite  |  hot,  he  puts  the  chewed  tallow  on  both 
sides  of  |  the  flat  end.    He  keeps  on  turning  the  bark-lifter  while  the  || 

30  tallow  is  melting,  so  that  it  spreads  over  both  sides.  Then  he  |  puts  it 
up  near  the  fire  so  as  to  let  the  tallow  soak  in.  When  |  it  almost  catches 
fire,  he  stops  heating  it.  Then  he  puts  it  down  |  in  the  corner  of  his 
house  so  as  to  let  it  cool  quickly;  |  and  when  it  is  cool,  it  is  hard. 

35  After  that  it  is  ready.  ||  This  is  the  bark-lifter  of  the  first  people  when 
they  went  to  peel  red  cedar-bark  |  and  yellow  cedar-bark,  of  which 

they  made  blankets  before  the  white  men  ca |  in  early  days.  | 

1      Spade. — Her  husband  makes  the  spade  for  digging  lily-bulbs.  |  It  is 
also  chopped  out  of  yew-wood.    When  he  goes  into  the  woods  and  |  he 

17  k'!5L!a  dE£na  tlesEma  qa£s  g-axe  pax£alilas  laxa  mag-inwallsas 
lEgwilases  gokwe.  Wa,  lii  LtenxLEnts  wilba£yasa  LloxulplEnk'asa 
momoxude  laxes   lEgwIle.     Wa,  gil£mese   x-ix£edExs    lae  dax£IdEx 

20  LEx"ba£yas  qa£s  ax£alodesa  k!iimElba£ye  laxa  k!6L!a  dE£na  tlesEma 
qa£s  yilsElales  laq,  yixa  apsotba£ye  qa  pExbes,  yix  wakalai>na£yas- 
ga  gwalega  (fig-)-  Wa,  gtPmese  gwaiExs  lae  ogwaqaxa  aps5- 
t!Ena£3T6s.  Wa,laeme  psxba.  Wa,  laxaeyilsElalax  waxsotba£yas  qa 
kElx-bes  ga  gwiileg-a   {fig.).     Wa,  g-il£mese  la  alak'lala  la  eex'baxs 

25  lae  ax£edxa  yasEkwasa  £mEl.\Lowe  qa£s  malEx£wideq.  Wa,  la 
;lx£edxa  l  !ok  IwayoLaxes  sEnqasoLa  dEnase.  Wii,  la  LtenxLEnts 
l>Exba£yas  laxa  lEgwilases  g'okwe.  Wii,  gfl£mese  alaklala  la 
ts!Elx£wldE.\s  lae  axbEntsa  malegikwe  yasEk"  lax  wax-sadza£yasa 
pE.xba£yas.     Wa,    a£mise    lexi£l;ilaxa     L!ok!wayaxs    lae    yax£Ideda 

30  yasEkwe  qa  las  haniElfiLEla  lax  waxsadza£yas.  Wii,  lii  et!ed 
pEx-£IdEq  laxa  lEgwile  €px  la£laqesa  yasEkwe  laq.  Wii,  g-tl£mese 
la  Elaq  x  ix£edExs  lae  gwiil  pExeq.  Wii,  a£mese  la  k-adEne- 
gwilaq  laxa  onegwllases  gokwe  qa  halabales  k-ox£wida.  Wii, 
o-il£mese  k5x£widExs  lae  L!Einx£wida.     Wit,   la£me  gwiilala    laxeq. 

35  Wa,    heEm    L!ok!wayasa     gale     bEgwanEmxs     sEnqaaxa     dEnase 

LE£wa   dexwe    qa£s    k' !6bawasilaxs    k!es£maolex    g'axa    mamal£ax 

laxa  qwesalii  £nala. 

1      Spade. — Wii,    laxa    la£wiinEmas    eaxElaxa     tsloyayaxa    xokume. 

Wa,  hi'Emxaeda  LlEmqle   sopletsos  yixs  lae    aliiq  laxa  aLle.     Wa 


boas]  ITSTDUSTKIES  145 

finds  (yew  trees),  he  chops  down  one  that  is  two  |  spans  in  diameter. 
When  the  tree  falls,  he  measures  off  ||  two  spans  and  chops  it  off  with  5 
bis  |  ax.  After  he  has  done  so,  he  splits  it  through  the  heart.  |  He 
takes  the  side  without  branches  |  and  chops  off  all  the  heart-wood  so 
that  it  comes  off  and  so  that  |  it  is  flat.  After  he  has  done  this,  he 
chops  the  other  side  so  ||  that  it  is  two  spans  thick,  and  |  he  chops  it  10 
well  until  it  is  smooth  and  of  the  same  thickness.     After  |  doing  so,  he 

measures  one  short  span  V^. a    and   |   chops   it 

so  that  it  is  in  this  way:   I s 1  3    and    he    chops 

the  top  I  so  that  it  has  a  crosspiece  on  it.  After  finishing  one  edge,  ||  15 
lie  does  the  same  with  the  other  edge.  Now  the  end,  [  beginning 
at  the.  bottom  (1)  is  square.  This  is  the  digging-point,  which  extends 
to  (2),  I  the  middle  handle,  and  towards  (3),  the  crosspiece  on  top. 
After  doing  so,  |  he  carries  it  in  his  hands  as  he  goes  home.  He  puts 
it  down  and  |  takes  a  piece  of  fire-wood,  on  which  he  adzes  it.  He 
takes  his  adz  ||  and  takes  hold  of  the  spade  for  lily-bulbs.  With  his  |  20 
left  hand  he  holds  it  by  the  point,  and  he  places  the  crosspiece  (3)  |  on 
the  fire-wood.  In  his  right  hand  he  takes  the  adz,  and  |  he  first 
adzes  down  at  the  middle  handle  (2),  which  he  makes  round.  |  When 
it  is  round,  he  turns  the  end  so  that  the  point  (1)  ||  stands  on  the  25 

g-il£mese   qliiqexs    lae    hex-£idaEm    sop'Exodxa    modEnx'sa    laxEns  3 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex.      Wa,     gd-mese     t!ax,£IdExs     lae     bal£Idxa 
malplEnk'e  laxEns   q!wa,qhvaxts!ana£yaxs   lae    tEmx"sEntses  s5ba-  5 
yowe  laq.     Wa,   g-il£niese    1:1xsexs    lae    naq!Eqax    domaqasexs  lae 
kiixsEndEq.      Wa,    la£mes   hi5    ax£etso£se   wIlEmases    ok!waedzarye. 
Wa,  la  ai;k"!a     sopalax     domaqas     qa    lawayes.      Wa,    he£mis    qa 
£nEmadzowes.     Wa,  gil£mese    gwala  lae    sop.'edEx    apsadzE£yas  qa 
maldEiies    laxEns    q!waq!waxts!ana£yaqe     wSgwasas.      Wa,     laxae  10 
agk*!a    s5paq    qa   £nEmadzowes   wagwasas.     Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs 
lae    baHdxa     ts IexHs !anaeye     laxEns      q!\vftq!wax-ts!ana£yaxs    lae 
sop!edEq  qag-es  gwale  g'a    (fig.).     Wa,   laxaii  sobEtEiidxa  oxt:1£yas 
qa  gextEweLas.     Wii,  gll-mese  gwala  apsotEnxa£yaxs  lae  heEmxat! 
gwex-£idxa     apsEnxa£yas.      Wii.    ;rcmise    la    k!iWElx£una    5xLa£yas  15 
g-ag"iLEla  lax  5xLa£yas  (1)  xa    tsegwayoba£ye    heg-ustala  laxa    (2) 
daad/.oyEwe  lag'aaLEla  laxa     (3)   gextfrye.      Wii,    g-fPmese  gwalExs 
lae  dak- lotElaqexs  lae  na£naku  laxes  g'okwe.     Wa,  la  ax-alilaq  qa£s 
ax£edexa  lEcpwa  qaes    k'limldEmaq.      Wii,    laxae  ax£edxes  klnnLa- 
yowe  qaes  daxeidexa    tsloyayoLaxa  x'okume  qa£s  daleses  gEmxol-  20 
ts!iina£ye   lax    (1)  tsegwayoba£yas.     Wa,  la  EakMEnts  (3)  gexta£ye 
laxa   lEqwa.     Wii,  la  dalases  h("'lk-!olts!ana£ye  laxa  k!tmLayowaxs 
laS  he'  gil   k!iml£Itso£se     (2)    daadzoyEwe  qa  lex£Enx£Ides.      Wii, 
g-il£mese    lex£Enx£IdExs    lae    xweh'IdEq    qa    hes    la    LEnqalas    (1) 
tsegwayoba£yas  laxa  lEqwa.     Wa,  lii  k'  !iml£idEq  qa  pElbes  yo  gwii-  25 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 10 


146  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.  anh.  35 

25  fire-wood,  and  he  adzes  it  so  that  the r — -.        point    becomes 

tliin  |  like  an   adz,    in    this  manner:1  As  soon  as  this 

is  done,  he  takes  |  his  crooked  knife  and  shaves  it  off  so  as  to  make  it 
smooth.  Now  |  the  digging-point  is  sharp;  and  he  smooths  the 
en  isspiece  on  top  |  by  shaving  it.     As  soon  as  he  has  done  so,  he  hard- 

30  ens  it  by  means  of  tallow.  ||  You  know  the  way  it  is  done  with  the 
digging-stick  for  clover  when  it  is  heated  |  by  the  fire  and  rubbed 
with  taUow  to  make  the  point  brittle.  |  He  does  it  in  the  same  way 
when  he  is  making  the  spade  for  lily-bulbs  |  when  he  is  hardening 
the  point  of  the  spade  that  he  is  making.  | 
1  Digging- Stick  for  Clover. — First  |  this  is  searched  for  by  the  man. 
He  takes  his  ax  to  go  into  the  woods  |  to  look  for  a  yew-tree  without 
branches.  As  soon  as  he  finds  one,  he  |  cuts  down  the  thick  yew-tree 
5  that  has  no  branches.  ||  When  it  falls  down,  he  measures  |  five 
spans  and  |  four  finger-widths,  nearly  six  spans,  |  then  he  cuts  it  off; 
and  when  it  has  been  cut  off,  he  splits  it  in  two  |  through  the  heart. 

10  When  it  has  been  split  in  two,  he  splits  one  side  ||  again  in  two 
through  the  heart ;  and  when  this  has  been  split,  |  it  is  triangular  (in 
cross-section).  He  measures  two  spans  j  and  four  finger-widths  | 
fourspans,  and  cuts  a  notch  into  it,  so  thai  it  is  in  size  three  |  spans 


26  loxda  sobavox;  g-a  gwalega  (fig.).  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwatexs  lac  ax-- 
edxes  xBlxwala  k'  lawayowa  qa£saek'  !e  k-  laxwaq  qa  qeses.  Wa,  laEm 
ex'bes  tsegwayoba£yas.  Wa,  laxae  qaqetslax  gexta-yas  laxes  k!a- 
£wena£yaq.     Wa ,  gilmiese  gwalExs  lae  p  lap  lets  !asa  yasEkwe  laq, — xes 

30  la£mos  q!ala  lax    gwegila  Byayaxa    LEX'SEmaxs  lae  pExaso 

laxa  lEgwile  qaes  yils£etasE£wesa  yasEkwe  qa  i,!Emx£wides  5ba£yas. 
Wa  h'rmis  iiE({i:mg  ilti:;"\\esosa  eaxElaxa  fcsloyayaxa  x'okumaxs 
lae  p!ap!ets!ax  tsegway5baeyases  tsloyayogwilaya-. 
1  Digging-Stick  for  Clover  (Ts!oyayoxa  LExsEine). — Wa,  heEm 
o-il  la  alaso£sa  bEgwanEme;  ax£edxes  sobayowe  qa£s  la  laxa  aLle 
aliix  eketEla  LlEmqla.  Wa,  g'iPmese  qlaqexs  lae  hex£idaEm 
sop'.ExodEq  yixa  LElove  LlEmqla  i.oxs  k  !easae  LlEnx'Ena£ya. 
5  Wa  gil£mese  tlax'ldExs  lae  niEnsndEq  vises  cj!waxts!ana£ye. 
Wa  la  brd£ulxa  sEk" !a.p !Enk-e  LaxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£yex  he£misa 
modEne  liixEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yix  q!aq!aL!Ep!Elayasexs  lae 
sopsEndEq.  Wa,  gil-mese  la  tEmg"ikuxs  lae  kiixsEndEq  qa£s  naqlE- 
qgx  domaqas.     Wa,  gil£mese  kuxsaak IQsexs  lae  etslEndxa  apsodeie 

10  kiixsEndEq  niiqlEqax  domaqas.  Wa,  giPmese  kuxsaak liisExs  lae 
klok'.ulnosa.  Wa,  la  nu:ns£ldxa  malplEnk'e  laxEns  qhvaqlwax-- 
ts!ana£yex,  he£misa  modEne  babELawes  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana- 
£yaxs  lae  sobEtEndEq  qa  £wil5yiwes  qa  yuduxudEnes  laxEns  q!wa- 


boas]  INDUSTEIES  147 

in      this     manner,  6  at(l).     When  || 

this  is  done,  he  chops    4<^~  1^~7  3  ^>   at  (2)  so  that  it  15 

is  three  spans  |  from  *  5  (1)  to  the  end  at 

(4).  I  When  it  is  squared,  starting  from  (1),  he  chops  out  the  heart  | 
so  that  it  all  comes  off ;  and  when  it  is  all  off,  he  chops  the  one  side  | 
so  it  is  flat  (3).    When  it  is  finished,  he  lays  it  down  flat  j|  and  he  20 
chops  (6)  and  (5)  so  that  they  are  this  way:    _______-^-r^_-!—  When 

it  is  ]  triangular  in  cross-section,  he  chops  at   " ~~— — L^~       (3)  so 

that  it  is  pointed  and  so  that  it  |  hends  back.  Now  it  is  one  hand 
wide  at  (7),  and  it  is  four  |  finger-widths  under  each  side  of  (7).| 
When  this  is  done,  |  he  carries  it  on  his  shoulders  and  goes  home. 
Then  he  k^y    puts   it  down  and  ||  takes  25 

his    adz.  ^<^^^    First     he      measures  | 

the  grip   ,  ? ^^^  at   (5).     Its  length  is  one 

hand-        ^ — ~~^^  width.  He  |  cuts  around  it 

with  his  2  adz,  so  that  the  handle  of 

the  digging-stick  (6)  |  is  two  fingers  thick;  and  he  does  the  same 
at  (4) ,  so  that  the  grip  is  one  |  hand-width  in  length.  When  this 
is  done,  ||  he  adzes  (6)  so  that  it  is  round;  and  after  he  has  done  30 
so,  I  he  adzes  the  back  (3),  going  to  the  hard  point  (1)  of  the  | 
digging-stick.  When  this  is  done,  he  adzes  the  belly  (2),  |  going 
towards  the  hard  point  of  the  digging-stick  (1);  and  when  this  is 
done,  I  he  takes  his  crooked  knife  and  straight  knife  and  cuts  a 

q!waxts!ana£yex  yix  ;wagklasas  ga  gwaleg'a  (fig.)  yix  (1).  Wa, 
gil£mese  gwatexs  lae  sopalax  (2)  qa  yuduxMsnes  laxEns  q!wa-  15 
q!wax-ts!ana£yaqe  £wag-idasa  g-ag'lLEla  lax  (1)  IaxLEnd  lax  (4). 
Wii,  gih'rnese  la  1c!ewe1xu  gagiLEla  lax  (1)  lae  sopalax  domaqas 
qa  £wl£lawe  lawii.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  soplfildzodxa  fips5d- 
dza£ye  qa  pEx="edes  (3).  Wa,  la  gwalaxs  lae  haxHvElsasqexs  lae 
sop'.edEx  (6)  lo£  (5)  qa  g'as  gwaleg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  gll'mese  la  20 
k!ok!ulnosExs  lae  sop  led  (3)  qa  wilbax'Ides.  Wa,  he£niis  qa 
tleqales.  Wii.  laEm  EmxLe  £wadzok!unasas  (7),  la  modEne  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana-'yaqe  bEnadza-yas  (7).  Wa,  g-ll£mese  gwalExs  lae 
wlkilaqexs  lae  nirnakwa  laxes  gokwe.  Wa,  la  wex-alllaqexs  lae 
fix£edxes  k'  ItniLayuwe.  Wa,  he£mis  g  11  mEns£Itso£seda  (fig.)  (5)  25 
q!wedzadzEt;Vve  ytxs  EmxLae  £wasgEinasas  laxEns  a£yasaxs  lae 
tsExse°"strdases  k!tmi.ayuwe  laq  qa  maldEnes  £wagidasas  (6) 
k!ilxp!eqe.  Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex^dEX  (4)  yixs  EinxLa£niaaxat ! 
laxEns  a£yasowe  ylx  £wasgEmasasa  daadzoytVye.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  aek-  !a  k  !irnl£ldEx  (6)  qa  lex-£Enx-'Ides.  Wa,  gil£niese  gwa-  30 
Iexs  lae  aek'.a  k!linl£IdEx  (3)  aweg-a£yas  lag-aa  lax  (1)  p!esba£yasa 
ts'.oyayowe.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  k- KmHdEx  (2)  ok  !waedza£ye 
lag-aa  lax  (1)  p!esba£yasa  tsloyayowe.  Wa,  giPmese  gwatexs  lae 
ax£edxes  xElxwala  i.E£wes  nExxala  khiwayowa.     Wa,  lii  qEmdo- 


148  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  30 

35  notch  ||  at  (7)  with  the  straight  knife,  and  he  shaves  it  off  so  that  it  is 
hollow  in  the  middle,  |  in  this  way:  i^^_^  anc^  ne  ^oes  tne 
same  at  (5).  j  After  this  has  been  zJ_^t  done,  he  takes  the 
crooked  knife  and  shaves  off  |    the  whole    digging- 

stick  smoothly.    When  it  has  all  been  shaved  off,  |  he  puts  it  over  the 

40  fire  of  his  house  to  dry,  ||  and  it  stays  there  four  days  drying.  When 
it  is  dry,  he  takes  |  perch-oil  and  poms  it  into  a  large  |  clam-shell. 
Then  he  takes  tallow,  which  he  puts  down  |  by  the  side  of  the  fire  of 
his  house;  and  he  takes  down  his  |  digging-stick  and  heats  the  ends 

45  over  the  fire  of  his  house.  When  ||  it  is  burnt  black,  he  takes  the  tallow 
and  rubs  it  |  on  the  end  of  the  digging-stick.  When  this  is  done,  he 
heats  it  again  |  over  the  fire,  and  he  only  stops  heating  it  when  it  is 
scorched  at  the  point  |  and  when  the  tallow  begins  to  boil  as  it  is  melt- 

50  ing.  Then  |  ho  takes  also  the  perch-oil  which  he  put  into  the  large 
clam-shell,  ||  and  he  takes  rubbed  shredded  cedar-bark,  pul  s  it  into  the  | 
perch-oil  and  rubs  it  on  the  digging-stick.  When  it  is  rubbed  all  over  | 
and  oiled  with  perch-oil,  he  heats  t  he  digging-stick  over  the  fire  of  his  | 
house;  and  when  it  is  really  hot,  he  again  takes  the  |  shredded  cedar- 

55  bark,  puts  it  into  perch-oil,  and  rubs  it  |j  on  the  hot  digging-stick. 
When  it  is  rubbed  all  over,  |  he  stands  it  upright  in  the  cool  corner 
of  the  house.     Then  the  |  digging-stick  for  digging  clover  is  finished. 


35  yodEx  (7)  yisa  nExxala  k"!awayowa  qa£s  k!axfwide  qa  xllboya- 
lesga  gwaleg-a  (Jig.)  yix  (7).  Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex-£IdEx  (5). 
Wa,  giPmese  gwatexs  lae  ax£edxa  xElxwfda  qaes  aek"!e  k!axEwld 
ogwida£yasa  tsloyayowe.  Wa,  gil-mese  £wl£la  klokwe  6gwida£yas 
lae  Les-'aLElots  lax  nEqostawases    Isgwlle  qa  lEmx£wides.     Wa,   la 

40  moxse  £nalas  xttelaLEla.  Wa,  gfh'mese  Ieiiix-'whIexs  lae  ax£edxa 
dzeklwese  qa£s  klunxtslSdes  laxa  'walase  xoxulk- Sm5tsa  niEtla- 
na£ye.  Wa,  la  ax£edaxaaxa  yasBkwe  qa="s  gaxe  glg'alilas  lax 
mag'inwalisasa  lEgwllases  gokwe.  Wa,  he£mis  la  3,xax5daatsexa 
tsloyayowe  qa  n5xewide  6ba£yas  laxa  lEgwllases  g'okwe.     ^,V;i,  g  11- 

45  maese  la  k!umla£nakulaxs  lae  &x£edxa  yasEkwe  qa£s  mEgulbE£yes 
laxa  5ba£yasa  tsloyayowe.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwatexs  lae  etled  pEx£ld 
laxa  lEgwIle.  Wa,  al£mese  gwal  pEX"aqexs  lae  k!wek!umElkiyax£- 
Ide  oba£yas  loxs  lae  mEdElx£wideda  yasEkwaxs  lae  yaxa.  Wa,  laxae 
ax£edxa  dzeklwese  q  lots  laxa  xoxulk-  llmotasa  £walase  mEt!ana£yaxs 

50  lae  ax£edxa  qloyaakwe  kadzEkwa  qa£s  dzopstEndes  laxa  dzeklwe- 
saxs  lae  dzEgilEnts  laxa  tsloyayowe.  Wa,  giFmese  hamElxeEn  la 
qlElexusa  dzeklwesaxs  lae  papax-lLalasa  tsloyayowe  laxa  lEgwllases 
g'5kwe.  Wa,  g*ll£mese  la  alak" lala  latstelqwaxs  lae  etled  ax£edxa 
k'adzEkwe  qa£s  dzopstEndes  laxa  dzeklwesaxs  lae  etled  dzEgtl£Ents 

55  laxa  tslElqwa  tsloyayowa.  Wa,  gil'mese  hamElx£Enxs  lae  dalaq 
qa£s  la  Lanegwelas  lax  wudanegwelases  gokwe.  Wa,  laEin  gwala 
tsloyaywaxa  LEX'SEme  laxeq. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  149 

Digging-Stick  for  Roots. — First  the  man  makes  j  a  digging-stick  of  1 
yew-wood  for  digging  carrots.     When  it  is  nearly  |  spring,  and  the 
plants  begin  to  have  buds,  the  man  j  takes  his  ax  and  goes  into  the 
woods  to  look  for  a  yew-tree.     When  ||  he  finds  one,  he  picks  out  a  5 
good  branch  wit  limit   knots,  which  is  |  bent  and  about  two  finger- 
widths  thick.  [  He  chops  it  off  close  to  the  trunk:  and  when  it  is  off,  | 
he  measures  off  three  spans  and  chops  it  off.  |  Then  he  chops  off  the 
end  so  that  it  is  flat ,  and  [[  it  is  like  the  stick  for  peeling  off  hemlock-  10 
bark.     After  chopping  it,  he  |  goes  home  to  his  house.     He  carries  it 
along.     When  |  he  arrives  at  his  house,  he  puts  down  what  is  to  be 
the  digging-stick  for  digging  carrots.     He  takes  his  |  crooked  knife 
and  his  straight  knife  and  takes  what  is  to  be  the  digging-stick  |  for 
carrots  and  sits  down.     First  the  ||  bark  of  the  yew- wood  digging-  15 
stick  for  carrots  is  shaved  off  with  a  straight  knife.  \  When  it  is  all 
off,  he  shaves  off  the  sap.  so  that  it  is  [  all  off;  and  when  it  is  all  off, 
he  puts  down  his  straighl   j  knife,  takes  his  crooked  knife,  and  shaves  | 
the  digging-stick  that  is  being  made.     He  shaves  it  well,  [[  so  that  it  '_'() 
is  smooth;  and  when  it  is  smooth,  j  he  shaves  off  the  end  so  that  it  is 
flat,  and  he  also  makes  it  smooth  and  |  a  4*^a^_\^->3  n^-tle   bent. 
There  is  a  knob  at  the  other  end,  in  this  way:  x  ]  When  the 

Digging-Stick  for  Roots. — Wa,    heEm    g  Tl    axJets5ssa    bEgwiinEma  1 
tsloyayaxa  XEtEme,  ytxa  i.temqle.     Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  Elaq    qlwa- 
xEiixa  yixs  g'alae  tEmx-£ldeda  q  Iwaq  IwExemase,   lada  bEgwanEine 
ax£edxes  sobayowe  qa£s  la  laxa  aLle  alax  i!Emq!a.    Wa,  la  g'iFmese 
qlaqexs  lae  doqluqa  lax  ek'a  LlEnk'edEinsxa  ek"etEla  loxs  ek'aes  5 
wawakalaena-ye  lo£  qa  maldEnes  £wag'idasas   laxEns  qlwaqlwax-- 
ts!ana£yex.       Wa,    la   sop  lEXLEndEq.      Wa,    g'iFniese    lax-sExs    lae 
baFidxa  yudux"p!Enke   laxEns   q  Iwaq  !wax-ts  !ana£yaxs    lae    tEmx"- 
sEndEq.     Wa,  lasopledEx  oba£yas  qa  pExbes  oba£yas.     Wa,  laEm 
yo  gwaloxda  idoklwayaxwa  laqe.     Wa,  g'iFmese"  gwal  s5paqexs  lae  10 
naEnakwa    laxes    g'okwe.      Wa,  laEm  dalaq.     Wa,  g'iFmese   lag'aa 
laxes  gokwaxs  lae  axmlilasa  tsloyayoLaxa  xEtEmaxs  lae  ax-cedxes 
xslxwala  LE£wis    nexxata  k'awayowa.      Wa,  lii    dax-£Idxes  tsloya- 
yoLaxa   xEtEme    qa=s  klwag'alllexs   lae  h<">  g-il  k"!axalayoxa  xex-'u- 
na£yasa     LlEmqlEkMEne    tsloyayowes   iiExx'ala   k"!awayowa.     Wa,  15 
g-il£mese  £wi£Mweda   xEx£una;yasexs    lae  k" laxalax   xodzeg"aeyas  qa 
-wi-F.wes  dgwaqa.     Wa,  g'iFmese  £wi£laxs  lae  g'eg'alllaxa  nExx'ala 
kliiwayowa  qa£s  dax-£idexes  xElxwala  k'lawayowa  qa£s  k"  !ax£wldes 
lax  6gwida£yases  ts  !oyayogwilasE£we.     Wa,  la£me  ae\k-!axs  lae  k'!a- 
xwaq  qa  qes£Enes.     Wa,  g'iFmese  qaqetslaakuxs  lae  aek'la  k'!ax£wi-  20 
dEx  oba£yas    qa  pExbes.     Wa,  laEmxae    qaqetslaq  qa    qeses  Fixes 
k-ak'Elx"balaena£ye.     Wa,  la  mEgutalaxa  loxsEme  g"a  gwaleg'a  (fig.) 
yixs    lae     gwala    tsloyayaxa  XEtEme.      Wa,    la    LeqEleda   waokwe 


150  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKXUTL  [bth.  ANN.  as 

digging-stick  for  carrots    (some    |    Indians   call  it  rock    carrot)    is 

25  finished,  lie  puts  it  down  by  the  fire  of  the  house  ||  so  that 
the  heat  will  strike  its  back;  and  when  it  begins  to  smoke,  he  | 
turns  it  over  so  that  the  inner  side  (2)  is  towards  the  fire;  and  when 
this  |  also  begins  to  smoke,  he  takes  deer-tallow  and  rubs  it  on  |  all 
over  the  stick  and  the  knob  (3).     The  name  of  |  this  knob  is  "top 

30  handle."  Then  he  puts  it  down  again  by  the  side  of  the  fire,  ||  and 
turns  it  over  so  that  the  melting  tallow  will  soak  into  |  the  digging-stick. 
When  it  nearly  catches  fire  on  account  of  the  heat,  |  he  wraps  soft 
cedar-bark  around  his  hand,  takes  hold  of  |  the  handle  at  the  end  of 
the  digging-stick,  and  pushes  the  flat  digging-point  |  (4)  into  the  hot 

35  ashes.  He  watches  it;  and  ||  when  the  hot  ashes  seems  to  boil  up, 
he  knows  |  that  the  point  of  the  digging-stick  is  burnt  black.  |  Then 
he  takes  the  top  handle  of  the  digging-stick  |  and  pushes  it  into  the 
tallow;  and  when  it  has  been  there  long  enough,  he  |  heats  the  point 

40  of  the  digging-stick  again.  When  the  melted  ||  tallow  at  the  end 
begins  to  bod,  he  dips  it  into  cold  |  water  and  takes  it  out  again. 
Now  it  is  brittle.  |  Now  the  digging-stick  for  carrots  is  finished.  | 
1  Digging-Stick  for  Cryptochiton. — First  the  man  goes  |  into  the  woods 
to  get  a  branch  of  yew-wood.  When  he  finds  |  a  curved  branch,  lie 
chops  it  off.     When  it  is  off,  |  he  measures  off  two  spans.     Then  he 

biikhims  XEtxEt!a  laq.     Wii,  la   k'adnolisas  lax   lEgwllases  gokwe 

25  qa  l  !es'"alasE£wes  &wlga£yas  yix  (1).  Wii,  gtl="mese  kwax£IdExs  lae 
lexElesaq  qa  l  !ask' laesales  6k!waedza£yas  yix  (2).  Wii,  gn£Emxaa- 
wise  kwax,£IdExs  lae  ax£edxa  yasEkwasa  gewase  qa£s  dzEk'etledes 
laq  qa  hamElx£Endeseq  LO£me  niEgutfrya  yix  (3).  Hi1  Em  i.egadEs 
q!wedzadzEtaEye.     Wii,  laxae  et!ed  k'adnolisas  laxes   lEgwIle.    Wa, 

30  la£me  lexi£liilaq  qa  labEtesa  yaxa  yasEku  lax  6gwida£yasa  tsloyayo- 
waxa  xEtxEt!a.  Wii,  g'TFmese  Elaq  xix£etses  laena£ye  tstelqwaxs 
lae  saxts!analaxaq!oyaakwe  kadzEkwaxs  lae  dax,£IdEx  qhvedzadzE- 
ta£yasa  ts!oyayowaxa  xEtxEtla  qa£s  l  lEnxbEtalisesa  ts!oyayoba- 
£yas  yix  (4)  laxa  tslElqwa  gu£na£ya.      Wii,  la  doqwalaq.     Wii,   g-il- 

35  £mese  he  gwexs  la  maEmdElqiileda  tslElqwa  gu£niixs  lae  q!aLE- 
laqexs  lEfmae  k!umla£nakuleda  ts  !oyayoba£yasa  itsloyayowe.  Wii, 
lit  h("'x£ida£mese  dax£ldxa  q!wedzadzEta£yasa  ts!oyay:lx&  XEtxEtla 
qa£s  LlEnx£edes  laxa  yasEkwe.  Wii,  g'TPmese  gagiilaxs  lae  et!ed 
pEx-£itsa  ts  loyayoba^ye  laxa  lEgwIle.     Wii,    gil£mese    maEmdElqu- 

40  leda  yaxa  yasEku  lax  oba£yasexs  lae  LlEnxstEnts  laxa  wuda£sta 
£wiipa.  Wii,  la  xwelax£ustEndEq.  Wii,  la£me  LlEmx£wida  laxeq. 
Wii,  la£me  gwala  ts!oyoy;ixa  xEtxetla  laxeq. 
1  Digging-Stick  for  Cryptochiton. — Wii,  heEm  g'il  la  axsosa  bEgwii- 
nEme  laxa  aLle  LlEnaklasa  LtaqS.  Wii,  g-il£mese  q!axa 
wawakaliixs    lae    sopodxa    LlEnak-e.     Wa,    g'il£mese     lawaxs    lae 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  151 

cuts  it  off,  ||.and  he  chops  the  end  until  it  is  flat  on  one  side.     It  5 
is  two  finger-widths  |  in  thickness.     After  chopping  |  the  ends,  he 
goes   home,  carrying   the    chiton    digging-stick   in   his  hands.  |  He 
goes  into  his  house,  takes  his  knife,  |  and  cuts  off  the  bark    and 
the  sap;  and  when  ||  it  is  all  off,  he  cuts  the  end  so  that  it  may  be  flat  and  10 
thin  and  |  smooth,  and  it  also  has  a  round  point,  in  this  way.1     Now 
the  digging-stick  for  cryptochitons  is  finished.  [  He  takes  deer-tallow 
and  |  puts  it  down  „close  to  the  fire.     Then  he  takes  the  digging- 
stick  for  cryptochitons  and  |  pushes  the  flat  end  into  the  ashes  where 
it   is   not  very  hot.  ||  He  watches  it;   and  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  15 
burn,  he  rubs  the  tallow  |  on  both  sides,  and  he  keeps  it  a  while. 
Then  he  puts  |  the  flat  end  back  into  the  hot  ashes;  and  he  does  not 
keep  it  there  long  |  before  he  takes  it  out  and  rubs  more  tallow  on 
both  sides,  |  and  he  heats  it  by  the  fire  of  his  house.     When  ||  it  is  20 
nearly  burning,  he  puts  it  down  in  the  corner  of  the  house,  so  that  it 
cools  off  quickly;  |  and  as  soon  as  it  gets  cold,  the  point  is  brittle.  | 
Hook  for  Devil-Fish(l). — When  the  devil-fish  hunter  gets  ready  |  to  get 
devil-fish,  he  first  goes  to  get  a  long  thin  |  young  hemlock-tree.     After 
he  finds  it,  he  cuts  it  down,  so  that  ||  it  falls  down.     He  cuts  off  the  25 
branches  and  measures  a  piece  two  |  fathoms  long.     Then  he  cuts  off 

bal£Idxa  malp!Enk'e  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yexs  lae  tsEx-sEndEq. 
Wii,  la  sop!edEx  oba£yas  qo  pExbes  apsbaeyas.     Wa,   mahlEiix'sawe  5 
£wag'idasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£yex.     Wa,  g'ii£mese  gwal  sopax 
oba£yasexs    lae    nirnakwa.     Wa,    laEm    diildotElaxes   qlEnyayaxa 
qlEnase.     Wa,  la  laeL  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  lii  ax!edxes  k-!awayuwe 
qa£s    klaxa'lex    xExuwiina£yas    lo£    xodzeg-a£yas.      Wii,    g'll£mese 
'wiiaxs  lae  aekMa  k!axubEndEx  pExba£jTas  qa  pEles;  wa,  heEmis  qa  10 
qeses;    wii,  he£mis  qa  k'ilxbes,  g"a  gwiileg'axs1  lae  gwala  qlEnya- 
yoLaxa   qlEnase.     Wa,    la    ax£edxa   yasEkwasa    gewase   qa£s  g'axe 
k!wanolisaxes  lEgwile.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  q lEnyaj'OLaxa  q!Enase  qa£s 
iJEngeses  pExbaEyas  laxa  guna£ye  laxa  hehxliis  ts!Elqwalaena£ye.  Wa, 
lii  doxdoqwaq.     Wii,  gil£mese  k!umElx£idExs  lae  dzEx£itsa  yasEkwe  15 
lax  wawaxsadza£yas.     Wii,    la   gagiilExs    lae   xwelaqa  LlEnxallsasa 
pExba£yas   laxa   tslElqwa    gii£na£ya.     Wii,    k'!est!a   alaEm  gaesExs 
lae    diix£ldEq  qa£s  et!ede  dzEx  £itsa  yasElcvve    liixaax  wawax-sadza- 
Eyas.     Wii,  lii   papaxLalas   laxa  lEgwilases  gokwe.     Wii,  g-fl£mese 
Elaq  xix£edExs  lae   S,xealilas    lax  onegwilases  g'okwe  qa  halabales  20 
wuilF.x£Ida.     Wii,  g'iPmese  wudEx£IdExs  lae  L!Emx£wIde  6ba£yas. 

Hook  for  Devil-Fish  (1). — Wii,  hemiaaxs  lae  xwanal£ideda  netsleno- 
xwaxa  tEqlwa.     Wa,  hi;rmis  gil  la  ax£etso£seda  g11t!a  witen  q!wa- 
qlwaxmedzEma.     Wa,    gll£mese    q!iiqexs    lae    tsEk- !EXLEndEq    qa 
t!ax'£Ides.     Wa,  egiilEndEx  LlEnak'as.     Wii,  lii  bal£id  qa  malplEnk'es  25 
liixEns  hai.ax  yix  £wasgEmasas.     Wii,  lii  k-!axalax  xEx£iina£yas.  Wii, 

1  Sea  figure  on  p.  144. 


152  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  35 

27  the  bark;  |  and  when  it  is  all  off,  he  sharpens  the  thick  end.  |  He 
measures  four   finger-widths   from  the    |    thick    end    and    cuts    in 

30  a  notch  in    this   manner:  -«__ -__^  Then  he  ||  cuts  a  piece 

of  hemlock-wood  four        fingers     long,  |  in     this 

shape:   ^^- — -^^    After       ~~~~~J    '  this  is  done,   |  he  takes 

spruce-  "~~  root  and  splits  it,  and  he  takes  |  the  hook  of  the 

devil-fish  spear  and  fits  into  the  notch  of  the  devil-fish  spear,  |  and 
heties  Ns^.  ^    on    w'tu   ^IC    split    root. 

When  Wfo^        he  has  finished,   ||    it   is  like 

;55  this: '^"fta, Then  he   sharpens    the   thin 

end  to  .gBw=-   j  ^eej  jor  ^e  devil-fish.  | 

1  Hook  for  Devil- Fish  (2).  -  -Now  I  have  finished  talking  about  him  j  who 
makes  the  kelp  fishing-line.  Now  I  shall  talk  about  him  who  goes 
to  get  |  devil-fish  to  put  od  his  line.  First  he  has  to  take  his  | 
straight-edged  knife,  which  he  takes  when  he  goes  into  the  woods  to 
5  look  for  a  slim  hemlock-tree.  j|  As  soon  as  he  has  found  one,  he  cuts 
it  down,  so  that  it  falls  |  on  the  ground.  He  cuts  off  the  branches. 
After  he  has  cut  off  the  |  branches,  he  cuts  the  top  oil'.  Sometimes  |  it  is 
two  fathoms,  sometimes  three  fathoms  long.    Finally  he  cuts  off  the  | 

10  bark,  until  it  is  white,  and  he  cuts  off  ||  the  top  until  it  is  sharp. 
He  does  not  sharpen  the  butt-end  of  the  |  pole  for  fishing  devil-fish. 
As  soon  as  he  has  finished  the  long  pole  for  fishing  devil-fish,  |  he  looks 

27  gilmiese  £wl£laxs  lae  k!ax£w!dEx  LE£xuba£yas  qa  ex'bes.  Wa,  la 
mEns£Idxa  modEne  laxEns  q!wiiq!waxts!ana£yex  g'ag'iLEla  laxa 
oba£yasa  LE£xuba£yasexs   lae  qEmtledEq  ga  gwalega   (fig.)-     Wa, 

30  la  modEnas  £wasgEmase  laxEns  q!waq!wax  ts!ana\vex  gayol  laxa 
qlwaxase.  Wa,  lii  ga  gwaleg-a  (fg.).  Wa,  glhniese  gwatexs  lae 
ax£edxa  L!5p'.Ekasa  alewase  qa£s  dzExsEiideq.  Wa,  la  ax£edEx 
galbELasa  nedzayowe  qa£s  kit!aLEl5des  laxa  qEintba£yasa  nedza- 
yowe.     Wa,  la  yil£aLElotsa  dzEXEkwe  idoplEk'  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese 

35  gwalExs  lae  ga  gwaleg'a  (fg.).  Wa,  lii  k-  !ax£wldxa  wllbaeye  qa 
exbesa  p  !ewayoba£yaxa  tEqlwa. 
1  Hook  for  Devil-Fish(2). — Wa,  la£niEn  gwal  gwagwexviila  laxa  pEna- 
yogweliixa  pEnayowe.  Wa,  la£mesEn  gwagwexsfiilal  laxa  tateliixa 
tEq'.wa  qa  tetelasexes  pEnayowe.  Wii,  heEm  g'il  ax£etsoses  iiex- 
x'ala  klawaya,  qa£s  daakiixs  lae  aLe£sta  alax  gilt  lit  wil  qhvaxasa 
5  laxa  aLle.  Wii,  gilmiese  qlaqexs  lae  k-  !imt  lEXLEndEq  qa  tlag'a- 
Else.  Wii,  lii  klimtiilax  LlEnak'as.  WTii,  g'll£mese  £wl£laweda 
LlEnak'axs  lae  kMImtodEx  wilEtaeya.  Wa,  la  £nal£nEmp  !Ena 
malplsnk1  laxEns  baxax  loxs  yuduxup!Enkae.  Wa,  lawlsi.a 
k'!axwalax   xEx£iinayas    qa   £mElk!Enes.     W"ii,    laxaa   k!ax£wedEx 

10  wIlEtayas  qa  ex'bes.  Wa,  laLa  k'les  exbeda  LExuba£yasa  nedza- 
yoLaxa  tEqlwa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwala  gilt!a  nedzayaxa  tEqlwiixs 
lae  et!ed   alex'£idEx    wllagawa£yasa  g'flx'de  axanEms  yixs  belts  !e- 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  153 

for  a  stick  smaller  than  the  first  one,  which  is  the  size  of  a  |  short  span  13 
when  the  ringers  are  put  around  the  butt-end  of  the  |  long  pole  for 
fishing  devil-fish.1     The  one  for  which  he  is  looking  must  be  small.  |[ 
As  soon  as  he  finds  it,  he  begins  to  cut  it  down  with  his  straight-  15 
edged  knife.  |  Then  he  does  the  same  as  he  did  with  the  former  one;  | 
only  this  is  different,  that  the  two  ends  are  sharp,  |  and  that  it  is 
shorter  than  the  one  he  first  made,  for  it  is  only  a  |  fathom  and  a  half 
long.     There  is  also  a  honk  made  of  the  concave  side  of  ||  hemlock  20 
on  it.     After  he  has  shaved  off  |  with  his  straight-edged  knife,  the 
butt-end  of  the  pole  for  fishing  devil-fish  he  cuts  a  notch  three  |  finger- 
widths  long,  made  in  this  way;2  and  as  soon  as  j  the  notch  is  deep 
enough,  he  takes  the  brittle  convex  side  of  the  hemlock-  |  tree  and 
cuts  it  until  its  butt-end  is  sharpened.  ||  He  measures  four  finger-  25 
widths  |  and  cuts  it  off  so  that  it  is  |  flat  on  one  side.     After  he  has  cut 
it,  he  takes  |  spruce-root,  splits  it,  and  scrapes  off  the  bark  |  and  the 
juice;  and  when  it  is  done,  he  takes  the  pole  ||  for  fishing  devil-fish,  30 
puts  the  short  end  into  the  notched-end  of  the  |  pole  for  fishing  devil- 
fish, and  ties  it  on  with  the  split  root.  |  Now  it  looks  |  like   tins.3 
Now  there  is  a  hook  at  the  end  of  the  pole  for  fishing  devil-fish.  |  This 

£staEns  tslExuts!ana£\'exs  bfiLa  lax    qlwesEndayo  lax     LEgiita-yasa  13 
g'iltla  nedzayaxa  tEqlwa.1     Wa  laLaLe  wawllalai.e  la  alaso£s.     Wa, 
gil£mese   qlaqexs    lae    k' limt  lEXLEndEntses    nExxiila   klawayowe  15 
laq.     Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex£Idqexs  gweg'ilasaxa  g  ale  axas.     Wa, 
lexa£mes     ogii£qalayosexs    £naxwa£mae    eex-bes   waxsba've.     Wa, 
he£misexs    ts  !e1\  Iwagawayaasa    g'ile    axas  qaxs    a£mae  £nEqlEbode 
esEgiwa£yaslaxEns  baxa.    W;i,he£me^exsgalbalaaxaLlEmwega£yasa 
qlwaxase  i.asa.     Wa,  hemiaaxs  lae  gwal  k'  laxwasa  nExxala  k-  lawayo  20 
lax    LExuba£yasa  nedzayaxa    tEqlwa.     Wa,  le    qEmtledxa  yiidux"- 
dEne   laxEns   q!waq!waxts!ana£yexa  g-a  gwiilega.2      Wa,   gil'mese 
hehabEte     qEmta£j*asexs     lae    ax£edxa    L!Einwega£yasa    qhvaxase 
Lasa.     Wii,  la   k'!ax£widEq   qa   eexbes   apsba£j'as   yLx  LExuba£yas. 
Wa,   giPmese  eexbaxs   lae  mEns£idEq  qa  modEnes   laxEns  q!wa-  25 
q!waxts!ana£yex.     Wa,  le  kllmtsEndEq.     Wii,  le    k!ax£w!dEq   qa 
pExk-!ot!Enes.     Wii,  gll£mese  gwal   k'liixwaqexs  lae  ax£edxa  l!o- 
p!Ekasa  alewase   qa£s   dzEtledeq.     Wii,    le    k-ex5dEx    xEx£una£yas 
lo£   wapaga£yas.     Wii,    giPmese   gwiilExs   lae    ax£edxa    nedzayaxa 
tEqlwa     LE£wa    ts!Exusto.     Wii,    le    ax£aLElots    lax     qEintba£yasa  30 
nedzayowaxa    tEqlwa.     Wii,    le    yil£etsa    dzEdEknre    LloplEk-    laq. 
Wii,  la-mese  g'a  gwalega."     Wa,  laEm  galbaleda  nedzayaxa  tEqlwa. 
Wii,  heEm  nesElaxa  tEqlwaxs  lEmwaes   g'Qkwaseda  tlesEme  laxa 
wiilx  Twa£yasa  x"ats!a£ye.      Wii,  heEm   LegadEs   nedzayaxa   tEqlwa. 

1  That  is,  one  short  span  circumference  at  the  butt-end. 

-  See  figure  1  on  p.  152.  3  See  figure  4  on  p.  152. 


154  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.sb 

is  used  to  catch  devil-fish  when  its  hole  is  dry  |  at  low  tide.     Now  its 
35  name  is  "pole  for  pulling,"  ||  and  the  name  of  the  long  pole  is  "imple- 
ment for  pulling  out  at  half  tide  |  from  the  hole  under  water  when  the 
tide  is  not  out  far."  |  There  is  no  hook  at  the  end  of  the  long  pole  | 
for  fishing  devil-fish.  | 
1       Spear  for  Sea-Eggs. — First  there  is  taken  by  the  man  a  thin  |  young 
hemlock-tree  in   the  woods.     When   he   finds   one  that  is  clear  of 
branches  and  long,  |  he  cuts  it  clown  with  a  knife,  so  that  it  falls; 
and  j  when  it  falls,  he  measures  off  three  and  a  half  fathoms  in  length.  || 
5  Then  he  cuts  off  the  top.     He  cuts  off  the  bark  |  and  the  sap.     He 
tries  to  make  it  one  and  a  half  |  finger-widths  in  thickness.    After  this 
has  been  done,  |  he  takes  thin  yew -wood  branches  for  prongs.     He 
measures  the  prongs  to  be  |  two  spans  and  four  finger-widths  in 
10  length.  ||  These  are  to  be  at  the  end  of  the  sea-egg  spear.  |  He  cuts  off 
the  ends  so  that  they  are  sharp-pointed,  and  he  also  cuts  off  |  the 
lower  end  so  that  it  is  fiat.     When  this  is  done,  he  digs  out  |  the 
roots  of  a  spruce-tree  and  splits  t  hem  in  two.  |  Then  he  peels  off  the 
15  bark;  and  when  this  is  done,  he  cuts  ||  the  butt-end  of  the  spear- 
shaft  until  it  is  square.  |  Then  he  takes  the  prongs  and  lays  the 
flat  ends  against  |  the  square  end  of   the  spear-shaft,  and  he  ties 
them  on   |  ^^  with  the  split  spruce-root,  so  that  it  is  in 

this    m  ay  : 


35  Wii,  he£mis  LegadEs  nanesamEndzayowa  glrfcagawa£ye  nedzaya 
laxa  tEgwats!e  tlesEmxs  tlEpElae;  yixs  klesae  £walasa  xats!a£ye. 
Wii,  laEm  k-!eiis  galbala,  ytxeda  giltagawa£ye  nedzayaxa  tEqlwa. 
1  Spear  for  Sea-Eggs. — AVii,  heEin  g"!l  la  axsossa  bEgwanEma  wile 
q!waq!waxadzEm  laxa  axle.  Wii,  glFmese  q!axa  eketEla  g  iltlaxs 
lae  hex"£idaEm  k!lmt!ExodEq  qa  tlax'ides.  Wii,  gIFmese 
t!ax£IdExs  lae  bal£idEq  qa  mamoplEnktlisesa  nEqlEbode  laxEns 
5  bai-ax.  Wa,  la  kllmt'odEX  6xta£yas.  Wii,  lii  klaxalax  xEx£una£yas 
LE£wes  xodzega^ye.  LaEm  laloLla  qa  mamaldEnx' sales  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  ytx  £wag-idasas.  Wii,  g'iFmese  gwalExs  lae 
ax£edxa  wiswule  LlEiuqla  qa  ts!e£xubes.  Wa,  la  £mEnsJIdeq  qa 
hamodEngales  laxEns   q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  lax  malp!Eiike   awas- 

10  gEmasasa  mots!aqe  ts!et3'.e£xuba£yasa  mamaseq!wayop!eqeLaxa 
mEseqwe.  Wii,  lii  k  !ak!axubaq  qaeex"bes.  Wa,  laxae  k!ax£w!dEx 
eoxLa£yas  qa  pepEqiEXLes.  Wii,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  £lap!ldEX 
iddplEk'asa  illewase.  Wii  la  paxsEndEq  qa  malts !esexs  lae  sa- 
qlwodEx  xEx£una£yas.     Wii,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  k!ax£wIdEx  oba- 

15  £yasa  mamaseq!wayop!eqe  yix  LE£xuba£yas  qa  k' lEwulx^unes.  Wa, 
lii,  ax£edxa  ts  !ets  !exuba£ye  qa£s  pax£aLElodales  pepEq!EXLa£yas  lax 
k'  !ek-  !Ewulxuba£yasa  mamaseq  IwayoLe.  Wii,  lii  ytl£aLElotsa  pax-- 
saakwe  L!op!Ek'  laq.     Wii,  la  g-a  gwideg'a  (fig-)- 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  155 

Hook  for  picking  Elderberries. — Those  who  pick  elderberries  first  go  |  1 
to  make  a  hook  of  a  small  hemlock-branch  of  |  the  size  of  our  first- 
finger  and  one  fathom  in  length.  |  The  woman  shaves  off  the  bark 
until  it  is  smooth;  ||  and  after  this  is  done,  she  takes  a  piece  of  the  same  5 
hemlock-tree,  |  which  is  thinner  and  is  to  form  the  hook.  She  | 
shaves  off  the  bark  of  this  also,  and  it  is  one  |  span  long.  Then  she 
cuts  it  off  |  and  measures  two  finger-widths  from  the  ||  end.     There  10 

she  cuts  a  notch   which  goes    half  way through   |   the 

thickness  of  the  pole.     It  is  in  this  way: After  |   this  is 

done,  she  does  the  same  thing  with  the  piece  that  is  to  form  the  hook; 
and  when  |  the  notch  is  also  cut  in  one-half  the  thickness  of  the  piece 
that  is  to  form  the  hook,  |  she  takes  split  spruce-root,  puts  it  into  water,  ||  15 
and  soaks  it.     After  it  has  been  soaked,  she  takes  the  piece  that  is  to 
be  the  hook  at  the  end  |  and  puts  the  two  notches  together.    She  |  takes 

up  the  soaked  split  root  and  ties  the    //   two  pieces  together. 

When  |  it  is  finished,  it  is  this  way:  j   // 

Pole  for  gathering  Eel-Grass. — First  the  man  ||  goes  to  look  in  the  20 
woods  for  a  bent  young  hemlock-tree;  and  when  |  he  finds  one,  he 
cuts  it  at  the  bottom  with  his  adz;  and  when  |  it  falls,  he  measures 
off  two  fathoms  and  a  half.  |  Then  he  cuts  off  the  top.     At  the  top  it 


Hook    for    picking    Elderberries. — Wii,    heEm     gil    la     ax£ets6£sa  1 
tslexaLaxa  tslex'ines  gaLayciLaq  ylxa  wile  q!waxasaxa  y5  ewagi- 
tEns  ts  lEmalax'ts  !anaeyex.     Wit,  la  esEg"Eyowe  EwasgEmasa  laxEns 
baxax.     Wii,  la    aek'laxs    lae    kMaxalax    xEX£unaeyas    qa  qes£Enes. 
Wii,  g'il£mese   gwalExs  lae  axeedxa    giiyoh'nutxat!    laxa  qlwaxase.  5 
Wa,    laLa    wawilalagawesa    galpleqLe.     Wii,    laxae     aek'laxs    lae 
klaxalax  xEx£una£yas.     Wa,  la  £nEmp!Enke    laxEns    qlwaqlwax-- 
ts!ana£yex     yix     £wasgEinasasexs      lae     klfmttslEndEq.      Wii,    lii 
niEns£idxa   maldEne    laxEns    q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex    giigiLEla  laxa 
5ba£yasexs    lae     qEmtbEtEndEq    qa    negoyodesex   fwagidasas    yix  10 
£walabEdasas  qEinta£yas.     Wii,  lii  g'a  gwiilega  {fig.).     Wii,  g-il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  ogwaqa  he  gwex£ldxa  galpleqLe.     Wii,  g  il£Emxaawise 
nEgoyode  £walabEdasas  ciEmta£yas  lax  Ewag-idasasa  galpleqLe,    lae. 
ax£edxa    paakwe   LloplEksa    alewase    qa£s    l:apstEndes   laxa  Ewape 
qa    pex£wides.      Wii,    gih'mese    pex£widExs    lae    ax£edxa    galbeLe  15 
qa£s  kak'Etodeses  qeqEmta£ye  loc"    qEmta^yasa  galpleqLe.    Wii,  la 
ax£edxes    peqwasE£we    ])aaku    LloplEka    qa£s    yaLodes    laq.      Wa, 
giPmese  gwiila  lae  g'a  gwiileg-a  {fig.)- 

Pole     for     gathering     Eel-Grass. — Wii,     hesmis     gil     la     aliiso£sa 
bEgwaiiEme  laxa  aLle    wakalii  qlwaqlwaxadzEma.     Wa,  gil£mese  20 
qlaqexs     lae     tsEk'  lExodEq     yises     k-  liniLayowe.     Wii,     g-ilemese 
t!ax£idExs    lae    babldEq     ylsa    nEqlEbodiis    babELawa£ye    laxEns 
baLiixs  lae  tsEk'odEx  5xta£yas.     Wa,  la  maldEnx'sawe  £wagidasas 


156  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ANN.  36 

25  is  two  |  finger-widths  thick.  Then  he  takes  his  straight  ||  knife  and 
cuts  off  the  bark  and  the  sap.  \  When  they  are  all  off,  it  is  a  finger- 
width and  a  half  thick  |  at  the  thin  end,  and  it  is  hardly  thicker  at 
the  |  other  end.     Tin-  tip  is  more  curved  than  the  |  butt.     At  each 

30  end  there  is  a  knob.  ||  When  it  is  finished,  he  goes  home  carrying  it; 
and  as  soon  as  he  enters  |  his  house,  he  puts  down  the  twisting-stick 
by  the  side  of  the  fire.  |  Then  he  takes  deer-tallow  and  puts  it  down 
where  he  is  working  at  the  |  twisting-stick.  Then  he  takes  the 
twisting-stick  and  pushes  it  to  and  fro  over  the  |  fire.     He  pushes  it 

35  to  and  fro  until  the  whole  stick  gets  warm;  ||  and  when  it  is  very  hot, 
he  takes  the  |  tallow  and  rubs  it  over  the  twisting-stick.  As  soon  as 
it  is  |  all  covered  with  tallow,  he  pushes  it  to  and  fro  over  the  fire;  | 
and  when  the  tallow  nearly  catches  fire,  then  he  rubs  on  |  some  more 

40  tallow;  and  when  it  is  covered  with  tallow,  ||  he  puts  it  down  in  the 
corner  of  the  house,  where  it  cools  off  quickly.  |  He  wishes  it  to  he 
brittle  and  stiff.  Therefore  he  does  so  |  with  the  tallow.  As  soon  as 
it  gets  cold,  he  takes  soft  cedar-bark  |  and  the  twisting-stick,  and 
wipes  it  off  with  the  soft  shredded  cedar-bark,  |  so  that  all  the  tallow 

45  comes  off  from  the  surface.  When  it  is  all  off,  it  is  finished.  ||  That 
is  all  about  this.  I 


oxta.£yas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.     Wa,  la  ax£edxes  nExxala 

25  klawayowa  qa-s  klaxalex  xExuunfryas  lo£  xodzeg-a\yas.  Wa, 
gll£mese  '"wFlaxs  lae  mamaldEiixsala  '"wag'idasas  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana:yex  yixa  wIlEta£ye.  Wa,  la  halsElaEm  Lfu.akwaleda 
apsbaeyas.  Wa,  la  xEiiLEla  wakalagawesa  wllba£ye,  yixa 
LE£xuba£ye.     Wa,  la  memox'balaxa  loidxsEmeda  wax'sba'yas.     Wa, 

30  giPmese  gwalsxs  lae  na£nakwa  dalaq.  Wa,  g'il£rnese  la  laeL  laxes 
g-okwaxs  lae  k'adEnollsasa  klilbayowe  laxes  lEgwlle.  Wa,  la 
ax£edxa  yasEkwasa  gewase  qa£s  g'axe  g'eg"alilas  laxes  eaxElasaxa 
k'lilbayowe.  Wa,  la  ax'edxa  k'lilbayowe  qa£s  kak'adELales  laxes 
lEgwlle.     Wa,  laEm   wiqwl£lalaq   qa    6nEma£nakules   ts!Elgu£nakule 

35  ogwlda£yas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  alak'  !ala  la  ts  !Elx£widExs  lae  ax£edxa 
vasEkwe  qa£s  yilsetlldes  laxa  k'lilbayowe.  Wa,  g  ihmese  mEgu- 
gltxa  vTisEkwaxs  lae  xwelaqaEin  la  kakadELalas  laxes  lEgwlle. 
Wa,  gIPmese  Elaq  xlx£ededa  yasE.x£una£yasexs  lae  xwelaqa  yilse- 
tlitsa  yasskwe    laq.     Wa,  g"il£mese    la    mEgug'Itxa  yasEkwaxs  lae 

H*  k  atlalilas  laxa  onegwllases  gSkwe  qa  halabales  wudEx£Ida. 
Wa,  laEm  £nex-  qa  L!Emx£wides  qa  Llaxes,  lagilas  he  gwegilasa 
yasEkwe  liiq.  Wa,  g'il£mese  wudEx£IdExs  lae  axeedxa  kadzEkwe 
LE£wa  kMilbayowe.  Wa,  la  deg'itletsa  qloyaakwe  k-adzEkwe  laq 
qa  lawayes  yasEx£una£yas.     Wii,  giPmese  £wi£laxs  lae  gwala.     Wa, 

45  laEm  gsval  laxeq. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  157 

Flounder-Spear. — The    first    thing  to   be  done  by  the  |  flounder-  1 
fisherman  is  to  get  a  spear-shaft  for  flounder-fishing.     He  [  has  to  get 
tough  wood  for  the  prongs.     It  is  split  in  two  |  in  this  manner.1     It 
is  split  through   the  heart,  and  cut  at  the  ends  ||  which  are  made  5 
sharp.     When  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  bird-cherry  bark  and  the  | 
shaft,  and  he  so  cuts  the  sides  that  they  are  flat,  |  and  he  also  cuts 
one  side  of  the  prongs  so  that  they  will  fit  |  on  the  end  of  the  shaft. 
When  he  has  finished  this,  he  takes  the  |  bird-cherry  bark  and  ties 
it  to  the  prongs  and  the  shaft.  ||  He  ties  it  very  tightly.     When  it  is  10 
done,  I  it  is  like  this:  Now  the  flounder-spear 

is  finished.  |  ^5==™" 

Fishing- Tackle  for  Flounders. — When  a  man  goes  to  catch  many  | 
flounders,  he  takes  the  leg-bone  of  a  deer  which  is  |  thoroughly  dry,  so 
that  it  is  white,  and  he  breaks  it  up  ||  lengthwise  into  slender  pieces.  As  1 5 
soon  as  it  is  broken  up,  he  measures  off  |  pieces  two  finger-widths  long, 
and  breaks  them  off  |  at  the  end,  so  that  they  are  all  the  same  length. 
When  this  has  been  done,  |  he  takes  a  flat,  rough  sandstone.  He  | 
also  takes  a  dish  and  pours  water  into  it  until  it  is  half  full.  ||  Then  20 
he  puts  the  sandstone  into  it;  and  he  takes  [  one  of  the  thin  bones, 
dips  it  into  the  water,  and  |  puts  one  end  against  the  sandstone  and 


Flounder-Spear. — Papa£yaxa   paese,    yixs  he£mae    gil   la    axso£sa  1 
papayaenoxwaxa  paeseda  saEntslo  qa's  papayayowa.     Wa,  he£me- 
i.al  ax£etso£seda  fcslaxmse  qa  dzexubesxa  xokwe   qa£s    malts !e    g*a 
gwiilega.1    Wa,  laEm  naqteqax  domaqas.    Wa,  la  k"!ak!axubEndEq 
qa   exbes.     Wa,  glPmese    gwalExs    hie    ax£t~dxa    lEii'wume  LE£wa  5 
saEnts!o.      Wa,  hi    k"  !ak- lEWEnodzEndEq    qa    pepEgEnoses.      Wa 
laxae    k' !ax£widxa    epsanodza£yasa    dzedzegume    qa    bEngaaLEles 
laxa   oba£yasa    saEntslowe.      Wa,    g"fl£mese    gwalExs    lae    ax'edxa 
lEn£wume  qa'"s  k" !tlx"£aLElodes  laxa  dzedzegume  LE£wa  saEnts!owe. 
Wa,  laEJii  aElaxs   lae   k" !llk* !ak-6dEq.     Wa,  giPmese   gwatexs  lae  10 
g-a  gwiilega  (fig.)-     WT;'i,  laEm  gwala  papayayoLaxa  paese. 

Fishing-Tackle  for  Flounders. — Wa,  he£maaxs  q!aq!EyoL£aeda  bE- 
gwanEmaxa  paese,  hi  ax£edEX  xaqas  g'Qg'Eguyasa  gewasaxs  lae 
lEmlEmxeunx-£ida  yixs  lae  momx£una  qa-s  tEtEpsEndeq  laxes  <*  il- 
dolase  qa  wIswuh'Enes.  Wii.  gil£mese  ewIwe1x"sexs  lae  niEiis-edEq  15 
yises  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£ye  qa  nifddEnes  awasgEmasasexs  lae  tEpa- 
lax  epsba£yas  qa  £nEmes  iiwasgEmasas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs 
lae  &x£edxa  dE£nasgEme  t  lesEmaxa  pEgEdzowe  k'  loltsEma.  Wa, 
laxae  ax£edxa  loc^lwe  qa£s  giixts!6desa  £wape  laq  qa  nEgoyoxsda- 
lisexs  lae  mox"stEntsa  dE£nasgEme  tlesEin  laq.  Wa,  la  ax£edx-  20 
£iiEmts!aqe  laxa  xaxmEnexwe  qa£s  hapstEndes  laxa  £wapaxs  lae 
tEsalots   apsba£yas   laxa    dE£nasgEme    tlesEma  qa£s  yilsElalax'£ides 

1  It  is  cut  through  the  center  lengthwise. 


158  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

23  rubs  it  |  until  it  is  sharp-pointed,  and  he  does  the  same  with  the 
other  end.     As  |  soon  as  it  is  sharp-pointed,  he  rubs  the  middle  part 

25  so  that  it  is  round;  and  when  ||  it  is  round,  it  is  done.  He  does  this 
with  all  of  them.  |  When  he  has  finished  fifty,  he  puts  them  away,  for 
that  |  is  the  number  of  bones  for  the  flounder  fishing-line.  Then  he 
takes  |  hair  and  twists  a  length  of  two  |  spans;  that  is,  hair  of  women. 

30  And  when  he  has  ||  enough  of  these,  the  same  number  as  the  polished 
bones,  then  he  puts  them  away.  He  takes  |  cedar-bark  and  gives  it  to 
his  wife,  and  she  goes  at  once  |  and  puts  it  into  the  water  to  soak. 
After  it  has  been  there  for  one  night,  |  the  woman  takes  out  the  cedar- 
bark  and  splits  it  into  |  long,  narrow  strips,  and  she  twists  it  until 

35  it  is  moderately  thick.  ||  When  it  is  forty  fathoms  long,  it  is  finished.  ] 
Then  (the  man)  stretches  it  outside  of  the  house  |  tightly,  so  that  it  is 
stretched  (taut).  It  remains  there  for  four  days.  |  Then  he  takes 
down  the  twisted  cedar-bark  fishing-line  |  and  coils  it  up  and  puts  it 

40  down  in  his  house,  and  then  ||  he  takes  dried  back-sinew  of  the  deer 
and  shreds  it,  and  |  twists  it  until  it  is  like  thread.  As  soon  as  hi' 
has  j  twisted  much  of  it,  he  takes  the  round  bones  and  the  twisted- 1 
hair  thread  and  ties  one  end  of  /  the  twisted  hair  to  the 

45  round  bone,  j  He  ties  the  hair  ||  to          f  the    crosspiece  a   little 

beyond  the  middle,  in  this  way:  Vr-  He  does  this  with  all  of 


23  qa  exbax£Ides.  Wii,  laxae  hi'Em  gwex£Idxa  apsba£ye.  Wa,  g  il- 
£mese  ex'baxs  lae  yilsElalax£IdEq  qa  lex£Enx£Ides.      Wa,  g  il£mese 

25  la  lexEiix£ldExs  lae  gwala.  Wa,  la  he£staEm  gwex£Idxa  waokwe. 
Wa  g'il-mese  £wl£la  gwiila  sEkMasgEmgustaxs  lae  gexaq  qaxs  b.6- 
£mae  awaxweda  xaxEXeEnasa  l  lagedzayawaxa  paese.  Wa,  la  ax£ed- 
xa  sE£ya  qa£s  metledeq  qa  maemalplEnkes  awasgEmasas  laxEn 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,    yixox    sE£yaxsa    tsledaqex.     Wa,    g'iPmese 

30  helala  lax  £waxaasasa  glxEkwe  xaqexs  lae  gexaq.  Wa,  lit  ax£ed- 
xa  dEnase  qa£s  la  tslsis  laxes  gEnEme.  Wa,  hex,£ida£mese  la 
hapstalisaa  laxa  wa  qa  pex£wldes.  Wa,  g  Tl£mese  xama£stalisExs 
lae  ax£wu£stEndEq  yixa  tslEdaqe  laxa  dEnase  qa£s  dzEdzExsEndeq 
qa  ts lefts !Eq!astowes  g  ilsg  ildEdzowa.      Wa  la  mElx£edEq  qa  heia- 

35  g'ites.  Wa,  la  mosgEmgostaplEnk'e  £wasgEmasas  laxEns  baLax. 
Wa,  gil£mese  ^valExs  lae  dox£wulsaq  lax  l !asana£yases  g'okwe 
qa£s  lEk!ut!Elseq  qa  ts!as£ides.  Wa,  lii  mop!Enxwa£se  Enalas 
he  gwex"sExs  lae  ax£edxa  L!agedzaana£ye  yixa  mElkwe  dEnsEn 
dEnEma  qa£s  qEs£edeq    qa£s  la    qEs£alilaq    laxes    g'Skwe.      Wa,  la 

40  ax£edxa  lEinokwe  adegesa  gewase  qa£s  dzEdzExsEndeq  qa£s  mEl- 
x'£ideq  qa  medEkwes  he  gwex'sa  q!Enyo.  Wa,  giPmese  q!e- 
nErne  meta£yas  lae  axeedxa  leElx£Ene  xaq  LE£wa  medEkwe 
sesE£yak" !Ena.  Wa,  la  yil£a.LEl5dalasa  leElx£Ene  xaq  lax  epsba- 
£yasa   medEkwe    sE£ya.      Wa,  la   g'ek"!5lts!a£ye    yiLalaasasa  SE£ya 

45  laxa  galodayowe  lex,£En  xaqa  g-a  g^valeg•a  (Jig.).     Wa,  la  £naxwaEm 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  159 

them;  |  and  when  they  are  finished,  he  gathers  |  up  the  ends  of  the  hair  45 
threads  and  ties  them  with  twisted  sinew,  |  so  that  they  are  all  gathered 
together,  and  he  hangs  them  up  in  the  corner  of  his  house.     The  | 
round  cross-bones  are  hanging  downward.  || 

Fish-Trap  for  Perch. — First  the  man  takes  |  cedar-bark  and  soaks  it  in  1 
the  river.     Then  he  goes  into  the  woods  |  carrying  his  hand-adz ;  and 
when  he  comes  to  a  place  where  there  are  |  many  straight  young  hem- 
lock-trees, he  cuts  the  tall  ||  slender  trees  which  are  a  little  over  four  5 
finger- widths  in  diameter.  |  As  soon  as  the  tree  falls  down,  he  measures 
off  four  spans.  |  Then  he  cuts  it  off.     That  is  the  measure  |  which  he 
uses  in  cutting  off  twenty-four  pieces  of  the  same  length;  |  and  he  cuts 
off  twenty  of  them  four  ||  linger- widths  thick,  longer  than  the  first  10 
ones.  I  After  he  has  done  so,  lie  measures  a  length  of  two  |  spans  and 
cuts  it  off.     He  cuts  sixteen  |  of  this  length.     After  he  has  done  so,   | 
he  measures  them  three  spans  ||  long  and  cuts  them  off.     There  are  15 
twelve  of  these  all  of  the  same  |  length.     After  he  has  done  so,  he 
sharpens  the  points  of  the  twelve.  |  These  will  be  the  posts  for  the 
perch-trap  at  one  end.  |  And  he  also  sharpens  the  sixteen  |  short  ones 
which  are  two  spans  in  length.  ||  These  will  be  the  entrance.     And  20 

he'  gwex'Idxa  waokwe.     Wa,  g  il^mese  £wi£la  gwalExs  lae  q!ap!ex-£I-  46 
dEx    epsba£yasa    sesE£yak"  !eii   qa£s   yil£idesa    medEkwe    at  !Ema  qa 
q  lap  !exLalesexs  lae  tex£walllas  lax  onegwilases  gokwe.     Wa,  laEm 
bebEnba£yeda  l§Elx-£Ene  galodayu  xaqa. 

Fish-Trap    for    Perch. — Wa,    lii'-Em    gil    ax£ets5£sa    bEgwanEnia  1 
dEnase   qa£s  la  tleltalesaq  laxa   wa.     Wa,    lii  laxa    aLle    qa£s    da- 
lexes    k'limLayuwe.      Wii,     g'il'mese    lag-aa    laxa    k"  !iq  Iwekiilaxa 
qlenEme      q!waq!waxmEdzEinxs,      wa,  lii,    tsEk'  lExLEndxa     giltla 
£wllaxa    IndsEla'me    LEkwagawesEns    q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.       Wa,  5 
g  il;"mese  t!axl£idExs  lae  baleidxa  moplEnke  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!a- 
na£yex  yix  £wasgEmasasexs  lae  tsEX'sEiidEq.     Wii,  he£mis  la  niEn- 
yayosexs    lae     hanal    tsEtsExs-calaxa    hamotslaqala     enEmasgEma. 
Wa,  la  et!ed  tsEtsEX'SEndxa  maltsEmg'ostiiwe  modEn  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana="yex,    yix   g-iltagawa£yas    lax   gilx'de    tsEk'es.      Wa,  10 
g'ih'mese   gwalExs  lae  bal£Idxa  malp!Eiike  laxEns   q!waq!waxts!a- 
naeyex  yix  ewasgEmasasexs  lae  tsEx'sEiidEq.     Wa,  la  q!EL!Ets!agE- 
giyuwe  tsEka£yas  hr-xsa  awasgEme.      Wa,    g  il£mese   gwalExs   lae 
et!ed  bab'ldxa  yuduxup  lEnk'e  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana\yex,yix  £was- 
gEmasasexs     lae    tsExsEndEq.     Wa,    la    malts !agEgiyowa    hex-sa  15 
awasgEme.     Wii,  g  il'"mese  gwalExs  lae  dzodzoxubEndxa  malts  !agE- 
g-iyowe.    Wii,  heEm  LeLEmltsa  L&LEmwayoLe  Lfiwaya  lax  epsbaeyas. 
Wa,  laxae  dzodzoxubEiidEx   epsba£yasa  q!EL!Ets!agEg'iyuwe    tslEl- 
ts!Ek!waxa  maemalplEnqas    awasgEmas   laxEns    q!waq!waxts!iina- 
£yex  yixa  xoIoslc..     Wii,  g  il£mese  £wi£la  gwala  lae  ax£edxa  iJoplEke  20 


160  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  36 

21  when  it  is  all  done,  he  takes  roots  |  and  ties  them  together  in  the 
middle.  He  puts  them  together  and  carries  them  |  home  to  his  house. 
When  the  tide  is  half  down,  |  he  takes  his  stone  hammer  and  cedar- 
hark  that  he  had  soaked  in  the  river  and  |  carries  the  posts  for  the 

25  trap  down  to  the  beach,  and  he  ||  puts  them  down  where  the  beach  is 
not  very  steep  and  where  it  is  sandy.  He  |  unties  the  roots  in  tbe  mid- 
dle of  the  bundle,  and  he  first  takes  out  one  |  of  the  pieces  four  spans  in 
length  |  for  a  measure,  and  he  lays  it  down  and  he  marks  along  it  |  in 
this  manner.1     Then  he  takes  it  up  and  lays  it  down  at  one  end  of 

30  the  ||  line,  in  this  maimer,1  and  he  marks  along  it.  He  takes  it  up 
again  |  and  lays  it  down  on  the  other  end  of  the  first  line,  in  this 
manner,1  and  he  |  marks  along  it.  After  he  has  done  so,  he  takes  up 
two  pieces  |  two  spans  in  length,  and  he  |  puts  them  down  on 
each  side  of  what  has  been  marked,  in    this  way, 

35  and  he  ||  marks  along  them.     As  soon  as  this  is  done, 
lie  takes  his  stone  hammer  |  and  one  of  the  posts 


three  spans  in  length,  |  and  he  drives  it  in  at  (1);  and   \\aJ^   N"SW 
when  |  one  span  and  a  half  shows,  |  then  he  takes   w"^  \<j 

40  another  one  and  drives  it  in  at  (2).     When  ||  the  top  is  level  with  the 
first  one,  he  drives  another  one  in  |  at  (3),  and  other  ones  at  from 


21  qa£s  yiLoyodes  laqexs  lae  q  lap  lego x£widEq  qa£s  wlk'ileqexs  gaxae 
na£nakwa  laxes  gokwe.  Wa,  g  iPmese  naEnxsEg'ilaleseda  xatsla- 
XElaxs  lae  ax£edxes  pElpElqe  LE£wa  dEnase  tleltales  laxa  wa.  Wa, 
hi  wlk  ilaxa  LaLEmwayoLe  qa£s  la  wlk  intsIesElaq  laxa  LlEma£ise  qa£s 

25  la  wix'ealisaq  laxa  k'lese  alaEin  tsedesa  laxa  ex'stEWese.  Wa,  la 
qwelodxa  ylLoy;1£ye  LloplEka.  Wa,  heemis  gil  dax£Itsoseda  £nEm- 
ts'.aqe  g'ayol  laxa  moplEnk'as  £wasgEmase  laxEns  q!\\aq!wax- 
ts!ana£yex  qa£s  mEnvayowa  qa£s  k'atlaliseq.  Wa  la  xtidElEneq 
g-a  gwiileg'a.1      Wa,  lii    dag'ilisaq    qa£s    katlalises  lax  apsba£yasa 

30  xuldese  ga  gwalegaxs1  lae  xuldEfEndEq.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  dag'ilisaq 
qa£s  k"at!alises  laxa  apsba£yasa  g-ale  xultes  g-a  gwalega.1  Wa,  laxae 
xQldEbsneq.  Wit,  g-il£mese  gwatexs  lae  ax£edxa  malts !ac[e  laxa 
infilplEiik'as  awasgEmase  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  qa£s  ka- 
tEnuralises  lax  wax-sanodzExsta£yasa  la  xQldEkwa  g'a  gwaleg'a  (fig.) 

35  qa£s  xwexuldEfEndeq.  Wa,  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  pElpElqe 
LE£wa  £nEmts!aqe  laxa  dzodzoxulayixayuduxup!Enk-as  awasgEmase 
laxEns  q !waq Iwaxts !ana£yex  qa£s  dex£waliseq  lax  (1).  Wa,  g'il. 
£mese  £iiEmp'.Enk-a  la  nelala  LE£wa  np>xsa£ye  laxEns  q!waq  Iwaxts  !a- 
na£yexs  lae  et'.etsa  £nEmts!aqe  dex£walisaq  lax  (2).    Wii,  gil£mese 

40  £nEmatox£wid  LEfwa  gale  deqwesexs  lae  etletsa  £nEmts!aqe  dex£wa- 
lisaq  lax    (3).     Wa,    la  etletsa    waokwe    dex£walisaq    lax  (4)— (11). 

1  See  outliues  of  cut  on  this  page. 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  161 

(4)  to  (11).  |  The  last  one  he  drives  in  at  (12).  |  These  are  the  posts  42 
of  the  perch-trap.     As  soon  as  |  this  is  done,  he  takes  the  soaked 
cedar-bark,  splits  it  into  long  strips,  ||  and,  when  it  is  all  split,  he  45 
takes  up  |  one  piece  of  the  stops  four  spans  in  length  |  and  lays  it 
down  at  the  outer  side  of  the  back  of  the  perch-  |  trap,  close  to  the 
posts.     Then  he  ties  it  with  cedar-bark  |  to  the  posts,  and  he  ties  it 
together  with  the  back;  for  he  first  ties  it  to  ||  posts  (l)-(4),  which  are  50 
the  back-stop.     As  soon  as  this  is  done,  he  takes  |  another  one  of  the 
same  length  and  lays  it  down  on  top  |  of  what  he  has  already  tied  on 
the  back-stop  at  post  (4),  and  he  ties  it  on  to  |  the  hack-stop  and  the 
side-stop,  and  he  ties  the  side-stops  on  to  posts  |  (5),  (6),  and  (7). 
When  this  is  done,  ||  he  takes  another  one  of  the  same  length  and  lays  55 
it  down  on  the  |  upper  side  of  the  side-stop  at  post  (1).     He  ties  it  on, 
and  |  ties  the  side-stop  to  posts  (12),  (11),  and  (10).     When  this     is 
done,  he  takes  one  of  the  pieces  two  spans  in  length,  |  with  sharp 
point  towards  (9),  and  ||   he  places  the  thick  end  under  the  side-stop  60 
at  (10).  |   Then  he  ties  together  the   entrance   and  the   side-stop  at 
(10),  and  he  ties  the  entrance  to  |    (9),  and  he  does  the  same  with 
(7)  and  (8).    When  |  this  is  done,  he  takes  another  one  of  the  four-  | 
span  sticks  and  places  it  over  the  ||  side-stops,  and  he  ties  it  together  65 

Wa,  la  etledxa  alElxsda£ye  EnEmts!aqa  dex£walisaq  lax  (12).     Wa,  42 
hcErn  dzddzoxiilasa  LaLEmwa_yuwe  Lawayowa.     Wa,  g'ilmiese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  ax£edxa  pegEkwe   dEnasa  qa£s  dzEdzExsEinleq  qa  g'ilsg  il- 
stowes  ts!elts!Eq!astowa.     Wa,  giFmese  £wI£we1xsexs  lae  dax£idxa  45 
£nEints!aqe    laxa  mop!Eiikas   £wasgEmase  laxEus    q!\vaq!\vaxts!a- 
na£yex  qa£s  katlalises  lax  l !asadza£yas  awap!aJyasa  LaLEmwayowe 
Lawayowa  mak 'Jink'  tene  lax  dzodzoxulaxs  lae  yib'itsa  dEnase  laxa 
dzodzoxula    qa£s  yaLodesa  Enixap!a£ye  LE£we  heEin  gil  yaLotsose 
(l)-(4)    LEWa   Emxap!a£ye.      Wii,    gil£mese    £wl£laxs    lae   ax^edxa  50 
mEmts  !aqexa  he^maxat !  £wasgEine  qa£s  k'at  lEndes  laxa  ek"  !ot  !Eiia- 
Eyasa  la  yiLElaLEla  Emxap!a£ya  lax  (4).     Wa,  laxae  yaLodxa  Emxa- 
p!aeye   le£w.i  EmxEiiwaejre.     Wa,  laxae  yaLodxa  EmxEnwa£ye  lax 
(5) ;  wii,  la  heEmxat!  gwex'£idEx  (6)  lo£  (7).     Wa,  g'il£mese  gwatexs 
lae  ax£edxa  £nEmts!aqexa  he£maxat!   £wasgEme  qa£s  kat!Endes  la-  55 
xa  ek'  !ot  !Ena£yasa  Emxap  !a£ye  lax  (1) .    Wa,  la  yaLodEq.    Wa,  la  et  !ed 
yaLodxa  EmxEnwa£)Te  lo£  (12)  lo£  (11),  hemiise  (10).     Wa,  g'il£mese 
gwalExs  lae    dax£idxa    £nEmts!aqe   laxa  malp!Eiikas    awasgEmase 
laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  qa£s  gwebales  ex'ba£vas  lax  (9),  lae 
kat!Entsa  LExuba£ye  lax   bEnk' !ot !Ena£yasa  EmxEnwa£ye  lax   (10)  60 
lae  yaLodxa  xdlsoe  lax    (10)   LE£wa  EmxEnwa£ye.     Wa,  la  yaL5dEx 
(9)  LE£wa  xolose.  Wa,  la,  heEmxat!  gwex'£IdEx  (7)  lo£  (8).    Wa,  gil- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  et!ed  dax£ldxa  £nEmts!aqe  laxa  mop!Enke  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  £wasgEmasa  qa£sk'at!Endes  lax  ek"!ot!Ena- 
£yasa  EmxEnwa£ye.      Wa,  la   yaLodEq  l0£   (1)   lo£  (2)  lo£   (3) ;  wii,  65 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 11 


162 


ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL 


[ETH.  ANN.  36 


66  at  (1),  (2),  (3),  and  |  (4).  When  this  is  done,  he  takes  another  one  of 
the  same  |  length  and  lays  it  on  top  of  the  back-stop,  and  he  |  ties 
it  at  (1),  (12),  (11),  and  (10),  and  he  does  the  same  |  with  the  other 

70  side  at  the  entrance.  As  soon  as  there  are  eight  ||  rows,  it  is  finished. 
Then  he  takes  pieces  four  spans  and  |  four  finger-widths  in  length 
and  puts  them  down,  and  he  |  takes  up  another  one  and  lays  it  on  it, 


in  this  manner: 
and  he  places  the 
he  also  ties  them 
75  takes  up  another 
width   |    apart 


He  |  ties  them  together  at  (1), 
other  ones  on  (2)  and  (3),  and  | 
at  (4).  When  this  is  done  he 
one  ||  and  places  it  one  finger- 
from  the  first  one  and  ties  it  on  at 


both  ends;  and  |  he  continues  tying  on  all  the  others,  going  towards 
(4)  and  (3).     As  |  soon  as  it  is  all  covered,  it  is  like  this. 
When  it  is  finished,  he  |  goes  up  from  the  beach  and 

80  breaks  off  hemlock-branches  in  the  woods.     He  ||  carries 
them  down  to  where  he  is  making  the  perch-trap  and 
puts  them  down,  and  he  goes  up  again  and  takes  small : 
clams,  which  he  gets  for  bait  |  for  his  fish-trap.     He  car- 
ries them  down  and  breaks  the  shells  of  the  clams  |  and  scatters  them 
in  the  trap.     As  soon  as  this  is  done,  he  puts  |  the  cover  over  the  trap. 

85  He  puts  hemlock-branches  on  top  of  it,  so  that  ||  it  is  dark  inside,  and 
he  places  four  large  stones  |  on  top  of  the  hemlock-branches  to  keep 
it  under  water.     Then  it  is  done.  | 


g'6  he£mise  (4).  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  etled  dax"£Idxa  he£maxat! 
£wasgEme  qa£s  kat  lEndes  lax  ek"  lot  !Eiia£yasa  Emxap  !a£ye.  Wa,  laxae 
yaLodEq  lax  (1)  lo£  (12)  l5£  (11);  wa, he£mise  (10).  Wa,  laheEmxat! 
gwex£ldxa    apsanft£ye   LE£wa  xolose.     Wa,    gil£mese  malgunalts !a- 

70  kostfdaxs  lae  gwala.  Wa,  la  dax'£Idxa  sayak!ap!Enk-Elasa 
modEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  qa£s  k'atlalise.  Wii,  la  da- 
x'ldxa  £nEmts!aqe  qa£s  katbEndes  laq;  ga  gwiilega  (fig.).  Wa,  la 
yaLodEx  (1).  Wa,  lii  etled  k'atbsntsa  waokwe  lax  (2 — 3),  wa  la 
yaLodEq  (4).     Wa  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  etled  dax-£Idxa  £nEmts!aqe 

75  qa£s  katledes  laxa  enEmdEne  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  awa- 
lagiilaasas  LE£wa  gale  ax£a.LElodayosexs  lae  yaelbEndEq.  Wa,  lii 
ha£nal  yil£aLElodalasa  waokwe  lalag'aaLElaa  lax  (4)  l5£  (3).  Wa, 
gil£mesE  Emdzoxs  lae  g'a  gwaleg'a  (fig.).  Wii,  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
lasdesa  laxa  L!Ema£ise  qa£s  la  LlEx£wIdEx  qlwaxa  laxa  aiJe  qa£s 
lii  gEmxEnts  lesElaq  lax  ax£etsasas  LaLEmwayowas  Lawayowa.  Wa, 
lii  xwelax£tisdesa  qa£s  lii  ax£ed  laxa  g-aweq!anEme  tatelanEms 
qaes  Lawayowe.  Wii,  lii  dEntslesElaq  qa£s  lii  tEptsIalasa  tele  gawe- 
qlanEma  qa£s  gwelalts !6dales  laq.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwatexs  lae  paqE- 
yotsa    sala    laxa   Lawayowe.     Wa,    lii    xESEyintsa    qhvaxe   laq  qa 

ok  p!EclEk-iles.  Wa,  lii  t UiqEyindalasa  mosgEme  awiikwas  tlesEm 
lax  6ku£ya£yasa   qlwaxe  qa  'wunsalayos.      Wa,    laEm    gwal   laxeq. 


80 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  163 

Net  for  Sea-Eggs. — You  know  already  how  nettle-bark  |  is  cleaned  1 
and  what  is  done  with  it.    When  it  is  put  |  on  the  netting-needle,  they 
take  the  netting-measure,    which  is  half  a  finger  wide  |  and  four 
finger-widths  ||  long,  and  they  net  on  it.  |  After  they  have  netted  5 
three  spans  in  length,   the  ends  are  netted  together.     Thus  |  the 
mouth  is  three  spans  around,  and  they  net  downward;  |  and  as  soon  as 
it  is  two  spans  long,  |  they  net  the  bottom  together.  Then  the  scraping- 
net  for  flat  sea-eggs  is  like  a  basket.  ||  It  is  this  way:     -smg^   After  he  10 
has  finished   netting  it,  |  he  takes  his  ax  and  gnes    fjgSSJj    UI,<I    the 
woods  looking  for  the  root  of  yellow-cedar;   |   and    tttHBfl    when  he 
finds    a   yellow-cedar    tree,    he    digs   out   a    root     *§B*'     which  is  | 
moderately  thick,  and  he  measures  five  spans  |  and  then  cuts  it  off. 
He  splits  it  through  the  ||  heart;  and  when  it  is  in  two  parts,  he  chops  |  15 
off  the  heart  on  one  side  so  that  it  all  comes  off,  and  he  chops  off  the   | 
sap.     Then  he  tries  to  make  it  half  a  finger  |  thick;  and  he  chops  off 
the  two  edges,  so  that  it  is  two  finger-widths  wide,  |  its  whole  length 
from  end  to  end.  ||  After  finishing  it,  he  carries  it  out  of  the  woods  and  20 
takes  it  into  his  house;  |  and  he  puts  it  down  on  the  floor,  and  he  takes 
his  crooked  knife,  |  sits  down,  and  takes  the  yellow-cedar  wood  and 
he  shaves  |  the  two  edges  straight;  and  after  doing  so,  |  he  shaves  off 

Net  for  Sea-Eggs. — Wii,    laEmLas   q!a,LElax   gwegilasaxa   gunaxs  1 
lae  axsE£wa   LE£wa   enaxwa   eaxeneq.     Wa,  gilcmese    la   qEtts!oyo 
laxa    yEgayo    lae   ax£edxa     ts  lEwekwexa    k"  lodEnosElas   wagwasas 
laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.     Wii,  la   modEn  laxEns  q!waq!wax-- 
ts!ana£yex  ylx    £wasgEinasas.     Wii,  la,   ylxEntsa.gunelaq.     Wa,    lii  5 
yuduxup!Enke    £\vasgEmasasexs  lae   yaqodEX    6ba£yas.     Wa,  laEm 
yuduxllp!Ex-site   £wadzEg'ixstaasas.     Wa,  la  ylqaxodEq.     Wa,  g'il- 
£mese   malplEnke  £wasgEmasas    laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£yaxs    lae 
yaqodEx  6xsda£yas  qa£s  yiwlla    gwexsa  L!abatexa  xElodzayowaxa 
amdEma.  Wa,  laEm  g'a  gwiilega  (fig.)-  Wii,  g'ihniese  gwal  yiqaqexs  10 
lae  ax£edxes  sobayowe  c^a^s  lii  laxa  arJe    aliix  L!op!Ek-asa  dexwe. 
Wa,  g'IPmese   q!axa    dex"mEsaxs    lae  £lap!ldEx  LloplEkasxa  hela- 
gite  LloplEka.     Wa,  la  bal-idxa  sEk"!ap!Enk"e  laxEns  q!waq!waxv 
ts!anaJyex  ylx  £wasgEinasasexs  lae  tsExsEndEq.     Wit,  lii  naq.'Eqax 
domaqasexs  lae   xoxusEndEq.     Wa,  g'il'mese    malts  !exs    lae    sopa-  15 
lax-£id  apsodile  domaqs  c[a  £wPlawes.     Wa,  lii  sopalax-£idEx  xodze- 
g"a£yas.     Wa,  laEm    laloLla    qa    k'lodEnes    laxEns  q!waq!waxts!a- 
na£yex  yix  wagwasas.  Wii,  lii  sop  !edEx  ewiinxaEyas  qa  maldEnes  £wa- 
dzEwasas  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!iina£yex  hebEndala  lax  £wiisgEmasas. 
Wii,  g'IPmese  gwatexs  lae  dalt  !alaq  qa£s  lii  daeLElaq  laxes  g-ok\ve.  20 
Wa,  la  katlalilaq  qa£s    ax£edexes   xElxwala   k'lawayowa.     Wii,  la 
klwagalila    qa£s    dax-£idexa    dEyddzowe.      Wii,  he£mis    g'il    k"!ax- 
£wlts6£se  ewunxa£yas  qa  naEnqEnxEles.     Wa,  g'IPmese  gvvalExs  lae 
k!6dzodEx  apsadzE£yas    qa   qedzEdzowes.     Wii,  g'Umiese  gwalExs 


164  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL,  [eth.  ANN.  36 

25  the  one  flat  side  so  that  it  is  smooth.  After  doing  so,  he  ||  turns  it 
over  and  shaves  off  the  other  side  until  it  has  a  thin  edge,  |  and  it 
is  half  a  finger  thick.  |  After  doing  so,  he  takes  a  basket,  goes  to  the 
beach,  |  picks  up  stones,  which  he  puts  into  the  basket.  |  When  he 

30  has  enough,  he  carries  them  on  his  back  into  his  ||  house  and  puts  them 
down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  |  He  puts  the  stones  on  the  fire,  and  he 
takes  the  basket  and  he  |  goes  down  again  to  the  beach  and  plucks  off 
dulce;  |  and  when  his  basket  is  full,  he  carries  it  up  the  beach  |  into 

35  his  house,  and  he  puts  it  down  on  the  floor.  ||  Then  he  digs  a  hole  by 
the  side  of  the  fire  of  the  same  length  |  as  the  stick  of  yellow  cedar 
which  is  to  be  steamed  to  make  a  hoop  for  the  scraping-net.  One  | 
span  is  the  width  of  the  hole  that  he  is  digging,  |  and  its  depth  is  the 
same.     When  this'is  finished,  he  takes  |  mats,  so  that  they  are  ready 

40  for  use,  and  he  takes  the  tongs  to  put  ||  the  red-hot  stones  into  the 
hole,  and  he  puts  them  into  the  hole  that  has  already  been  dug.  | 
When  it  is  nearly  full,  he  takes  his  didce  and  throws  it  on  the  |  red- 
hot  stones;  and  when  a  thick  layer  has  been  put  on,  |  he  puts  the 
yellow-cedar  stick  on  it,  and  he  takes  |  more  dulce  and  throws  it  on 

45  to  it;  and  as  soon  as  there  is  a  ||  thick  layer  of  dulce  on  the  yellow 
cedar,  he  takes  water  and  |  throws  a  little  on  top  the  whole  length  of 
the  yellow-cedar  stick,  |  and  he  covers  it  over  with  mats.     After  he 

25  lae  lex£Id  qa£s  k' ladzodex  &psiidza£yas  qa  pElesa  apsEnxa£ye. 
Wa,  laLa  k' !odEnx-sa£ma  apsEnxa£ye  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex. 
Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  la  laxa  L!Ema£ise 
qa£s  la  t!iiqax  tlesEma  qa£s  lii  t!iixts!alas  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa, 
gil£mese    hel£ats!axs    lae     oxLosdesa     qa£s     lii    oxLaeLElaq    laxes 

30  g  okvve  qa£s  lii  5xLEgalilas  lax  mag-inwalisases  lEgwlle.  Wa,  la 
xE£xuLEnts  laxes  lEgwlle.  Wii,  la  xwelaqa  ax£edxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  lii 
xwelaqEnts !es  liixa  LlEma£ise.  Wa,  lii  k!ulx£Id  laxa  LlEsLlEkwe. 
Wa,  gil£mese  qotle  lExa£yasexs  lae  6xLEx£id  qafs  lit  oxLosdesEla 
qa£s    lii    oxLaeLElaq    laxes  gokwe   qa£s    lii    oxLEg'alilaq.     Wa,    lii 

35  £lap labia  laxa  mag'inwalilases  lEgwllaxa  £nEmasgEme  lo£  nEkaso- 
Lasxa  dEyodzowe  qEX"ExsteLasa  xElodzayowe.  Wii,  la£nEmp!Enk' 
laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yix  £wadzEqawilasas  £lapa£yas.  Wii,  lii 
heEmxat!  £walabEtalile.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  15e1- 
wa£ye  qa  g'axes  gwa£lila.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  ts!esLala  qa£s  k'lipledes 

40  laxa  x'ix'ixsEmala  tlesEma  qa£s  lii  k'!ipts!alas  laxa  £labEgwelkwe. 
Wa,  la  Elaq  q5t!axs  lae  ax£edxa  LlEsLlEkwe  qa£s  lEXEyindes  lax 
oku£ya£yasa  x-ix-ixsEmala  tlesEma.  Wii,  g-il£mese  waklwaxs  lae 
ax£edxa  dEyodzowe  qa£s  paqlEqes  laq.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa 
waokwe  L!ESL!Ekwa  qa£s  lExeg'indes   laq.     Wii,  gil£mese  la  waxu- 

45  wiinaya  LlEsLlEkwe  laxa  dEyodzoxs  lae  ax£edxa  £wape  qa£s 
xELlEx£Ide  tsadzELEyints  lax  £wasgEmasa  kunyasaxa  dEyodzowe. 
Wa,  lii   nas£itsa   le£wa£ye  laq.     Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  165 

has  finished,  he  takes  a  |  round  billet,  and  he  cuts  it  with  an  ax  un- 
til it  is  round.  |  Its  size  is  three  spans  around.  ||  When  it  is  done,  he  50 
takes  thin  cedar-bark  rope,  so  that  it  is  |  ready  for  use.  After  it  has 
been  steaming  quite  a  while,  he  |  takes  off  the  covering  mats  and  he 
pulls  out  the  yellow-cedar  wood  that  has  been  steamed,  |  and  he  puts 
it  around  the  end  of  the  round  piece  of  fire-wood,  |  and  he  ties  it 

tightly  to  the  fire-wood,  in  this  manner:   ]TT\   After  he  has  tied 

it  on  with  a  ||  rope,  he  heats  it  by  the   iLAJ   fire  0f  ^e  house_  55 

Now  I  he  heats  it  all  roimd  until  it  is  burnt  black.  Then  he  takes 
tallow  and  |  rubs  it  on  it  while  it  is  still  warm.  When  it  is  cov- 
ered I  with  tallow,  he  puts  it  down  in  the  corner  of  the  house,  until 
it  I  cools  off  quickly.  Now  he  wants  it  to  become  brittle  and  ||  to  GO 
retain  its  hoop  shape  and  to  not  spring  back  again.  |  Therefore 
the  tallow  is  put  on.  When  it  gets  cool,  he  |  takes  the  hoop  for  the 
mouth  of  the  scraping-net  for  flat  sea-eggs,  and  he  takes  the  |  drill 
and  drills  ten  holes  to  sew  on  |  the  mouth  of  the  scraping-net.  After 
he  has  done  so,  it  is  ||  in  this  manner:  x^c^  Then  he  takes  the  65 
scraping-net  and  |  nets  its  mouth  to  the  ff  J\  hoop.  It  is  a  dif- 
ferent kind  of  I  nettle-bark  twine  that  ^lff'  he  puts  through  the 
drill-holes.     It   passes    through    I    two  meshes.    As  soon  as 

this  is  done,  he  takes  a  small  |  hemlock-        "         tree     two     fathoms 


lex£Ene     lEqwa   qa£s    k'!imlEIdeq     qa     lex'£Enes.     Wa,    he£mis    qa  48 
yiiduxup!Ensesstes  £wagidasas    laxEns     q  !waq  !wax-tsana£yex.     Wa, 
giT'mese  gwalExs    lae    fix£edxa    £wlle    dEnsEn    dEnEma    qa  g'axese  50 
g\varllia.     Wa,    gll£mese     gagiyala     la    g'iye     kunsasE£wasexs    lae 
nasodEx    naylmas     leElwa'ya.      Wa,    la     lEX£uqodxes    kunsasE£we 
dsyodza.     Wil,  la  qEx-se£stEnts  lax  6ba£yasa  k!axubaakwe  lEqwa. 
Wa, la  yil-idxa  max-£ina£yaxa  lsqwa  (Jig.).     Wa,gfl£mese  gwal yiLasa 
dEiiEme  laqexs  lae  pExi£dEq  laxa    lEgwllases  gokwe.     Wa,  laEm  55 
pEx-se£stalaq    qa    k!iimElx£Ides.     Wa,    lit    axfedxa    yasEkwe    qa£s 
dzEk'Ildzodes  laqexs  heemae  ales    tslElqwe.     Wa,  gil£mese  hamEl- 
se£steda  yasEkwe  laqexs  lae  ax£alllas    laxa   onegwilases  gokwe  qa 
odax£Ides     wudEx-£ida.      Wa,    laEm     £nex'     qa     L!Emx£wIdes     qa 
xak' !Eiuts  !awes  lax    laena£yas   wakala  qa  k!eses  edesa  dzax£wida.  60 
Wa,  heEin  lag'ilasa  yasEkwe  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  wudEx-£idExs  lae 
axodxa    wiilg'ixsteLasa    xElodzayaxa    amdEma.     Wii,    la    ax£edxa 
sElEme    qa£s    sElEmx'sodexa     nEqadzEqe    sEla£ya    qa    nEyimxso- 
watsa   t  !EmgExsta£yasa    xElodzayowe.     Wa,  gil-'mese   gwafcxs   lae 
g-a  gwaleg'a  (fig.).     Wa,    la    ax£edxa    ylgEkwe    xElodzayo,   la£me  65 
ytxdzodEq     laxa      willg'ixsteLas.      Wii,    laEm     5gu£laEm    medEk" 
giink'.Ene  la  nexsoyos  laxa  sesEla£ye  qa£s   la  hex'sala    laxa   mae- 
maltsEmtowe  ytgela£ya.     Wa,  gih'mese  gwalExs   lae   ax£edxa    wile 
qwaxasa    malplEnke  £wasgEmasas  laxEns  baLax.     Wa,  la  k"  laxalax 


166  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  se 

70  in  length,  cuts  off  ||  the  bark  and  the  sap ;  and  when  it  is  all  off,  he 
cuts  |  off  the  thick  end  so  that  it  is  flat,  and  he  puts  t  on  the  end  of 
his  scraping-net  |  for  flat  sea-eggs  to  serve  as  a  net- 
handle,  for  thus  is  called  what  they  tie  to  the  end  of  it;  | 
and  he  takes  a  split  spruce-root  and  ties  the  |  scrap- 
ing-net for  small,  flat  sea-eggs  to  the  end  of  the  net- 

75  handle.  After  he  has  ||  done  so,  it  is  in  this  way: 
1  Staging  for  drying  Roots. — After  they  have  eaten,  |  they  go  out  of 
the  house.  Immediately  (the  man)  goes  into  the  woods,  |  carrying 
his  ax,  and  he  cuts  down  four  |  good-sized  long,  straight  cedar-trees 
5  that  have  no  branches.  He  measures  off  ||  three  fathoms  and  cuts 
them  off.  |  The  four  sticks  are  each  three  fathoms  in  length.  |  Then 
he  measures  off  one  fathom  and  |  cuts  them  off,  and  he  chops  off 
eight  of  the  same  length.  |  As  soon  as  all  these  have  been  cut  off  one 

10  fathom  in  length,  ||  he  sharpens  one  end.  When  |  all  the  ends  are 
sharp,  he  carries  them  on  his  shoulders  and  |  carries  them  into  his 
house,  and  he  throws  them  down  where  he  is  going  to  put  them  up 
for  |  a  staging.  When  they  are  all  in  the  house,  he  takes  one  |  of  the 
sharpened  sticks  and  drives  it  into  the  ground  close  to  the  inner  | 

1 5  back-rest  in  the  corner  of  the  right-hand  side  of  the  house ;  and  when 
it  is  |  two  spans  in  the  ground,  he  |  takes  another  one  of  the  sharp- 

70  xE£xuw£iina£yas  lo£  xodzeg'a£yas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl£laxs  lag  kMax- 
£\\rldEX  LE£xuba£yas  qa  pepEgEnoses.  Wa,  la.  axbEntsa  xElodzayo- 
waxa  amdEina  laxa  xElospleqe  qaxs  heemae  LegEmsa  lal  yilbayaats. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  dzEdEkwe  Lloptelcsa  alewase  qa£s  yil£aLElodesa 
xElodzayowaxa  amdEina    lax    Gba£yasa  XElospleqe.     Wa,  g'll£mese 

75  gwalExs  lae  ga  gwaleg'a  {fig.)- 
1  Staging  for  drying  Roots. — -Wa,  g-il£mese  gwal  LlExwaxs  lae 
hoqiiwElsa  qa£s  lit  laxes  gokwe.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese  la  laxa  aLle 
dak  lotElaxes  sobayowe  qa£s  lii  sopIsxSdxa  m5ts!aqe  g'llsgiltla 
ha£yal£ag"it  ek-etEla  naEnk'Ela  dzESEkwa.  Wit,  lit  bal£idEq  qa 
5  yaeyoduxup!Enk-es  laxEns  baLaqe  awasgEmasasexs  lae  sopsEndEq. 
Wa,  la£me  £nEmax'e  awasgEmasasa  motslaqe  lax  yuduxup!Enke 
laxEns  baLax.  Wii,  lii  et!ed  bal£idxa  £nEinp!Enke  laxEns  baLiixs 
lae  sopsEndEq.  Wit,  lit  malgiinalts!aqa  sopa£yas  hexsa  awasgEme. 
Wit,  g'il£mese  £wI£wElxs£eda  £nal£nEmp!Eiik'as    awasgEmase  laxEns 

10  baLiixs  lae  dzodzoxubEndEx  epsba£yas  qa  eex'bes.  Wa,  gil£mese 
£wi£la  la  dzodzoxubaakiixs  lae  yilkulsaq  qa£s  lit  yilx£wult!alaq  qa£s 
lit  yilgweLElaq  laxes  g'okwaxs  lae  yilx£walllaq  laxes  ax£alilasLasa 
k'lagllLe.  Wit,  gil£mese  £wI£laeLaqexs  lae  &x£edxa  £nEmts!aqe 
laxa  dzodzoxubaakwe  qa£s  dex£waliles  laxa  mag-idz;i£yasa  tsaq!Ex- 

15  La£ye  lax  onegwilasa  hclklotewalllasa  g'okwe.  Wit,  g-il£mese 
malplEnke  £walabEtal!lasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yaxs  lae 
ax£edxa      £nEmts!aqe      dzodzoxubaakwa      qa£s      dex£wallles     laxa 


boas)  INDUSTRIES  167 

ened  sticks  and  drives  it  into  the  floor  |  one  span  distant  from  the  18 
first  |  post;  and  he  takes  one  of  the  long  sticks  for  a  crosspiece  and  |j 
lays  it  down  outside,  in   this  manner:  Then    he  20 

takes  another  one  |  of  the  sharpened  poles  and  drives 

it  down  at  the  other  end  of  the  long  stick  that  he  had  laid  down ;  |  and 
when  it  is  two  spans  in  the  ground,  |  he  takes  the  other  sharpened 
stick,  |  places  it  at  the  same  distance  as  at  the  other  end,  and  drives 
it  into  the  floor.  ||  When  it  is  also  two  spans  deep  in  the  ground,  |  he  25 
takes  his  hand-adz  and  adzes  off  the  tops  |  of  all  the  posts,  so  that 
they  are  hollowed  out.  These  are  called  "notches  for  the  beams," 
and  |  they  are  in  this  manner:       M  As  soon  as  they 

have  all  been  notched  out  on  top,       I  I |    he     takes    a 

beam  and   places   it  over  the  post  ||  at  one   end,  and  he  puts  the  30 
other  end  on  the  top  of  the  other  post,  |  so  that  it  is  in  this  man- 
ner:    (_^ ;      J)    When     the     staging    is    finished,  he 

|  the  baskets  with  long  cinquefoil-roots 
—   and  he  does  the  same  along  the  other 


puts 

on  it,   • 

side.  |  35 

Frame  for  drying  Berries. — Now  we  will  talk  about  the  work  |  of  1 
the  husband  of  the  woman,  for  ho  does  not  sit  still  in  his  house  while  ] 
his  wife  is  picking  elderberries.     First  he  has  to  look'  for  a  good  | 
cedar-log  which  is  soaked  in  water  and  soft,  for  this  splits  straight.  || 
After  he  has  found  one,  he  chops  it  with  his  ax  on  the  under  side.  |  5 

£nEmp!Enke  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaeyex,  yix  awalagolilasasa  Le-  ig 
Lame.      Wii,    lii      axEedxa     £nEmts!aqe     laxa     k' !axdEmaLe     qa£s 
k-at!aliles  lax  iJasalllas  g-a  gwiileg'a  (fig.),  lii  ax£edxa  £nEints!aqe  20 
laxa  dzodzoxubaakwe  qa£s    dex£waliles  laxa  apsbaEyasa  la  k'adela. 
Wa,    gil£Emxaawise     malptenke    £walabEtalilasas     laxEns     q!wa-- 
q!wax-ts!ana£yaxs   lae    ax£edxa    £nEnits!aqe    dzodzoxubaakwa    qa£s 
na/naxts'owex    awalagolilasasa    apsba£yaxs  lae   dexbEtalllaq.     Wa, 
gll'Emxaawise  malplEnk'e  £walabEtalilasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!a-  25 
na£yex  lae  ax£edxes  klimLayowe  qa£s  lclimLEtodeq  cja  xiibEtowes 
Enaxweda  LeLame.     HeEin  LegadEs  cjlasexa  kats.'EwasLasa  k'laxdE- 
maxa  g'a  gwiilega  (fig.).     Wa,  gIPmese  £wFla  la  q!eq!adzEkwa  oxta- 
£yasa  LeLamaxs  lae  ax£edxa  k'laxdEma  qa£s  k'adEtodes  laxa  Lamasa 
apsbaeye.     Wa,    laxae    ogwaqa    kadEtotsa    apsba£yas    laxa  Lame.  30 
Wa,  la£me  g'a  gwaleg'axs  (fig.)  lae  gwala  k-  !ag'ile  qa  g'exdEmasa 
Laxabatsle  LliiLlabata.     Wa,  lii  heEm  xat!  gwex,£Idxa  apsodEq!a. 

Frame  for  drying  Berries. — Wa,  la£mesEns  gwagwex'sEx£idEl  lax  1 
lil-wiinEmasa    ts!Edaqaxs   k'!esae  km   klwael  laxes   g'okwaxs   lae 
ts!exes  gEiiEmaxa  tslexina.     Wii,  heEm  gil  la  alasoese  ek'a  k!wax- 
Lawaxa  k!unk!iinq!Eqexa  tElqwe  qaxs  liec"mae  eg'aqwa  lax  pats.'asE- 
Ewe.     Wii,  g'iPmese  q!iiqexs  lae  sopletses  sobayowe  laxa  wIlEme  qa£s  5 
tEmxubEtEndeq   g'a  gwiileg'a  (fig.),  gil£mese  nEg5yode  tEmkwaeyas 


168  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  3b 

6  He  chops  into  it  this  way :  Q  t^  \  As  soon  as  he  has  chopped 
half  way  down  |  to  the  heart  of  the  wood,  he 
measures  from  the  place  where  he  has  |  chopped  nine  spans  of  our 

10  hand.  |  Then  he  chops  in,  and  cuts  in  ||  as  deep  as  before  at  the  other 

end.  Then  he  stops  chopping.    Now  it  is  |  in  this  way:  ^ ^ ^ — . 

Then  he  takes  his  wedges  and  drives  them  in  at  the  ^ 

end  |  of  (1),  towards  the  top  of  the  cedar- tree;   and  he  uses  his  stone 
hammer  to  drive  them  in ;  |  and  when  he  has  a  piece  wedged  off,  he  turns 

it  over  on  its  back.     Then  it  is  in  this  way :  |  /- —  -^ >  Then  he 

wedges  the  piece  which  he  has  cut  off  from  ^ the  tree 

15  into  pieces.  He  splits  it  up  small  enough  so  that  he  ||  can  carry  it  out 
of  the  woods.  After  he  has  cut  it  into  pieces,  he  carries  it  home  on  his 
shoidder  |  out  of  the  woods  and  into  his  house.  There  he|  throws  it 
down  in  the  corner  of  the  house ;  and  after  all  has  been  carried  out, 
he  |  takes  his  adz  and  puts  it  down.    He  also  takes  his  straight  |  knife, 

20  his  wedge,  and  his  stone  hammer,  and  he  ||  splits  off  the  thickness  of  one 
of  our  fingers ;  |  and  when  it  has  come  off,  he  measures  pieces  two  finger- 
widths  |  in  width.  He  takes  his  straight  knife  and  |  splits  the  wood  with 
it.     He  continues  to  do  so  until  he  has  many  of  the  same  size.  |  When 

25  he  thinks  he  has  split  out  enough,  he  takes  his  straight  ||  knife  and  one 
of  the  cedar-sticks  which  he  has  split  and  cuts  it  well  |  and  straight  on 
one  side,  so  that  it  is  straight  and  flat.  |  After  he  has  done  so,  he  turns 

7  lax  lalaa  lax  domaqas  lae  baHtses  q!waq!waxts!ana'ye  g-ag"tLEla 
laxes  tEmkwa'ye.  Wa,  la  £na£nEmap!Enk'  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!a- 
na£yex  yix   baxa£yasexs   lae   tEmxewidEq.     Wa,    g-il£Emxaawise   la 

10  £nEmale  £walabEdasas  i.E-"wa  apsbafyaxs  lae  gwal  sopaq.  Wa,  laEm 
gagwiilega  (Jig.).  Wa,  lii  &x£edxes  LEmlEmg'ayowe  qa£s  qlwaelbEn- 
des  lax  (1)  xa  wllEta£yasa  welkwe.  Wii,  lit  pElgEtEweses  pElpElqe 
laq.  Wa,  g"il*mese  iiEi.axe  latoyas  laxa  welkwaxs  lae  g'a  gwiileg'a 
(Jig.).  Wa,  la  LEinlEinx'SEndxes  latoyowe.  Wa,  a£mese  gwanala  qa£s 

15  lakweses  ([5  lal  ytlx£ult  lalaLEq.  Wa,g'il£mese  £wI£we1xsexs  lae  veIx 
ewidEq  qass  yilx£ult lalaq  qa£s  lii  yilgweLElaq  laxes  g'okwe.  Wa,  lii 
vElx£walilaq  lax  onegwilases  g'okwe.  Wii,  g"il£mese  £wI£lolt!axs  lae 
ax£edxes  k"!imLayowe  lit  g'lg'alilaq.  Wa,  he£misLaLes  nExx"alak"!a- 
wayowe.     Wa,  lii    ax£edxes  LEmg'ayowe   LE£we  pElpElqe.     Wii,    lii 

20  latodxa  £nEindEiie  laxEns  q!wiiq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  yix  wagwasas. 
Wa,  g'Il£mese  lawiixs  lae  mEns£Itsa  maldEne  laxEns  q!wiiq!wax'ts!a- 
na£yex  qa  £wadzEwatsex,  lae  ax£edxes  nExxiila  k-!awayowa  qa£s 
xoxllsEndeq.  Wii,  lii  bex'siiEm  gweg"ilaxa  q!enEme  hex'sa,  awagwite. 
Wa,  gil£mese  k-otaq  laEm  helales  xa£yaxs  lae  ax£edxes  nExxiila 

25  k'lawayowa  LE£wa  £nEints!aq  laxes  xa£ye  klwaxLawa  qa£s  aek-!e 
k"  laxwax  apsot  !Ena£yas  qa  nEqEles ;  wii,  he£mis  cja  pEx£Enes.  Wii, 
g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  lex-£IdEq   qa£s   k"!ax£wldex    awlg'a£yas  qa  lene- 


boas]  INDUSTRIES  169 

it  over  and  cuts  the  back  so  that  it  is  round  |  and  also  straight.     After  28 
doing  so,  he  takes  another  one  [  and  does  the  same  as  he  did  to  the  first 
one  he  made,  and  he  ||  continues  doing  so  with  the  others.     When  all  30 
have  been  cut  out,  he  |  splits  some  smaller  than  our  little  finger.     He 
takes  |  his  straight  knife  and  cuts  them  square.  |  When  he  thinks  he 
has  enough  of  these,  he  measures  these  off  |  two  spans  and  two  finger- 
widths  J!  in  length.     Then  he  cuts   them  off.     There  are  many  of    35 
these  |  which  he  has  cut  the  same  length.     After  they  have  been  done, 
he  takes  his  |  wedge  and  Ms  stone  hammer  and  he  wedges  the  other  | 
cedar-sticks  into  thin  pieces.     When  they  are  all  in  pieces,  he  takes 
his  |  straight  knife  and  the  cedar-sticks  which  he  has  wedged  into 
pieces  and  ||  splits  them  into  small  pieces  with  his  straight  [  knife,  so  40 
that  they  arc  the  thickness  of  half  the  thickness  of  our  little  finger.  | 
Now  he  has  split  out  very  many.     After  doing  so,  he  takes  the  |  first 
one  which  he  made  two  finger-widths  in  width,  and  he  cuts  |  square 
holes  a  little  larger  than  the  size,  of  our  little  finger  ||  four  finger-widths  45 
from  the  end  of  what  he  |  is  cutting.     As  soon  as  the  hole  passes 
through,  he  measures  |  two  spans  from  this  hole,  and  there  he  makes 
another  hole;  |  and  when  it  also  passes  through,  he  measures  off  two 
more  spans  |  from  the  last  hole  he  made;  and  he  continues  to  do  so, 
proceeding  to  the  end  of  the  stick.  |[  As  soon  as  this  side-stick  has  been  50 


g'es  lo£  qa  riEqEles.     Wii,  giFmese  gwalExs  lae  etledxa  £nEmts!aqe.  28 
Wit,  aEinxae  nanaxtslE  waxes  gilx'de  axa£ya.     Wa,  ax'sa^mese   he 
gweg'ilaxa   waokwe.     Wii,  giFmese  £wi£la  la  k- lakwa.     Wii,  la  et  led  30 
xox'wldxa  wawilalagawa£yasEns  sEltlax'tslana'yex.     Wa,   lii  axsed- 
xes    nExxiila     k'lawayowa     qaEs   k' laxHvldeq    qa     k' !EWElx£unes. 
Wa,  g  il'Emxaawise   k'otax   laEm   helalaxs   lae  baHdEq  ytse  q!wa- 
q!wax"ts!ana£yaxa  malplEnk'e   hennisa   maldEne  babELawe  laxEns 
q!wac[!wax-ts!ana£yaxs    lae  k' limts  lEiulEq.     Wii,  laEmxae  q leiiEme  35 
k' !imta£yas    he    gwex'se.      Wii,    giPmese    gwalExs    lae    ax£edxes 
LEmg'ayowe  LE^wis  pElpElqe  qa^s  LEmlEmx'salexa  waokwe  klwax- 
i.awa  qa  pElspadzowes.     Wii,  g'lPniese  £wI£wQ1x'sexs  lae  &xeedxes 
nExx'iila    k'lawayowa   qa£s    laxat!  ax£edxes  LEmk'asoxude  klwax- 
Lawa.      Wii,  lii   heloxus£End   xoxoxusalaq    yfses    nExx'ala    klawa- 40 
yowe  laq  qa  k  !f>dEnes  wagwasas   laxEns    sElt!ax"ts!anasyex.     Wa, 
lii   alak'lala  qlenEme  xa£yas.      Wii,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae    ax;edxes 
gilx'de   axa£yaxa  maemaklEnas    awadzEwase.      Wii,  lii  klex'sodxa 
k' !EWElxustowe  halsElaEm  lalexalagawesEns  sElt!ax'ts!anaeyex  ylxs 
modEnae    laxEns     q!waq!wax'tsiinaeyex    g'ag'iLEla     lax    oba£yase  45 
k'!ex'sotsE£was;    g'iPmese    lax'sawe    k"  !esoda£yasexs    lae    baHtses 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yaxa    malplEnk'e   g'ag'iLEla    lax    k'lexsoda-yas. 
Wii,  gik'Emxaawise  lax'saxs   lae  etled  bal£idxa    malplEnk'e  g'iig'f- 
LEla  lax  ale  k'lex'sodes.     Wa,  frnuse  he  gwemakiilax  labEiidalae. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwala  l  Ian  !ExEnwa£yaxs  lae  g'a  gwaleg'a  {jig.).    Wa,  50 


170  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [eth.ann.S6 

51  finished,  it  is  this  way:    ' '   Then  he  |  puts  it  down.    Then 

he  takes  the  other  one  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  one  that  \ 
he  has  finished,  and  he  marks  it  according  to  the  first  one,  so 
that  the  hole  that  he  is  to  make  will  be  in  the  corresponding  place ;  | 
and  after  he  has  marked  it,  he  cuts  the  holes  through  it;  and  when 
these  are  |  finished,  he  takes  a  square  piece  of  the  size  of  our  little 

55  finger  ||  and  two  spans  and  two  finger-widths  in  length,  |  which  is 
called  "crosspiece  for  tying  on."  He  measures  one  |  finger-width 
from  the  end  of  it.  Then  |  he  takes  his  straight  knife  and  cuts  a 
notch  around  it.     He  cuts  off  |  a  little  all  round,  so  that  it  fits  into 

60  the  hole  of  the  side-stick.  He  ||  pushes  it  through  the  hole  that  he  has 
cut;  and  when  he  has  cut  off  enough  |  so  that  it  fits  in  tight  for  the 
end  to  pass  through,  |  he  only  stops  pushing  it  in  when  |  it  fits  tightly 
against  the  shoulder  of  the  notch,  |  he  does  the  same  with  the  other  end 
of  the  |  crosspiece  as  he  did  to  the  former  end.     After  |  doing  so,  he 

65  continues  the  same  with  the  others ;  and  ||  when  all  of  them  have  been 

finished,  it  is  in  this  way :     After  this  has  been  done,  | 

he  takes  cedar-bark  and  i  |  2  |  3  |  4  |  -s  |  e  [  soaks  it  in  water.  After 
doing  so,  I  betakes  the   ~  thin  pieces  of  cedar- wood 

half  as  I  thick  as  our  little  finger  and  one  finger-width  |  in  width.    These 

70  are  to  be  the  middle  sticks.  When  he  has  ||  put  them  all  down  at  the 
place  where  he  is  sitting  making  the  drying-frame,  after  |  they  have 
all  been  brought  there,  he  takes  the  soaked  cedar-bark  and  puts  it 

51  la  k'at!alilaq  qa£s  ax£edexa  £nEmts!aqe;  la  kadEnodzEllias  laxa 
la  gwala.  Wa,  la  xult  !edEq  qa  naqallltsa  k-  !ek'  lex'sEwakwe.  Wii, 
g-il£mese  gwal  xultaqexs  lae  k- .'Eylmxsala.  Wa,  g!l£Emxaawise 
gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa   k*  !EWElx£unexa  yo  £wiigitEns    sElt!ax"ts!ana- 

55  £yexxa  hamaldEngala  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  awasgEmas. 
W'.i,  lieEin  LegadEs  k'!Elx-dEma  gayege.  Wa,  la  mEns£Itsa  £nEm- 
dEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  g'ag^LEla  laxa  oba£yasexs  lae 
ax£edxes  nExx'fila  k- !awayowa  qa£s  k- !imtse£staleq.  Wa,  xaiJEX'£Id 
k- !axuse£stala  qa  heladzEqElis  laxa  L!aL!EXEnxa£ye.     Wii,  lanaxwe 

60  LlEnxstots  laxes  k' !ex'soda£ye.  Wii,  g'JPmese  helale  tEk'alaena- 
£yases  lae  lax'sawe  oba£yas.  Wa,  al£mese  gwiil  q  lomtaqexs  lae  wala 
lax  k'!imtse£stalaso£x"diis.  Wa,  laxae  heEin  gwex-£idxa  apsba£yasa 
k-!Elx-dEma  gayeg"a£ya,  ylxes  gwex,£idaasaxa  &psba£yas.  Wa,  g"il- 
£mese  gwala  £nEmts!aqaxs  lae  hex'siiEm  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe;   g'll- 

65  £mese  £wl£la  gwalExs  lae  g-a  gwiileg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs 
lae  ax£edxa  dsnase  qa£s  lii  pexustEnts  laxa  £wape.  Wa,  g"il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  pepatslaakwe  pelspEle  k!wek!wagEdzowaxa 
k'!odEnas  wagwase  laxEns  sElt!ax-ts!ana£yex.  Wa,  lii  £nEm<lEne 
awadzE£wasas  liixEns  q !waq !wax-ts !anaeye,  ylxa  iiExtsIa,.     Wii,  g'il- 

70  £mese  g"ax  £wllg-alll  lax  k Iwaelasasexs  k-  !ltk-  lEdeselae.  Wii,  g-tl£mese 
£wllg'alilExs  lae  ax£edxa  pexustallle  dEnasa  qa£s  g'axe  g'eg'alilasexs 


uoas]  INDUSTEIES  171 

down.  |  He  calls  his  wife  to  split  it  into  narrow  strips,  |  and  she  72 
immediately  comes  and  sits  down  and  |  splits  the  cedar-bark  into 
narrow  strips  for  him  to  tie  on  the  middle  sticks  of  the  ||  drying-frame.  75 
After  splitting  off  one  strip,  she  gives  it  to  her  |  husband.     He  takes 
it,  and  also  one  of  the  split  sticks  from  |  the  middle  sticks  of  the 
drying-frame,  and  he  puts  it  on  at  (1)  and  close  |  to  (7),1  and  he  ties 
it  on  with  split  cedar-bark,  |  and  he  sees  to  it  that  there  is  no  turn  in 
the  cedar-bark.     After  tying  it  on,  he  takes  up  ||  another  one  of  80 
the  split  sticks  and  places  it  alongside  of  the  first  one,    |    which 
he  put  on  also   at    (1).     Then   he   ties   it   also    to  the  crosspiece.  | 
He  continues  doing  this  at  (1);  and  as  soon  as  it  has  been  filled  up 
to  (8),1  I  the  side-stick,  then  he  ties  them  on  at  (2);  and  after  that 
has  been  filled,  |  he  ties  them  up  at  (3),  (4),  and  (5).     Now  the  drying- 
frame  ||  has  been  finished;  and  when   ^^^^^^^^^^  all   the  sticks  85 
have  been  tied  on,  it  is  in  this  way:   [  1     |     |     |     |     |  |  After  |  the  dry- 
ing-frame has  been  finished,  he  gives  it  to  his  wife.  | 

Rack  for  holding  Baskets. — His  wife, however,  takes  easily-  |  splitting  1 
eedar-wood  and  splits  it  so  that  (the  pieces  are)  one  finger  |  thick  one 
way,  and  half  |  a  little  finger  thick  the  other  way.     She  measures 
them  ||  by  the  inside  of  the  empty  oil-box.     Then  she  cuts  them  off;  5 
and  when  |  she  thinks  she  has  enough  of  these  sticks,  she  measures 


lae  Le£lalaxes  gEnEme  qa  g'axes  dzeldzEq  lastogwfla  dzEdzExsEiidxa  72 
pegF.kwe    dEnasa.     Wa,   la  hex'Jida£mese    la    gEriEmas   k!wag-allla 
qa£s   dzEdzExsEnde   dzeldzEqlastogwilaxa  yaeLElai-axa  nExts  lawasa 
k-!ltk-!EdesLe.     Wa,  g"il-mese  dzExodxa  £nEmxsaxs    lae  tslas  laxes  75 
hVwfinEme.     Wa  dax,£ldEq.     Wa,  heemisa  £nEmxsa  patslaak"  g'ayol 
laxa    uExtslaLasa   k"  Mr  IsdesLe  qa£s  k'atlEndes  lax  (1)  lit  maxp£E- 
nex  (7);  wa,  hi  yil-TiLElodEq  yisa  dzEXEkwe  dEnasa.     Wii,  la  k"!es 
helqlalaq  k'Slpleda.     Wa,  g"ll£mese  gwal  yitaqexs  lae  et!ed  ax£6dxa 
£nEmxsa  patslaakwa  qass  k'adEnodzEndes  laxes   gilx'de  ax£aLElo-  80 
dayowa  laxaax  (1)  k- lElx'dEma  gayolEma.    Wa,  laxae  yt^aLElodEq. 
Wa,  axus;i-rmese  he  gweg'ilax   (1).     Wii,  g'tPmese  lEnxEnd  lax  (8) 
L!aL!EXEnxasya,  lae  et!ed  ytleEndalax  (2).     Wa,  giPmese  lEnxEndEq 
lae  et!ed  ytl£Endalax  (3)  lo£  (4)  lo£  (5).     Wa,  laEin  gu^iila  k'ttkME- 
desaxs  lae  £wl£la   yELEkwe    (6).     Wa,   lag-a  gwaleg-a  (fig.).      Wa,  85 
giPmese  gwala  k-  !itk'  lEdesaxs  lae  ts!as  laxes  gEnEme. 

Rack  for  holding    Baskets. — Wa,  laLa  gEiiEmas  ax£edxa  eg'aqwa  1 
lax   xasE£we   klwaxLawa,  qa's   xoxewideq,  qa   EnalenEmdEndzayaa- 
kwes    awadzEwase  liixEns   q!waq!wax*ts!ana£yex.     Wa,    lak'lodEn 
laxEns  sElt!ax"ts!anaeyex,  yix  wlwagwasas.     Wa,  la  heEm  mEnseItse 
g'oldolas  ots lawasa  dEngwats!emotaxs  lae  k'ltmtslEndEq.     AV;i,  g-fl-  5 
£mesc  k'otaq  laEm  helales  axa'yaxs  lii  mEns;Itsa  £iiEmts!acie  lax  ts!E- 

1  (7)  and  (8)  are  the  two  long  side-sticks. 


172  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  ss 

7  with  another  stick  the  |  width  of  the  empty  oil-box.  One  finger- 
width |  on  each  side  is  the  size  of  these  square  pieces  of  cedar-wood.  | 
She  makes  four  pieces  of  the  same  size,  and  all  of  the  same  length.  |[ 

10  After  they  have  been  cut  off,  she  takes  cedar-bark  and  |  puts  it  into 
water  and  leaves  it  there  until  it  gets  soaked.  |  When  she  thinks  it  is 
soaked,  she  takes  it  out  and  splits  it  |  into  narrow  strips.  After 
doing  so,  she  takes  |  one  of  the  shorter  cedar-sticks,  one  of  the  pieces 

15  to  which  the  rack  on  which  ||  the  basket  rests  is  tied  when  erabapples 
are  being  boiled,  and  she  takes  |  one  of  the  flat  pieces  of  cedar  and 
places  it  lengthwise,  so  that  the  two  are  |  in  this  way.1  Then  she 
takes  split  cedar-bark  and  ties  together  |  the  two  ends  of  the  rack 
that  she  is  making.     After  this  has  been  done,  |  she  takes  up  one  of 

20  the  long  cedar-sticks  ||  and  puts  it  down  flat  on  the  crosspieces,  and 
she  ties  these  together  with  cedar-bark.  |  She  continues  doing  this 
from  one  end  of  the  crosspieces  to  the  other.  |  When  she  reaches  the 
other  end,  she  takes  another  one  of  the  shorter  |  cedar-sticks  and 
ties  it  under  the  rack.  |  She  measures  so  that  equal  distances  are 

25  between  the  ||  four  cross-sticks.  She  ties  them  also  with  cedar-bark.  | 
She  does  this  with  all  four  sticks.  After  she  has  |  done  so,  it  is  hi 
this  way.2  | 

goliisa  dEngwats!emote,  ytxa  £nEmdEne£staliis  £wag'idase  laxsns 
q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  laxes  k- !Ewiux£unena£ya  klwaxLawe.  Wii, 
la  motslaqa  hex"sa  awagwite.     Wa,  laxae  hex'siiEmxat!  awasgEme. 

10  Wa,  g'lh'mese  gwal  k!imk'  !imtts!alaqexs  lae  ax£edxa  dEnase  qa£s 
hapstEndeq  laxa  £wape,  qa  yawas£lde  hapstallla,  qa  pex£wides.  Wit, 
uihinese  k'otaq  laEm  pex£wldEx  lae  ax£wustEiidEq  qa£s  dzEdzExs£- 
Endeq  qa  ts!elts!Eq!astowes.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwabsxs  lae  ax£edxa 
£nEmts!aqe  laxa  ts !Ekwagawa£yasa  klwaxLawe,  yix  k- !ilxdEmaLasa 

15  handzowasa  k' !itk" lidesElasa  q!oliixa  tsElxwe.  Wa,  laxae  dax-£ldxa 
£nEmxsa  laxa  giltagawaEye  klwaxLawa  qa£s  k"ak'Etodex  oba£yas 
w a  gwideg-a1.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  dzEXEkwe  dEnasa  qaes  lii  yaLo- 
dayonoxus  lax  6ba£yases  k- !itk- !EdesIlasE£we.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwal- 
£aLF.laxs  lae  et!ed  ;Ix£edxa  £nEmxsa  laxa  g'iltagawa£ye  klwaxLawa, 

20  qaes  laxa  paxEnts  laxa  k1  lilx-dEina.  Wa,  laxae  yaLodEq  yisa  dE- 
nase. Wii,  axusa£mese  he  gweg-ilaxs  labEndalaaxa  k-!Ilx-dEma.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  labEndqexs  lae  et!ed  dax-£klxa  £nEmts!aqe  laxa  ts!Ekwa- 
gawa£ye  klwaxLawa  qa£s  lii  k-adabots  lax  awabo£yasa  k!itk'!E- 
dese.     Wii,    laEm     aEm    mEnsi£liila,    qa   £nEmes    awalagalaasLasa 

25  mots'.aqe  k- !ek' ItlxdEma.  Wii,  laEmxae  yiLodalasa  dEnase  laq. 
Wii,  lii  £naxwaEm  he  gweg'ilaq  laqexs  mots!aqae.  Wii  g'il£mese 
gwalaxs  lae  g-a  gwiileg-a.2 

1  Tied  together  at  the  ends  at  right  angles. 

2  See  figure  of  frame,  p.  171.    There  are  only  four  cross-sticks. 


II.  HUNTING,  FISHING,  AND   FOOD-GATHERING 

Goat-Hunting. — When  the  mountain-goat  hunter  |  goes  up  the  moun-  1 
tain  to  hunt  goats,  he  searches  for  thick,  long  |  cedar-withes.  Some- 
times these  are  two  fathoms  long  |  and  of  the  thickness  of  the  fourth 
ringer.  They  have  no  branches.  [|  He  twists  them  well,  going  towards  5 
the  thick  end.  |  He  steps  on  the  top  while  he  is  twisting  it;  and 
when  |  the  piece  that  he  has  twisted  is  long,  he  steps  near  the  end 
of  the  |  twisted  piece  and  continues  twisting  it.  He  does  not  stop 
until  |  the  whole  length  has  been  ^--=====  twisted;      and     he 

puts  a  knotted  loop  at  one  end.  ^^^T  Now   it   forms   a  || 

snare  for  catching  goats  where  C  j  they  have  a  single  10 

trail  on  a  mountain.  |  As  soon    ^-==^  as  he  finds  a  place 

on  the  trail  that  is  near  a  precipice  upward  and  downward,  [  and  also 
a  tree  standing  I        /  at  the  outer  side  of  the  trail,  then 

he  ties|  the  thick       'JjL     M  ■  end  of  the  snare  to  the  bottom  of 

the     tree.      He       JM?^-  \  opens   the  |  loop  and  puts  it  be- 

hind   the    tree,  -x^^lcwSLy  in   the   middle  of   the  goat-trail, 

in    this  way:  ||  £l    §MW^m^^^  Now  the  tree  is  (1);  the  precipice  |  15 
above    is     ('_'':        /r'«       Y"V"~;  {^w  *mu'e  is   (4);  j  the  trail  is  (4); 
the  precipice    3 /'««.  "-'* ..'/ "M-       below  the  trail  is  (3).   | 


Goat-Hunting. — Wa,    he£maaxslaeda    tEwe£nenoxwaxa  £niElxLowe  1 
ekMesta  laxa  nEg'ii.     Wa,  la  alex£idxa  helagite  gilt!a  sElbasedEm- 
sa   wilkwe    yixs    £nal£nEmp!Enae    malptenk'e    wasgEmasas    laxEn 
baxax.     Wii,  la  yowagitEns  sEltlax.     Wa,    la   k-!eiis   LlEnk-edEms. 
Wii,  la  ark-  !axs   lae  g'iixtodExs  lae  sElp  !edEq  gwayStela  lax  oxLa-  5 
£yas  yixs  t!epalaax  6xt;i£yasexs  lae  sElpaq.     Wa,  giPmese  gagil- 
tale  sElpacyasexs  lae    wIexuwklEq  qa£s    t!ep!ldexa   makala  laxa    la 
sElbEkwa.     Wa,  la£xae  et!ed  sElpleda.     Wii,    al£mese    gwalExs   lae 
labEndEx  £wasgEmasas.  Wii,  la  maxubEndEq  (fig.).  Wii,  laEm  xiina- 
yolxa    £mEbcLowe    lax    £nEmx-£idaasas     tlEX'iliis  laxa  nEgii.     Wa,  10 
g'il£mese     q!iixa     magilx-iwa£ye    ttex'ila     laxa    eiJExsdalaa,    wii, 
heemesa  Lasaxs  Lalae  lax  l  !asotst;i£yasa  tlEx'ila;    wii,  lit   ni5xup!e- 
gEnts  LExubaJyasa  x'imayo  lax  5xLaEyasa  Lase.     Wii,  la  qEx'stotsa 
ximayowe  lax  &La£yas  lax  nExsta'ya  t!Ex-iliisa  £mElxLowe  ga  gwii- 
lega  (fig.).     Wa,  heEm  Lase    (1);    wii,  he£mes  tsetala    tlesEme  lax  15 
6k  lanekwasa  t  !EX"ila   (2) ;    wa    heemes  x'Imayowe  (4) ;  wa,  he£mes 
tExile  (4);  wa,  he£mes  eLlExsdalaa  (3). 

173 


174  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL,  [eth.  Ann.  36 

As  soon  as  he  has  finished  this,  he  leaves ;  and  after  four  |  days  he 

20  goes  to  look  at  his  snare;  and  if  a  goat  has  been  snared,  ||  he  can 
see  it  a  long  ways  off  hanging  down  at  (3) .  Now  the  |  snare  has  caught 
a  goat  which  has  died.  He  pulls  it  up,  |  takes  the  snare  off  the 
neck  of  the  goat,  |  and  sets  it  again.     Then  be  takes  the  goat  |  a  little 

25  ways  off  from  the  place  of  his  snare.  ||  Then  he  cuts  it  open  and  takes 
out  the  intestines,  but  he  keeps  |  the  tallow.  He  twists  cedar-withes 
and  |  ties  together  one  fore-leg  and  one  hind-leg  |  with  the  cedar-withes, 
and  he  does  the  same  with  |  the  legs  of  the  other  side.     Then  he  puts 

30  the  tallow  into  the  ||  belly.  He  cuts  holes  through  each  |  side  of  the  belly 
with  his  knife,  pusbes  the  |  thick  end  of  the  cedar-withe  into  it,  and 
sews  it  up.  |  After  he  has  sewed  it  up,  he  puts  his  arms  through  |  the 
legs  that  have  been  tied  together,  so  that  the  goat  lies  with  its  belly 

35  on  bis  back,  ||  and  he  carries  it  down  the  mountain. 

1       Sealing. — And  they  do  the  same  way  when  hunting  |  seal  as  they 

do  when  hunting  porpoise;  and  |  the  hunting-canoe  for  seal-hunting 

is  the  same  as  the  hunting-canoe  for  porpoise-hunting.  | 

5      As  soon  as  it  gets  dark,  at  new  moon  the  hunter  gets  ready,  ||  and 

carries  down  his  small  hunting-canoe,  |  which  he  launches  on  the  sea. 

18  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  bus.  Wa,  g-il£mese  mop!Enxwa£se 
£nalasexs    lae    doqwaxes    x'lmayowe.      Wa,     giPmese    x'imtslaxa 

20  £niElxLaxs  lae  doqiilaqexs  tekwiima£yae  lax  (3).  Wa,  la£me  xl- 
maxalaxa  xlmayowaxs  lae  lE£la.  Wii,  la  nexostodEq  qa£s  xi- 
modexes  ximayowe  lax  q!oq!onasa  £mElxLowe.  Wii,  la  xwelaxa- 
lodaEm  ximastStses  ximayowe  laq.  Wii,  gaxesa  £mElxLowe  laxa 
qwaqwesala  lax  ximaasases  x'lmayowe. 

25  Wii,  la.  qwax£idEq  qa£s  lawiyodex  yaxyig'ilas.  Wii,  la.  axelax 
yixusEma£yas.  Wa,  lit  ax£edxa  dEwexe  qa£s  sElpledeq.  Wii,  la 
q!ap!ex-£idxa  g'alEmgalgiwa£ye  gogii£y6s  LE£wa  apsoltsedza£ye 
alEmxLes  qa£s  yaLodesa  dEwexe  laq.  Wii,  laxae  heEm  gwex-£idxa 
epsoltsedza£ye.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa   yixusEma£yas  qa£s    axts  lodes    lax 

30  tEk'liis.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  k'lawayowe  qa£s  LlEnqEmsales  lax  wax-- 
sane£xusta£yas  qwaqa£yas  tEkMasa  £mElxLowe.  Wii,  lii  LlEnxsalas 
LExuba£yasa  dEwexe  laq.  Wa,  laEin  q!Enk!aedzEndEx  tEk'liis. 
Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  qlEnaqexs  lae  plEmx'sases  e£eyasowe  laxa  la 
yaLEwak"    g'6g"igu£yosa  £niElxLowe.     Wii,   la£me   he   gwek'Elac^exs 

35  lae  banolEla  liixa  nEg'ii. 
1      Sealing  (Alexwaxa  megwate). — Wa,  he-Emxaa  gwegilaxs  alexwa- 
axa  megwates  gweg'ilasaxs  alexwaaxa  k"!olot!e.     Wa,  heEmxaawis 
alewatsleses  alewatslaxa  k'!6lot!exes  alewatslaxa  megwate. 

Wii,  gil£Em  p  !EdEx-£Idxa  x'iisawayaeda  £mEkulaxs  lae  xwanal£lde- 

5  da  alewinoxwe  qa£s  lii  LElLElbEndxes  alewats!e  xwaxwaguma  qa£s 

la  hanstalisas  laxa  dEmsx'e  £wapa.     Wii,  lii  lasdesa  qa£s    ax£edexes 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  175 

Then  he  goes  up  the  beach  and  takes  his  |  canoe-box  in  which  he  7 
keeps  his  harpoon-points  and  his  harpoon-line,  |  and  also  the  blue 
hellebore-root  and  peucedanum-seeds,   and  also  sinew.    |   Then  the 
hunter  paddles  with  his  steersman.  ...  ||  All  these  are  taken  aboard  10 
the  small  canoe.     As  soon  as  they  go  aboard  |  the  little  hunting- 
canoe,  they  take  their  |  paddles  and  paddle;  and  when  they  nearly 
arrive   at   the  island,    |  the  hunter  puts  his  paddle  down   on   the 
second    thwart  |  behind    him.     The    points    of    the    harpoon    turn 
towards  the  stern,  and  the  two  points  ||  are  pushed  against  the  stern-  15 
seat  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  little  canoe.  |  The  handle  of  the 
harpoon-shaft  lies  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  bow,  |  where  the  har- 
pooneer  is  seated.  | 

Then  he  pulls  his  harpoon-shaft  out  of  the  stem-seat ;  and  he  pushes 
it,  handle  first,  forward  and  |  places  it  in  the  bow  of  the  little  canoe.  || 
He  puts  it  down  on  his  right  side.     Then  he  opens  the  canoe-box,  |  20 
takes  out  the  harpoon-line  and  the  harpoon-points,  and  ties  the  end  of 
the  |  line  to  the  harpoon-line.  | 

After  this  has  been  done,  he  puts  the  points  on  the  prongs,  |  and  he 
ties  the  ends  of  the  guide-rope.     Then  he  turns  ||  the  harpoon  the  other  25 
way,  and  ties  the  line  on,  where  he  holds  it  with  his  |  left  hand,  as  he 
is  throwing  the  harpoon  at  what  he  is  going  to  spear.     As  soon  as  he 
has   finished,  |  then  he   puts    the   prongs   and    the   harpoon-points 


Qdzaxs  gildasa,  yix  g'iyimts tewasas   LeLEgikwas  LE£wis  qlElkwe;    7 
wii,  he£misLes  axsole  LE£wa    qlExmene;     wa,  he£misa  atlEme;    wa, 
he£niise  alexusayuwe  sesEwayo  LE£wis  k!waxxa£ye.  .  .  .  Wii,  he£mis  la 
£wilxdzEms  laxes  alewasELEla  xwaxwagiima.     Wii  gil-mese  hoguxs  10 
laxes  alewasELEla  xwaxwagiimxs    lae    hex'£ida£Em  dax£ldxes  sesE- 
wayowe  qa£s  sex£wide.     Wit,   gil£mese  Elaq  liigaa  laxa  mEkaliixs 
laeda  alewinoxwe  k'atases  alexusayowe  sewaya  laxes  gwaap!ElExse 
LEXExsa    lax    gwabalExts!ena£yas     dzegtimas     mastas     qEXEiiexa 
LEx'ExstEwIlExse    lax   gEmxotiiga£yases  alewasELEla  xwaxwaguma.  15 
Wa,     lit     gwexLale     xabats!Exsda£}Ta     lax     gEmx5tiiga£yas     laxes 
klwaxdzase. 

Wa,  lii   tEgulExsaxes    mastowe    qa£s    wl£xuwldeq  xwelala  c^a  liis 
kadeg'iwe    lax    ag'iwa£yases    alewasELEla    xwaxwaguma.      Wii,    lii 
lag'ots    laxes     helk!6tiigawa£yaxs    lae   x"6x£widxes    odzaxse     qa£s  20 
ax£wuts  lodexa    q!Elkwe    LE£wa     LEg'ikwe.      Wit,     lii     moxubEntsa 
LeLEgikwe  laxa  maxba£yasa  qlElkwe. 

Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  k'!ox"bEntsa  LeLEgikwe  laxa  dzedze- 
gume.     Wii,  lii  yil'edEx  oba'yasa  t!amak!Exawa='yc.    Wii,  lii  xwel£id- 
xa    mastowe     qa£s     max£waLElodeses     qlElkwe      lax     dalaasLases  25 
gEmxolts  !ana£yas      qo     sEx"£idL6.       Wii,     g'iPmese     gwalExs     lae 


176  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  Ann.  36 

28  into  the  sea-water,  |  so  that  the  prongs  swell  and  hold  the  harpoon- 
points  better.  | 

After  he  has  done  so,  he  puts  it  down  in  the  bow  of  the  little  || 

30  hunting-canoe.  He  coils  up  his  canoe-line  in  the  canoe-box.  |  When 
he  comes  to  the  middle,  he  takes  his  bladder  and  puts  it  into  |  the 
sea-water  and  pushes  it  down  so  as  to  moisten  it.  He  |  takes  the 
middle  of  the  harpoon-line  and  ties  on  the  neck  of  the  |  bladder  with 

35  two  half-hitches.  Then  he  pulls  it  tight  and  puts  it  ||  into  the  bow  of 
the  little  hunting-canoe  just  above  the  |  canoe-box.  He  coils  up  the 
other  half  |  of  the  other  end  of  the  spearing-linc  underneath  it.  | 

As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,  he  begins  to  paddle.     He  keeps 
close  |  to  the  shore  of  the  island  and  watches.     As  soon  as  he  sees  a 

40  seal  diving, —  ||  which  he  recognizes  by  the  phosphorescence, — he  puts 
his  paddle  (into  the  water).  Then  |  he  grasps  the  end  of  his  harpoon- 
shaft.  If  the  seal  should  be  frightened  away,  |  the  steersman  puts 
his  paddle  |  edgewise  into  the  water  and  moves  it  about  so  as  to  | 

45  produce  phosphorescence.  When  the  seal  sees  this,  it  comes  ||  back 
to  look  at  the  phosphorescence  around  the  paddle.  Then  |  the  kar- 
pooneer  harpoons  it  as  it  comes  swimming  along  on  the  left-hand 
side  |  of  the  hunting-canoe.  | 

As  soon  as  he  hits  it,  he  hauls  in  the  line,  so  |  that  the  seal  kicks 


27  LlEnstEntsa  dzedzegume  LE£wa  LgLEg'ikwe  laxa  dEmsxe  ^Wapa 
qa  pos£idesa  dzedzegume  qa  Elba£yesa  LeLEglkwe. 

Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae    k-adEg'iyots    laxes  alewasELEla  xwa- 

30  xwagiima.  Wa,  la  qEsEymdalases  qlElkwe  laxa  5dzaxse.  Wa, 
gil£mese  nEgoyoxs  lae  ax£edxes  poxunse.  Wa,  la  niE£xustEnts 
laxa  dEmsx-e  £wapa  qa£s  Lagiinses  qa  pe£x"sEmx£Ides.  Wa,  la 
ax£edEx nEgoya£yases  qlElkwe  qa£s  q.'udzEmk'  llndes  lax  6waxsta£yasa 
poxunse.     Wa,  la  nex£edEq    qa   lEk.'titlaLEles.     Wii,  la  g'etslalg'i- 

35  yots  lax  og'iwa£yases  alewasELEla  xwiixwaguma  lax  eklelExsasa 
odzaxse.  Wa,  laxae  qESEytndalas  laxa  apsEX'se.  Wa,  laEm 
bEnaxse  apsba£yasa  qlElkwe. 

Wa,  g"il£mese  gwalatexsExs  lae  sex£wida.     Wa,  laEm  mak'iLlala 
laxa  £mEk-a,laxs  lae  hela£ya.     Wa,  giPmese  dox£waLElaxa  megwa- 

40  taxs  miiLlalae  bex'sEmalaxs  lae  k-atases  sewayowe.  Wa,  lii 
xapstodEx  xabats!Exsda£yases  mastowe.  Wa,  gtl£mese  hawl- 
naHdeda  megwataxs  lae  k!waxr,a£yas  k"!okwalamasxes  sewayowe 
qa£s  L!EnxstEndes  laxa  dEmsxe  £wapa  qa£s  yawlxileq  qa 
bEndzales.      Wa,     g'il£mese     dox£waLEleda     megwataqexs     gaxae 

45  aedaaqa  qa£s  awulplaltEwex  bex'asa  sewayowe.  Wa,  he£mis  la 
sEx£idaatsa  alewinoxwaqexs  g'axae  ma£nakula  lax  gEnixanoLE- 
ma£yas  alewatslas  xwaxwaguma. 

Wa,    gil£rnese  q!apaqexs  lae  hex,£idaEm  nex£edxes    qlElkwe    qa 
kwats!EXLasx-a    yisex   k'!egEmasa     alewatsle   xwaxwagumaxs    lae 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  177 

against  the  bow  of  the  hunting-canoe  as  it  ||  is  diving  down.  When  50 
the  seal  is  going  to  a  patch  of  kelp  or  |  seaweed,  then  the  hunter  takes 
his  harpoon-shaft  and  pushes  it  |  at  the  side  of  the  seal's  head  as  it  is 
diving  along  swimming  under  |  the  water.  Then  it  turns  and  leaves  | 
the  seaweed;  for  the  seal,  when  it  is  harpooned,  ||  searches  first  for  55 
seaweed  or  a  kelp-patch,  and  wriggles  through  it.  |  Then  it  often  hap- 
pens that  the  harpoon-line  breaks  or  that  the  seal  pulls  out  |  the 
harpoon-points.  Therefore  an  expert  hunter  |  hauls  in  his  harpoon- 
line  as  soon  as  he  hits  the  seal,  to  watch  that  it  |  does  not  go  to  a  kelp- 
patch.  || 

If  the  hunter  is  inexperienced  and  spears  a  seal,  he  lets  |  the  line  60 
run  out  when  the  seal  is  swimming;  and  when  |  the  line  has  run  out 
entirely,  then  (the  seal)  hauls  the  hunting-canoe,  and  |  the  hunter  is 
surprised  to  find  his  fine  twisted  in  the  kelp  as  the  seal  |  goes  to  and 
fro  in  it;  and  then  it  comes  off,  ||  and  the  hunter  has  difficulty  in  65 
pulling  back  his  line  and  clearing  it  |  from  the  kelp.  | 

An  expert  hunter  just  steers  the  seal  with  his  harpoon  |  to  make  it 
go  seaward.     When  |  it  comes  up,  as  its  breath  is  at  an  end,  he  takes 
the  harpoon,  ||  he  puts  the  prongs  close  to  the  harpoon-line  and  the  |  70 
barbed  points,  and  pushes  it  down.     It  does  not  take  long  before  the 

rnax-£ida.  Wa,  g11£niese  lalaeda  megwate  laxa  wadolkala  LE£wa  50 
q!axq!Elesaxs  lae  axeededa  alewinoxwaxes  mastowe  qa£s  l!eiix£- 
edes  lax  6noLEnia£yasa  megwate  lax  t  !EpsErnalaena£yasexa 
£wapaxs  ma£nakiilae.  Wa,  hex'£ida£mese  mElg'iLa£ya  qa£s  bEwesa 
wadolkala  qaxs  he£inae  gil  alaso£sa  megwataxs  galae  sex£I- 
tsE£wa  q!ax-q!El!se  LE£wa  wadohVala  qa£s  la  x-ilx'ilkhltlEqaq.  55 
Wa,  he/mis  q!unala  aledaatsa  qtelkwe  loxs  a£mae  k' lEqowa  L6le- 
gtkwe  laxa  megwate.  HeEm  lag'ilasa  egilwate  alewinox"  hex£- 
idaEm  nex£edxes  qtelkwaxs  g'alae  sEx£ida  qaxs  q!aq!alalaaq  qa 
k'.eses  la  laxa  wadolkala. 

Waxe  yiigilwata  alewinoxwaxs  sEx£Idaaxa  megwate,  la  ueiii  60 
tslEngwegexes  q!Elkwaxs  lae  max£ida.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laste 
qlElkwasexs  lae  sEplededa  alewats!es  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  afmese 
qlayaxaxs  lae  x'imsgEma£yes  qlElkwe  laxa  q!ax'q!Elise  qaxs 
hex'£ida£mae  ts!ats!Elxsalax£Ideda  megwate  laqexs  lae  lawii. 
Wa,  la  laxumaleda  alewinoxwaxs  lae  nexsawi£lalaxes  q!Elkwe  65 
laxa  q!axq!Elise. 

Wax'eda  egilwate  alewinoxwa  a£mese  nanaqasllases  mastowe 
laxa  megwate  qa  las  maxtlano  laxa  Llasakwe.  Wa,  g-U£mese 
q  !o£nakulaxs  lae  laba£nakiile  hasa£yasexs  lae  ax£edxes  mastowe 
qa£s  qExEndes  dzedzegiimas  laxes  qlElkwe  lax  mag-aana£ye  laxa  70 
LgLEglkwaxs  lae  q!5dEnsaq.  Wit,  k-!est!a  galaxs  lae  £w!balisEmeda 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 12 


178  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ikth.  ann.  »b 

72  seal's  breath  is  at  an  end.  |  As  soon  as  it  stops  moving,  the  hunter 
rises  in  the  canoe  |  and  stands  in  the  middle  of  his  canoe,  a  little 
towards  the  stern.  |  He  holds  the  nose  in  the  right  hand,  and  with 

75  the  left  hand  ||  he  takes  the  fore-flipper.  He  pushes  the  seal  down, 
pulls  it  up  suddenly,  |  and  hauls  it  aboard.  He  lays  it  crosswise  in 
the  stern  of  the  hunting- 1  canoe.  | 

Then  he  twists  out  the  harpoon-heads  and  washes  them ;  and  when  | 
the  blood  is  all  off,  he  puts  them  back  at  the  end  of  the  harpoon.  || 

80  When  this  is  done,  he  starts  to  paddle.  | 

Late  at  night  he  knows  that  the  seals  |  finish  swimming  among  the 
islands,  for  they  all  are  then  on  the  sleeping-rock.  |  The  hunters  know 
all  the  sleeping-rocks  |  of  the  seals.     As  soon  as  he  comes  near  the  || 

85  sleeping-rock,  he  paddles  strongly  in  his  hunting-canoe;  and  when  he 
comes  in  sight  of  |  the  sleeping-place  and  the  seals  tumble  into  the 
water,  then  |  the  hunter  stands  up  in  the  canoe,  grasps  the  end  of  his 
harpoon,  and  |  spears  the  seals  as  they  swim  under  water,  where  they 
are  seen  by  the  phosphorescence;  |  and  he  does  the  same  as  I  de- 

90  scribed  before.  ||  When  his  hunting-canoe  is  full  of  hair- seals  he  goes  | 
home.  | 
1       Catching  Flounders.1 — When  it  is  a  fine  day,  the  |  wife  of  the  man 
gets  ready  in  the  morning  to  go  and  get  clams  |  and  cockles  for  bait ; 

72  megwate.  Wa,  gil£mese  nEq  !6x£wIdExs  lae  LaxtilExsa  alewinoxwe 
qa£s  gaxe  lax  gwak!odoy:i£yases  alewasELEla  xwaxwaguma.  Wa, 
la   dale    helk!otts!ana£yasex  xindzasaj.     Wa,  la  dale  gEmxolts!a- 

75  na£yasex  gElq!a£yas  lae  wigiinsaq  qa£s  odax£Ide  nexostodEq  qa£s 
nex£alExseq.  Wa,  lii  gEyaxs  lax  gwaklodoyawelExsasa  alewasE- 
LEla xwaxwaguma. 

Wa,  la  sElpodxes  LeLEglkwe  qa£s  ts!ox£wi~deq.  Wa,  gil£niese 
£wl£]aweda    Elkwaxs    lae     xwelaqa   axbEnts  laxes    mastowe.     Wa, 

80  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  sex£wida. 

Wa,  laEm  gala  ganuLa.  Wa,  laEm  q!oLElaxa  megwataxs  lE£mae 
gwal  miiLlala  laxa  £maEmk-ala  qaxs  lE£mae  £wllgaala  laxes  k!we- 
khviise.  Wa,  la  maxwa^m  q!6LEleda  esElewinoxwax  k!\vek!wasasa 
megwate.     Wa,  la  giPmese  lag'aa  laxa  la  £nExwala  laxa  klwiisaxs 

85  lae  rdax,£id  sex£wida  qa  yix'es  alewasELElesexs  lae  tekulodxa 
klwase.  Wa,  gil£mese  L!ex-steda  megwataxs  lae  LaxiilExseda  ale- 
winoxwe xapstewex  xabats!Exsda£yases  mastowe.  Wa,  he£mis  la 
SEX'£idaatsexa  megwataxs  lae  bexsEmala  maxt!ala  laxa  ba£ne. 
Wa,  laxae  heEm   gwegilaqes  gwegilasaxEn  g-ilxde  gwagwex's£a- 

90  lasa.     Wa,  gil£mese  qot !a  alewasELEliisexa  megwataxs  lae  na£naku 
laxes  gokwe. 
1       Catching    Flounders.1 — Wa,   g-il£mese    ek'a    £nalaxa    gaalaxs    lae 
gEnEmasa  bEgwanEme  xwanal£Ida  qa£s  la  tatelaxa  g'aweqlanEme 

1  Continued  from  p.  159,  line  49. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  179 

ami  when  she  has  many  clams  and  |  cockles,  she  goes  home  to  her 
house.     As  soon  as  she  arrives  on  the  ||  beach  of  her  house,  she  takes  5 
a  piece  of  broken  shell  of  a  horse-clam  |  and  cuts  open  the  small  clams 
and  cockles  to  take  off  |  the  shells.     She  throws  these  into  the  water, 
and  puts  the  edible  insides  |  into  a  basket.     When  she  has  done  so, 
the  woman  goes  ashore.  |  Her  husband  takes  the  flounder-fishing  line 
and  the  ||  cross-bones  with  the  hair,  and  he  carries  them  down  to  the  10 
beach  where  the  |  fishing-canoe  is.     He  lays  out  the  fishing-line  on  the 
beach  |  near  the  canoe;  and  when  |  it  is  stretched  out  straight,  he 
takes  one  of  the  |  cross-bones  with  the  hair-line,  measures  off  two 
fathoms,  ||  and  ties  the  end  of  the  hair-line  of  the  cross-bone  to  the  15 
fishing- 1  line.     When  this  is  done,  he  takes  another  |  one  of  the  cross- 
bones  with  the  hair-line,  measures  half  a  fathom,  |  and  ties  the  end  of 
the  hair-line  of  the  cross-bone  to  the  |  fishing-line.     The  fifty  are  all 
the  same  distance  apart;  ||  namely,  half  a  fathom.     When  they  are  |  20 
all  on,  he  takes       ■         i         *        i-   the  cleaned  clams  and  cockles  for 

puts  on  the  bait.  The  cross- 
through  the  |  clams  and  cockles 
when  they  are  baited.  |  As  soon 


bait,  and  he  | 
bone  is  pushed 
in  this  manner 
as  all  are  baited,  KU  KU   \U    ^^  ^h.e  fisherman  ||  coils  up  the  fish-  25 

LE£wa  dzale.  Wa,  g'ipmese  qlEyoLxa  gaweqlanEme  LE£wa 
dzalaxs  lae  na£nakwa  laxes  gokwe.  Wa,  glPmese  lag'alis  lax 
L!Ema£isases  g-okwaxs  lae  kex'£ida£Em  ax£edxa  tEplayasox  mEtla-  5 
na'yex  qa£s  Ebc-£idexa  gaweqlaiiEme  LE£wa  dzale  qa  lawayes 
xoxulk'!imotas.  Wa,  la  tslExstalaq.  W a,  la La  axtslalas  hamts la- 
was  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wii,  g'il'mese  £wi£la  gwalExs  lae  laltaweda 
tslEfliiqe.  Wii,  la  la£\vunEmas  ax£edxa  L!agets!aana£ye  LE£wa 
galodaana£ye  sesE£3'ak"  !Ena  qa£s  la  dEuts!esElaq  lax  hanedzasasa  10 
L!agedzats!e  xwaxwaguma.  Wit,  lii  L!ax£alisaxa  L'.agedaana£ye 
dEnEina  lax  aLaxsdza£yasa  iJagedzatsle  xwaxwaguma.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  la  nEqEle  L!agets!ena£yasexs  lae  &x£edxa  £nEmts!aqe  galo- 
daanawe  sE£yak"!Ena.  Wii,  la  bah'Idxa  malplEnke  laxEns  baLaxs 
lae  yil£aLElots  oba£yasa  galodaanawe  sE£yak"!Eii  laxa  Llagedza-  15 
ana£ye.  (knEma.  Wa,  glPmese  gwalExs  lae  etled  ax£edxa  £nEm- 
tslaqe  galodaanawe  sE£yak'!Ena.  Wii,  lii  biihldxa  nEqlEbode  laxEns 
biiLiixs  lae  yil£aLEl5ts  oba£j'asa  galodaanawe  sE£yak-!En  laxa 
L!agedzaana£\e  dEiiEma.  Wii,  lii  he£staEm  awalagaleda  sEk-!as- 
gEmg'osta  nenEq!Ebodes  awalagalaase.  Wii,  gll£mese  £wilg-aaLE-  20 
laxs  lae  ax£edxa  Elgikwe  telalas  gaweq!anEma  LE£wa  dzale  qa£s 
lii  tel£Its  laq.  Wa,  laEm  L!EL'.Eiiq!Eqasa  galodayowe  xaq  laxa 
g-aweq!anEme  LE£wa  dzale.  Wii,  la  ga  gwiileg-axs  (jig.)  lae  telkwa. 
Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£la  telkuxs  laeda  Llagetslenoxwe  bEgwanEm 
qEs£edxa  Llagedzayowe    qa£s    lii    qEs£alExsaq    laxes   L!agedzats!eLe  25 


180  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.3B 

26  ing-line  in  his  fishing- 1  canoe  in  front  of  the  stern-thwart.  When  he 
has  done  so,  |  he  looks  for  two  medium-sized  elongated  stones  for 
anchors  at  each  end  of  the  |  fishing-line.  When  he  has  found 
them,  he  puts   them    into   his  |  fishing -canoe.     Then   he   goes   up 

30  the  beach  and  ||  takes  his  fishing-paddle  from  his  house.  He  goes 
down,  carrying  it,  |  to  the  beach,  and  goes  into  the  stern  of  his 
fishing- 1  canoe.  Then  he  paddles  and  goes  to  the  fishing-place  where 
the  water  is  not  ]  very  deep.     It  is  sufficiently  deep  if  the  fishing-line 

35  lies  three  |  fathoms  deep.  As  soon  as  he  reaches  it,  ||  he  takes  up  one 
of  the  elongated  _^*=*=e=:r  st°nes  I  an(i  the  end  of  the  fishing- 
line,  and  ties  the     fr  end  of  it  to  the  middle  of  the  | 

elongated  stone.  (           (  )    When   this    is   done,    he    puts  it 

overboard;  and  |  *■ when  the  anchor  reaches  the  bot- 
tom, he  takes  his  paddle  and  paddles.  |  When  the  small  canoe  begins 

40  to  go  ahead,  the  fine  runs  out  into  the  water.  ||  When  it  is  all  in  the 
water,  he  takes  the  |  other  elongated  stone  and  ties  it  on,  four  fath- 
oms |  from  the  end  of  the  fishing-line.  Then  he  takes  his  paddle  |  and 
paddles  again,  so  as  to  stretch  the  fishing-line,  and  he  puts  overboard 
the  |  stone  anchor.  >.  _=. =*_5C3  When  it  touches  the 

bottom,    he    takes   /^^\  f  /^~~^\    a  r,miM  cedar-wood  || 

45  float  of  this  shape  |ff        |}/  /  \   and  ties  it  to  the  end 

of   the  fishing-line.   W^§^/  I  J  I  Then  he  throws  it 

into   the   water.  \^__^^    Then   he  goes  home 

20  xwaxwagiima  lax  ostEwilExsas.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
alex£idEx  maltsEma  ha£yal£a  sESEx"sEm  t!esEma  qa  q!Elq!Elsbesa 
L!agedzaana£ye.  Wa,  g'il£mese  q  laqexs  lae  t!ax£alExsaq  laxes 
L!agedzats!eLe    xwaxwagiima.     Wa,  la   lasdes  laxa  L!Ema£ise   qa£s 

30  la  ax£edxes  L!agetsa£yasesewayowa  laxes  g'okwe  qa£s  laxat !  dEnts  !e- 
sElaq  laxa  L!Ema£ise.  Wa,  lii  laxsa  lax  5xLa£yases  LlagedzatsleLe 
xwaxwagiima.  Wa,  la  sex£wida  qa£s  la  laxa  Llagedzasexa  k"!ese 
wunqElas  £wape,  ylxs  he£mae  helaesa  yuduxup!Engese  laxEns 
baLax  yix  £walaedzasasa  Liagedzase.     Wa,  g"il£mese    lag'aa  laqexs 

35  lae  hex-idaEm  ax£edxa  £nEinsgEme  laxa  sExusEme  tlesEina  {fid-) 
lo£  6ba£yasa  Llagedzayowe  qa£s  yiLoyodes  oba£yas  lax  nEgoysVyasa 
sExusEme  tlesEma.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwabsxs  lae  qtelstEnts.  Wa  gll- 
£mese  lag'alisa  q  lEltsEinaxs  lae  dax'£idxes  sewayowe  qa£s  sex£wide. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  sEpIededa  xwaxwagiimaxs  lae  q!ulex-s£Em  la  ts!Enxu- 

40  staleda  Llagedzayowe.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wi£la£staxs  lae  ax£edxa  £nEins- 
gEine  sExusEine  t!esEma  qa£s  ytLoyodesa  mop!Enk*e  g'agiLEla 
lax  apsba£yasa  Llagedzayowe  laqexs  lae  et led  dax,£ldxes  sewayowe 
qa£s  sex£wide  qa  lEk!ut!alisesa  L!agedzayowaxs  lae  qtelstEntsa 
tlesEme.     Wa,  gil£mese  lag'alisExs  lae  ax£edxa  loxsEme  klwaxsEme 

45  pEwaxbe  g'a  gwaleg'a  {fig.)  qa£s  yil£aLElodes  oba£yasa  Llagedza- 
ana£ye  laqexs  lae  tslExstEnts.     Wa,  la  na£nakwa  laxes  g'okwaxs  lae 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   i'OOD-GATHERING  181 

to  his  house  |  after  having  finished  on  the  water.     In  the  evening  47 
he  goes  into   his  fishing-  |  canoe  and  paddles  to   the  place  where 
he  left  his  fishing-line;    and    |    when    he  reaches   the  round  cedar- 
wood  float  at  the  end,  he  takes  it  ||  and  puts  it  into  his  small  canoe,  50 
and  he  hauls  in  his  |  fishing-line.     Then  he  takes  off  the  flounders, 
and  black-edged(?)flounders  |  which  hang  on  the  hooks;  and  as  soon 
as  he  has  them  all  off,  he  takes  |  clean  clams  and  baits  his  fishing- 
line;  and  |  after  he  has  baited  it,  he  takes  his  paddle  and  paddles;  || 
and  when  his  small  canoe  starts,  then  the  line  runs  out  into  the  55 
water.  |  When  it  is  all  in,  he  puts  the  |  stone  anchor  into  the  water; 
and  when  it  touches  the  bottom,  he  takes  the  round  cedar-  |  float  at 
the  end  and  throws  it  into  the  water.     Then  he  goes  home.     He  picks 
up  some  |  dry  driftwood.     When  he  thinks  he  has  enough  to  steam  || 
the  flounder  standing  on  edge,  he  goes  home  |  to  his  house.    When  it  is  60 
high  water  he  throws  out  the  |  driftwood  on  the  beach  of  his  house. 

Fishing  Kelp-Fish. — The  woman  takes  the  harpoon  for  getting  large  1 
sea-eggs  |  and  a  flat-pointed  prying-stick  of  yew-wood  used  for  prying 
off  mussels,  |  and  she  puts  them  aboard  her  small  canoe  in  which 
the  fish-trap  is  kept,  |  and  she  also  puts  aboard  her  new  fish-trap. 
Thon  she  takes  the  harpoon,  ||  which  is  made  of  a  thin  rod  of  red  pine. 
Sometimes  it  is  three  fathoms  long.  |  Two  points  of  tough  wood  are  5 


gwalraLaeya.     Wa,  het!a  la   dzaqwaxs   lae   laxs   laxes  Llagedzatsle  47 
xwaxwagiima  qaJs  lii    sexut!a    lax  axalasases   Llagedzayowe.     Wii, 
gil-mese  lag'aa  lax  loxsEine  klwaxsEm   pEwiixbexs    lae    dax,£idEq 
qa£s  £niExU£walExses  laxes    xwaxwagumaxs    lae  dEiix'idxes   Llage-  50 
dzaanaeye.     Wa,    lae"mese    k!udzElEiiexa     paese    i.E;wa    k"!ada    la 
tete-xubeq.     Wa,    g'iPmese    £wic"lamasa     lae     xwelaqaEm     ax£edxa 
Elg'lkwe    gaweq  lanEma    qafs    tel'Ides    laxes    Llagedzayowe,     Wii, 
giPmese  £wi£la  la    telkuxs    lae  ax-edxes   sewayowe    qafs   sex£wide. 
Wa,  glFmese   sEbELaya   xwaxwagumaxs  lae    q!iilexs£Em    ts!Enxu-  55 
stale  L!agedzayas.     Wii,  gil£mese   fwFlastaxs    lae    q!ElstEntsa    t!e- 
sEme.     Wii,    g'iHmese    lag'alisexs   lae  ax£edxa  loxsEine  klwaxsEme 
])E\viixbe  qaes  tslExstEmles.     Wa,  la  niimakwa.     Wa,  lit  anexbiilaxa 
lEmxwa  qlexala.     Wa,   gil-mese  kotaq  laEm  hela  lax  tleqwapdE- 
maxa    k-!ot!aakweLe    t!eqwabEku    paesa,    wii.    lawisLe    nii^nakwa  60 
laxes   g-6kwe.     Wa,  gil'mese    yixulaxs  lae  hex'idaEm  sEjr'ultodxa 
cj!exale  lax  L!Ema£isases  gokwe. 

Fishing  Kelp-Fish. — Wii,  le'da  tslEda'qe  &x£e'dxes  ma'maseqlwa-  1 
yople'qe   sa'Ents!o    LE£wa    pExbaa'ksve    LlE'mqla    xo'layaxa    xo'le 
qa£s   le    LEx-walExsElas     la'xes    LEgats!e'Le    xwa'xwaguma.    Wii, 
he'£misLes  a'ltsEme  LEgE'ma.     Wii,  laE'm  wi'Lxsa   sa'Ents!o,  yixa 
rwi'le  wu'nx£una.     Wii,  la  £nal£nE'mp!Ena  yu'duxup!Enk"e  ^wii'sgE-  5 
masas   la'xEiis   ba'Lax.     Wii,    la  k'ilxbii'laxa   ma'lts!aqe    e5e'x:ba 


182  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.4nk.s5 

7  tied  to  its  end,  |  in  this  manner:  ^^*  The  tying 

is    made     of     split    |  spruce-root.    '■  ■niiingg°^      — ^  The   im- 

plement for   prying  off  mussels  is  made  of  a  broken   |   paddle  in 

10  this  way:  It  is  four  spans  long,  ||  and  the  flat  end 

is     four   —  j,^      )  fingers  wide.    |  The    handle    is   round.    | 

That    is  all  about  it.  | 

The  woman  carries  her  paddle  as  she  goes  aboard  her  small  fishing-  | 

15  canoe,  and  she  first  goes  to  search  for  sea-eggs,  for  ||  these  are  the  bait 
for  tho  fish-trap.  As  soon  as  she  finds  the  sea-eggs,  she  spears  them  | 
with  tho  harpoon;  and  when  she  has  enough  for  baiting  the  fish- 
trap,  |  she  breaks  the  sea-eggs  and  puts  them  hi  to  the  fish-trap;  and  | 
when  there  are  no  sea-eggs,  she  pries  off  mussels  with  the  prying- 

20  stick;  |  and  when  she  has  enough  bait  for  the  fish-trap,  ||  she  breaks 
them  to  pieces  and  puts  them  into  the  trap.  Then  she  looks  |  for  a 
place  where  eel-grass  is  growing  under  water.  She  selects  a  place 
about  two  |  fathoms  deep.  Then  she  |  takes  her  fish-trap  and  puts 
it  overboard,  so  that  it  is  placed  on  the  bottom  among  tho  eel-grass,  | 

25  so  that  the*  kelp-fish  do  not  see  distinctly  that  it  is  a  fish-trap.  ||  Evi- 
dently the  kelp-fish  smell  the  bait  inside  and  go  in.  |  After  the  fish- 
trap  has  been  under  water  for  some  time,  she  hauls  |  it  up  and  takes 
the  fish  out.     There  may  be  six  |  or  eight  fish  in  it.     When  she  has 

7  ts!a'x-Ensa  g-a  gwaleg'a  {fig.)-  Wa,  la  yELEmno'xusa  dzEQEkwe'  l!o'- 
p!Ek-sa  ale'wase.  Wa  la'Leda  xo'layaxa  xo'le  k-6'q!Ewesox 
se'wayiix  g"a  gwaleg'a  (Jig.) .    Wa,  la  mop  lEnk'e  £wa'sgEniasas  la'xEns 

10  q!wa'q!wax'ts!ana£yex.  Wa,  lii  mo'dEn  la'xEns  q!wa'q!waxts!a- 
na£yex  yix  £wa'dzobaasas  tse'gwayoba£yas.  Wii,  la'Le  le'x-£Een 
5'xLa£yas.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'lek-. 

Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  da'laxes  se'wayaxs  la'e  laxs  laxes  LEgatsleLe 
xwa'xwaguma,  le    he   g'il    la   ala'sE£we    mEse'qwa,    qaxs    he"mae 

15  teltsliisa  LEgE'me.  Wa,  g-i'l£inese  q  la'xa  mEse'qwaxs  la'e  sEx-£I'tsa 
sa'Ents!o  laq.  Wa,  g"il£mese  he'lala  lax  te'ltsliiwasa  LEgE'maxs  la'e 
tso'tsox-sEndxa  mEse'qwe  qa£s  mo'ts lodes  laxa  LEgE'me.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mese  k"  lea's  mEse'qwa  la'e  hi1  tse'x£widaasa  xo'le  yise's  xo'la- 
yowe.    Wa,  g  i'l£Emxaa'wise  he'lala  lax  telts'.a'wasa  LEgE'maxs  la'e 

20  tEtEpsE'ndEq  qa£s  lii  mo'tslodEs  la'xa  LEgE'me.  Wii,  le  a'lex£IdEX 
ts!a'ts!Ek!waxa  ts!a'ts!ay?me.  Wii,  he'£mis  qa  malplE'nk-es  la'- 
xEns ba'Liiqe  £walEnsElasa'sa  £wa'pe.  Wii,  h("''x"£ida£mesa  tslEda'qe 
da'x£Idxes  LEgE'me  qa£s  ts!EnxustE'ndes  qa  hana'qesexa  ts!ats!a- 
yi'ine   qa  k'le'ses  q!ulp!alta'leda   pEx-Itaqexs   LEgF.ma'e.  Wii,  la'- 

25  xEnteda  pExTte  me'sElax  teltsla'was,  la'g'ifa  latslii'laq.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
emese  gagii'la  g-Eyi'nsEleda  LEgE'me  la'xa  £wa'paxs  la'e  dE'nx-£I- 
tsE£wa  qa£s  k!fllsItsE£waeda  pEX'i'te.  Wii,  laE'm  q!e'ts!axs  qlEL.'a'e 
loxs   malgunala'e.    Wii,  g"i'l£mese  la  h<;l£6'Leda  LEqa'sa  LEgE'maxs 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  183 

caught  enough  fish  in  the  trap,  |  she  goes  homo.  She  goes  right  up 
from  the  ||  beach  into  her  house.  She  takes  up  her  small  basket  |  30 
and  carries  it  down  to  the  beach.  She  carries  it  in  her  hand  |  and 
puts  it  into  her  small  canoe,  and  she  |  puts  the  fish  into  the  little 
basket.  As  soon  as  the  small  basket  is  full  of  kelp-fish,  |  she  carries 
it  up  in  her  hand  from  the  fishing-canoe.  She  |  carries  it  hi  one  hand 
up  the  beach  and  into  the  ||  house.  Then  she  puts  it  down  in  the  35 
roar  of  the  house.  | 

Fishing  Perch  (Taking  perch  out  of  the  fish-trap).  |  — The  time  when  1 
the  perch  go  into  the  trap  is  at  |  high  tide,  when  the  trap  is  under 
water.     As  |  soon  as  the  ebb-tide  goes  way  down,  the  trap  is  dry  on 
the  beach.  ||  The  owner  just  watches  for  the  splashing  of  the  perch  |  5 
that  are  caught  and  are  splashing  hi  it.     As  soon  as  they  are  quiet,  | 
the  perch  fisherman  takes  a  medium-sized  basket  and  carries  it  down 
to  the  beach  |  to  where  his  trap  is ;  and  he  takes  off  the  four  |  ballast 
stones  and  puts  them  down,  and  he  takes  off  the  hemlock-branches  j| 
and  puts  them  down  on  the  beach,  and  he  takes  off  tho  roof  and  he  |   10 
lays  it  down  on  tho  beach,  and  finally  he  takes  out  the  fish  from  the  | 
trap  and  puts  them  hito  the  basket.     When  |  he  has  taken  them  all 
out,  he  takes  out  the  broken  shells  of  tho  clams  that  served  for  bait;  [ 
and  when  they  are  all  out,  he  carries  up  his  ||  fish-basket  and  takes  it  15 

la'e  na'-nakwa  la'xes  go'kwe.  Wii,  hc'x^ida'mese  la  la'sdes  la'xa 
L'.Ema£ise  qafs  lii  lae'L  la'xes  g'o'kwe,  wa,  lii,  k'lo'qiililaxa  la'laxame  30 
qa£s  la  k'  !6'qimts!e'sElaq  laxa  LlEma£ise.  Wa,  lii  k'  !6'x£walExsa 
la'xes  LEga'tsle  xwa'xwagiima.  Wa,  la  da'x-eidxa  pExTte  qars 
k-!ixts!o'des  la'xa  la'laxame.  Wii,  g'i'Pmese  qo't!aaxa  pEx'I'teda 
la'laxamiixs  la'e  kMo'gulExsaq  la'xa  LEga'tsle  xwa'xwagiima  qaes 
la  k-!o'x£wusdESElaq  la'xa  L!Ema£ise  qafs  le  k!o'gweLElaq  la'xes  35 
g'o'kwe.     Wa,  la  k"  !o'x£walTlaq  lax  one'gvvilases  go'kwe. 

Fishing    Perch. — K!iilsaxa     Lamawe   laxa    LaLEmwayowe    Lawa-  1 
yowa.     Wa,   heEm  la  latslalatsa  Lamawe    laxa  Lawayiixs    lae    wa- 
WElgEma£yaaxs  lae   g'iyinsEla     laxa     dEmsxe    ewapa.      Wa,    g'il- 
£mese.  klwayaxaxs   lae   x-ats!e£staxs    laetla  Lawayowe   lEmxwalese. 
Wa,  ;i£mesa   axn5gwadiis   xlts!ax-ilaqexs  lae    kiisx'EsgEmlisExs  lae  5 
delakileda    miitslawas  Liimawa.      Wii,    g-il£mese    sEltledExs   laeda 
LaLEmwaenoxwe    ax£edxa     hehca     lExaeya     qa's    lii     k"!oqunts!esE- 
laq     lax    axfedzasases      Lawayowe.      Wii,    lii  tIaqEmaxodxa    tnos- 
gEme   Elg'as  tlesEma    qa^s  t!ax£aliseq.     Wii,  lii  xEsaxodxa  qlwaxe 
qa£s  xEsiilises  laxa  L!Ema£ise.     Wii,  lii  paqodEx   siilixs    qa£s  pax£a-  10 
lises   laxa    L!Ema£ise.     Wa,    lawisLe   k!uls£Idxa  miits!;iwasa    Lawa- 
yowe   qaEs    klExtshiles    laxa    k!fdyats!e    lExafya.      Wii,    g'iPmese 
£wilolts!axs  lae  ax-wults!o<lxa  tapesawaeye  xoxfdk- !imotasa  tele  ga- 
weq!iinEma.     Wa,   g'il-'mese   £wi£lolts!;ixs   lae  k"  !oxfusdesaxes  LEm- 
watsle  lExa£ya   qa£s  le  k"!ogweLElas  laxes   gokwe.     Wii,  la   ax£ed  15 


184  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.bb 

16  into  his  house.  Then  he  takes  |  the  clams  and  carries  them  down  to 
the  beach  |  and  breaks  them  and  puts  them  into  his  trap;  and  after 
ho  has  done  so,  |  he  puts  the  roof  on  again.  He  puts  the  hemlock- 
branches  over  it  |  and  puts  on  four  medium-sized  stones  over  the|| 

20  hemlock-branches.  Then  it  is  ready  again  when  the  tide  comes  in.  | 
Then  he  goes  up.  | 
1  Gathering  Herring-Spawn. — When  the  herring  is  about  to  spawn,  | 
the  man  who  goes  after  herring-spawn  looks  for  fine  |  hemlock-branches 
with  smooth  leaves.  When  he  finds  them,  |  lie  goes  home.  Then  he 
5  watches  for  the  herring  to  spawn.  ||  As  soon  as  the  sea  begins  to  look 
milky,  the  man  goes  |  for  the  hemlock,  and  breaks  off  long  branches 
of  the  |  hemlock;  and  after  he  has  broken  off  many,  |  he  carries  them 
to  the  spawning-place.     Then  he  takes  long  |  cedar-poles  and  takes 

10  them  to  the  spawning-place;  and  he  also  ||  takes  stout  rope  and  long 
stones,  and  he  ties  the  end  |  to  the  long  stones.  Then  he  takes  a  thin, 
long  |  rope  and  takes  a  long  pole  and  puts  it  |  into  the  sea.  Then  he 
takes  the  hemlock-branches  and  ties  them  to  (lie  |  pole  with  the  long, 

15  thin  rope;  and  he  only  stops  when  ||  the  hemlock  reaches  the  end  of 
the  long  pole.  Then  he  puts  it  into  the  water  at  the  |  spawning-place 
of  the  herrings,  and  he  takes  the  big  rope  and  |  ties  its  end  to  the  pole, 
and  he  puts  the  stone  into  the  water.  |  Then  it  is  an  anchor  when  it  is 
in  the  water.  I 


16  laxa  g-aweq!anEme  qa£s  lit  diilaqexs  lae  lEnts!esEla  laxa  L!Ema£ise 
qa£s  lii  tEpts!;ilas  laxes  Lawayowe.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
xwelaqa  paqimts  salas.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  xESEyintsa  qlwaxe  laq.  Wa 
laxae  et!ed  tlaqEyintsa   mosgEme  ha£yal£a  tlesEina  lax  6kii£ya£yasa 

20  qlwiixe.  Wa,  lasmxae  gwales  qo  yixwaLo.  Wa,  laEin  lasdesa. 
1  Gathering  Herring-Spawn. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  plExule'da  wii'- 
£na£ye;  wa,  le'da  wa'ts!enoxwe  bEgwa/iiEm,  he'x-£idaEm  la  a'liix  e'k'a 
qlwa'xa,  yi'xa  £iiEma'xLas  k'la'momo.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  qla'qexs 
la'e  na'enakwa.  Wa,  la  q!a'q!alalaxa  wa'£naeye  qa  wa's£ides.  Wa, 
5  gi'Fmese  dzEm6'£na'kiileda  dE'msxaxs  lae'da  bEgwa'nEme  cia's£id 
qafs  le  la'xa  q!wa'xe  qa£s  L!Ex£wIdexa  gi'lsgiltla  lax  wdts!an;isa 
qlwa'xase.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  la  qle'iiEme  iJEgwa'nEmasexs  la'e 
gE'mxElaq  qa£s  les  la'xa  wa'yade.  Wa,  la  e't!ed  ax£e'dxa  giltla 
dzEXEqwa'     qa£s   lexat!    ax£a'llsaq     la'xa    wa'yade.     Wii,    la'exaa 

10  ax£e'dxa  LE'kwe  dEiiE'ma  LE£wa  g'tltsEme  t!e'sEma.  Wii,  la  rao'x"- 
bEnts  la'xa  giltsEine  tle'sEma.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa  wl'ltowe  gi'ltla 
dEnE'ma.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa  gi'lt!a  dzESEqwa'  cpa£s  k'atstE'ndes 
la'xa  dE'msx'g.  Wii,  la  iix£e'dxa  q!wa'xe  qa£s  le  yilEnda'las  la'xa 
dzEsEqwe'  yi'sa  g  ilt!a  wl'lto  dEiiE'ma.     Wa,  a'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e 

15  la'bEndeda  q!wa'xaxa  g'i'ltla  dzESEqwa'.  Wii,  la  LlEstE'nts  lax 
wa'yasLasa  wa'£na£ye.  Wa,  la  ax£S'dxa  EE'kwe  dEnE'ma  qa£s 
mo'xubEndes  la'xa  dzEsEqwe'.  Wa,  la  ax£stE'ntsa  t!e'sEme.  Wa, 
laE'm  qlE'ltsEma  j^Lxs  la'e  axa'la. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  185 

For  four  days  it  is  left  in  the  water.  ||  After  it  has  been  in  the  water  20 
for  four  days,  the  herrings  have  finished  spawning.  |  Then  the  man 
takes  his  canoe  and  washes  it  out.  |  When  it  is  clean,  he  goes  out  to 
where  the  hemlock  is  in  the  water.  |  He  unties  the  rope,  and  puts  the 
hemlock  with  the  spawn  on  it  |  into  the  canoe.  || 

Catching  Devil-Fish. — There  is  no  hook  at  the  end  of  the  long  pole  |  1 
for  fishing  devil-fish,  for  the  only  end  with  which  they  spear  the  devil- 
fish is  the  thin  end.1 1  When  the  man  who  fishes  for  devil-fish  in  deep 
water  |  feels  for  it  in  its  hole,  for  ||  that  is  the  name  of  the  stone  house  5 
of  the  devil-fish,  he  feels  for  its  |  body  and  he  strikes  for  the  hard 
part.  |  He  makes  a  thrust  at  it  twice.     Then  he  pulls  out  the  pole 
and  |  puts  it  into  his  small  fishing-canoe.  |  Then  it  does  not  take  long 
before  the  devil-fish  comes  out  of  its  hole;  and  he  takes  ||  his  long  10 
spear  and  spears  it,  lifts  it  up,  |  and  puts  it  into  the  small  canoe. 
Immediately  |  he  takes  out  the  intestines.     He  never  strikes  it  on 
the  rock  to  kill  it,  |  for  he  wishes  (it  to  be  hard). 2    .    .    . 

Gathering  Seaweed. — When  a  woman  goes  to  gather  ||  seaweed  at  a  15 
place  where  there  are  nice  smooth  stones,  she  plucks  it  off  |  when  the 
rock  on  which  it  is  is  wet.     When  the  sun  shines,  she  just  |  peels  it  off 
from  the  rock  when  it  is  dry  all  over.     Then  she  puts  it  into  her  | 


Wii,  la  mo'p!Enxwa£se  £na'liis  he  gwe'wala  la'xa  dE'msx'e.  Wa 
g'i'l£mese  mo'xse  £na'las  tlewalaxs  la'e  gwal  wa'seda  wa'£na£ye.  20 
Wa,  le'da  bEgwanEme  ax£e'dxes  xwa'kliina  qaes  ts!o'xug'indeq. 
Wii,  g"l'l£mese  e'g'ig'axs  la'e  ida'sta  lax  axa'lasases  tle'yo.  Wa,  la 
qweTidxa  dEiiE'me  qa£s  ax£ii'lExsElexa  q!wa'xe  la  an£a'ndEXLala 
la'xes  xwa'kliina. 

Catching  Devil-Fish. — Wa,  laEm  k*!eas  galbala  yixeda  g"iltagawaeye  1 
nedzayaxa  tEqlwa'  qaxs  lex-amae  se'qElaxa  t.Eqlwe'da  wl'lba£yasa 
g  i'ltagawa£ye.     Wa,    he'£maaxs  la'e  ple'xwaLEleda  nanesamEnsaxa 
tEq!wii'xs  klwae'lae  la'xes  g'o'kwe  tle'sEma  laxes  tEgwa'tsIe  qaxs 
he'='mae  i.e'gEmsa  g'o'kwasa  tEq!wa'  tle'sEma.    Wa,  lii  p!e'x£wldxa  5 
ba'k-awa£yasa     tEqlwa'.     Wa,     hcx£idaemese     L!Enxeedxa    ple'sa. 
\Xi\,  malp  !Ena£mese  L!Eiixcedqexs  la'e  le'x£wldxes   nanesamEndza- 
yowe  qa£s  k'atla'lExses   la'xes   nanesamEndza'ts!e    xwa'xwaguma. 
Wa,  k-!est!a  gil'laxs  g"a'xae  mo'ltslaweda  tEqlwa',  wa,  la  da'x,£Id- 
xa    g"l'lt!a     nane'saniEiidzayo    qaes   sEx£I'deq.     Wii,  le    klwe'tla-  10 
Isxsaq   la'xes    nanesamEndza'ts  !e    xwa'xwaguma.     Wa,  he'x"£Ida- 
emese  la'wiodEx  be'x'bek'Ias.     Wa,  la£me  hewiixaEm  k' !e'lax,£IdEq 
qaxs  £ne'k'ae  (qa  ple'ses). 

Gathering   Seaweed. — Wa,    he/£maaxs    la'eda    tslEda'qe    lEqa'xa 
lEqlEstE'ne  la'xa  e'k'e  £nEma'a  tle'sEma.     Wa,  la  klu'lg'ilalaq  yrxs  15 
klii'nqlae  axa'sas.     Wa,  g'i'h'mese  Lle'sasosa  Lle'sEliixs  la'e  a'sm 
qusElalaq  la'xa  t!e'sEinaxs  la'e  lEmlE'mxuya  c[afs  axtsla'les  la'xes 
£wa'lase  lExa'ya.     Wa,  g'i'1-mese  qo'tleda  lExa'yaxs  la'e  giix£alExsas 

1  See  figure  on  p.  152.  -  The  end  of  this  description  is  missing. 


186  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  35 

large  basket.     When  the  basket  is  full,  she  pours  it  |  into  her  canoe, 

20  and  she  spreads  a  mat  over  the  ||  short  boards  in  the  canoe.  As  soon 
as  the  canoe  is  full  of  seaweed,  |  she  goes  home.  | 
1  Digging  Clover. — Now  she  is  ready  when  the  |  season  for  digging 
clover  arrives;  that  is,  when  the  leaves  of  the  clover  |  are  killed  by 
the  frost,  and  winter  is  coming.  | 
5  As  soon  as  there  is  frost  at  night,  the  woman  ||  gets  ready  in  the 
morning.  She  takes  her  clover  digging-stick  |  and  her  flat-bottomed 
basket,  her  back-protector,  |  and  her  cedar-bark  belt,  and  she  walks 
down  to  the  |  clover-garden.  There  she  puts  down  her  tools  in  the 
direction   towards  |  sunrise,  so  that  the  sun  is  at  her  back  when  it 

10  rises,  and  ||  it  does  not  shine  into  her  eyes,  so  that  she  can  see  dis- 
tinctly the  |  clover  which  she  is  digging,  for  generally  the  women 
pick  up  |  other  kinds  of  roots  when  they  are  digging  clover.  When 
she  |  has  put  down  her  tools,  she  takes  her  mat  and  spreads  it  over 

15  her  |  back  so  that  the  lower  end  is  a  little  above  the  ||  heels.  Then 
she  takes  the  cedar-bark  belt  |  and  puts  it  around  her  waist,  and  she 
puts  the  cedar-bark  |  rope  over  it;  that  is  to  say,  the  end  of  the  belt. 
She  ties  on  |  the  end.  Then  she  takes  her  flat-bottomed  basket  and 
puts  it  down  |  in  front  in  the  direction  where  she  is  going  to  dig. 

20  Finally  she  takes  ||  her  digging-stick    and    sits  down  on  the  back- 


la 'xes  ya'yats!iixs  la'e  LBbB'xsa    le£wa£ye    lax  o'kuya£yasa  pa'xse 

20  ts!a'ts!ax"sEma.     Wa,   g'i1emese  qo't!eda  ya'yatsliisexa   lEqtestE'- 
naxs  la'e  nii'£nakwa. 
1       Digging    Clover. — Wii,    la£me    gwalala    qo    lag'aal    laxa    ts!ots!E- 
yinxaxa  LExsEme    ytxs   lae    xiils£Ide    mamiimasa    LEx'sEmaxs   lae 
g1wes£etso\sa  giwesaxa  la  ts!awenes£Ida. 

Wa,  gil£mese  g'iwesaxa  ganoLaxs  lae  hex-£ida£meda  tslEdaqe 
5  xwanaHdxa  gaala.  Wa,  laEin  ax-edxes  tsloyayoLaxa  LEX'sEine 
LEewis  LEqlExsde  lExa£ya  LE£wis  LEbeg-a£ye  le£wa£ya.  Wa, 
he£mises  dEnedzowe  wuseg'ana.  Wii,  lii  qas£id  qa£s  la  laxes 
LEgEdzowe.  Wa,  het!a  ax£alisases  eaxElayoLa  guyinxelise  lax 
nelasasa    LlesEla    qaes  oxLalalisexa     LlesElaxs  g'axae    neFeda  qaes 

10k'!ese  L!aL!ets!elexstalii  laqexs  g'axae  nehceda  qaes  q!iilp!altalexa 
LEx'sEmaxs  lae  ts!5saq  qaxs  qlflnalae  dadakineda  tsledaqaxa 
ogucjlemase  LloplEk'Exs  tslosaaxa  LEX"sEme.  Wa,  g'il£mese  axea- 
hsaxes  eaxElayoLaxs  lae  ax£edxes  le£wa£ye  qa£s  LEbegindes  laxes 
awlg'afye.      Wa,     afmise     gwanala     aek'  !alagawa£yes    bEnba£yasa 

15  le£wa£yases  oxLax'sedzaJyaxs  lae  ax£edxa  dEnedzowe  wuseg'ano 
qa£s  qEkiyindes  laq  laxes  qEnase.  Wii,  lii  qEkiylntsa  wile  niElk11 
dEnsEii  dEiiEm  obesa  wiiseg'anowe  laq  qa£s  mox£waLElodes 
oba£yas.  Wa,  lit  ax£edxes  LEqlExsde  lExe  qa£s  hangalises  liixes 
nEqEmalise   laxes   guyolElasLe   qo   ts!os£IdLo.     Wii,  lawesLe  ax£ed- 

20  xes   ts!oyayowe    qa£s    k!wadzolisexes    LEbega£ye     le£waeya.     Wa, 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  187 

protecting  mat.  |  Nowshe  works  while  she  is  sitting.     She  pokes  down  21 
her  digging-stick  so  that  |  the  point  is  one  span  deep  in  the  ground.  | 
Then  she  pries  up  the  clover  |  easily,  turning  down  the  stick,  for  she 
does  not  wish  to  break  the  ||  clover-roots,  and  she  pokes  it  again  into  25 
the  ground  so  that  it  stands  up,  |  and  she  picks  out  the  clover-roots 
and  throws  them  into  her  fiat-bottomed  basket.     When  |  she  has 
picked  all  the  clover-roots  out  of  the  soil,  she  |  pries  up  some  more 
clover  with  her  digging-stick,  and  she  again  |  puts  the  digging-stick 
standing  where  she  is  going  to  pry  up  ||  the  roots  next  time,  after  she  30 
has  finished  picking  out  what  she  has  just  pried  up;  |  and  she  con- 
tinues to  do  so.  |  She  does  this  every  day,  for  sometimes  |  it  takes  the 
woman  five  days  to  work  over  her  |  clover-garden  when  it  is  large. 
In  the  evening  ||  she  takes  the  mats  and  pours  the  clover  on  several  |  35 
mats,  and  covers  it  with  others  where  she  has  dug  it  up;  |  and  in  the 
morning  she  takes  the  mat-covering   off  and  |  spreads  it   out,  and 
scatters  the  clover-roots  on  them  so  as  to  get  dry,  if  |  it  should  be  a 
fine  day  in  the  morning;  but  if  it  should  be  a  bad  day  in  the  ||  morn-  40 
ing,  then  she  does  not  take  off  the  mat-covering  until  |  the  sky  clears 
up,  for  it  is  said  that  it  is  not  good  for  the  clover  |  to  be  dried  in  the 
house.     They  say  that  if  it  is  dried  in  the  house,  |  it  shrinks  up;  but 


la£me    k!wak!wasdenaqExs     lae     ts!ExubEtalisaxes    tsloyayowe    qa  21 
£nEmp!Eiikes  laxEns   q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  yix  EwalabEtalidzasasa 
6ba£yas  ts!oyayasexs    lae    klwet lEqallsaxa  LEX'SEme  laxes  k'!ets!e- 
na£ye    ealtsilaxs    lae     k!wet!edsq     qaxs    gwaqtelaaq    EEltsIaleda 
LEX'SEme.     Wa,  la  et!ed  ts!ExubEtalisaxes  tsloyayowe  qa  Laesesexs  25 
lae  mEnx-£idxa  LEX'SEme  qa£s  ts!Exts!ales  laxes  lExaya.     Wa,  gil- 
£niese    EwIlg"ilk"amEnaxa     LEX'SEme      laxa      dzEqwaxs     lae    et!ed 
klwet  teqalisaxa    LExsEme     yisa     tsloyaj'owe.       Wa,    laxae    etled 
ts!ExubEtalisaxes   ts'.5yayowe    qa   Laeses   lax    etledLe  klwetlEqale- 
dzEmLEs    qo    liil     gwalL     mEiimaqalxes    la    al    klwet  lEqaledzEma.  30 
Wa,    laEmxae    aEm    uaqEmgiltEwexes    gilxde    gwegilasa.     Wa, 
ax'sa^mese    la  he  gwegilaxs  lae    tslosaxa    Eneenala   ytxs  EnalEnEm- 
p!Enae    sEk"!axse    Enalasa    tsEdaqe  sEii3'EnbEndxa   £nala  ts!osaxes 
LEgEdzowaxs    lexEdzae.     Wa,  g"ihiax\va£mese    dzac[\vaxs   lae   aEm 
axEedxa    leElwaEye    qa'"s    lii    gtigEdzotsa    LEX'SEme    laxa    waokwe  35 
leElwaEya    qaEs    naxuytndesa   waokwe    laq    laxes  tsloyasaq.     Wa, 
g  ilnaxwa;mese  laxa  gaaliixs  lae  axEedxa  naxuyaeye  leElwa-'ya  qaEs 
LEplaliseq.     Wa,     la    lEndzotsa    LEX'SEme    laq    qa£s    x'il'"aliseqexs 
eg  idzalaeda  Enalaxa  gaala.     Wii,    gil^mese  yaxdElxEleda    Enalaxa 
gaalaxs    lae    hewaxa     axodEX     naxuyaEyas     leF.lwa-ya,    Ialaa    lax  40 
eg'idox;wI(lExdEmLasa     Enala,     qaxs    k"!esaaEl     eka    LEx'sEmaxs 
xitalelEmae    laxa    g"okwe.     G'ihcEm£lae    x'ilalelEm    laxa    g  okwaxs 
lae    hexEidaEm    xuls£ida.     Wa,  la£lae    kMes    xuleEnakulaxs   x-il£ale- 


188  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.86 

it  does  not  shrink  when  it  is  dried  |  at  the  place  where  it  is  dug.     The 

45  soil  ||  is  not  washed  off.  If  the  sky  has  been  clear  for  two  days,  |  the 
roots  are  dry  all  over.  Then  the  dirt  drops  off.  |  Then  the  woman 
takes  her  basket,  goes  to  the  |  pile  of  clover,  and  puts  (the  roots)  into 

50  the  clover-basket.  |  When  all  the  baskets  are  full,  ||  the  woman  takes 
dry  grass  and  places  it  on  top  of  the  |  clover-baskets.  After  she  has 
done  so,  she  takes  a  |  thin  cedar-bark  rope  and  ties  up  the  top  of  the 
baskets.  |  Then  she  puts  them  into  the  canoe  and  goes  home  to  the 

55  winter  house,  |  for  they  dig  clover  at  another  place,  for  ||  the  best 
clover  grows  at  Knight  Inlet  and  at  Gwa£ye.  Now  she  arrives  at  her  | 
winter  house.  She  does  not  put  down  the  clover- 1  basket  near  the  fire 
of  the  house,  but  she  |  puts  it  in  a  cool  corner  of  the  house.  Now 
she  waits  for  |  the  winter  before  cooking  the  clover-roots.     As  soon 

60  as  the  people  begin  the  winter  ceremonial,  then  ||  the  people  are  in- 
vited to  eat  the  clover.  | 
1  Digging  Cinquefoil-Itoots. — The  same  digging-stick  |  is  used  for 
digging  cinquefod-roots  which  is  used  for  clover.  Sometimes  |  the 
man  who  makes  the  digging-stick  makes  a  smaller  digging-stick  |  for 
5  the  cinquefoil-roots,  for  it  is  thinner  and  it  is  one  span  ||  shorter  than 
t lie  clover  digging-stick;  |  and  the  basket  for  cinquefoil-roots  has  |  no 


dzEinae  laxa   tsloyasaq.     Wii,   laxae    k!es    ts  !oxwalasE£wa    dzEx- 

-15  £iina£yas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  malp!Eiixwa£s  eg-idzaleda  £naliixs  lae 
lEmlEmxeunx-£Ida.  Wa,  he'mis  la  qlupalats  dzedzEx£iina£yas. 
Wa,  he£mis  la  ax£edaatsa  tslEdaqaxes  L!aL!Ebate  qa£s  las  lax 
modzasasa  LEx-sEine  qa£s  lii  lExtslalas  laxa  LEgatsIe  LlaidEbata. 
Wa,  giPmese   £wl£la  la    qoqut!eda    LeLEg"ats!e  LlaLlEbatExs  laeda 

50  tslEdaqe  ax£edxa  lelElxLowe  k!et!Ema  qa£s  ts!ak-iyindales  laxa 
LeLEg"ats!e  L!aL!Ebata.  Wa,  giFmese  gwalExs  lae  &x£edxa 
£wllEne  mElku  dEnsEn  dEnEma  qa£s  t  !Emak'iyindales  liiq.  Wa, 
laEm  moxsas  laxes  ya£yats!e  qa£s  la  na£nakwa  laxes  ts!EWEnxE- 
lase  gokwa    qaxs   ogu£la£mae    awlnagwise    axasaxa   lex'seiuc  ytxs 

55  hae  Dzawade  lo£  Gwa£ye  ek"  q!waxats.  Wa,  laEm  lag-aa  laxes 
tslEwF.nxElase  g'okwa.  Wii,  k'!est!a  he  mogwalilases  LeLEgpats!e 
LlaLlEbata  laxa  £nExwala  laxa  lEgwilases  g'Skwe,  ytxs  hae 
mogwalllaqe  wiidanegwllases  g'5kwe.  Wa,  laEm  lalaal  laxa  ts!a- 
wiinx£IdLa     qo      hamex'silax-eIdLEq.     Wa,    g-tlemese    ts!ets!exJede 

60  g'okulotasexs  lae  Le£lalases  LEx'sEme  hxq. 
1  Digging  cinquefoil-roots  (Tslosaxa  t!Ex"sose). — HeEmxat!  tslosE- 
laxa  t!Exusose  tsloyayfixa  LExsEme.  Wit,  laxa  enal-iiEmp Isneda 
tsloyayogwilaenoxwe  tsloyayogwilaxa  hek!umgilil£Em  qa  tsloya- 
yoxa  t!Exusose,  yixs  £wawilalae.  Wii,  laxae  £nEmp!Enk-  lfixEns 
5  q !waq Iwaxts !ana£yex yix  ts lEkwagawayanEmasa ts loyayaxa t !exuso- 
sasa  tsloyayaxa  LEx'sEme.     Wa,    he£misa    ts!oyats!e  lExa£ya    yixs 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  189 

flat  bottom,  as  the  one  that  is  used  for  digging  clover,  for  the  same  |  7 
basket  that  is  used  for  clams  is  used  for  cinquef oil-roots;  |  and  the 
other  cinquefoil-basket  is  smaller.     It  is  for  the  lower  roots,  ||  for  10 
these  are  very  long,  and  they  grow  under  the  curly  |  cinquefod-roots. 
As  soon  as  the  season  for  digging  cinquefod-roots  in  the  autumn 
arrives,  then  |  the  woman  who  owns  a  cinquefoil-garden  takes  her 
cedar-bark  belt  and  |  mat,  two  cinquefoil  digging-baskets,  and  her  | 
digging-stick,  and  goes  to  the  cinquefoil-garden.  ||  When  she  arrives  15 
there,  she  puts  down  her  baskets  |  and  her  digging-stick,  and  she 
spreads  the  mat  on  her  back.  |  She  takes  her  woven  cedar-bark  belt 
and  puts  |  it  around  her  body  over  the  mat.     After  |  she  has  done 
so,  she  sits  down  on  the  lower  end  of  the  back-protector  mat.  ||  Then  20 
she  takes  her  digging-stick  and  pokes  the  end  into  the  ground  in  one 
corner  of  her  |  cinquefoil-garden.     The  point  of  the  digging-stick  does 
not  go  in  deep.  |  Then  she  pries  it  up.     Then  the   cinquefoil-roots 
show   themselves,    and  |  the   woman  picks   out   the   short,    curly  | 
cinquefod-roots  and  puts  them  into  the  larger  ||  basket  which  stands  25 
at  her  right  side.    She  puts  down  |  the  smaller  basket  on  the  left-hand 
side.     After  |  she  has  picked  out  the  cinquefoil-roots,  she  takes  her 
digging-stick  again  and  pushes  |  the  end  into  the  ground  at  the  place 
where  she  dug  first,  for  the  small  cinquefod-roots  are  only  four  fingers 

k'lesae  LEq'.Exsda  he  gwexse  tsloyatslaxa  LExsEme,  yixs    yiiqla-  7 
la£maoxda  dzeg"ats!axa  g'aweqlanEine  tsloyatslaxa  tlExusose.     Wa, 
la  a£ma£yaleda  £nEmsgEme  tsloyatsles   qa£s  axtslalasxa   Laxabalise 
yixa  g  ilsg'ilstowe  t!Exusosa.     Wii,  qlwaxa  lax  ewaabalisasa  t!Emkwa  10 
t!Exus5se.     Wa,   gil£mese  ts  lots  lEyinxxa  L;iyinxaxs  laetla   tlEk'Ila- 
gwade  tslEdaq  ax£edxes  dEnedzowe  k!EdEku  wuseganowa  LE£wa  le- 
£wa£ye.     Wa,   heemeses    maltsEme    tsletsloyatsle    laElxa£ya    LEwis 
tsloyayowaxs   lae    qas£id   qa£s    la    laxes    tlEk'flakwe     t!Egudzowa. 
Wa,  g  iPmese  lag-aa  laqexs  lae  axEing'alisaxes  ts!ets!oyats!eLe  laEl-  15 
xa£ya  LE£wis  tsloyayowe.     Wa,  la  LEbeg'intses  LEbeg'a£ye  le£waeya. 
Wa,   la   ax£edxes   dEndzEdzowe    k-  !idEku    wuseg'anowa   qa£s  qEk"i- 
yindes  laxa  LEbeg'a£yas  le£wa£yaxs  lae  wusex-£Its.      Wa,    g-il£mese 
gwalExs    lae   klwadzodsx    bEiiba£yases     LEbeg-a£ye    le£wa£yaxs    lae 
dax-£Idxes  tsloyayowe  qa£s    ts!ExubEtalisex    awiinxelisases  tlEkila-  20 
kwe    tlEgudzowa.     Wa,    la    k'!es    wungEg'Ile     6ba£yasa   tsloyayo.     - 
waxs  lae  k!wet!edEq.     Wa,    he£mis  la  nel£edaatsa  t!Exusose.     Wa, 
he£mis  la  niEnx-£idaatsa  tsloyenoxwe  tslEclaqxa  t  !Emt  lEingiixEowe 
ts!Elts!Exustowe  t!Exusosa  qa£s  lExtshiles  laxa  £walasagawa£ye  ts!o- 
yatsle  lExaxs    hanesae    lax   helk- lotagawalisas.     Wa,  he'tla  hanesa  25 
&mayagawa£ye    lExa£ye   gEnvxagawalisas.     Wa,    g'il£mese    £wdgEl- 
qaxa  t !Exusosaxs  lae  etled  &x£edxes  tsloyayowe  qa£s  ts!ExubEtal!sas 
6ba£yas  laxes  g'ibrde  £lapa£ya  qaxs  a£mae  maldEne  £walabEtalasasa 
tlExusose    laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.     Wa,  laLa  modEne  £wala- 


190  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  35 

30  deep,  |  but  the  long  lower  roots  are  four  fingers  ||  deeper,  if  the  sand  | 
is  good  and  does  not  contain  pebbles.  The  reason  why  there  are  no 
long  cinquefoil-roots  |  at  Nimkish  River  is  that  there  are  many  small 
pebbles.  Gwa£ye  |  in  Knight  Inlet  is  the  only  place  where  the  long 
cinquefoil-roots  grow,  |  for  the  soil  in  the  cinquefoil-gardens  is  half 

35  sand  and  half  light  ||  clay,  and  therefore  the  cinquefoil-roots  and 
the  I  long  roots  grow  well.  As  I  said  before,  the  short  cinque- 
foil-roots are  on  top,  |  of  the  long  roots  below.  Therefore  the 
woman  who  is  digging  cinquefod-roots  |  pushes  down  her  digging- 
stick  again  after  she  has  picked  up  all  the  short  roots;  for  the  |  short 
roots  and  the  long  roots  do  not  keep  together,  although  they  belong 

40  to  one  ||  stem.  Now  I  will  stop  talking  about  this,  and  I  ]  will  talk 
again  about  the  woman  who  is  digging.  She  |  does  not  pry  up  the 
sand  quickly,  but  she  digs  up  the  sand  and  clay  slowly,  |  so  that  the 
long  cinquefoil-roots  do  not  break  and  that  they  come  up  in 
long  strings  |  when  she  is  picking  them  out  of  the  sand;  and  she  puts 

45  them  into  the  ||  basket  for  the  long  cinquefod-roots.  She  keeps  on 
doing  so  over  the  whole  garden-  |  bed,  and  she  only  stops  digging 
after  she  has  worked  over  the  whole  ground.  |  In  the  evening,  when 
it  gets  dark,  the  woman  who  is  digging  cinquefoil-roots  |  takes  her 
short  roots  and  puts  them  on  a  pde,  and  covers  them  over  with  |  mats; 

50  and  she  does  the  same  with  the  long  roots,  for  ||  sometimes  it  takes 


30  bEtalasasa  Laxabalise  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  laqexs  ek'aeda 
egise  yixs  k'leasae  tlatledzEma.  HeEm  lag'ilas  k!e;is  Laxabalise 
Gwanaxs  qlenEmaes  t !at !edzEine.  Wa,  lex'a£mese  Gwa£ye,  yix 
wasa  DzawadEenoxwe  ex-  qlwaxatsa  L&xabalise  LE£wa  t!Exusose 
qaxs    naxsaaplaes    tlEk'Ilakwe    tlEgudzo   lo£    eg'ise    LE£wa    k!use 

35  L!eq!a.  Wa,  he£mis  lag'ilas  ek'e  q!waxena£yas  t!Exusosas  LE£wis 
Laxabfilise.  LaxEn  laEmx'de  waldEmaxs  ek'layaeda  t!Exusosasa 
Lnxabalise.  Wa,  he£mis  l&gilasa  tsloyenoxwe  tsted&q  et led  ts!oxu- 
bEtalisases  ts  loyayowaxs  lae  £w!£lolxa  t  !exus6s§  qaxs  k"  !esae  Lawa- 
gilleda    t!Exusose  LE£wa  Laxabiilisaxs  wax,£mae  enEmes  yisx'Enexa 

40  tlEgwanowe.  Wa,  la£mEn  gwal  gwagwex'sJala  laxeq.  Wa,  la- 
£mesEn  et!edEl  gwagwex"s£ala  laxa  tsloyenoxwe  ts!EdaqExs  lae 
k"!es  etlltsilaxs  lae  k!wet!qiilisaxa  eg'ise  LE£wa  k!use  L!eq!a  qa 
k'!eses  aEltsleda  Laxabiilise  qaxs  siiyEnaaq  qa  g-ilsg'ilstowesexs 
lae   sex'tilaq   laxa  eg'ise  qa£s  la  LExuts!;ilas  laxes  senats!axa  Laxa- 

45  biilise  lExa£ya.  Wa,  hex'saEm  gweg'Ilax  wadzEgasases  t!Ek'I£lakwe 
t'.Egiidzowa.  Wa,  al£mese  gwal  tslosaqexs  lae  £wllg  ildzowa.  Wa, 
g'ilnaxwaEm  k' !ilto£nakulaxa  dzaqwaxs  laeda  tsloyenoxwe  tslEdaq 
ax£edxes  t!Exusose  qa£s  q!ap!esgEmg'al!seq.  Wa,  la  noxusEmtsa 
leElwa£ye  laq.     Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex£Idxa  L&xabalise  qaxs  £nal- 

50  £nEmp!Ena£e  m5p!Enxwa£se  £nalasa  tsloyenoxwe  tslEdaq  tslosaxes 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHEKING  191 

the  woman  four  days  to  dig  over  her  |   cinquef oil-garden.     In  the  51 
morning,  when  day  comes,  the  |  owner  of  the  cinquefoil-garden  goes 
to  the  pile  of  short  roots  |  and  of  long  roots  and  takes  off  the  mat 
covering  of  the  piles  |  of  short  and  long  roots,  and  spreads  the  roots 
out  so  that  they  are  close  together.  ||  After  she  has  done  so,  she  55 
takes  the  roots  and  scatters    them,  |  and  she  does  the  same  with 
the  long  roots.     After  she  has  done  so,  |  she  leaves  and  goes  home  to 
her  cinquefoil-digging  house.     Now  [  she  dries  the  short  roots  so  that 
the  sand  on  them  gets  dry.     When  |  she  arrives  at  her  house,  she 
takes  her  cinquefoil-baskets  and  looks  them  over,  ||  and  she  takes  60 
them  to  the  place  where  she  left  her  |  short  roots  and  long  roots  dry- 
ing.    As  soon  as  she  arrives  there,  she  |  takes  up  the  short  roots  and 
puts  them  into  the  baskets;  |  and  when  they  are  all  in,  she  takes  dry 
grass  and  |  puts  it  on  top  as  a  cover;  and  after  it  has  been  put  on,  || 
she  takes  cedar-bark  split  for  this  purpose  one  finger  |  wide  and  ties  65 
up  |  the  cinquefoil-baskets.     After  she  has  done  so,  she  gathers  | 
them  together  and  covers  them  with  mats.     Then  |  she  takes  cedar- 
bark  and  splits  it  into  narrow  strips.  ||  She  lays  down  one  of  the  pieces  70 
of  spht  cedar-bark,  |  takes  the  long  cinquefoil-roots  and  puts  the  ends 
together,  laying  them  down  |  on  the  strip  of  cedar-bark.     When  she 


t!EkI£lakwe  tlEgiidzowa.     Wa,  g'il£mese    £nax-£idxa   gaalaxs    laeda  51 
tlEgwadasa  t!Exusose  qas£Id  qa£s  lii    lax  niExmEwedzases  t!Exusose 
LE'wa  Laxabalise  qa£s  ax£edexa  nenaxusEma£ye  leEl£wesa  mExniE- 
wlse  t!Exusosa  LE£wa  Laxabalise  qa£s  mEink'alexs  lae  LEp!alIsElaq. 
Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalExs   lae  ax£edxa  t!Exusose    qaes  lendzodales  laq.  55 
Wa,  laxae  heEmxat!  gwex£Idxa  Laxabalise.     Wa,  g"il£niese  gwalExs 
lae  bus  qa£s  la  na£naku    laxes    ts!Ewedzats!e    g'okwa.      Wa,  laEm 
x'ilElsaxa    t!Exusose    qa    lEinx£wides    egisEna£yas.     Wa,    g'il£mese 
lag-aa  laxes  g'okwaxs  lae  hex-£idaEm  k'  !EiiEmg"alllaxes  t!et!Egwa- 
tsleLe  L!fiL!Ebata  qa£s  la  dalaqexs    lae    aedaaqa   lax   x'iledzasases  60 
t!Exusose    LE£wa  Laxabalise.     Wa,  g'?l£mese    lag'aa    laqexs    lae    he 
g'il    q!ap!ex,£ItsE£weda    t!Exusose    qa£s  texts  Sales    laxa  LlaLlabate. 
Wa,    g'il£mese  £wllts  !axs    lae.    ax£ed  laxa     lEnixwa    k-  let  lEma    qa£s 
ts!ak'iyindales    laq.     Wa,     g'iPmese     gwiil    ts!ak-iyindalaqexs    lae 
fixfedxa   hek!umg'ilila£ye    dzEXEk"    dEnasaxa    £nal£iiEmdEnas  awa-  65 
dzE£was    laxEns    q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex.      Wa,  la    t  lEinak  iymdalas 
laxa  tlEgwatsle  L!aL!abata.     Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalexs    lae  q'.apleg'a- 
lisaq  qa£s  naxusEmdesa  leElwa£ye    laq.     Wa,  g'il£mese    gwalExs  lae 
ax£edxa    dEnase    qa£s    heloxusEnde    dzEdzExsEndEq   qa    £wls£wula- 
dzowe.      Wa,  la  k-at!alisaxa   £nEmts!aqe    dzEXEk"   dEnasa,  wa,  la  70 
ax£edxa  Laxabalise  qa£s  £nemabEndaleq  qa£s   la    k-at!ets  laxa    dE- 
nase.     Wa,      g'il£mese     belts  !e£staaxusEns     q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex 


192  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL.  [eth.ann.  35 

73  can  put  her  fingers  |  around  them,  she  squeezes  them  together 
and   ties    them  firmly  in   the    middle.  |  They  are   this   way  when 

75  they  have   been  tied:  .     When  ||  this   has   been   done,  she 

does  the  same  with  ^^^j=^^-  the  others,  and  she  only  stops  | 
when  they  are  all  5=pfe=Er  ^et^  1U  bundles  in  the  middle. 
Sometimes    |  she   has  ?  ^    more  than  a  hundred  bundles  of 

long  cinquefoil-roots  belonging  to  one  woman  who  has  a  good  | 
cinquefoil-garden.  After  this  has  been  done,  she  puts  the  |  long 
cinquefod-roots  into  the  basket;    and    when  they   arc   all   in,  she 

80  takes  ||  grass  and  puts  it  on  top,  and  she  ties  it  down  with 
cedar-bark.  |  Then  in  the  evening  she  gathers  up  |  the  baskets 
for  long  cinquefoil-roots,  and  she  spreads  mats  over  them.  | 
After  she  has  done  so,  she  goes  home  to  her  digging-house.  |  In  the 
morning,  when  daylight  comes,  the  woman  and  her  husband  get 

85  ready.  ||  They  launch  their  canoe  into  the  sea,  |  push  down  the  roof- 
boards  of  the  digging-house  |  and  place  them  in  the  bottom  of  the 
canoe.  When  |  the  bottom  of  the  canoe  is  all  covered,  the  baskets 
with  short  roots  |  are  placed  on  the  boards  in  the  canoe;  and  when 

90  they  are  ah  in,  ||  they  take  the  baskets  with  long  roots  and  put  them  | 
on  top  of  the  baskets  with  short  roots;  and  when  they  are  all  in,  | 
they  put  the  bedding  and  provisions  on  top.  When  everything  is  in,  | 
they  take  the  mats  and  spread  them  over  the  load.  |  When  everything 


73  lax  qlwedzoyodaq  lae  qEno£yodEq  qas  lEkliitlede  yil£edEq. 
Wa,  laEm  g'a  gwiileg'axs  lae  ylLoyala  {fig.).  Wa,  g'il£mese 
75  gwala  lae  hanal  he  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe.  Wii,  al£rnese  gwiilExs 
lae  £wPla  la  qeqEiio£yaleda  Laxabalise  yixs  £nal£iiEinp!Eiiae  g'ex-- 
s6gug'Eyoxusayokwa  Laxabalisasa  enEmokwe  tslEtlfiqaxa  ekas 
tlEki£lakwe.  Wa,  gpil£mese  gwiilExs  lae  LExuts!iilas  laxa  Laxa- 
batsle  LlaLlEbata.  Wa,  g'lPmese  £wilts!;txs  laaxat!  ax£edxa  k- le- 
go tlEine  qa£s  ts!ak-iyindes  laq.  Wa,  laxae  tlEmak'iylntsa  tlEiiase  laq. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  £wi£la  la  gwalExs  laaxat!  q!ap!eg-alesaqexa  dza- 
qwaxa  LeLaxabatsIe  LlaLlEbata  qa£s  LEpsEmdalesa  leEl£wa£ye  laq. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  naenak"  laxes  ts!Ewedzats!e  g'okwa. 
Wa,  gilemese  £nax-£Idxa  gaalaxs  lae  xwanal£Ida  ts!Ewesde  tslEdaqa 
85  LE£wis  la£wunEme  qa£s  wI£xust.Endexes  xwakliina  laxa  dEmsx'e 
£wapa.  Wa,  la  weqwaxElax  salases  ts!Ewedzats!ex"de  g'okwa 
qa£s  la  paxsEla  laxes  xwakluna.  Wa,  g"il£mese  liamElxalExs  lax 
oxsasa  xwaklunaxs  lae  he  g'il  moxdzEma  t!Egwats!e  LlaLlEbata  qa 
mag-idza£yes  laxa  paxsaxs  lae  mEXEdzEweq.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wil- 
90  xsa  lae  moxsElaxa  Laxabatsle  LlaLlEbata.  Wa,  laEm  niEXE- 
yindalas  laxa  tlEgwatsle  LlaLlEbata.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wllxsasexs 
lae  mokuyindalases  mEmwala  laq.  Wa,  g"il£mese  £wilxsasexs  lae 
ax£edxa  le-El£wa£ye  qa£s  LEpEyindales  lax  okiiya£yases  ma£ye.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  hoguxs  laxes  ya£yats!e  xwakluna.     Wa,  lada 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  193 

is  aboard   the  canoe,  the  ||  man  stands  in  the  stern  of  the  canoe,  95 
which  he  steers.   |  He  looks  at  his  clover-digging  house  and  prays  to 
it.'  ...  | 

As  soon  as  he  arrives  at  the  beach  of  his  winter  house,  |  he  puts  the 
stern  of  his  traveling-canoe  landward  and  backs  in.  |  The  man  gets 
out  of  the  traveling-canoe,  and  ||  unloads  the  cargo  when  the  tide  is  100 
high.  If  it  is  low  tide,  he  |  ties  a  long  cedar-bark  rope  to  the  stern 
seat  of  his  |  traveling-canoe  and  carries  up  the  end  of  the  rope  to 
high-water  mark,  j  where  he  ties  it  to  a  stone  which  serves  as  an 
anchor.  After  he  has  done  so,  |  the  (couple)  are  invited  by  their 
relatives  to  eat,  if  it  is  ||  low  tide  when  they  arrive.  If  it  is  high  tide,  5 
they  are  only  |  invited  when  the  cargo  has  been  carried  up  the  beach. 
They  ]  put  the  baskets  with  the  long  roots  and  those  with  the  short 
roots  in  two  different  places.  |  The  baskets  with  the  long  roots  are  put 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  |  house,  and  the  baskets  with  the  short 
roots  are  placed  on  the  left-hand  ||  side  of  the  house,  for  these  corners  10 
are  cool.  As  soon  as  |  all  have  been  carried  up,  they  go  to  the  one 
who  invited  them.  .  .  .  As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,  |  (the  man)  takes 
the  baskets  with  long  cinquefoil-roots  and  puts  them  across  |  the 
two  beams.2  If  there  are  many  baskets  with  long  roots,  there  may 
be  four  layers,  one  on  top  of  the  other,  |  from  one  end  of  the  staging 

bEgwaiiEme    LaxLexa    xwak'una     qaxs    he£mae    LEnxLa£ya.      Wa,  95 
doqwalaxes    ts!Ewedzats!exe    g'okwa  qa£s  tslErwaqeq.1   .   .   . 

Wii,  g'ilJmese  lag-aa  lax  L!Ema£isases  ts!awunxElase  g-okwa  lae 
iiLaxLamakulaxes  ya£yats!e  xwakluna  qaes  k' !Ex£alisexs  lae  lal- 
taweda  bEgwanEme  laxes  ya£yats!e  xwakluna.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese 
moltodxes  mayaxs  yixulalisae.  Wa,  g-il£mese  x'atsIaesExs  lae  100 
aEin  mogwanotsa  gilt !a  dEiiEm  laxa  LE.\Eq!EXLaya£yases  ya£ya- 
ts!e  xwak!una  qa£s  la£s  oba-yas  laxa  ya£xumotasa  yixwa  qaes 
mox£bEndesa  tlesEme  laq  qa  qlElsbes.  Wa,  g'iPmese  gwal  lie 
gwex"£idqexs  lae  Lalelalasoses  LeLELala  qa  las  LlExwa  laq.  yixs 
xats'.aesae  lag'alits!Enxas.  Wa  g  ilnnese  yixulalisExs  lae  5l£Em  5 
Lfilelalasoxs  lae  £wI£losdese  mEmwalas.  Wii,  laEm  alEwIla 
mogwalilElasasa  Laxabats!e  L'.aLlEbata  LEewa  t!Egwats!e,  yixs 
fnal'nEmp!Enae  he  mogwalilEma  Laxabatsleda  helk-  !otewalllasa 
g-okwe.  Wa,  la  he  nidgwalllEma  t!Egwats!e  L!aL!Ebata  gEmxo- 
tewalllasa  g-okwe,  yixs  wudanegwilae.  Wii,  g-iPmese  £wi£losde-  10 
sexs  lae  LaxEwid  laxa  Lalelaliiq.-  .  .  .  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwfdExs 
lae  ax£edxa  Laxabatsle  LliiLlEbata  qa£s  niExEndales  lacj,  yixs 
gil-mae  q!eiiEina  LaxabatsUixs  lae  mox'"wedgustala  maxo£nakula 
hayimbEndEX  iiwasgEmasasa    k'lagile.     Wii,    g'iluuese    £wilg'aaLE- 

—     1  See  page  618. 

z  Then  follows  the  description  of  the  making  of  a  raised  platform  for  keeping  provisions  (p.  166). 

75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 13 


194  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth    i 

15  to  the  other.  When  they  are  all  on,  ||  he  takes  mats  and  spreads 
thern  over  them, so  that  the  |  frost  can  not  get  at  them,  for  he  does  not 
wish  them  to  freeze.  Now  |  it  is  called  "staging  for  long  einquef oil- 
roots,"  and  it  is  also  called  |  "staging  on  which  long  cinquefoil-roots 
are  thrown."     After  this  has  been  done,  |  he  dot's  the  same,  putting 

20  on  the  stage  the  ||  baskets  with  short  roots:  and  after  this  has  been 
done,  he  spreads  j  mats  over  them.     Generally  he  does  not  put  up 
one  |  basket  of  long  cinquefoil-roots  when  the  baskets  arc  piled  up:  | 
and  when  there  are  many  people  in  his  tribe,  he  keeps  out  four 
baskets  with  short  cinquefoil  roots  to  cook  them  for  the  people;  but  || 

25  more  than  one  basket  of  long  cinquefoil-roots  is  never  kept  out,  for 
only  the  chiefs  j  eat  the  long  cinquefoil-roots.  The  common  people 
eat  the  short  roots,  j 
1  Digging  Sea-Milkwort.1  -When  the  plants  first  begin  to  grow  and 
the  tops  begin  to  sprout,  j  the  woman  takes  her  digging-stick  which 
she  uses  for  clams,  |  and  her  small  basket,  and  goes  to  a  place  where 
,">  -lie  has  seen  ||  milkwort  growing.  In  the  following  year  there  is 
nothing  to  be  seen  in  the  springtime,  ,  anil  she  just  digs  for  it.  She 
sits  down  and  pushes  the  point  of  her  digging-stick  into  the  sand, 
and  she  pries  up  the  sand.  |  Then  she  picks  out  the  milkwort-roots 


15  laxs  lae  ax'edxa  teElswaeye  qa£s  i.EpEyindales  laq  qa  k' leses 
lax'saweda  g'Ewesmise  laq,  qaxs  gwaqtelaaq  wudala.  Wa,  laEm 
LegadEs  LaxapdEmil  k-!agH  laxeq.  Wa,  la,  LeqEleda  waokwas 
k' laxdEmllasasa   Laxabats!e    LlaLlEbata   laq.      Wa,    g'iPmese    gwa- 

■_>()  Iexs  lae  aEin  nEqEmg"ilEweqexs  lae  axEalilasa  t!ExdEm!lasasa  t!e- 
t!Egwats!e  LlaLlEbata.  Wa,  g'ilemese  gwatexs  laaxat!  LEpEyintsa 
leEpwa£ye  laq.  Wa,  lii  qliinalaqas  k"!es  lasa  EnEmsgEme  Laxaba- 
ts!e  Llabat  laxes  la  inalai.Ela  laxa  LaxapdEmile  klaglla.  Wa-, 
o-il-'mese  q'.enEme  g-6kulotasexs  lae  axelaxa  mosgEme  t!et!E- 
u;wats!e    LlaLlEbata  qa£s   t  !EquIasEEwa.     Wa,  laxe    k' !es    h&yaqax 

25  snEmsgEma  Laxabatsle  Llabata  qaxs  Iexaunaeda  g'Ig'Egaina:ye 
LELtixapg'Exa  Laxabiilise.  Wa,  laLeda  bebEgwanEmq  !alaeme 
tlExl't!aquxa  tlExusose. 
1  Digging  Sea-Milkwort' (Tslosaxa  hoqlwale).  -Wii,  heEmaaxslae  g*f] 
qlwaxEnxa  lae  Elaq  tEmx'alise  oxta'yasa  qlwaqlwiixEma  lae 
axeededa  tslEdaqaxes  klilakwexa  dzeg"ayaxa  g'aweqlauEme 
LE£wes  lalaxamaxs  lae  qas'ld  qaes  la  laxes  q!aetsEEwe  qlwaxatsa 
5  hoqlwalaxa  apsEytnxde  qaxs  k'leasae  dogul  qlwaxaxa  qlwaxEnxe 
qaxs  tVmae  tslosElaq.  Wa,  lii  klwag'alis  qaEs  tslEx"l>EtaIisex 
obaEyases  tslosElaxa  klilakwe.  Wii,  lii  klwetlEqalisaxa  egise. 
Wii,  hecmis  la    mEnx-eidaatsexa  hoqlwale  qaEs  la  tslExtslalas  laxa 

'Olauz  maritima,  v.  Fernald. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  195 

and  throws  them  into  |  the  small  basket  which  stands  on  the  ground 
in  front  of  her.    She  continues  doing  so  ||  while  she  is  digging.     When  1 0 
her  basket  is  full,  she  goes  |  home,  carrying  the  basket  in  her  hands.  | 

Digging  Bracken '  -  Root. — The  woman  j  takes  her  back-protecting 
mat  and  her  cedar-bark  belt,  |  and  her  digging-stick  which  she  uses  for 
digging  clams.  Then  ||  she  goes  to  a  place  where  she  knows  fern  is  15 
growing  and  where  |  the  soil  is  soft.  As  soon  as  she  arrives,  she 
spreads  the  mat  over  her  back  |  and  she  puts  on  the  woven  cedar- 
bark  belt.  After  |  she  has  done  so,  she  sits  down  on  one  end  of  the 
mat,  holding  the  |  digging-stick,  and  she  pushes  the  point  of  the 
stick  into  the  ground.  ||  Then  she  digs  up  the  ground;  and  when  she  20 
readies  the  fern-root,  |  she  follows  the  whole  length  of  the  root,  for  it 
is  very  |  long;  and  when  she  reaches  the  soft  end,  she  j  breaks  it  off; 
and  if  it  is  very  long,  she  coils  it  up.  She  continues  j  doing  so  as  she 
is  digging.  When  she  has  enough,  she  takes  a  ||  spruce-root  and  ties  25 
it  around  the  middle,  and  she  folds  the  roots  up  in  a  bundle,  |  which 
she  carries  on  her  back  to  her  house,  using  her  digging-stick  as  a 
walking-stick,  for  the  load  of  fern-roots  is  really  heavy  when  the  old 
woman  finds  many.  | 

Digging  Fern --Root. — The  woman  takes  her  |  yew-wood  digging-  1 
stick  and  a  large  basket,  |  which  she  carries  on  her  back.     She  uses 
her  digging-stick  as  a  cane.     Then  she  walks,  |  looking  for  fern-root. 

lalaxamaxs  hanesae  lax  nEqEmalisas.     Wa,  ax'sa'mese  he   gweg'i- 
laxs  ts!osae.     Wa,  g'iFmese    qot!e    lExElasexs  lae   na/nakwa  laxes  10 
g'okwe  k'oxk"  !otElaxes  hoq '.waleats !e  lalaxama. 

Digging  Bracken-Root  (Sakwaxa  sagiime). — HeEm  ax£etsd£sa  ts!E- 
daqes  LEbega£ye  le£wa£ya  LE£wes  dEnedzowe  wuseg'anowa.  Wa, 
he-mesLai.es  k'!ilakwexes  dzeg'ayowaxa  gaweqlaiiEine.  Wa,  la 
qas-'id  qa£s  la  laxes  q!atsEwe  qlwaxatsa  sagiime,  yixa  asm  15 
tElq'.uts  tlEka.  Wa,  g'IPmese  lag'aa  laqexs  lae  LEbeg'intses 
le£wa£ye  qa£s  qEk'iylndeses  dEnedzowe  wiiseg'ano  laq.  Wa,  glPmese 
gwala  lae  klwadzodEx  apsba£yases  LEbeg"a£ye  le£wa£ya  dalaxes 
klilakwe.  Wa,  la  qlumtbEtElsax  oba'yases  k'  lilakwe  qa£s  elap!e- 
dexa  clzEkwa.  Wa,  giPmese  laklEndxa  sagiimaxs  lae  km  hegu-  20 
lEne  labElEnex  £wasgEinasasa  Llop'.Ek'asa  sagiime  qaxs  alak'Ialae 
gtlsgilt!e  L!op!Ek'as.  Wa,  glPmese  lag'aa  laxa  q!wayots!axs  lae 
alts!EiulEq  qa£s  q  !Elx£wideqexs  Lomae  giltla.  Wa,  la  hex'saEin 
gweg'ilaxs  sakwae.  Wa,  g'il£mese  heloLEqexs  lae  ax£ed  laxa 
LloplEk'asa  alewase  qa£s  qEnoyodes  laqexs  lae  gwanaqi£lalakwa.  25 
Wa,  lii  oxxalaqexs  lae  na£naku  laxes  g'okwe  sek"  laqElaxes  k'  !ilakwe 
qaxs  alak' !alae  giint!eda  sagumaxs  oxLaakwaaxs  qlEvoLanEmaasa 
laElk!wana£ye. 

Digging    Fern -Root     (Nesaxa    tsak'os).  —  Wa,    heEm     ax£etso£sa  J. 
ts'.Edaqes   l  !Enq  tek' !me    k!ilakwa    LE£wes    £walase    lExa£ya.     Wa, 
la  oxLala.     Wa,  Laxa   sek- laqElaxes  kMilakwe.     Wa,  la  qas£id  qa£s 

1  Pteridiu  m  aquilinum.  '  Dryopteris  spinulosa  dilatata. 


19fi  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [MH.Amf.3s 

5  As  soon  as  she  finds  large  ones,  she  puts  her  ||  basket  down  on  the 
ground  and  pokes  with  her  digging-stick  under  the  root  of  the  fern. 
She  holds  with  her  left  hand  the  top  of  the  digging-stick,  and  she  holds 
with  her  |  right  hand  the  leaves  of  the  fern,  and  she  pulls  at  it.  and  | 
she  pries  it  up  with  her  digging-stick.  As  soon  as  she  gets  it  out,  she 
plucks  off  the  |  leaves,  and  she  throws  the  root  into  the  basket.     She 

10  continues  ||  doing  so,  pulling  it  out,  and  she  only  stops  when  her 
basket  is  full.  |  Then  she  breaks  off  some  slim  hemlock-branches  and 
puts  them  on  top  |  of  the  fern-root.  After  she  has  done  so,  she 
carries  her  |  fern-root  basket  on  her  back  and  goes  home.  | 

15  Gathering  Fern-roots.1 — Generally  the  tribes  go  ||  to  get  fern-roots 
when  they  are  hungry  and  J  they  can  not  go  to  get  other  kinds  of  food; 
and  those  who  haveto  camp  for  along  time  in  bad  weather.  |  Then  they 
go  to  gather  fern-roots.  The  |  man  makes  a  stick  for  peeling  bark  like 
the  stick  for  peeling  hemlock-bark.  |  It  is  the  same  length.     It  is 

20  bent  and  has  a  flat  point.  ||  Generally  it  is  four  spans  long.  |  The 
woman  carries  it  with  her  basket  and  goes  to  |  look  for  loose  moss  in 
which  the  fern  grows.  When  she  finds  |  many  plants  of  the  fern- 
root  growing  among  the  loose  moss  on  rocks,  1  she  sits  down  and 

25  plucks  off  the  moss;  ||  and  when  she  comes  to  the  rock,  she  takes  her 
peeling-stick  and  |  pushes  it  along  the  rock  under  the  moss,  and  she 


la  alaxa  tsakose.  Wii,  g'il£mese  qlaxa  awawe  lae  5xxEg-aElsaxes 
5  lExiVye.  Wii,  la  L'.Engabotses  klilakwe  lax  L'.op!Ek-asa  tsakose. 
Wa,  la  dale  gBmxolts lanasex  oxta£yasa  k'ttlakwe.  Wa,  la  nesale 
helk-!otts!anasexs  ylsx'lnasa  tsak'osaxs  lae  nex£edEq.  Wa,  la 
klwetaxsllases  klilakwe  laq.  Wa,  giPmese  laLEq  lae  k!ul5dEX 
yisx"inas.     Wa,  la  lEX'tslotsa  tsakuse  laxes   lExa£ye.      Wii,  hexsa- 

10  £mese  gweg'ilaxs  nesae.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  q!ot!e  IexeI&s. 
Wa,  la  l!ex£wk1  laxa  wiswulEtayasa  qlwaxe  qa£s  ts  !ak-iylndes 
lax  a  6kuva£vasa  tsakuse.  Wii,  lii  gwalExs  lae  oxLEX'Idxes 
tsag'atsle  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  na£nakwa. 

Gathering  Fern  -roots  (LEkwaxalEk!wasye). — HeEmq!unalalEkwax- 

15  (lEmxa  lEk!wa£}Taxs  palaeda  g'ayole  laxa  lelqwalaLa£ye  yixa 
wayapolEla  laLElaxa  heemaomase  LE-'wa  yiyag'idzaiiEmasa  £nalaxs 
g'ayag"ilisElae.  Wa,  heemisla  lEkwaxa  lEk!wa£ye;  wii,  heJmis  ax;e- 
tsosa  bEgwanEma  idoklwayowe  he  gwex'se  Lloklwayaxalaqe.  Wa. 
la  heEmxat!  '"wasgEme  laxes  hanqwalaena£ye  paxbaakwa.     Wa,    la 

20  qluniila  mop!Enk-e  ewasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!anaye\. 
Wa,  he£mis  daaxusa  tstedaqe  LE£wis  lExa£yaxs  lae  qas£id  qa£s  la 
alax  hasdExwa  plElEins  qlwaxatsa  lEk!wa£ye.  Wa,  gil£mese  q!axa 
qleiiEme  yisx-Ensa  lEk!wa£ye  q  !waq  !iixEgexa  hasdexwa  p!ElEinsaxs 
lae    hex-£idaEm    klwagElodsq    qa£s    mapElalexa    plElEmse.      Wa, 

25  gil£mese  lagila  laxa  tlesEmaxs  lae  ax£edxes  Lloklwayowe  qa£s 
LlEnqElales  lax    awaba£yasa    plElEmese    qa£s  Llokliig'ilodeq.     Wa, 

1  Polypodium  glycorrhiza  X>.  C.  Eaton. 


hoas]  HUNTING,    FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  197 

pries  it  off  the  rock.  |  As  soon  as  it  turns  over,  she  pulls  the  moss  apart  27 
and   pulls    out  the    fern-roots,   which    she   throws  into  her  basket. 
She  continues  j  doing  so:  and  when  her  basket  is  full,     she  carries  it 
home.  !  Then  she  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  |  30 

Digging-    Erytliroaium. — Now    I    will    speak    again    |    about    the  1 
ervihronmm,  how  it  is  dug;  for  the  j  woman  takes  the  same  digging- 
st'ck  that  is  used  for  short  cinquefoil-roots,  and  the  back-protecting 
mat,   and  her     cedar-hark  belt,  and  she   takes  a  small-meshed  flat- 
bottomed  |]  basket:  and  she  goes  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  for  that  is  5 
the  only  place  |  where  the  ervthronium-plant  grows.     As  soon  as  she 
arrives  where  it  grows,  |  when  the  leaves  first  come  out  of  the  ground, 
she  carries   a  large  |  horse-dam  shell.     Then   she   takes  her  back- 
protecting  mat  and  |  spreads  it  over  her  back,   and  she  takes  her 
cedar-bark  belt  and  |j  puts  it  on  over  the  mat.  putting  it  around  her  10 
waist.     Then  |  she  takes  a  large  horse-clam  shell  and  her  digging- 
stick,  and  she     takes  her  small-meshed  Hat-bottomed  basket  and  puts 
it  down  on  her  |  left-hand  side.     Then  she  sits  on  the  end  of  the  j 
mat  and  pushes  the  end  of  the  digging-stick  into  the  ground  and  pries 
up  the  sod.     Then  she  scrapes  the  soil  with  her  clam-shell  |  and  picks  15 
out  the  erythronium  plants  from  the  soil  and  throws  them  |  into  her 

glhmese  nELElaxs  lae  behldxa  plElEmse.     Wa,  a£mese  la  Isk'alaxa  27 
lEk!wa£ye    qaes    le    LExuts!alas    laxes    IexeIu.     Wa,    la    hexsaEm 
gweg'ilaxa    waokwe.     Wa,  g'ih'mese    qot!e    Isgwatsles    bsxa^ya   lae 
kMoqwalaxes    tegwatsle    lExa£ya    qaes    la    na£nakwa    laxes  g-5kwe.  30 
Wa,  lii    k- logiindlisases    tegwatsle    lExa£ya    lax    lEgwIlases  g-okwe. 

Digging     Erythronium.  —  Wa,     la£mesEn     edzaqwal     gwagwex's-  1 
Ealal    laxa  xaasx  Ent  !axs  lae    ts!osasEewa   yixs    he-mae    ax£etso£sa 
tstedaqes  tsloyayaxa    t!Exusose  i.E'wis   LEbeg'a'ye    le=wa£ya  LE£wis 
dF.nedzowe    wuseg'anowa.      Wa,     he£misa   t  !olt  !ExusEme  LEqlExsd 
lExa£ya.     Wa,  lii    qas£ida    lax    ogwag'ilisasa    wlwa    qaxs  lex'a£mae  5 
qlwaxatsa  xaasx'Entle.     Wa,  g"llemese  lagaa  lax  qlayasaxs  galae 
(|!\va(|!uxEtdx-wide     yisxinas,    wa,    la    dalaxa     -walase     xalaetsox 
inr.t  'ana\vex.     Wa,  beemis  g'il  ax'"etsosses  LEbeg-aeye  leewa£ya  qa£s 
LF.beg'indes.     Wa,  lii  ax£edxes  dEnedzoWe  wuseg-anowa  qa£s  qEne- 
g'indes  laxes    LEbega£ye    le£wa£ya.     Wa,  la    wtiseg'oyots.     Wa,  la  10 
axeedxa  ewalase   xalaetsox    niEt!ana£yex    LE£wis   tsloyayowe,  laxae 
axEedxes    t!olt!ExusEme    LEqlExsd    bsxaeya    qa£s    hangalises    laxes 
gEnvxotEmalise.      Wa,   lawisLe    klwadzodEx    6ba£yases    LEbeg'a£ye 
le£wa£ya,  wa,  lit  LlEiixbEtalisas  5ba£yases  tsloyayowe  qa-s  k!wet!e- 
deq.     Wa,  he£mis  la  xElpElg'ayaatsesa  £walase  xalaes  laxa  tlEk'a.  15 
Wa,  la    mEiimaqaxa    xaasx'Eiit  !e  laxa    tlEk'a    qa£s  lii  ts!Exts!alas 
laxes    lEXEla.     Wa,  g'ih'mese    wakwa    x'aasx'Ent  !;ixs    lae    £nEmal£I- 


198  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  and 

18  basket.  If  there  are  many  plants,  it  is  only  a  short  time  |  before  the 
basket  is  full;  and  when  |  the  small-meshed  flat-bottomed  basket  is 

20  full,  she  carries  it  home  in  her  hand.  ||  After  entering  the  house,  she  | 
puts  down  the  basket  inside  of  the  door  of  the  house  to  keep  it  cool 
and  so  that  the  roots  |  do  not  get  dry,  for  they  are  dirty.  | 
1  Digging  Lupine-Roots.  — In  spring,  when  I  the  salmon-berries  begin 
to  have  buds  and  the  olachen  first  arrives  in  |  Knight  Inlet .  the  season 
arrives  when  the  tribes  are  hungry  |  when  they  first  arrive  at  Knight 
5  Inlet.  Then  the  woman  first  takes  her  digging-stick  ||  for  clover 
and  her  basket  and  her  |  woven  cedar-bark  belt,  and  goes  to  the  I 
flats  back  of  the  houses  of  the  olachen  fishermen.  When  she  finds 
t  he  |  tops  of  shoots  of  lupine  as  they  come  out  of  the  ground,  she  puts 
down   her   |    lupine-basket   and  her  digging-stick.     She  takes  her  || 

10  narrow  back-protector  and  spreads  it  on  her  back,  and  she  sees  to  it 
that  |  it  reaches  down  to  her  heels.  Then  she  puts  a  belt  I  over  it 
and  ties  it  around  her  waist.  When  she  lias  finished,  |  she  takes  her 
digging-stick  and  her  lupine-basket  and  sits  down  close  to  the  |  shoots 

15  on  the  end  of  her  back-protecting  mat.  ||  She  pushes  the  point  of  the 
digging-stick  into  the  ground  close  to  the  |  lupine-shoot,  and  she 
pries  it  up.  As  soon  as  the  roots  come  out,  |  she  picks  I  hem  out  of 
the  clay  and  throws  them  into  her  |  basket;  and  when  she  has  picked 

18  (Iexs  lae  qotles  IexeUi.  Wa,  g'il-mese  qotle  x-aasx'Ent!aats!as 
t!6lt!ExusEm    LEqtexsd    lExa£ya    lae    k"  loqulaqexs     lae    niimakwa 

20  laxes  g-okwe.  Wa,  giPmese  laeL  laxes  gokwaxs  lae  hex-cIdaEm 
hanstolilas  lax  aweLEliis  tlEX'iliises  g'okwe  qa  wudasE£wes  qa  kleses 
lEmlEmxusEmx;ida  qaes  dzedzoxsEina£yas. 
1  Digging  Lupine-Roots  (Qliinsiixa  q!wa£ne). — Wa,  he/maaxs  lae  gtl 
bolex£wIdeda  qlwalmlsaxa  la  qlwaxEnxe  yixs  lae  gil  nefclesa 
dzaxu£n§  lax  Dzawade,  ylxs  he£mae  palaEnxsa  lelqwalaLa£yaxs 
g-alae  la£nieLes  lax  Dzawade;  wa,  he'mis  gtl  ax£etsosa  ts!edaq!a- 
5  vases  tsloyayaxa  LExsEme,  LE£wis  lExa£ye,  LE£wis  dEnedzowe 
k'  !!dEdzEEwaku  wuseg'anowaxs  lae  qas£id  qa£s  lii  ladzolisaxa  5,wa- 
dzalise  lax  aLana£yasa  g'igokwasa  dzawadala.  Wa,  z  ihmese  qlaxa 
6xta£yasa  qlflndzanaxs  g'alae  q!waq!uxEtox£wida  lae  g-Igallsa\es 
qlunyatsleye  lExa£ya   LE£wa    tsloyayowe.     Wa,   la    ax£6dxes    wila- 

10  dzowe  LEbege  le.£wa£ya  qa£s  LEbegindes.  Wa,  la  doqwala  qa 
sEk1  !EXLax'sIdza£yesex  oxLaxsIdza'yasexs  lae  qEx'Eyintsa  wflseg'a- 
nowe  laqexs  lae  wusek'  lExsdalaq.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
ax£edxes  tsloyayowe  i,E-"wis  qlunyatsleye  lExa£ya  qa£s  kliinxEllsexa 
qlundzanowaxs    lae    klwadzEwex    6ba£yases    LEbeg-a£ye    le£wa£ya. 

15  Wit,  la  tslExubEtalisas  6ba£yases  tsloyayowe  lax  awEnxElIsasa 
qlundzanowe  qa£s  klwetlqaliseq.  Wa,  g'iPmese  g'ax  LEx£walisa 
qlwa-naxs  lae  mEnmaqaq  laxa  i.leqla  qa£s  lit  LExuts!&las  laxes 
q!un£yats!e  lExa£ya.     Wa,  g-ll£mese  £wilg'ilqeda  Leqliixa  q!wa£nax« 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,    AND   FOOD-GATHERING  199 

all  the  roots  out  of  the  clay,  |  she  takes  her  digging-stick    again, 
pushes  it  into  the  ground  as  she  ||  did  before,  and  she  picks  out  the  20 
lupine-roots  and  |  puts  them  into  her  basket.     She  continues  doing 
this;  |  and  when  her  basket  is  full,  she  carries  it  in  her  one  hand.  | 
She  takes  the  digging-stick  in  the  other  hand  and  goes  home.  |  Then 
she  puts  down  the  basket  at  her  place,  and  ||  she  places  the  digging-  25 
stick  upright  at  one  side  of  the  door.  |  Then  she  takes  a  small  dish 
and  pours  some  fresh  water  into  it.  |  When  it  is  half  full,  she  puts  it 
down  by  the  side  of  her  place.     She  takes  her  |  basket  and  places  it 
by  the  side  of  the  small  dish  I  which  contains  water.     Then  she  takes 
some  of  the  lupine-roots  and  puts  them  into  the  ||  water  in  the  small  30 
dish,  and  she  washes  them  all  over,  so  that  the  clay  |  comes  off.     As 
soon  as  all  the  clay  is  off,  she  |  begins  to  eat  the  roots,  with  her  hus- 
band and  her  children;  |  and  they  only  stop  when  they  have  enough. 
After  eating  lupine-root  |  for  some  time,  they  become  dizzy,  as  though 
they  were  drunk  ||  after  having  drunk  whisky.     After  eating  lupine-  35 
root,  I  they  put  away  what  is  left  over.     When  |  the  woman  and  her 
husband  eat  too  much  of  the  lupine-roots,  they  become  really  drunk.  | 
Their  eyes  are  heavy,  and  they  can  not  keep  them  open,  and  |  their 
bodies  are  like  dead,  and  they  are  really  |)  sleepy.     Then  they  go  and  40 
lie  down  in  their  rooms  and  I  sleep;  and  when  they  wake  up,  they 

lae  et!ed  ax£edxes  ts!oyayowe  qa£s  ts!ExubEtallses  oba£yas  laxes 
gilxde  gwex-£idaasa.  Wit.  laxae  niEnmaqaxa  q!wa£ne  qa£s  la  20 
LExuts!;ilas  laxes  q!unyats!e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  axsa£mese  he  gweg'ilaqe. 
Wa,  gtl'mese  qotle  qhmvats.'as  lExa£ya  lae  k'loqwalaxes  qhmyatsle 
lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  dak'.'otElaxes  tsloyayowaxs  g'axae  naenakwa. 
Wa,  la  k- !ox£walllaxes  qhmyatsle  lExa-ya  laxes  k!waelase.  Wii, 
laLa  he  Lag*alilases  tsloyayowa  apsotstalilas  tlExiliises  gokwe.  25 
Wa,  la  ax'edxa  lalogume  qaEs  guxtslodesa  £WE£wap!Eme  laq  qa 
nEgoyoxsilallsexs  lae  hangalllas  laxes  klwaelase.  Wa,  la  axc"edxes 
q!unyats!e  lExa£ye  qa£s  hang'allles  lax  makiigilllasa  lalogume 
EwabEts!ala.  Wa,  lii  ax£ed  laxa  q!wa£ne  qa£s  LExustEndes  lax 
£wabEts!iiwasa  lalogume.  Wa,  la  ts!5ts!ox£unaq  qa  lawii£yes  Lie-  30 
l  !Eq  liik-  !Ena£yas.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wl£lawa  l  !eL  h:q  !ak'  !Ena£yasexs  lae 
q !unsq !was£Idxa  q!wa£ne  LE£wis  la£wuuEme  Lo£mes  sasEme.  Wa 
alsmese  gwatsxs  lae  poHda.  Wa,  gIPmese  gagala  gwal  q!Qns- 
qlwasaxa  q-!wa£niixs  lae  k'.'EdElx£ida  he  gwex'sa  wunalaxs  lae 
gwal  naqaxa  nEnqlema.  Wii.  gihinese  gwal  q!unsq!wasaxa  q!wa-  35 
£naxs  lae  g'exaxes  anex-s:i£ye.  Wii,  gil£mese  Lomax,£Id  q!ek-!Eseda 
tslEdaqe  Lo£mes  la£wunEmaxa  q!wa£naxs  lae  alax-£Id  la  wuenala 
la  gunsguntles  gegEj-agEse  la  k'leas  gwex-£idaas  dEx'ala.  Wa, 
laxae  lElEmg'it !lde  ok!wina£yas.  Wa,  laxae  alak'Iala  la  bEq!u- 
lEla.     Wii,  he£mis    la  iiEm  la  kulEmg'aillats  laxes    gegaelase  qa£s  40 


200  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [hth.ann.S5 

41  feel  well  again,  because  I  they  are  no  longer  drunk.  That,  is  all 
about  this.  | 
1  Digging  Carrots.1 — The  woman  takes  this  (cedar-bark  basket),  I  the 
yew-wood  digging-stick,  her  back-protecting  |  mat  and  her  cedar- 
bark  belt.  She  goes  to  the  |  rocks,  for  carrots  generally  grow  on 
5  rocks  where  there  is  grass  ||  on  the  points  of  land.  When  she  reaches 
the  point  where  many  carrots  |  were  growing  the  past  season  (for  the 
woman  only  goes  there  if  she  knows  |  that  there  were  many  of  them, 
for  they  have  not  come  out  yet),  she  takes  her  |  back-protecting  mat 
and  puts  it  on  her  back,  and  she  takes  her  |  belt  and  puts  it  over  it 

10  around  her  waist,  then  |)  she  ties  the  mat  on  her  back.  She  takes  her 
digging-stick  |  and  sits  down  on  the  rock.  Then  she  puts  her  basket 
down  in  |  front  of  her,  and  she  peels  off  the  grass  and  the  roots  from 
the  rocks  with  her  yew -wood  ]  digging-stick,  so  that  it  turns  over 
and  the  roots  show.     Then  |  she  picks  out  the  carrots  and  throws 

15  them  into  her  basket.  ||  After  she  has  selected  them  from  among  the 
roots  of  (other)  plants,  |  she  takes  her  digging  stick  again  (some  women 
call  it  the  |  peeling-stick  for  carrots)  and  she  does  |  as  she  did  before 
when  she  peeled  it  off  from  the  rock.     After  tilling  her  carrot-baskel , 
she  puts  it  on  her  back.     Generally  she  uses   the  peeling-stick  fur 

20  carrots  as  a  walking-stick.  ||  She  goes  home  to  her  house;  and  when  she 


41  mex£ede.  Wa,  g"il£mese  tslEX'£idExs  lae  es£Ek"  la  bebEgwaiiEma  lae 
gwal  wunala.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Digging  Carrots  (Tslosaxa  xEtEm1).— Wa,  he£mis  axeetsosa  tslE- 
daqe  LEewis  LlEmqlEk'lEne  tsloyayowa.  Wa,  hesmises  Lebega£ye 
le£wa£ya  LEewis  dEnedzowe  wfiseg'anowa.  Wa,  la  qaseiJa  laxa 
awlnak'.wa  qaxs  heemae  qlunala  qlwaxatsa  xEtxEtleda  k!edEk!wa 
5  laxa  ewaelba£ye.  Wa,  g'il'mese  lagaa  lax  qlayasasa  XEtxEtla 
qlwaxa  apsEylnx'de  qaxs  (rmaeda  tslEdaqe  heEm  lagilExs  q!aXE- 
laaqexs  qleiiEmae  laq  qaxs  k'!es£mae  q!wax£ida.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxes 
LEbeg"a£ye  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEbeg'indes.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxes  dEnedzowe 
wuseganowa  qa£s  qEnegindes  laqexs  lae  wttseg'oyodES.     Wa,  laeme 

10  qaqak'Enax  LEbeg-aeyas  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxes  tsloyayowe 
qa£s  k!wag"aale.  Wii,  laEm  ha'ne  xstxEt  laats  !as  Llabat  lax  iiEqE- 
malaiis.  Wii,  lii  i.  !ok!ug-ilodxa  k'letlEme  vises  l  !Emq  tek-  line 
tsloyayo  qa  nELEles  qa  Enaxwes  nel£ededa  i.loplEk'e.  Wii,  lii 
niEnmaqaxa     XEtxEtla     qa£s     tslExtslfdes     laxa      L  [abate.       Wii, 

15  gll'mese  £wllg-flqeda  oguqlemase  i.!opli-:ksa  q Iwasq luxElaxs  lae 
etled  dax:"Idxes  tsloyayowe  ytxs  LeqElaeda  waokwe  tsledaqas 
LloklugElayoxa  XEtxEtla  laq.  Wa,  laxae  aEm  nEg'EltEwexes 
gilx'de  gwex£idaasa.  Wa,  giPmese  qot!e  xEtlasas  Llabataxs  lae 
5xLEx£IdEq.     Wii,  la  qlunala  ssk'  laoElaxes  Lloklwayaxa  XEtxEtla. 

i  Continued  from  p.  139,  line  22. 


eoas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  201 

enters,  |  she  puts  down  her  load  and  puts  it  on  the  floor  by  the  side  21 
of  the  iire.  | 

Digging  Lily-Bulbs.1 — As  soon  as  (the  digging-stick)  is  finished,  (the  1 
man)  gives  it  to  his  wife.  |  In  the  morning,  when  day  comes,  the 
woman  arises  and  |  eats  before  she  goes  out.     After  she  has  finished 
eating,  I  she  takes  her  back-protector  and  her  cedar-bark  belt  II  and  5 
her  new  basket  for  lily-bulbs  and  also  the  |  digging-stick  for  lily- 
bulbs.     She  goes  to  the  flat  on  the  beach,  for  |  there  the  lily  grows  and 
there  is  soft  sand.     When  |  she  reaches  the  place  where  there  are 
many  lily-blossoms,  she  |  puts  down  her  new  basket  for  lily-bulbs  and 
her  digging-stick  for  ||  lily-bulbs,  and  she  puts  the  mat  on  her  back.  10 
She  puts  on  the  |  cedar-bark  belt,  which  she  ties  around  her  waist. 
After  doing  so,  |  she  sits  down  on  the  lower  end  of  the  back-protector, 
for  |  the  end  of  it  reaches  as  far  as  her  heels.     She  puts  down  her  I 
new  basket  for  lily-bulbs  in  front  of  her.     She  takes  her  ||  flat-edged  15 
digging-stick  and  pushes  the  point  into  the  sand  on  one  side  |  of  the 
lily-plant;  and  when  the  point  is  half  way  in,  she  |  pulls  out   her 
digging-stick  and  pushes  it  into  the  sand  again  on  one  side  of  the 
plant,  |  in  this  way:    I  I    and  she  pulls  it  out  and  pushes  it  again 

into   the    sand    |    at   I    '     |    the  upper  side,  in  this  way.2     She  pulls 


Wa,  la  na£nakwa  laxes  g'Skwe.     Wa,  giPmese  laeL  laxes  g'okwaxs  20 
lae  oxLEgalllaq  laxa  maglnwallsasa  lEgwIlases  gokwe. 

Digging  Lily-Bulbs.1 — Wa,  gih'mese  gwalExs  lae  ts  !;is  laxes  gEiiEme.  1 
Wa,    giPmese    enax,£idxa   gaalaxs    lae    Lax£wideda    ts!Edaqe    qa£s 
heyasElexs   k!es£mae   la  qas£ida.      Wa,  gil£mese   gwal   heyasElaxs 
lae  ax^edxes  LEbeg"a£ye    le£wa£ya    LE£wis    dEnedzowe  wuseganowa 
LEJwes  altsEme  x"6gwats!e   dEntsEm  idabata;    wa,  he£misLes  ts!5-  5 
yayaxa    xokiime.      Wa,  lii    qas£id    qa£s  la   laxa    awadzalise    qaxs 
he£mae    ex-   qlwaxatsa    x"5kume    loxs    tElgwesae.     Wa,    gil^mese 
lagaa    laxa    q!enEine    gogulEtE;wesa    xokumaxs    lae    hex'idaEm 
gig-alisaxes      altsEine     x-6gwats!e      L!abata     LE£wis      tsloyayaxa 
x"6kume.     Wa,  lii    LEbegintses    le£wa£ye  qa£s   qEk'iyindeses  dEne-  10 
dzowe  wuseg'anowe  laq  qa-s  wiiseg'oyodes.     Wa,  g'iPmese  gwatexs 
lae  k!wadzodEx  bEiiba^yases  LEbeg'aEye  leHva'ya  qaxs  sEk"  lEXLax-- 
sklze£maax    oxLax'sIdza£yas    gog'Egiiyas.       Wa,    la     hangalisaxes 
altsEme   xogwatsle    Llabat    laxes    liEqEmahse.     Wa,  la  dax£Idxes 
pExba  ts!oyayowa.     Wa,  L  tenxbEtEnts  pExba£yas  lax  apsanoL  !EXLa-  15 
£yasa  x-5gwanowe    qa    nEgo£yowes    tsegwayobaEyas.     Wa,  lii  k'!E- 
qidisaxes  tsloyayowe   qa£s    etlede   LlEnxbEtalisas   lax    apsanoL.'Ex- 
i.a£yas  g-a  gwaleg'a  {fig.).    Wa,  laxae  k-!Equlisaq  qac"s  etlede  LlEnx- 
bEtalisas laxa    apsanoL!EXLa;yas  g'a   gwaleg'a.-    Wa,  la  k" lEqfilisaq 

1  Continued  from  p.  146,  lino  33.  2  See  figure  to  left. 


202  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.35 

20  it  out  ||  and  pushes  it  into  the  sand  again  so  that  the  cuts  (in  the  sand  I 
meet.     Then  she  |  pries  out  the  lily  plant   and  bulb  in  this  way:  | 

□  The  lily-plant  is  the  black  spot  in  the  middle  of  the  square. 
Then  |  she  breaks  the  soil  and  picks  out  the  bulb,  and  she 
breaks  off  the  I  stem  of   the  lily-bulb  and  throws  it  away. 

25  Then  she  throws  the  ||  bulb  into  her  bulb-basket.  She  continues 
doing  this  |  as  long  as  she  is  digging  bly-bulbs.  She  digs  them  up 
very  quickly  when  she  is  digging,  for  |  three  finger-widths  is  the  width 
of  the  |  digging-stick  for   lily-bulbs.     As  soon  as  the  basket  is  full, 

30  and  when  it  is  a  fine  day,  she  goes  to  get  a  mat  from  her  house,  ||  and 
she  spreads  it  out  where  she  is  digging.  She  takes  hold  of  her  |  basket 
on  each  side  and  pours  the  bulbs  on  the  mat  which  has  been  spread  out, 
and  |  she  goes  on  digging  as  she  did  before.  Now,  the  bulbs  that 
have  been  poured  on  the  mat  are  getting  dry;  |  and  when  the  basket 
lias  been  tilled  again,  |  she  pours  it  out  again   on  the  mat.     When 

35  evening  comes  ||  and  it  is  fine  weather,  she  gets  another  |  mat  from 
her  house  and  spreads  it  over  the  |  bulbs  t  hat  she  has  dug  so  that  I  hey 
may  not  get  wet  from  the  night  dew.  |  When  day  comes,  the  woman 
goes  back  to  where  she  is  digging  the  |  bulbs,  and  she  takes  along 

40  another  mat,  which  she  spreads  out.  |J  She  takes  the  one  that  was 
spread     over     the  I       I  bulbs  and  spreads  it-out  close  to  I  the 

one    on  which   she  ]  poured  the  bulbs.     The  three  mats  are 

spread  in  this  way:  |  She  scatters  over  them  the  bulbs  which 

20  qa£s  etlede  idEnxbEtalisas  laxa  la  MgEwats  L!Enqa£yasexs  lae  k!we- 
tlEqalisaxa  x'Qgwano  LE£wa  xokume  laxa  ga  gwiilaga  {fig.).  HeEin 
xogwanoweda  nExts!owe  tsloltsEm  topala.  Wa,  a-mise  hex£idaEm 
waxsEndxa  dzEqwa  qa£s  daqodexa  x'okume  qa£s  khllpodexa  x-o- 
kume  laxa    xogwanowe    qa£s    ts!Ex£edeq.     Wa,    laLa    ts!Exts!otsa 

25  x-okiime  laxes  x-6gwats!e  Llabata.  Wii,  axsii-mese  he  gwegilaxs 
tslosaaxa  x-okiime.  Wii,  laLa  ha'nakwelaxs  lae  tslosa  qaxs 
yfidux£dEnae  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yix  £wadzobaasas  tse- 
gwayoba£yasa  tsloyayaxa  xokume.  Wii,  gil£mese  qot!e  x-ogwa- 
fcslas  Llabata  lae  ax-'edxa  leJwa£ye  laxes  g'okwe,  yixs  egidzalaeda 

30  £niila  qa£s  la  LEplalisas  laxes  tsloyase.  Wa,  la  tetEgEnodxes 
x'ogwatsle  Llabata  qa£s  lti  giigEdzots  laxa  LEbese  le£wa£ya.  Wii, 
xwelaqa-'mese  la  ts!os£ida.  qaxs  lE£maaLal  xEleses  la  gtigEdzoyoxa 
LEbese  le£wa£ya.  Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  qot!e  x'6gwats!as  Llabataxs 
lae  et!ed  gugEdzots  laxa    LEbese   le£wa£ya.     Wa,  g-il£mese  la  dza- 

35  qwaxs  yfxs  eg'idzalaeda  dzaqwa,  wii  il£mese  la  ax£edxa  ogii£la£maxat ! 
le£wa£ya  laxes  g'okwe  qa£s  lii  LEpsEmlisas  laxes  x'ogwanEine 
x-okiima  qa  kMeses  xwelaqa  k!unx£Id  laxa.  gosaxElaxa  ganui.e.  Wii, 
gil£mese  £nax£Idxa  gaaliixs  lae  et!ededa  tslEdaqe  laxes  x'ogwasaxa 
x'okume  qa£s  dalexa  ogii£la£maxat !  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEplaliseq.     Wa, 

40  laxae  ax£ed  LEpEyalisaxa  x'ogwanEmas  x'okuma  qa£s  LEpEiixEhscs 
lax  modzoyaasasa  xokume  ga  gwaleda  yuduxwe  leElwa£ya.  (fig.). 
Wii,  la  gweldzotses  x-ogwanEme  x'okum   lac[  qa  ha£nakweles  Ieuio- 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  203 

she  has  dug,  so  that  they  may  dry  quickly.    |    After  doing  so,  she  43 
goes  again  and  digs  lily-bulbs;  and  |  when  she  has  filled  her  basket, 
she  goes  and  pours  them  on  the  ||  mat.     When  it  gets  dark,  she  goes  45 
and  gets  more  mats  |  from  her  house,   and  spreads  them  over  the 
bulbs  that  she  lias  dug.  |  When  she  has  many,  she  stops.     When  it  is 
bad  weather,  in  the  |  evening  she  takes  short  boards  and  makes  a 
roof  over  them.  |  There  are  four  posts  for  it,  and  she  puts  two  small  || 
beams  over  them ;  and  she  lays  on  the  short  split  cedar  boards,  |  that  50 
it  maybe  tight  if  it  should  rain.      If  it  is  a  fine  day  in  the  |  morning, 
she  takes  off  the  boards  of  short  split  cedar-wood  and  scatters  |  the 
bulbs  over  the  mats.     If  the  weather  is  fine,  it  takes  more  than  I  six 
days  to  dry  the  bulbs  thoroughly  in  the  sun.     Now  I  will  ||  stop  for  a  55 
short  time  talking  about  the  woman.1   .   .   .  | 

After2  the  woman  has  put  the  rope  around  the  box  for  lily-bulbs,  | 
she  carries  it  on  her  back  to  where  she  has  dried  the  |  bidbs,  and  she 
puts  the  bulbs  into  the  box.  When  |  it  is  full,  she  takes  some  lily- 
leaves  |[  (some  Indians  call  it  lily-plant)  and  she  puts  them  on  top.  |  60 
Some  Indians  call  this  the  soft  cover  for  the  lily-bulbs.  After  doing 
this,  |  she  puts  the  cover  on.  Some  Indians  call  this  "putting  the  | 
flat  cover  on  the  box  for  lily-bulbs."     When  it  is  a  fine  morning,  | 

£nakiila.    Wil,  gib'mese  gwalExs  lae  et!ed  x-5x£wldxa  x'okiime.    Wii,  43 
g-ilnaxwa£mese  qotleda  x-ogwats!as    LlabatExs  lae  gugEdzots  laxa 
le£wa£ye.      Wii,    gilnaxwa£mese    dzaqwaxs    lae    axfedxa   leEl£wa£ye  45 
laxes  g'okwe  qa£s    la   LEpEyints  laxes  xogwanEme  x'okiima.     Wa, 
gil£mese  qteyoLExs    lae  gwala.     Wa,  g'il£mese  yak- !ElxElaxa  dza- 
qwaxs lae  ax£edxa  ts  !ats  !a£xusE£me  qa£s    la  sesgEmlisas  laq.     Wii, 
laEin  mots!aqe   LeLamas.     Wii,  lit  kak'EdEtotsa  malts !aqe  wiswfd 
k'ek'atewe   laq.     Wa,    a£mese    la    paqemk'  !Ena£ya    ts!ats!a£xusEme  50 
laq  qa  amxes  qo  yogux,£idLo.     Wii,   gil£mese    egidzoleda    £nalaxa 
gaaliixs    lae    sewayodEx    saliis    ts!ats!a£xusEma    qa£s    gweldzodesa 
xokiime  laxa    leElwa£ye.     Wii,  gll£Em    aegisa   Enala    lae  hayaqax 
q!EL!Exse    £naliisa    x'iliixa    x'okiime    laxa    LlesEla.      Wii,    la£niEn 
yawas£id  gwal  gwagwex's£ala  laxa  tslEdaqaxs  hae.1     ...  55 

Wa,2gil£mese  gwiileda  tslEdaqe  wElxsEmdxes  x'ogwats!e  xEtsEma 
lae  hex£idaF,m  la  oxLalaxa  xEtsEine  qa£s  lii  lax  x'ildzasases 
x'okume.  Wa,  la  k-!ats!5tses  x'okume  laxa  XEtsEine.  Wii,  g-il- 
£mese  qotlaxs  lae  ax£ed  lax  yisx'Enasa  xokume.  Wii,  la  £nekeda 
waokwe  baklum  x-ogwano,  qa£s  ts!iikiymdes.  Wii,  laxae  £nek-eda  60 
waokwe  baklum  t!akE_yindeslaxa  x'okiim.  Wii,  g'iPmese  gwalExs 
lae  paqEmts.  Wii,  laxae  £nekeda  waokwe  baklum  yikuylndesa 
yfkuyaeye  laxa  x'ogwatsle  XEtsEma.  Wii,  g'ibmese  ek"a  gaalaxs 
lae  hex""idaEm  la  moxsases    x'lx'ogwatsle    xexEtsEm    laxes  x-ogu- 


1  Continued  on  p.  60.  -  Continued  from  p.  81,  line  72. 


204  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL.  [ETH.  ANN.  36 

65  she  puts  all  the  boxes  with  lily-bulbs  aboard  the  ||  canoe;  and  when 

they  are  all  aboard,  they  start  for  home,  |  going  to  the  winter  village.  | 

When  they  arrive  at  their  house,  they  unload  the  canoe,  |  if  it  is 

high  water  at  the  time  of  their  arrival.     Then  they  put  down  the 

boxes  |  in  a  cool  corner  of  the  house,  for  the  lily-bulbs  easily  dry  up  || 

70  when  the  boxes  arc  put  down  where  it  is  warm;  therefore  they  are  | 
put  into  a  cool  corner  of  the  house.  There  the  owner  of  the  roots  will 
keep  them  until  the  |  winter  comes  and  the  tribe  have  a  winter 
ceremonial,  j 
1  Picking  Elderberries.  -You  know  |  the  way  of  making  various  kinds 
of  baskets.  The  basket  |  of  those  who  pick  elderberries  is  a  small- 
meshed  basket.1  .  .  .  |  In-  the  morning,  when  it  is  fine  weather,  the 
5  woman  takes  her  ||  hook,  her  cedar-bark  belt,  and  her  small-meshed  | 
large  basket,  which  she  carries  on  her  back,  and  she  goes  to  the  place 
where  elderberries  are  growing,  |  for  elderberries  grow  only  on  the  banks 
of  rivers.  There  the  |  woman  goes  who  picks  elderberries.  As  soon  as 
she  reaches  the  elderberry-bushes,  |  she  puts  there  her  baskets  on  the 

10  ground,  for  generally  she  has  two  ||  or  even  three  baskets  for  carrying 
elderberries.  She  takes  her  belt  |  and  puts  it  round  her  waist;  and 
after  doing  so,  she  takes  her  |  smallest  basket  for  elderberries  and 
hangs  it  in  front  of  her  body.  |  First  she  picks  off  the  berries  growing 


G5  LB£lats!e  xwfikluna.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wilxsaxs  lae  alex£ulesa.  Wa, 
la-inc  nirnakwa  qa£s  lii  laxes  tslawfmxElase  gox"dEmsa. 

\\':i ,  gil-mese  lag'aa  laxes  g"5kwaxs  lae  hex-'idaEm  moltodExs 
yixulalisaaxs  lae  lagalisa.  Wa,  la  lie  mogwalilElasa  xexEtsEma 
wtidanegwllases  g'okwe  qaxs  x'Elyak'aeda  x'okumaxs  tslatslslqwa- 

70  lacs  mExelasa  xix'5gwats!e  xexEtsEma.  Wa,  he£mis  lagilas  he 
mogwalelEma  wudanegwllasa  gokwe.  Wa,  laEm  lalaal  laxa 
tslawimxe  qo  ts!ets!ex£IdLe  g'okulotasa  x*ogwadasa  xokume. 
1  Picking  Elderberries  (Tslex'axa  tslex'ina). — Wa,  laEinLas  q!aLE- 
lax  gwegilasasa  lsxelaxa  oguqala  laElxa£ya.  Wa,  lie'mis  Iexe- 
lasa  ts!ex-axa  ts!ex"ineda  t!olt!oxsEme  lExaeya.'  .  .  .  Wa,2 
g'iPmese  eg-ldzalaxa  gaalaxs  lae  hex-£ichrma  tsiEdaq  ax£edxes 
5  gaLayowe  LE£wes  dEmlzEdzowe  wiiseg'anowa  LE£wes  t!olt!oxsEine 
walas  li'.xa'ya.  Wa,  la  oxLalaqexs  lae  laxa  tslenadaxa  ts.'exlna, 
yi\s  lex-a£mae  tslenadeda  ogwaga£yasa  wlwa.  Wa,  he-mis  lalaasa 
ts!e£nenoxwe  tslEdaqa.  Wa,  gil-mese  lag'aa  laxa  ts!ex'mEdzEXE- 
kwaliixs  lae    hanEmgaElsElaxes    laslxEla    qaxs  qlunalae  maltsEma 

10  loxs  yudux'sEmae  ts!enats!e  laElxa'ya.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  wuseg'a- 
nowe  qa£s  wiiseg-oyodes.  Wa,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes 
amayaga£yases  ts!e£nats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  nanayagEines.  Wa,  het!a 
g'il  ts!ex"£Itso£seda    banaaba£yas.     Wa,  gil£mese    qot!e    nanayagE- 

i  Continued  on  p. 155,  line  1.  •  Continued  from  p.  155,  line  18. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHINi;,    AND    FOOD-GATHERING  205 

below;  and  when  the  |  basket  hanging  on  the  front  of  her  body  is  full, 
she  pours  the  berries  into  the  large  basket;  ||  and  after  she  lias  puked  15 
off  from  the  bushes,  all  the  elderberries  growing  below  she  takes  the 
hook  and  pulls  down  the  elderberries  growing  on  the  upper  part  of 
the  |  bushes,  and  she  picks  them  off;  and  when  the  basket  hanging 
in  front  of  her  body  is  full,  |  she  pours  the  berries  which  she  has 
picked  into  the  large  |  basket  for  carrying  elderberries.  She  con- 
tinues doing  so  with  her  hook,  pulling  down  ||  the  berries  on  the  upper  20 
part  <>f  the  bushes.  After  all  the  \  baskets  have  been  filled  with 
elderberries,  she  ties  down  the  top,  for  they  are  j  all  heaping  full. 
After  doing  so,  she  carries  one  at  a  time  j  on  her  back,  and  she  goes 
to  and  fro,  carrying  them  down  the  river. 

Picking  Salal-Berries. — You  know  the  I  ways  how  baskets  are  made.     1 
They  use  a  large  small-meshed  |  basket  for  picking  salal-berries.     One 
basket  is  large,  |  and  the  next  one  is  medium-sized,  and  the  smallest 
kind  of  basket  is  carried  in  front  of  the  body.  ||  The  name  of  the  large    5 
basket  of  the  woman  is  "swab1  owing-basket."      and  the  next  basket 
is  called  ''middle-one;"  |  and  "front-basket"   is  the  name  of  the 
smallest  one.     In  the  morning,  when  it  is  clear,  the  woman  puts  |  her 
salal-berry  picking  baskets  one  into  the  other.     She  takes  her  belt 
and  puts  it  into  the  baskets,  and  she  takes  ||  goat-tallow  and  chews  it.  10 
As  soon  as  she  has  chewed  it,  she  puts  it  |  into  the  palm  of  her  right 


masexa  tslex'Inaxs  lae  guqasases  tslenanEine  laxa  £walase  lExa£ya. 
Wa,  g"tlemese  £\vTlg-ElEXLdwa  banaabtVyasa  tslex'niEsaxa  tslex'inas,  ],5 
lae  ax£edxes  gaLayowe  qa£s  gaLaxEles  laxa  ek  !ala  ts!enxLawesa 
ts!ex"niEse.  Wa,  he;"mis  la  tslenatsex.  Wa,  gib'Emxaawise  qotle 
nanayagEinasexs  lae  guqasases  tslenanEine  laxa  Ewalase  ts!ensts!es 
h:xarya.  Wa,  ax"sirmese  he  gweg'ilases  g"aLayowe  la  gai.axElas 
laxa  ek-!ala  ts!enxLawesa  ts!ex-mEse.  Wa,  gilnnese  £naxwa  la  20 
qoqutle  ts!ets!enats!as  laElxa£ya,  lae  t  lEmak'Eyindalaq  qaxs  £na- 
xwa:'raae  L!eL!ak"Emala.  Wa,  g'iPmese  gwala  lae  enal£nEmsg"E- 
mEmqaxs  lae  oxLalaqexs  lae  oxLiitosElaq  laxa  wa. 

Picking   Salal-Berries  (NEkwaxa  nEklule).     Wa,  laEmLas  -naxwa     ] 
qlaLElax  gwegilasasa  lExeliixa  lExa£ye.     Wa,  la  wllxsd  t!olt!oxsEme 
lEXEliisa  nEkwaxa  nEklule.     Wa,  he;misexs  £walasaeda  £nEmsgEme; 
wa,  la  heleda  £nEiusgEme;  wa,   he£misa  nanaagEmxa  amayaga£yas 
lExEliis.     Wa  heEm  LegEinsa  £walega£yasa  lEXEliisa  ts!Edaqe  nag'e.    5 
Wa,    la     lielomagEmx'Leda     mak'llaq.      Wa,    la    nanaagEmxxeda 
amayaga-'yas.     Wa,    giPmese  egidzalaxa    gaaliixs    lae    k!wak!uso- 
daleda  tslEdaqaxes  nEgwats!eLe  laElxa£ye.     Wii  fix£edxes  wiisega- 
nowe,  qa£s  gits  lodes  laxes  laElxa£ye.     Wii,  la  fix£edxa  yasEkwasox 
£mELxLox  qa£s  malex£wideq.    Wii,  g'iPmese  £wi£we1x-sexs  lae  axdz5xu-  1 0 
tsliindEs   laxes    kelk!ots!ana£ye.      Wii,    dziikots  laxes   gEmxoltsa- 


206  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.sb 

13  hand  and  rubs  it  with  the  left  |  hand.  When  it  is  all  over  her  hands, 
she  |  rubs  it  on  her  face,  so  that  a  thick  layer  of  tallow  is  on  her  j 

15  face,  and  so  that  the  mosquitoes  cannot  bite  through  it.  ||  This  is 
called  "tallow  sitting  on  the  face."  | 

After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  her  salal-picking  cedar-bark  hat  | 
ami  puts  it  on.  On  her  back  she  carries  the  baskets,  and  |  she  also 
takes  her  paddle   and  goes  down  to  the  beach  where  her  |  salal- 

20  berrying  canoe  is.  She  launches  it  and  goes  aboard.  ||  She  sits  in  the 
stern,  and  puts  the  baskets  into  the  canoe.  Then  |  she  paddles, 
going  to  an  island  where  salal-berries  grow,  for  these  are  the  only  j 
places  where  salal-berries  grow  well.  When  she  arrives  there,  she 
ties  a  stone  to  her  |  small  canoe,  carries  the  baskets  on  her  back,  and 
goes  into  the  woods  |  to  pick  salal-berries.     When  she  reaches  the  edge 

25  of  the  salal-berry  patch,  ||  she  puts  down  her  baskets,  takes  her  belt  | 
and  puts  it  round  her  waist.  After  that  she  takes  her  j  front-basket, 
the  smallest  one  of  her  baskets,  and  liangs  it  in  front  of  her  chest. 
She  puts  her  |  two  baskets  upright  on  the  ground,  |  and  she  picks  off 

30  the  salal-berries  and  puts  them  into  the  front-basket.  ||  When  it  is 
full,  she  pours  them  into  the  swallowing-basket,  the  largest  one  |  of  (lie 
salal-berry  baskets.  She  continues  picking  them  into  her  front-bas- 
ket. When  |  it  is  heapingfull,  she  pours  them  into  the  medium-sized 
basket;  and  ]  as  soon  as  it  is  full,  she  pours  them  into  the  swallowing- 

12  na£ye.  Wa,  g'il£mese  la  haniElgEdzE'we  lax  e£eyasasexs  lae  dzE- 
dzEk'Emts  laxes  goguma£ye.  Wa,  laEm  wakweda  yasEkwe  lax 
gdgiima£yas,    qa     kp!eses    laxsawe    qtekElasa    LesLEna    laq.     Wa, 

15  heEm  LegadEs   k!wak!uxumakwasa  yasEkwe. 

Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  iiEkumle  dEntsEm  LEtEinla 
qa£s  LEtEmdes.  Wa,  lit  oxLagintses  nenEgwats!e  laElxa'ya.  Wii, 
la  dagilx'Lalaxes  se£wayowe  qa's  la  lEiits'es  lax  hanedzasases 
nEgwats!eLe    xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  la  wI£.\"stEndEq   qa£s  lii   laxsEq. 

20  Wa,  laEm  klwaxLaqexs  lae  hangaalExsaxes  laElxa£ye.  Wii,  la 
sex£wid  qaJs  la  laxa  nEgwa.de  laxa  'makala  cjaxs  lex'amae  ex- 
qlwaxatsa  lEnEmx'de.  Wii,  g'il£mese  lag'aaxs  lae  mogwanodxes 
xwaxwagume.  Wa,  lii  oxLag'lntses  laElxa£yaxs  lae  aLe£sta  laxes 
nEgwasLaxa     iiEklule.     Wii,    g'il£mese     lEnxEiidxa    q!eq!axLaliixa 

25  iiEklulaxs  lae  oxLEg-a£saxes  laEh\a£ye.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxes  wusega- 
nowe  qa£s  wusex-£ides.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  nana- 
agEmexa  iimayaga£yas  IexeIi'Ls  cja£s  tek!iipEleq.  Wa,  lii  heli£liilax 
hanx'hats!ena£yasa  maltsEine  laElxa£ya  qa  alak'lales  t!et!axEsa. 
Wii,  lii    k!iilp!ldxa  nEk!ule  qa£s    lii    k!iilpts!alas  laxes  nanaagEme. 

30  Wii,  g"il£mese  qot!axs  lae  giiqasas  laxes  niige£xa  £waleg"a  -"\  i  is 
nEgwats!iis  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  hanal  k!idpts!alaxes  nanaagEme.  Wii, 
gilnaxwa'mese  qotlaxs  lae  guqEyints  laxes  nag'a£ye.  Wii,  g'll- 
£mese  la  LliikEmalaxs   lae   et!ed  giixts!alaxes    helomiigEme.     Wii, 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  '20  7 

basket;  and  |  when  that  is  also  full  and  the  berries  are  heaped  high, 
she  ||  picks  them  into  her  front-basket;  and  when  this  is  also  heaping  35 
full,  |  she  puts  it  on  the  ground.     Then  she  breaks  off  good  hemlock- 
branches  and  |  puts  them  on  the  opening  of   the  salal-baskets  all 
around;  and  when  |  she  has  put  them  in  standing  all  around   the 
salal-berry  baskets,  she  |  bends  down  the  ends  and  ties  the  hemlock- 
branches  down  in  this  way.1  ||  After  tying  them  down  with  cedar-bark  40 
rope,  which  is  on  the  basket,  she  |  puts  the  swallowing-basket  down 
into  her  small  canoe,  and  she  goes  back  and  |  carries  the  medium- 
sized  basket,  and  she  hangs  the  |  front-basket  over  her  chest,  and  she 
carries  one  on  each  side  as  she  ||  comes  out  of  the  woods,  and  puts  45 
them  in  the  bow  of  the  travelling-canoe.     As  soon  as  j  she  has  done 
this,  she  goes  aboard  her  travelling-canoe  and  paddles  |  home  to  her 
house.     As  soon  as  she  arrives  on  the  |  beach  of  her  house,  she  carries 
the  largest  |  basket  on  her  back  and  takes  it  up  into  her  ||  house.  50 
She  puts  it  down  at  a  place  not  too  near  the  fire.  |  She  goes  down 
again  to  the  other  two  berry-baskets,  and  she  carries  |  one  on  each  side 
as  she  walks  up,  in  the  same  way  as  she  had  done  when  she  came  out 
of  the  woods  |  when  she  picked  the  berries  on  the  island,  and  she 
puts  them  down.  | 

gil'Emxaawise   qot!axs   laxes    laena£yaxat!  L!ak"Emala,    wa,   laxas 
k!ulpts!6dxes    nanaagEme.     Wa,   g-ir-cEmxaawise   LlakEmalaxs  lae  35 
hangaElsaqexs    lae    L!Ex£Widxa     eke    qlwaxc    q!enEma.      Wa,    la 
qluxstEnts  lax  awe£stas  awaxsta£yases  nenEgwatsle.     Wii,  gfl^mese 
nvllala     q!waxtaakwa     yudux"sEme     nenExuts!ala      laElxa£ya     lae 
g\vagunaxbax'£idxa    oba£yasa    t!ak-Ema£ye  qlwaxa,  yixs    lae    gwal 
t!EinakEyintsa  nalame  dEnsEn    dEiiEma    laq.     Wa,  g'il£mese  £wi£la  40 
la  t!Emak'Eyaakuxs  lae  oxLag'Eutsa  nEgwats!e  nag'e  qaes  la  oxle- 
gaalExsas  laxes  ya£yats!e  xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  la  xwelaxsaga  qa£s 
lii    oxLag'Entsa    helomagEme     nEgwats.'a.      Wii,    lii    tEk!upi:laxes 
nanaagEme  nEgwats'.axs  g-axae  tetEkwasElaxa  maltsEmaxs  gaxae 
laltlala  qa£s   hanag'Eyodes    lax    ag-iwa£yases    ya£yats!e.     Wa,   gil-  45 
£mese    gwalExs    lae    laxs    laxes  ya£yats!e.     Wa,  lii  gaxe  sex£wida 
qa£s   gaxe    nii£nakwa    laxes   g"5kwe.      Wii,    gil£rnese    lag'alis    lax 
L!Ema£isases  g'okwaxs    lae  hex'£idaEm    oxLE^ilExsaxa    £walegEyas 
lEXEliisxa  nag'a£ye  qa£s  lii  oxLosdesElaq  qa£s    la    oxLaeLElaq    laxes 
g'okwe.     Wa,    lii    oxLEg'alllas    laxa    k-!ese   nExwala  lax  lEgwilas.  50 
Wa,  lii  etEnts!es  liixa  maltsEme   nEgwats!e    laElxa£ya,  laxae  tetE- 
kwasElaqexs  giixae  lasdesEla  laxes  gwalaasaqexs    g'axae   laltlalas 
laxes  nEgwasde  laxa  niEkala.     Wa,  laxae  hanEmg'alrlas. 

'  That  is,  the  branches  are  put  in  between  the  berries  and  the  basket,  tips  up,  and  are  then  bent  over 
from  all  sides  toward  the  middle  and  tied  together  so  that  they  cover  the  berries. 


208  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Leth.  ANN.  86 

1  Picking  Currants'  (qlesena). — The  same  baskets  |  are  used  by  the 
women  to  pick  currants  as  are  used  when  picking  salal-berries,  |  and 
there  are  three  of  them.  When  the  woman  sees  that  the  weather 
is  fine  in  the  morning,  she  |  takes  her  baskets  and  her  cedar-bark 
5  belt  ||  and  her  cedar-bark  hat,  and  puts  the  baskets  on  her  hack.  | 
Then  she  puts  on  her  cedar-bark  hat  and  goes  out  to  the  place  where  | 
the  currant  bushes  grow.  As  soon  as  she  gets  there,  she  puts  down  | 
her  currant-picking  baskets.   She  takes  her  cedar-bark  |  beltand  puts  it 

10  around  her  waist.  After  doing  so,  she  takes  ||  her  front-basket,  hangs  it 
in  front  of  her  chest,  hung  from  a  strap  around  her  neck.  |  She  pinches 
off  the  stems  of  the  currants,  and  |  breaks  them  off  and  throws  them 
into  her  front-basket.  When  it  is  |  fuli,  she  pours  it  into  the  swallow- 
ing-basket.  Then  she  goes  on  pinching  off  |  more  currants  at  the  lower 
ends  of  the  stems.     She  pinches  them  oif  and  throws  them  into  the  || 

15  front-basket  for  currant-picking:  and  when  it  is  full,  she  goes  back  and  j 
pours  them  on  top  of  those  which  she  poured  in  first.  When  they  are 
level  with  the  top  of  the  basket,  |  she  stops  pouring  them  into  the  swal- 
low ing-basket.  She  does  the  same  as  she  did  before  with  the  medium 
sized  basket;  |  and  when  it  is  also  level  with  the  top,  she  stops  pour- 
ing them  in,  |  and  she  also  fills  her  front  basket;  and  when  this  is 

20  full,  ||  she  gets  skunk-cabbage  leaves,  which  she  puts  as  a  covering 
over  the  ■  three  currant-baskets.     When  they  are  ah  covered  with  | 

1  Picking  Currants'  (Qlesiixa  q!esena). — Wa,  heEmxat!  q'edza- 
tslesa  tslEdaqaxa  qlesenes  IexeI&xs  laxde  nEkwaxa  uEklula  yu- 
dux"sEme  laelxa-ya.  Wa,  g'iPmese  ek  tedzfdaxa  gaalaxs  lac  he- 
x-£ida£ma  ts'.Edaqe  ax£edxes  laElxa£ye  LE£wis  dEndzEdzowe  wuse- 
5  g'anowa  LE£wis  dEntsBme  LEtEmla.  Wa,  la  oxLalaxes  lai'.lxa- 
£yaxs  lae  LEtEmtses  dEiitsEme  LEtEmlaxs  lae  qas£id  qa£s  lii  lax 
qlwaxasasa  qlesmEses.  W&,  gil£mese  lag'aa  laqexs  lae  hang'a- 
Elsaxes  q!eq!edzats!e  laElxa-cya.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  dEndzEdzowe 
wuseg'anowa  qa£s  wusej;'oyodes.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax:ed- 

10  xes  nanaagEme  lnxaya  i|a£s  tek!upEleqexs  lae  qEnxalax  aoxLaasas 
qa£s  lii  eplExLax  6xi.a£yas  yisx'Enasa  qlesena  qa£s  epiiliqexs  lae 
epts!alas  laxes  q!edzats!e  nanaagEm  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gil£mese  qo- 
t!axs  lae  guxtslots  laxes  niige.  Wa,  la  xwelaqa  ep!ExLax-£idEX 
oxLa£yasa  y!sx"Enasa  qlesena  qa£s  epaliqexs  lae  eptslalas  laxaaxes 

15  q!edzats!e  nanaagEm  lExa£ya.  Wii,  g'll£mese  qot!axs  laaxat  gnc^E- 
ytnts  laxes  g  ilxde  guxtsloya.  Wii,  gll£mese  £nEmak'Eyaxs  lae  gwal 
guqEytndalaxa  neg"a£ye.  Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex'£idxa  helomagEme. 
Wa,  g  ih'Emxaawise  'nEmakEyaxs  lae  gwal  guqEyindalaq.  Wa, 
laxae    c[aqut!aaxes   nanaagEm    lExa£ya.     Wa,  gll£mese  qotlaxs  lae 

20  map  led  laxa  k!Ek"!aok!wa  qa£s  ts  !ak"Eylndales  lax  okuya£yasa 
q!eq!edzats!e  yuduxusEm  laElxa£ya.     Wa,  gll£mese  £naxwa  la  ts!e- 

i  Ribes  petiolare  Dougl. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  209 

skunk-cabbage  leaves,  sbe  breaks  off  straight  twigs  of  huckleberry-  22 
bushes,  |  and  pushes  four  of  them  through  the  top  of  each  of  the 
currant- 1  baskets.  They  are  put  across  over  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves;  || 
and  after  she  has  done  so,  it  is  this  way:       ^+— i — r\    This  repre-  25 
sents  the  mouth  of  a  |   currant-basket;  and    /  j  when  they 

are  turned  on  their  sides,  |  none  of  the  cur-   I  y    rants  drop 

out  through  the  |  skunk-cabbage  covering,  ^ — \-^  because  the 
huckleberry-twigs  that  have  been  pushed  through  |  hold  them  in 
tight.  First  she  carries  the  large  basket  out  on  her  back  ||  and  she  30 
carries  it  into  her  |  house,  and  she  goes  and  puts  it  down  in  a  cool 
corner  of  the  house.  Then  |  she  goes  back  and  brings  out  of  the 
woods  the  medium-sized  currant-basket,  |  and  she  takes  it  into  her  [ 
house.  Then  she  puts  it  down  next  to  the  large  basket.  Then  || 
she  goes  back  and  brings  the  currant-basket  which  is  carried  in  front.  35 
She  |  carries  it  out  of  the  woods  and  brings  it  into  her  house  and 
puts  it  down  |  where  the  others  are.  | 

Picking  Huckleberries.1 — As  soon   as  this  (the  hook  for  picking  1 
berries)  is  finished,  (the  woman)  |  gets  ready  to  go  and  shake  off 
huckleberries  |  in    the    morning.  ...  In    the    morning,    when    day 
comes,  |  she  arises  and  eats  a  light  breakfast.     After  doing  so,  ||  she  5 
takes  her  two  huckleberry-baskets  and  her  paddle  |  and  her  mat  to 

ts!ak'Eyaaxusak'!Ek'!aok!waxs  lae  LlEX£wIdxa  naEiiqEla  gwadEmsa  22 
qa£s  la  l  lEnqEmstilasa  maemotslaqe  lax  awaxsta£yasa  q  leq  ledzats  !e 
LaElxa£ya.     Wa,   laEm  ek'  ladzEiichilaxa  ts!ets!ak"Ema£ye   k'lEk'lao- 
k!wa.  Wa,  lag'a  gwiilaxslae  gwala  {fig.).  Wa,  hebolaEin la  awaxstesa  25 
q  leq  ledzats  !e  laElxa£ya.     Wa,  g'll£mese  la  waxEni  la  qox£witsa  qle- 
q  ledzats  !e    laElxa-ya    qaxs    k' le/isae    la  gwex-£Idaas  la  lawaye  ts  le- 
ts !ak"Eya£yas  k'lEklaoklwa  qaeda  la  Elalayoseda  la  LlEnqEinxsfda 
naEiiqEla  gwadEniEsa.     Wa,  laheEingil  5xLEx-£its6£seda  q  ledzats  !e 
niige    lExa£ya,  qa£s    giixe    oxLoltlalaq    qa£s    la    oxLaeLElaq    laxes  30 
gokwe,  qa£s  la    oxLEgalilaq  lax  wudanegwllases    golave.     Wa,  la 
xwelaxsag'a     qa£s     liixat!     5xLEx-£ldxa     helomagEme     qledzatsle 
lExa£ya,    qa£s    gaxexat!     oxLoltlalaq,    qass    lii    oxLaeLElaq    laxes 
gokwe,  qa£s  la    oxLEg'aldas    lax    la   hanelatses   nag'a£ye.     Wa,  lii 
xwelaxsag'a,  qaes  la  6xLEX'£idxa  nanaagEme  q ledzats !ii,  qaJs  g'axe  35 
oxLoltlalaq,  qa£s  la  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  g'okwe.     Wa,  la  oxLEgalllaq 
lax  haxhanelasases  g'ilx'de  hanEmg'alilEma. 

Picking  Huckleberries.1 — Wa,  gIPmese   gwalamasqexs   lae    hex£i-  1 
daEm  xwanal'Ida,  qa£s  lalag-Il  klElal  laxa  k'lEladaxa  gwadEme,  qo 
£nax-£IdElxa   gaala     .     .     .     Wa,    gih'mese    £nax-£Idxa   gaalaxs  lae 
gag-usta,  qaxs  xa,L!Ex-£ide  gaaxstalax,£ida.     Wa,  g'tl-mese  gwalExs 
lae  dax£idxes  maltsEme  klek'lElatsle  laElxa£ya   LE£wis  se£wayowe;  5 
wa,  he£mises   klwaye    le£wa£ya;    LE£wis  dEntsEme  LEtEmla,  LE£wis 

'Continued  from  p.  140,  line  10. 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 14 


210  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.35 

7  sit  on,  her  cedar-bark  hat  and  her  |  cedar-bark  belt.  She  carries 
them  all  as  she  is  going  down  to  the  |  beach  to  the  place  where  she  left 
her  canoe  that  she  is  to  use  when  she  goes  huckleberrying.  |  She  goes 
aboard,  sits  down  in  the  stern,  and  paddles,  and  she  goes  to  the  || 

10  huckleberry-patch  on  an  island,  for  that  is  where  huckleberries  grow,  | 
that  are  good  to  be  picked,  and  the  women  go  there  for  picking  |  huckle- 
berries. As  soon  as  she  arrives  there,  she  puts  out  the  anchor-line  | 
of  her  canoe.     She  takes  her  belt  |  and  puts  it  around  her  waist,  over 

15  her  blanket;  ||  and  after  doing  so,  she  takes  her  two  |  baskets  and 
puts  the  smaller  basket  into  the  |  larger  one.  She  carries  them  on  her 
hack,  |  placing  the  forehead-strap  over  her  forehead.     She  puts  on 

20  her  |  hat,  and,  after  doing  so,  she  goes  out  of  her  ||  canoe  into  the 
thicket,  for  there  are  always  many  |  salal-berry-bushes  outside  of  the 
huckleberry-bushes.  When  |  she  reaches  the  huckleberry-bushes,  she 
puts  down  her  |  baskets  and  hangs  the  medium-sized  basket  |  on  her 

25  chest,  and  she  goes  to  the  place  where  she  sees  many  ||  huckleberries 
on  the  bushes.  She  stands  under  them  and  bends  them  down  into 
the  |  basket  and  shakes  off  the  |  huckleberries  into  it.  As  soon  as 
the  huckleberries  fall  into  the  basket,  |  she  strikes  the  bushes  with 
the  right  hand,  and  all  the  |  huckleberries  fall  oil'  into  the  basket. 


7  dEnedzowe  wtiseg'anowa.  Wa,  la  'wFlEnkulaqexs  lae  lEntsles  laxa 
LlEma£ise  lax  hanedzasasesk'!ElEt!aats!axagwadEme  xwaxwaguma. 
Wa,  la  laxs  laqexs  lae    k  IwaxEEndqexs   lae  sex£wida,  qa£s  la  laxes 

10  k-'.Eladiixa  gwadEine  laxa  £mEk,iila  qaxs  heniEnalaEmae  heladxa 
k-  !ek'  '.EldEinsaxa  gwadEme.  Wa,  he'mis  lalaasa  tstedaqexes  klsl- 
dEmsaxa  gwadEme.  Wii,  gil£mese  lag'aa  laqexs  lae  qlEldzanodxes 
k'!ElEt!aats!axa  gwadEme  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  la  dax£Idxes  wuse- 
(r-aaowe  qa£s  qEnoyodes  laxes  qEnase  lax  okiiya£yases  nEx£una£ye. 

15  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  dax£Idxes  maltsEme  k'!elc!Elats!e 
laElxa£ya  qa£s  hunts  lodeses  helomagEme  kMElatsIe  lExa  laxa 
£walase  nage  k-!Elats!e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  6xLEx£Idqexs  lae  qEx'I- 
walaxa  qlalEyowe.  Wa,  la  LEtEmtses  k'lElEmlaxa  gwadEme 
LEtEmla.      Wa,    gil£mese    gwalExs    lae    lalta    laxes  IclEJEt.'aatsle 

20  xwaxwaguma,  qa£s  la  lalaqa  laxa  q!waxolkwala,  c^axs  keniEnala- 
£mae  lenokiile  Llasalaasa  k'lEldEmsaxa  gwadEme.  Wa,  g11£mese 
lag'aa  laxa  gwadEmdzExEkQlaxs,  lae  hang-aElsaxes  k-!ek-!Elats!e 
laElxa£ya.  Wit,  lit  ax£wults!odxa  helomagEme  lExa£ya,  qa£s 
teklubodesexs  lae  qas£ida  qa£s  la   laxes   la  dogrd  qlexLulaxa  gwa- 

25  dEme.  Wa,  lii  iiixLElsaqexs  lae  gElex£w!dEq,  qa£s  lii  gElexuts!ots 
laxes  k-!Elats!e  helomagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  he£mis  lit  k' lElillatsexa 
gwadEme.  Wii,  giPmese  gwal  texts laleda  gwadEmaxs  lae  LEqEl- 
geses  h elk- !olts !ana£ye  laxa  gwiidEmse.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wi£laxalts !a- 
wa  o-wadEme    laxa  k'!Elats!e    helomagEme    lExa£ya    lae  niEx£edxa 


mas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  211 

Then  she  lets  go  of  the  ||  huckleberry-bush,  as  there  are  no  more  30 
berries  on  it.     She  goes  to  another  bush  with  |  many  huckleberries, 
and  she  does  as  she  did  with  the  |  first  one.     When  the  small  basket  is 
full,  she  |  pours  the  huckleberries  that  have  been  shaken  off  into  her 
larger  |  basket,  and  she  does  as  she  did  before  to  the  other  one,  ||  and  35 
she  shakes  off  the  huckleberries  into  her  small  basket ;  and  when  |  the 
large  basket  is  all  full  and  also  the  small  one,  |  she  takes  skunk- 
cabbage  leaves  and  spreads  them  over  the  two  |  baskets.     She  ties 
down  the  top,  and  |  after  doing  so,  she  carries  the  larger  basket  on 
her  back  and  ||  the  small  one  in  front  of  her  body.     Then  she  goes  40 
home.  I 

Picking  Salmon-Berries. — When   |    the    salmon-berries    ripen,    and  l 
when  the  man  wants  to  give  a  |  salmon-berry  feast,  he  engages  many  | 
women  to  go  picking  salmon-berries.     Then    they  all  take  their  || 
hooked  salmon-berry  picking  boxes  and  their  front-  |  baskets  to  pick  5 
the  berries  in,  which  are  used  besides  the  hooked  boxes  for  holding 
the  picked  berries. 1  .  .  .  \ 

Now 2  the  hired  women  take  the  front-  |  baskets  and  the  hooked 
boxes  along,  for  each  of  them  has  besides  (a  box)  |  a  basket.     They 
also  take  their  paddles  and  go  down  ||  to  the  beach  in  front  of  their  10 
houses.     Then  they  go  into  their  |  small  canoes,  and  generally  there 


gwadEmEsaxs  lae  lobEXLala,  qa£s  la  Lex£wid  laxa  ogiVlamaxat!  30 
q!exx;ilaxa  gwadEme.  Wa,  la  aEmxaawise  naqEmg  iltowexes 
gilx'de  gweg"ilasa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  qot!e  helomagEmasexs  lae 
giiqosases  k'telanEme  gwadEm  laxes  £walase  nag'e  k'telatsle 
lExa£ya.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  tiEm  naqEmgiltoxes  gale  gweg'ilasaxs 
lae  et!ed  k!Elts!odxes  helomagEme  k'lElatsle  lExa£37a.  Wii,  gfl- 35 
£mese  £nfixwa  qoqutle  6walase  nag'e  lExiis  LE-wa  helomagEmaxs 
lae  ;lx£ed  laxa  k'!lk'!aok!wa  qa£s  LEpE}rindes  laxes  maltsEme  gwe- 
gwadatsle  laElxa;ya.  Wa,  la  tlEinak'EyindEq.  Wii,  gil-mese 
gwalExs  lae  oxLitgintsa  £walasagawaeye  gwadatsla.  Wii,  laLa 
tek'.iipElaxa  amayagawa£ye  gwadatsle   lExa£yaxs  gaxae  nii£nakwa.  40 

Picking  Salmon-Berries    (Hanisaxa  qlEmdzEkwe). — Wa,  he£maaxs  1 
lae  L!oL!Ep!Enxsa  qlEmdzEkwe;  wa,  giPmese  q!EmdzEkwelaexsdeda 
bEgwanEmaxa  c[!EmdzEkwe,  yixs  helae.     Wii,  la  helaxa  q!Eyokwe 
tslEdaqa    qa    liis    hanisaq.      Wa,    hex-£ida£mese    £mixwa    ax£edxes 
gegaLEkwe  hehEmyats !iixa  qlEmdzEkwe.     Wa,  he£misa  nanaagEme  5 
lExa£ya.     Wa,  heEin  hanodzesa  giiLEkwe  h;imyats!es.     .     .* 

Wa,2la£me  £naxwa£ma he£lanEme  tsedacj dagilxLalaxes nanaagEme 
lExa£ya  LE£wis  gaLEkwTexa  £nal£nEmsgEme,  yixs  a£mae  hunosElaxa 
nanaagEme  lExa£ya;  wa,  he£mises  sesE£wayowe,  qa£s  la  hoqiintsles 
lax  L!Ema£isases   gigokwe,  qa£s  la  hogiixsEla  laxes    hehEmyats !e-  10 
Laxa    qlEmdzEkwe   xwaxuxwaguma.     Wa,  la    q!iinala    memema£l- 

'  Here  follows  the  description  of  the  berrying-box,  p.  140,  line  17,  to  p.  141,  line  43. 
'Continued  from  p.  141,  line  34. 


212  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

12  are  |  two  in  each  canoe  paddling;  and  they  are  going  with  the  bow 
ahead  to  where  they  know  |  many  salmon-berry  hushes  grow.  They 
do  not  all  wish  to  keep  together, —  ]  the  whole  number  (of  women). 
As  soon  as  they  come  to  a  place  where  they  are  going  to  pick  salmon 

15  berries,  ||  they  go  ashore  out  of  their  small  canoes,  and  |  take  their 
baskets  and  hooked  boxes  along.  |  The  hooked  box  is  carried  on  the 
back,  and  in  front  of  their  bodies  hang  |  the  baskets.  They  have 
tied  the  small  canoes  |  ashore  by  means  of  the  anchor-line.     After 

20  this  has  been  done,  they  go  back  to  the  place  where  the  ||  salmon- 
berry  bushes  grow;  and  when  they  come  to  a  place  where  there  are 
many  salmon-berries  ]  on  the  bushes,  they  put  down  the  hooked  box 
so  that  it  stands  upright,  |  and  they  begin  to  pick.  They  put  the 
berries  into  the  [  front-basket:  and  when  it  is  full,  they  pour  the 
salmon-berries  which  they  have  |  picked  into  the  hooked  box.     They 

25  do  so  every  time  ||  when  they  iill  the  front-basket.  When  the  box 
is  full,  |  they  fill  the  front-basket  too;  and  as  soon  as  it  [  is  full,  they 
carry  it  on  their  backs  to  the  hooked  boxes.  Then  they  |  put  them 
into  the  small  canoe,  they  go  |  aboard,  and  go  home  to  their  houses. 

30  As  soon  as  they  arrive  ||  at  the  beach  of  the  house,  they  hang  the 
front- 1  basket  in  front  of  the  body.  The  man  who  engaged  them  goes 
down  to  the  beach  |  and  carries  up  the  hooked  boxes,  and  he  pours 
the  |  berries  into  an  empty  oil  box.  | 

12  ts!alaxs  lae  sexewida.  Wa,  la£me  heEm  gwamag'iwales  q!ale 
q!eq!adEX  qlwalmEse  laxes  k!ets!ena£ye  helqlala  q!ap!ala  laxes 
£waxaase.     Wa,  g'il£mese  lag'aa  laxes  hehEmyasLaxa  q  lErndzEkwaxs 

15  lae  hoxewultax"daexwa  laxes  hehEmdzELalats  !e  xwaxuxwagunia,  qa£s 
dedagilxLalexes  nanaagEme  lExaeya  LE'wis  gaLEkwe  hamyatslexa 
q!EindzEkwe.  Wa,  lil  GxLalaxa  gaLEkwe  yixs  laaLal  tetekliipElaxes 
nanaagEme  lExa£yaxs  lae  mogwanodxes  heliEmdzELalatsle  xwaxu- 
xwagunia.    Wa,  g'iPmese    gwalExs   lae    aLe^sta  laxa  qlwahnEdzE- 

20  xF.kula.  Wa,  giPmese  laqa  laxa  q!eq!axxalaxa  qlEmdzEkwe 
qlwalmEsa,  lae  oxLEg'aElsaxes  gaLEkwe.  Wa,  aemise  la  nEngatols 
hansaxs  lae  hamseida.  Wa,  la-me  hamts  lalasa  qlEmdzEkwe  laxes 
nanaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g'il£mese  qotlaxs  lae  guxts!otses  ham- 
yanEme  qlEmdzEk11  laxa    gaLEkwe.     Wa,  la  hex'saEm    gwegilaxs 

25  lanaxwae  qotles  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g-il£mese  qot!e  gai.E- 
kwasexs  lae  qaqotlaaxes  mxnaagEine  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
qot!axs  lae  oxLEg'ilsaxes  q!EmdzEgwats!e  gaLEkwa,  qa£s  g'axe 
uxi.EgaalExsas  laxes  hamdzELalats  !e  xwaxwagiime.  Wa,  lax'da^xwe 
laxs  laqexs   gaxae    na£naku   laxes   g-okwe.     Wa,  g"il£mese   lag'alis 

30  lax  L!Emaeisases  g-6kwaxs  lae  lex'aEm  teklubayes  nanaagEme 
lExa£ya,  qaes  aok!unaaq.  Wa,lada  helanEmaq  lEnts!es  laxa  LlEma- 
£ise,  qaes  la  5xx5sdesaxa  q!EmdzExuts!ala  gaLEkwa,  qa£s  la  gflxts!otsa 
qlEmdzEkwe  laxa  dEngwatslEmote. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  213 

Picking  Crabapples.  —The  same  kind  |  of  large  swallowing-basket  1 
and  the  medium-sized  basket  |  and  the  front-basket  are  used  by  the 
woman  for  picking  |  crabapples,  when   she   goes  to  pick  them  at 
Knight  Inlet  and  Gwa£ye£,  for  these  are  the  only  places  where  large  || 
crabapples  grow  that  are  not  rotten.     They  are  not  rotten  inside,  |  5 
and  therefore  the  women  who  pick  crabapples  go  to  these  places,  for 
they  are  not  [  like  the  crabapples  of  the  islands,  which  are  rotten 
outside  |  and  inside.     They  only  become  harder  when  |  the  women 
boil  them.     Therefore  they  pick  the  crabapples  ||  that  I  have  men-  10 
tioned.     The  season  for  picking  crabapples   is  |  when  they  are  still 
green.     The  woman  who- works  on  crabapples  watches  j  until  they 
are  large  enough.     When  they  are  large  enough,  |  the  woman  gets 
ready,  takes  the  |  three  baskets  which  I  have  named,  ||  the  paddle,  15 
and  the  punting-pole,  her  cedar-bark  belt,  |  and  her  cedar-bark  hat. 
and  goes  aboard  her  small  |  canoe.     She  puts  her  baskets  aboard, 
and  j  the  belt  around  her  waist.     She  wears  her  |  cedar-bark  hat; 
and  when  she  is  ready,  she  stands  in  the  ||  bow  of  the  small  canoe,  20 
takes  the  punting-pole  |  and  punts  up  river  stern  first,  when  she  is 
poling  up  the  river  at  Knight  Inlet.  |  When  she  comes  to  a  place 
where  there  are  many  crabapple  trees,  she  puts  ashore  J  and  steps 


Picking  Crabapples  (TsElxwaxa  tsElxwe). — Yixs  h£emaaxat!  tsEl-  1 
£wats!eda  e\valase  nitge  lExa£ya  LEewa  helomagEme  lExa£jTa.     WiL, 
he£misi.eda    nanaagEme    lExa'va,    visa    tstedaqaxs    lae    tsElxwaxa 
tsElxwe   lax    Dzawade    lo£    Gwa£ye,    qaxs  lEX'a£mae   awawadxox 
tsElxwex  loxs  k'lesae  qlulqultsEma.     Wa,  laxae   k!es  q!ulq!uleqa;  5 
wa,  lag'ilas  £nEmeyastayaatsa  tsetsEpwenoxwe  ts!edaqa,  yixs  k!esae 
he  gwex'se  tsElxwase  tsElxwasoxda  £maEmkal;ixs  q  !weq  !filq  lultsE- 
mae    loxs    q!weq!ulq!uleqae.       Wa,    la    asm    \i  !(?]>  !EtsEnvx-£IdExs 
wax'aeda  ts!Edaqe  q!olaq.     Wa,  he'inis  lagilas  lexaEm  tsEhwasEn 
lax'de  Le.LEqElasE£wa,  yixs  he£maaxat!  tsElxwaxdEmxa  tsElxwaxs  10 
he£mae    ales  lEnlEnxsEma.     Wa    lex'a£mes  iiEia  doqwalasofsa  tsEl- 
tsEhwenoxwe  tsedaq,  qa  aw5x'"widesa  tsElxw£e.    Wii,  giPmese  iiwox- 
£wic1exs  laeda  ts!Edac[  hex'idaEm  xwanaHda.     Wa,  la£me  ax£edxa 
yuduxusEme    laElxa\yaxEn     lax'de    LeLEcjElasEEwa.     Wii,    he^misa 
se£wayowe  LE£wa  dzomegale.     Wa,  he£mises  wuseg'anowe  dEiidzE-  15 
dzowa  LE£wis  dEntsEme  LEtEmla.     Wa,  la  laxs  laxes  tsElxiiLElats  !e 
xwaxwagiima.      Wa,    axealExsaxes     laElxa£ye,    qa£s     wusex-£ideses 
dEndzEdzowe     wuseg'anowa     laxes      gwalElaene£me     LEtEmalaxes 
dEntsEme  LEtEmla.     Wa,  g'ih'mese  gwalExs  lae    Laxiigiwex    ag'i- 
wa£yases  tsElxuLElats!e  xwaxwagumaxs  lae  dax-£Idxes  dzomeg'ale,  20 
qa£s  tenox£wide  hE'"xudzEgEmalaxs  lae  tenostala  lax  was  Dzawade. 
Wa,  g'il'mese  lagaa  lax  tsElxuniEdzEXEkulaxs  lae   t lenogwaElsaxes 
tsElxiiLElats !e  xwaxwagumaxs  lae  laltawa,  qaes  moxulsex  6ba£yases 


214  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  Ann.  35 

out  of  the  canoe.     She  ties  up  the  end  of  her  |  anchor-line   (some 

25  Indians  call  it  the  tying  line).  ||  After  she  has  done  so,  she  carries  the 
three  |  baskets  on  her  back,  one  inside  the  other;  and  she  carries 
them  along,  looking  for  a  tree  |  with  many  crabapples.  Then  she 
puts  down  her  |  large  basket  and  takes  out  the  second  basket,  | 

30  which  she  also  puts  down,  and  takes  out  the  front-basket.  ||  This  she 
hangs  in  front  of  her  body  and  picks  crab-apples,  |  picking  them  off  in 
bunches.  She  puts  them  into  her  |  front-basket;  and  when  that  is 
full,  she  pours  it  |  into  the  large  basket.  Then  she  goes  back  and 
picks  off    more  |    crabapples  into  her  front-basket;    and  when  it  is 

35  full,  ||  she  pours  them  again  into  the  large- basket.  She  continues  | 
doing  this;  and  when  the  large  basket  is  full,  |  she  does  the  same  with 
the  medium-sized  basket;  and  when  that  also  is  full,  |  she  picks  into 
her  front-basket;   and  when  that  is  also  full,  |  she  carries  the  large 

40  basket  on  her  back,  and  pours  its  contents  ||  into  the  small  canoe,  in 
case  there  are  many  crabapples  ]  on  the  trees;  and  she  also  pours 
the  other  basket  into  the  canoe,  |  and  she  goes  on  picking  apples  into 
her  front-basket,  and  |  she  does  as  she  was  doing  before.     When  | 

45  the  three  baskets  are  full,  she  carries  the  ||  large  basket  on  her  back 
into  the  |  small  canoe.  She  goes  back  and  carries  the  medium-sized  | 

q!Eldzana£ye,  yixs  Leqalaeda  waokwe  baklumas  mogwana£ye,  laxa 

25  q!Eldzana£ye.  Wa,  g"n£mese  gwalExs  lae  5xLEx-£idxes  yuduxusEme 
laElxexs  k!wak!Qsalae,  qa£s  la  oxLayak'Elaq,  qa£s  la  aliixa  alak-!ala 
la  qlexLalaxa  tsElxwe  tsElxumEsa.  Wa,  ex-emese  hang-aElsaxes 
nag'ae  £walas  lExaeya,  qa£s  hanoltslodexa  helomagEme  lExa£ya. 
Wa,  laxae  hangaElsaqexs  lilaxat!  hanoltslodxa  nanaagEme  lExa£ya. 

;;0  Wa,  he'mis  la  tekluboyosexs  lae  tsElx£w!dxa  tsElxwe.  Wa, 
laEmxae  eplExxax  £nal£nEmxLalaena£yas,  qa£s  la  eptslalas  laxes 
tsEl£wats!e  nanaagEm  lExa£ya.  Wa,  giPmese  qot!axs  lae  guxtslots 
laxes  £walase  nag'e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  et!ed  la  epts!alax£Idaxaasa 
tsElxwe  laq  laxes  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.     Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  q5t!axs 

35  laaxat!  et!ed  guqasas  laxes  £walase  nag-e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  ax-sa£mese 
he  gweg'ilaq.  Wa,  gil£mese  qotleda  £walase  nag-e  lExasexs  lae 
heEmxat !  gwex-£Idxa  helomagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gil£mese  qot !axa- 
axs  lae  epts!alaxes  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g"il£mese  qot!axaaxs 
lae  5xxEx,£ldxes  £walase  nag'e   lExa£ya,  qa£s   la  gux£alExsaq  laxes 

40  tsElxuLElats  !e  xwaxwagiima,  yixs  qlenEmae  tsEltsElxuxxawa£yasa 
tsetsElxumEse.  Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  gux£alExsElaxa  waokwe  laELxa- 
£ya.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  epts!alax-£Idxes  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa, 
laEmxae  aEm  naqEmgiltEwexes  g-ilx-de  gweg-ilasa.  Wa,  g-il£Em- 
xaawise  £naxwa  qoqutle    yuduxusEme   laElxesexs   lae    oxLEx-£rdxes 

45  ewa,lase  niige  lExas,  qa£s  gaxe  oxLEg-aalExsaq  laxes  tsElxiiLElats !e 
xwaxwagiima.      Wa,    laxae     aedaaqa     6xLEx,£Idxes     helomagEme 


boas]  HUNTING,    FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  215 

.basket,  while  she  is  carrying  the  front-basket  in  front  of  her  body.  47 
When  |  all  the  baskets  have  been  put  into  the  canoe,  she  steps  into 
the  |  bow  of  the  small  canoe,  takes  the  paddle,  ||  pushes  the  canoe  50 
off  shore,  and  paddles.     She  goes  down  stern  first,  |  drifting  down  the 
river.     As  soon  as  she  arrives  in  front  of  her  |  house,  she  goes  ashore, 
and  then  her  (  husband  goes  to  meet  her,  and  carries  on  his  back  the 
large  |  basket  with  crabapples  up  the  beach  and  into  his  house.  || 
Then  he  puts  it  down.     He  spreads  out  a  new  mat;  and  when  |  that  55 
is  done,  he  pours  the  crabapples  on  to  it.     When  the  basket  is   | 
emptied,  he  goes  back,  carrying  it  down  on  his  back,  and  he  gives  it 
to  his  wife;  j  and  he  carries  up  the  medium-sized  basket,  which  he 
also  I  carries  on  his  back,  going  up  the  beach,  and  he  goes  and  car- 
ries it  into  his  house.     Then  ||  he  pours  the  crabapples  on  the  mat  at  60 
the  place  to  which  he  had  carried  the  first  |  crabapples;  and  when 
this  is  done,  he  goes  down  again,  |  carrying  the  empty  basket  on  his 
back.     He  gives  it  |  to  his  wife,  who  fills  it  with  crabapples,  and  also 
the  large  |  basket.     The  large  basket  has  already  been  tilled  in  the 
canoe  ||  when  he  arrives.     Then  he  |  carries  it  on  his  back  up  the  65 
beach  into  the  house,  and  |  he  puts  it  down.     Then  he  carries  on  his 
back  the  medium-sized   |  basket,  he  carries  it  up  and  puts  it  down   | 


lExa£ye  laxes  tek!iipElaena£yaxes  nanaagEme  lExaeya.    Wa,gil£mese  47 
£wilg'aalExs    lax    tsEixuLElatslas   xwaxwagumxsexs    lae    laxsa    lax 
agi£wa£yases   tsElxiiLE£lats!e   xwaxwagumaxs   lae   dax-£Idxes  se£wa- 
yowe,  qa£s  q!otElsesexs  lae  sex£wula.     Wa,  la£me  liE£x"dzEgEmalas  50 
g'axae     yolala     laxa    wa.     Wa,     giPmese    lag'aa    lax    nEgEtlases 
g'okwaxs   lae   £nEmsalisa.      Wa,  g'il£mese    ;iiEmsalisExs   lae  la/wii- 
nEins     lalalaq,     qa£s     oxLEg'ilExsexa      £walase     niig'e     tsEl£wats!e 
lExa£ya,  qa-s   la    oxLosdesElaq,  qa's    la    oxLaeLElaq   laxes  g'okwe. 
Wii,  la  oxLEg'a£lilas.     Wii,  lii   LEpliililasa   Eldzowe   le£wa£ya.     Wa,  55 
g •iPmese  gwalExs  lae   giigEdzotsa   tsElxwe   laq.     Wa,   giPmese  la 
lopts!axs  lae   xwelaqa  oxLEnt  IsesElaq,  qaes  ts!awes  laxes  gEnEine. 
Wa,    la    6xLEX,£Idxa    helomagEme    tsEpwats.'e  lExa£ya,  qaes  laxat! 
oxLalaqexs  lae  lasdesEla,    qa£s  la   oxLaeLElaq   laxes  g-okwe.     Wa, 
laxae  giigEdzotsa  tsElxwe  laxa  le£wa£ye,  yix  la  giigEdza£lllats  g'ale  60 
la  oxLaeLEms  tsElxwa.     Wii,  g-il£mese    gwalExs  lae  xwelaqa  oxleii- 
tsIesElaq   laxa    lopts!Ewe    helomagEme    lExa'ya,  qa£s    laxat!   tslas 
laxes  gEnEme,  qa  k"!ats!odesesa  wulExse  tsElx11  laq  LE-Cwa  £wfilase 
nag'e  lExa£3ra.     Wa,  la£mes    qot!alalExsa   £\valase  tsEl£wats!e  nag'e 
lExa£yaxs  lae  lag'aa.     Wa,  hex-£idaEmxaawise  oxLEx,£IdEq,  qa£s  la  65 
oxLosdesElaq,    qa£s    la    oxLaeLElaq      laxes    g-6kwe.      Wa,    a£mese 
hangalllasexs    lae    etEntslesa,    qa£s    lii    5xLEx-£Idxa     helomagEme 
lExa£ya.     Wii,    gax£Emxae    oxLosdesElaq    qa£s    g'axe    oxLEg-alilas 


216  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Lbth.ank.85 

70  where  the  other  baskets  are.  Finally  his  wife  ||  comes  up,  carrying 
the  front-basket.  She  goes  up  the  beach  and  |  puts  it  down  with 
the  other  baskets  containing  crabapples.  Then  she  |  eats  a  little 
food.  After  doing  so,  she  asks  her  husband  to  |  help  her  clean  off 
the  stems  of  the  crabapples.  | 
1  Picking  Viburnum-Berries.  — The  |  season  for  picking  viburnum-berries 
is  towards  the  end  of  summer,  when  it  is  nearly  autumn.1  .  .  .  |  As 
soon  as  the  viburnum-berries  are  nearly  ripe,  when  they  are  still  green,  | 
5  the  woman  gets  ready  to  pick  them.  She  takes  her  ||  three  baskets,— 
the  large  swallowing  basket,  the  medium-sized  swaUowing-basket,  | 
and  the  small  front-basket.  These  arc  the  same  as  the  baskets  into 
which  huckleberries  and  |  salal-berries  are  picked.  She  carries  the 
baskets  on  her  back,  |  and  goes  down  in  the  morning  to  the  beach  in 
front  of  her  house,  where  her  |  small  canoe  is.     She  puts  the  basket 

10  aboard  the  canoe  and  ||  goes  in.  Then  she  takes  her  punting-pole 
of  hemlock  and  |  punts  up  the  river  of  Knight  Inlet,  for  that  is  the 
only  place  where  viburnum-berries  grow.  |  As  soon  as  she  reaches 
the  place  where  viburnum-berries  grow,  she  backs  the  stern  |  of  the 
small  canoe  towards  the  shore,  and  she  leaves  the  canoe.  She  |  takes 
out  the  anchor-line  and  ties  it  to  the  end  of  a  stake.     After  doing  so,  || 

15  she  takes  her  baskets,  carries  them  on  her  back,  and  puts  them  |  down 
to  where  she  sees  many  viburnum-berries  on  the  trees.  She  only  | 
takes  her  front-basket,  which  she  carries  in  front  of  her  body,  and 

laxes  ha£nakulasaxa  waokwe  laElxa£ya.     Wa,  la£me  he£me  gEnEmas 

70  tekliipElaxa   nanaagEmaxs  g'axae  lasdesEla.     Wa,  la  heEinxat!  la 

hanqaseda  waokwe  tsetsEhwatsJe  laElxa£ya.     Wii,  la£nie  xaL!Ex,£Id 

LlExwa  laxeq.     Wii,  g'il£mese   gwalExs  lae  helaxes  la£wuriEme    qa 

las  g'iwalaq  qo  lcintalaLEx  tsEltsElxumEts  !EXLa£yas. 

1      Picking  Viburnum-Berries  (Ttelsiixa  tlslse). — Wa,    he£maaxs     lae 

Elaq  t  '.Elt  IslyEnxa  la,  gwabEndxa  heEnxe,  yixs  lae  exala  layEnxa.  .  .' 

Wa,  g'il£mese  Elaq  iJobEXLodeda  tlElsaxs  he£mae  ales  lEnlEnxsEme, 

laas  xwanaludeda     t!Elts!ELElaLe    tstedfiqa.      Wa,    laEm    ;ix£edxes 

5  yuduxusEme    laElxa£_yaxa  ewalase    niig'e    LE£wa  helomagEme.     Wa, 

he£mises  nanaagEme,  ylx  k'!Elats!iisexa  gwadEme,  loxs  nEkwaaxa 

nEk!ule    hexsames     lEXElase.      Wa,    lii.    5xLEx£Idxes    laElxa£yaxa 

gaala;  cja^s  la  lEnts!es  laxa  L!Ema£isases  gokwe   lax    hanedzasases 

t!EldzELElats!eLe  xwaxwaguma.     ^^"a.  la  GxLEg'aalExsases  laElxa£ye 

10  laqexs  lae  laxsa.     Wii,  la   dax'£Idxes   dzSmegale  qlwaxasEna   qaes 

ten5x£wide  lax  was  Dzawade,  qaxs  lex-aemae  ex-  qlwaxatsa  tlElse. 

Wa,  giPmese  lag'aa  liixa  tlElsmEdzEXEkfdiixs  lae  k'lax'Elsa  5xLa- 

£yases  t!Eld/.ELE]ats!e  xwaxwaguma,   qa£s  la    lalta.     Wii,  la  dagt- 

lExsax  mogwana£yas,  qa£s  mox£walisex  oba£yas.     Wii  g'il£mese  gwa- 

15  Iexs  lae  ;ix£edxes  laElxa£ye,  qa£s  oxLEx£Ideq,  qa£s  la  5xLEg-aElsas 

laxes  la  d5gul  qlexLi'da   t!Els  laxa  tlElsniEse.     Wii,  lex'a£mes  :ix£e- 

tso£ses    nanaagEme    lExa£ya,    qa£s    lii    teklubotsex   lae  LoxLElsaxa 

'  Continued  on  p.  118. 


boas]  HUNTING,    FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  217 

stands   under   |    the    tree   that  has   many  berries.     .She   plucks   off  18 
a  bunch  at  a  time  |  and  puts  them  into  her  front  basket.     It  does  not 
take  ||  long  before  the  front-basket  is  filled;  and  when  it  is  full,  she  20 
goes   |   and    pours    the   berries    into    the    large    swallowing-basket. 
Then  |  she  picks  some  more  into  the  front-basket;  and  when  that  is 
full  again,  |  she  goes  back  and  pours  them  into  the  large  swallowing- 
basket;  and  when  her  |  large  basket  is  full,  she  does  the  same  with 
the  second  medium-sized  basket.  ||  When  there  are  very  many  ber-  25 
ries,  |  she  spreads  her  blanket  in  the  bow  of  the  canoe,  |  and  carries 
the  large  swallowing-basket  to  the  canoe  and  |  pours  out  the  viburnum- 
berries  that  are  in  the  swallowing-basket  on  the  blanket;  |  and  she 
does  the  same  with  the  medium-sized  basket.     Then  ||  she  goes  back  30 
to   the  place  where  she  was  picking  berries,  and  tries  to  fill  the  | 
three  baskets  again.     When  they  are  full,  |  she  carries  them  on  her 
back  and  puts  them  aboard  the  canoe;  and  when  |  they  are  all  aboard,  • 
she  unties  the  anchor-line  from  the  stake,  |  goes  aboard,  and  drifts 
downstream.  ||  Then  she  goes  home.     As  soon  as  she  arrives  at  the  35 
beach  |  in  front  of  the  house,  her  husband  comes  down  to  meet  her, 
and  he  carries  on  his  back  |  the  large  swallowing-basket.     He  carries 
it  up  the  beach,  |  and  puts  it  down  at  a  cool  place  in  the  house.     Then 
he  goes  down  again,  |  and  carries  on  his  back  the  medium-sized  basket, 

qlexLala  tlElsmEsaxa  t!Else,  qa£s  k!filp!edex  enalenEmxLalaenaeyasa  18 
tlElse,  qa£s  la  k!ulpts!alas  laxes  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.     Wit,  k"!est!a 
giilaxs    lae    qot!e    nanaagEme    Iex&s.      Wii,    g"il£rnese    qotlaxs   lae  20 
qEpasases  t  iBlyanEme  laxa  ewalase  nag'e  lExa£ya.     Wii,  laxae  etled 
k!ulpts!alaxes    nanaagEme    lExa£ya.      Wa,  gil£Emxaawise    qot!axs 
lae    qEpasas    laxa    £walase    nag'e   lExa£ya.     Wa,  gil£mese    qotleda 
Ewalase  niig'e  lExiixs  lae  heEmxat!  gwex-£Idxa  helomagEme  lExa£ya- 
Wa,  gil£mese    alak'lala    qleiiEma    t!Else  lae    ax£edxes  £nEx£fina£ye,  25 
qa£s  lii   LEp!alExsas  lax  Sg"iwa£yases  t!EldzELElats!e  xwaxwaguma 
Wa,    la    oxLEx£Idxes     t!Eldzats!e    ewalas    nag'e    lExa£ya,    qaes   lii 
qshsdzotsa  t!Elts!ax"dasa  £w5lase  niig"e  lExii  laxa   LEbExse  £nEx£u 
nas.     Wii,  laxae   heEm   gwex-£Idxa    nanaagEme    lExa£ya.      Wii,  la 
aedaaqa    laxes      tlElyasaxa     tlElse,   qa£s    lii    qaqotlaa  £naxwaxes  30 
yuduxusEme  laElxa£ya.     Wii,  g-fl£mese  £naxwa  qoqut!axs  lae  oxle- 
gaalExsElaq  laxes    t huldzELElats !e    xwaxwaguma.      Wii,  g"il£mese 
£wilg"aalExsExs  lae  qwelodEx  moklwasas  mogwana£yases  t!EldzELE- 
lats!e   xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  lii  laxs    liiqexs    g'axae   yolx-£ida.     Wa, 
gax£Em  na£naku  liixes  g-okwe.     Wii,  g-tl£mese  g-ax£alis  lax  L!Ema£i-  35 
sases  gokwaxs  lae  lalale  hVwunEmasecp     Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  oxle- 
g'ilExsaxa  £walase  niig'e  t  lElyats  !ala  lExa£ya,  qa£s  lii  6xL5sdesElaq 
qa£s  la  oxLEgllllas  laxa  wudanegwllases  g'okwe.     Wii,  laxae  etEn- 
ts!esa,  qa£s  la  oxLEg'ilExsaxa  nanaagEme  t  !Elyats  !slla  lExa£ya,  qa£s 


218  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  35 

40  and  ||  carries  it  up  the  beach  to  his  house,  and  he  |  puts  it  down  at  the 
same  place  where  he  put  the  large  basket.  |  Then  he  goes  down  again, 
and  takes  hold  of  each  corner  of  the  blanket  containing  the  berries,  | 
and  he  carries  them  up  into  his  house  |  and  puts  them  down  where 
the  berry  baskets  stand.  | 
1  Picking  Qotlxole. — When  the  |  qotlxole  are  nearly  ripe,  when  it  is 
nearly  winter,  |  the  woman  takes  a  flat-bottomed  basket.  Some- 
times there  are  |  three  or  even  four  flat-bottomed  baskets.  This 
5  is  also  on  the  ||  upper  course  of  the  Knight  Inlet  River.  It  is 
named  by  the  DEnax"da£xu  |  Llaklum,  what  is  called  by  the  Kwa- 
kiutl  qotlxole.  They  call  the  man  who  has  them  "  owner  of  qot  Ixole,"  | 
and  they  call  the  picking  qotaxE.  The  DEnax-da£xu  |  call  the 
picking  L.'akwa.  | 

10  I  will  speak  of  this  as  the  Kwakiutl  speak.  ||  The  woman  takes  her 
baskets,  as  she  goes  down  to  the  beach  carrying  the  |  baskets  on  her 
back,  one  inside  of  the  other.  She  goes  aboard  her  small  canoe,  and  | 
she  puts  the  baskets  into  the  canoe.  Then  she  takes  the  punting- 
pole,  I  stands  up  in  the  bow  of  the  small  canoe,  and  [  poles  up  the 

15  river.  She  goes  stern  first,  poling  up  the  river  ||  of  Knight  Inlet. 
As  soon  as  she  arrives  at  the  place  where  the  berries  grow,  she  goes 
ashore.  |  First  she  takes  the  anchor-line  of  her  small  canoe  I  and  ties 


40  laxat!  OxLosdesElaq,  qa£s  la  oxxaeLElaq  laxes  g-5kwe,  qa£s  la 
oxLEgalllas  lax  hane£lasasa  £walase  nag'e  tlElyatslsila  lExa£ya. 
Wa,  lii  etEntslesa,  qa£s  lii  dadEnxEndxa  t  !EldzEdzfda  £nEx£iines, 
qa's  g'fixeq!Enep£wiisdesElaq,  qa£s  lii  qlEiiebeLElaq  laxes  g"6kwe, 
qa£s  lii  qlEneplalilas  lax  hux-haneJlasasa  tlet.'Eltslala  laElxa£ya. 
1  Picking  Qotlxole  (Qotiixa  qotlxole). — Wa,  he£rnaaxs  lae 
Llopeda  qotlxoliixa  la  Elaq  tslawfmxa.  Wii,  he£mis  la  :ix£edaatsa 
tslEdaqaxa  LeLEqlExsde  laElxa£ya,  yixs  £nalrnEmp!Eiiae  yudux"- 
sEma  l5xs  mosgEmae  laElxa£yas  LeLEqlExsdEX'sa,  yLxs  he£maaxat! 
5  lii  nEldzii  Dzawadexa  gwE£yasa  DEnax-da£xwe  Llegwada,  qaxs 
l !iik !umxxaeda  gwE£yowasa  Kwag"ule  qotlxole.  Wii,  lii  qodEdxE- 
lax  g'ayasas,  wii,  lii  qotaxElaxa  mEnaq.  Wa,  laLeda  DEnax'da- 
exwe  LliikwaxElaxa  mEniiq. 

Wa,    hetlaLEn   yaqlEndasLe   gwek' lalasasa    Kwag-ule.     Wa,    la- 

10  £mes  ax£ededa  tslEdaqaxes  laElxa£ye,  qa£s  la  lEntsIes  oxLalaxes 
laElxa£yaxs  lae  k!wak!usala,  qa£s  la  laxs  laxa  xwaxwagume.  Wa, 
lii  oxLEg'aalExsaxes  laElxa£yaxs  lae  dax-£idxa  dzomegale,  qa£s 
Laxug-ewa-ye  lax  :ig-iwa£yases  qodELElatsleLe  xwaxwagiimaxs  lae 
tenox£wida.     Wa,  la£me  hE£xuts!EgEmalaxs  lae  tenostala  liixa  was 

15  Dzawade.  Wa,  gil£mese  liig'aa  laxa  qodadiixs  lae  nEmsElsa. 
Wa,  he£mis  g-il  ax£etso£scda  mogwanayases  qodELElatsIe  xwaxwa- 
giima,   qa£s    la   mox£wits    oba£yas    laxa    Lag-agellsaxa    wa.      Wa. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  219 

the  end  to  a  tree  standing  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  |  After  doing  so,  18 
she  carries  the  baskets  on  her  back  |  to  the  place  where  she  knows 
many  berries  are  growing;  and  when  ||  she  comes  to  where  they  are  20 
thickest,   she   puts   down  her   baskets,  |  puts   the   cedar-bark  belt 
around  her  waist,  and,  |  after  doing  so,  she  puts  on  her  cedar-bark 
hat.     Then  |  she  places  the  baskets  apart,  one  in  each  place  among 
the  |  plants,  and  she  picks  off  the  berries  and  puts  them  into  the  || 
nearest  basket.     She  is  sitting  between  the  baskets.  |  Therefore  she  25 
puts  them  into  the  nearest  one,  and  therefore  she  puts  them  |  into 
every  basket  that  has  been  put  down  all  around  the  woman.     As  | 
soon  as  all  the  baskets  are  full,  she  does  not  carry  them  on  her  back,  | 
but  she  takes  hold  of  each  side  with  her  hands  ||  and  carries  them  out  30 
of  the  woods,  taking  them  to  her  |  small  canoe.     She  puts  them  down 
in  the  bow  of  the  |  canoe;  and  when  they  are  all  in,  she  |  goes  into 
the  bow  of  the  canoe,  after  having  untied  the  anchor-line.  |  Then  she 
takes  her  paddle  and  pushes  off  her  small  ||  canoe,  and  she  paddles.  35 
She  drifts  down  the  river ;  |  and  as  soon  as  she  reaches  the  front  of  the 
house,  she  goes  ashore.  |  When  she  arrives,  she  takes  hold  of  the 
baskets  on  each  side  |  with  her   hands,  and  carries  them  up  the 
beach.  |  After  they  have  all  been  taken  up,  she  eats  a  little.  | 


g*il£mese   gwala   lae    oxLEg'ElExsaxes   qeqodats  !eL§  laElxa£ya    qa£s  ig 
la   oxLayak'Elaq    laxes   qlale    q!eq!adxa    qotlxole.      Wa,   gil£mese 
lagaa  lax  wagwasasexs  lae  6xLEg"aElsaxes  qeqodats  !eLe  laElxa£ya.  20 
Wa,  la£nie  wusex-£Itses  dEndzEtlzowe  wuseg'anowa.     Wa,  g'iPmese 
gwalExs    laaxat!    LEtEmtses    dEntsEme    LEtEmla.      Wa,   g'il£rnese 
gwalExs  lae  gwelElsaxes  laElxa£ye,  qa  £nal£nEmsgEmeses  hehEngexa 
qotmEse.      Wa,    lit    niEnx-£Idxa    qot!xole,  qa£s  la  giixtslalas    laxa 
nExwala    lExii   laq    laxes    aene£me    nEqtegllesxes    laElxa£ye.      Wa,  25 
he'mis   la    gtixts'.otsoses    ex'ax'klaasa,    lag-ila   fnaxwaEm    guxtsla- 
laq    laxes  £waxaasasa  laElxa£yaxs  hehEne£stalaaxa    ts!Edaqe.     Wa, 
g'iPmese  £naxwa    qoqutle  qeqodatslas  laElxaeya,  lae  k-!es  oxLalaq, 
yixs     a£mae     dadanoweses     wax-solts!ana£ye     lax     waxpsanii£yases 
qodatsle    lExa£yaxs    lae    daltlalaq,    qa£s    la    dagaalExsElaq    laxes  30 
qodELElats!e  xwaxwagiima,  qa£s  la  hangaalExsaq  laxa  ag'iwa£yases 
qodELElats!e     xwaxwagiima.      Wa,    g'iPmese     £wIlgaalExsExs    lae 
laxsa    laxa    6xLa£ye    laxes    laeneEmx-de    qwelElsaxa    mogwanaya. 
Wa,    la    dax-£Idxes    se£wayowe     qa£s    q!odEt!odexes    qodELElats!e 
xwaxwagiima.      Wa,  la£me    sex£wida,    qa£s    g'axe  ySlala    laxa  wa.  35 
Wa,  g"il£mese    lag-aa   lax  nEgEt!iises   g"6kwaxs    lae    nEmsalis    lax 
L'.Ema£isas.      Wii,    g'il£niese     lag-aaxs    lae     aEmxat!    dadanoweses 
wax-solts!ana£ye  e£eyaso  lax  wax-sana£yases  qodatsle  Iex&xs  g'axae 
MsdesEla.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wI£losdesaxs  lae  xaL!Ex£id  LlExwa. 


220  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.  35 

1  Picking  Dogwood-Berries. —  |  The  women  use  the  same  large  basket 
and  medium-sized  basket  |  and  front-basket.  When  the  man  thinks  | 
they  will  give  a  feast  of  dogwood-berries,  he  engages  many  old  || 
5  women  to  go  and  pick  the  berries.  They  each  carry  on  the  back 
their  |  three  baskets,  one  inside  the  other;  and  when  |  they  come  to 
a  place  where  there  are  many  of  them,  they  put  down  the  baskets, 
take  out  the  |  fronts-basket  and  hang  it  in  front  of  the  body,  and  begin 
to  pick.  I  They  pick  the  berries  very  fast,  and  some  people  call  the 

10  picking  qElca.  |[  As  soon  as  the  women  fill  the  front-basket,  |  they 
pour  (the  berries)  into  the  large  basket  and  go  on  |  picking  as 
before;  and  when  the  front-basket  is  filled,  |  again  they  pour  the 
contents   into  the  large    basket.     They  continue  |  doing  this  while 

15  they  are  picking;  and  as  soon  as  the  three  ||  baskets  are  filled  with 
berries,  they  carry  them  on  their  backs, — the  |  large  baskets, — and  hang 
the  front-baskets  in  front  of  the  body,  |  and  then  they  go  home  to  the 
house  of  the  man  who  engaged  them.  As  soon  |  as  they  go  in,  they 
put  down  the  large  baskets,  and  |  the  man  takes  an  empty  oil-box 

20  and  pours  the  berries  ||  into  it.  When  the  large  basket  is  empty,  he 
gives  it  back  to  the  |  owner,  and  then  the  women  who  picked  the 
berries  go  I  homo.     Thev  take  for  themselves  the  berries  in  the  front- 


1  Picking  Dogwood-Berries. — QEkiixa  qEk'Laale1  yixs  he£niae  la  qE- 
g'atslesa  tslEdaqes  niig'a£ye  £walas  lExa£ya  LE-wa  helomagEme  1e- 
xa£ya  L6£mes  nanaagEme  lExa£ya,  yixs  g'iPmae  nenk'  leqEleda 
bEgwaiiEine,  qa£s  qEk'elexa  qEk'Iaalaxs  lac  lielaxa  qlEyokwe  liiEl- 
5  k!iina£ya,  qa  liis  qEkaxa  qEk'!aale.  Wit,  lii  EntixwaEni  oxLalaxes 
yaeyu(lux"sEine  laElxa£yaxs  k!wak!usalae.  Wa,  g'tl£mese  lag'aa  lax 
qlayasas,  lae  oxLEgaElsaxes  laElxa£ye.  Wa,  la  ax£wults!odxa 
nanaagEme  h:xa£ya,  qa£s  lii  teklupElaqexs  lae  hams£Ida.  Wa,  la 
Lomax,£Id  halabaleda  h&msaxa  qEk" !aale,  yixs    qEk'axElaeda  wao- 

10  kwe  tsledaqxa  hamsaq.  Wa,  g'iPmese  qot!e  nanaagEme  lExii- 
sexs  lae  guxts!ots  laxes  nag'e  cwalas  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  et!ed  ham- 
s£idaxat!.  Wii,  gihcEmxaawise  qot!e  nanaagEmas  lExaxs  lae 
et!ed  guxtslots  laxaaxes  nag'e  ewalas  lExa£ya.  Wii,  la  hex'sii 
gweg'ilaxs   hamsae.      Wii,    g'JHmese    -'naxwa    qoqtttle   yfiduxusEme 

15  qeqEg-ats!es  laElxa'yaxs,  g'iixae  oxLolt  lalaxes  qEg'atsIe  nag'e 
£walas  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  tekliipElaxes  qEg'atsle  nanaagEme  lExa- 
£yaxs  g'axae  na£nakwa  laxa  gokwas  lielanEmiiq.  Wa,  gIPmese 
laeLExs  lae  oxLEg'alllasa  qEg'atsle  £walas  lExa£ya.  Wii,  leda 
bEgwanEme  ax£edxa  dEngwatsIemote,  qa£s    lii  giixts!otsa  cpj;k'!aale 

20  laq.  Wii,  gil='mese  lii  loptslaweda  nag'e  £walas  lExaxs  lae  ts!as  lax 
axnogwadas.  Wii,  he£mis  la  na£nagwatsa  ts!Edaqe  qEk'ilg'is  laxes 
g'okwe.     Wa,  la£me  aok!unaxa  qEg'atsle  niinaagEm  lExa£ya.     Wa, 

'  Cornus  canadensis  L. 


boas]  HUNTING,   FISHING,   AND   FOOD-GATHERING  221 

basket,  |  and  they  tell  the  man  where  they  left  the  medium-sized   | 
basket.     Then  he  engages  some  young  men  of  his  own  ||  numaym  '  to  25 
bring  them  out  of  the  woods.     Then  they  pour   them  |  into   the 
empty  oil-box.  | 

Picking  Gooseberries. — These  |  are  taken  by  the  women  by  shaking  1 
them  off  on  a  new  large  |  mat.     They  also  use  the  large  basket  and 
the  cedar-bark  |  belt  and  cedar-bark  hat  and  a  short  ||  piece  of  a  5 
punting-pole.     The  woman  goes  to  a  goosebeny-  |  patch  while  the 
gooseberries  are  still  green.  |  The  woman  looks  for  large  ones;  and 
when  she  sees  them,  she  |  puts  down  her  basket.     She  takes  her 
belt,  ]  puts  it  over  her  blanket  around  her  waist.  ||  After  doing  so,  10 
she  takes  her  cedar-bark  hat;  and  |  when  this  is  done,  she  takes  her 
large   mat  and  !  spreads  it  under  the  gooseberry-bush  which  has 
many  gooseberries  on  it.     When  |  this  is  done,  she  takes  the  broken 
pole  and  with  it  strikes  |  the  goosebeny-bush,  striking  off  the  goose- 
berries ||  so  that  the}'  all  fall  on  the  mat.  |  When  the  gooseberries  are  15 
all  off  from  the  bushes,  |  the  woman  takes  her  large  basket  and  puts 
it  down  next  |  to  the  mat  on  which  the  gooseberries  have  fallen. 
She  lifts  the  mat  by  two  corners  |  and  pours  the  gooseberries  into 


he£misexs  nelaaxa  bEgwanEmas    handzasasa   qEg-ats!e  helomagEm  23 
lExa£ya.     Wii,  he£mis   helag'iltsexa    ha£yal£a   gayol    laxes    £nE£me- 
mote,    qa    las    oxL6lt!EndEq.      Wa,    laeme    £wi£laEin  la   guxtsloyo  25 
laxa  dEngwats!emote. 

Picking    Gooseberries      (Ttemxwaxa     tlEinxwale). —  Wii,      hcEm  1 
iix£etsosa   tslEdaqes  k'  teldzowaxa  tlEinxwales    Eldzowe    ewalas    le- 
£wa£ya,    wii.    he-misLes    niig'e    £walas    lExa£ya    LE£wis    dEiulzowe 
wtiseganowa,  LE£wis  dEntsEme  LEtEmla;   wa,  he£misa  ts!Exustowe 
k'oqlEwe  dzomegala.     Wa,  la.  qas£ida,   qa£s  lii  laxa  tlEmxmiEdzE-  5 
xEkiila,  yixs  he£rnae  ales  lEnlEnxsEma  tlEinxwale.     Wii,  lex-a£mes 
doqwalasosa  tstedaqa   awawe.     Wii,  g'il£mese    d<3x£waLElaqexs  lae 
oxLEg'alisaxes    lExa£ye.     Wa,    lii   ;ix£edxes    dEndzEdzowe   wuseg  a- 
nowa,    qa£s    qEkiyindes    laxes    £nEx£una£ye    laxes    qEnase.      Wa, 
gil="mese    gwalExs    lae    lEtEmtses    dEntsEme  LEtEmla.     Wit,   gil-  10 
£mese    gwalExs   lae  ax£edxes  k'  lEldzowe    Eldzowe  le£wa£ya    qa£s  lii 
LEbabots  laxa    t!EmxuniEse    qlexi/daxa  tlEinxwale.     Wa,  g'ihmese 
gwal£alisExs    lae    ax£edxa    k-oq!a£ye  dzomeg'ala,    qa£s  kwexElEXLa- 
wa£yes    laxa    t!EmxuniEse.      Wii,     la£me    kwexaxElaxa  tlEinxwale, 
qa    las    qubEdzodalaxa    qlubEdzowasa    tlEinxwale    le£wa£ya.     Wa,  15 
gil£mese   £wIlg'ElEXLowa    t  !EmxumEsaxes    tlEinxiixLawixdiixs    lae 
ax£ededa    tslEdacpixa  niig-a£ye  £walas  lExa£ya,  qaes    lii  hanEiixEnts 
laxa    qlubEdzowasa    tlEinxwale  le£wa£ya.     Wa,    lii    dadEnxEndxa 
le£wa£ye,     qa£s     lii    laatslotsa     tlEinxwale    laxa    nag'a£ye    £wiilas 


1  The  subdivision  of  the  tribe  to  which  he  belongs.    See  p.  795  et  seq. 


222  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [ETH.ANS  35 

20  the  large  ||  basket.  Sometimes  she  spreads  her  mat  three  times  | 
under  the  gooseberry-bushes.  Then  her  large  basket  is  full.  |  When 
it  is  full,  she  folds  up  her  mat,  puts  it  on  top  |  of  the  gooseberries  in 
the  basket,  and  carries  the  basket  on  her  back  |  home  to  her  house 
and  puts  it  down.  || 


20  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  £naI£nEinp  tena  yuduxup  lEnaEin  LEbabotses 
le£wa£ye  laxa  t  !EmxuniEsaxs  hie  qotles  nag"a£ye  £walas  lExa£ya. 
Wa,  glPmese  qotlaxs  lae  k!oxJw!dxes  leJwa£ye,  qa£s  LEpEyindes 
laxes  t!Em£wats!e  nage  £walas  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  oxLEx-£fdqexs 
g'axae  naenakwa  laxes  g-okwe.     Wa,  la  6xLEg-alIlas. 


III.  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD 

Cutting  Dog-Salmon.1 — When  |  a   woman    cuts   dog-salmon,  she  1 
takes  off  its  giUs;  |  then  she  cuts  off  the  head  and  takes  it  off;  then 
she  cuts  the  |  back  of  the  dog-salmon  along  the  upper  side  of  the 
dorsal  fin,  beginning  at  the  ||  back  of  the  neck,  and  down  to  four  5 
fingers-width  from  the  meat  of  the  tad.  |  Then  she  turns  the  salmon 
round  and  turns  it  over,  and  |  she  cuts  from  the  salmon-tail  up  to 
the  I  back  of  the  neck,  and  the  meat  on  the  |  backbone  is  half  thick 
and  half  thin  (medium  thickness).     As  soon  as  she  has  taken  it  off, 
she  puts  away  the  ||  outer  side  that  is  going  to  be  made  into  preserved  10 
salmon.2 1 

Boasted  Old  Salmon  (Those  that  have  finished  spawning  |  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  river). — Now  we  will  talk  about  the  Nimkish  |  when 
they  go  to  catch  salmon  at  Prairie,  above  Gwane,  |  when  they  | 
want  to  get  dog-salmon  that  is  not  fat  when  it  arrives  at  Prairie.  ||  As  15 
soon  as  it  is  evening,  the  river  people  get  read}'  to  |  catch  salmon  at 
the  place  for  tying  up  the  canoe  that  belonged  to  his  ancestors;  for 
they  have  traditional  places  for  tying  |  up  their  canoes  when  catch- 
ing dog-salmon  with  hooks  at  night.  As  soon  as  |  a  man  discovers 
any  one  who  has  tied  his  canoe  there,  the  owner  begins  to  fight  with 

Cutting  Dog-Salmon1  (TIelalas  xak'ladzo). — Wa,  he-maaxs  lae  1 
xwal'Ideda  ts!Edaqaxa  gwa£xnise;  wa,  laEm  Sx5dEx  q!osna£yas 
Wa,  la  qax£IdEq  qa  lawas  hext!a£yas.  Wa,  la  xwaHdEx  a£we- 
g'a£yasa  gwa£xnise  ek'lotlEndalax  k'!ideg-a£yas  g'ax"£id  lax  oxLa- 
at:i£yas  lag'aa  laxa  modEne  lax  q  !EmElxsda£yasa  ts!fisna£yas.  5 
Wa,  la  xweTldxa  k' !otEla  qas  lex£ideq.  Wii,  laEinxaawise 
xwal£Ida,  g-ax'£Id  lax  wulxwaxsda£yasa  k-!otEla  la  ekMolEla  lax 
oxxaata£yas.  Wii,  laEm  £naxsaiip!  lo£  wakwa  q  !EniEldzo£yasa 
xak'adzo  lo£  pEl.  Wii,  gil£mese  lawiimasqexs  lae  gexaxa  wiidzE- 
kwexes  xEms!laso£Le. 2  10 

Roasted  Old  Salmon  (Ts!Elak-  L!obEku;  ylxa  la  gwal  xwela£wa 
lax  £nEldziisa  wiwa). — Wa,  la£mesEn  gwagwex's£alal  laxa  £nEinge- 
saxs  lae  laxes  wiwamets!ase  Odzalase,  lax  £nEldza  Gwane  qaxs  iix£- 
exsdaaxa  gwa£xnlsaxs  lae  gwiil  tsEnxwaxs  lae  lag'aa  lax  Odzillase. 
Wii,  g-il£Ein  dzaqwaxs  laetla  wlwametslenoxwe  xwanaHda  qa£s  le  15 
negwesa  lax  m5kwa£yases  gale,  qaxs  nenuyamts !es£mae  mokwa- 
£yasxes  gaLa£yaxa  gwa£xnisaxa  ganuLe.  Wa,  g-il£mese  nEgELa- 
yodxa   la    mokwala    laqexs    lae    xomal£Ide    axnogwadiis    LE£wa   la 

'  See  also  p.  302.  2  Continued  on  p.  226,  line  17. 

223 


224  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAK1UTL  [eth.ann.bb 

him   who    goes   to  |  steal   salmon    with    the   hook.     Therefore   the 

20  Nimkish  always  ||  disappear  at  night,  for  they  club  one  another  when  | 
one  does  not  give  in  to  the  owner  (of  such  a  place).  Therefore  they 
just  |  club  one  another  with  their  punting-poles.  (I  just  wish  to  | 
talk  about  this.)     As  soon  as  evening  comes,  the  |  river  people  start, 

25  and  tie  their  canoes  to  the  tying-placos  ||  where  the  salmon  go  to 
spawn.  When  it  gets  dark,  (the  man)  feels  about  with  his  hook  tied 
to  a  long  shaft.  When  there  are  many  |  salmon,  it  does  not  take 
long  before  he  fills  (his  canoe).  When  it  is  full,  |  he  goes  home.  As 
soon  as  day  comes,  his  wife  takes  an  |  old  mat,  spreads  it  over  her 

30  back,  and  then  she  takes  her  ||  belt  and  puts  it  over  the  old  mat  on 
her  back.  |  As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  her  carrying-basket,  | 
puts  it  on  her  back,  and  goes  down  to  the  place  where  the  salmon- 
canoe  of  her  husband  is.  |  Then  she  first  takes  up  the  best  of  the  dog- 
salmon,  whose  skin  is  not  white.  |  Of  this  she  makes  preserved  sal- 

35  moil.  Afterwards  she  carries  up  those  whose  skin  is  white;  ||  and 
when  all  the  best  salmon  have  been  taken  up  from  the  beach,  |  the 
one  with  white  skin  is  first  cut  open.  She  does  the  same  |  as  she 
does  with  the  one  about  which  1  spoke  first,1 — namely,  the  salmon 
speared  at  the  mouth  of  the  river, —  |  when  it  is  cut  open.  The  only 
point  that  is  different  is  when  |  it  is  roasted,  for  the  salmon  with 

g'iloLa    gaLa   laq.     Wii,     heEm     lag'ildaseda     £nEmgese     q.'unala 

20  xisaxox  ganuLEx,  qa£s  kwexap!Ex"£Ida£maaxs  yiix'stosaeda  £nE- 
mokwaq  g'axa  axnogwadas.  Wii,  he£mis  lag'ilas  aEm  la 
kwexap !Ex-£itses  dzomegale  liixeq.  (Wa,  ;t£rnEn  £nex-  qEn  gwa- 
gwexsEXExnde  laxeq.)  Wa,  gil£Eni  dzagwelex£na£ktilaxs  laasa 
wlwamets  lenoxwe  alex£wid  qa£s  le  mox£waLEla  laxes  mokwa£ye  laxa 

25  tslEnaasasa  k-!otElaxs  xwela£wae.  Wa,  gibmese  p!EdEx£IdExs 
lae  lEx£ulx£itses  galbala  g'lltla  saEnts!;i.  Wii,  gil£mese  qlenoma 
k'!otElaxs  lae  k!es  gex-£IdExs  lae  cjotla.  Wa,  g'il£mese  qotlaxs 
lae  na£nakwa.  Wa,  g  il£mese  £nax-£IdExs  lae  gEnEinas  ax£edxa 
k- !ak" lobane,  qa£s   LEbegindes   laxes    awlg"a£ye.      Wa,  la  ax£edxes 

30  wiiseg'anowe,  qa£s  qEkiyEndes  laxa  k'  !ak'  !obana£ye  la  LEbeg'Is. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  gwfdExs  lae  ax£edxes  oxLaats'.e  lExa£ya,  qa£s  ox- 
LEleqexs  lae  bants lEyala  lax  hanaasas  yalnEgwats  !ases  la£wunEme. 
Wii,  la£mes  he  gil  ax£etsosa  eke  gwa£xnisaxa  k'!ese  tslElak'a. 
Wa,  heEm  xa£masllas6ltse.     Wii,  al£mese  la  oxLEx-£Idxa  ts!ets!Ela- 

35  k'axs  lae  £wi£losdE£yamasxa  ek-e  k' !otEla.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wi£los- 
dE£yamasqexs  lae  he  gll  xwal£ItsE£wa  tslElak'e.  HeEm  gweg'I- 
laqe  gweg'IlasaxEn  g'ilx'de  waldEma  sEg-inete  lax  ox"siwa£yasa 
wii,1  yixs  lax"de  xwilLasE£wa.  Wii,  lexa£mes  ogucpila£yosexs  lae 
L!opasE£wa,  yixs  k"!esae  alaEm  Llopa  ts!Elak-e  LlobEkwa  yixs   lae 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  225 

white  skill  is  not  as  thoroughly  roasted  ||  when  it  is  roasted,  because  40 
it  is  not  fat;  and  it  is  not  hung  up  for  a  long  time  |  to  dry  over  the 
lire  of  the  house  of  the  river  people.  |  They  try  to  make  it  thoroughly 
dry  before  it  is  taken  down  by  the  |  woman,  and  she  puts  it  away  at 
the  place  where  the  food  is  kept  for  the  winter.  |  Even  if  it  is  kept 
a  long  time,  it  does  not  get  mouldy,  and  it  does  not  ||  get  a  bad  taste,  45 
for  it  is  not  fat.  Therefore  it  is  liked  |  by  the  Indians.  Now  we 
will  talk  about  it  when  it  is  |  given  as  food  in  winter  by  the  one  who 
obtained  it.  |  .  .  . 

Middle  Piece  of  Salmon. — When  the  |  woman    cuts  dog-salmon,  1 
making  preserved  salmon  of  what  she  is  cutting,  she  |  leaves  the 
meat  on  the  skin  thick.     After  she  has  |  cut  it,  she  takes  the  cut- 
ting-board and  puts  it  down  outside  of  the  |[  house,  in  this  man- 
ner,1    When  the  meat  on  the  skin  is  too  thick,  |  she  cuts  it  off  four  5 
finger-widths  on  the  side  of  (the  fish)  from  which  | 
she  is  going  to  make  preserved  salmon.     Then  she 
cuts  downward  from  the  back  of  the  neck  of  the  | 
dog-salmon,  and  she  cuts  down  to  the  tail  of  the 
dog-salmon.     Then  |  she  hangs  it  on  the  stage  be- 
low the  upper  stage   at  the  place  on  which  ||  the 
preserved  salmon  is  hung.     As  soon  as  it  is  half 
dried,  the  woman  takes  it  down   |   and  binds  (the 
pieces)  together  with  split  cedar-bark,  in  this  way:  | 


L!opasB£wa,  qaxs  k'lesae  tsEnxwa.  Wa,  he'misexs  galae  la  xiIe-  40 
ltiLEla  lax  nEqosta-wasa  lEgwilasa  g-okwasa  wiwametslenoxwe. 
Wa,  laEm  lalotla  qa  alak"  lalasLas  lEmx£wIdEl,  qo  lal  axaxoyoltsa 
tslEdaqe,  qa£s  gexeq  laxa  g-a£yasas  dedamalasexa  lata  ts!&wunx£- 
edEL.  Wit,  wax£Em  la  gala  la  k'les  x-its!EX-£Ida.  Wa,  k-!es£Em- 
xaawise  q!esp!Ex£lda,  qaxs  kMeasae  la  tsEnxwa£ya,  lag-ilas  ex-£a- 45 
glsa  bakliime.  Wa,  la£mesEns  gwagwex-s£alal  laqexs  lae  ka£m- 
g'llayoxa  tslawunxe  yis  axanEmaq.     .     .     . 

Middle    Piece    of     Salmon     (Q!aq!aq!e£). — Wa,  he£maaxs    laeda  1 
tslEdaqe  xwaxaxa  gwa£xnisaxs  lae  xamasilaxes  xwaLasE£we.     Wa, 
la£mese  wakweda  q!EmlEdzaeyasa   wfulzEkwe.     Wa,  g'iPmese  gwal 
xwaLaxs  lae    ax£edxes  t!Eledzowe,  cja£s   ax£Elseq  lax  l  !asana£yasa 
g-okwe  ga  gwaleg'a.1     Wa,  g-lPmese  xEnLEla  w:1gudza£yeda  q!Em-  5 
lalaxs    lae     tlElsodxa     modEnas    ^wadzEHvas     lax      apsEnxa£yases 
xamsilasoLe.     Wii,  laEm  g"iix£ide  t!Els6y;1s  lax  6xLaatii£yasa  gwa£x- 
nise.      Wa,    la     laxsdEnd    lax    wuxwaxsda£yasa    gwa£xnise.     Wa, 
he£mis    la    gexwatses    laxa    q!ElaboJyasa    q!E£lile    qa  gexwalaatsa 
xaemase.     Wa,  g'il£mese  k- !ayax£wklExs  laeda  tslEdaqe  axaxodEq,  10 
qa£s  yibEdzodeq  g'a  gwiileg"a   yisa  dzEdEkwe  dEniisa  (Jig.).     Wa, 

1  That  is,  placing  its  upper  end  on  a  log,  so  that  the  cutting-board  slants  down  toward  her. 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 15 


226  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE   KWAKIUTL  [hth.ann.bb 

12  Then  she  hangs  them  up  again  where  they  were  hanging  before.  As 
soon  as  they  are  |  really  dry,  the  woman  takes  them  down  again 
and  puts  them  |  into  a  basket  made  to  hold  the  middle  parts  of  the 

15  salmon.  As  soon  ]|  as  they  are  all  in,  she  puts  (the  basket)  away 
at  a  place  where  she  made  room  for  it  |  under  the  stage  where  she 
put  her  preserved  salmon.  | 

Backbones  of  Salmon.  The  woman  takes  cedar  bars  and  |  splits  it, 
and  she  takes  two  backbones  (of  dog-salmon)  and  puts  them  together  | 
at  the  tails;  that  is  the  place  where  she  tics  them  together  with  cedar- 

20  bark    in  ||  this    manner:  ^   »         Then  she  hangs  them  up  on  the 

stage  under  which   |  the  J\  preserved  salmon  is  dried,  that, 

it  may  have  the  full  heat  jiglll^  of  the  hre;  and  when  |  it  be- 
gins to  be  dry,  the  woman  \W^~==%L  makes  two  baskets  of  cedar- 
bark;  |  and  when  she  fin-  ^^  ^^  ishes  them,  she  puts  them  down 
and  takes  down  the  backbones,   j   When  they  are  all  down,  she  sits 

25  down  and  begins  to  break  off  the  tails  ||  from  the  backbones,  and  she 
throws  the  tails  into  |  one  basket,  and  she  throws  the  backbones  into 
the  other  one;  |  and  when  they  are  both  full,  the  woman  puts  away 
the  |  two  baskets  under  the  stage  on  which  she  keeps  the  preserved 

30  salmon.  |  Tins  is  to  be  food  for  winter  use,  and  it  is  called  ||  "back- 
bone for  soaking."  It  is  a  small  basket  into  which  she  puts  the  | 
salmon-tails,  and  the  name  of  the  basket  is  "tad -receptacle."     The    | 


12  la  etled  gex£widEq  laxes  gilx'de  gexwalaasa.  Wii,  g-il£mese  la 
fdax-Id  la  lEmx£wida  lae  axaxoya  yisa  tstedaqe.  Wa,  la  axtslots 
laxa  Llabate  hekweleEin  qa  g"its!E£watsa  q!aq!aq!a£ye.     Wa,    gil- 

15  Emese  £wi£la  axtslots  laqexs  lae  g-exaq  laxes  g-ayaslla£ye  qa  gavats 
lax  awaba£yas  kMag'ile  qa  axatsa  xa£miise.' 

Backbones  of  Salmon. — Wii,2  la  ax£ededa  tstedaqaxa  dEnase  qa£s 
ts'.EX£edeq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  ma£le  xak"!adza,  qa£s  q  lap  !ex'£idex 
ts!ets!asna£yas.       Wa,    he£mis    la   y&Lodaatseq,    yisa    dsnase;   g-a 

20  gwaleg-a  (Jig-)-  Wa,  la£mese  gex£widEq  laxa  q!Elaba£yasa  lEm£wa- 
saxa  xa£mase  qa  L !esalasE£wesesa  lEgwIle.  Wa,  g-fl£mese  Iehix- 
£wT(Iexs  laeda  tslEdaqe  Llabatilaxa  made  l !a.L lEbataxa  dedEntsEme. 
Wa, g"il£mese gwatexs lae  mExalilaq,  qa£s  axaxodexa  xakladzo.  Wa, 
g-U£mese  £wi£laxamasqexs  lae  klwagalfta  qa£s  k"oqalexa  ts!asna£ye 

25  laxa  xak" ladzowe.  Wii,  la£mes  tslExtslalasa  ts!asna£ye  laxa  £nEms- 
gEme  Llabata.  Wa,  la£mes  ts  texts  liilasa  xak- ladzowe  laxa  £iiEms- 
gEin.  Wii,  g"ll£mese  qoqutlaxs  lae  gexeda  tstedaqaxa  ma£l- 
tsEme  LliiLlabat  lax  awaba£yasa  k!ag-ile  qa  gexudEmasa  xa£mase. 
Wa,  laEm  he£mawalalxa    tslawunxe.     Wa,  heEin    LegadEs  tlelalas 

30  xak" ladzowe.  Wa,  laemes  aEinayaleda  Llabate,  yix  g"Its!E£wasasa 
ts!ana£ye.     Wa,  heEm  Legadeda  Llabatas  ts!asnaeyaats!e.     Wii,  la, 

i  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  -130. 
'Continued  from  p.  223,  line  10. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  227 

basket  into  which  she   puts  the  backbones  is  larger;  it  is  called   |  32 
"backbone-receptacle."     That  is  all  about  this.1  | 

Split  Salmon.—  When  the  (  woman  cuts  open  the  dog-salmon,  she  1 
takes  oil'  the  gills  of  the  |  dog-salmon,  and  then  she  cuts  open  and 
takes  on'  its  head,  and  she  |  cuts  open  the  back  on  the  upper  side  of 
the  back  fin.   ||  The  meat  on  the  backbone  is  not  tlnck;  and  she  cuts  5 
down  I  to  the   tail,   and  she   breaks  off  the   tail.     Then  she  |  puts 
dew  n  on  the  ground  what  has  been  cut.     She  takes  the  backbone  and 
cuts  off  the  |  meat   that  was  on  it  from  the  back  of  the  salmon's 
neck,  and  |  she  cuts  down  to  four  finger-widths  from  the  place  where 
she  broke  off  the  salmon's  ||  tail.     Then  the  woman  turns  over  what  10 
she  is  cutting,  and  |  she  cuts  off  the  meat  that  was  left  on  it;  and 
when  she  reaches  down  |   to  the  same  distance  that  she  has  cut  be- 
fore on  the  other  side,  she  breaks  off  the  j   backbone  and  throws  it 
away  when  it  is  only  bone.    Then  it  is  thus:  j  j       Now  the  meat 

is  divided   at  the  ends,  and   a.  piece  of  the  //        backbone   ||  is  15 

at  the  upper  end.  This  is  called  "tail-hold-  //  \\  ing-together." 
As  soon  as  the  woman  finishes  this,  |  she  ^  ^  hangs  this, 
what,  is  called  "split-down,"  on  a  frame  made  for  the  purpose,  | 
outside  of  the  house.  When  the  weather  is  bad,  she  j  hangs  it 
up  on  the  staging  in   the    house.     Now  it  is  hanging  in    this   man- 


£walaseda  idabate,  yix  gits!j-:£wasasa  xak'Iadzo.     Wa,  heEm  Lega- 32 
dEs  xak'!adzats!e.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq.1 

Split   Salmon     (Leqwaxa). —  Wa,2  hemaaxs    lae  xwal£Ideda   ts!E-  1 
daqaxa  gwa£xnise;  wa,  laEm  heEm  gil  axoyose  q!osna£yasa  gwa£x- 
nise.     Wa,    lawIsLa    qax-£IdEq,    qa    lawayes    hex-t!a£yas.      Wfi     la 
xwaftdEX    a£wig#a£yas    ek" lot tendalax    lr!idega£yas.     Wa,    la£mes 
k'  !es£Emxat !  wagudza£ye  qlEmlalasa  qloq'.uyo.     Wa,  la  laxsdEndaEm  5 
laxa  ts!asna£ye.      Wa,    laEm    k'oqodEx    ts!asna£yas.     Wa,  la£mese 
k"!ixElsaxa  la  wtidzEkwa.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  q!oq!uyo  qa£s  tlElsodex 
qlF.mlEdzEwexdiis    g-ex-£id    lax    5xLaata£yasa    klotEla.      Wa     la 
lag-aa    laxa  modEne    g-ax'£kl    lax    gax'saasas    k'6qoyoxudas    laxa 
ts!asna£}re.      Wa,  la£meseda  tstedaqe  lex-£Idxes  t!ElsasE£we.      Wa    10 
laEm£xaawise   thdsodEx  qlEmlEklzEwex'das.     Wa,  gil£mese  lag'aa 
lax  £walag"Ilasdase  xwaLa£ye  laxa  apsadzE£yaxs  lae  k'oqodxa  qo!- 
qluyo  qa£s  ts!Ex£Idexa  la  aEm  la  xaqa.     Wa,  laEm  la  g-a  gwalee-a 
(fig.).     Wa,    laEm    qExbada    q'.Emlale.     Wa,    ke£mis    q!oq!uy5wa 
ek!Eba£ye.     Wa,  heEm  LegadEs   klwawaxsde.     Wa,  g'IPmese  gwa-  15 
Iexs  laeda  tslEdaqe  gex£unts  laxa  hekwelae  qa  ge£wasxa  Leqwaxa 
lax   l !asana£yases    g'okwe.     Wa,  gib'mese    £yax-sE£me   £nalaxs  lae 
heEm   gexwasE'wa    q!Ellle    laxa    g'okwe.     Wa,    lag'a  gwafaxs  lae 

'  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p  435 
"  Continued  from  ibid.,  p.  433. 


228  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ietii.ann.B6 

ner:  |     =r&yy^^=  After  it  has  been  hanging  thus  for  three  days,  || 

20  i  t  is  /  f\[\  \  hatf  dried.  Then  the  woman  takes  it  down  | 
a  n  d  LJ  V  —  straightens  it  out,  so  that  the  split-down  hangs 
straight  down  from  the  end  of  the  tail-holding-together.  |  Then  she 
hangs  it  up  again  ;  t  the  place  where  it  was  hanging  before,  |  and 
it  is  in  this  way:  fl  She  just  leaves  it  again  hanging  over 

one  night.  |  Then    — -4|  the  woman  takes  it  down,  and  she  pulls 

25  out  the  short  /  \\  bones  that  are  left  ||  in  the  split-down. 
As  soon  as  all  the  LJ  *— J  bones  are  out,  she  rubs  it  |  as  the 
women  do  when  they  are  washing  clothes;  |  and  therefore  the  split- 
down  is  soft,  and  therefore  also  it  is  |  white.  After  she  has  fin- 
ished rubbing  it,  she  hangs  it  up  again  |  at  the  place  where  it  was 

30  hanging  before;  and  when  it  is  really  dry,  the  ||  woman  takes  it  down 
again  and  puts  it  on  a  mat.  As  soon  as  it  is  |  all  down,  she  takes  two 
cedar-bark  baskets  and  puts  them  down  at  the  place  where  she  is 
working,  |  and  she  takes  the  split- down  and  breaks  off  the  tail- 
holding-together  and  |  throws  it  into  one  of  the  baskets.  Then  she 
rubs  |  the  split-down  again;  and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  throws  it 

35  into  the  ||  other  basket;  and  she  continues  doing  so,  and  only  |  stops 
when  it  is  all  finished.  Then  she  puts  away  the  two  |  baskets  under 
the  staging  where  she  keeps  the  preserved  salmon.  |  It  serves  for 
winter  food.'  j 


gexwaleg-a   {fig-).     Wa,    g'ihmese    la    yuduxuxse    £naliis    he  gwale 

l>0  gexwalaena£yas  lae  k- !ayax£wlda.  Wa,  leda  tslEtlfiqe  axaxodEq 
qa*s  dahedeq,  qa  £naEnqalax,£ldesa  Leqwaxa  £nExbEndxa  klwii- 
waxsdi:£ve.  Wa,  lae  etled  gex'und  laxes  gibrde  gexwalaasa. 
Wii,  ga  gwiileg'a  {fig.).  Wa,  aEmxaawise  xa£malax  gexwalaxs 
laeda  ts'.Edaqe    axaxodEq  qaes  qlEkolexa  tsEltslEkwe  xaq   exdzo- 

25  wexa  Leqwaxa.  Wa,  g'ihmese  £wl£lamasxa  xaqaxs  lae  qlEwex-- 
£IdEq  yo  gwegllox  gweg"ilasa-<a  tsledaqaxs  tsloxwaaxa  gwll- 
gwala.  Wa,  lag'llas  tElkwa  Leqwaxa.  Wa,  heEmxaiiwis  lag'llas 
mElmadzE£we.  Wa,  gihinese  gwal  qloyaq  lae  etled  gex£wklEq 
laxes  gexwalaase.     Wa,  g'ihmese  alax-eId  lEmx£wedaxs,  lae  etlededa 

30  tslEdaqe  axaxodEq  qa£s  axdzodales  laxa  le£wa£ye.  Wa,  gihmese 
£wl£laxaxs  lae  ax£edxa  ma£le  LlaLlEbata  qa£s  ax£allles  laxes  eaxE- 
£lase.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  Leqwaxe,  qaes  koqodexa  k!wawaxsdE£ye,  qa£s 
tslExtslodes  laxa  £nEmsgEme  Llabata.  Wa,  la£mese  etled  qlEwex- 
Idxa  Leqwaxa.     Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  tslExtslots  laxa  £nEms- 

35  gEine  Llabata.  Wa,  laEm  hex'saEm  la  gweg'ila.  Wii,  al£mese 
gwalExs  lae  £wl£lamasxes  axsE£we.  Wii,  la  g'exaxa  ma£ltsEme 
LlaLlEbata  lax  awabii£yasa  klaglle  qa  axatsa  xa£mase.  Wii,  laEm 
hemawalalxa  ts  lawunxe.1 

'  t'ontinu?d  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition.  Vol.  V,  p.  433. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  229 

Fresh  Roasted  Backbone.     When  |  the  dog-salmon  is  cut  by  the  1 
woman,  |  the  dog-salmon  is  put  on  an  old  ma1  to  be  cut.     Then  |  the 

woman  cuts  off  the  gills  of  the  dog-salmon,  so  that  they  ||  are  attached  5 
only  to  the  end  of  the  intestines  of  the  dog-salmon.     Then  she  cuts 
off  |  the  head;  and  as  soon  as  it  is  off,  the  woman  |  begins  to  cut, 
beginning  at  the  back  of  the  neck  of  the  dog-salmon,  and  going  to 
four  finger-widths  |  from  its  tail.     Then  she  cuts  along  the  upper  side 
of  the  dorsal  fin;  |  then  she  turns  around  what  she  is  cutting,  and  she 
cuts  into  it  ||  on  the  upper  (dorsal)  side  where  she  stopped,  four  fin-  10 
ger-widths  from  the  tail  of  the  dog-salmon.  [  Then  she  cuts  it ,  beginning 
from  there,  until  she  reaches  the  back  of  the  neck.  |   Then  the  meat 
on  the  backbone  is  t  luck  when  she  takes  it  off  from  the  |  skin.     When 
there  are  many  backbones,  the  woman  |  takes  straight-splitting  pine- 
wood  and  she  splits  it  in  ||  pieces  to  make  roasting-tongs.     These  are  15 
four  spans  |  in  length.     As  soon  as  she  finishes  splitting  them,  she 
puts  them  into  the  ground  |  where  she  is  working.     Then  she  takes 
the  intestines  of   the  dog-salmon  and  |  rubs  them  on  the  roasting- 
tongs.     As  soon  as  they  are  all  slimy,  [  she  takes  cedar-bark  and  ties 
it  around  under  the  ||  split  part  of  the  roasting-tongs;  and  after  she  20 
finishes  tying  it,  she  takes  |  the  backbone  and  puts  it  crosswise  into 
the  roasting-tongs ;  and  as  soon  as  |  four  have  been  put  in,  she  ties  a 
piece  of  cedar-bark  |  just  over  them.     Then  she  takes  four  more  pieces 

Fresh    Roasted    Backbone    (Alxwase    LlobEdzo    xalcladzo). —  Wa,  1 
lie'rmaaxs    lae  xwa'LasE£weda  gwa£xnise,  yisa  tslEda'qe;  wa,   IaEm 
k- lEgEdzo'tsa  gwa£xni>e    laxes    xwaLEdzd'we    k- lii'klobana.      Wa, 
la£mese    tsloVldeda  tslEda'qax   q!o'sna="yasa    gwa£xnise,  qa  a£mes 
axba'xa  ya'x'ylg'ilasa  gwa£xnise.     Wa,  hr'mes  qa'x'-IdEq  qa   lawa-  5 
yes   hex-t!a;"yas.     Wa,  g-iPmese  lawa'yexs  la'e  xwa'Hdeda  tslEda- 
qaxa  g'a'x"£lde  lax  oxL,aata£yasa  gwa'xnise    la'g'aa  la'xa   nio'dEne 
lax  ts!a'sna£yasa  gwa£xnise.     Wa,  laE'm  e'k"  lot  lEndalax   k'lide'g'a- 
£yas.  Wa,  la  xweTldxes  xwa'i.asEfwe.  Wa,  la£me'se  xwa'lbEtE'ndEx 
nExsa'wases  wa'laasde  la'xa  mo'dEne  lax  tsla'smryasa  gwa-'xnise.  10 
Wa,  la-mes  xwiiTldEq  g-a'x-Eid  laq  la'laa  lax   6'xLaata£yas.     Wa, 
IaEm  wa'kwe  qlE'mEldza-yasa    xak"!idzoxs  la'e  la'wa  la'xes  dese- 
na'-'ye.      Wa,  gil£mese.   qle'nEmeda  xa'k'ladzaxs    la'eda    tskda'qe 
ax£e'dxa  eg'a'kwa  lax  xa'sE£we  xE'xumEsa.     Wa,  la'mese  xo'xex"- 
sE'ndEq,    qa£s    Llo'psayogwlleq.     Wa,    laE'm    moplicnk'e  ba'i,a£yas  L5 
qa  EwasgEmats.     Wa,  g-iTmese  gwal  xa'qexs  la'e  La'g-aElsaq  la'xes 
e'axE="lase.      Wa,    la£me's    ax£e'dxa    ya'x'yig'ilasa    gwa£xnise    qa£s 
yiltslElE'ndes  la'xa  Llo'psayoLe.     Wa,  g"I'l£mese  la  -na'xwa  kleklE- 
la'laxs  la£e  ax£e'dxa  dEna'se    qa£s   yih'ai.E'lodes  la'xa  bE'nba£yasa 
xa'£yasa  ido'psayo.     Wa,    g'l'l£mese   gwal   ylLa'qexs  la'e    ax£e'dxa  20 
xa'k'ladzo    qaes    ge'g-aalts lodes    la'xa    idopsayo.     Wa,    gi'h'mese 
mo'weda  la    ax£a'lts!oyoxs   la'qexs    la'e    yil£aLE'lotsa    dEna'se    lax 
e'k'leLElas.     Wa,    la    e'tled    ax£e'dxa    mo'maxatd    xa'k'ladzo    qa£s 


230  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.S6 

of  backbone  and  |  puts  them  over  those  that  have  been  tied  in.     As 
25  soon  as  these  four  are  also  done,  ||  she  ties  (the  tongs)  up  again  above 
them,   anil  she  keeps  on  |  doing  so;  and  she  only  stops  when  she 
reaches  the  end  of  the  roasting-tongs.  |  That  is  in  this  way: 
As  soon  as  they  are  full,  she  takes  j  four  slender  pieces  of 
split  pine  and  places  them  lengthwise  |  on  the  ends  of  the 
30  backbones  in  the  roasting-tongs.     Now  there  is  one  ||  long 
strip    of   split  pine    on   each   side.     Then  she  takes    six 
pieces  |  and  pushes  them  through  between  the  two  legs  of 
the   roasting-tongs;  then    |  she  puts  one  on  each  side  of  the  back- 
bones; then  she  pushes  them  over  (the  long  split  sticks),  |  and  thus 
they  are  fastened.     After  this  is  done,  she  puts  them  in  the  ground 
by  the  side  |  of  the   lire   of  the  house;  and  when  they  begin   to 
35  blacken,  the  woman  ||  takes  them  and  puts  them  right  over  the  fire.    | 
Now  they  are  finished,  and   they  are   called   "roasted   backbones" 
after  this.  | 
1       Pectoral    Fins    of    Dog-Salmon    (Pectoral  fins    of    the   dog-salmon 
taken  |  at  the  upper  part  of  the  river).-  When  the  woman  cuts  the   | 
dog-salmon  and  she  finishes  taking  off  the  gills,  she  |  cuts  around  I  he 
5  neck  of  the  dog-salmon,  and  cuts  oil'  the  ||  pectoral  lins,  half  a.  finger 
thick,  |  and  they  are  just  hanging  down.     Then  she  also  |  cuts  oil' 
the  anal  fins  and  takes  them  off.     She  puts  them  into  a  |  basket; 

axe'gindes    lii'xa    la    yii.Ekwa'.       Wa,    gThicnixaa/wise    £Wi'£leda 

J5  mo'waxs    la'e    e'tled    yil£e'dEx     e'k- leLElas.     Wa,    kiE'm    he'x'sa 

gwe'gule.     Wii,  a'l£mes    gwa'lExs   la'e    qluxtowe'da    ido'psayowe. 

Wa,  laE'm  g'a  gwa'leg'a  (jig.).     Wa,  g-!'l£mese  qltixto'xs  la'e  ax£e'd- 

xa   mo'ts!aqe   wiswiU    xok"  xEx"me'sa.     Wil,    hi.    ao'dzaqalamasEq 

lax  oba£yasa  la   L!o'pts!5ls    xa'k-!adz5.     Wii,  laE'm  wa'x-sasElaxa 

30  g  1'lsgilt !a  xoku  xExmiE'sa.     Wii,  la  e't!ed  ax£e'dxa  q!EL,!Ets!a/qe 

qa£s   idE'nxsodes   aa'qodala     xEwe'la£yasa   ido'psayo.     Wa,  laE'm 

wa'x-sats'.Eiidalaxa     xii'k- ladzowe.      Wii,    laE'm     e'k'.'odEnts    laq. 

Wii,  he'Emis  la  Ela'layose.     Wa.  g"f'l£mesc  gwa'lExs  la'e  La'nolisaq 

la'xa  lEgwi'lases  g'o'kwe.     Wii,   gi'l'mese    la    k  !uniElx£I'dExs  la'e 

35  ax£e'deda  tslEda'qaq  qa£s  i.e'saLEl5des  la'x  i  £nExsta'£yases  lEgwI'le. 

Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la.    LaE'mLa  Le'gadEs  Llo'bEdzo  xa'kladzo  la'xeq.1 

1       Pectoral  Fins    of  Dog-Salmon    (PEL.'Exa'£wesa    gwaExnise    g-a'yol 

lax  uiE'ldziisa  wa). — Wii,    he'£maaxs    la'e    xwa'Leda    tsteda'qaxa 

gwa£xnise.     Wa,    giTmese     gwiil     lawa'lax     q!o'snaeyasexs    la'e 

t  !o'tse£stElaxa     5'xawa£yasa     gwa£xnisaxs    la'e     t.'atlo'sk'inaEmxa 

5  pEL!Exa'£wa£yas.     Wii,   la£me's  kMo'dicu    la'xEns    q!wa'q!wax-ts!a- 

na£yex,  yix  Ela'la£yas  laE'm  a/Em  la  te'kwala.     Wii,  laEmxaa'wise 

tkVsodxa  pELii'ga£ye.     Wa,  laE'mLa  lawiiq.     Wii,  la  axtsla'las  la'xa 

'Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  437. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  231 

and  after  she  has  sliced  that  which  is  to  be  preserved  salmon,  |  she  S 
hangs  it  up  at  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  dry  it.     After  she 
finishes  hanging  it  up,  ||  she  takes  a  drying-rack  and  puts  the  anal  10 
fins  on  it,  and  she.  scatters  them  |  over  it.     Then  she  puts  it  up  right 
over  the  fire,  so  that  the  heat  |  of  the  fire  strikes  it.     She  finishes 
thai ;  and  when  [  the  salmon  is  half  dry,  the  woman  takes  down  that 
which  is  to  be  preserved  salmon.  |   Then  she  takes  her  fish-knife  and 
cuts  off  the  pectoral  fins  [[  and  throws  them  also  into  a  basket.     After  15 
she  has  done  so,  |  she  hangs  up  the  basket  with  the  pectoral  fins  in 
it  by  the  side  of  the  |  drying-rack  on  which  the  anal  fins  are.     After 
this  is  done,  |  she  gathers  the  drying-poles  and  spreads  on  them  that 
which  is  to  be  preserved  salmon,  |  with  the  meat  side  downward,  to 
the  fire.  ||  When  she  has  done  so,  she  watches  the  pectoral  tins  and  20 
the  |  anal  fins  until  they  are  thoroughly  dry.     As  soon  as  they  are 
thoroughly  dry,  |  she  puts  them  away  as  food  for  the  winter.     She 
does  |  the  same  with  the  salmon-tails,  which  are  also  put  on  a  drying 
rack  |  when  they  are  dried.     Now  we  shall  talk  about  the  way  ||  they  25 
are  cooked. 

Dog-Salmon  Cheeks.    (Plucked  cheek,  the  head  of  the  dog-salmon  i 
when  it  is  |  roasted,  to  keep  it  for  winter  use). — 

When  the  Nimkish  go  to  catch  salmon  in  the  river  Gwane,  above, 
and  when  there  are  many  dog-salmon,  the  ||  woman  cuts  oil'  their  5 

lExa'£ye.     Wii,  gi'fmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  t!E'ls5edxa  xa£ma/sLaxs  la'e  8 
ge'x'wIdEs    la'xes    x"ila'sLaq.     Wii,  g-iT'mese   gwfil   ge'xwaq     la'e 
&x£e'dxa  k"  !itk"  lEde'se  qa/s  axdzo'desa  pELa'ga£ye  laq  lagwe'ldzEwe  10 
laq.     Wii,  la,  La'laLElots  la'xa  nExsta'£yasa  lEgwI'le  qa  ide'sEg'5- 
stalasE£weses  LleValiisa  lEgwI'le.     Wii,  la  gwa/ia.     Wii,  g'i'Pmese 
k'  !a/yax£wldeda  xa£ma/sLaxs  la'eda  tsteda'qe  iixa'xodxes  xa£ma'sLe. 
Wii,  la£mes  ax£e'dxes  xwaxa/yowe  qa£s  tlo'salexa  pe'pEL!Exawa£ye 
qa£s  ts!Exts!a'les  la'xa  lExa'£maxat!.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  £wl'£laxs  f5 
la'e    tex£waLElotsa    pEL  !Exawa£yaats  !e    lExe    la'xaaxa  apse'LElasa 
k-  !itk"  tede'sexa  la  axdza'yaatsa  pEL§  'ga£ye.  Wa,g'i'PmesegwaT"aLE- 
laxs  la'e    q  lap  !e'x"£Idxa   gayo    qa£s    LEp  !a,LElodesa    xa-'ma'sLe    laq. 
Wii,  laE'm  'na'xwaEm  bana'dzE£ye  q!EmEldza'£yas  la'xa  lEgwI'le. 
Wii,  g'i'Pmese  gwa'la  la'e  da'doqwllaxa  pEidExa'wa£ye  LE£wa  pELa'-  20 
ga£ye  qa  a'lak" lales  lE'mx£w!da.     Wii,  gTh'mese    a'la    la   lE'mx£wI- 
(Iexs  la'e  g'e'xaq  qa£s  la'k"  lESElalxa  tshlwii'nxLa.     Wa,  he'Enixaa 
gwe'g'ilaxa     ts!a'sna£ye     k'!itlc!Ede's£Emxaa    ftxdza,  yaasasexs    la'e 
lE'mxwasE£wa.       Wii,     hr'me'sEns     gwa'gwex"s£alal      laqexs     la'e 
ha£mexsi'lasE£wa.     .     .     . :  2.r> 

Dog-Salmon    Cheeks.    (P!e1os,    yix   he'x -f !a£yasa    gwa£xnise,    vixs  1 
Llo'bEkwae  qa£s  3xelasE£we    la'laa  la'xa  ts!a£wii'nxe). — 

Wii,  he'£maaxs    la'e    wl'£wamesa    £nE'mgese  la'xes    wii     Gwa£no 
la'xa   £nE'ldzas.     Wii,  g'i'1-mese  qle'nEma  gwa£xnisaxs  la'eda  ts!s- 

'Continued  on  p. 327,  line  1. 


232  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  U'.th.  ann.  sb 

6  heads.  Then  the  woman  takes  |  wood  of  the  red-pine  that  splits 
readily.  (She  makes  pieces)  one  span  and  four  fingers  long,  |  and 
she  splits  them  to  make  roasting-tongs.  Sometimes  she  makes  |  one 
hundred,  and  sometimes  she  makes  two  hundred.  |  After  her  work  is 
finished,  she  gathers  them  up,  and  takes  them  to  the  place  where 

10  she  ||  cuts  dog-salmon.  Then  she  puts  up  on  the  ground  one  pair 
of  tongs,  and  |  puts  the  salmon-head  on  the  end  of  the  tongs,  which 
are  open;  |  and  she  just  stops  pushing  down  the  head  |  when  the 
points  of  the  tongs  reach  up  to  the  eyes  of  the  head.  |  The  roasting- 

15  tongs  are  not  tied  with  cedar-bark.  After  ||  she  has  finished  with 
one  of  them,  she  puts  down  what  she  has  finished;  |  then  she  takes 
another  pair  of  roasting-tongs  and  |  puts  them  up  in  the  place  where 
t  he  first  ones  have  been  standing.  Then  |  she  does  with  them  the  same 
thing  as  she  did  with  the  first  ones.  |  She  goes  on  doing  so  with  the 

20  others.  After  she  has  ||  finished,  her  husband  takes  much  fire-wood 
and  makes  a  fire  |  on  the  beach.  When  the  fire  that  he  makes 
blazes  up,  they  |  take  the  heads  in  the  roasting-tongs  and  place  them 
around  it.  |  First  the  throats  are  roasted;  and  when  they  begin  to 
be  black,  |  they  turn  them  all  round,  so  that  the  nape  of  the  neck  is 

25  next  ||  to  the  fire  on  the  beach.  As  soon  as  the  skin  is  blackened, 
they  are  taken  from  the  fire  |  and  put  down  on  the  beach;  and  when 
they  cool  off,  she  |  takes  the  salmon-heads  out  of  the  roasting-tongs 

5  da'qe  qaka'lax  he'x-t!a£yas.  Wii,  la  iix£e'deda  tslEda/qaxa  e'g-a- 
qwa  lax  xa'sE£we  wiina'gfde.  Wa,  la  mo'dEnbala  la'xEns  ba'i,a\. 
Wa,  la  xo'x£wulEq  qa£s  L  lo'psayogwlleq.  Wa,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Ena 
la'k'lEnde  axa/£yas  loxs  lo'i/maax  ma£lp!E'nyage  axa'£yas.  Wii, 
g-i'l£mese  gwa/le  axa'Eyasexs  la'e  q!ap!e'x£idEq  qa£s  las  la'xesxwa'l- 

10  dEmsaxa  gwa£xnise.  Wii,  le  La'gaElsaxa  enE'mts!aqe  LlSpsaya  qa£s 
klwaxto'desa  ke'x-t!a£ye  lax  lae'na£yas  aqa'le  wa'x'sanots lExsta- 
£yasa  Llopsayowe.  Wii,  ii'l£mese  gwal  we'qwaxElaxa  he'x"t  !a£yaxs 
la'e  la'g'ae  5'ba£yasa  Llopsayowe  lax  gegEya'g'Esasa  hext!a£ye. 
Wa,  laE'm  la  k-!ea's   ylLE'msa    Llo'psayowe    dEna'sa.     Wa,  gi'l- 

15  £mese  gwa'lamasxa  £nE'mts!aqaxs  la'e  LEx£idlsaxes  la  gwa'lama- 
tsEewa.  Wa,  la'xaa  e'tled  ax£e'dxa  £nE'mts!aqe  Llo'psaya  qa£s 
La'stolises  lax  La'dzE£wasdases  g  i'lxde  axsE£wa'.  Wa,  he'Em- 
£xaii'wise  gwe'x£IdEq  la'xes  gf'lx'de  gwe'gilasxa  gi'lx'de  axso's. 
Wii,  a'£mes  la  he  gwe£na'kulaxa    wao'kwe.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese    gwa,'- 

20  Iexs  la'e  la'£wunEmas  ax£e'dxa  q!e'nEme  lEqwa'  qa£s  lEx£wa'lise 
la'xa  L!Eina'£ise.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  x'l'qosta.  lEqwe'la£yasexs  la'e 
ax£e'dEX'da£x"xa  L!eL!o'pts!ala  he'xt!e£  qa£s  le  q!wa£stalas  laq. 
Wii,  laE'm  he  g'll  Llo'pasose  q!oq!ona's.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  k!iimE'l- 
x£Ii1exs   la'e  le'x£idEq   £wi'£la  qa  hes   la  awa'p!a£yas    la    nExwa,'- 

25  laxa  lEgwise'.     Wii,  g-i'l£mese  k!umE'lx-£Ide  Lle'sasexs  la'e  axsEn 
cla'laq    qa£s    k-a't!alisEleq.     Wii,  g-i'l£mese  k'6x£w!dExs  la'e   axo'- 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OP   FOOD  233 

and  puts  them  down  on  the  beach  |  by  her  side.     When  she  has  28 
taken  them  all  off,  she  takes  the  roasted  salmon-heads  |  and  breaks 
open  the  jaws.     She  spreads  them  out  so  that  they  are  ||  spread  out  30 
flat.     Then  she  takes  out  the  edible  part  inside  the  head,  and  only  | 
the  skin  and  the  bones  are  left  on  the  "plucked  cheek."     As  soon 
as  |  this  is  done,  she   takes  a  long  drying-rack.     Sometimes  it  is  |  a 
little  over  a  fathom  in  length.     The  width  of  the  drying-rack  is  |  two 
spans    and    four    finger-widths.  ||  She    puts    her    "plucked    salmon-  35 
cheeks"   on  it.     They   are   all   spread   out  |  when   they   are  on   the 
drving-rack,  and  they  are  close  together  |  on  it.     As  soon  as  this  is 
all  done,  she  takes  what  she  has  done  |  and  puts  it  just  over  the 
fire  of  the  house,  where  it  is  really  |  hot.     When  she  finishes,  she 
requests  her  husband   to  ||  go  and  call  those  who  are  walking  about  40 
in  the  village,  the  men  the  |  children  and  the  women,  and  even  the 
weak  old  women,  |  to  go  and  eat  the  edible  part  taken  out  of  the 
head  when  it  was  lifted  |  from  the  roasting-place  of  the  "plucked 
cheek."     Immediately    the  |  man    calls    all    the   men    and    all    the 
women  ||  and  children  seen  by  him  to  come  quickly  and  to  eat  the  45 
roasted  |  salmon-heads.     It  is  not  long  before  all  those  whom  lie    j 
invited  come  down  to  the  beach,  and  they  sit  around  (lie  heap  of 
roasted  edible  insides  of  the  |  salmon-heads.     Then  they  begin  to 

dalaxa  L!eL!o'psayowe,    yi'xa  hehe'x"t!a£ye,  qa£s  ax£ati'sEleq  la'xes  27 
ftpsa'lise.     Wii,   giTmese  £wl'-iaxs  la'e    ax£e'dxa  Llo'bEkwe  hex- 
t!a£ya   qa£s  wa'x-se£stE'ndex   qlwayo'sas.     Wa,  la   LEpsE'ndEq  qa 
LEpa'les.    Wa,  la  lawayodEx  ha'mtslawasa  he'x't  !a£ye.     Wa,  a'£mes  30 
la  Lies    LE'wa    xa'qeda  la    axa'la    la'xa    plslo'se.     Wa,   g'iTmese 
Ewl'£la  gwa'texs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  k'litk'lEcle'se  g'i'lt!a  £na'l£nEmp!Ena 
e'sEgiyo    la'xEns    ba'Liiqe    £wa'sgEmasa.     Wit.    la     hamo'dEugala 
la'xEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,vix  £wa'dzEwasasak"!itk"!Ede'se.  Wa, 
he'£mis  la  axdzo'dalatseses  plElo'sLe.     Wa,  laE'm  £wI'£laEm  LEpa'-  35 
laxs     la'e    gldzEwexa     k'!itk!Ecle'se.      Wii,    la    mEmko'laxs    la'e 
gi'dza£ya.      Wa,  g'i'Pmese  £wl/£laxs  la£e  ax£e'dxes  axa'£ye  qa£s  le 
La'laLElots  la'xa  nEcp'stases  lEgwI'lases  g-o'kwe  la'xa  a'la  la  ide'- 
saia.     Wa,   g-i'l£mese    gwalExs    la'e    axkla'laxes    la'-'wiinEme    qa 
les    Le'£lalaxa    g'ayi'mgilsElaxa  be'bEgwanEme    Lo£me    g'i'ngina-  40 
nEme  LE£wa  ts'.e'daqe    LE£wa  wa'x-£me  la    wao'yatslala    tsle'daqa 
qa    les   ha£ma'pEx    h;lmts!a'wasa    he'xt!a£ya,    yixs    la'e    £mE'wr^ 
la'xa  L'5'basdasexa  la  plElo'sa.     Wa,  he'x-£ida£mese  le'da  bEgwa,'- 
nEme    Le£lalaxa    £na'xwa    be'bEgwiinEm    LE£wes    dogflle     tsle'daq 
Lo£ma  g-i'nglnanEm  qa  g'a'xes  ha'labala  he'x-hax£Idxa  Llo'bEkwe  45 
hex"t!aeya.     Wii,  k-!e'st!a  ga'laxs  g'a'xae  ewi'£la  h5'qunts!esa  Le'- 
£laiiEme  qa£s  le  k!utse£sta'iisElaxa    £mEwe'se    Llo'bEk"  hamtsla'sa 
he'x"t!a£ye.     Wii,  la'x-da£xwe    hamx-£I'da.     Wii,    gi'l-mese    po'l£i- 


'_'o4  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.»B 

eat;  and  as  soon  as  they  have  had  enough,  |  they  carry  away  what 
50  they  could  not  eat.  They  carry  ||  it  in  their  hands  and  go  home. 
But  the  owner  of  the  |  heads  which  arc  called  "plucked  cheeks" 
goes  up  from  the  beach  and  makes  a  fire  under  the  "plucked  cheeks." 
When  they  are  dry  enough,  (the  woman)  takes  them  down  and  puts 
them  into  a  |  large  basket.  Then  she  puts  them  away  for  the 
winter.  |  That  is  the  end.  || 
1  Koasted  Dog-Salmon  Heads  (Heads  of  |dog-salmon  when  they  are 
roasted  ami  dried,  with  the  edible  insides). — 

When  the  woman  cuts  oil  the  head  of  the  [  dog-salmon,  and  when 

5  she    has    many  salmon-heads,  she  takes  the  ||  same  number  of    short 

roasting-tongs  of  the  same  kind  as  the  roasting-tongs  |  for  roasting 

the  "plucked  cheek,"  and  she  does  in  the  same  way  as  she  does  j  when 

she  roasts  them.     Each  point  of  the  roasting-tongs  is  pushed  |  into 

each  side  of  the  neck  of  the  salmon-head,  and  reaches  up  to  the  eyes.  | 

When  this  is  done,  she  puts  them  up  around  the  fire  on  the  ground,  || 

10  outside  of  the  house.     First  the  jaws  are  roasted;  and  |  when  they 

begin  to  be  black,  she  turns  them  around  with  the  nape  of  the  neck   | 

towards  the  tire;  and  when  that  begins  to  be  black  also,  she  takes 

them  |  into  the  house.     Then  she  puts  them  up  with  the  |  roasting- 

15  tongs  over  the  fire,  right  where  it  is  really  hot.  \\  They  stay  there  a 

dExs  la'e  £wI'£laEm  mo'tElaxes  k'le'tsla^yawa^ye  qa£s  les  da'k-!ota- 
50  laqexs  la'x"da£xwae  na'£nakwa.  Wa,  la'i.eda  axno'gwadasa  he'x*- 
t!a£ye,  yi'xa  plElo'se  ld'sdesa  qa£s  le  lEqwe'laabEwexes  ptelo'sa. 
Wa,  g-i'l£mese  lE'mx-wTdExs  la'e  axa'xodEq  qa£s  ge'ts lodes  la'xa 
£wa'lase  lExa/£ya.  Wa,  laE'm  g'e'xaq  qae'da  ts!a£wu'nxe.  Wa,j 
laE'm  gwa'la. 
1  Koasted  Dog-Salmon  Heads  (Xd'xwasde,  yix  he'xt  !a\vasa  gwa,£x- 
nisaxs  L,!6pasE£wae  qaes  lE'mxwasE-we  Ewi'£la   LE£wis  ha'mtsla). 

Wa,  he'£maaxs   la'e   qa'x£Ideda  fcslEda'qax   he'x-t  !a£yasa  gwa£x- 

nise.  Wii,  g  iT'mese  la  qle'nEmeda  he'x"t!a£yaxs  la'e  ax-e'dxa  he'- 

5  Emaxat!  wa'xeda   tslE'ltsbsklwa  i. leido'psaya" ;  he  gwe'xse   Llopsa- 

£vasa  Llo'paxa  plslo'se.     Wii,  la    he'Emxat!   gwa'le  gwa'laasasexs 

la'e  Llo'paq.     Wa,  lasm  idE'nqale  wa/x*san6ts!Exsta£yasa  ido'psayo 

lax  e'wanulxawa£yasa  he'x't!a£ye.     Wa,  la  la'gaa  lax  gegEya'gEsas. 

Wa,  giTmese  gwa'texs  la'e   gwa'stElsaq   lax  lEqluse',  lax  ida'sa- 

10  na£yases  g'o'kwe.     Wa,  laEm  he  gll  L!5p!etsose  oxi.asx'a'ya.     Wa, 

g-i  l£mese  k!umElx-£IdExs  la'e    le'x-£idEq  £wl'£la    qa  hes   giiyapla'- 

leda  lEqluse'.     Wa,  g'lT'Emxaa'wise    k!umElx-£IdExs  la'e  fix£e'dEq 

qa£s  le  lae'Las  la'xes   g"6'kwe.     Wii,  la  Le'saLElots    £wi'£la    LE£wis 

LleLlo'psayowe  lax  e'kda£yases  lEgwi'le  lax  nEga'sasa  a'la  Lle'sala. 

15  Wa,    la  he'xsai:m    la.     Wa,    iiTmese    axa/xod,  la'e    a'lakMala    la 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  235 

long  time,  and  she  takes  them  down  when  they  begin  to  be  quite  |  16 
dry.  Then  she  takes  off  the  roasting- tongs,  and  |  she  ties  the  roasting- 
tongs  together  and  puts  them  in  the  corner  of  the  house.  |  That  is 
also  what  the  woman  does  when  she  roasts  the  "plucked  cheeks." 
Then  |  she  takes  a  large  cedar-bark  basket  and  puts  the  roasted 
heads  ||  into  it;  then  she  puts  it  away  for  winter  use.  |  '  20 

Dog-Salmon  Spawn  (1)  (Scattered  spawn  of  the  dog-salmon,  |  caught  1 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  rivers  when  the  dog-fish  are  spawning). — 
When  a  woman  cuts  the  fish  caught  by  her  husband,  |  she  takes  a 
high  box  and  puts  it  down  at  her  ||  left  side  at  the  place  where  she  is  5 
cutting;  and  after  |  the  woman  has  finished  cutting  the  dog-salmon, 
and  when  |  what  she  is  cutting  is  opened  out,  then  she  scoops  out 
with  her  hands  the  scattered  J  spawn  and  puts  it  into  the  tall  box; 
and   after  she  has  |  done  so.   and  the  box  is  full  of  the  scattered 
spawn,  ||  her  husband  goes  up  and  puts  it  down  in  the  |  corner  of  the  10 
house.     Then  short  boards  are  put  down  flat  on  top  of  it,  that  |  the 
rain  may  not  drip  in  when  it  rains.     When  |  that  is  done,  he  leaves 
it,  for  the  cover  is  not  water-tight,  for  |  the  men  will  always  go  and 
take  out  some  of  it.  | 

Dog-Salmon  Spawn  (2). — Now  we  will  talk  about  the  sticky(spawn).  |  1 
When  the  tall  box  is  full  of  spawn,  when  |  the  woman  cuts  the  dog- 


lE'mx£wida.      Wii,     lawi'sLa     axa'laxa     L'eiJo'psayowe.      Wa,    la  16 
yiLo'yodxa  LleLlo'psayowe  qa£s  g'e'xeq  la'xa  one'gwftases  go'kwe 
he'Emxaa   gwe'x-'Ideda    tsfeda'qaxs   Llopaaxa    plElo'se.     Wii,    la 
ax£e'dxes  £wa'lase  dE'ntsEm  Lla'bata  qa£s  g"e'ts!odesa  xo'xwasde 
laq.     Wit,  la  g'e'xaq  qa£s  he'lelayolxa  ts!awii'nxi,a.  20 

Dog-Salmon  Spawn  (1)  (Gweletse,  yix  ge'£nasa  gwa'xnisaxs  giya-  1 
nEmae  lax  £nE'ldzas;i  wl'wa;  yixs  la'e  xwl'laweda  gwsVxnise). — Wa, 
he'£maaxs    la'e    xwa'l'Ideda    tslEda'qax    ya'nEmases    la'£wunEme 
la£mes  he   g'il    ax£e'tsoseda    La'watse    qa£s    ha'ng'alises   lax  gEin- 
xagawallsas  k!wae'dzasasexs  la'e  xwaTlda.     Wii,  gi'h'mese  gwii'la  5 
la'e  xwa/Hdeda    t'slEda'qaxa    gvva£xnise.     Wii,   g-i'lJmese   nElalese 
xwa'La£yasexs     la'e     LE'lx-'Itses     eecyasowe     la'xa     gwe'ledza£ye 
ge'='nii  qa£s  LElts!a'les  la'xa  La£watsa.     Wii,  a'l£mese  gwal  he  gwe'- 
g'ilaxs    la'e   qo'tleda   La'watsaxa    L.rwele'dzafye   ge'£na.     Wii,   g'i'l- 
Emese  qo't  !axs  la'e  la'-'wunEmas  la'sdesa  qa£s  le  ha'ng'alilas  lax  5'ne-  10 
gwllases  g'o'kwe.     Wii,  la  paqE'mtsa  ts!a'ts!ax"sEme  laq,  qa  k"!e'ses 
tsaxuts!a'lasosa  tsa'xwaxs   la'naxwae    yu'gux-£Ida.     Wii,  g-i'l="mese 
gwa'lExs    g'a'xae    bas   qaxs  k'e'sae    aE'mxax    pa'qEmaeyas    qaxs 
qliina'laeda  be'bEgwa'nEine  1     tsEyo'ltslod  laq. 

Dog-Salmon  Spawn  (2). — Wii,  la£me'sEngwa'gwex'sealal  la'xa qlE'n-  1 
kwe.     Wa,  he'£maaxs    la'e    qo'tleda    La'watsaxa    ge'£naxs  g'ii'lae 
xwii'i.eda  tslEdaqaxa    gwa£xnise.     Wii,    la   ax£e'deda    tslEda'qaxes 


236  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.36 

salmon,  she  takes  a  |  dish  and  washes  it  out,  When  it  is  clean,  she  || 
5  dips  up  the  fresh  salmon-spawn  into  it.  When  it  is  half  full,  |  she 
stops,  and  she  takes  a  smooth  stone  and  pounds  |  it  so  that  it  all 
bursts.  After  it  has  all  burst,  she  |  stops  pounding  it.  Then  she 
takes  a  good-sized  seal-bladder  and  |  puts  the  burst   salmon-spawn 

10  into  it.  She  just  finishes  putting  it  into  it  ||  when  it  is  full.  When 
it  is  full,  she  takes  a  twisted  cedar-bark  rope  |  and  ties  the  neck  of 
the  bladder  firmly.  After  this  has  been  done,  |  she  hangs  it  up  not 
very  near  to  the  fire,  in  the  |  rear  of  the  house.  Then  it  remains 
hanging  there  until  |  the  fern  and  the  salmon-berries  begin  to  sprout.  || 

15  The  juice  of  this  is  also  used  by  painters  for  making  the  paint  |  stick 
on  what  they  paint.  | 

Quarter-Dried    Salmon. — This    is  |  another    way    of     (preparing) 
soaked  green  salmon.     Now  we  will  talk  about  |  the  way  of  (prepar- 

20  ing)  quarter-dried  green  salmon.  Wlien  ||  dog-salmon  are  first 
speared,  when  very  old,  the  wife  of  the  |  one  who  speared  them  car- 
ries them  up  with  her  fingers,  and  places  them  on  the  mat  on  wloich  | 
she  cuts  open  the  dog-salmon  that  her  husband  lias  obtained.  |  Then 
she  takes  her  fish-knife  and  cuts  the  old  dog-salmon.  |  She  first  cuts 

25  the  gills  at  the  neck  ||  of  the  salmon,  and  then  she  cuts  off  the  head 
and  takes  it  off.  I  Then  she  cuts  down  along  the  back  from  the  neck 


l5'q!we  qa£s  tslo'xug'indeq.  Wa,  giTmese  eg'ig'a'xs  la'e 
5  gu'xts!otsa  alo'inase  ge'£ne  laq.  Wii,  giTmese  nEgo'£yox£wklExs 
la'e  gwa'la.  Wa,  la  axee'dxa  qe'tsEme  t!e'sEmaqa£s  lE'sElgEndes 
laq  qa  -naxwes  qux-ei'da.  Wii.  giTmese  ewi'ela  qux-ei'da,  la'e 
gwal  lEsE'lgeq.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa  heTa  pS'xuntsa  me'gwate  qa£s 
pEnts!a'lesa  kiigikwe'  ge'£ne  laq.    Wii,  iiTmese  gwal  pEnts!a'laqexs 

lo  La'e  qo'tla.  Wit,  giTmese  qo't'.axs  la'e  axEe'dxa  niE'lkwe  dEna'sa 
qa£s  aEle'  yiLExstE'nts  la'xa  poxunse.  Wii,  g-tT'mese  gwa'la  la 
te'x£walllas  la'xa  k'!es  xE'nLEla  nExwa'la  la'xa  lEgwi'le  lax 
5'gwlwa£lllasa  g5'kwe.  Wii,  laE'm  he'xsaEm  tegwl'le  la'laal 
la'xa  q!wa'xEndLasa  sa'gum  LEewa  q!wa'lEme.     Wii,  he'£misexs  la'e 

15  axso'sa  k' !a'k' !Et '.e'noxwe  qa  ^wa'prlases  k'la'tEliixes  k!atasE£we, 
yixs  k!iit!Ega£yae. 

Quarter-Dried  Salmon  (Dze'lelak";  klo'lox"). — Wii,  gaEm  £nEmx,£- 
idalaxaat!  t!elk"  k"!6'loxwa.  Wii.,  he'emawisLaLEns  gwagwex-s£alaLe 
gwe'gilasaxa     dze'lelakwe     klo'loxwa.      Wa,     he'£maaxs     g'a'lae 

20  sEg'Ekwa'  gwa£xnisaxs  la'e  tstela'ka.  Wa,  le'da  gEiiE'm.isa 
sEgEkiiliiq  ga'sx'Exei'dEq  qa£s  le  lclEgEdzo'ts  la'xa  le'£wa£ye,  yix 
xwa'i.Edza'sex  ya'iiEmases  la'£wunEme  gwa£xnisa.  Wii,  la£mes 
ax£e'dxes  xwaLayowe.  Wa,  la  xwaTldxa  ts.'Ela'k'e  gwii£xnisa. 
Wii,    he'Em  gil  t!o's-its5sexs   la'e    t!o'seIdEx    q!o'sna£yas    6'xawa- 

25  £yasa  k-!o'tEla.  WTa,  la'wisLa  qa'x£IdEq  qa  la'wes  he'x't!a£ya. 
Wa,  la    xwaTldEx    awi'g-a£yas    gii'x£kl    lax  5'xLaata£yas  lii'gaa 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  237 

down  |  to  four  finger-widths  above  the  tail.     A  little  [  meat  is  left  27 
on  the  backbone.     The  meat  on  the  green  salmon  is  thick.  |  Then 
she  takes  split-cedar  sticks  and  ||  spreads  (the  green  salmon)  as  she  30 
does  the  dried  green  salmon.     As  soon  as  |  she  has  spread  it,  she 
hangs  it  up  in  the  smoke  of  the  fire  of  her  |  house.     Sometimes  it 
hangs  there  one  day;  |  then  it  is  half  dried.     As  soon  as  it  is  half 
dried,  the  woman  takes  it  down  |  and  looks  for  a  mixture  of  sand  and 
clay  on  the  ||  bank  of  the  river;  and  as  soon  as  it  is  dry,  she  digs  it  35 
out;  |  and  when  she  has  dug  two  spans  deep  into  the  ground,  |  she 
spreads  out  one  of  the  quarter-dried  green  salmon  in  it;  then  |  she 
takes  grass  and  puts  it  over  it;  then  she  strews  a  |  handful  of  dirt 
(sand  and  clay  mixed)  over  it.     As  soon  as  it  is  covered  with  ||  dirt,  40 
she  takes  another  green  salmon  and  |  spreads  it  out  in  the  hole;  then 
she  puts  grass  |  over  it,  and  she  again  puts  dirt  on  it.  |  Sometimes 
one  woman  puts  a  hundred  in  |  one  hole.     Then  she  covers  it  above 
with  dirt,  ||  and  much  grass  is  put  under  it;   |  and  it  is  still  there  45 
when  winter  arrives.  | 

Spawn  of  Silver- Salmon. — Now  I  shall  talk  about  the  |  spawn  of  the  1 
silver-salmon  and  of  the  sockeye-sahnon  caught  by  trolling;  for  they 
are  alike,  |  and  their  spawn  is  small.     When  |  the  woman  cuts  what 


La'xa  mS'dEne    lax    e'k'!a£yas    ts!a'sna£ya.     Wii,  laE'm   la    ho'lale  27 
q!E'mlEdza£yas     q!o'q!ii£yas.      Wa,     la     wa'kwe     q!EmlEdza'£yasa 
kMo'loxwe.      Wa,    la£rue'se     ax£e'dxa     xo'kwe     k!waxLa/£wa    qa£s 
qEt!e'deq  lax  gwii'iaas£masa  lEmo'kwe  k-  !o'loxwa.     Wa,  giTmese  30 
gwal     qEta'qexs     la'e     ge'x£w!dEq     la'xa     kwa'xiliisa    lEgwI'lases 
go'kwe.    Wa,  la  £na'l£nEinp!Ena  £iiE'mxsa£me  £na'las  ge'x£ulaLElaxs 
la'e  k!a'yax£wlda.     Wii,  giTruese  k' !a'yax£w!dExs  la'e  axa'xodeda 
ts!Eda'qaq  qa£s  le  a'lex'ldxa  na'xsaaple  lo£  e'g-ise  lo£  L!e'q!e  lax 
o'gwaga£yasa    wa.     Wii,  la  guT'Em  lE'nixwaxs  la'e  £lap!e'dEq;  wii,  35 
g'iT'mese  malplEnx'bEtE'lsEla  la'xa  a£wi'nak!use  £la'i>ay£asexs  la'e 
LEpbEtE'lsasa  £nE'me   tlze'le£lak"    k!o'loxu    laq.     Wii,  la£me's  ax£- 
e'dxa  k'!e't!Eine  qa£s  Sxdzo'des  la'qexs  la'e  xn,L!Ex,£I'd  k'la'dzotsa 
go'xsEma£yaakwe     dzEc^wa    laq.     Wii,     gi'l£mese    haniElg  fdzo'£ya 
dzEC[wa'    la'c[exs    la'e    e't!ed     ax£e'dxa    £nE'me     k!o'loxwa    qa£s  40 
LEbegi'ndes      laq.      Wii,      laE'mxaa'wis     ax£aldzo'tsa     k!e't!Eme 
laq.     Wa,  laE'mxaii'wise    k'  ladzotsa    dzEcjwa'   laq.     Wii,  la    enal- 
£iiEmp!Ena  la'k'  lindeda  he  gwa'la  axesa  -'iiEmo'kwe  ts!Eda'q  lii'xa 
£nEmts!Eq!Ese    £la'pa£ya.     Wa,  la  ae'k'Ia   tslEme'g'intsa     dzEcjwa' 
la'qexs     la'e    qle'nEma    k!e't!Eme     la     axa'bEwes.      Wii,    laE'm  45 
he'x'saEm  le  la'g'aa  la'xa  la  ts!awfi'nxa. 

Spawn  of  Silver-Salmon. — Wa,    la£me'sEn    gwa'gwex-s£alal    la'xa  1 
ge'£niisa    do'gwinete   dza£wii'na    LE£wa   mEle'k'e,  jixs    £iiEina'xis- 
£maaxs    he'£mae    a'les    a'm£Emae    ge'£niis.      Wii,    he'£maaxs    la'e 


238  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.sb 

5  her  husband  has  caught  by  trolling,  and  also  ||  the  sockeye-salmon 
caught  in  salmon-weirs,  she  puts  the  spawn  down  on  the  beach  |  on 
the  right-hand  side  of  the  place  where  she  is  sitting  and  cutting.  As 
soon  as  she  has  finished  |  cutting,  she  takes  a  drying-rack,  made  on 
purpose,  and  puts  |  the  spawn  on  it  in  this  manner:  |j  »  jj  ; 
As  soon  as  this  is  done,  |  she  puts  it  up  just  over  the 

10  fire,  so  that  it  is  smoked  by  the  smoke.  ||  It  is  left  there 
a  long  time,  and  it  is  only  taken  down  when  it  is  j  really 
dry;  and  it  is  put  into  a  spoon-basket  of  open  weave,  | 
and  then  she  hangs  it  up  again  |  behind  the  lire  so  that     inrHnnnr' 
it  gets  just  enough  heat  from  it.     Then  it  is  |  called   "dried-part- 
of-salmon,"  and  its  name  is  "whole-piece.''  || 

15  Sockeye-Salmon. — that  is,  (old)  white  sockeye-salmon.  |  When 
the  sockeye  gets  white  in  the  upper  part  of  the  river,  |  it  is  called 
"ugly  sockeye  salmon;"  and  it  is  speared  by  those  who  live  on  the 
livers  |  at  the  spawning  place  of  the  ugly  sockeye-salmon  at  the 
upper  part  of  the  river.     As  soon  as  |  (a  man)  gets  many,  his  wife 

2(j  cuts  some  -  /7T\  of  them  in  the  same  way  ||  as  the  dog-salmon 
are  cut  /  \  when  they  are  made  into  green  dry  salmon.  | 
She  just      /  \    cuts  right  down  the  back  of  the  salmon  in  this 

manner:  / — ^ — 1  |  She  does  not  allow  it  to  be  taken  into  the 
house,  for  she  does  not  allow  it  |  to  be  smoked  by  the  smoke.  Her 
husband  only  |  puts  up  the  staging  for  hanging  up  what  has  been 

xwa'Hdeda  tsteda/qax  do'gwanEmases  la'nvuiiEme  Lo£ma  La'wa- 
5  y5ts!o  niEle/k'a,  wa.  hrme'se  ax£a'llSElaxa  ge'£ne  lax  he'lk'lo- 
tagawii'lisases  klwae'dzasaxs  xwa'Lae.  Wa,  giTmese  gwal  xwa'- 
Laxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  hekwe'lae  k- Htk- tede's  qas  LExudzo'da- 
llsa  ge'£ne  laq;  g-a  gwa'leg'a  (Jig.).  Wii,  gl'Pniese  gwa'texs  la'e 
La'g'aaLElots  lax  liEqo'stases    lEgwI'le  ([a,    kwa'x-asE£wesesa    kwa- 

1(1  x'f'la.  Wa,  la  gii'la  axElii'LEla.  Wa,  aT'mese  axa'xoyoxs  la'e 
a'lak"!ala  la  lE'mx'wkla  qa£s  axtslo'yowe  la'xa  yibElo'sgEme 
ka'yatsla.  Wii,  laEm£xaa/wise  xwe'laqa  te'x-£wahiEm  la'xa  o'gwi- 
walllasa  lEgwI'le  qa  hela'lisa  Lle'salasa  lEgwI'le  laq.  Wa,  laE'm 
Le'gadEs  la'llEm£we'dzEku  loxs  sEne'ts!ex-Lae. 

1.5  Sockeye-Salmon. — Ta'yaitslala,  yi'xa  la  ts!EkVx-£Id  mEle'k'a. 
Wa,  gi'l£Em  la  ts!Ela'x,£Ideda  mEle'ke  lax  £nE'ldziisa  wa,  la'e 
Le'gadEs  mEla'le.  Wii,  he'£mis  la  sTik'a'sosa  wl'wametslenoxwe 
lax  la  xwe'lawaatsa  mEla'le  lax  £nE'ldzasa  wa.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
q'.Eyo'Lqexs  la'e  gEnE'mas  xwaTldxa    waS'kwe  qa   yo'wes   gwii'- 

20  lox  xwa'La£yasex  xwii'La£yasa  gwa£xhisaxs  la'e  k'lo'loxwllaq. 
A 'Em  nEqa'xod  xwaTldicx  awi'g-a£yasa  k'  lo'tEla  g-a  gwii'leg-a  (Jig.). 
Wii,  la  k-!es  he'lqlalaq  la  lae'L  la'xa  g-o'kwe  qaxs  k'le'sae  he'l- 
qlalaq  kwii'x'asosa  kwa'xila.  Wii,  a'£miseda  la'£wiinEmas 
qaxE'lsa  qa  ge'xudEmasa   la  xwa'Leses  gEnEme.     Wii,  he'Einxaii'- 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  239 

cut  by  his  wife;  and  the  ||  -woman  hangs  up  what  she  lias  cut,  and  it  25 
is  dried  by  the  |  sun  and  the  wind.     It  is  left  hanging  there  with 
cross-sticks  |  of  broken  cedar  in  the  tails,  which  |  cross  over  the  two 
diving-poles.     It  is  left  there  for  a  long  time,  so  that  it  becomes  really 
dry.  |  When  it  begins  to  be  dry,  it  is  named  "sun-dried  salmon."  | 
When  it  begins  to  be  really  dry,  the  woman  [  takes  it  down  and  takes  30 
off  the  cross-pieces  of  cedar-wood  from  the  tails.     As  soon  |  as  they 
are  all  off,  she  gathers  them,  and  takes  them  into  her  [  house.     She 
takes  a  box  and  tilts  it  over  by  the  side  of  the  |  lire;  and  soon  it 
becomes  warm,  and  then  it  becomes  dry  inside.     After  it  is  ||  quite  35 
dry  inside,  she  puts  it  down  on  the  floor  of  the  house  not  far  from  the  | 
fire,  so  that  it  is  heated  by  the  heat  of  the  fire.     Then  she  |  takes  the 
sun-dried  salmon  and  puts  it  away  well  in  it.     After  |  she  has  done 
so,  she  puts  the  cover  on  the  box  containing  the  sun-dried  salmon.    | 
Then    the    cover   is    tied    down    with    cedar-bark    rope.  ||  Then   she  40 
finishes  it.  ] 

Old    Sockeye-Salmon. — I    will    again    talk    about  ugly    sockeye-  1 
salmon.  |  When  a  man  has  caught  many  ugly  sockeye-salmon,  his 
wife  |  makes  sun-dried  salmon  of  some  of  them.     Others  she  splits 
in  two;  |  and  when  she  gets  tired  of  cutting  sun-dried  salmon,  ||  she  5 
just  splits  the  others,  in  two.     She  just  cuts  off  |  the  heads  of  the 

wlseda  tslEda'qe  la  ge'x£wldxes  xwa'La^ye.  Wa,  laEm  ide'sasosa  25 
Lle'sEla  LEEwa  ya'la.  Wii,  la£mes  hexsii'Ein  ge'xwale  ge'gE'yaxs- 
dalaxa  ko'gEkwe  k!waxi.a'wa.  Wa,  he'£misa  gayo'ssla  la'xa 
ga'yo  ma'£lts!aqa.  Wii,  la  ga'laEm  he  gwa'le  qa  a'lakMales  Ieiux- 
swlda.  Wii,  g'iTmese  lE'mx£wIdi:xs  la'e  Le'gadEs  ta'yaltslala. 
Wii,  g'!'lemese  la  a'lak-!ala  bs'mx^widExs  la'eda  ts!Eda'qe  iixa'-  30 
xodF.q  qa£s  lawa'lexa  gegE£yaxsdK;yas  klwaxLa/wa.  Wii,  g'i'l- 
£mese  £wl£la'masqexs  la'e  q!ap!ex-£idEq  qa's  le  niEwe'Las  la'xes 
g-6'kwe.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  xatsE'me  qa£s  qogunoliseq  la'xes  Ie- 
gvvl'le  qaes  pEx'tslo'deq  qa  lE'mx£walts!ax,£ides.  Wii,  gi'Mnese 
lE'mx£walts!ix""idExs  la'e  ha'ng'alllas  la'xa  kle'se  qwe'sala  la'xes  35 
hogwi'le  qa  i.!e'sahisE£weses  Llesalasa  lEgwI'le.  Wii,  la£me'se 
ax£e'dxa  ta'yaltslala  qa£s  le  ae'k' !a  hii'ntslalas  laq.  Wii,  gt'l£mese 
gwa'lExs  la'e  yikilyi'nts  yikiiya£yasa  ta'yalts!alaats!e  xatsE'ma. 
VVa,  la£mese  t  lEmakiyi'nts  t!Ema'k"iyaeyasxa  dEnsE'ne  dEnE'mlaq. 
Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq.  40 

Old  Sockeye-Salmon. — Wii,  he'EmxaEn  gwa'gwex-s£alasLa  mElo'le,   1 
yixs  gi'Pmae  qlEyo'Leda  bEgwa'nEmaxa  niElo'laxs  la'e  gEiiE'mas 
ta'valtslalag'ilaxa    wao'kwe.      Wii,    la    qlwa'xseg'ilaxa     wao'kwe. 
Wa,  he/£nmaxs    la'e    wio'l£ida  la'xes    xwa'L!ena£yaxa    ta'yaltslala. 
Wii,  ii'-'mise   la   q!wa'k"ilaxa  wao'kwe.     Wa,  laE'm  ;i'Em  la  qak'a'-  ,", 
lax    he'x-t!a£yasa    mElo'le.      Wa,  laE'mxaa'wise  xwa'i.odaF.nixaax 


240  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  Lbth.ann.85 

7  ugly  sockeye-salmon,  and  she  also  cuts  off  the  |  backbone;  and  she 
cuts  down  across,  dividing  the  body  of  the  |  salmon  into  two  pieces, 
which  arc  only  held  together  by  the  tail.  |  As  soon  as  she  finishes,  her 

Id  husband  puts  up  poles;  ||  then  he  puts  up  posts  on  each  end  of  which 
rest  the  long  poles  over  wliich  the  split  salmon  are  hung.  |  After  he 
has  done  so,  the  woman  takes  the  split  salmon  and  |  hangs  them  over 
the  poles  in  this  manner:  y       y  and  |  they  are    also    put 

up  outside  of  the  house,  £j=7/\\  //\\  jl  and  the  |  sun  and  the 
wind  ilvy  them,  and  there       /]  M  LJ  LJ         *aey  st;iy  a  ^on§   time  II 

15  before  they  are  dry.     As  soon   as   night    comes,   | 

the  woman  takes  a  large     I  mat  of  coarse  cedar-bark 

and  spreads  |  it  over  them  to  cover  them,  so  that  they  may  not  got 
damp  |  by  the  dew  of  the  night;  and  when  it  is  a  fine  day,  |  she 
uncovers  them  again  in  the  morning  and  takes  off  the  large  mat  cover- 

20  ing,  ||  so  that  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  wind  may  reach  them; 
and  when  it  is  |  raining,  she  does  not  uncover  them.  When  they 
are  really  dry,  |  the  woman  takes  them  down  and  takes  them  into 
the  house.  |  Then  she  takes  a  cedar-bark  basket  and  puts  them  into 
it.     After  |  they  have  been  put  in,  she  puts  them  away  close  to  the 

25  fire.  ||  This  will  be  food  for  the  winter.  Sometimes  they  |  do  the 
same  with  the  silver-salmon.  They  do  not  do  the  same  with  dog- 
salmon  |  and  other  kinds  of  salmon.     That  is  all  of  this.  | 


7  xa'k' ladzas.  Wa,  la  ha'xEle  xwa'La£yas  la  maelts!fi'ndEX  o'gwi- 
da£yasa  k!o'ti:la.  Wa,  laeme'sele'x-aEmla  ElEga'tayosests!a'sna£ve. 
Wa,  giTmrse  gwa'la,  la'e  ax£E'lse  la'£wiinEinrsexa  dzo'xume;  laE'm 
10  LaLEDE'lsa<[  qa  ka'dEtayaatsa  ge'xudEmaLasa  q!wa/xsa£ye.  Wa, 
t^iTmese  gwa'lExs  la'asa  tsteda'qe  ax£e'dxa  q!wa'xsa£ye  qa£s 
qEXEnda'le  ge'x-undalas  laq,  g'a  gwii'leg'a  {fig.).  Wa,  laE'mxaa 
he'Em  la  axEldzE'ma  L,!a/sanaeyasa  g'o'kwe.  Wii,  laE'mxae  ke'£ma 
Lle'sEla  LE£wa  ya'la  lE'mxwaq.  Wii,  la£me'se  hex-sa'Em  ge'xwa- 
15  laxs  k- !e's£ni;'.e  lE'mx-wida.  Wii,  giTmese  ga'nuHdExs  la'naxwa- 
eda  tslEda'qe  ax'e'dxa  £wa/lase  qliile'dzo  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  LEple'- 
des  lax  e'k"!a£yas  qa  no'kwes  qa  k'le'ses  xweiaqa  dE'lx£id;i'ma- 
tso£sa  go'saxa  ga'nuLe.  Wa,  gTl£mese  e'ka  £na/laxa  gaa'laxs 
la'e  xwe'laqa  lo's£IdEq  qa  la'was  nawE'masxa  £wa'lase  le'£wa£ya 
20  qa  L'.e'sasE£wesesa  Lle'sEla  LE£wa  ya'la.  Wii,  glTmese  yo'- 
gwaxs  la'e  k'les  lo's£idEq.  Wa,  gt'Pmese  a/lak'lala  lE'mx£wI- 
dExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  axa'xodEq  qa£s  le  lae'Las  la'xes  g'o'kwe. 
Wa  la  ax£e'dxa  Lla'bate  qa£s  ha'nts  lodes  laq.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese 
o-wal  ha'nts  lalaqexs  la'e£  g-e'xaq  la'xa  liExwa'la  la'xes  lEgwI'le. 
25  Wa  laE'm  he'lelayolxa  tslawu'nxLa.  Wa,  la  £na'l£nEmplEna  he 
gwe'°"ilasE£weda  dza£wu'ne.  Wa,  la  k'  les  he  gwe'g"dasE£weda  gwa£x- 
nise   LE£wa    wao'kwe  k'lo'kliitEla.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  la'xeq. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  241 

Roasted  Silver-Salmon.  (Roasted  tails  of  silver-salmon  caught  by  |   1 
trolling.)  || 

When  the  silver-salmon  caught  by  trolling  is  cut  open,  |  the  30 
tail  is  left  on  the  backbone.  After  |  the  woman  has  cut  it,  she 
takes  the  roasting-tongs  and  breaks  off  the  |  tail  from  the  backbone, 
and  she  puts  the  salmon-tails  |  crosswise  into  the  roasting-tongs  in 
this  manner :  m  Often  ||  the  salmon-tails  are  taken  off  after  the  35 
backbone  has  CP  been  roasted,  |  in  this  manner 
they  only  pg  break  them  off  after  they  have  >3p  | 
roasted.  |  dH  After  the  tails  have  been  put  JM  [ 
the  roasting-  CP  tongs,  |  they  are  put  by  the  ^ 
of  the  fire;  — * —  and  when  theskinis  blackened,  |  D>*^§ 
are  taken  away  and  laid  down  ||  just  over  the  fire,  so 
the  heat  of  the  fire  goes  right  up  to  them;  |  and  when  the  owner 
of  the  house  gets  hungry ,he  just  takes  |  them  down  and  eats  of  them. 
And  if  he  does  not  eat  all  (he  has  taken  down),  he  just  |  puts  it  back 
above.  | 

Halibut. — [The  method  of  halibut  fishing  has  been  described  in 
"The  Kwakiutl  of  Vancouver  Island''  (Publications  of  the  Jesup 
North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  pp.  472-4S0).  The  account  con- 
tinues as  follows :] 

As  soon  as  (the  halibut-fisher)  enters  his  house,  his  wife  |  quickly  1 
gives  him  something  to  eat;  and  when  he  begins  to  eat,  his  wife  | 
goes  out  of  the  house,  carrying  her  small  basket,  in  which  she  has 
four  fish-knives.  |  She  is  going  to  work  on  all  the  halibut  lying  on 
their  backs  on  the  beach.  || 

Roasted  Silver-Salmon. — Llo'bEk"  ts!a'sne£sa  dza£wu'ne  do'gwineta.  1 
Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  xwa'l-ItsEeweda  do'gwanEme  dza£wu'na.      Wa,  30 
Ur'me'se  axfila£meda  ts!a'sna£ye  laxa  xa'k'Iadzas;  wa,  g  il£mese  gwal 
xwa'Leda   tslEda'qaxs    la'e    ax£e'dxa   iJo'psayowe    qa£s  k'o'qalexa 
ts!asna£ye  laxa  xa'kMadzowe  qa£s  le  ge'g'aalts!alisa  ts!asna£ye  la'xa 
iJo'psayowe   g-a  gwa'leg'a  (fig.).      Wa,  la    q!una'laEmxat!  a'l£Em 
la'wodayowa   ts!a/sna£yaxs    la'e    Llo'pa    la'xa   xa'k- ladzowe,   yixs  35 
g'a'e  gwa'leg'a  {fig.).     Wa,  aT'mese  k'oqa'layoxs  la'e  Llo'pa.     Wii, 
he/£maaxs  la'e  gwat  axa'lts!odalay5  la'xa  L !5'psayoweda  ts!a'sna£ye. 
Wa,  la£me'se  La'nolidzEm  la'xa  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  la£me'se  klfimE'lx'- 
£lda£me  Lle'sasexs  la'e  ax£e'tsE£wa  qa£s  Le'saLElodayowe  lax  nEqo'- 
stasa   lEgwi'le    qa   L!e'sEg-ostalasE£weses  Lle'salasa   lEgwI'le.     Wa,  40 
g'i'l£mese  po'sq!Ex£ideda  g"o'gwadasa  go'kwaxs  la'e  a'Em  axaxo- 
dEq  qa£s  hasmx''ide  laq.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese  k-  !es  £wi'£laqexs  la'e  a'Em 
xwe'laxaLElots  la'xa  e'k*!e. 

Halibut. — Wii,   g'i'Pmese    lae'L   la'xes  g'o'kwaxs   la'e   gEnE'mas  1 
ha'labala  LlExwe'laq.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese   hamx,£i'dExs  la'e  gEnE'mas 
la'wElsa  da'laxes  la'laxame  g"i'ts!E£watses  md'we  xwa'xiiLaya.     Wa, 
laE'm  la,L  e'ax£edElxa  £na'xwa£me  nEhiELe'sa  p!ep!a'£ye. 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 -16 


242  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  ieth.ann.  sis 

5  Now  I  will  talk  about  the  woman,  what  she  is  going  to  do  after  |  her 
husband  has  finished  fishing;  for  the  man  never  |  helps  his  wife  this 
side  of  his  going  out  |  fishing  (after  he  has  finished  fishiug),  and  also 
when  he  has  hauled  the  halibut  out  of  his  halibut-fishing  canoe.1  .  .  || 

10  As 2  soon  as  the  woman  sits  down  on  the  beach  at  the  place  where  | 
the  halibut  have  been  put  down,  she  takes  out  her  four  knives,  and  | 
she  takes  a  sandstone  and  whets  her  knives  on  it.  |  As  soon  as  the 
four  knives  are  sharp,  she  |  first  takes  the  fin-knife;  for  the  four 

15  knives  all  have  names.  ||  The  first  knife  is  the  fin-knife;  |  the  next 
one,  the  cutting-knife;  the  next  one,  the  Making-knife;  and  |  the  last 
one,  the  splitting-knife.  She  sits  down  by  the  head  of  the  halibut, 
and  |  she  cuts  open  the  lower  part  of  the  belly  of  the  halibut,  (in 
this  manner:)3  ^^Ife^.  ^e  cu*s  a^  around  it-  |  Then 

she     turns     it       y^^^^^^.        A  backward  and  takes  the  cut- 

20  ting-knife  and  ||    £•')  O %[   cu^s  under  the  cheek-fins,  and 

cuts  out  the  ^  ^J  gills.  As  |  soon  as  she  has  them 
off,    she    pulls  **^P^S^  out  the  intestines  of  thehalibut, 

and  she  |  cuts  off  the  guts  so  that  they  come  off  from  the  stomach. 
Then  she  turns  the  stomach  inside  out,  so  as  to  |  spread  it,  and  puts 
it  down.     Last  she  cuts  off  the  pectoral  fins,  |  on  the  other  side,  and 

5  Wa,  la'me'sEn  lasL  gwagwex-s£alaL  la'qexs  laeda  tslEda'qe  heL 
lax,  e'axalaLEqexs  la'e  gwa'les  la'£wunEme  lo'qwa,  qaxs  hewa'xa- 
£meLeda  bEgwa'nEine  g"5'x£wIdElxes  gEnE'me  gwa'sagaweses  lae'- 
na£ye  lo'qwa.  Wa,  he'£misexs  la'e  gaxusoita'laxa  p!ep!a'£ye  la'xes 
lo'gwatsle.1     .     .     . 

10  Wa,2  giTmese  k!wa'g'aliseda  tsteda'qe  lax  k-!ixk'!ige'dzasa 
p!a'£yaxs  la'e  ax£wdlts!o'dxes  xwa'xuLayowe  mo'wa.  Wa,  la 
ax£e'dxa  tle'gayowe  dE£na'sgEm  qa£s  g-e'xalallses  xwaLayowe  laq. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi'£la  e'x'bax-£ideda  mo'we  xwa'xuLayoxs  la'e  he 
gil  ax£e'tsoseda  pELa'layo  xwa'Laya,  qaxs  £niixwa£mae  Le'gadeda 

15  mo'we  xwa'xiiLayo.  Wa,  he'Em  ga'leda  pELa'layowe  xwa'Laya; 
wa,  he'£misa  gElts!E'me;  wa,  he'£misa  xwa'Layowe;  wa,  he'£mis- 
Leda  t!E'lyayowe.  Wa,  la  klwa'g'alis  lax  oxta'lisasa  p!a'£ye.  Wa, 
la  xwaTidEx  bE'nba£yas  tEk"!a'sa  p!a'£ye  (Jig.).  Wa,  la  xwaltse'- 
£sdEnq.     Wa.  la    nEFaLE'lodqexs    la'e    ax£e'dxa    gEltslE'me    qa£s 

20  xwa'xuLaple'dexa  pEL!E'mya£ye  qa£s  xwaL5'dexa  c[!o'sna£ye.  Wa, 
giPmese  lawaxs  lae  go'loltslExa  ya'x'yigilasa  p!a£j'e.  Wa,  la  xwa'- 
Lodxa  ts!Eyi'me  qa  lawayes  la'xa  mS'qula.  Wa,  la  le'x-sEmdEq  qa 
Lle'plEqalesexs  lae  ax£a'lisaq.  Wa,  lawI'sLa  hewEyo'd  xwa'Lddxa 
pELa'   la'xa   apsa'dzE£ye  qa£s  ax£a'liseq.     Wii,    la  xwa'Jtse£stalaxa 

>  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  4S0. 
•  Continued  from  ibid.,  p.  480. 
■That  is,  close  to  the  edge  of  the  fish. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  243 

puts  them  down.  Then  she  cuts  around  the  ||  skin,  keeping  close  to  25 
the  edge-fin.  She  only  stops  cutting  when  she  |  arrives  at  the  end 
of  the  tail  [salt-taste  tail].  Then  |  she  begins  to  cut  from  behind  the 
head  of  the  halibut,  at  the  place  where  she  first  cut  it.  She  |  does 
the  same  on  the  other  side.  Then  she  cuts  off  the  skin  of  the  white 
side.  |  As  soon  as  the  skin  is  off,  she  cuts  down  along  the  middle 
of  the  ||  backbone  of  the  halibut;  and  when  she  reaches  the  backbone,  30 
she  again  |  cuts,  beginning  from  the  rough  edge,  cutting  close  to  the  | 
ribs,  until  she  reaches  the  backbone.  Then  she  takes  off  one  side  of 
the  |  halibut  and  puts  it  down,  (in  this  manner:) 
Then  she  does  the  same  also  |  on  the  other  side. 
As  soon  as  it  is  off,  she  turns  it  over  and  cuts  \^  is 
off  also  ||  the  skin  of  the  black  side.  As  soon  as 
it  is  off,  she  cuts  |  also  that  side  of  the  rough-edge,  and  goes  on 
to  the  backbone.  When  she  |  reaches  it  again,  she  cuts  down 
straight  |  to  the  backbone,  and  she  puts  it  down  with  what  came 
from  the  other  side.  |  Then  she  does  the  same  also  to  the 
other  side  that  was  still  on.  ||  As  soon  as  all  the  meat  of  the  40 
halibut  is  off,  she  takes  off  the  apron-side  (spawn)  |  and  puts  it 
down.  Then  she  cuts  off  the  head,  and  she  |  takes  the  rib  of  an  elk 
and  takes  hold  of  the  tail.  Then  she 
lifts  the  backbone  of  the  halibut  by  the 
tail  and  cuts  off  the  ribs,  |  cutting  them  WOTMST" 
close  to  the  backbone,  (in  this  manner:) 


Lle'se  ma'k-inxEndalaxa  q!wa/q!unxa£ye.     Wa,  a/l£niese  gwal  xwa'- 25 
Laxs   la'e   la'g'aa   la'xa   6'xxa£yasa  dE'mp!axsda£ye.      Wa,   he'Em 
g-a'g'iLEle  5'xLaata£yasa  p!a'£ye  gi'lptedasa  xwa'La£yas.      Wa,  la 
e'tledxa  apsE'nxa^e.     Wa,    la  sa'podxa  £mEla'dza£ye  L!esa.     Wa 
giPmese  lawa'da  Lle'saxs  la'e  £nEqa/xod  xwaTedEx  £nEXEna/£yas 
hamo'masa  p  !a/£ye.    Wa,  g-il£mese  la'g-aa  la'xa  hamo'maxs  la'e  e't  led  30 
xwa'Fid  ga'g'ELEla  laxa  q!wa'q!unxa£ye.      Wii,  laEm  ma'k-ildzoda- 
laxa  xi'la  qa£s  le  wala  la'xa  hamo'mo.     Wa,  la  axo'dxa  apso'dEdza- 
£yasa  p!a'£ye  qa£s  ax£a'lises  {fig.).     Wa,  la'xaa  e't  led  he  gwe'x-£Idxa 
apsE'nxa£ye.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  lawa'xs  la'e  le'x'ilisaq  qa£s   6'gwaqe 
sapo'dxa  ts!o'lats!a£ye  Lle'sa.    Wa,  g-i'l£mese  lawa'xs  la'e  xwaT'idEx  35 
awu'nxa£yasa  q!wa'q!unxa£ye  qa£s  la'lae  la'xa  hamo'mo.     Wa,  gi'l- 
£Emxaawise  la'g'aa  la'qexs  la'e  £nEqa'xod  xwa'l£edEx  £nEXEna'£ya- 
xaashamo'm5.     Wa,  la'xaa  gi'g-illsas  la'xesga'yanEme  la'xa  apsa'- 
dza£ye.    Wii,  laxaa  he'Em  gwe'x,£Idxa  la  &x£a'laLEleda  apsE'nxa£ye. 
Wa,  giTmese  £wi£loweda  qlE'mlalasa  p!a'£yaxs  la'e  axo'dxa  tsa'ple-  40 
dza£ye  qa£s   ax£a'liseq.     Wa,  la  qak'o'dEx  ma'legEman5s.     Wa,  la 
ax£e'dxa  gElE'masa  l!ewe'1s§  qa£s    da'x,£idexa  dE'mp!axsda£ye  qa 
a'k'laxsdalesa    hamo'masa    p!a'£yaxs  la'e   kwexa'laxa  xila'.     Wa, 
laE'm  ma'g'ilEnexa  hamo'mo  {fig.).     Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi£la  la'weda 


244  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ihth.ans.S5 

45  As  soon  as  the  ribs  are  off,  ||  the  woman  takes  cedar-bark  and  ties  the 
tail-ends  of  |  both  sides  of  the  ribs  of  the  backbone  together,  (in 
this  manner:)  ,/OT5V  Then  she  carries  them  |  up  and  hangs 

themjustover  \^W%j  the  fireplace  of  the  house.  She  |  takes 
her  roasting-  i)t§j  Ysyfy/  tongs  and  takes  them  down  to  where  the 
fins  are.  |  She  ^fc§3     \^"i/   ta^e3  them  at  once,  and  puts  four  fins 

50  in  one  pair  of  ||  V^^  fifes'  roasting-tongs.  She  ties  the  roasting- 
tongs  on  top  with  cedar-bark.  |  Then  she  takes  thin  split  cedar- 
wood,  and  puts  it  over  each  side,  (in  this  manner:)  |  fh  .. 
As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,. she  gathers  driftwood  on  r  f^ 
the  beach,  |  and  makes  a  fire;  and  when  the  fire  that 
she  has  made  blazes  up,  she  |  picks  up  stones  and  puts 

55  them  on  the  fire  that  she  has  made.  As  soon  as  ||  there 
are  enough  on  it,  she  takes  the  fins  in  the  roasting- 
tongs  and  |  puts  them  up  by  its  side.  Then  she  gathers 
the  backbones  |  while  the  tail  is  still  attached  to  them ;  and  she  takes 
the  |  stomachs  and  puts  them  down  on  the  beach,  not  far  from  the 
stones  in  the  fire.  |  Then  she  also  takes  mats  and  puts  them  down 

60  there  also  with  her  ||  tongs,  and  also  a  bucketful  of  water.  As  soon  | 
as  the  fins  are  roasted,  she  takes  them  away  from  the  stones  on  the 
fire;  |  and  when  the  stones  are  red-hot,  she  takes  her  |  tongs  and 
with  them  takes  off  the  wood  that  is  left  on  the  fire.  |  When  it  is  all 


45  x'i'laxs  la'e  ax£e'deda  tslEda'qaxa  dEna'se  qa£s  ya'Lode  o'xsda£yasa 
wa'x'sot'.Ena£ye  xi'lasa  hamo'ma  qa£s  ya'Lodex  (fig.) .  Wii,  la  da'laq 
qa£s  le  ge'x£waLE'l5ts  lax  mEqo'stawas  lEgwI'lases  g"5'kwe.  Wa,  la 
ax£e'dxes  L!o'psayowe  qa£s  le  lE'nts!es  lax  axa'sases  pELa'.  Wii, 
he'x"£ida£mese  axee'dEq  qa£s  axtslo'desa  mo'we  pELa'   la'xa   £nE'me 

50  Lld'psaya.  Wa,  la  k' !ilg-Etotsa  dEna'se  laxa  Llo'psayowe.  Wa, 
la  ax£e'dxa  xo'kwe  wI'sweI  k!waxLa'£wa  qa£s  k'!aa't!edes  laq  (Jig.). 
Wa  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  q!ap!e'x-£idxa  qle'xaie  la'xa  L!Ema£ise 
cni£s  lExwa'lise.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  x'I'qSstawe  lEqwe'la£yasexs  la'e 
xo'x£widxa  tle'sEme  qa£s  xExuLa'les  la'xa  lEqwe'la£yas.     Wa,  g'i'l- 

55  £mese  he'l£a  lax  na'qa£yasexs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  Llo'ptslala  pELa'  qaes 
le  La'n5llsas  laq.  Wa,  la£me'se  q!ap!e'x-£idxa  h&mo'mo,  yixs  he'- 
£mae  a'les  axa'le  dE'mp!.ixsda£yas  laq.  Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa 
mo'qula  qa  ga'xes  g'ae's  laxa  k'les  qwe'sala  la'xa  t!e'qwapa£ye. 
Wa,    la'xaa     ax£e'dxa     le'El£wa£ye    qa£s     g'a'e    ax£a'lisaq     LE£wis 

60  k'lipLa'la;  wa,  he'£misa  na'gatsle  la  qo't!axa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  g"i'l- 
£mese  Llo'pa  pELa'xs  la'e  axsE'ndEq  la'xes  t!e'qwapa£ye.  Wa, 
g-i'l£mese  £na'xwa  la  x-I'xixsEmx-£Ideda  tle'sEmaxs  la'e  &x£e'dxes 

,  k'!ipLa'la  qa£s  k-!ipsa'les  la'xa  x-ixiq!ayawa£yasa  gu'lta.  Wa, 
g'i'l£mese    £wi£laxs   la'e    axee'dxa    ts!a'ts!Esmote    qa£s  lExse£sta'les 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  245 

off,    she    takes   old    eel-grass,    and    puts    it    around  j|   the    red-hot  65 
stones;    and    she  plucks   off   |    broad-leaved   grass,    and    throws   it 
over  the  |  hot  stones.     As  soon  as  they  are  covered,  she  takes  the  | 
stomach  and  puts  it  on  the  stones.     Then  she  takes  the  head  and  | 
puts  it  on  the  stones,  close  to  the  old  eel-grass,  inside  of  it.  ||  As  soon  as  70 
this  is  done,  she  takes  the  fins  that  have  not  been  roasted  and  |  puts 
them  on  also,  and  also  some  of  the  rough-edge  and  of  the  |  backbone, 
which  she  puts  on  also,  and  also  the  tail  and  the  |  apron-part.     As 
soon  as  it  is  all  on,  she  takes  her  mats  and  |  spreads  them  down  to 
one  side  of  what  she  is  steaming.     Then  she  takes  a  ||  bucket  with  75 
water  and  pours  it  over  what  she  is  steaming.  |  After  she  has  finished 
pouring  the  water,  she  takes  the  mats  and  covers  it  |  with  them,  so 
that  the  steam  cannot  come  through.     After  she  has  done  so,  |  she 
takes  her  fish-basket  and  picks  up  the  guts  of  the  |  halibut,  and  the 
fiver  and  the  slime.     After  she  has  it  all,  ||  she  carries  it  down  to  the  SO 
beach,  and  she  throws  it  into  the  sea.  |  Then  she  washes  out  her  fish- 
basket,  so  that  all  the  slime  comes  off  |  from  it;  and  then  she  goes 
up  the  beach,  takes  the  pieces  cut  off  from  one  side  of  the  halibut, 
and  |  scrapes  off  the  blood.     After  she  has  done  so,  she  spreads  them 
out  |  on  the  beach,  so  that  they  are  not  one  on  top  of  the  other,  but 
very  close  together  ||  at  the  edges.     Then  she  covers  them  over  with  85 
a  mat,  for  it  is  not  |  good  if  they  are  split  while  they  are  still  fresh. 

la'xa    &wi'£stasa    x-i'x'ixsEmala    tle'sEma.      Wa,    la'xaa  k!u'lx£ld  65 
la'xa     ftwa'dzoxLo    kJe'tlEma    qa£s  lExa'lodales    lax    o'kuya£yasa 
tslE'lqwa    tle'sEma.     Wa,  gi'Pmese    ha£niElxa'laxs    la'e    3x£e'dxa 
mo'qula  qa£s  ax£a'lodales.     Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  ma'legEmano  qa£s 
ax£a'lodales  la'xa  ma'k'ala  la'xa  tsla'tslEsmote  lax  6'tslawas.     Wa, 
giTniese  £wl£laxs  la'e    ax£e'd    la'xa    k'le'se  Llo'pletsos  pELa'  qa£s  70 
le'xat!  ax£a'lots  laq.     Wa,  he'£misa  wao'kwe  q!wa'q!unxa£ya  LE'wa 
h&mo'mo  qa£s  le'xat!    ax£aiodalaq,  LO£ma   dE'mp!axsda£ye,  LE£wa 
tsa'p  !ets!a£ye.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wFlaxs  la'e  fix£e'dxes  le'El£wa£ye  qa£s 
Le'LEp!a'liseq    lax    ma'g'inwalisases  nEka'sEwe.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa 
£wa'bEts!ala  na'gatsla  qa  dza'dzELEyl'ndes  la'xes  nEk'a'sEwe.     Wa,  75 
g'i'Pmese  gwa'l  dza'sac^exs  la'e  fix£e'dxa  le'El£wa£ye   qa£s  na's£ides 
laq  qa  k'le'se  k'u'xusaleda   kla'lEla  laq.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'texs 
la'e  ax£e'dxes  k"!o'gwats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  le  mEntsla'lasa  tslEj'i'masa 
p!a'£ye  LE£wa  dewa'na  LE£wa  k-!e'la.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi£laxs  la'e 
kMo'cjuutsIe'sElaq  la'xa  L!Ema£ise  qa£s  leqEpstE'mlEcj  la'xa  dE'msx'e.  80 
Wa,    la    ts!o'x£wklxes    k"!o'gwats!e    lExa'£ya    qa   £wi£lowesa  k!e'la 
la'qexs  la'e  lo'sdesa  qa£s  le  ax£e'dxes  apso'dele  xwa'Le  p!a'£ya  qa£s 
k'e'xalexa    E'lkwa.      Wa,    g'i'Pmese    gwa'lExs    la'e    gwel£alI'sElaq 
la'xa     L!Ema£ise    qa  k'!e'ses  haqEwInekala.     Wa,  la'La  mEmka'- 
la£me  ewE'nxa£yas.     Wa,  la  na'kuyintsa  le£wa£ye  laq,  qaxs  k'ie'sae  85 
ek-    lax  t!E'lsasE£waxs  he'£mae  a'les  ge'te.     Wa,  he'£mis   la'gilas 


246  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.»5 

87  Therefore  |  they  are  only  split  the  following  day.  After  she  has 
finished  covering  them,  |  she  calls  those  who  are  walking  about  to 
come  and  sit  down  on  the  |  beach.     As  soon  as  they  arrive,  she  takes 

90  off  the  covering  of  ||  what  she  is  steaming.  Then  she  spreads  a  mat 
on  the  beach,  as  a  place  on  which  to  throw  |  the  bones  that  are  left 
over  when  they  eat.  As  soon  as  the  guests  finish  eating,  |  the  woman 
watches  that  all  the  |  guests  throw  on  the  mat  the  bones  that  are 
left  over.  |  As  soon  as  all  the  guests  begin  to  eat,  taking  up  their 

95  food  ||  with  their  hands,  while  they  are  eating;  and  when  they  eat,  | 
they  throw  all  the  bones  that  are  left  over,  and  the  fat  skin,  |  on  the 
mat  spread  on  the  beach.  After  they  have  eaten,  the  |  guests  get  up 
from  the  beach  and  go  down  and  |  wash  their  hands  in  the  sea. 
100  When  they  have  finished,  they  ||  all  go  home  to  their  houses  and 
drink  water  there;  |  and  the  woman  scrapes  off  from  the  stones 
the  rest  of  the  food  of  her  |  guests,  and  puts  it  on  the  mat;  and  she 
puts  the  |  rest  of  the  food  of  her  past  guests  on  it,  and  she  carries  it 
down  to  the  beach,  |  and  she  shakes  it  into  the  sea.  Then  she  washes 
5  off  ||  the  mat,  so  that  it  is  clean.  After  she  finishes  |  washing  it,  she 
carries  it  back,  and  hangs  it  at  the  place  where  the  |  halibut  is  dried. 
After  she  finishes,  she  gathers  the  skins  of  the  |  halibut  and  takes 
them  into  her  house  to  hang  them  up  |  over  the  fire,  so  that  they  are 

87  a'teml  thu'lsasolxa  gaa'lasa  lEnse.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwal  £na'xwaxs 
la'e  £la'q!iig\a£lxa  giyi'mgilsEla  qa  g'a'xes  k!iis£a'lisEla  la'xa 
L!Ema£ise.      Wii,     gi'l£mese    g'a'xExs     la'e    le'tledxa    nSyi'mases 

90  nEk-a'sE£we.  Wa,  la  LEpla'lisxa  le'£wa£ye  qa  tstegEdzo'dalatsa 
ha£ma.'paxes  xa'qesawa£ye.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  hamx-£- 
I'deda  Le£lanEme.  Wa,  laE'm  q!a'q!alaleda  ts!Eda'qe  qa  £na'xwa- 
£mesa  klwe'le  tslEgEdzo'dalases  ha£mo'te  xaq  la'xa  le£wa£ye.  Wa, 
g'i'l£mese   hamx-£i'dExs    la'e    £na'xwa£ma    Le£lanEme   xa'maxtsla- 

95  nases  e'£eyas5wedas  la'xes  ha£ma'£ye.  Wa,  giT'mese  hamx£I'dExs 
la'e  tslEgEdzo'dalases  xa'qesawa£ye  LE£wa  tsEnoxmo'dEinas  Lies 
la'xa  LEbe'se  le£wa£ya.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£ma'paxs  la'eda 
klwe'le  qlwa'gilis  qa£s  le  h5'q!unts!es  la'xa  LlEma£ise  qa£s  le 
ts!E'nts!Enx£w!d  la'xa  dE'msxe.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwalExs  la'e 
100  £na'xwa  na'£nakwa  la'xes  g'ig"o'kwe  qa£s  le  na'x£Idxa  £wa'pe  laq. 
Wa,  la'Leda  tslEda'qe  k'exa'lodxa  k-!e'ts!ayawa£ye  ha'mx-sE£weses 
Le£lanEme  qa£s  axdzo'dales  la'xa  le£wa£ye.  La  fixe'g"ints  lax 
ha£mo'tdasa  Le£lanEmx-de  qa£s  le  qlEne'pEntslesElaq  la'xa  LlEma£ise 
qa£s  le  laaxstE'ndEq  la'xa  dE'msx'e.  Wa,  la  ts!o'x£wiildzo- 
5  (laEmxa  le£wa£ye  qa  e'g-idzox£wldes.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwal  ts!o'- 
xwaqexs  g'a'xae  da'laq  qa£s  g'axe  gex£wa'lisaq  la'xa  ge'xudEmaxa 
k-!a£wase.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lqexs  la'e  q!ap!e'x-£idxa  LleLle'sasa 
p!a'£ye  qa£s  le  lae'Las  la'xes  g'o'kwe  qa£s  le  ge'x£waLE'lots  lax 
nEqo'stawases  lEgwI'le  qa  L!e'salasE£wesesa  Lle'salas.     Wa,  laE'm 


doas]  PRESERVATION  OF  FOOD  247 

heated   by  the  heat.  ||  The    meat-side  of  all  of   them  is  upward.  10 
This  is  the  way  that  the  Indians  call  |  "  turning  up  the  back."     Then 
she  takes  a  rest,  for  she  will  |  split  the  halibut  that  is  to  be  dried 
on  the  following  day.  | 

This  is  the  way  the  Indians  do  when  they  catch  the  first  halibut.  | 
Everything  is  steamed  by  the  women,  for  it  is  said  that  the  halibut 
know  ||  that  the  one  who  caught  them  first  is  thankful  for  it.     There-  15 
fore  |  it  is  steamed  at  once  when  it  is  first  caught;  and  it  is  said,  that, 
if  |  the  one  who  caught  halibut  first  does  not  cook  it  right  away,  he 
will  not  |  have  another  bite.     The  fisherman  will  go  out  in  vain 
trying  to  |  fish  halibut.     Therefore  they  do  this  way  when  halibut  is 
first  caught.  ||  The  woman  does  not  do  thus  when  |  more  hahbut  is  20 
caught  by  her  husband.     When  they  first  take  out  the  stomach  of  | 
what  is  next  caught  by  her  husband,  then  they  throw  it  all  into  the  | 
sea,  with  the  guts  and  the  heads  |  and  the  backbone  and  the  apron- 
part.     Often  they  also  ||  throw  the  fins  into  the  water.     Sometimes  25 
they  |  hang  up  the  fins  at  the  drying-place  of  the  hahbut,  so  that  they 
get  half  dry.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  half  dry,  they  boil  them,  and  eat 
them  with  spoons  |  with  the  liquid.     But  the  woman  only  now  and 
then  eats  |  roasted  fins,  when  she  takes  a  rest  from  splitting  her  hali- 
but, ||     the  four  that  are  being  roasted  while  she  is  steaming  the  30 
stomach  and  |  the  other  parts.  | 

ma'xwaEm  e'k'!adza£ye  E'lsadzE£yas.     He'Em  gwE£ya'sa  ba'k!ume  10 
nElEna'£yeda  he  gwa'le.     Wa,  laE'm  x'oVid  la'xeq    qaxs  a'l£meLe 
tlE'lsalxes  k- !a'wasilas5Laxa  la/La  £na'x,£IdElxa  lE'nsLa. 

Wa,  he'Em  gwe'g'ilatsa  ba'kliime  qaes  g'ale  15'gwanEm  p!a'£ya 
yixs  k!e6'sae  k'les  he'x-£idaEm   nEk'a'sosa  tslEcla'qe    qaxs   qla'la- 
emaa£laeda    p!a'£yaqexs  rno'lolE£maaxs  g'a'lae    la'LanEma  la'g'Ilas  15 
he'x'£idaEm    nEx-£i'tsE£wa,    yisa    g'a'loLaq.     Wa,    qa£lao    k"  le'slax 
he'x-£IdaEm  lax  ha£me'x"silas6lax  yis  lo'gwanEmaq  la'£laxe  k' le'slax 
la/lax  e'tled    lax  q!Ek-a£so    laxExs  la'e    wax-    e'tled  lo'qweda  15'- 
qlwenoxwaxa  p!a'£ye.     Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilas  he  gwe'g'ilaxes  g'a'lo- 
LanEme    p!a'£ya.     Wa,  k'le'scla    la    he    gwe'g'ileda    tslEda'qax   la  20 
e'tled  lo'gwanEmses  la'£\vunEme.     G'i'Pmae  la'wEyodEx  mS'qiilasa 
a'le    lo'gwanEmses    }a'£wimEmaxs    la'e     a'Em     tstexsta'laq    la'xa 
dE'msx'e,   £wi£la    LE£wis   ts'.Eyi'me,    L6£ma    ma'legEmanowe.     Wa, 
he'£misa  hamo'mowe  LE£wa  tsa'p!edza£ye.     Wa,  qfuna'laEmxaawise 
tslExstalaxa   pELa'  la'xa   dE'msx'e.     Wa,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Ena   ge'x-  25 
£walisxa  pELa'  la'xa    lE'mxudEmaxa    kla'wase    qa    k" !a'yax£wides. 
Wa,    g-i'l£mese    k"  !a'yax£widExs    la'e     ha'nxXEndEq    qa£s    yo'seq 
LE£wis  £wa'pala.     Wa,  la'Leda  ts!Eda'qe  le'x-aEm  hamx-£i'dnaxwa 
la'xa  Llo'bEkwe  pELa',  yixs  la'Le  xoVkIexs  la'e  t!E'lsaxes  k"!a'- 
wasexa     mo'we    Llo'pasosexs     la'x'de     nEka'xa    mo'qula    LE£wis  30 
wao'kwe. 


248  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [eth.ann.so 

32  As  soon  as  the  autumn  comes,  when  the  halibut  are  really  fat,  | 
the  fishermen  go  out  again  to  fish  halibut  for  food  in  |  winter.     Their 

35  wives  take  out  the  stomachs  and  ||  cut  off  the  gills,  and  they  split 
them  open  and  spread  them  out  on  the  beach;  and  they  |  spread 
them  right  over  the  fire  of  the  house,  so  as  to  dry  them;  |  that  is 
called  "dried  stomach."  And  they  cut  off  the  |  head,  and  they  cut 
off  the  lower  jaw  and  open  it  out,  |  and  they  cut  on  each  side  of  the 

40  bone  in  the  head.  ||  As  soon  as  it  is  off,  [the  woman]  throws  it  away 
on  the  beach,  |  at  the  place  where  the  brain  was.  And  she  spreads 
the  outer  skin  also  |  just  over  the  fire  of  the  house.  That  is  called  | 
"dried  head."  And  she  takes  the  fins  and  hangs  them  up  at  |  the 
same  place  where  she  first  hung  the  others;  and  that  is  called  "dried 

45  fins."  ||  Then  she  takes  the  ribs  and  hangs  them  up,  in  the  same  way 
as  I  |  have  said  before  [p.  244];  and  this  is  called  "ribs."  |  And  she 
takes  the  rough-edges  and  ties  them  together  at  the  tail-ends,  and 
she  |  hangs  them  up  at  the  same  place  where  the  others  are,  and  this 
has  the  same  name.  |  And  she  also  takes  the  tail  and  cuts  down  the 

50  side;  ||  and  as  soon  as  it  is  spread,  she  takes  out  the  end  of  the  back- 
bone, |  and  she  also  spreads  it  over  the  poles  where  the  others  were; 
and  this  is  called  |  "dried  tail."  And  she  also  takes  the  apron-part 
and  |  hangs  it  up  where  the  others  are,  and  this  is  called  "dried 
apron."  |  And  she  also  takes  the  skin  and  spreads  it  on  a  cutting- 

32  Wa,  g-iTmese  la'ymx£edExs  la'e  a'lak'lala  la  tsE'nxweda  p!a'£ye 
la'as  e'tled  la  lo'x£wideda  lo'£lq!wenoxwaxa  p!a/£ye  qa£s  la'k'lESE- 
lalxa  ts!awu'nxe.      Wa  la  gEgEnE'mas  axa'laxa  mo'qtila  qa£s  t!o- 

35  sodexa  q!o'sna£ye.  Wa,  la  yi'ml£klEq  qa  LEpa'lisexs  la'e  LEp!En- 
da'las  lax  nEqo'stowases  lEgwI'lases  g'o'kwe  qa  lE'mx£wides. 
Wa,  he'Em  Le'gadEs  mo'qwasde.  Wa,  la'xaa  qax-£idEx  ma'- 
legEmanas.  Wa,  la  t!o's£IdEx  o'xLasx'a£yas  qa  wa'x-se£stes. 
Wa,    la'xaa    t!d't!EdzEn5d  k\ats!a'ena£yasa  xaxtsla'wasa  ma'legE- 

40  mano.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  lawa'xs  la'e  ts!EqE'nts!esxa  g-I'ts!E£wa- 
sasa  lEqwa'.  Wa,  la'xaa  LEp!a'LElotsa  helo'sgEmae  la'xaaxa 
nEqo'stawasa  lEgwi'lases  go'kwe.  Wa,  he'Em  LegadEs  ma'- 
leqasde.  Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  pELa'  qa£s  ge'x£iindaies  la'xaax 
axa'sasa    g-i'lx'de    ax£a'LEl6daya.     Wa,  he'Em    Le'gadEs    paLasde. 

45  Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  xi'la  qa£s  ge'x£wlde  lax  gwa'laasasEn  gi'l- 
x'de  wa'ldEma  (see  p.  244).  Wa,  he'Em  Le'gEmse  xi'la.  Wa, 
la  ax£e'dxa  q!wa'q!Qnxa£ye  qa£s  ya'Lodex  o'xsda£ya.  Wii,  la'xaa 
te'x£waLElots  lax  axa'sasa  wao'kwe.  Wa,  he'x'saEm  Le'gEmse. 
Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa    dE'mp!axsda£ye    qa£s   t!o's£Idex  ono'dza£yas. 

50  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  LEpa'laxs  la'e  la'wayodxa  o'ba£yasa  hamo'mo.  Wa, 
la'xaa  LEpla'LElots  lax  axa'sasa  wao'kwe.  Wa,  he'Em  Le'gadEs 
dE'mplaxsdeyasde.  Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  tsa'p!edza£ye  qa£s  te'x- 
£waLE'lodes  la'xes  wao'kwe.  Wa,  he'Em  Le'gadEs  tsa'p!edza- 
£yasde.     Wa,  la'xaa    ax£e'dxa  Lle'se  qa£s  LEbEdzo'des  la'xa  tlEle'- 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  249 

board  ||  for  dried  halibut.     The  meat  side  of  the  skin  is  upward.  |  55 
Then  she  takes  her  splitting-knife,  and  she  cuts  under  the  |  thick 
layer  of  fat  of  the  skin,  and  two  finger-widths  is  the  width  |  of  split- 
ting it ;  and  she  continues  cutting  [what  she  is  doing]  until  she  comes 
to  the  |  tail,  for  she  begins  at  the  neck,  and  it  just  does  ||  not  come  60 
off;  and  she  does  the  same  with  the  other  side:  this  is  |  called  "  torn- 
from-the-edge."     The  torn-off  edges  |  do  not  come  off  from  the  skin. 
As  soon  as  |  the  woman  finishes,  she  hangs  it  up  at  the  place  where 
the  others  are.  |  She  puts  the  meat-side  upwards;  but  when  it  has 
been  hanging  four  [|  days,  the  woman  takes  down  the  skin,  and  she  65 
tears  off  the  |  torn-off  edges.     And  when  they  are  all  off,  the  woman 
takes  a  |  narrow"  piece  of  cedar-bark  and  ties  them  in  the  middle,  and 
she  hangs  them  up  |  again  not  very  near  to  the  fire,  namely,  |  the 
torn-off  edges.     Then  she  hangs  up  the  skin  again  also.     This  is 
only  ||  done  to  those  that  are  caught  in  the  autumn,  when  the  halibut  70 
is  just  |  getting  fat.  .  .  -1 

When  the  guests  have  gone  out,  |  the  woman  sharpens  her  fish- 
knives,  in  the  evening;  |  and  when  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  the 
cutting-board  |  and  scrapes  it  off,  so  that  it  is  clean.  After  she  has 
done  so,  she  ||  puts  it  down  on  the  beach  where  she  is  going  to  split  75 

dzaxa  k'!a'£wase.  Wa,  laE'm  e'k'Iadza^ye  E'lsadza£yasa  Lle'se  55 
Wa,  la  Sx£e'dxes  tlE'lyayowe  xwa/Laya.  Wa,  la  tlE'lyabodxa 
wa'kwe  tsetsE'nxunxesa  Lle'se.  Wa,  la  ma£ldE'ne  wa/dzEwasasa 
tlE'lyabotsE£was.  Wa,  he£na'kula£mese  fixa'£yas  la'g'aa  la'xa 
oxsdE£yas  g'a'g'iLEla  la'xa  5'xawa£yas.  Wa,  ha'lsEla£mese  [la 
k'les  la'waxs  la'e  e'tled  he  gwe'x£idxa  apsE'nxa£ye.  Wa,  he'Em  60' 
Le'gadEs  xwa'xiisE'nxa^e,  yi'xa  tsE'ntsEnxunxa£ye.  Wa,  laE'm 
k'les  lawa'eda  xwa'xiisEnxa'j'e  lax  Lle'se.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa,'- 
Iexs  la'eda  tsteda'qe  ge'x£waLE'lots  lax  axa'sasa  wao'kwe.  Wa, 
laE'm  he  e'k!adza£ye  E'lsadza£yas.  Wa,  he'tla  la  mo'bEnxwa£se 
£na'liisexs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  axa'xodxa  Lle'se  qa£s  xwa'sodalexa  65 
xwa'xiisEnxa£ye.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wi'laxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa 
ts!e'q!e  dEna'sa  qa£s  yiLo'yodeq.  Wa,  la'xaa  xwe'laqa  te'x'waLE'- 
lots  la'xa  k'le'se  xE'nLEla  £nExwa'la  la'xa  lEgwI'le,  yi'xa  xwa'- 
xusEnxa£ye.  Wa,  la  xwe'laqasa  L!e'se  6'gwaqa.  Wa,  laE'm  le'x'aEm 
he  gwe'gilasE£weda  logwanEmaxa  la'yinxe,  yixs  he'£mae  a'les  tsE'n-  70 
x£wideda  p!a,'£ye.  .  .  .  '  Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi£laho'quwElseda  Le£la- 
nEmxdaxs  lae'da  tslEda'qe  ge'xi£lalaxes  xwa'xiiLayowaxa  la  dza'- 
qwa.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'texs  la'e  &x£e'dxes  t!Ele'dzowe  qa£s 
kexEldzo'deq  qa  e'g'idzowes.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'texs  la'e  ax£a'- 
lisaq  la'xa  LlEma£ise   lax  fixa'sases  tlE'lsasoLe.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'-  75 

■Here  follows  a  description  of  the  cooking  and  eating  of  halibut-heads  (pp.  357-359).    Then  the  text 
continues  as  above. 


250  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE  KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

76  the  (halibut).  Now  she  is  |  ready  for  the  following  day.  As  soon 
as  day  comes,  the  |  woman  goes  down  to  the  beach,  to  the  place  where 
she  is  going  to  cut  the  halibut;  |  and  she  sits  down  at  the  place  where 
the  cutting-board  is  already  put  up,  in  this  manner:  | 
Then  she  takes  one-quarter  of  the  halibut  and  puts  it 

80  down  on  its  back  on  the  ||  cutting-board.  The  skin- 
side  is  next  to  the  cutting-board,  |  and  the  side  next 
to  the  ribs  is  upward.  Then  |  she  cuts  it  downward,  in 
this  manner:  pi  i-i'l  She  begins  at  the  neck  of  the  halibut,  |  and 
goes  half  way  /  /  l/l  down  the  quarter  towards  the  thin  end.  It 
is  |  thicker  at       /\h/\/     one   en<^>   anc^  ^s  length   is  two  spans  of 

85  our  ||   fingers  I  /       and   two   finger-widths.      Then  she  does  | 

the    same    to         y  the  other  quarter;  and  if  one  piece  is  cut 

too  long,  |  she     V/  cuts   it   off    and  throws  it  into    a   basket 

which  is  made  on  purpose  |  for  the  unused  cut-off  pieces.     When 
she  has  done  so  with  the  |  other  pieces  at  which  she  is  working, 

90  she  puts  them  on  a  mat  spread  out  on  the  beach.  Then  ||  she  takes 
one  piece  and  puts  it  down  on  the  cutting-board;  for  |  all  the  hali- 
but is  cut  into  long,  square  pieces.1  Then  |  she  cuts  them  length- 
wise, going  straight  down  the  long  thick  pieces  of  halibut.  She  | 
cuts  them,  beginning  at  the  thick  end,  going  towards  the  thin  end.  j 
She  stops  cutting  when  they  are  half  the  width  of  a  little  finger  || 

95  thick.     Then  she  turns  her  knife  down  flat,  and  she  cuts  under  I  one 


76  lala  qae'da  la/La  £na'x-£IdEL.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  £na'x-£IdExs  la'eda 
tsteda'qe  lE'nts!es  la'xa  L!Ema£ise  lax  axa'sases  tlE'lsasoLg.  Wii, 
la  khva'galisa  la'xa  la  gwa/les  Lae'sa  ttele'dzoga  gwa'leg'a  (fig.). 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  apso'dele    p!a'£ya   qa£s   nELEdzo'des   la'xa    tlEle'- 

80  dzo.  Wii,  laE'm  he  ma'k'aleda  axa'sdiisa  Lle'se  la'xa  tlEle'dzo. 
Wa,  la  ii'k"!:idza£ya  ma'kalaxde  la'xa  xi'la.  Wa,  la£me'se  t!o'- 
saxodEq  ga  gwii'leg'a  (fig.),  ga'giLEla  la'xa  6'xawa£yasa  p!a'£ye 
la'g'aa  la'xa  £nEgo'ya£yasa  apso'dlle  la  wi'swiilba.  Wa,  la  lele- 
kwe'da  apsba'£yas.     Wa,    la    ma£lp!E'nk'e    awa'sgEmasas    la'xEns 

85  q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£ye,  he£me'sa  ma£ldE'ne.  Wa,  la'xaa  he 'Em 
gwe'xfidx;i  apsExse  la'xa  6'xsdErye.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  g-i'lt!agaaxs 
lae  tlo'sodEq  qa  ts'.Exts!o'desa  q!e'gaa  la'xa  lExa'£ye,  hekwe'le 
qae'da  t!o't !asesawa£ye.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi£la  hegwe'x,£Idxa  wao'- 
kwe  la'xes  lae'na£ye  g'e'dzodalas   la'xa  LEbEse'  le£wa£3Ta.     Wii,  la 

90  iix£e'dxa  £nE'mts!aqe  qa£s  k'adEdzo'des  la'xes  tlEle'dzowe  qaxs 
la'e  £na'xwaEm  la  k'!e'k'!EWElx£Gna  pla'wedzEse.  Wa,  la£me'se 
nEgElE'ndalax  nEx£Ena'£yasa  k'lEWE'lkwe  p!a'£ya.  Wii,  la£me'se 
tlo'saq  g'ii'giLEla  la'xa  LE£xuba£ye  la'g'aa  la'xa  wilba£yas.  Wii, 
a'l£mese  gwal  t!o'saqexs  la'e  k'lo'dEne  wa'gwasas  la'xEns  sEtlax-- 

95  ts!a'na£yex;   wa    la    pa'x£idxes   tlE'lyayowe    qa£s    tlE'ltteldzapexa 

1  That  is,  square  in  cross-section. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  251 

side  of  what  she  is  working  at;  and  then  she  rolls  out  the  halibut,  96 
thus  [  the  piece  that  she  is  cutting  becomes  thin;  and  she  only  stops 
when  it  is  spread  out.  |  Then  she  rolls  it  up  again  and  turns  it  over, 
and  she  also  cuts  it  thin  |  (on  the  other  side) ;  and  she  does  not  stop 
cutting  until  it  is  all  spread  open.  She  ||  goes  on  doing  so  with  the  200 
others.  As  soon  as  all  the  halibut  is  cut  thin,  |  she  hangs  the  pieces 
up  on  the  drying-place       .  .  for  the  dried  hali- 

but, I  in    this  manner:      "Jf  /^=7^A-7^?YffC'         She  hangs  them 

up  lengthwise.  |     After      /  V ^  * — ^  ^jf  \       t,ney     have     all 

been     hung     up,     the    /     \  $        \    woman     takes 

her  I  fish-knives  and  puts  ■  them    into    her 

small  basket,  and  carries  them  ||  away  with  the  basket  in  which  the  5 
cut-off  tips  of  the  halibut  are.1  .  .  .    | 

When 2  it  is  evening,  the  woman  goes  down  to  the  |  beach,  to  the 
place  where  the  drying  halibut  is.  Then  she  gathers  up  the  dry- 
ing-poles I  on  which  the  drying-halibut  hangs.  As  soon  as  she  has 
gathered  them  all,  |  she  covers  them  over  with  mats,  so  that  the  || 
dew  of  the  night  will  not  get  at  them.  |  1 0 

When  day  comes,  she  takes  off  the  covering- 1  mats,  and  she  spreads 
out  again  the  drying-poles  on  which  the  drying  halibut  hangs.  | 
She  does  so  every  evening  and  every  |  morning.  Sometimes  it  takes 
three  days  ||  before  the  drying-halibut  is  half  dry.     When  it  is  half  15 

fipso'dllases  SxsE£we'.  Wa,  la  len£na'kuleda  p!a'£ya.  Wa,  la  96 
wll£na'kiilaxs  la'e  tte'lsaq.  Wa,  a'l£mese  gwa'lqexs  la'e  LEp!e'- 
da.  Wa,  la  le'x-£EndEq  qa£s  xwe'l£Ideq.  Wa,  la'xaa  t!E'ls£IdEq. 
Wa,  a'lEmxaa'wise  gwal  tte'lsaqexs  la'e  ewi£la  LEpa'la.  Wa,  la 
he£staEm  gwe'x,£Idxa  wao'kwe.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  £wFla  la  tlEle'kwa  200 
p!a'£yaxs  la'e  ge'x£widEq  la'xa  ge'xudEmaxa  k-  !a'£wase.  Wii,  laE'm 
ga  gwa'leg'a  (Jig.).  Wa,  laE'm  ge'xusEq!ala  la'xes  gildo'lase. 
Wa,  gt'Pmese  la  swl£la  gEyo'kuxs  la'eda  tsteda'qe  ax'e'dxes 
xwa'xiiLayuwe  qa£s  la'ts!odes  la'xes  la'laxame.  Wa,  la  da'laq 
LE£wa  lExa'£ye,  ylx  la  gi'ts!Ewatsa   t!o't!Esba£ye  pla'^ya.1    ...  5 

Wa,2  g"i'l£mese  dza'qwaxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  lE'nts!es  la'xa  l!e- 
ma£ise  lax  axa'sases  k"!a/ewase.  Wa,  la  q!;ip!e'x£Idxa  gega'yo, 
ylx  la  ge'xwalaatsa  k"!a'£wase.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £wl£la  q!ap!e'x-£I- 
dExs  la'e  na'kiinEntsa  le'El£wa£ye  laq  qa  k'le'sese  la'g'aaLEleda 
go'siixa  ga'nuLe  laq.  10 

Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £na'x-£ldExs  la'e  e'tled  la'wly5dxa  £nawE'me  Je- 
£wa£ya  qa£s  e't!ede  gwe'l£Idxa  gega'yowe,  ylx  ge'xudEmasa  k'!a'- 
£wase.  Wa,  la  lie'mEnalaEm  he  gwe'gilaxa  dza'dzaqwa  LE£wa 
gegaa'la.  Wa,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Ena  yu'duxup!E'nxwa£se  £na'lasa 
k!a'£wase    k'!es    k"!a'yax£wlda.      Wa,    gl'Pmese    k!a'yax£widExs  15 

1  Continued  on  p.  359.  ■  Continued  from  p.  359. 


252 


ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL 


lETH.  ANN.  36 


16  dry,  |  she  takes  down  all  the  drying  halibut,  and  she  opens  them,  so 
that  they  are  spread  open.  |  Then  she  hangs  them  up  again  lengthwise. 


They  are  hanging  |  in  this  way: 
fine  day,  they  are  then  ready  in  j 
20  they  are  thoroughly  dry.  As 
comes,  they  are  taken  down 
are  opened  out  again  and  |  spread  out  on  the  beach. 


When  it  is  a 
one  day,  and 
soon  as  ||  day 
again,  and 
Then  they  are 


spread  out  on  the  drying-poles.     As  soon  as  |  much  halibut  is  ready, 


she  spreads 
in  this  manner: 
halves  length- 

25  puts  it  away  || 
pose    in    one 
in  this  manner: 
halibut  on  top  of 
weight  one  on  an- 
flat.     |     That   fin- 

30 


the  drying  halibut  out  |  on  the  beach, 
and  when  it  is  dry,  |  she  folds  it  in 

wise, in  this  way:   ,      and  she 

on  a  stage  made  l^-^  --/  on  pur- 
corner  of  the  '  "— ■ —  house, 
and  the  woman  piles  one 
another.  Then  they 
other,  and  they  become 
ishes  this.  | 
As  soon  as  all  the  dried  halibut  is  flat,  ||  being  piled  up  one  on 
another,  they  get  damp  again.  Then  the  |  woman  takes  large  bas- 
kets, made  on  purpose,  and  she  puts  |  the  dried  halibut  into  them, 
one  hundred  in  each.  Finally  |  she  puts  (the  baskets)  in  a  place 
where  the  damp  can  not  get  at  them.     Now  this  is  done.  ] 


l'i  la'e  fixEma'xSdxa  k'!a/£wase  £wl£la.  Wa,  la  dzax£wI'dEq  qa  da'l£- 
ides.  Wa,  la  xwe'laqa  g'i'lg'aaLE'lodalaq.  Wa,  laE'm  la  ge'g'i- 
lala  g-a  gwa'leg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  g'lTmese  e'k'a  £na'laxs  la'e  he'lala- 
Emxa  £nE'mxsa  £na'laxs  la'e    a/lax'£Id    k' !a'yax£wlda.      Wa,    g'1'1- 

20  £mese  £na'x£IdExs  la'e  e'tled  axa'xoyS  qa£s  e'tlede  dzax-wIdEq  qa 
LeLEpa'lesexs  la'e  LEp!a'LElots  la'xa  ge'gayo.  Wa,  g'l'Pmese 
q!a'q!ex-silaxs  p!a'£yaxs  la'e  LEpIall'sElaxa  lakMa'yax-'wid  k'!a'£was 
la'xa  LlEma'ise  g-a  gwa'lega  (fig.).  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  lE'mxew!dExs 
la'e   nEgEXLa'la  k'!o'xewidBq   g"a  gwa'leg'a    (fig.)    qa£s   le  g-e'xaq 

25  la'xa  k"!a'gele,  hekwe'leEm  lax  one'gwllasa  g'o'kwe  g-a  gwa'leg-a 
(fig.).  Wa,  laE'm  £mEwe'glndaleda  tslEda'qasa  k'!a'£wase  la'xa 
wao'kwe.  Wa,  laE'm  gu'ngwatolii  qa  £ne'£nEmadzox£wldes.  Wa, 
laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £na'xwa  la  naEngEdzo'x£wIdeda  k-!a'£wasaxs  la'e 

30  gae'l  £mEwega'yap!a.  Wa,  laE'm  xwe'laqa  la  pe'x£wida,  wii,  le'da 
tsteda'qe  ax£e'dxa  hekwe'la£ye  awo'  L!a'i.!Ebata.  Wa,  la  hantslo'da- 
lasa  k-!a'£wase  lae'lak!Endts!aweda  £na/l£nEmsgEme.  Wa,  lawI'sLa 
ge'xaq  la'xa  kle'se  la'g'aaatsa  dE'lx'a.    Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq.1 


'  Continued  on  p.  360. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  253 

Dried  Codfish. — When  they  can  not  |  catch  any  halibut  and  they  1 
have  much  codfish,  |  the  woman  takes  out  the  guts,  and  she  does  in 
the  same  way  as  I  |  described  before  when  she  cuts  what  has  been 
caught  by  her  [|  husband;  and  she  also  does  in  the  same  way  when  ,3 
she  spreads  open  the  meat  |  while  the  skin  is  still  on.  As  soon  as  |  the 
bone  is  taken  off,  the  woman  takes  off  the  skin  and  throws  it  away,  j 
Then  one-half  of  it  is  this  way:  .--- — J  Then  the  woman  |  cuts 

it  in  two  lengthwise.     Then  there    p""-^  are  four  pieces  on  both 

sides.  ||  Then   she   cuts   straight    *-- 1  down   one-half  of  |  one  10 

side  in  this  manner,    , _^^  and  she  does  in  the  same  way  | 

as  she  does  with  the -_^\      halibut    when    she    cuts    them 

thin,  and  they  are  |    ' — ^   hung   up  at    the   place  where 

halibut  is  dried.     It  is  done  in  the  same  manner.  |  As  soon  as  it  gets 
dry,  it  is  all  white;  and  when  it  is  ||  bad  weather,  it  is  dried  in  the  15 
house,  behind  |  the  fire.     When  it  gets  dry,  it  is  all  red.  |  All  this 
does  not  keep  well,  the  sun-dried  as  well  as  the  |  smoke-dried  (fish). 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

The  dried  codfish  is  treated  in  the  same  way,  and  they  also  ||  do  20 
everything  with  it  that  they  do  with  dried  halibut.     It  is  eaten  as 
breakfast  in  the  morning  |  when  there  is  no  dried  salmon  in  the 
house.  I 


Dried    Codfish     (Ne'sasde    k'!a'£was). — TV  a,    he'£maaxs    k'lea'sae  1 
gu£yo'Lasxa    p!a'£ye,    wa,    g'i'l£mese    q!e'nEmaeda    ne'ts!a£ye,  wii, 
le'da  tsteda'qe  he'x-£idaEm  la/wfyodEx  ya'x'yig'ila  lax  gwa'laasasEn 
gwa/gwex's£alase   gwe'g'ilatsexs  gila'e    xwa/HdEx  ba'kulanEmases 
la'£wimEme.     Wa,  la'xaa  he'Em  gwe'gllaxs  la'e  LEpa'le  qlE'mlala-  5 
sexs   he'£mae    a'les    axa'la    la'xes   Lle'se.     Wa,  g"i'l£rnese    lawa'ye 
xa'qasexs    la'eda    tsEda'qe    t!E'lsodEx     L!e'sas    qa£s    ts!Ex£e'deq. 
Wa,  la   g'a    gwa'leda    epso'dllaseg'a  (Jig.).     Wa,    le'da    ts'Eda'qe 
ma£lts!E'ndEq  la'xes  gi'ldolase.     Wa,  laE'm  mo'x'seda  wa'x'sodlle. 
Wa,    la£me'se    £nEqa'xod    xwa'l£idEx     £nEx£Ena'£yasa    apsEx-sa'sa  10 
apso'dlle  g"a  gwa'leg'a  {jig.).     Wa,  la'Em  he'Em  gwe'gilaqe  gwe'- 
g'ilasaxa  p!a'£yaxs  la'e  t!E'lsasE£wa.     Wa,  la  he'Emxat!  la  ge'xwa- 
sE£we  lax  ge'£wasaxa  k'!a'£wase.     Wa,  la  he'Emxat!  gwe'g-ilasE£we. 
Wa,  g'i'l£mese  lE'mx£widExs  la'e  £mE'lmaxsa.     Wii,  g-i'l£mese   yE- 
ya'gisa  £na'liixs  la'e  he'Em  lE'mxwasE£weda  g'o'kwe  lax  o'gwiwa-  15 
lilasa  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese    lE'mx£widExs    la'e    Lla'LlEqluxsa. 
Wa,  la  k-!es  ga'la  e'k'anaxwa   LE£wa   L!a'L!esdEgola   L6£ma  kwa'- 
kwax'dEgole.     Wii,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Wa,  la  he'Emxat!  gwe'gilasE£weda  ne'sasde  k!a'£wasa;  he'Emxaa 
gwa'yi£laleda   k-!a'-wasasa    p!a'£ye,    yixs    gaa'xsta£yaaxa    gaa'liixs  20 
k"!ea'sae  xa'mas  g'ae'l  la'xa  gp6'kwe. 


254  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.85 

1  Herring-Spawn.1 — When  (the  man)  has  all  (the  spawn)  in  the 
canoe,  |  he  goes  ashore  at  a  point  where  the  wind  blows  hard. 
Then  he  |  takes  the  long  ^_j^a        poles  and  puts 

them  up  in  this  way :  j  "^^^^S^^^^^^^S^*  This  is  called 
"standing  on  rock;"  ff^Slli^-i^^^rr^^^'  and  when  he 
5  has  finished  ||  hanging  //  jS^feg-^T^^T^^^^^  up  the  hem- 
lock-branches with  \f  the  spawn  on 
it,  and  when  it  is  fine  weather  |  and  the  wind  is  blowing  hard, 
(the  spawn)  gets  dry  in  six  days;  |  and  when  it  is  all  dry,  the 
man  takes  down  the  |  hemlock-branches  with  the  spawn  on 
them  and  puts  them  on  the  rocky  place,  and  |  his  wife  wipes 
off  the  herring-spawn  from  the  hemlock-branches.     Then  she  'puts 

10  it  j|  on  a  mat;  and  when  it  is  done,  she  covers  it  with  a  mat,  | 
when  it  is  evening.  In  the  morning,  when  day  comes,  she  |  spreads 
all  the  mats,  and  she  scatters  the  herring-spawn  over  them;  and 
when  |  it  is  really  dry,  she  takes  her  boxes  and  she  |  picks  out 
from  among  the  white  herring-spawn  large  pieces  and  puts  them  into 

15  the  ||  boxes;  and  when  (a  box)  is  full,  she  takes  the  cover  |  and  puts 
it  on.  Then  she  puts  it  away  in  a  dry  place  in  the  house".  |  This  is  kept 
to  be  eaten  in  winter.  Then  she  takes  a  |  medium-sized  cedar-bark 
basket  and  puts  into  it  the  red  spawn.  |  This  is  sold  to  other  tribes, 

20  f°r  II  this  is  not  good  to  be  kept  long.  Now  that  is  all  about  hemlock- 
branches  with  |  herring-spawn  on  them.    .  .  .   Kelp  is  also  towed 

1  Herring-Spawn. — Wa,1  gi'l£mese  £wilg"aalExs  la'xa  xwa'kluniixs  la'e 
la'g'aala  la'xa  a£wl'lba£ye  yix  la'k!wemadzasasa  ya'la.  Wii,  la  ax£- 
e'dxa  g  i'lsglltla  dzESEqwa  qa£s  qa'xalodes  g"a  gwa'leg'a  {fig.).  Wa, 
he'Em  Le'gadEs  qa'qla.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ge'x£waLElo- 
5  da'lasa  En£EndEXLa'la  q!wax  laq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  ae'gisa  £na/- 
laxs  la'klwemasaeda  ya'la,  wa  la  lE'mwumx£Idxa  qlELtexsa'  £na'la. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wl'£la  lE'mx£wIdExs  la'eda  bEgwa'iiEme  5x£axo'dxes 
En£EndExxa'la  q!wa'xa  qa£s  3x£aldda'leq  la'xa  t!edzEk!wa.  Wa,  la 
gEnE'mas  qE'mxalaxa  aE'nte  la'xa   qlwa'xe.     Wa,  la  kla'dzodalas 

10  la'xa  le£wa£ye.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wi'£laxs  la'e  £nakujri'ntsa  le£wa£ye 
la'qexs  la'e  dza'qwa.  Wa,  gi'l  £na'x-£idxa  gaa'laxs  la'e  £wl'£la 
LEpIa'lodalaxa  le'El£wa£ye  qa£s  gweldzolalesa  aE'nte  laq.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mese  a'lak!ala  lEmx£wi'dExs  la'e  Sx£e'dxes  xEXEtsE'me;  wa,  la 
mE'nmaqaxa  £mE'la  aE'ntaxa  a£wa'£wastowe  qa£s  la  latsla'las  la'xa 

15  XEXEtsE'me.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  qoqiltlaxs  la'e  ax£e'dEx  yikuya'£yas 
qa£s  yikiiyi'ndes  laq.  Wa,  la  g'e'xaq  la'xa  lEmwe'le  la'xa  g  6'kwe. 
Wa,  he'Em  axe'lasos  qa£s  ha£ml'lxa  tslawu'nxe.  Wa,  la  &x£e'dxa 
ha£ya'l£a  Lla'LlEbata  qaEs  k"!ats!o'desa  L!a'L!axudeeleqala  aE'nt 
laq.      Wa,    he'Em    la'xoyos    la'xa    a'logiila    le'lqwalaLa£ya,    qaxs 

20  k'le'sae  ga'la  e'k!a  he  gwe'x'se.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xa  qlwa'xe 
En£EndaxLa'la.     .     .     .2    Wa,3  he'£misa  qla'xqlElise  la  da'paso  qa£s 

> Continued  from  p.  185.         » Continued  on  p.  422,  line  1.         "Continued  from  p.  422,  line  12. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  255 

and  I  put  into  the  spawning-place.     It  is  also  anchored  there;  |  and  22 
when  the  herring  finish  spawning,  after  four  days,  |  the  kelp  with 
the  spawn  on  it  is  taken  oUt  of  the  water;  and  ||  the  hair  of  the  kelp  25 
is  pulled  off  from  its  stem  and  is  hung  on  the  poles  |  on  the  point 
where  the  wind  blows  hard,  and  the  |  woman  always  turns  it  over; 
and  she  does  not  do  so  a  long  time,  |  before  it  gets  dry;  and  when  it 
is  quite  dry,  |  the  stems  of  kelp  are  counted  into  lots  of  ten,  which 
are  laid  flat  ||   one    on   another,  and  are  tied   in   the  middle  with  30 
cedar  bark,  this  way:    ,^^>_^      Then  they  are  put  into  a  box, 
and  |  a  cover  is  put    I|gS||[lllS    on  tight.    Then  it  is  put  away 
in  a  dry  place  |  in  the   ^=^^^^       "=^  house.     This  is  to  be  eaten  in 
winter.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Preserving  Roots. — See  p.  188. 

Elderberries. — After1  all  (the  berries)  have  been  earned  down-  l 
stream,  (the  woman)  spreads  a  |  mat  at  a  place  not  too  near  the  fire. 
She  unties  |  the  cords  of  her  elderberry-basket,  and  pours  the  berries  | 
on  the  mat  that  has  been  spread  down.  She  sits  down  by  the  side 
of  it,  and  puts  the  ||  empty  baskets  down  on  her  left-hand  side.  Then  5 
she  takes  up  one  bunch  of  |  elderberries  at  a  time  and  strips  off  the 
elderberries  into  the  cleaning-basket.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  all  off, 
she  throws  away  the  stem  and  |  takes  up  another  bunch  of  elderberries 
and  strips  the  berries  |  into  the  basket  in  which  she  had  carried  the 

le'xat!  axaLayo'dayo  la'xa  wa'yade.     Wa,  laE'mxae  a/Em  qte'lsala.  22 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  wa'seda  wa'na£yaxa  la  m6'p!Enxwa£s  £na'laxs 
la'e  ax£flsta'noweda  En£EndEXLa'la  q!ax-q!Eli'sa.     Wa,  la  klulpa'la- 
yEwa  awa'dzo   sE£ya'sa   q!a'x"q!Elise  qa£s  lii  te'x£iinda'layo   la'xa  25 
dzo'xiime  la'xa  awl'lba£ye  lax  lak!we'madzasasa  ya'la.     Wa,  le'da 
tsteda'qe  he'mEnaiaEm  le'x-lexaq.     Wa,  k!e'st!a  ge'x-£id  he  gwe'- 
g'ilaqexs  la'e  lEmx£wI'da.     Wii,  g-i'l£mese  a'laklala  la  lEmx£wI'de 
la'e  ho's£itsE£wa  £naE'nqaxsa  q!a'xq!Elise.  Wa,  la  papEqa'laxs  la'e 
yiLoyo'tsasa    dEna'se   (Jig.).     Wa,    la    ge'ts!oyo    la'xa    xEtsE'me.  30 
Wa,  la  aEinxa'sE£we  yikuya£ya'sexs  la'e  ge'xayo  la'e  lEm£wI'le  la'xa 
go'kwe.    Wa,  laE'm  ha£ml'lxa  tslawu'nxe.     Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Preserving  Roots. — See  p.  188. 

Elderberries. — Wii,1  gil£mese  £wi£latosamasqexs  lae  LEplalilasa  1 
le£wa£ye  laxa  k-  !ese  nExwala  laxes  lEgwile.  Wii,  lii  qwelEyindEx 
t!Emakiya£yases  ts!enats!e  lExa£ya.  Wii,  lii  qEbEdzotsa  ts!ex'ina 
laxa  LEbele  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  lii  k!unxElilaq  yixs  lae  ha£nela  £nEmsgEme 
loptsla  lExii  lax  gEmxagawalllas.  Wii,  la£mes  dax£idxa  £nEmxL5la  5 
tslexina  qa£s  x  ix-ts!ahsa  ts!ex"ina  laxa  lExa£ye  xig'ats!eq.  Wa, 
gil£mese  £wilg-ilEXLoxs  lae  ts!Ex£edEx  ts!enanas.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed 
ax£edxa  £nEmxLala  ts!ex'ina.  Wii,  laxae  x*ix-ts!alasa  tslexlna 
laxes     x'Ix-ts!alasaqes     xigikwiiguts!a     ts!enats!e    lExa£ya.      Wa, 

1  Continued  from  p.  205,  line  23. 


256  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE  KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.sb 

10  elderberries.  ||  When  these  are  also  off,  she  throws  away  the  stems, 
and  |  continues  doing  so  with  the  other  elderberries.  When  they  are 
all  |  off,  she  goes  to  pick  more  elderberries.  In  the  morning,  when 
daylight  comes,  |  she  does  the  same  as  she  did  before  when  she  went 

15  to  pick  elderberries;  |  and  when  her  baskets  are  full,  she  ||  ties  down 
the  top  and  she  carries  them  down  river  on  her  back,  |  carrying  one 
basket  at  a  time;  and  she  does  the  same  as  she  did  with  the  | 
elderberries  she  picked  first,  stripping  the  berries.  When  |  they  are 
all  off,  she  puts  them  into  the  baskets;  and  |  when  this  is  done,  she 

20  spreads  a  mat  over  them  so  that  the  ||  soot  of  the  roof  can  not  drop 
on  them  during  the  night.  In  the  morning,  when  daylight  comes,  | 
she  takes  her  paddle,  goes  to  her  small  canoe  and  ]  launches  it,  in  order 
to  go  and  get  fire-wood.  When  she  reaches  |  the  place  where  there 
is  much  driftwood,  she  puts  it  aboard  her  small  canoe;  |  and  when 

25  it  is  full,  she  goes  home.  When  ||  she  reaches  the  beach  of  her  house, 
she  takes  out  of  the  canoe  the  |  driftwood  that  she  has  obtained ;  and 
when  it  is  all  on  shore,  she  asks  her  |  husband  to  carry  it  up  |  into 
the  house.     Then  her  husband  goes  and  |  carries  it  up  into  his  house; 

30  and  his  wife  goes,  taking  her  clam-digging  stick  ||  and  a  shell  of  the 
horse-clam.  She  sits  down  on  the  floor  in  the  |  middle  of  the  house, 
and  with  the  end  of  her  digging-stick  digs  up  [  the  ground.   Then  she 

10  glh'Emxaawise  £wllg'ilEXLa  lae  ts!Ex£edEx  tslenanas.  Wa,  axusa- 
£mese  he  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe  ts!ex'ina.  Wa,  g-il£mese  cwFla  la 
x'ig'ikwaxs  lae  etled  ts!ex-axa  ts!ex'inaxa  la  enax"£Idxa  gaala,  wa, 
laxae  aEm  he  gweg'iles  gilx'de  gwegilasExs  lax'de  ts!ex-axa  ts!e- 
x-ina.     Wa,  g"il£Emxaawise   qoqutle  ts!ets!enats!as  laElxa£yaxs  lae 

15  tlEmakiyEndalaq.  Wa,  g'axe  oxLatosElaq  laxa  wa.  Wa,  laEm- 
xae  £nal£nEmsgEmEmk'aq.  Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex-£Idqes  gllxde 
gweg'ilasxes  g-ilxde  ts!enanEmxs  lae  x'lx^IdEq.  Wa,  gil£mese 
EwFla  la  x'ig'Ekuxs  lae  Ewi£la  la  laaxtslalas  laxa  laElxaeye.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  gwatexs  lae  nakuyindalasa  le£wa£ye  laq  qa  k-!eses  q!up!E- 

20  qElasoesa  q!walobEsaxa  la  ganoLa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £nax'£Idxa  ga- 
alaxs  lae  ax£edxes  se£wayowe  qa£s  la  laxes  xwaxwagume.  Wa, 
la  wI£xustEndEq  qa£s  la  aneqax  qlexala.  Wa,  g'ih'mese  lag'aa  lax 
qlayasasa  q!aq!exEmaxs  lae  moxsaq  laxes  xwaxwagume.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  qot!e  xwaxwagumasexs  g'axae  na£nakwa.     Wa,  giPmese 

25  g-jLx'alis  laxa  L'.Ema£isases  g'okwaxs  lae  hex£idaEm  moltSdxes 
qlexanEme.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £w!£loltaxs  lae  hex,£idaEm  axk-!alaxes 
larwtinEme  qa  las  wex'wtisdesElaxa  q!exale  qa  las  weglLElaq 
laxes  g-6kwe.  Wa,  la£mese  wlx'wusdese  la£wunEmaseq  qa£s  la 
wlg'iLElaq  laxes    g'okwe.      Wa,  laxa    gEnEmas    ax£edxes  k'lilakwe 

30  LE£wa  £walase  xalaetsox  mEt!ana£ye.  Wa,  lii  k!wag-alll  laxa 
awagawalllases  g-6kwe.  Wa,  lii  ts !Ex£walllaxes  k'lilakwe  laxa 
awlnagwlle.     Wa,    he£mis    g"ag  illlatsexs    lae  bal£Itses  q!waq!wax- 


eoas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  257 

starts  and  measures  |  three  long  spans  and  one  short  one  for  the  length  33 
of  her   |    digging,  and   the    same   for    the    width    of    the    hole   she 
digs  with  her  digging-stick.  ||  Then  she  cleans  the  soil  out  with  the  35 
large   clam-shell.     When  |  it  is   one  span   and    four   finger-width-    | 
deep,  she  stops  digging.     Then  she  takes  the  small  |  pieces  of  drift- 
wood and  puts  them  into  the  hole;  and  when  they  are  level  |  with 
the  floor,  she  takes  larger  pieces  of  driftwood  and  ||  puts  them  down  40 
on  the  sides  of  the  hole.      Then  she  puts  one  down  on  each  side, 
inside  of  these  two,  |  and  she  lays  other  medium-sized  sticks  cross- 
wise close  together  over  the  |  four  pieces.     After  this  has  heen  done, 
she  takes  her  medium-sized  hand-  |  basket,  goes  down  to  the  beach, 
and  puts  stones  |  into  it.  When  it  is  full,  she  carries  it  up  ||  into  her  45 
house,  and  she  pours  the  stones  over  the  wood  that  she  has  built  up. 
She  I  keeps  on  doing  this,  and  does  not  stop  until  there  are  many 
stones  on  it.  I  When  she  thinks  there  are  enough,  she  stops.     She 
takes  the  |  large  basket,  goes  into  the  woods,  where  she  is  going  to 
look  for  dead  fern  and  |  skunk-cabbage.     First  she  plucks  off   the 
■  lead  fern-fronds;  and  when  ||  her  basket  is  full,  she  breaks  off  the  50 
broadest  leaves  of  skunk-cabbage;  |  and  when  she  has  broken  off 
many  of  them,  she  piles  them  on   top  of  the  fern-fronds  j  and  ties 
them  down.     She  puts  the  basket  on  her  back  and  carries  j  it  out  of 

ts!ana£yaxa     mamoplEnk'Elasa     ts!Exuts!ana£ye     yix  ewasgEmasas  00 
daplalilai.as.     Wa,  la  heEmxat !  £wadzEgEg-axs  lae  laptitses    kdila- 
kwe.     Wa,  la  gololtslalasa    £walase  xalaes   laxa  t!Ek*a.      Wa,   g'il-  ■..- 
£mese  moilEiibaleda  '"nEmp!Enk'e  IaxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaeye  ytx  la 
EwalabEtalllasas  Elapasyasexs  lae  gwal  elapa.     Wa,  la  ax-edxa  amEm- 
£ye   q!aq!exEma    qa£s    Loxts!odes  laq.      Wa,  gibmese     £iiEmakiya 
LE£wa    awlnagwllaxs  lae  ax£edxa    LasLakwala  qlexala  qaJs    kak'E- 
dEnodes    laq.      Wa,    lii    kiik-Etotsa    malts!aq    lax    awaga"wa£yas.  40 
Wa,  la  gEk'Eyindalasa  niEink'Ewakwe  hayal£ast6  qlexal  laxa    mo- 
ts !aqe.     Wa,  gil'mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  hela     k-!ogwats!e    Ie- 
xa£ya  qa£s  la    lEnts!e   laxa    LlEma£ise  qa£s  lii  xoxuts!alasa  tlesEme 
laq.      Wa,  gibmese    qotlaxs  lae    oxLosdesElaq    qa£s  la    oxLKeLElaq 
laxes  gokwe  qa£s  la   guqEyints    laxes    eaxalasoxude.     Wa,    la    he-  45 
x'saEm  gwegile.     Wa,  abmise  gwalExs  lae  q!enEma  t!esEmc.    Wa, 
gil£mese    kotaq   laEm   helalaxs  lae   gwala.     Wii,  lii  ;ix'"edxa    £wa- 
lase  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  laxa  aide.     Wa,  laEm  la]  axlxa  gEmse  lo£  k!E- 
k-!aok!wa.     Wa,  het!a   gll    k  !ulx-£its6£seda  gEmse.     Wa,  gibmese 
qot!e    lExa£yas  lae    p!ox£widxa    awadzoxLowe  k!Ek' !aok!wa.     Wa,  50 
gll'Emxaawise  q!enEme  plogwaiiEmasexs  Lie  mokuyints  laxa  gEm- 
se,  qa£s    tlEmak-iyindeq.     Wii,   lii   6xi.Ex;I<li:q    qa£s   gaxe    oxloI- 
t'.alaq     qa£s    lii    oxLaeLElaq    laxes    gokwe.     Wa,    lii    oxLEg'alllas 
75052—21 — 35  eth— rr  1 17 


258  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [utii.ann.  35 

the  woods  into  the  house.     She  puts  it  down  on  the  floor,  |  not  too 

55  close  to  the  pile  of  wood  and  stones.  She  does  not  set  fire  ||  to  it 
until  daylight.  As  soon  as  the  wood  is  burnt  up,  she  |  takes  her 
tongs,  which  are  in  readiness  on  the  floor  of  the  house.  She  also 
takes  a  long-handled  |  large  ladle  and  a  large  dish.  If  |  there  are  many 
elderberries,  there  are  three,  or  even  four,  |  large  dishes  for  holding 

60  the  boiled  elderberries.  This  is  all  ||  she  needs  for  her  work.  When 
the  stones  are  red-hot,  |  she  takes  her  tongs  and  picks  out  what  is  left  | 
of  the  drift-wood  and  the  small  pieces  of  charcoal.  When  |  these 
are  all  out  of  the  fire  from  the  stones,  she  levels  down  the  top  of  the  | 
red-hot  stones  so  that  it  is  level;  and  after  this  has  been  done,  she  || 

05  takes  the  dead  fern-fronds  and  sprinkles  a  little  water  over  them, 
just  enough  to  |  dampen  them;  and  after  this  has  been  done,  she 
throws  them  on  the  red-hot  |  stones.  When  these  are  thickly 
covered  with  dead  fern-fronds,  she  takes  the  |  broad  leaves  of  skunk- 
cabbage  and  spreads  them  over  the  dead  fern-fronds  as  smoothly  as 
possible;  |  and  she  bends  the  edges  of  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  in  at 

70  the  sides  ||  of  the  hole  that  she  has  dug;  and  she  only  stops  when  she 
has  four  layers  of  |  skunk-cabbage  leaves  on  top  of  the  fern-fronds. 
After  doing  so,  she  |  takes  her  elderberry -basket,  and  she  pours  the 
bemes  over  the  |  skunk-cabbage  leaves;  and  when  all  have  been 
poured  on,  she  takes  many  |  skunk-cabbage  leaves  and  spreads  them 

laxa    k!ese   nExwala  laxa   t  leqwabEgwIle.     Wa,    al£mese  mEnabo- 

55  tsa  gfilta  laqexa  la  £nax-£idxa  gaala.  Wa,  gil£mese  x'lqostaxs  lae 
ax-'edxes  k"!lpL§,laa  qa  g"axes  gwalel  k'adela.  Wa,  he£misa  g  ilt  !i;\- 
Lilla  £walas  k'5ts!Enaqa.  Wa,  he£misa  £walase  loq!wa.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  qlenEma  tslexinaxs  lae  qliinala  yuduxiixxa  loxs  mEwex- 
Laeda    awawe    dzeg'atslexa    tslex'ina   loElqlwa.     Wa,  heEm    waxe 

60  ax£exstsE£was  qa£s  eaxalaya.  Wa,  g'il£mese  memEnltsEmx"£Ideda 
tlesEmaxs  lae  ax£edxes  kllpLalaa  qa£s  k" !ips£alax-eidexa  x'lx'E- 
q!ayawa£yasa  qlexale  LE£wa  am£Emayastowe  tslotna.  Wa,  g  il- 
£mese  ewilg"ilqeda  t!esEmaxa  gultaxs  lae  £nEmak-Eyhidxa  x'Ixex- 
sEmala    tlesEma    qa    mEmak'Eyes.     Wa,     gih'mese     gwalExs    lae 

65  axeedxa  gEmse  qa£s  xaL!Ex,£Ide  telxEg-ELEyintsa  £wape  laq  qa 
dslxes.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  lEXEyindalas  laxa  x'Ix'exse- 
mala  t!esEma.  Wa,  glPmese  la  wakwa  gEmsaxs  lae  ax£edxa 
awaxLowe  k"!Ek!aok!wa  qa£s  aek'le  LEpEyindalas  laxa  gEmse. 
Wa,  laxae    ek' !Ebax"£ide     6ba£yasa     k!Ek'!aok!wa    lax    wax'sane- 

70  qwasa  ElabEkwe,  wa  fll£mese  gwalExs  lae-  modzEkwaleda  k'  !e- 
k!aok!wa  lax  okwaya£yasa  gEmse.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
k'  loqiilllaxes  ts!ets!enats!e  laElxa£ya  qa£s  lii  giiqEylndalas  laxa 
k-Ek"!aok!wa.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wilts!axs  lae  ax£edxa  qlenEme  k'!E- 
k!aok!wa  qa£s  lexat!  LEpEyindalas  lax  okiiya£yasa  ts!ex-ina.    Wii, 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  259 

over  the  elderberries.  ||  She  stops  when  these  are  very  deep,  and  she  75 
waits  for  the  j    berries  to  be  cooked.     Then  she  washes  the  large 
dishes  and  the  |  large  long-handled  ladle;  and  after  doing  so,  she 
rests  for  a  little  while.     When  evening  comes,  she  peels  off    the 
skunk-cabbage   covering  |  from   the   elderberries   which   have   been 
steamed;  and  after  the  skunk  cabbage  lias  been  taken  off,  ||  she  takes  SO 
the  large  dishes  and  puts  them  all  round  it.  |  Then  she  takes  the  large 
ladle  and  dips  into  the  cooked  |  elderberries.     She  puts  them  into 
the  large  dish;  and  |  when  it  is  full,  she  continues  dipping  into  them 
and  pouring  them  into  the  other  elderberry-dishes.  |  When  all  have 
been  taken  out  of  the  steaming-hole,  she  takes  ||  other  skunk-cabbage  85 
leaves  and  spreads  them  over  the  cooked-elderberry  |  dishes,  for  she 
does  not  want  the  soot  to  fall  into  them.     She  |  leaves  them  that  way 
over  night,  so  that  they  will  cool  off  and  become  |  cold  in  the  night, 
and  also  that  they  may  become  thick.  |  In  the  morning,  when  day 
comes,  the  woman  who  works  at  the  elderberries  takes  a  straight- 
splitting  ||   cedar-stick,  square  in  cross-section,  of  the  thickness  of  90 
one-half  of  our  ||  little  finger.     She  takes  her  knife  and  |  measures  off 
pieces  of  square  cedar-stick  two  |  spans  long.     Then  she  cuts  them 
off.     There  I  are  two  of  the  same  length.     Then  she  measures  off  ||- 
two  pieces,  each  one  short  span  long,  and  she  takes  the  straight-  95 
edged  knife  and  cuts  them  off.  |  Now  there  are  two  each  two  spans 

giPmese  la,  qlex'dzEkwalaxs  lae  gwala.     Wa,  il'mise   la  esElaq  qa  75 
l  lopes.     Wa,  he£mis  la   tsloxng'indaatsexa    awawe  IdElqlwa  LE£wa 
£walase     giltlEXLala     k'atslEnaqa.      Wii,     g'il-mese     gwalExs    lae 
yawaa£id  x'5s£ida.     Wa,  lii  dzaqwaxs  lae  knsalaxa  iiEyime  k'lEk'Iao- 
k!wa  lax  okny  a  lyases  iiEk'asEswe  tslex'ina.    Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laweda 
k'Ek'laoklwaxs  lae  ax£edxa  awawe  loslqlwa  qa-s  la  k-aestalilElas  laq.  80 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  k'atslEnaqa  qa£s  tseqes  laxa  kfr'nekwe  tsle- 
x'ina qa£s  la  tsets  la-las  laxa  awawe  dzeg'Egwatsle    loElqlwa.     Wa, 
giPmese  qotlaxs  lae  h.-mal  tsets lalaxa  waokwe  dzeg'Egwatsle  IoeI- 
qlwa.     Wa,  gil£mese    £wllgElts!awa   kunyasaq    lae    ax£edxa    k'lE- 
klaoklwa  waokwa  c[a£s  lii  LEpEylndalas  laxa  dzEgEgwatsle   IoeI-  85 
qlwa    qaxs    gwaqtelaaq  q!upEyindalas6£sa  qlwalobEse.     Wa,  laEin 
xamaelL  hel    gwaeLe    qa£s     alaklalll    wudEx-£ida;  wa,    he£mis    qa 
wndaqedesexa  ganoLe;  wa,  he£mis  qa  gEnx'£ides.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £na- 
x  "Idxa  gaalaxslaeda  tslatslex'sila  tslEdaq  ax£edxa  eg'aqwa  lax  xa- 
sE£we  klwaxLawa.      Wa,  la   k'!5dEne     k' lEWElx£unena£yas    laxEns  90 
sElt!ax'ts!ana£yex  yix  £wag'idasas.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  k'lawayowe.  Wa, 
la  bal-klxa   k' lEWElx£ime  klwaxLawa  qa  malp lEnk'es  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!wax'ts!ana£yex    yrx    awasgEmasasexs  lae  k'limtslEiidEq.    Wa,  la 
maltslaqa  £nEmasgEme.     Wa,  laxae    bal£itses  tslExuts!ana£ye    laxa 
maltslaqaxs  laaxat!  ax£edxes  liExxala  k'lawayowa  qa£s  k'limtslEii-  95 
deq.     Wii,    laEm    maltslaqa    maemalplEnkas    awasgEmase    liixEns 
q!waq!wax'ts!iina£yex.     Wa,  la  malts  lax'Emxaeda  ts!etslExuts!ana- 


260  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  linn.  ann.  35 

97  long,  |  and  there  are  also  two  (each)  one  short  |  span  long.  She  uses 
these  to  |  measure  the  width  of  the  elderberry-cakes.  It  is  like  this.1  || 
100  After  she  has  finished,  she  takes  the  broadest  skunk-cabbage  leaves 
and  j  spreads  them  out  on  a  mat.  Then  she  takes  her  husband's 
crooked |  knife  and  cuts  out  the  middle  vein  of  the  leaves  of  the  | 
skunk-cabbage,  trying  to  get  it  of  the  same  thickness  as  the  |  edge 
of  tin-  leaf.  After  doing  this  with  many  of  them,  she  puts  down 
5  flat  ||  all  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  which  she  has  cut,  (putting  them 
fiat)  on  the  fire  of  her  |  house,  so  that  they  will  get  soft.  She  wants 
them  to  get  a  little  |  heat  only,  and  therefore  she  puts  them  on  the  tire 
fur  a  little  while.  |  After  doing  this  with  all  of  them,  she  puts  them 
away.     Sometimes  |  they  leave  the   elderberries   in   the  house  for 

10  three  days,  so  that  they  may  get  very  ||  thick  before  making  them 
into  cakes.     Now  they  are  ready  to  be  |  made  into  cakes.2   |  .  .  . 

The3  woman  takes  the  drying-frame  for  the  elderberry-cakes.  |  She 
puts  it  down  where  she  is  going  to  put  the  elderberries  on  it.  She 
takes  |  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  which  have  been  heated,  and  the 

15  middle  vein  of  which  has  been  cut  out,  and  she  puts  them  on  ||  the 
drying-frame  smoothly.  As  soon  as  the  |  skunk-cabbage  leaves  have 
been  spread  over  the  drying-frame,  she  takes  her  straight  |  knife  and 


98  £yes  awasgEmase  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex.  Wa  laEm  k'adayol 
qa  a\vadzE£wasi.Es  lEqaLases  tsiendzoLexa  g'aLa  gwalaLeg'a .' 
100  Wa,g'il:"mese  gwalEXS  lae  ax£edxa  awadzowe  k'  !fik'  !aok  !wa  q.rs  pfi- 
gEdzodes  laxa  LEbele  le^wa'ya.  Wa,  la  &x£edEx  xElxwala  k!a- 
wayases  hVwunEme  qa£s  xElxwales  lax  t  !EnxEdzo£yas  nEgEdz4£yasa 
k!Ek!aok!wa.  Wa,  laEm  laloida  qa  £nEmakwes  £wagwasas  i,E£wa 
fiwfinxa'ye.  Wa,  g-ll£mese  qlexse  la  he  gwex'£ItsoJsexs,  lae  papagE- 
,",  i.-lasa  k-!axEwaxlls  t  tent  !EirxEdza£ye  k'!Ek-!aok!wa  lax  lEgwIlases 
gokwe  qa  lelEndEdzox-wkles.  Wa,  laEin  km  £nex-  qa  xai.!Ex-£I- 
des  ts!Elts!Elgudzox-wIdEx  lae  yawas£ld  paxLEnts  laxes  lEgwile. 
Wa,  gil£mese  maxwa  la  gwalaxs  lae  gexaq  qaxs  £nal£nEmp!En  e 
yuduxup  !Enxwaese     £nalas     he     gwaela     dzeg'Ekwe     ts!ex-fn;!    qa 

1(1  alak'Iales  la  gEnlcaxs  lae  lEqasE£wa.  Wa,  laEm  gwalila  lalai  I  lax 
lEqax'dEmLaq.2   .  .  . 

Wa,,3  la  ax£ededa  tstedaqaxes  lEgEdzowe  kMitktedesxes  ts!endzoLe 
qa£s  la  pax£a.lilas  laxes  lEgasLaxes  ts!endzoLe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes 
pEnkwe  k!axEwaxus   t!Ent!EnxEdzE£we    k"!Ek"!a5k!wa    qa£s   aek'Ie 

15  LEbEdzodalas  laxes  lEgEdzowe  k*  !ltk"  lEdesa.  Wa,  g"il£mese  labEnde 
LEpa'yas  k!Ek!aok!wa  laxa  k-!itkp!Edesaxs  lae  ax£edxes  nExxala 
k'  lawayowa  qa£s  t  losalexa  la  £wadzogawa£yasa  QExtslawasa  k'  !ftk"  !e- 

i  A  rectangulai  cake.  2  Continued  on  p.  107,  line  1.  -'Continued  from  p.  171,  line  86. 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  261 

cuts  off  all  those  that  are  broader  than  the  middle  sticks  and  that  li 
hang  over  the  drying-frame.   |  When  she  has  cut  them  all  off,  she 
takes    her  measuring-stick    |    (for    the 
berry-cakes)  and  places  it  down  at  (1), 
and  she  takes  ||  one  of  the  dishes  con- 
taining the  cooked  elderberries  and  puts 
it  down  at  (1),  next  |  to  the  drying-frame.     Then  she  takes  her  large 
long-handled  ladle  |  and  a  large  shell  of  the  horse-clam,  and  [  she  dips 
the  ladle  into  the  cooked  elderberries.     She  sits  |  down  on  the  floor 
at  one  end  of  the  drying-frame  at  (1),  and  takes  her  measuring- 1|  rod  25 
and  puts  it  down  at  the  end  at  (1) ;  and  she  puts  down  |  three  sticks; 
and  as  soon  as  they  have  all  been  put  down,  she  takes  the  large  | 
ladle  which  is  full  of  cooked  elderberries,  and  pours  them  into   |  the 
cedar-stick  mould.     Then  she  takes  the  large  shell  |  of  the  horse- 
clam,  which  she  turns  on  its  back,  and  presses  the  back  of  the  ||  shell  30 
on  the  cooked  elderberries,  so  as  to  spread  them  inside,  of  the  |  cedar- 
stick  mould.     Now  she  presses  them  with  the  back  of  the  shell,  |  so 
that  they  settle  down  and  have  the  same  thickness  as  the  |  cedar- 
stick  mould,  and  have  the  same  thickness  all  over.  |  After  doing  so, 
she  takes  off  one  of  the  moulding-  ||  sticks,  the  one  nearest  to  (1),  and  35 
also  two  |  side-sticks,  but  she  does  not  touch  the  |  cedar-stick  mould 
nearest  (2).     Now  she  puts  down  the  |  cedar-stick  mould;  one  short 

dese.     Wa,  g'iPmese    la  £wl£la  la  tlEwekwaxs  Lie    ax£edxes  k'atse-  18 
stalayoLe  mEnyayowa  qa£s  g'edzodes  lax  (1).     Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa 
£HEmexLa    dzeg'Egwats!axa    tslexina   loqbva    qaes  g-axe  hanballlas  20 
lax  (1)   klitklEdesa.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa   £walase  g'iltlEXLala  k'atslE- 
naqa.      Wa,    he£misa     £walase     xalaetsox     mEt!ana£yex.     Wa,    lii 
tseqasa  k'atslEnaqe  laxa  dzeg'Ekwe  tslex'ina  (fig.).     Wa,  la  k!wa- 
bahlaxa    k'Btk'lEdese   lax    (1).      Wa,,  la   ax£edxes   k'atse£stalayowe 
mEnyayowe.     Wa,  la  k'atbEnts  lax  (1).     Wa,  lii  kats  e£stalasa  yu-  25 
duxuts!aqe  laq.     Wa,  g'il£mese  gwal£aLElaxs  lae  dax'£Idxa    ewalase 
k'atstenaqaxs  lae  qotlaxa  dzeg'Ekwe   tslex'ina  qa£s  lii  tsets  lots  laxa 
mEnyayowe     klwaxLawa.       Wa,    la     ax£edxa     £walase    xalaetsox 
mEt!ana'"yex;   wa,    lit   nELaleda   xalaesaxs   lae  SxElges  awig'asyasa 
xalaese    laxa    dzeg'Ekwe    tslex'In-!,   qa    gwelalts  !awe  lalaneq"    laxa  30 
mEnyayowe  klwaxLawa.      Wa,  laEm  Laqulges   awigayasa   xalaese 
laq  qa  qlEsmEnkwes.     Wa,  he£mis    q;    EnEmales  wagwasas  le£w;- 
mEnyayowe    klwaxLawa.      Wa,    he£mis    qa    '"iiEmakwe    wagwasas. 
Wa,    g'iPmese    gwala     lae     ax£aLElodxa    £nEmts!aqe     mEnyayowe 
klwaxLawaxa  gwaqEnwa£ye  lax  (1).     Wa,  he£misa   maltslaqe  gege-  35 
ba£ya.     Wii,.  la£me  hewaxaEin    Labalaxa     mEnyayowe    klwaxLawa 
gwiiqEnwe     lax     (2).     Wa,    lii     k'atEmg'aaLElotsa    memEnyayowe 
klwaxLawa     £naFnEints!aq     lax     wax'sba£yaxa    tslEg'ola.     Wii.  la 


2G2  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.anh.S5 

stick  at  each  end,  |  and  she  puts  down  the  long  cedar-stick  measure 

40  at  the  end,  ||  this  way:  ,  .  ,  ,  ,  ,  After  doing  so, 
she     again    takes    her     :  =  _|==         s=  ;     ladle,  |  which  is 

always  kept  filled  with  cooked  elderber- 

ries, and  |  she  pours  them  into  the  cedar-stick  mould;  and  she 
again  takes  the  |  large  shell,  and  she  does  the  same  as  she  did 
with   the   first   one.  |  She    continues    doing   so  with   the   others,  || 

1")  and  she  only  stops  after  finishing  the  whole  length  of  the  drying- 
frame.  |  As  soon  as  all  the  elderberries  have  been  made  into  cakes, 
she  calls  her  husband  j  to  lake  hold  of  the  end  of  the  elder- 
berry diving-frame,  and  they  |  put  it  up  right  over  the  lire  where 
salmon  are  always  dried;  |  and  when  they  have  all  been  put  there, 

50  they  build  up  the  fire  so  that  it  burns  ||  well,  for  she  wishes  them  to 
dry  quickly.  When  |  there  is  a  good  fire  underneath,  the  elderberry- 
cakes  dry  in  one  day,  and  they  are  really  |  dried  (through).  She  leaves 
them  drying  there  one  day  and  one  night.  |  In  the  morning,  when 
day  comes,  the  woman  takes  her  breakfast,  the  one  who  makes  the  | 
elderberry  cakes.1  || 

55  When2  (the  cedar  bark)  is  all  split  into  strips,  she  takes  her  elder- 
berry-cakes j  and  piles  up  the  drying-frames  |  which  she  is  going 
tie  together  in  bundles.  She  takes  up  one  of  the  strips  of 
soft  cedar-bark  |  and  breaks  it  in  two.  She  puts  (the  two  pieces) 
down  on  the  floor,  on  a  mat  that  has  been  spread  out.    Then  she  takes 

kat  !ai.i'.lotsa  gildola  inEnyayowe  klwaxLawa  lax  oba£yas  g'a  gwii- 

40  leg'a  {jig.)-  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwatexs  lae  etled  dax,£Idxa  k'atslEnaqe 
qaxs  heniEnala£mae  qotlalalilxa  dzeg'Ekwe  ts'ex'Ina.  Wa,  laxae 
tsetslots  laxa  mEnyayowe  klwaxLawa.  Wa,  laxae  etled  six£C'dxa 
£walase  xalaesa  qa£s  kemiexat!  gwex£Itse  laxes  gilx-de  gwegilas 
g'ale  lEqasEEwa.     Wa,    aX'sirmese    he    gweg'ilaxa    waokwe.     Wa, 

45  fihmese  gwalExs  lae  labEndEx  £wasgEmasasa  k"  !ltk"  lEdese.  Wa, 
g11£mese  ewl£la  la  lEgEkwa  tslendzowaxs  lae  Ee'lalaxes  la£wiinF.me 
qa  g'axes  dadEbEndxa  tslendzodzala  k- !ltk"  tedesa  qaes  lii  Lag'a- 
ai.Elots  lax  nEqostawases  lEgwIle  lax  x'ildEmase  xaxamase.  Wa, 
g'ih'mese  £wllg-ustaxs  lae  lEqwelax-'idxa   lEgwaba£y;  s   qa  alalr laics 

50  ex-  x'lqEla  qaxs  walaqelaaq  halabala  lEinx£wIda.  Wa,  gil£mese 
eke  Llesaaba,£yas  lae  helalaEmxa  'nEinxsa  snalaxs  lae  alakliila 
lEmx£wida.  Wa,  lii  hexsiiEin  x'ilEhiLElaxa  enala  LEswa  ganoLe. 
Wii,  gil£mese  £nax'£Idxa  gaalaxs  lae  gaaxstalax"eldeda  lEqlenoxwaxa 
tsle.vlna  tslEdaqa.1   .   .    . 

55  Wa,2  g'il£mese  £wl£la  la  dzEdzExsaakwa  lae  ax£edxes  tslendzowe 
qa  gaxes  papEqEwek'ales  dzedzendzodzala  kleklEtklEdesa  lax 
yaeltsEmasLaseq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £nEints!aqe  dzEXEk"  k'Sdzskwa 
qa£s  EltslEndeq.  Wa,  lit  kak-EdEdzolllas  laxa  LEbele  ELdzo  le£wa£ya. 
Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  tslendzowe  ssk'laxsa  qa£s  papEqodes  lax  ek'!a£yasa 

1  Herefollows  a  description  of  theshredding  of  cedar-bark,  p.  132,  line  1.  !  Continued  from  p.  134,  line  34. 


BOAS]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  263 

five  cakes  of  elderberries,  one  on  top  of  the  other,  and  [|  puts  them  60 
on  the  two  strips  of  soft  cedar -bark,  (in  this  way) : 
and  when  |  the  edges  are  even,  she  pulls  the 
two  strips  of  cedar-bark  tight  and  ties  the  ends  to- 
gether. |  As  soon  as  she  finishes  it,  she  takes  up  another  |  piece  of 
soft  split  cedar-bark  and  breaks  it  in  two;  and  she  puts  down  the 
pieces  on  the  |  mat  that  has  been  spread  out.  Then  she  takes  the 
bundles  of  elderberry-cakes  that  have  been  tied  and  ||  puts  them  65 
on  it.  She  ties  them  crosswise,  the  same  way  as  the  first,  |  in 
this  manner:  This   is  what  they  call  one  bundle  of 

elderberry-  V ! — 1  cakes,  |  when  five  cakes  of  elderberries 

are    tied    to-   > — I 1  gether.     She  continues  doing  so  with 


what  she  in-  tends  to  keep  in  the  house,  to  be  eaten  in 

winter.  She  uses  |  a  medium-sized  box.  When  she  finishes  tying  the 
elderberry-cakes  into  bundles,  ||  she  tilts  (the  box)  to  one  side,  near  the  70 
fire;  and  when  it  is  warm  inside  and  really  |  dry,  she  puts  the  bundle 
of  elderberry-cakes  |  into  the  box.  When  it  is  full,  she  puts  the  | 
cover  on  and  ties  it  down.  When  this  is  done,  |  she  puts  the  elder- 
berry-box away  in  a  place  where  it  is  always  dry;  ||  that  is,  where  the  75 
heat  of  the  fire  can  reach  it.  After  she  has  done  so,  she  |  gathers  tip 
the  cakes  that  she  did  not  tie  into  bundles,  and  puts  them  into  an- 
other |  small  box,  and  she  throws  all  the  elderberry-cakes  into  it.  | 
When  they  are  all  in,  she  puts  the  cover  on,  |  ties  it  down,  and  puts 
(the  box)  down  by  the  side  of  the  first  box.  || 


la,  ax£axel    malts !aq    dzExEk"    kiidzEkwa    (Jig.).     Wii,  giPmese  la  60 
£naxwa  £nEmEiixalaxs  lae  lEk!iit!cd  yaltsEmtsa  malts  !aqe  dzEXF.ku 
IriidzEkwe    laq.     Wa,    g"il£mese    gwalExs    lae  &x£edxa     £nEmts!aqe 
dzExEkwe  k'adzEkwa  qa£s  Eltstendeq.     Wii,  laxae  k'adEdzodalas  lax 
LEbele  Ie£wa£ya.     Wii,    lii  ax£edxa    la    yiltsEmala  tslendzowa    qa£s 
axEyindes  laq.     Wit,  laEm  galfipalaxs  laeyil£ets  laxesg  ilx'de  yiLa£ya  65 
g'a  gwalega  (fig.).     Wa,  heEm  gwE£yo  £nEmxsayoku  ts!endzowa  la 
ylltsEinala   sEklaxsa    ts!ets!endzii.     Wa,    lii    hexsiiEm  gwegilaxes 
gwE-yo  qa£s  hangwil  qa£s  ts!ex'ts!axsolxa  tslawiinxLa.  Wa,  lii  fix£ed- 
xa  hela  xiixadzEmaxs  lae  gwal  yaeltsEmaxes  ts!ets!endzowe.     Wii, 
lii  qogunolisas  liixes  lEgwIle  qa£s  pExts.'odeq.     Wii,gtl£mese  alak"  !ala  70 
lii  lEmxuts!axs  lae  aek"!a  hants!alaxa  yaeltsEinala  ts!ets!endzo  laxa 
ts!endzoats!e    xiixadzEma.     Wii,    g'il£mese    qotlaxs    lae    yikuyints 
yikuya£yas.     Wii,  lii    t!Emak-EyindEq.     Wii,  g'il£mese   gwalExs   lae 
hang'alllases  ts!endzoats!e  xaxadzEine  laxa  hemEnala£me  lEm£w!la 
ylx    lag'aaasasa    Llesalases    lEgwIle.     Wii,    g-il£mese    gwalExs    lae  75 
q!ap!eg  illlaxes  k' !ese   yiltsEntso£    tslendzowa  qa£s  lii  ax£edxa  Qgvi- 
£la£me  xaxadzEma.     Wa,  la    pElx'£alts!alasa    tslendzowe  laq.     Wii, 
gil£mese    £wllts!axs    laaxat!    yikuyints    yikwaya£yas.      Wii,    laxae 
tlEmak'EyiiidEq  <ja£s  lexat!  hanolllas  laxa  g-ilx-de  hang'alilEins. 


264  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  36 

]  Salal-Berries.1 — She  takes  a  large  dish  and  puts  it  down  by  the  | 
side  of  her  salal-berry  baskets.  She  unties  |  the  tops  of  the  salal- 
berry  baskets;  and  when  |  this  is  done,  she  pulls  out  the  hemlock- 
5  branches  which  cover  the  top.  ||  Then  she  takes  a  medium-sized  mat 
and  spreads  it  outside  of  where  she  sits,  where  |  she  is  going  to. pluck 
the  salal-1  terries  off  the  stems.  She  takes  hold  of  a  salal-berry  branch  | 
and  plucks  off  the  berries  from  the  stems,  and  she  goes  on  and  puts  | 
the  cleaned  berries  into  the  dish,  and  she  throws  the  branches  |  on 
the  mat  that  has  been  spread  out.     She  cleans  them  very  quickbj  : 

10  and  ||  after  all  the  berries  have  been  cleaned  which  she  put  into  the 
dish,  |  and  after  the  branches  have  been  put  on  the  mat  that  has 
been  spread  out,  |  she  folds  up  the  mat  holding  the  branches,  |  and 
she  goes  out  and  shakes  them  out  outside  of  the  house.  Then  she 
goes  back  into  |  the  house.     She  takes  her  front-basket,  goes  down 

15  to  the  ||  beach  in  front  of  her  house,  and  picks  up  fresh  stones,  which  | 
she  puts  into  her  small  basket,  enough  so  that  she  can  |  carry  them. 
Then  she  carries  the  basket  on  her  back  into  the  house,  |  and  she  puts 
it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  Then  |  the  stones  are  poured  out  by 
the  side  of  the  fire.     Then  she  goes  down  again,  carrying  her  front- 

20  basket,  ||  and  puts  more  stones  into  it;  and  when  |  she  has  enough, 
she  carries  them  on  her  back  into  the  house,  and  |  puts  them  on  top 


1  Salal-Berries. — Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  loqlwa  qa£s  g'fixe  kan5- 
lilas  lax  haxhanelasases  nenEgwats!e  laElxa£ya.  Wa,  la  qwelE- 
yindEx  t!et!Einak'Eya£yases  nenEgwats!e  laF.lxa'ya.  Wa,  g"il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  lEkiimwalax  t!ak'Eya£yases  nenEgwatsle  q!waxa.  Wa, 
5  la  Sx£edxa  hel£a  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEp lallleq lax  Llasalilases  klwaelasi.axs 
laLe  k'imt!edEixa  nEklule.  Wa,  lii  dax'Idxa  £nEints!aqe  laxa 
nEk!iile  qa£s  klulpalexa  nEk!ule  laxes  ylsx'Ene,  qa£s  la  k!ats!otsa 
k'lmdEkwe  nEk!ul  laxa  loqlwe.  Wa,  la  ts.'EgEdzodalasa  yEsx'ine 
laxa  LEbele  leewa£ya.     Wa,    la  halabalaxs  lae   k'lmtaq.     Wa,  g-il- 

10  £mese  £wl£la  kimdEkwa  nEk'.ule  la  k!ats!;\xa  kfmdEgwatsle  loq!wa. 
Wa,  laxae  fwl£ladza£ya  yisx'Ene  laxa  klmdEdzowe  LEbel  leewaeya. 
Wa,  g"il£mese  ewi£laxs  lae  q'.EnepElUaxes  klmdEdzowe  le=wa;va 
qa£s  la  laaqEWElsaq  lax  L!asana£yases  g"5kwe.  Wa,  lii  edei.  laeL 
laxes    gokwe    qa£s    ax£edexes    nanaagEme    qa£s    la    lEntsles    laxa 

15  L!Ema£isases  gokwe.  Wa,  la  xExuewklxa  alExsEme  tlesEma  qa£s 
la  xExuts!alas  laxes  nanaagEme.  Wa,  a£mise  gwanala  qaes 
lakwesexs  g'axae  oxLosdesElaq  qafs  la  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  gokwe. 
Wii,  la  oxLEg'alllas  lax  onalisases  lsgwlle.  WiL,  laEm  gugEnolisas 
laxes  lEgwllexa  t!esEme.     Wa,  laxae    etEnts!esa  k'loqulaxes  nana- 

20  agEme  qa£s  laxat!  et  !ed  xEx"ts!alasa  tlesEme  laq.  Wa,  gll'mese 
helatslaxs  lae  oxLosdesa  qa£s  laxat!  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  g'okwe  qa£s 

i  This  follows  the  description  of  the  gathering  of  salal  berries,  p.  207,  line  53. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  265 

of  those  she  brought  in  first.     She  just  puts  |  the  basket  with  stones  2:; 
in  it  on  the  floor,  and  she  builds  up  the  fire  so  |  that  it  is  high.     She 
takes  good  dry  fire-wood  and  ||  lays  it  across  the  top  of  the  fire.     When  25 
this  is  done,  |  she  piles  stones  on  top  of  it;  and  when  they  are  all 
on,  |  she  takes  a  low  box  and  washes  it  out.  |  When  this  is  done,  she 
puts  it  down.     She  takes  a  small  steaming-  |  box  and  pours  water 
into  it  half  way  up  from  the  bottom;  and  she  ||  leaves  it  there  just  30 
outside  of  the  low  box,  at  a  place  between  it  |  and  the  fire.     Then 
she  takes  the  fire-tongs  and  puts  them  down  on  the  floor.  |  Now  it  is 
all  done,  and  she  waits  for  the  stones  to  get  red-hot,  |  as  they  arc 
still  on  the  fire.  | 

Now  we  will  talk  for  a  little  while  about  the  low-sided  box  for 
mixing  salal-berries.  ||  It  is  three  long  spans  and  one  short  span  |  in  35 
length,  and  it  is  just  two  |  long  spans  in  width,  and  it  |  is  one  span 
in  height.  |  The  corners  ma  tie  in  the  same  way  as  the  boxes  for 
keeping  preserved  salmon.  ||  That  is  all  about  this.  |  40 

As  soon  as  all  the  stones  winch  are  on  the  fire  are  red-hot.  |  the  woman 
wIki  works  on  the  salal-berries  takes  the  dishes  containing  the  cleaned 
berries  and  puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the  low  box  for  making 
salal-berry  cakes;  |  she  takes  the  tongs  and  puts  them  down  at  the 


la  oxLaqas  laxes   g'ibrde    xEgwanEma.     Wii,  a'mese    la    hangellla  22 
fc!ets!ala     lExaxa    xEgwile   tlesEma.     Wa,  la   heTldxes  lEgwlle    qa 
q!ap!esgEmllles.     Wa,   lii    ax£edxa    eke    lEmxwa    lElqwaEma    qa£s 
gayi£lalax'£ideq    lax    6kiiya£yases    lEgwlle.      Wii,  gil-mese  gwalExs  25 
lae  xEquylndalasa  t!esEme  laq.     Wii,  glh'mese  fwIlk'EyEndExs  lae 
ax£edxa    bEngEla    t!Eqagi£lats!a    qa£s  aek'Ie   ts!oxug'indEq.      Wa, 
gihmese    gwalExs    lae    hang-ah~las.      Wii,    laxae    ax'edxa    amaeye 
q!olats!a    qafs    giixtslodesa    fwape    qa  £nEgoyoxsdales.     Wii,    laEm 
ha£nel  lax  Llasotiiga^yasa   bEng'Ela  t!EC[ag-i"lats!ii  lax  awagawa'yas  30 
LE£wa  lEgwlle.    Wii,  laxae  ax-'edxa  tslesLala  qa  gaxes  kadela.    Wit, 
laEm  Jwi£la   laxeq.     Wa,  aJmise    la    esEla   qa  memEnltsEmx-£ideda 
tlesEme  la  xExuLiilales  lax  lEgwilas. 

Wii  qEns  yawas£lde  gwagwexsExJId  laxa  bEngEla  t!Eqagi;la- 
ts!a,  yixs  mamoplEiikElaasa  ts!Exuts!anaeye  laxEns  q!waq!wax--  35 
ts!;ina£yex  j'ix  £wasgEmg'Eg'aasas.  Wii,  la  iiExnEqEla  malp.'Enk" 
laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yix  JwadzEgEg'aasas.  Wii,  lii 
c"nEmp!Enk'osta  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!;ina-yex  yix  ewalasgEmasas. 
Wa,  la  yiiEm  gwale  wi'dayasox  wulaeyasa  xEtsEmaxs  k'ogEkwae. 
Wa,  laemEn  gwal  laxeq.  40 

Wii,  gil£mese  ^naxwa  la  mEmEnltsEmx'Jdeda  xExuLalalese  t  !e- 
sEmxs  lae  ax£ededa  nanak!t"dtslla  ts!Eilaqxes  k-lmdExuts .'alaxa  de- 
kluie  loElqlwa  qa£s  g'axe  k"anolilElas  laxa  bEng'Ela  t!Eqag-i- 
elats!a.     Wa,  laxae  &x£edxes  ts!esLala  qa  gaxes  k'adel  lax  eaxElas- 


266  K'l  HXOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.  36 

45  place  where  she  is  going  to  work.  ||  Then  she  takes  up  with  both 
hands  the  cleaned  salal-berries  and  |  pours  them  into  the  low  box  for 
making  salal-berry  cakes,  for  its  name  is  |  "low  box  for  making  salal- 
berry  cakes."  She  puts  the  berries  into  it;  and  |  she  only  stops  pour- 
ing in  salal-berries  when  they  arc  four  |  finger-widths  deep,  when  they 

50  are  levelled  down  on  top.  ||  Then  she  takes  the  tongs  and  takes  up 
with  them  the  red-hot  stones.  |  First  she  dips  them  into  a  steaming- 
box  containing  water,  so  that  |  the  ashes  that  stick  on  the  stones  will 
come  off,  and  so  that  they  may  not  be  too  hot  |  and  burn  the  salal- 
berries  when  they  are  put  in.  |  After  dipping  the  stones  in,  she  puts 

55  them  in  one  corner  of  the  ||  salal-berries;  and  she  continues  doing  so 
with  the  other  red-hot  stones.  |  When  she  finishes,  it  is  this  way. 
Then  |  with  both  hands  she  takes  more  salal-berries 
and  pours  them  on  the  red-hot  stones  which  |  are  in 
the  salal-berry  box;  and  when  these  are  also  four  | 
finger- widths  ha  depth,  then  she  takes  the   tongs   and 

60  takes  up  ||  more  red-hot  stones.  She  dips  them  into  the  steaming- 
box  |  with  water  hi  it,  and  puts  them  on  the  salal-berries;  |  and 
when  these  are  all  covered  with  stones,  she  pours  more  |  salal- 
berries  on  top;  and  when  these  are  all  in,  she  again  |  puts  in  more 

65  hot  stones;  and  when  they  are  all  covered  ||  with  hot  stones,  she 
takes  a  medium-sized  mat  |  and  spreads  over  it,  for  now  it  boils  up; 

45  Las.  Wa,  la  gox£wId  laxa  lExuts!ala  klmdEk"  nEklfila  qa£s  lii 
goxuts!alas  laxes  tlEqag'i£lats!e  bEngEla  qaxs  he£mae  la  LegEm- 
sa  bEngEla  tlEqagldatsliixs  lae  goxtsloyowa  nEklule  laq.  Wa, 
al£mese  gwal  goxtslalasa  nEklulaxs  lae  modEn  laxEns  qlwa- 
q!wax"ts!ana£yex  yix    waxutslEwasas    yixs    lae    £nEinakE£yaakwa. 

50  Wa,  lii  ax£edxes  tsIesLala  qa£s  kliplldes  laxa  xIxExsEmala  tlesEma 
qaes  lii  gagilasda  hapstEnts  laxa  qlolatsletslala  £wapa,  qa  lawiilesa 
k!wek!utsEina£yaq  gnna£ya.  Wa,  he£mis  qa  k-!eses  xsnLEla  tslElqwa 
qa  k!eses  k!umElx;eIdeda  nEk!ule  qo  lal  k'!ip!Eqalts  laq.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  la  hapstaakweda  t!esEmaxs  lae  k!ip!Eqas  lax  apsbalts  lawasa 

55  iiEklule.  Wii,  la  hex'sa  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe  x-IxExsEmala  tlesEma. 
Wa,  g'5l£mese  gwalExs  lae  g'a  gwaleg'a  (Jig-).  Wa  laxae  et!ed 
gox£\vld  laxa  nEklute  qa£s  goxuyindes  laxa  xIx'EXSEmala  tlesEmaxa 
la  axEgexa  nsklule.  Wa,  g'ilEmxaawise  modEne  wagwasas  laxEns 
q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yexs   lae  etled    ax£edxes  ts  iesLilla '  qa£s  k'!!p!edes 

60  laxaaxa  x'lx'ExsEmala  t!esEma  qa£s  la  hapstEnts  laxa  £wabEts  la- 
wasa qlolatsle.  Wa,  laxae  kliplEqas  lax  6kuya£yasa  nEklfile. 
Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  la  hamElqEyindqexs  lae  etled  goxuyindalasa 
nEklfile  laq.  Wa,  gil:mese  £wllg-Elts!ayeda  nEklidaxs  lae  etled 
k' lipEyindalasa  tslElqwa   tlesEm  laq.     Wii,  g'il£Emxaawise  haniEl- 

65  qEyE£yeda  tslslqwa  tlesEm  laqexs  lae  &x£edxa  heladzowe  le£\va£ya 
qa£s  LEpEyindes  laq,  qaxs   lE£mae    maEmdElqula.      Wa,    g-il£mese 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  267 

and  after  |  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  an  elderberry-cake  that  has  not  67 
been  tied  up  in  bundles  with  |  shredded  cedar-bark,  and  puts  it  up 
on  edge  over  her  fire.  |  It  gets  brittle  quickly,  and  she  goes  down  to  the 
beach  in  front  of  her  house  ||  to  look  for  a  flat  sandstone;  and  when  70 
she  finds  one,  |  she  takes  it  up  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the 
box  in  which  |  the  salal-berries  are  being  cooked.     She  takes  her 
husband's  stone  hammer  and  |  places  it  on  the  flat  sandstone.     When 
the  elderberry-cake  is-quite  |  brittle,  she  takes  down  the  elderberry- 
cake  and  she  takes  a  new  |[  mat  and  spreads  it  out.     She  puts  the  flat  75 
sandstone  on  the  |  mat  and  takes  up  the  cake  of  elderberries,  places 
it  |  on  the  sandstone,  and  she  takes  the  stone  hammer  and  pounds  | 
the  elderberry-cake  so  that  it  breaks  in  pieces.     When  it  is  all  broken 
up,  |  she  takes  up  the  pounded  elderberry-cake  with   both  hands, 
rubs  it  together  ||  so  as  to  make  a  powder  of  it,  ami  she  only  |  stops  80 
when  it  is  all  like  flour.     After  she  has  broken  up  |  one  of  the  elder- 
berry-cakes, she  takes  others,  for  generally  |  they  break  ten  cakes  of 
elderberries  for  making  the  |  salal-berry  cakes.     After  ten  elderberry- 
cakes  have  been  broken  up,  ||  she  takes  off  the  mat  that  has  been  85 
spread  over  the  salal-berry  box,  for  |  they  are  done  when  they  stop 
boiling.     She  takes  a  ladle  |  and  a   large  dish  and  puts  them  down 
by  the  side  of  the  low  salal-berry  box.  |  Then  she  takes  the  tongs 

gwfilExs    lae  ax£edxes  ts!endzewats!e,    yixa    k-!ese   yaeltsEmalaxa  67 
k-adzEkwe  qa£s  lii    pElk'EmgaaLElots    laxa    nEqostawases    lEgwIle 
qa  halabales   tsos£eda.     Wa,    lii   lEnts!es   lax   iJEma£isases   g'okwe 
qa£s   la  alax    pEgEdzowa    dE£na  tlesEma.      Wit,    g11£mese    qlaqexs  70 
lae  ax£edEq  qa£s  g'axe   pax£alilas  lax  apsanallJases  t  !Eqag"ilasE£we 
QEklula.     Wa,  lii  &x£edEx  pElpElqases    la£wunEme    qa£s  lii    mEgu- 
dzots    lax    pEgEdzowe    dE£na    tlesEma.      Wii,    gihmese    alak"!ala 
la    tsosaxs  lae    axiixodxa    ts!endzowe.     Wii.    lii    ax£edxa    Eldzowe 
le£wa£ya    qaes  LEp!allles.      Wa,  lii   pagEdzotsa    dF/na    tlesEin    laxa  75 
le;'wa'ye.     Wii,   lii    ax£edxa    £nEmxsa    ts!endzowa   qa£s    |>;>x£fdodes 
laxa  dEena  tlesEma.      Wii,  lii    ax-edxa  pElpElqe    qa£s   lEsEldzodes 
laxa    tslendzowe    qa    q!weq  hilts  !es.      Wii,    gIPmese   £wFwe1xsexs 
lae  g5x£wltses  wax'soltslana^ye  cEeyaso   laxa  qlwelkwe  ts!endzowa 
qa£s    heloxusEndeqexs    lae     flzakodxes     e£eyasowe.      Wii,     al'mese  80 
gwillF.xs    lae    yoEm  gwex'sa  quxex.     Wii,    g11£mese    £wI£wEbrseda 
'"uEmxsa    tslendzowa    lae    etledxa     waokwe     qaxs    heniEnala'mae 
nEqaxse  tslendzowe  q!welasE£wasa  tstediiqe  qas  axEgEmxes  t !Eqa- 
g-ilasE£we  nEk!ula.     Wii,  gih'mese  £wi£Ia  la  qlwelkwa  nEqaxsa  tslen- 
dzowa lae  axodxa  le£wa£ye  LEpEmalllasa  t  !Eqag"I£lats  !e  bEng'Ela  qaxs  S5 
lE£mae  L!opaxs  lae  gwiil  mEdElqula.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  kats!i:naqe; 
wii,  he£misa  £walase    loq!wa    qa£s   la   lranolilas  laxa  t!Eqag-i£lats!e 
bEng'Ela.      Wit,  lii    ax£edxa    tsIesLala    qa£s    klapteles    laxa    t.'esE- 


268  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.aitn.85 

and  feels  for  the  stones,  |  which  are  in  the  bottom,  under  the 
90  boiled  salal-berries ;  and  when  ||  she  gets  hold  of  a  stone,  she  takes  a 
spoon  and  scrapes  off  the  jam  that  |  sticks  to  the  stone.  After 
scraping  it  off,  she  puts  |  (the  stone)  into  the  dish;  and  she  continues 
doing  this  with  the  other  stones.  |  When  all  the  stones  are  out,  she 
takes  the  dish  with  the  stones,  |  goes  out,  and  throws  them  out  of  the 
95  house.  Then  ||  she  goes  back  with  the  dish  and  puts  it  down.  Then 
she  takes  her  tongs  |  and  stirs  the  salal-berries :  She  stirs  them  for  a 
long  time.  Then  the  |  boiled  salal-berries  become  liquid.  Next  she 
takes  a  spoon  |  and  dips  it  into  the  pounded  elderberries,  and  pours 
these  into  the  boiled  |  salal-berries;  and  she  continues  stirring  them 
]()()  with  the  tongs.  When  ||  all  the  pounded  elderberries  have  been 
thrown  in,  it  gets  thick.  |  After  finishing  this,  she  takes  her  drying- 
frame,  (the  same  one)  that  is  used  in  making  elderberry-cakes,  |  and 
she  also  uses  the  (same)  measure  that  she  used  to  measure  the  elder- 
berry-cakes, |  and  also  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  heated  over  the 
tire,  for  she  does  everything  |  with  the  boiled  salal-berries,  making 
5  them  into  cakes,  as  she  did  when  ||  making  cakes  of  the  elderberries; 
and  she  also  ties  them  into  bundles  |  with  shredded  cedar-bark  in  the 
way  in  which  she  tied  the  dried  elderberries.  |  Thus  they  are  tied 
into  bundles  with  shredded  cedar-bark,  and  they  are  put  into  a 
(square)  box,  which  is  |  called  "salal-berry  box"  because  it  contains 


maxs  lae  xEgiindzes  laxa  Llope  nEklula.  Wa,  giFmese  lalxa 
90  tlesEmaxs  lae  axeedxa  k'atslEnaqe  qa£s  kixalexa  tlEqiixs  lae 
klwekliitsEmexa  tlesEme.  Wa,  g'iPmese  £wilgEltsEmxs  lae  k'lip- 
tslots  laxa  loqlwe.  Wa,  ax'sa£mese  he  gwegilaxa  waokwe  tlesE- 
ma.  Wa,  giPmese  £wi£losteda  tlesEmaxs  lae  dag'ililaxa  tletslala 
loqlwa  qa£s  la  guqEWElsaq  lax  L  !asana£y  ases  g'Qkwe.  Wa,  g'ax- 
95  £mese  k'alaxa  loqlwe  qa£s  kagallles.  Wa,  lit  ax£edxes  tslesLala 
qa£s  xwetledes  laxa  Llope  nEklula.  Wa,  la  geg'illlExs  lae  ala- 
k-!ala  la  swapaleda  Llope  nEklula.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  k'atslEnaqe 
qa£s  tseqes  laxa  qlwelkwe  tslexina  qars  la  tseqElas  laxa  Llope 
nEklula.  Wa,  lii  hemEnalaEm  xwetasa  tslesLala  laq.  Wa,  g"il- 
100  £mese  -wPlaqeda  qlwelkwe  tsle.vina  laqexs  lae  gEnx£Ida.  Wa, 
g'il-mese  gwatexs  lae  axeedxes  k"  lltk- Isdesexes  lEgEdz6x"diixa  tslen- 
dzowre.  Wa,  heEinxaawis  nii:nya\  a>es  niEnyayaxa  tslendzowe. 
Wa,  laxae  pEnkwa  k"lEk"!aok!wa  laxa  li-.gwlle,  vixs  a£mae  naqEin- 
gilto  laxes  la  gwegilasxa  Llope  nEkliilExs  lae  lEqaq  laxes  gweg'ila- 
5  saxs  liixde  lEqaxa  tslendzowe.  Wa,  heEmxaawise  gwiilaxs  laeyael- 
tsEmalaxa  k'adzEkwe  laxaax  gwalaasasa  tslendzowaxs  lae  yael- 
tsEmalaxa  kadzEkwe.  Wii,  laxae  xEtsEme  hants lEwasaxa  Lega- 
das    nEgudzEwatsle  XEtsEma,  ylxs    lae    g'Its!Ewaxusa    nEgudzowe 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  269 

the  salal-berry  cakes.  |  Those  are  not  the  best  salal-berries  that  arc 
mixed  with  ||  elderberries;  for  they  make  them  in  a  (cheap)  way  to  sell  110 
them,  and  also  for  her  [  husband  to  give  a  feast  of  salal-berry  cakes. 
They  do  the  same  with  the  |  salal-berries  as  they  do  with  the  elder- 
berries when  a  feast  is  given.  |  The  only  difference  is  that  the  dishes 
are  called  |  " salal-berry-cake  dishes."  That  is  all  about  the  one 
way  of  doing  this.|| 

Salal-Berries  and  Elderberries  mixed — (Strips  of  caked  salal-  1 
berries).  |  In  tins1  (box)  salal-berries  mixed  with  elderberries  are 
pounded  before  they  are  ripe.  |  This  is  what  I  talked  about  first,  for 
they  are  made  as  cheaply  as  possible,  because  they  are  for  sale  |  or 
given  at  a  feast  to  different  tribes.  Therefore  the  salal-berries  are 
not  pure;  ||  and  they  put  in  the  elderberries  so  that  they  will  show  5 
up  better  and  |  that  the  salal-berry  cakes  will  dry  more  quickly,  when 
elderberries  |  are  mixed  with  them,  for  this  is  sold  cheaply.  | 

Now  I  wall  talk  about  the  salal-berry  cakes,  wluch  are  made  care- 
fully by  the  |  women  for  their  own  food  and  for  their  husbands,  their 
children,  and  their  ||  relatives.  When  (the  woman)  makes  the  salal-  10 
berry  |  cakes  mixed  with  elderberries,  she  does  not  pick  the  largest 
salal-berries  seen  by  her,  those  which  grow  well,  |  she  keeps  these  to 
be  picked  when  they  are  |  ripe.  When  they  are  quite  ripe,  she 
takes  her   three  |  baskets,  the  same   ones   that  were   used    before, 


t!Eqa.  Wa,  heEm  k!es  aek!aaku  iiEgudzS  tteqeda  la  geqElaxa 
tslex'ina,  yixs  hiie  senatseq  qa£s  laxoya.  Wa,  he£mis  qo  t!Eqa-  110 
gilaexsde  la£wunEmasex  nEgudzowa,  wa  laxae  heEm  gweg'ila- 
sE£weda  nEgudzowe  tlEqe  gwegilasaxa  ts'.endzowaxs  lae  klwela- 
dzEma.  Wa,  lex'a-'mese  ogux'ldeda  LegEinasa  loElq!wiixs  t:Ext!aga- 
ts!axa  nEgudzowe.     Wa  laEm  gwala  enEmx-£idala  gwegilasEq. 

Salal-Berries  and  Elderberries  mixed  (Tlsqelaxa  heyadzo  nEgiidzo  1 
t!Eqa). — Wa,1  la  heEmLal  klilxamEiiqula  nEklula  axEqElaxa  ts!en- 
tlzowEn  gale  gwagwex-s£alasa  qaxs  yayaqelakwaaxs  laxoyEweLe 
loxs  klweladzEmae  laxa  qleiiEme  lelqwalaLa£ya,  lagllas  k!es 
sayoqwa  nEklule.  Wa,  he£mis  lagilasa  ts!ex"ina  q!aq!ek"!es.  Wa,  5 
he£misexs  halabalae  lEmxewideda  nEgudzowe  t!sqaxs  laeda  ts!en- 
dzowe  axEgeq,  yixs  holaloxwaaxs  kilxwasE;wae. 

Wa,  la£mesEn  gwagwexsEx£IdF.l  laxa  nEgiidzowaxs  aek-  !asE£waasa 
ts!Edaqe  qa£s  helelayo  LE£wis  la£wunEme  LE£we  sasEme  L6£mes 
LeEELala.  Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  gwal  eaxElaxa  ts!ets!EnqEla  nEgiidzo  10 
tteqa  laxes  k!ets!ena£ye  nEkwaxes  dogide  awa,  nEklula,  ylxa  ekas 
q!wax£edaena£ye.  Wa,  laEm  giiLlEsaq  qa£s  lal  nEkwaLEq  qo  lftl 
q!ayox£w!dEl.  Wa,  g'il£mese  qlayoqwaxs  lae  ax£edxes  yuduxusEme 
laElxa'ya  yixaaxes   g'ilxde  nEgwatsla.     Wa,  lii   heEmxat!  gwegi- 

1  Continued  from  description  of  the  dish  for  pounding  salal-berries  (p.  60,  line  78). 


270  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.85 

15  and  she  does  everything  ||  as  she  did  before  when  she  went  to  pick 
salal-berries,  as  I  first  described;  |  and  she  also  does  as  I  said  before, 
when  she  picks  the  salal-berries  oh*  the  branches,  |  and  she  puts 
them  into  the  same  dishes;  and  when  they  have  all  been  cleaned,  | 
she  takes  the  mortar-box  for  the  salal-berries,  and  she  puts  it  down 
on  the  floor  |  where  she  is  going  to  work;  and  she  also  takes  her 

20  husband's  stone  hammer  and  places  it  ||  on  the  edge  or  by  the  side 
of  the  mortar-box.  Then  she  takes  the  |  disli  containing  the  cleaned 
salal-berries  and  puts  it  down  next  to  the  mortar-box;  |  and  she  puts 
in  both  hands  and  takes  out  the  |  cleaned  salal-berries  and  places 
them  in  the  mortar-box.     When  |  they  are  two  finger-widths  deep 

25  in  the  ||  bottom  of  the  mortar-box,  she  takes  her  [  stone  hammer 
and  pounds  them  until  they  burst,  and  she  continues  |  pounding 
them  until  she  sees  that  they  have  all  burst.  Then  she  takes  the  | 
large  dish  and  pours  the  pounded  salal-berries  into  it.  After  |  pour- 
ing  all   out,  she   takes  some   more   of   the   cleaned    salal-berries,  || 

30  puts  them  into  the  mortar-dish,  and  when  they  are  |  two  finger- 
widths  deep  in  the  |  mortar-box,  she  takes  her  stone  hammer  and 
pounds  them.  |  She  pounds  them  for  a  long  time;  and  when  she  sees  | 
that  they  have  all  burst,  she  puts  the  hammer  down  on  the  floor  || 

35  and  pours  the  pounded  salal-berries  into  the  dish.  |  She  continues 

15  les  gweg'ilasaxs  g'alex'de  nEkwaxEn  gibrde  gwagwex-s£alasa.  Wa, 
laxae  heEm  gwegilaqes  gweg-ilasaxs  lae  klulpalaxa  nEklule.  Wa, 
laxae  heEm  k-!ats!alaseda  loElqlwe.  Wa,  g'iPmese  £wiflala  k  iindi:- 
kwaxs  lae  ax£edxa  bag'atslaxa  nEklule  qa£s  g'axe  hang'alilas  laxes 
eaxElasLe.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edEx  pslpElqases  la£wunEme  qaes  gaxe 
*20  mEkwagEhlas  laxes  lEgatslaxa  nEklule.  Wa,  la  axsedxa  kimdE- 
gwatslaxa  nEklule  loqlwa  qaes  g'axe  k'anodzEnts  laxa  lEg"ats!axa 
nEklule.  Wa,  la  gox£witses  wax'solts!ana£ye  e£eyaso  laxa  kimdE- 
kwe  nEk'ula  qa's  la  goxts!alas  laxa  lEg'ats laxa  nEklule.  Wa,  g'll- 
'"mese  maldEii  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  yix  wagwasasa  kimdE- 

25  kwe  nEklid  lax  otslawasa  lEg-atslaxa  iiEklulaxs  lae  daxeidxa 
pElpElqe  qa£s  lEsElgEndes  laq  qa  £wi£les  kiix£kla.  Wa,  la  gegilfl 
lESElgeq.  Wa,  g  il£mese  doqulaq  laEm  £wi£la  kukaxs,  lae  axeedxa 
Ewalase  loqlwa  qa£s  la  qEposasa  la  lEdzEk"  iiEklul  laq.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  £wllasExs   lae    etled    g6x£wld    laxa    klmdEkwe    nEklula  qa£s 

30  lexat!  goxtslots  laxa  lEg-atslaxa  nEklule.  Wa,  glPEinxaiiwise 
maldEn  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  yix  wagwasas  lax  otslawasa 
lEgatslaxa  nEklulaxs  lae  dax-£Idxa  pElpElqe  qaes  lESElga£yes  laq. 
Wa,  laxae  gegilllExs  lESElga£yaaq.  Wa,  g"tl£Emxaawise  doqulaq 
laEm  £wl£la  kukiixusExs  lae  g'eg'alllases  lEdzayowe  pElpElqaxs  lae 

35  qEpasasa  la  lEclzEk"  iiEklfd  laxa  lsdzEgwatsle  nEkliil  loqlwa. 
Wa,  axusa£mese  la  he  gweg-ilaxa  waokwe  k'imdEk"  nEklula.     Wa, 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  '2  71 

doing  this  with  the  other  cleaned  salal-berries,  and  |  only  stops  when  37 
they  have  all  been  pounded.     She  does  not  make  them  into  cakes 
quickly,  |  but  leaves  them  for  two  nights  in  the  dish,  covered  over 
with  a  mat,  before  |  making  the  cakes.  || 

Now  I  will  talk  about  the  long  strips  of  dried  salal-berries.     When  |  40 
the  woman  gets  ready  to  dry  them,  after  leaving  them  two  nights 
covered  |  over  with  a  mat,  so  that  no  soot  will  drop  into  them  and  |  so 
that  they  will  get  thick, — for  she  can  not  make  them  into  cakes 
immediately  |  after  pounding,  because  the  berries  are  full  of  juice, 
and  therefore  ||  she  leaves  them  for  a  long  time  to  dry  up, — then  she  45 
takes  up  the  drying-frame,  |  the  (same)  one  as  she  used  when  she  dried 
elderberries  mixed  with  salal-berries,  |  and  also  the  heated  skunk- 
cabbage.     She  puts  the  heated  |  skunk-cabbage  leaves  down  flat  the 
whole  length  of  the  drying-frame.     She  puts  them  on  very  |  smoothly; 
and  when  they  are  all  down  on  the  drying-frame  from  end  to  end,  ||  she  50 
takes  her  straight  knife  and  cuts  the  curved  edges  |  of  the  skunk-cabbage 
leaves  that  hang  down  over  the  two  side-pieces  of  the  drying-frame  | 
(this  is  called  by  some  people  "stiff  edge   of   the  drying-frame) ".  | 
Alter  cutting  them  all  off,  she  takes  a  large  horse  clam-shell  |  and  a 
large  spoon,  and  she  takes  the  pounded-salal-berry  dish  j[  and  puts  it  55 
down  by  the  side  of  the  drying-frame.     She  |    takes  the  ladle,  dips 
it  in,  and  stirs  it  until  they  are  well  mixed  |  with  the  juice;  and  when 


almiese  gwalExs  lae  £wl£la  la  lEdzEkwa.     Wa,  k-!est!a  ya£nag'aala  37 
lEx£edEq.     Heda   la  malExse   ganoLas  -nakiiyalaxa  le£wa£yaxs  lae 
li;x£edEq. 

Wa,  la£mesEn  gwagwexs'EX£IdEl  laxa   heyadzo  nEgudzoxs  laeda  40 
ts!i:daqe  xwanaKd  qa£s  lEqeq  laqexs  lae  malExses  ganoLe  naxum- 
lllxa  le£wa£ye  qa  kMeses  q!wap!EqElaso'"sa  qhvalobEse.     Wa,  he£mis 
qa  alaklales  gEnx£Ida  qaxs  k- leasae  gwex""idaas  lEx£edqexs  g'alae 
gwal  lESElgeq  qaxs  alak"!alae  qlenEme  saaqas.     Wa,  he£mis  lag-tfas 
he  gwaele  qa  lEmlEmoxudes.     Wa,  lii  ax£ededa  tslEdaqaxa  k'!itk'!E-  45 
dese,  yixes  k" !itEiax-daxs    galex'de  lsqaxa  ts!ets!EnqEla  nEgudzo- 
wa.    Wa,  he£misai>Enkwe  k'!Ekaok!wa.     Wa,  la  pagEdzotsa  pEnkwe 
k!Ek!aok!wa  lax  £wasgEmasasa  k!itk-!Edese.     Wa,  laEm  aeklaxs 
lae  hamElgEdza£ya  k-!Ek!aok!wa  papEqo£nakulaxs  labEndalae.    Wa, 
la   ax£edxes    nExxala   klawayowa    qa£s    t!5salexa    kilkElxEnxa- 50 
£yasa  k-!Ek-!aok!waxs  lae  klesala  lax  kak'EtEnxa£yasa  k  itklEdese; 
ylxs   LeqElaeda   waokwas   LlaLlEXEnxe  laxa  kakEtEnxa-cya.     Wa, 
gil'mese  £wl£la  t!osEwakiixs  lae  ax£edxa  £walase  xalaetsa  mEt!ana£ye. 
Wa,  he£misa  £walase  katslEnaqa.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  lEg"Exuts!alaxa 
nEk!ule  loq'.wa  qa£s  gaxe  hanEiixEhlas  laxa  k' !itk' tedese.     Wa,  lii  55 
dax,£Idxa  katslEnaqe  qa£s  tseqes  laq  qa£s  xwetledeq  qa  Islgowes 
LE£wis  saaqe.     Wa,  glhmese  alak"  !ala  la  lElgoxs  lae  tsex£Itsa  kats  !e- 


272  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.85 

58  the  berries  are  well  mixed,  she  dips  the  |  spoon  into  them  until  it  is 
heaping  full  of  the  pounded  salal-berries ;  and  she  pours  |  them  on 
one  end  of  the  drying-frame.     Then  she  takes  a  straight  cedar-stick|| 

60  and  puts  it  down  (crosswise)  near  the  end  of  the  drying-frame,  in  this 

manner:  |  The  thickness  of  the  cedar-stick  is  one- 

hali'of  the  II  1-|  little  finger,    |    and  it  is   just  squeeze, I 

between  the  two  side-pieces  of  the  drying-frame. 

She  |  does  the  same  at  the  other  end;  and  after  doing  so,  she  takes 
the  |  clam-shell,  turns  it  over,  and  uses  it  to  smooth  the  pounded 

65  salal-berries  ||  on  one  end  of  the  drying-frame.  Then  the  pounded 
salal-berries  are  levelled  down  |  to  the  crosspiece  of  cedar-wood,  and 
she  presses  |  the  pounded  salal-berries  against  the  two  side-pieces. 
As  soon  as  she  has  spread  all  the  pounded  |  salal-berries,  she  dips  the 
spoon  into  the  berries  again  and  pours  them  out  at  the  |  end  of  the 

7ii  salal-berries.  She  continues  doing  this  until  ||  she  reaches  the  end 
of  the  drying-frame;  and  when  she  reaches  the  other  crosspiece,  | 
she  stops.  After  doing  so,  it  is  in  this  way: 
Sometimes    she  has  as   many   as   twenty  dryin 


frames  with  |  pounded  salal-berries,  or  even  more  when  the  salal- 
berries  are  growing  well  |  in  summer,  and  when  the  woman  is  indus- 
75  trious  in  picking  salal-berries.  ||  After  this  has  been  done,  she  asks 
her  husband  to  come  and  help  her  |  put  the  frames  up  just  over  the 
fire,  not  very  high,  |  for  the  woman  must  bend  her  head  when  she 

58  naqe  qa  Llak'Emallsexa  lsgEkwe  nEklula  qa£s  la  tsedz5ts  lax  apsba- 
£yasa  k'  !itk"  lEdese.    Wa,  lit  ax£edxa  k  IwaxLiiwe  qa£s  nEgEnSsa.     Wa , 

60  hi  katl)Ents  laxa  maxba£yasa  k"  !itk-  !Edese  g-a gwa£lega  ( fi<j.),  ylxs 
k!6dEnae  laxEns  sElt!ax-tsana£yex  yix  wagwasasa  klwaxLawe.  Wa, 
lii  a  Em  qataweltEwe  lax  L!aL!EXF.nxa£yasa  k!itk!Edese.  Wa,  lfixae 
hcicm  gwex£Idxa  fipsba£ye.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  axeedxa 
xalaese  qa£s  nELalamaseqexs  lae  gweldzodalaxa  lsgEkwe  iiEk!n!  lax 

65  5psba£yasa  k' !itk' lEdese.  Wii,  laEm  £nEmakaleda  lEg-Ekwe  ni:k!ul 
LE£wa  geba£ye  klwaxLawa.  Wii,  la  lalEnxEndxa  L!aL!EXEnxa£vas;i 
lEg'Ekwe  nEklula.  Wa,  gilnaxwa£mese  gweldzod  £wl£lasa  lEgskwe 
iiEklulExs  lae  et!ed  tsex-£etsa  kats!Enaqe  qa£s  la  tsedzots  lax  hi 
£walalaats    oba£yasa   nEk!ule.     Wii,   axusa£mese   he   gweg'ilaxs    lae 

70  labEndalaxa  klitkMEdese.  Wa,  gil£mese  lagaa  laxa  £iiEme  geba- 
£ya  lae  gwala.  Wa,  g'll£mese  gwalExs  lae  g-a  gwaleg'a  {Jig.),  ytxs 
£nal£nEmp!Eiiae  maltsEmgustaxseda  k'litklEdese  la  axdzalaxa 
lEgEkwe  nEk!ula  lo£xs  hayaqamaaq,  yixs  helaeda  iiEklflle  laxes 
q!wax£edaena£ye    lo£xs   sE£xuts!aeda  tslEdaqe  la  nskwaxa  iiEk!ttle. 

75  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  axk"  lalaxes  Ia£wunEme  qa  g'axes  gewalaq 
qa£s  Les£aLElodes  lax  nEqostawases  lsgwllexa  k-  !ese  alaEm  ek"  !ala 
qaxs   g'imxwala£maeda  ts!Edaqaxs  lae  LawabEwexa  k' !itk- lEdesaxs 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  273 

is  standing  under    the  drying-frame  |  when  it  is  put  up  over  the  77 
fire.     Now  the  woman  takes  hold  of  one  end,  |  and  her  husband  of 
the  other,  and  they  put  the  salal-berry  cakes  (for  now  their  name 
is  changed)  ||  over  the  fire.     After  doing  so,  her  husband  |  builds  up  SO 
the  fire  with  very  dry  alder-wood.  |  The  reason  why  they  use  alder- 
wood  to  burn  underneath  is  because  it  gives  no  sparks  |  and  it  makes 
a  very  hot  fire,  for  the  owner  of  the  salal-berries  wishes  them  |  to  dry 
quickly.     As  soon  as  the  fire  burns  well,  they  watch  ||  the  drying-  85 
frames  that  they  may  not  catch  fire,  and  they  do  not  leave  (the  cakes) 
there  for  more  than  two  |  hours.     Then  they  are  half  dry.     Now  | 
the  berry-cakes    are  done;  and  she  takes  them  all  down  and  puts 
down  on  the  floor  one  |  of  the  drying-frames.     Then  she  takes  down 
another  one  and  puts  it  on  top  |  of  the  one  on  the  floor;  and  she  con- 
tinues doing  so,  putting  them  one  |[  on  top  of  another.     After  she  has  90 
taken  them  all  down,  the  woman  |  takes  an  empty  drying-frame  and 
places  it  over  the  top  |  one  which  has  the  long  strips  of  salal-berry 
cakes  on  it.     Then  she  turns  it  over  on  the  |  empty  one.     The  woman 
is  careful  that  the  salal-berry  cake  |  is  flush  with  the  end  of  the 
empty  drying-frame,  and  ||  that  the  sides  are  straight  along  its  sides;  95 
for  all  the  frames  are  made  of  the  same  length  |  and  of  the  same 
width.     As  soon  as  |  she  has  finished,  she  calls  her  husband  to  come 
and  take  hold  |  of  the  drying-frames  that  he  face  to  face.     Then  her 

lae  Lestaya  lax  i?k'!a£yasa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  laEm  dadEba£ya  tslEdaqe  7S 
LE£wis  la£wunEmaxs  lae   Lestodxa   t!Eqa  qaxs    lE£mae  Llayoxxaxs 
lae  Lesta/ya  laxa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae  la£wunEmas  SO 
lEqwelax£Idxes   lEgwIlasa   L!asmF.sexa    alak-  !alii  la    lEmxwa.     Wa, 
heEm  lagilas  he  lEgwabEwIseda  LlasmEsaxs  k- !esae   anobexostala. 
Wa,    he£misexs    Lomae    LlesEgustala    qa£s    £nek-ae    qa    halabales 
lEinx'wides  t!Eqa.     Wa,  g-il£mese  x'iqostawe  lEqwela£yas  lae  q!aq!a- 
lalaq  qa  k!eses  xlx£ede  k'Utk'lEclesas.     Wii,  k-!est!a  malts  !agELE-  85 
laglla  laxa  q!aq!alak-!a£yaxa  enalaxs  lae  k"  !ayaxswlda.     Wa,  laEm 
L!opa    t!Eqa.     Wa,    la     axaxod    £wriaq    qa£s    pax£alllesa    £nEmxs 
k!itk!Edesa.      Wa,  la    et!ed    axaxodxa    £nEmxsa  qa£s  pageg-indes 
laxa   la,    pagela.     Wa,  la   hanal    axaxElaxa   waokwe    qa£s  la  £wl£la 
pagegindalas  laxa  waokwe.    Wa,  gil^mese  £wPlaxaxs  laeda  tslEdaqe  90 
ax£edxa  lobEdzala   k!itk'!Eclesa  qaes  lii    pap.EqodEq  LE£wa  ek'!F,n- 
xellle    tlEqadzalaxa    heyadzowe    t!sqa.      Wa,      laEm     bEnasaleda 
lobEdzala.     Wa,  la  doqwaleda    tslEdaqaxa  tlEqadzala  k!itk!Edes 
qa  £nEmabales  oba^yas  LE£wa  lobEdzala  k'  !itk-  !Edesa.     Wii,  hermis 
qa  enEmEnxales    ewEiixa£yas   qaxs   £nEmemaes    awasgEmase.     Wa,  95 
laxae    £nEm£me    awadzEwasasa     k!ek!itk!Edese.      Wa,    glls"mese 
gwalExs    lae    Le£lalaxes    la£wiinEme     qa    gaxese    dadEbEndxa    la, 
haqala     k-!ek!itk-!Edesa.       Wa,    la£mese     la£wiinEmas     dabEndxa 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 18 


274  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Iktii.ann.  35 

husband  takes  hold  of  |  one  end,  and  the  woman  takes  hold  of  the 
100  other  (end).  They  ||  lift  them  up  at  the  same  time,  and  then  turn 
them  over  so  that  the  drying-frame  with  the  salal-berry  cake  is  on 
top;  I  and  when  they  turn  them  over,  the  cake  falls  upon  the  | 
empty  drying-frame,  and  the  strip  of  salal-berry  cake  has  been 
turned  over.  |  Then  they  put  it  again  just  over  the  fire.  |  After  this 
has  been  done,  she  takes  the  same  drying-frame  |  from  which  she 
5  had  taken  the  strip  of  salal-berry  cake.  ||  She  peels  off  the  heated 
skunk-cabbage  leaves  which  stick  to  it,  and  throws  them  away.  | 
Then  she  turns  it  over  and  puts  it  on  the  next  one;  and  she  does  |  as 
she  did  before  with  the  first  one,  turning  over  the  cakes;  and  she 
continues  |  doing  this  with  the  others.     It  takes  only  one  day  |  to 

10  dry  all  of  them.  When  they  are  all  dry,  the  woman  ||  takes  a  small 
square  box,  takes  off  the  cover,  and  she  tilts  it  on  one  side  by  the  side 
of  the  fire,  ]  so  that  it  will  get  dry  inside.  |  As  soon  as  the  inside  is 
very  dry,  she  puts  out  the  fire.  |  Then,  without  help,  the  woman 
takes  down  the   drying-frames  and  |  puts  one  on  top  of  another,  as 

15  they  had  been  before,  when  she  turned  them  over.  ||  She  takes  the 
small  square  box  of  medium  size  and  places  it  |  near  the  drying- 
frames.  Then  she  takes  up  the  end  of  one  strip  of  salal-berry  cake,  | 
puts  it  into  the  bottom  of  the  salal-berry  box,  |  and  the  end  up 
against  the  narrow  end  of  the  small  box.     When  part  of  it  |  covers 

apsba£ye.  Wa,  lada  tstedaqe  da.v'Idxa  apsba£ye.  Wa,  lit  £nEma- 
100  x£Id  wlx'Idqexs  lae  lex-ldEq  qa  lies  la  ek' !agawa£ya  tlEqadzala 
k!itk!i:desa.  Wa,  gil-mese  lex£Idqexs  lae  laseda  tteqalaxa  lobs- 
dzala  k' !itk' lEdesa.  Wa,  laEm  lenkwa  heyadzowe  t!Eqa.  Wa, 
hex  -ida;mese  la  xwelaqa  Les£aLF.lots  lax  liEqostawases  lEgwIle. 
Wa,  gdPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax-'ediox  axdzayaasdasa  heyadzowe  t!Eqa 
5  qa;s  kusalexa  ts!agEts!aye  pF.nk"  k'!Ek!aok!wa  qa£s  ts!Ex£edeq. 
Wa,  la  hax-wldEq  qaea  liixat!  papEqodEq.  Wa,  lae  hesm  gwex£Id- 
qes  2;  ilxde  gwex£idaasxes  g  ilxde  lexasE£wa.  Wa,  axusaemese  he 
gwegilaxa  waokwe.  Wa,  la  eiiEmxsa£mese  £nalaxs  lae  £wl£la 
li:mx£wida.  Wit,  gil£mese  -naxwa  licni£wi:mx  £Ida  laeda  tshxlaqe 
10  axsedxa  xaxadzEme  qa£s  axodex  yikiiya£yas  qa£s  qogiinolisesa 
xaxadzEme  laxes  lpgwlle  qa  alak'lales  lEmx£wIde  otslawas.  Wa, 
gih'mese  alak"!ala  la  lEmxuts!axs  lae  k!ilx£edxes  lEgwIle.  Wii, 
liinaxukrmf'da  ts!i-;daqaxs  lae  axaxslaxa  k'!ek!itk"!Edese  qa£s 
papEq5£nakuleq  laxes  laxde  gwaelasExs  laxde  lexaq.  Wa,  la 
15  ax£edxa  xaxadzEme,  yixa  hela  XEtsEma  qa£s  gaxe  hiing'alila  lax 
maklnxelilasa  k!ek!itk!Edese.  Wii,  lii  dabEndxa  heyadzowe  t!Eqa 
qa£s  ts!Enxuts!rdes  lax  nxi.a'yasa  hayadzEwats !e  tlEqa  xaxadzEma. 
Wa,  lii  sEkale  oba£yas  laxa  a,|)sanexts!awasa  xaxadzEme.  Wii, 
o-il£mese    hamElxalts!axs    lae    gwanaxeedEq    qa    £nEmalases    k"!o- 


uoas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  275 

the  bottom,  she  folds  it  back  so  that  it  is  of  the  same  size  ||  as  the  20 
bottom  of  the  small  box.     It  is  in  this  way  |  ^__^__^  when  it  is 


folded.  | 
when  they 
leaves  over 


put  into  the  small  box  into  which  it  is  being 
She  continues  doing  this  with  the  others;  and 
are  all  in,  |  she  heats  some  new  skunk-cabbage 
the  fire;  and  |  when  they  are  soft,  she  takes  the  crooked  knife,  of 
her  husband,  ||  cuts  out  the  thick  veins  in  the  middle,  and,  when  they  25 
are  all  off,  |  she  heats  them  again  over  the  fire.     She  does  not  stop 
until  they  are  almost  brittle    |  and  very  dry.      Then  she  puts  the 
leaves  on  top  of  the  [  strips  of  salal-berry  cake,  and  she  tucks  them  in 
all  round  inside  the  box  |  containing  the  strips  of  salal-berry  cakes, 
so  that  it  is  very  tight.     After  doing  this,  ||  she  puts  the  cover  on  30 
and  ties  it  down.     When  |  this  has  been  finished,  she  puts  it  down 
in  a  place  where  the  heat  of  the  fire  reaches  it,  and  |  she  leaves  it 
there  until  whiter;  for  generally  |  the  cannibal  dancers  wish  to  eat  only 
long  salal-berry  cakes,  |  when  the  owners  of  the  long  salal-berry  cakes 
have  a  winter  ceremonial,  and  also  ||  the  head  chiefs  of  the  owners  of  35 
long  salal-berries  |  wish  to  eat  them;  but  the  poor  people  of  the  tribe  | 
eat  salal-berries  mixed  with  elderberries  when  they  are  given  at  a 
feast.  |  Now  this  is  finished.  | 

Currants1. — After  doing  so,    (the  woman)  takes  a  large  dish  and    |  1 
puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  currant-baskets.     She  pulls  out  the  | 


xwa£yas  LE£wa  paq!Exsda£yasa  xaxadzEme.     Wa,  hi  ga  gwiilegaxs  20 
{fig.)  lae  hantsla   laxa  xaxadzEme  laxes  q!Elxuts!aena£ye.     Wa,  la 
axus:iEm    he    gwegilaxa    waokwe.     Wa,    g'il'"mese    £wllts!axs    lae 
5x£edxa  alomase  k!Ek!aok!wa  qa£s  pEx£ideq   laxes  lEgwile.     Wa, 
glPmese    pEx£widExs    lae    ax£edEx    XElxwalases    la-wimEme    qa£s 
xElxwalex     t tent !EnxEdza£yas.     Wii,    giPmese    £wi£laxs    lae    et!ed  25 
papaxELalas  laxes  lEgwile.     Wii,  ab'mese  gwfdExs  lae  Elaq  tsos£eda 
qaxs   lae    alak'  !ala   la   lEmx£wIda.     Wa,  lii    aek'  !a  paqEyints  laxa 
heyadzowe  t!Eqa.     Wa,  laEm    dzopas    lax    ewaneqwas    6kiiya£yasa 
heyadzowe  tlEqa  qa    alak'Iales    Emxa.     Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
yikiiyints    yikiiya£yas.      Wii,    lii    tlicmakEyindEq.     Wii,    g'iPmese  30 
gwalExs    lae    hang'alllas    laxa    lagaaasas     L!esaliis     lEgwila     qaxs 
hex'siv'meLe  ha£nel  lagaal  laxa  laLa  ts!awunx£ida  qaxs  qlunalaeda 
hiimatsla  £nex-    qa£s  lex'ame    t!F.xt!;Iqxa    heyadzowe    t!Eqaxs    lae 
ts!ets!ex£Ide  g-okfdotasa  tlEgadiisa  heyadzowe  tlEqa.     Wii,  heEmisa 
xamagEma£ye  g'igEgamesa  g'okiilotasa  tlEgadiisa  heyadzowe  t!E-  35 
qaxs    £nek-ae  qa£s  t!Ext!aqeq,   yixs  laaLas   bEgiilIda£yas    g-6kulots 
liEngiidzoguxa    ts!ets!EiiqElaxs     lae     klweladzEma.      Wa,    la£mEn 
gwiil  laxeq. 

Currants. — Wii,  g'ih'mese  gwala,  lae  fix£edxa   £wiilase    loq!wa,   qa  1 
g'axese    hanalllxa   niige    q!edzats!e    lExa£ya.     Wa,    la  lEk-Emodxa 

1  Ribes  bracteosus,  Dougl.,  Ribes  pctiolare,  Dougl.    Continued  from  the  description  of  gathering  currants. 
See  p  209,  line  37. 


276  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [hth. jjjn. SB 

3  huckleberry-branches  that  have  been  pushed  through  the  baskets, 
and  she  takes  oft'  |  the  skunk-cabbage  covering  and  puts  it  down, 
•5  and  she  takes  a  mat  ||  and  spreads  it  outside  of  the  basket.  |  She  puts 
the  large  cleaning-dish  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  |  currant-baskets. 
When  everything  is  ready,  she  takes  |  one  branch  of  the  currants. 
She  takes  hold  of  it  with  her  left  |  hand,  and  pulls  off  the  berries  with 

10  her  right  hand,  and  ||  she  drops  them  into  the  large  dish  for  holding 
the  cleaned  berries.  She  |  continues  doing  so,  cleaning  the  currants. 
When  they  are  all  cleaned,  she  takes  her  |  front-basket,  goes  down 
to  the  beach  in  front  of  her  house,  and  |  picks  up  twelve  stones. 
When  they  are  all  in,   |  she  carries  it  on  her  back  into  the  house 

15  and  ||  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  Then  she  puts  the 
stones  |  into  the  fire;  and  after  doing  this,  she  takes  a  |  square 
box  and  puts  it  down  next  to  the  fire,  and  also  her  tongs,  which  | 
she  puts  down  on  the  floor,  and  also  a  large,  long-handled  |  ladle,  which 

20  she  puts  next  to  the  square  box.  ||  She  also  takes  skunk-cabbage 
leaves  which  were  used  for  covering  the  berries,  cuts  out  the  mid- 
ribs, |  and,  after  these  have  been  cut  out,  she  heats  them  over  the 
fire.  |  She  continues  to  do  this  until  they  get  very  brittle.  Then  she 
puts  them  into  a  |  small  dish  and  breaks  them  to  pieces  until  they 

25  are  as  fine  as  |  flour.  When  this  is  done,  and  the  stones  that  ||  she 
has  put  on  the  fire  arc  red  hot,  she  takes  a  small  steaming-box  and  | 

3  L§Lask'Eya£ye  gwadEmsa  qa£s  ts!Ex£Ideq.  Wa,  laxae  lawEyodxa 
nasEya£yas  k"!Ek'!aok!wa,  qa£s  ax£allleq.  Wa,  la,  ax£edxa  le£wa£ye, 
5  qa£s  LEplallleq  lax  iJasalllases  naga£ye  q!edzats!e  lExa£ya.  Wa, 
hi'i.atla  ha£nela  £walase  kimdatsle  loq!we  gEmxanalilasa  nag'a£ye 
q!edzats!e  bsxa£ya.  Wa,  giPmese  gwalEingalllExs  lae  dax£idxa 
£nEints!aq!EXLa  q!esena,  qa£s  daxi.ayex  yisx'Enase  ylses  gEmxol- 
ts!ana£ye.     Wa,    la    x'ik'alaxa   q!esenases    helk'!ots!ana£ye,  qa£s  la 

10  k!ats!ots  laxa  k'tmtslalase  £walas  loqlwa.  Wa,  ax"sa£mese  he 
gweg'ilaxs  k"irntaaxa  qlesena.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  8x£edxa 
nanaagEm  h:\a-ya,  qa£s  la  lEnts!es  lax  L!Ema£isases  g'okwe  qa£s 
la  xE£xuts!otsa  g'ag^iwala  tlesEm  laq.  Wa  g-il£mese  £wllts!axs 
g-axae  oxLosdesElaq  qa£s  la  6xi>aeLElaq  l.axes  g'okwe,  qa£s  la  6xLa- 

15  nolisas  laxes  lEgwIle.  Wa,  hex,£ida£mese  xE£xuwElts!alaq,  qa£s  la 
xE£xuLEiidalas  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa 
k'  limyaxLa,  qa£s  g-axe  h&nolisas  laxes  lEgwile  LE£wis  tslesLfda.  He- 
Emxat!  ax£etso£s,  qa  g'axes  k'adila.  Wa,  he£misa  £wiilase  giltlEx- 
Lfila  katslEnaqa  ax£etso£s,  qa  g'axes  g'enalllxa  k'limyaxLa.     Wa,  la 

20  :1x£edxa  ts!ets!ak'Eyex'das  k!Ek!aok!wa  qa£s  k'.'axalex  t.'Ent!EnxE- 
dza£yas.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  pEX'£IdEq  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa 
al£mese  gwal  pEX'aqexs  lae  alak'lala  la  tsosa.  Wii,  la  axtslots  laxa 
lalogume,  qa£s  tsosElgEndec[.  Wii,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  yo  la  gwex'sa 
qtixex.     Wii,  gil£mese   gwalExs    lae  memEnltsEmx'£Ideda    tlesEme 

25  xE£xuLalales  laxa  lEgwile.     Wa,  la   ax£edxa  arna£ye   q!6lats!a,  qa£s 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  277 

pours  some  water  into  it,  until  it  is  half  full.     She  puts  it  down  |  be-  26 
tween  the  square  box  and  the-fire.     Then  she  takes  the  large  |  long- 
handled  ladle,  dips  it  into  the  currants,  and  pours  (them)  |  into  the 
square  box;  and  when  one-half  of  the  currants  are  in  the  box  ||  one-  30 
half  are  still  in   the    large    dish    containing    the    cleaned   berries.   | 
Then  she  takes  her  tongs,  picks  up  the  red-hot  stones,  |  and  dip    them 
quickly  into  the  water  in  the  steaming-box  and  |  puts  them  into  the 
currants.    She  puts  in  six  red-hot  |  stones.     Then  she  dips  more  of  the 
cleaned  currants  with  her  large  ||  long-handled  ladle  out  of  the  dish  35 
containing    the    cleaned  currants  j  and  puts  them  over  the  red-hot 
stones.     She  only  |  stops  when  they  are  all  in.     Then  she  again  takes 
her  tongs  and  again  picks  |  up  red-hot  stones,  which  she  first  puts 
into  |  the  water  in  the   steaming-box,   and  she  puts  these  on  the 
currants.  ||  She  only  stops  when  six  stones  have  been  put  in.  |  Then  40 
she  takes  a  mat  and  covers  over  the  currants  that  she  is  steaming.  | 
She  leaves  them  this  way  all  day  and  all  night.     Then  the  woman  | 
goes  into  the  woods  looking  for  broad  skunk-cabbage  leaves;  and 
when  she  has  found  some,  |  she  breaks  off  the  broadest  leaves.  || 
When  she  has  many  of  these,  she  digs  up  spruce-roots,  which  she   |  45 
splits  in  two  and  which  she  ties  in  the  middle.     When  this  is  done, 
she  carries  |  everything  home  and  puts  it  down  at  the  left  side  of  the 


giixtslodesa    £wape   laq    qa   nEgoyoxsdales.     Wa,  lit   hanagots    lax  26 
awagawa£yasa  k!imyaxi,a   LE£wa   lEgwIle.     Wa  la  fix£edxa  £walase 
glltlEXLala  katstenaqa  qa£s   tseqes  laxa  qlesena  qa£s  la  tsets!alas 
laxa  klimyaxLa.     Wa,  gihmese    iiExseda    qlesena  la    tsEyadzEms 
laxa  klimyaxLa  LE£wa    g'etsla  laxa  k'imdEgwatsle   £walas  loqlwa,  30 
lae  ax£edxes    tslesLala    qa£s    k!ip!edes    laxa    xIxsEmala    tlesEma, 
qa£s  la    hanax£wid     hapstEiits    lax    '"wabEtslawasa    qlolatsle,    qa£s 
la    k- !ip lEqas    laxa    qlesena.     Wa,    la    qlELlEsgEma    x'lxExsEmala 
tlesEin   la    k- !ip  IgEmseq.     Wa,  laxae  etled    tsex,£Itsa  £walase    gil- 
tlEXLala  k'atslEnaq   laxa    lExuts!ala  k'imdEk"  qlesena,   qa's    lexat!  35 
tsekEyints  laxa  la  axEqslaxa  x'lx'ExsEmala  tlesEma.    Wa,  al£mese 
gwalExs  lae  £wl£la.     Wa, laxae  etled  ax£edxes  tsIesLala,  qa£s  k'!ip!e- 
des  laxaaxa  xixExsEmalat!esEma,  qa£s  lexat!  gag'alaslla  hapstEiits 
lax  £wabEts!awasa  q  !olats!e.     Wa,  la  k'  lip  IeIoxs  lax  okuya£yasa  q  !e- 
sena.    Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  £wi£leda  c{!EL'EsgEme  tlesEma.    Wa,  40 
la  ax£edxa  le£wa£ye  qa£s  £naxumdes  laxa  q!olasE£wasa  qlesena.     Wa, 
axusii£mese  he  gwaelxa  £nfda  EE£wa  ganuLe.     Wa,  la£meseda  tslEdaqe 
laxa  fiLlealaxa  awadzoxLowe  k!Ek!aok!wa.    Wa,  gil£mese  qlaqexs 
lae    p!ap!ox£wEqEwaxa     awadzoxLowe   liixa    k'!Ek"!a5k!wa.      Wa, 
gil£mese  qlEyoLExs  lae  £lap!idxa  L!op!Ek'asa  alewase,  cja£s  pak'tex-  45 
sEndeq  cja£s  ytLoyodes  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwatexs  g-axae  gEmxE- 
laq,  qa£s  la  na£naku    laxes    g'okwe,  qa£s  la  gEmxEnolisas  laxes  1e- 


278  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

18  fire.  ]  Then  she  takes  her  husband's  crooked  knife  and  |  sits  down 
where  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  have  been  placed.     She  cuts  up 

50  the  ||  tying  of  the  spruce-roots  which  have  been  split  in  two,  takes 
hold  of  a  |  leaf  of  skunk-cabbage,  and  she  cuts  off  the  mid-rib,  so 
that  it  is  the  same  |  thickness  in  the  middle  and  at  the  edges,  then  | 
she  takes  hold  of  another  one  and  she  does  the  same  as  she  did  with 
the  |  first  one.     She   continues   doing   this  with   the   others;  and  || 

5.")  when  nil  have  been  finished,  she  heats  them  by  the  lire;  and  when  | 
they  are  soft  and  thin,  she  puts  them  down  on  a  mat.  She  does  |  the 
same  with  all  of  them.  When  they  are  all  done,  she  takes  |  the 
drying-frames,  the  same  ones  that  were  used  for  the  salal-berry 
cakes,  |  and  she  also  uses  the  same  cellar  measure  which  she  used 

60  for  ||  mixed  elderberry  and  salal-berry  cakes.  She  takes  the  four  | 
cedar-sticks. and  puts  them  on  the  drying-frames,  and  she  also  |  takes 
a  large  horse-clam  shell  and  puts  it  down.  |  Finally  she  takes  off  the 
mat  that  has  been  spread  over  the  steaming-box  |  in  which  the  cur- 

65  rants  are.  She  takes  up  another  medium-sized ||  dish  and  puts  it  on  the 
corner  of  the  square  box.  She  takes  the  |  large  shell  and  skims  off  the 
juice  of  the  boiled  currants,  |  since  the  boiled  berries  have  all  gone 
down  in  the  |  juice.  She  skims  the  juice  into  the  dish  which  she 
placed  on  the  corner  of  the  box;  |  and  she  does  not  stop  until  the 

48  gwlle.  Wa,  lii  iix£edEx  xElxwala  k-  liiwayoses  la£wunEme,  qa£s  la 
klwagahl  lax    gEmxelasasa    k" !i:k!aok!wa.      Wa,   la.   tlotslEndxa 

3d  yir.oyoyc  pale  !Exsaaku  L!op!EX"sa  alewase.  Wa,  la  dax£Idxa  nEinxsa 
k!Ek!aok!wa,  qa£s  XElxwalex  tlEnt!EnxEdza£yas,  qa  £nEmes  wa- 
gwasasa  nEgEdza£ye  LE£wis  ewunxa£ye.  Wa,  g'tl£mese  gwfdsxs  lae 
etled  diix£idxa  EnEmxs  qa£s  a£mexat!  he  gwex£IdEq  laxes  gwex-£I- 
daasdaxes  gllx.'de  axsEswa.     Wa,  axusaemese  hegweg'ilaxa  waokwe. 

55  Wii,  gil£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  pEX-£IdEq  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  gIPmese 
lEndEdzox£wida,  lae  pagEdzolilas  laxa  i.ioblle  ie£wa£ya.  Wii,  la  £na- 
xwaEm  he  gwex-'Idxa  waokwe.  Wii,  g'iPmcse  £wFlaxs  lae  ax£ed- 
xa  lc!itk-!Edese,  yixaax  k"!itk'!EdesElasexa  nEgudzowe  tlEqa. 
Wa,  laxae  heEm  mEnyayoseda   k!waxLawe,  ylxes  mEnsEliixa  ts!e- 

60  ts!EnqEla  nEk'.iila.  Wii,  he£mis  ax£ets5£seda  motslaqe  mEnyayowe 
klwaxLawa,  qa£s  gedzoliles  laxa  k-!ek'!itk'!Edese.  Wa,  laxae 
iix£edxa  £walase  xalaetsox  mEt!ana£yex  qa£s  g'axe  gig-alilas. 
Wii,  lawesLe  axodxa  le£wa£ye  LEpEmallltsa  k-JimyaxLa  q!ola- 
ts!exa   q!esena,    qa£s  gigallles.     Wa,    la    &x£edxa   ogii£la£me   hela 

65loq!wa,  qa£s  kagiigEndes  laxa  klimyaxLa.  Wii,  lii  <lax-£Idxa 
£w.rdase  xalaesa,  qa£s  ax£\vldexa  saaqasa  q!esenaxs  g-axae  q!o- 
kiiyexa  qlolkwe  q!esenaxs  lae  wundzeses  hamaese  lax  awaba£yasa 
saaqe.  Wa,  lii  axuts!alas  liixa  loqlwe  la  hang'iigexa  k-!imyaxi.a. 
Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs   lae    lEmokwa    qlolkwe    qlesena.      Wii,    gil- 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF    FOOD  279 

boiled  currants  are  dry.  When  ||  this  is  done,  she  takes  the  tongs,  70 
with  which  she  searches  for  the  stones  |  that  are  still  in  the  bottom 
of  the  box.  |  She  takes  out  the  stones  and  puts  them  down  by  the 
side  of  the  fire..  When  |  all  the  stones  have  been  taken  out,  she  takes 
a  small  dish  into  which  she  puts  the  |  powdered  skunk-cabbage,  and 
she  empties  it  into  the  boiled  ||  currants.  When  if  is  all  in,  she  takes  75 
her  tongs  and  |  stirs  it;  and  she  only  stops  stirring  when  it  is  all  | 
mixed.  Now  the  boiled  currants  are  thick.  When  she  has  |  done  so, 
she  takes  the  heated  skunk-cabbage  leaves  and  spreads  them  |  on 
the  drying-frame  along  the  whole  length.  After  ||  doing  so.  she  takes  SO 
the  cedar-stick  measures  ami  lays  them  down  on  the  drying  frame,  | 
in  this  way,1  so  that  the  four  measures  are  at  (1).  |  She  takes  the  large 
shell  anil  dips  it  into  the  boiled  currants,  |  and  she  pours  them  out 
inside  the  measures  at  (1).  Then  she  turns  [  the  shell  on  its  back 
and  spreads  (the  currants).  When  they  are  spread  all  over,  || 
she  presses  them  so  that  they  fill  the  corners  of  the  mould  and  |  so  85 
that  they  are  pressed  close  together.  After  doing  this,  |  she  con- 
tinues doing  so  with  the  others,  when  she  makes  berry-cakes.  When 
the  I  cakes  have  all  been  made  to  the  end  of  the  frame,  she  puts  it 
just  over  the  fire;  |  and  after  doing  this,  she  takes  another  drying- 
frame,  and  ||  she  does  the  same  as  she  did  to  the  first  one  when  she  90 


£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax-edxa  tsIesLala  qa£s  k' lap  Isles  laxa  tlesE-  70 
maxs  heemae  ales  XEgwes  llix  6xLa£yasa  k'  limyaxLa.  Wa, 
laEin  klipustalaq  qa£s  k' libEiiolisEles  laxes  lsgwlle.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  £wld5steda  tlesEmaxs  lae  ax£edxa  lalogtime,  ylx  axtslEwasasa 
qlwelkwe  tsEwek"  k' !Ek-!aok!wa,  qa£s  la  k'laqas  laxa  qlolkwe 
qlesena.  Wa,  glPmese  '"wldaqaxs  lae  ax£edxes  tsIesLala  qa's  75 
xwetledes  laq.  Wa,  alemese  gwal  xwetaqexs  lae  alak'lala  la 
lElga.  Wii,  la£me  la  gEnkeda  q!olkwe  qlesena.  Wa,  gtlemese 
gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  pEnkwe  k!Ek!aok!wa  qafs  LEbEdzodales 
laxa  k"  !itk"  Isdese  labEndalax  £w5sgEmasas.  Wa,  gil£mese 
gwalaxs  lae  dax'Idxa  mEnyayowe  klwaxLawa  qa£s  k'atEmgaaLE-  80 
lode  g'a  gwalegasa1  motslac^e  k!wek!waxEn  mEnyayo  lax  (1). 
Wa,  lii  ax'edxa  'walase  xalaes  qa£s  tseqes  laxa  qlolkwe  qlesena 
qa£s  la  tsedzots  lax  otslawasa  mEnyayowe  lax  (1).  Wa,  nELala- 
masxa  xalaesaxs  lae  gweldzots  laq.  Wii,  gil-'mese  gweldzodExs 
lae  Laqwaq,  qa  lalaneqwes  lax  ewunxa£yasa  mEnyayowe.  Wa,  85 
he£mis  qa  gwalEles  ci!EsmEnxew!da.  Wii,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae 
asm  he  gwemakulaxa  waokwaxs  lae  lEqaq.  Wii,  giPmese  labEnde 
lEqa£vasexs  lae  hex'idaEm  Liistots  lax  nEqostawases  lEgwile.  Wa, 
giPmese  gwalExs  lae  etled  :ix£edxa  £nEmxsa  klitklEdesa.  Wa, 
aEmxaftwise  nEqEing  iltEwexes   gwegilasaxes    gilx'de    lEgEdzotsE-  90 

1  See  figure  on  p.  261. 


280  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Lbth.ann.sb 

91  put  the  cakes  on.  |  She  continues  doing  this  until  all  the  currants 
have  been  made  into  |  cakes.  After  this  is  done,  she  takes  a  mat  and 
spreads  it  over  them,  |  so  that  the  soot  of  the  fire  will  not  fall  on 
95  them  |  and  so  that  the  heat  of  the  fire  will  go  up  to  it.  ||  They  need 
a  strong  heat  to  dry  quickly,  for  the  |  cakes  of  currants  do  not  dry 
quickly.  Sometimes  it  takes  three  or  |  even  five  days  to  dry  them. 
When  they  are  |  dry,  she  takes  down  the  drying-frames  ami  [  places 
them  one  on  top  of  another  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  When  they  have 
100  all  been  taken  down,  ||  the  woman  takes  an  empty  drying-frame  and 
puts  it  on  top  of  |  one  with  a  currant-cake  on  it.  She  takes  care  that 
the  edges  are  flush  |  on  all  sides  ami  at  the  ends  of  the  two  drying- 
frames.  |  Then  she  calls  her  husband  to  come  ami  help  her  turn  over 
5  the  |  currant-cakes ;  and  when  her  husband  comes,  the  woman  ||  takes 
one  end  of  the  two  drying-frames  which  lie  together,  |  and  her  hus- 
band takes  hold  of  the  other  end.  Both  lift  them  up  at  the  same 
time,  |  and  they  turn  them  over.  Then  the  currant-cake  is  turned,  | 
and  falls  on  the  empty  drying-frame.  All  the  |  currant-cakes 
10  and  the  heated  skunk-cabbage  leaves  fall  off  together.  ||  When 
they  take  off  the  now  empty  drying-frame,  she  puts  it  down  |  and 
peels  off  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  that  stick  to  the  backs  of  the  | 
currant-cakes.  When  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  have  been  taken  off,  | 
they  put  (the  frames)  up  where  they  were  before,  and  they  do  the 

91  wa.  Wii,  ;V"mise  he  gwe£naktilaxs  lae  £\\i£la  lEgEkweda  qledzEdzowe 
tEq!a.  Wii,  g'il-mese  gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxa  le£wa£ye  qa£s  LEbeg'in- 
des  lax  elc  !adza£yas,  qa  k'leses  la  q!ubEtlzodaleda  qhvalobEse  laq. 
Wii,  ke£mis    qa    alak' !ales    L!esalaso£sa   LlesEg'ostalasa  lsgwlle,  qa 

95  hiilaxtsles  lEmo£nakula  qaxs  k' !esa6  gEyolenox  lEmx£w!deda 
qledzEdzowe  t!Eqa,  yixs  £nfd£nEinp  !Enae  yuduxiixses  enala  lo£xs 
lagaae  lax  sEk!ap!Enxwa£ses  enala  lidEm£wa.  Wa,  giPmese  lEmx- 
£vvk1exs  lae  enaxwa  LeLaxoyEwa  k!ek!itk-!Edese,  qa£s  gaxe 
papEqEwenekala  laxa  onalisasa  lsgwlle.  Wii,  g-il£niese  £wl£laxaxs 
100  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxa  lobEdzala  k' !itk!i:desa,  qa£s  lii  pagEdzots 
laxa  axdzalaxa  qledzEdzowe  tlEqa.  Wii,  lii  aekila  qa  nenamEn- 
xale  e£wEnxa£ya  LEEwe  6ba£yasa  malExsa  kMekMitk'Edesa.  Wa, 
lii  Ledalaxes  la£wiinEme,  qa  gaxes  g-Iwalaqexs  liiLe  lexalxes 
qledzEdzowe  tlEqa.  Wa,  gil'mese  gpaxe  la£wunEmasexs  lae  diibEn- 
5  deda  ts!Edaqaxa  apsba£yasa  papEqala  malExsa  k'!ek!itk'!Edesa. 
Wii,  lii  hVwiinEmas  dabEndxa  apsba£yas.  Wii,  la  £nEmax-£IdExs 
lae  wegiLElodEf(,  qa£s  lex,£ideq.  Wii,  he£mis  la  ladzatsa  qledzEdzowe 
t  !sqa  liixa  lobsdzala  k'  !itk'  lEdesa.  Wii,  la  £iiEmax-£idaEm  lasa 
qledzEdzowe  tlEqa  LE£wis  axdzayansa  pEnkwe  k'!Ek'!aok!wa.  Wa, 

10  gil£mese  ;ix£aLElodxa  lii  lobsdzala  k- !itk- lEdesa  qa£s  la  paxEalilas. 
Wii,  lii  qusalaxa  k'!Ek-!aok!wiixs  lae  klulfda  lax  e£eweg'a£yasa 
ci!edzEdzowe  tlEcpi.  Wii,  glhmese  £wi£lawa  k"!Ek!aok!waxs  lae 
xwelaqostod  LagaaLElots.     Wa,  la  heEmxat!  gwex-£idxa  m&kllaq. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  281 

same  with  the  next  one;  |  and  after  all  (the  cakes)  have  been  turned 
over,  they  spread  a  mat  ||  over  them,  and  they  are  left  there  only  one  15 
night.  Then  they  are  |  dry  all  through.  Then  she  takes  down  the 
drying  (frames)  and  puts  them  down.  When  they  have  all  been  put 
down,  she  gathers  up  the  |  currant-cakes  and  puts  them  in  piles  of 
five,  |  and  ties  them  with  soft  shredded  cedar-bark,  as  she  did  with 
the  ||  cakes  of  elderberries  mixed  with  salal-berries  when  they  were  20 
tied  into  bundles,  and  about  which  I  talked  before.  |  She  also  puts 
them  into  a  dry  small  box  which  she  keeps  j  not  too  far  from  the  fire 
of  the  house,  so  that  |  the  heat  of  the  fire  strikes  it,  for  the  currant- 
cakes  get  damp  easily,  |  unless  they  take  good  care  of  them  and  if 
they  do  not  know  how  to  treat  them.  ||  That  is  all  about  this.  |  25 

Viburnum-Berries. — While1  (the  man)  is  carrying  in  (the  berries),  i 
his  wife  goes  up  the  beach,  |  and  the  man  goes  aboard  the  canoe  |  to 
get  driftwood.  Meanwhile  his  wife  eats.  |  The  husband  does  not  stay 
away  long  before  he  comes  back;  and  as  soon  as  ||  he  reaches  the  5 
beach,  he  backs  up  the  stern  of  his  small  canoe  and  |  goes  ashore. 
He  throws  ashore  the  driftwood  that  he  brought;  and  when  it  |  is 
all  out,  he  carries  it  up  on  his  shoulder  into  his  |  house,  and  he  throws 
it  down  at  the  place  where  he  intends  to  build  the  fire  |  to  cook  the 
viburnum-berries.     As  soon  as  all  the  wood  has  been  carried  up,  he 


Wa,  g'ih'mese  £wi£la  la  lenkiixs  lae  et!ed  LEbegintsa  le£wa£ye  lax 
ek' !adzEJyas.  Wa,  £nEmxsa£mes  la  ganoLe  hexdEinas  gwalaLE-  15 
laxs  lae  alak!ala  la  lEmx-wula.  Wa,  la  LeLaxodxa  k!ek!itk!E- 
dese,  qa£s  pax£alllEles.  Wa,  giPmese  £wIlgalIlExs  lae  q  lap  !ex£Idxa 
q!eq!edzEdzowe  tlEqa,  qaes  papEqodaleq,  qa  sesEk'  laxsagales. 
Wa  la  yaeltsEmasa  qloyaakwe  kadzEk"  laq,  lax  gwalaasasa  ts le- 
ts lEnqEla  nEgudzoxs  lae  yaeltsEmakwaxF.n  gilxdii  g\v;igwex's£alasa.  20 
Wa,  laxae  hants!oj-o  laxa  pEX-tsEwakwe  xaxadzEma,  qa£s  la  hanga- 
lllEm  laxa  k-!ese  xEnLEla  qwesala  laxa  lEgwilasa  gokwe,  qa  laga- 
aasesa  L!esalasa  lEgwile,  qaxs  alakMalae  dElnaka  q!edzEdzowe 
tlEqaxs  k-!esae  aekilasE£wa  yisa  k-!ese  qlaLEla  gwegilasaq. 
Wii,  laEm  gwala.  25 

Viburnum-Berries. — Wa,1  g'il£mese  £wllosdesa  lae  htsdese  gEnEmas,  1 
wa,  la  laxsa  bEgwanEmaxa  t!EldzElalats!exde  xwaxwaguma,  qa£s 
lii  q!exats!enoxus  laxa  q!exale.  Wa,  la£me  LlE.wa  gEUEmas.  Wa, 
k'!est!a  alaEm  galaxs  g'axae  aedaaqe  laEwunEmas.  Wii,  gih'mese 
gaxalisExs  lae  aLaxLax-£Idxes  q!exats!e  xwaxwaguma,  c^a^s  lalta-  5 
wexs  lae  sEp!ultalax£Idxa  rjlexale  qlexanEms.  Wii,  gib"mese 
fwI£loltaxs  lae  yilxEusdesElax-£IdEq,  qass  la  yilgweLElaq  laxes 
g-okwe,  qa£s  la  yilx£walllas  laxes  gwEEyo,  qa£s  lEx-cwall£lasLEx 
LlobasLasa   tlElse.     Wii,    giPmese     ewFlosdesExs    lae    xamax-£ida- 

'Continued  from  p.  218,  line  44. 


282  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.ss 

10  [himself]"  goes  ||  and  takes  a  basket,  goes  down  to  the  beach,  |  picks 
up  stones,  and  puts  them  into  the  basket.  He  puts  in  as  many  as 
he  ran  |  carry.  Then  he  stops  putting  them  in  and  carries  them  in 
one  hand  [  up  the  beach  into  his  house.  He  puts  |  them  down  at 
the  place  where  he  intends  to  work  a  I  the  unripe  viburnum-berries. 

15  When  ||  he  thinks  there  are  enough  stones,  he  stops.  |  You  know 
already  everything  about  the  ways  of  building  a  fire  to  heat  |  stones, 
for  there  is  only  one  way  of  heating  stones  for  steaming  |  and  for 
heating  water  for  steaming.     The  |  man  has  to  go  out  to  get  drift- 

20  wood  and  stones  ||  for  this  purpose,  because  his  wife  is  working  at  the 
viburnu  m-berries.  When  he  has  finished  building  the  fire,  |  he  puts  on 
the  stones,  but  he  does  not  light  the  fire  under  them.  Then  |  the 
man  goes  to  help  his  wife,  who  is  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  mat  on 
which  he  lias  poured  |  out  the  viburnum-berries;  for  the  woman 
does  that  first  after  she  |  has  eaten,  after  coming  home.     She  goes 

25  and  spreads  a  new  mat,  ||  takes  the  large  berry-basket,  and  | 
pours  the  viburnum-berries  on  the  mat.  She  does  the  same  |  with  the 
front-basket  and  with  the  medium-  J  sized  basket.  Now  her  baskets 
are  empty.     Then  she  takes  the  smallest  basket,  the  front-basket,  || 

30  and  puts  it  down  on  her  left-hand  side.  She  sits  down  next  to  the  [ 
mat  on  which  the  viburnum-berries  are,  and  she  takes  a  bunch  of  | 
berries  and  picks  the  berries  off  the  stems,  and  she  puts  them  into 

10  Emxaaxs  lae  axeedxa  h-:xa£ye,  qaes  la  hmtsles  laxa  L!Ema£ise,  qa£s 
lii  XEXuts  lalasa  tlesEme  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa,  aEmise  gwanala,  qaes 
lakwesexs  lae  gwal  xexHs  lalaqexs  lae  kMoqullsaq,  qa£s  gaxe 
k- !ox£wusdesElaq,  qa£s  gaxe  k-!6gweLElaq  laxes  g'okwe.  Wit,  lii 
lc!ox;"walIlas    laxes    t  'fits'i.ltsedasi.axa    k' !Elx-e    tbslsa.     Wa,  laeme 

15  hex'idaEm  gwalExs  lae  k'otaq  laEm  helales  xEgwanEme  tlesEma. 
Wa,  laEmLas  Enaxwa  qlaLElax  gweg'ilasasa  la  lEqwelaxa  ts!ats!Ei- 
qlwaasLaxa  tlesEme  qaxs  Enami£lala*mae  gwayi£lalasa  laxa  nsk'aLe 
i.F."wa  qlolaxes  q!oias5Laxs  lae  fcs!ats!Elq!waxa  tlesEme.  Wa,  heEm 
lagilas hex'saEm  la eaxEleda bEgwanEmaxa  rjlexale  LEfwa t lesEmaxs 

I'll  lae  gEnEmas  eaxElaxa  t  !i:lse.  Wa.  g-il£mese  gwal£allla  lEqwiixs 
lae  mokuyalaxa  tlesEmaxs  k!es;'mae  menabEwakwaxs  laeda  bEgwa- 
nEiiie  gox£wIdxes  gEnEmaxs  lae  k!unxelllxa  le£wa£ye  la  qEbEdza- 
lllatsa  tlElse,  ytxs.  heemae  g'il  axeetsoesa  tslEdaqaxs  g-alae  gwal 
LlExwaxs  g'alae  g-ax  naEnakwaxs  lae  ax£edxa  Eldzowe  le£wa£ya,  qa£s 

25  LEplallleq.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  ewalase  niige  t!Elts!a,la  lExa£ya,  qa£s  lii 
qEDEdzotsa  tlElse  laxa  LEbete  le£wa£ya.  Wa,  laxae  heEmxat!  gwe- 
x£klxa  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex-£ldxes  helo- 
magEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la£me  £wi£la  lii  lopEmts!awa  laElxa£yas; 
wa,  lii    axeedxa    amayagaeyases    lai:lxaryexes   nanaagEme    lExa£ya, 

30  qa£s  hang  allies  laxes  gEmxagawalilaxs  lae  klunxelilxa  tlEldzEdzala 
LEbel  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  lii  dax'idxa  nEXLala  tlElsa,  qa£s  klulpalexa 
t!Else  laxes  t  !i:ldzanowe,  qa£s  lii  k'lats  lalasa  ttelse  laxa  nanaagEme. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  283 

the  small  basket.  |  She  throws  the  stems  down  on  the  right-hand  33 
side.     In  |  this  way  her  husband  helps  her;  and  as  soon  as  they  have 
picked    off   all   the  ||  berries,    the   man    lights    the   fire    under   the  35 
place  where  he  is  about  to  heat,  |  the  stones.     As  soon  as  it  burns, 
he  takes  the  high  |  steaming-box  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the 
fire.     He  |  takes  two   large  water-buckets  and   goes  to  draw  fresh 
water;  |  and  as  soon  as  he  comes  carrying  a  bucket  of  fresh  water  in 
each  hand,'[|  he  goes  to  the  place  where  the  stcaming-box  is  standing,  40 
and  pours  the  water  into  it.  |  There  are  only  two  buckets  of  water 
poured  in.  |  That  is  sufficient  for  the  high  steaming-box.     After  he 
has  done  so,  |  he  takes  the  basket  for  holding  the  berries,  puts  it  next 
to  the  |  steaming-box,  and  he  takes  the  long  tongs  ||  and  the  water-  45 
bucket  and  puts  them  down.     Then  he  goes  to  draw  |  fresh  water, 
which  he  places  between  the  stcaming-box  and  the  fire.  [  The  red-hot 
stones  are  to  be  dipped  into  this  water.     When  it  is  all  there,  he   I 
takes  an  empty  oil-box  and   puts  it  down.     Then  |  he  draws  some 
more  water  in  another  ||  large  bucket.     When  he  comes  back,   he  50 
pours  the  water  into  the  |  empty  oil-box  and  washes  it  out.     After 
doing  so,  he  |  goes  and  puts  it  down  where  it  is  to  be  left  until  winter 
comes;  |  however,  he  has  poured  away  the  dirty  water  with  which 
the  box  has  been  washed  out.  I  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  and  when  he 


Wa,  la  ts  teqElasa  t  lEldzanowe  laxes  helk"  lotagawalile.     Wii,  hemiis  33 
la  gExu£widaats  la£wimEmaseq.     Wa,  gib'mese  £wl£la  la  klfllbEkwa 
tlElsaxs  lae    menabodeda    bEgwanEmaxes   gwalelexdeda   ts!ats!E-  35 
q  !waasLaxa  t  !esEme.    Wa,  gil£mese  xlqostaxs  lae  :ix£edxa  Lawats  !exa 
yix"sEine  q!olats!a,  qa£s  g-iixe  hanolisas    laxa  lEgwile.     Wa,  laxae 
ax£edxa  maltsEme  awa  naEngatsUi,  qa's  la  tsex-£IdEx  £wE£wap  tema. 
Wa,  g  ih'mese  g'ax  wax-sEnkulaxa  EwiEwabEts!ala  naEngats!exs  lae 
he£nakulaEins  laxa  yixusEme  q!olats!a,  qa£s  lii  guqasasa  Ewape  laq.  40 
Wa,  laEm    maltsEma    naEiigatsle    qoqiit!axa    Ewape  guxts  !ojTosexs 
lae  helatslawa  yixusEme  q!olats!exa  Ewape.     Wa,  gih'mese  gwalExs 
lae  ax£edxa  k-!oxstanowe   lExilxa  t!Else,  qa£s  gaxe  ha£nolllas  laxa 
yixusEme  q!olats!e.     Wii,  laxae  et!ed  ax£edxa  gilt  !e  kltpLalaa  qa£s 
gaxe  katlalilas.     Wii,  la    ax£edxa   nagatsle,  qa£s   la  tsex£Id  laxa  45 
£wE£wap!Eme,  qa£s    g'axe    hanagots    laxa   q!olats!e   LE£wa    lEgwile 
qa£s  habasxes  klipLalaa.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wllgalllExs  laeda  bEgwa- 
iiEme    ax£edxa    dEngwats lemote,  qa£s   gaxe    hangalllas.      Wii,    lii 
et!ed  lii    tsa  laxa  £wape.     Wii,  laEm   he  tsayatslesiida  £nEinsgEme 
£walas  nagatslii.     Wii,  gil£mese  g-ax  aed;.aqaxs  lae  guxts  lots  laxa  50 
dEngwats  lemote    qa£s    tsloxugindeq.     Wii,    gil£mese    gwalExs    lae 
hangalilas  laxes  hemEnelasLe   ha£nelalL   lalaal  laxa  hlLa  tslawun- 
x£edEl,  yixs  laaLal  guqodxa  neqwa  Ewapa  yixs  tsoxug  indayaseq. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwalsxs  lae  dox£waLElaqexs  lE£mae  mEnmEiiltsEmx£i- 


284  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  3.-, 

55  sues  that  the  stones  are  red-hot,  ||  he  takes  his  long  tongs,  |  puts  the 
end  into  the  bucket  with  water  which  stands  between  the  |  steaming 
box  and  the  fire,  and.  when  1  be  end  of  the  tongs  is  wet,  he  picks  the  | 
red-hot  stones  out  of  the  fire  and  puts  them  into  the  steaming-box ; 
he  |  continues  doing  this  with  the  other  red-hot  stones;  and  when  || 

60  the  tongs  catch  fire  at  the  end,  he  puts  the  end  into  the  |  bucket  of 
water.  The  man  is  careful  that  |  the  water  does  not  boil  up,  for  he 
only  wants  it  to  be  real  hot.  |  When  it  has  nearly  come  to  a  boil,  he 
stops  putting  stones  into  it.  |  Then  he  takes  the  front-basket,  which  is 

(55  now  filled  with  viburnum-berries,  ||  and  pours  the  berries  into  the  cook- 
ing-basket. Then  (thewoman)  |  fills  the  front-basket  withmore  berries, 
which  are  in  the  |  medium-sized  swallowing-basket,  and  she  pours  these 
too  into  the  cooking- 1  basket.  When  it  is  nearly  full,  she  stops.  Then 
the  man  takes  hold  of  the  |  handles  of  the  cooking-basket  and  puts 

70  it  ||  into  the  hot  water  in  the  steaming-box.  The  woman  watches  |  it 
carefully  while  it  is  covered  with  water,  for  (the  berries)  must  not 
be  cooked  too  long.  |  She  takes  it  out  of  the  hot  water  every  now 
and  then,  and  watches  it.  |  When  (the  berries)  all  turn  red,  they 
are   at   once   |    taken    ou1    and    poured    into   the   empty   oil-box,  || 

75  which  has  already  been  put  down  at  the  place  where  it  is  to  stay 


55  dedatlesEme  lax  lsgwltas.  Wa,  la  dax*£idxes  g'flt  !a  k"  IfpLalaa  qa£s 
LtenxstEndes  6ba£yas  laxa  £wabEts!ala  nagats!e  hanagawalllxa  q!o- 
lats!e  LE^wa  lEgwile.  Wii,  g'iPmese  la  kliinxbalaxs  lae  k'lipllts  laxa 
xixExsEinala  t!esEma,  qa£s  la  k'lipstEnts  laxa  q!olats!e.  Wa,  la 
banal  he   gwegilaxa    waokwe     x'lx'ExsEmala  tlesEma.     Wa,  g'll- 

60  £naxwa£mese  xlxbax£lde  oba£yas  k-!ipLalaas  lae  L!EnxstEnts  laxa 
"w fd )Ets!allle  nagats!a.  Wii,  la'me  qlagEmaleda  bEgwanEme  qa 
kleses  niEdElx-wideda  £wape  qa  a'mes  alak'Iala  ts!Elx"sta.  Wa, 
gll£mese  Eliiq  mEdElx£widExs  lae  gwal  k!ipstalasa  tlesEme  laq. 
Wa,  la    ax£edxa .  nanaagEme  lExa£ya,  ylxs    lae    qotlalalilxa  tlslse, 

65  qaes  la  guqasasa  tlslse  laxa  k'loxstanowe  lExa^ya.  Wa,  lanaxwe 
etled  klasasa  tlElse  laxa  nanaagEme  lExa£yaxa  k!ots!awaxa 
helomagEme  lExa£ya,  qaes  lii  et!ed  guqasas  laxa  k'loxstanowe 
hcxa'ya.  Wa,  glPmese  Elaq  qot!axs  lae  gwala.  Wii,  la  dagaaLEla 
lax  k" !ek- lak'ogwaasasa   k'loxstanowe    lExa£ya,  qa£s  la  kloxstEnts 

70  laxa  ts!Elxusta  £wap  q!ots!axa  qlolatsle.  Wa,  la  Lomaxeid  q!aq!a- 
lalaqexs  lae  haiiEndzesa,  qa  kMeses  hax'SEqla  L!opalaena£yas.  Wii, 
laeme  yala  k!ox£wustEndEq  laxa  ts!Elxusta  £wapa,  qa£s  q!aq!alaleq. 
Wa,  gil-mese  ;naxwa  la  l !a.L !ExusEmx-£idExs  lae  nex-£idaEm 
k!oxrwustEndEq,    qa£s    lii    guxtslots    laxa    dEngwats lemotaxs    lae 

75  gwalil  hiVnel  laxes  hemEne£lasLe  ha£ne£las  lalaal  liixa  tslawunxxa. 


boasj  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  285 

until  winter.  |  As  soon  as  the  cooking-basket  is  empty,  (the  woman)  76 
pours  |  in  more  raw  viburnum-berries;  and  when  it  is  full,  she  puts  it 
down  by  the  side  of  the  |  steaming-box,  and  she  puts  a  few  more 
red-hot   stones  |  into   it.     When    (the    water)    nearly   boils   up,   she 
puts  ||  the  cooking-basket  in,  and  watches  it  until   they  |  get  red  or  80 
sometimes  whitish  yellow.     Then  they  are  |  done.     When  they  have 
that  color,  they  are  taken  out,  and  |  the  woman  then  goes  and  pours 
them  into  the  empty  oil-box.     When  four  |  basketfuls  (of  berries) 
have  been  poured  into  the  empty  oil-box,  ||  she  takes  another  empty  85 
oil-box,  washes  |  it  out,  and,  after  doing  so,  she  puts  it  down  along- 
side of  one  that  has  been  filled  with  |  viburnum-berries;  and  she  pours 
in  also  four  |  basketfuls  of  steamed  viburnum-berries.     Sometimes  |  a 
couple  will  put  up  as  many  as  ten  oil-boxes  full  of  viburnuni-berries,  || 
when  they  have  a  strong  desire  to  do  so,  for  they  help  each  other  90 
when  they  wish  to  have  |  many  oil-boxes  full  of  viburnum-berries. 
When  they  are  all  done,  |  (the  woman)  goes  to  draw  fresh  water  in  a 
large  bucket,  and  |  four  bucketfuls  are  poured  into  each  of  the  oil- 
boxes  containing  steamed  viburnum-berries.  |  When  water  has  been 
poured  into  all  of  them,  they  ||  take  a  board  and  lay  it  as  a  cover  on  95 
top  of  the  oil-boxes  containing  the  berries.  |  They  keep  it  there  until 
the  winter,  |  when  the  people  will  have  a  winter  ceremonial.     That 
is  all  about  this.  | 

Wii,  glPmese  la  loptslaweda  k"!oxstanowe  lExa£yaxs  lae  et!ed  gtix-  76 
ts'.otsa  k-!ilxe  ttels  laq.     Wa,  glPmese  qot!axs  lae  hanolllas  laxes 
q!olats!e,    qa£s    xaL!Ex£lde    k!ipstalax£Itsa    xIxExsEmala    tlesEin 
laq.     Wa,    gil£Emxaawise    Elaq    niEdElx£wIdExs    lae    k'  IdxstEntsa 
t!Elts!ala    k!oxstanowe    IexS.    laq.     Wa,    laEmxae    q!aq!alalaq    qa  80 
L!aL'.ExusEmx'Ides  lo£xs    emElxdeeleqalae    lEnxeda   waokwaxs  lae 
L!opa.     Wa,  g-iffmese  he  gwestox-wIdExs  lae  k!ox£ustEndEq,  qa£s 
la    guxts  lots    laxa    dEngwats!emote.     Wa,    g"Il£mese    la    niEwexxa 
ci6cp"it!eda  k!oxstanowe  lExa,  la  guxts !oyosexa  dEugwatsIemotaxs, 
lae    e!ted    ax£edxa    ogu£la£maxat !    dEngwatsIemota,  qa£s  ts!ox£wu-  85 
g'indeq.     Wa,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae  hangogwalllaq  LE£wa  la  helats!a 
t!Elyats!e    dEngwatsIemota.     Wa,,  laxae   guxts !otsa    mowexa  k!e- 
k'Soxstanowe     laElxe      c[!olku     t!Els     laq,     ylxs      £nal£nEinp  lEnae 
nEqasgEme    dEngwats!emote    t!Elyats!iisa    ha£yasEkala,    ylxa    la- 
k!wemasas  naqa£ye,   qa£s    gawalap!aaxs  £nekae  qa  q!exLeses  t!e-  90 
tlfilyatsle  dEngwatsIemota.    Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£la  LlOpaxs  lae  tsex£ld- 
xa  £wE£wap!Eme,  ylsa    awawe    naEngats!a,    qa£s  le    gucjEylndalasa 
maemosgEme     awa     naEngats!e     laxa     £n;ll£nEmsgEme     t!Elyats!e 
dEngwatsIemota.      Wa,    gil£mese     q!walots!Ewaxusa    £wapaxs    lae 
ax£edxa    £wadzowe     saokwa,  qa£s     papanaqes     laxes    t  let  Myats  !e  95 
dEngwatsIemota,  qa  pepaqEmes.     Wa,  laEm  edzelLExa  tslawunxLa, 
qo  ts!ets!ex£IdELe  gokulotas.     Wa,  laEm  gwala. 


286  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.35 

1  Crabapples. — The  woman  takes  the  large  basket,  |  which  is  still 
full  of  crabapples,  and  pours  these  |  on  the  mat  at  the  same  place 
where  the  first  lot  were  poured  out.  |  She  does  this  with  all  of  them, — 
5  the  medium-sized  basket  and  the  ||  front-basket.  When  they  are 
empty,  she  puts  them  down  all  around  |  the  crabapples  which  she 
had  poured  on  the  mat.  After  tins  is  done,  |  she  sits  down  on  the 
right-hand  side  of  the  basket  in  the  front  corner,  and  |  her  husband 
sits  down  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  medium-sized  basket.  |  The 

1 0  baskets  are  on  the  left  sides  of  the  ||  woman  and  her  husband  who  are 
sitting  down.  Then  they  take  up  each  a  bunch  |  of  crabapples  and 
pinch  off  the  stems  of  the  crabapples  |  with  the  right  hand.  With 
the  left  they  hold  the  |  crabapple-stems,  which  are  in  bunches;  and 
when  the  crabapples  have  been  picked  off,  |  the  woman  puts  the 

15  cleaned  crabapples  hi  to  the  front-basket,  ||  and  her  husband  puts  the 
cleaned  crabapples  into  the  |  medium-sized  basket.  They  continue 
doing  this  while  they  are  cleaning  them;  |  and  when  the  baskets  have 
been  filled,  they  pour  them  |  into  the  large   basket.     They  only  | 

20  stop  pouring  them  into  the  large  ||  basket  when  it  is  very  full.  Then 
the  woman  takes  a  |  large  dish  and  pours  into  it  the  clean  crab- 
apples and  those  which  |  her  husband  has  cleaned;  and  generally 


1  Crabapples. — Wa,  la£me  ax£ededa  tstedaqaxa  nagae  £walas  lExa 
£ya,  yixs  hec"mae  ales  tsElxuts!alaxa  tsElxwe,  qa£s  guqlEqesa  tsEl- 
xwe gltslaq  laxa  lax'de  gugEdzoyosexa  LF.bele  le£wa£ya.  Wa, 
la£me  £naxwaEm  he  gwex£Idxa  helomagEme  lExa£ya  LE£wa  na- 
.">  naagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  giPmese  la  lopEmtslaxs  lae  h:iue£stalas 
laxa  tsElxwe  lii  k'ladzalllaxa  le;\va£ye.  Wii,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae 
klwagalil  lax  helk*  lodEnwalllasa  iianaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gaxe 
la£wunEmas  klwagalil  lax  helk!odi'.u\valilasa  helomagEme  lExa£ya. 
Wa,  laEm    gegEmxagawallla  laElxa£ye    lax    k!iidze£lena£yasa    tslE- 

10  daqe  LE£wis  la£wunEme.  Wa,  lax-da£xwe  dax£idxa  £nal£iiEmxLala 
laxa  tsElxwe  qa£s  eplEXLe  maginodalaxa  tsElxwaxs  lae  epalaq 
ylses  helk'!ots!ana£ye.  Wa,  la  he  dalayoses  gEmxolts  !ana£ye  lax 
tsEltsElxuniEts!ExLa£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl-iawa  tsMxwaxs  lae 
k"!ats!odeda    tslEdaqases    k  imta\ye     tsElx"    laxa    nanaagEme    1e- 

15  xa£ya.  Wa,  laLa  la£wuiiKnias  he'  k'!ats!alases  kimta£ye  tsElxwa 
helomagEme  lExa£ya.  Wii,  ax"sa£mese  he  gwegilaxs  k'lmtaaq. 
Wii,  giPmese  qoqutle  k-eklmdats!asexa  tsElxwaxs  lae  giixtslots 
laxa  £walase  kimdEgwats!exa  tsElxwe  nage  lExa£ya.  Wa,  al- 
£mese    gwal   guxtslalaxa    £walase   k"imdEgwats!exa    tsElxwe    nage 

20  lExaxs  lae  alalclala  la  qotla.  Wii,  Iaxae  ax£ededa  tslEdaqaxa 
£walase  loqlwa,  qa£s  la  guxtsla'ases  k'imta£ye  tsElx"  laq  lo£  kim- 
ta£yases    la£wunEme.     Wa,    la    qlunala    ax£edxa  kMimyaxLa   lo£xs 


boas]  PRESERVATION    OF    FOOD  287 

she  takes  a  short  oil-box  or  |  a  high  box  and  pours  the  cleaned  crab-  23 
apples  into  it,  |  in  case  she  is  picking  a  great  many.     When  all  the 
crabapples  have  been  cleaned,  ||  the  husband  of  the  woman  goes  to  25 
get  driftwood,  |  for  it  is  hard  work  to  prepare  crabapples.     There- 
fore |  the  man  helps  his  wife.     When  he  gets  home  from  getting  | 
driftwood,  he  carries  it  on  his  shoulder  into  the  |  house,  and  puts  it 
down  where  he  is  going  to  build  a  fire.     As  soon  as  ||  all  the  drift-  30 
wood  has  been  carried  in,  he  puts  down  two  medium-sized  logs,   | 
which  will  be  the  side-pieces.     Between  them  he  puts  small  pieces  |  of 
dry  driftwood.     He    places  larger  pieces    of    driftwood  |  crosswise 
over  the  side-pieces  for  the  stones  to  rest  on.     When  (  this  is  done, 
he  takes  a  basket,  goes  down  to  the  beach,  ||  and  puts  stones  into  the  35 
basket.  |  When  he  thinks  he   has  as    many   as   he    can    carry,  he 
carries  them  on  his  back  up  the  beach,  |  and  carries  them  into  the 
house  in  which  the  crabapples  are  being  prepared.  |  Then   he  puts 
(the  basket)  down  on  the  wood  that  is  built  up  for  it.  |  He  brings 
many  stones  which  he  has  picked  up;  and  when  he  has  brought  in 
enough,  ||  he   lights  the  fire  under  the   wood    and  stones.     When  |  40 
it  is  burning,  he  takes  an  empty  oil-box  and  puts  it  down   along- 
side I  of  the  wood  and  stone  in  order  to  heat  it.     Then  he  goes  and 
gets  I  two  large  buckets  and  draws  water  in  them.     He  |  pours  the 

hae  &x£etsE£wa     Lawatsa,    qa£s   gftxts lalasosa    kimdEkwe  tsslxwa,  23 
yixs  qlenEmaeda  tsElwanEmas.     Wii,  g  iPmese  £wiela  la  k  imdEkwa 
tsElxwaxs  lae    he£rne    hVwunEmasa    tslEdaqe    la    qlexaxa    qlexale,  25 
qaxs  laxumlaeda    tsElxwaxs    eaxElasE£wae.      Wa,   he£mes    lag'ilas 
g'iwaleda  bEgwaiiEmaxes  gEiiEme.     Wii,  gilemese  gaxExs  q!exex- 
diixa  q!exiilaxs   lae   hex-eidaEm  wex"£IdEq,  qa£s  la  weg'iLElaq  luxes 
gokwe,  qa£s  la  wex£alliaq  laxes   lEx£walllasLe.     Wii,  gIPmese   £wi- 
£losdesa  qlexalaxs   lae  k'atlalllasa  ma£lts!aqe    hii£3Tal£ag-it    q!exala.  30 
Wa,  heEm  kakEdEnwa£ye.     Wa.   la    Lolaxotsa   g'alastoyowe  aniE- 
ma£}Tast5  kmxwa  qlexala.     Wit,  lit    ax£edxa    awawastala    qlexala, 
qa£s     gek"Eyindales     qa     t!iixt!Einasa     tlesEme.      Wii,      gil£mese 
gwiilExs    lae    ax£edxa    lExa£ye,    qa£s    lii    lEnts!es   liixa    L!Ema£ise, 
cpa£s  lii  t!axts!alasa     tlesEme   laxes     t!agats!exa     t!esEme  lExa£va.  35 
Wii.  gil£mese  gwiinala  laxusexs    lae    6xLEx-£IdEq,  qa£s     la     uxlos- 
desElaq,     qa£s     la,    oxLaeLElaq     hixes    tsatsElxuse£lats!eLe    g  okwa. 
Wii,  lii  oxLEgalllaq  qa£s  lii  t  !iic[EjTindalas  laxes  la  gwiillla-'ya.     Wii. 
lii  qlenEine    tlaganEmas    t!esEma.     Wii,  g'iPmese  hel£ale    t  liiganE- 
masexs    lae    tsenabotsa   gulta    laxes    t!eqwapa£ye.      Wii,   gil£mese  40 
xlqostaxs  lae    :ix£edxa  dEngwatslemote,  qa£s  giixe  h;i£nolisas   laq 
laxa  t  !eqwapa£yas,  qa  ts!ElxsEmx£Ides.     Wii,  he£mis  la  :ix£edaatsexa 
awawe  ma£ltsEm    naEngats!a,    qa£s  la  tsex"£Td    laxa   ewap,    qa*s    lii 
giixts!alas  liiq.     Wii,  g-il£mese  la  iiEgoyoxsdalaxa  £wiipaxs  lae  gwala. 


288  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Leth.  ann.ss 

45  water  into  the  box.  Wlien  it  is  half  full,  he  stops.  ||  Then  he  takes 
his  tongs  and  puts  them  down  on  the  floor.1 

(As  |  soon  as  this  is  done,  the  man  takes  a  bucket  and  goes  to  | 
draw  water;  and  when  he  comes  back,  he  puts  it  down  between  the  | 
empty  oil-box  and  the  fire.)    Now  all  j  the  stones  on  the  fire  are  red-hot. 

50  Then  he  ||  takes  the  tongs,  dips  the  end.  into  the  |  bucket,  and  picks 
out  the  red-hot  stones.  He  |  dips  them  into  the  water  so  that  the 
ashes  that  stick  on  them  come  off;|  and  after  doing  so,  he  puts  them 
into  the  water  in  the  steaming-box.  |  He  continues  doing  this,  and 

55  does  not  stop  until  ||  the  water  really  boils  up.  Then  he  takes  the  | 
rack  and  puts  it  into  the  boiling  water.  |  After  doing  this,  he  takes 
the  large  basket  containing  the  cleaned  crabapples,  |  puts  them  on  the 
rack  of  the  one  who  steams  crabapples,  |  and  he  also  takes  the  medium- 

G0  sized  ||  basket  and  puts  it  in,  and  he  also  takes  the  |  front-basket  and 
puts  it  in.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  all  in,  they  are  covered  with  hot 
water.     Then  |  the  man  takes  his  tongs  and  picks  up  more  [  red-hot 

65  stones,  which  he  dips  into  the  water,  ||  and  then  puts  them  in,  so  that 
the  water  really  boils  up.  |  When  it  is  boiling,  he  takes  a  rest.  |  His 
wife  watches  the  crabapples.     She  takes  a  ladle  |  and  dips  it  into 


45  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxes  k!ipLalaa,  qa  g'axes  kadela.1  .  .  .  Wa, 
g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£ededa  bEgwanEmaxa  nagatsle,  qa£s  la 
tsaxa  £wape.  Wa,  g-il£mese  g-ax  aedaaqaxs  lae  hanagots  laxa 
dEngwats  lemote  pewa  lEgwIle.  Wa,  la£me  maxwa  la  memEnl- 
tsEmx-eIdeda    tlesEme    tlaxLalales    laxa  lEgwIle.      Wa,    he£mis    la, 

50  dax-£Idaats!exes  k'lipLalaa,  qa£s  LlEnxstEndes  laxa  £wabEts!awasa 
nagatslaxs  lae  k-!ip!its  laxa  xIxExsEmala  t!esEma.  Wa,  laxae 
hapstEnts  laxa  ewape,  qa  lawayes  k!wek!CitsEmayaq  guna£ya.  Wa, 
g'iMmese  gwalsxs  lae  k'lipstEnts  lax  £wabsts!awasa  q!olats!axa 
tsElxwe    dEngwats !emot a.      Wa,  la  hex'sa  gweg-ile.     Wa,    al£mise 

55  gwalExs  lae  alaklala  la  maEindElqiileda  cwape.  Wa,  lii,  axeedxa 
k  !itk-!Edese,  qa£s  la  paxstEnts  laxa  maEmdElqiila  £wapa.  Wa, 
gil^mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  £walase  klmdEgwatsIe  nag-e  lExa- 
£ya,  qa£s  la  handzots  laxa  k-!itk!Edesasa  tsatsElxusllaxa  tsElxwe 
q!olasE£wa.     Wa,  laxae  :lx£edxa  kimdEgwats!axa  tsElxwe  heloma- 

60  gEm  lExa£ya,  qa£s  laxat!  ha£nodzEnts  laq.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa 
klmdEgwats!axa  tsElxwe  nanaagEm  lExa£ya,  qaes  la  hanagots  laq. 
Wa,  giPmese  £wi£lastaxs  lae  t!EpsEmxa  ts!Elxusta  £wapa.  Wa,  la 
ax£ededa  bEgwaiiEmaxes  k'lipLalaa,  qa£s  etlede  k!ip!lts  laxa 
x'lxExsEmala    t!esEma,  qa£s    laxat!    hapstEnts    laxa  £wape.     Wa, 

65  lit  xaL!Ex-£Id  kMipstalas,  qa  alax'£idages  mEdElx£wideda  £wape. 
Wa,  glPmese  alakMala  la  maEmdElqulaxs  lae  x-os£ida.  Wa, 
hetlale  gEiiEmas  la   q!aq!alalaq.     Wa,   laEm  ax£edxa    k-ats!Enaqe, 

i  Then  follows  the  description  of  the  manufacture  of  a  drying  frame,  p.  171.  line  1,  to  p.  172,  line  27. 


boas]  PKESEKVATION    OF   FOOD  289 

the  crabapples  and  feels  if  they  get  soft.  |  When  they  are  soft  all 
through,  they  are  done.     Then  she  ||  calls  her  husband  to  take  out 
the  three  |  baskets  with  the  boiled  crabapples.     They  pour  these  into  70 
the  empty  oil-box  |  which  has  been  washed  out  by  the  wife  of  the 
man,  and  which  is  now  ready  to  be  placed  |  where  the  crabapples  are 
to  be  kept.     They  |  pour  in  the  steamed  crabapples.     If  they  do  not 
boil  all  the  ||  other  crabapples,  the  woman  puts  the  green  cleaned  [  75 
crabapples  into  the  three  baskets,  and  |  her  husband  puts  more  red- 
hot  stones  into  the  cooking-box.  |  As  soon  as  the  water  boils  up,  he 
puts  in  |  the  three  baskets  with  crabapples  and  does  the  ||  same  as  he  80 
did  before;  and  after  the  crabapples  have  been  boiled,  |  he  takes  the 
two  large  buckets,  goes  to   draw  some  |  water,   and  pours  it  on, 
because  he  wants  to  have  two-  |  thirds  more  water  than  crabapples.   | 
After  he  has  done  this,  he  takes  a  short  board  and  puts  it  on.  ||  He  85 
keeps  them  there  until  winter  comes,  when  the  tribe  of  the  crabapple- 
owner   have   a  winter   ceremonial.    |   Sometimes  the  chiefs  want  to 
give  a  crabapple-feast,    for    |    this  is  one  of   the  great  feasts  of  the 
tribes.  |  That  is  all  about  the  cooked  crabapples.  | 


qa£s   tsex£Ides   laxa    tsElxwe,    qa£s    p!ex£wide,    qa    tEltELxusEmx£-  68 
Ide.     Wa,  giPmese   la  tEltElxusEmxs    lae    L!opa.      Wa,  la£me    Le- 
£lalaxes  !a£wunEme  qa£s  k'!ox£ustalax£Idexa  yiiduxusEme  q!eq!olxu- 70 
ts!ala    laElxaxa    tsElxwe,  qa£s    la    giixts!alas    laxa    ogu£la£max"at ! 
la  ts!oxiigitso£sa  gEiiEmasa  bEgwanEmexa  la  gwa£lll    ha£nel    laxes 
heniEne£lasLe  ha£nelasa  tsEl£wats!e  dEngwatslemota.     Wa,  he£mis  la 
guxts!alatsesa  q!6lkwe  tsElxwa.     Wa,  g'iPmese  k-!es  £wi£la  q!ol£Idxa 
waokwe  tsElxwa   lae    a£ma    ts!Edaqe    xwelaxtslotsa    lEnlEnxsEme  75 
kimdEkwe  tsElxu  laxa  yuduxusEme  la  tsetsElxuts!alaxa  tsElxwe  la- 
ai.es  la£wiinEme  et!ed  k!ipstalasa  x'lx'ExsEmala  t!esEm  laxes  q!olas- 
Laq.     Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  mEdElx£wideda  £wa])axs  lae  k- !5xstEnda- 
lasa  yuduxusEme  tsetsElxuts!ala  laElxa  laq.     Wa,  aEmxaawise   iie- 
qEmglltEwexes  gllxde  gwegilasa.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£la  la  q!olkwe  80 
tsElxwasexs  lae  ax£edxes  awawe  ma£ltsEm  naEngats!a,  qa£s  la  tsaxa 
*wape,   qa£s    la    giiq!aqas    laq.     Wa    a£mese    £nex-    qa    ma£lp!Enes 
he  £waxeda  £wape  £waxaasasa  tsElxwaxs  lae  gwala.     Wa,  giPmese 
gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!ats!Ets!axusEme  qa£s  la  paqEinlllas  laq.  Wa, 
laEm  lalaal  laxa  ts!awiinxLa,  qo  ts!ets!ex£IdLe,gokidotas  tsEpwadas  85 
loxs  kilxwasE£waasa  g'igEma£yas  tsElxweliLaxa  tsElxwe,  yixs  he- 
£mae    glgexa    £walase      k!weladzEmxa    q!enEme     lelqwalaLa£yaxa 
tsElxwe.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxa  qlolkwe  tsElxwa. 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — ft  1 19 


290  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAK1UTL  [eth.  ANN.  33 

1  Qotlxole.' — When  she  has  finished,  she  takes  a  dish  and  |  puts  the 
(>erries  into  it.  Then  she  takes  oil  and  pours  |  much  of  it  on.  There 
is  more  oil  than  there  are  berries.  |  When  this  is  done,  she  takes  a 
5  wooden  spoon  and  puts  it  down  next  ||  to  her  seat.  Then  she  calls 
her  husband  and  her  |  children  to  come  and  eat  the  berries;  |  and 
when  they  have  all  come,  the  woman  gives  them  spoons;  |  and  after 
doing  so,  she  takes  up  the  dish  with  the  berries  |  and  puts  it  before 

10  them.  Then  they  all  begin  to  eat  the  berries.  ||  The}7  eat  them  with 
their  spoons.  |  Whoever  is  not  accustomed  to  eat  them  drains  off  the 
oil  to  make  them  dry  when  |  he  is  eating  them,  but  the  berries  choke 
one  when  they  are  eaten;  |  and  therefore  any  one  who  does  not  like 
to  eat  od  with  them  must  chew  them  a  long  time,  and  |  can  not 

15  swallow  them:  he  just  has  his  mouth  full  ||  of  berries.  But  if  he  is 
experienced  in  eating  them,  he  does  not  take  many  |  berries  in  his 
spoon,  and  he  takes  much  od,  |  when  he  puts  them  into  his  mouth; 
and  he  does  not  chew  them  long  |  before  swallowing,  for  the  oil  makes 
them  shppery.     After  eating  the  berries,  |  they  do  not  drink  water, 

20  and  just  ||  go  out  of  the  house.  They  do  not  drink  water  for  a  long 
time,  because  they  |  do  not  want  the  oil  to  rise  into  their  throats. 
Tins  is  one  way  to  do  with  the  berries,  when  |  they  are  given  at  a 


i  Qotlxole.1 — Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  fix£edxa  loqlwe,  qa£s  k!a- 
tslodesa  qotlxole  laq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  Lle£na,  qa£s  kiinqlEqesa 
qlenEme  laq.  Wa,  laEm  he  q!iigawa£ya  L!e£nasa  qot!x5le.  Wii, 
g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  klkayEme,  qa  gaxes  gael  lax  hemE- 
5  ne£lase  klwaelats.  Wa,  he£mis  la  Ledalatsexes  la/wmiEme  LE£wis 
sasEme  qa  g'axes  k!us£ahla,  qa£s  qotqwat  ledexa  qotlxole.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  g'Sxda£xuxs  laeda  tslEtlaqe  tslawanaesasa  kak'EtslEnaqe 
laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  kag'illlaxa  qotqudatsleLe  loqlwa, 
qa£s  la   kaxdzamoldas   laq.     Wa,    hex£ida£mese   £naxwa  qotqwa- 

10  tledxa  qotlxole.  Wa,  la£me  yosases  kak'EtslEnaqe  laq.  Wa, 
heEm  yiig'ilwat  qotqwata  x'atslalaxa  Lle£na,  qa  lEmokwesexs  lae 
qotqwat ledEq,  qaxs  alaklalae  mskwa  lax  qotqwatsE£wae.  Wii, 
heEm  gegilll  wiil£Em  malekwaqiixa  kllltiisa  Lle£na.  Wa,  la 
kMeas  gwex£idaas   nEx£wrIdEq.     Wa,  he'mis  la  aEm  la    qotlaeLlE- 

15  xalatsexa  qotlxole.  Wax'Ida  egilwate,  yixs  k'lesae  qlesgEma 
qotlxolaxs  XEXuts!a,e  lax  k'atslEnaqas.  Wa,  hetla  qlensma  Lle- 
£naxs  lae  yosk"  lEdzEnts.  Wii,  k'lestle  geg'ihl  malekwaqexs  lae 
nEX£widF.q,  qaeda  Lle£naxs  tsax'ae.  Wa,  giPmese  gwala  qQtqwa- 
daxa    qotlxolaxs  lae    k'les    nagekilaxa    £wape.     Wa,    la£me    asm 

20  hoquwElsa.  Wa,  la£me  k'les  gEyol  niix£edxa  £wape  qaxs  gwaqlE- 
lae  lEwumsa  Lle£na.  Wa,  la£me  gwal  laxa  £nEmx£idala,  yixs 
he£mae  gweqiixs  lae  qotelagila  qlenEme    lelqwalaLa£ya  lax  gwiila- 

'  This  description  follows  that  of  the  gathering  of  qotlxole  (p.  218,  line  1,  to  p.  219,  line  39). 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  291 

feast  to  many  tribes.     It  is  the  way  |  I  have  described  before.     I  23 
will  only  talk  about  it  |  when  they  are  put  into  boxes  for  winter  use. 
They  are  just  put  into  ||  (square)  boxes,  and  the  cover  is  put  on  and  25 
it  is  tied  down.  |  Then  they  are  put  in  a  cool  corner  of  the  house,   | 
and  they  are  eaten  in  the  way  I  have  just  described.  |  That  is  all.   | 

Qot  !xole  mixed  with  Oil. — When  many  berries  have  been  picked  by  1 
the  |  woman,  she  asks  her  husband  to  get  a  |  high  box  that  does  not 
leak  and  to  put  it  down;  and  then  he  builds  up  |  the  fire  and  puts 
stones  into  it.     There  ||  are  very  many  stones.     Then  he  takes  his  5 
bucket  and  goes  to  draw  |  a  bucketful  of  water;  and  when  he  comes 
back,  |  he  puts  it  down  next  to  the  fire.     When  this  is  done,  he  takes 
his  |  tongs  and  puts  them  down  by  the  fire.     He  takes  his  |  oil-box 
and  puts  it  down  by  the  fire.     When  ||  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  10 
the  basket  with  berries  and  [  puts  them  down  next  to  his  high  boxes, 
and  pours  |  them  in.     As  soon   as    (the   boxes)   are  nearly  full,  he 
stops  pouring  them  in.  |  He  continues  doing  this  until  the  other 
boxes  are  all  full.  |  As  soon  as  (the  berries)  are  all  in,  he  just  waits 
for  the  ||  stones  which  he  put  on  the  fire  to  be  red-hot;  and  when  he  15 
sees  |  that  they  are  getting  red-hot,  he  takes  his  tongs,  |  picks  up 
the  red-hot  stones,  dips  them  into  the  |  water  in  the  bucket  so  that 


asasEn  la,    q!wel£idayowa,    yixa    lexaEmLEn    gw5gwex-s£Ex£IdaasL  23 
laqexs  lae   hankwa   qaeda   tslawiinxe,  yixs    a£mae    k-!ats!oyo  laxa 
xexEtsEme.     Wa,  a£mese  la  yikiiyintsoses  yikwaya£yaxs  lae  tlEmaki-  05 
yintsE£wa,  qa£s  la  kiingalllEm    laxa  wudanegwllases  gokwaxa  qo- 
dats!e    xexEtsEma.     Wa,  hec"mis  qotqwat!eneqEn  lax-de  gwagwex-- 
s£a)asa.     Wii,  lasm  gwala. 

Llakwe  qotlxola. — Wa,    he£maaxs    qlenEinae    qodanEmasa    ts!E-  1 
daqe  qotLxolii.     Wa,  la  axk'Ialaxes  la£wunEme,  qa  ;ix£edesexa  lS- 
watsaxa  alii  la  Einxa,  qa  g-axes  hax-hanlla.      Wit,  la  lEqwelax,£id 
laxes  lEgwile.     Wa,  lii  xExuLalaxa  tlesEme  liixes  lEgwIle.     Wii,  la 
q!enEmk'as£ma  t!esEme.     Wa,  lii    ;ix£edxes    nagatsle,  qa£s  la  tsiisa  c 
£nEmsgEine   nagatsle   laxa   £wape.     Wa,  giPmese   g-ax    aedaaqaxs 
lae  ha£nolisas  laxes   lEgwile.     Wa,  g'il£mese   gwalExs   lae    ;ix£edxes 
k-!ipLalaa,  qa£s  gaxe  k'adEnolisas  laxes  lEgwile.     Wa,  la  iix£edxes 
dEngwatsle    qa£s    g'axe    ha£nolisas    laxes    lEgwile.     Wa,    gil£mese 
gwiilExs     lae      ;ix£edxes      qeqot!xoleats!e     laElxa£ya,      qa£s     g-gxe  iq 
hnnEmgalilElas   lax    h;ixha£ne£lasasa   LeLawatsa.     Wa,  lii  guxts!o- 
dalas  laxa  LeLawatsa;  wa,  gil£mese    Elaq    qot!axs  lae  gwal  giiqas 
laq.      Wii,  la  hex'saEm  awaxatsla    laxa   waokwe  LeLawatsa.     Wa, 
g-il£mese    £wilts!axs    lae    km    la    esEla     qa    memEnltsEmx-£Idesa 
tlesEme     xExuLalalis     laxa     lEgwile.      Wa,     gtl£mese     dox£waLE-i5 
laqexs    lE£mae  memEnltsEmx£IclExs  lae  dax,£Idxes  k'llpLalaa,  qa£s 
k!ip!ldes    laxa    xIx'ExsEmala     tlesEma    qa£s    lii    hapstEnts    laxa 


292  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [hth.  ann.  ss 

the  ashes  that  stick  to  them  come  off,  |  and  puts  them  into  the  oil 

20  which  is  in  the  oil-box.  ||  He  continues  doing  this,  and  does  not  stop 

until  the  oil  in  the  box  begins  to  boil.   |  He  does  not  dip  out  |   the 

boiling  oil  immediately  to  pour  it  on  the  berries  in  the  box,  |  but  he 

takes  a  large  shell  of  a  horse-clam  and  skims  off  the  |  froth  floating 

25  on  the  hot  oil.     When  that  is  all  off,  ||  he  takes  a  long-handled  ladle. 

and  dips  it  into  the.  hot  oil.  |  Then  he  pours  it  on  the  berries,  and  he 

does  not  stop  until  |  the  berries  are  covered  by  the  boiling  oil.     He 

leaves  them  there,  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  |  until  the  oil  tliickens. 

He  leaves  them  there  for  two  days  to  get  entirely  cooled  off.  |  Then 

30  he  takes  the  boxes  containing  the  berries  and  the  oil  and  ||  puts  them 

down  in  a  cool  corner  of  the  house.     After  he  has  put  them  there, 

he  |  takes  the  cover,  puts  it  on,  and  ties  it  down.  |  After  he  has 

done  so,  he  takes  an  old  mat  and  |  spreads  it  over  them,  and  there 

they  will  stay  until  winter  comes.  | 

1       Curing  Seaweed  (l).1 — A  woman  inexperienced  in  working  |  seaweed 

spreads  it  out  at  once  on  the  beach  to  |  dry.       Then  the  seaweed 

that  is  treated  that  way  is  tough.  |  An  experienced  woman  only  takes 

5  the  ||  seaweed  out  of  the  canoe,  and  she  takes  a  mat  and  |  covers  it 

over  on  the  beach,  after  she  has  piled  it  up  on  the  beach,  |  even  when 

the  day  is  fine.     She  does  not  spread  it  for  a  long  time,  for  she  wishes  | 

18  £wabEts!awasa  nagats!e,  qa  lawayes  k!wek!utsEmayaq  guna£ya. 
Wa,  la  k'llpstEnts   laxa  L!e£nats!awasa  dEngwats!e.     Wii,  la  hex-- 

20  saEm  gwegilaq.  Wii,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  alak'lala  la  maEmdEl- 
quleda  l  !e£nats  lawasa  dEngwats!e.  Wii,  k'!est!a  yanagaala  tsex-£Id- 
xa  maEmdElqula  L!e£na,  qa£s  la  guqEyints  laxa  q5dats!e  Lawatsa. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  xalaetsa  mEt!ana£ye,  qa£s  ax£wklexa 
a£awiis     6kiiya£yasa    ts!Elxusta     L!e£na.      Wa,     g-il£mese    £wi£lawa 

25  a£awiixs  lae  iix£edxa  tsexLa,  qa£s  tsex'£Ides  laxa  ts!Elxusta  L!e£na 
qa£s  la  guqEyindalas  laxa  qot  !xole.  Wii,  al£mis  gwalExs  lae  t  !EpE- 
yeda  qot!xolaxa  maEmdElqula  L!e£na.  Wa,  la  hexsaEm  haxha£nile 
qa  L!ax£Idesa  L!e£naxa  la  ma£lExsa  £nala,  qa  alak'Iales  wtidEx£Ida. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxes  Llagwatsliixa  qot!xole    Lawatsa,  qa£s  lii  h:ing-a£li- 

}0  las  laxa  wiidanegwilases  gokwe.  Wii,  g  il£mese  gwah'alllExs  lae 
ax£edEX  yikuya£yas,  qa£s  yikiiyindes  laq.  Wii,  la£me  tlEmakiyin- 
dEq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  k!ak!Ek'!obana,  qa£s 
LEpEyindes  laq.  Wa,  laEm  lalaal  laxa  ts!awiinxLa  helgwaeLe. 
1  Curing  Seaweed  (l).1  —  Wii,  g'i'l£mese  ya'g'ilwateda  tslEda'qea'axsi- 
l.ixa  IsqlEstE'naxs  la'e  he'x-£IdaEm  lex-alisaq  la'xa  LlEma£ise  qa 
lEinx£wi'des.  Wa,  he'Em  LlasLlExdzo  lEqlEstE'neda  he  gwe'x,£i- 
tsE£we.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  e'gilwateda  tslEda'qaxs  la'e  a/Em  molto'd- 
5  xa  lEqlEstE'ne  la'xes  ya£yats!e.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  le'wa£ye  qa£s 
£naxusEmli'ses  la'qexs  la'e  q!ap!esgEmlisa  la'xa  L!Ema£ise  yixs 
wa'x'mae  e'k'a  £na'la.  Wa,  la  k'!es  gEyol  lex'ali'saq  qaxs  £ne'kae 
qa  xas£i'des.    Wa,  he'tla  la  mo'xse  £na,'lasexs  la'e  le't!edxa  le£wa£ye 

1  Continued  from  p.  186,  line  21. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  293 

it  to  rot.     After  it  has  been  in  this  way  for  four  days,  she  takes  off  the 
mat  |  cover.     Then  she  takes  a  drying-rack  made  for  the  ||  seaweed,  10 
to  dry  it  on.     It  is  made  of  broad  split  cedar,  and  is  |  one  fathom  in 
length,  and  three  |  spans  is  the  length  of  the  four  crosspieces.  |  That  is 
the  width  of  the  drying-rack.     Then  she  spreads  the  seaweed  |  on  it. 
Now  she  dries  it  in  the  sun  and  the  wind.  ||  Sometimes  one  woman  has  15 
ten  drying-frames  on  which  |  seaweed  is  drying.     When  it  is  a  fine  | 
day,  she  turns  the  seaweed  over  at  noon,  and  |  in  the  evening  it  is 
entirely  dry.     When  it  is  dried,  |  the  woman  rolls  it  all  up  and  puts 
it  away  in  her  house.  ||  Now  it  is  rolled  up  in  a  mat;  and  when  it  is  a  20 
fine  day,  |  she  starts  again  in  her  canoe.     She  is  going  to  get  chitons. 
As  soon  |  as  she  has  many,  she  goes  home.1  | 

After2  the  men  have  eaten  the  chitons,  they  go  out  of  the  house  | 
after  they  have  drunk  water.  The  woman  takes  the  dish  from  which 
they  have  eaten  ||  and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  25 
work  at  the  seaweed.  |  Then  she  takes  her  small  box  and  puts  it 
down  at  the  place  where  |  the  dish  is.  Then  she  takes  cedar-branches 
and  breaks  off  the  |  soft  tops  and  puts  them  down.  Then  she  takes 
the  cover  of  her  |  little  box  and  puts  it  down  on  its  back.  Then  she 
takes  the  seaweed  and  spreads  ||  it  on  the  box-cover.     She  folds  it  over  30 

na'kuyes.     Wii,    la    ax£e'dxa   k'  !itk-  tede'sexa    hekwe'le£nie  qae'da 
lEq!EstE'he  qa  lE'm£wats  ylxa  awa'dzos  xa£ye  k!waxLa/wa,   lat!a  10 
£nE'mp!Enk-  la'xEns  ba'Le  awa'sgEmasas.     Wii,  lat!a  yu'duxup!Enk- 
laxEns    q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£yex,   yl'xa   mo'tslaqe    gayo'lEms.     Wa, 
he'£mis  £wa'dzE£watsa  k-!itk'!Ede'se.     Wa,  la  lEntso'tsa  lEqlEstE'ne 
laq.     Wa,    laE'm    lE'mxwaq     la'xa    Lle'ssla    LE£we    ya'la.     Wa, 
laE'm      £nEl'"nE'mp!Ena     £nEqa'xseda      k'!itk'!E(le'se      lEmo'dzosa  15 
£nEmo'kwe     tslEda'qa     la'xa    lEqlEstE'ne.     Wa,    g'i'l£mese    e'k"a 
£na'laxs  la'e  le'x'£IdaEmxa  lEqlEstE'naxa  £nEqii'la.     Wa,  la  lE'mx- 
£w!daEm  £na'xwaxa  la  dza'qwa.    Wa,  g-i'l£mese  lEmx£wi'dExs  lae'da 
tslEda'qe  le'x-£EndEq   £wl£la  qa£s  le  g'e'xaq   la'xes   g'6'kwe.     Wa, 
laE'm  le'x-£Enalaxa   le'£wa£ye.     Wa,  g'l'l£mese    e'k'a   £na'laxs   la'e  20 
e'tled  ale'x-'wlda.    Wii,  laE'm  lal  qlE'nsax  q!ana'sa.    Wii,  gi'l£mese 
lalxa  qle'nEmaxs  g'a'xae  nii'£nakwa.' 

Wii,2  g'i'l£mese  gwii'lExs  la'e  ho'quwElseda  q!E'nsq!ase,  ylxs  la'e 
gwal  nii'qaxa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  leda  tslEdaqe  ax£e'dxa  ha£maats!e'x-de 
lo'qlwa  qa£s  le  ha'ng-a£lllaxs  la'xes  e'axE£lasLaxa  lEq!EstE'ne.  25 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  xa'xadzEme  qa£s  g'a'xe  ha'ng-a£lilas  l3x  la  ha£ne'- 
£latsa  lo'qlwe.  Wii,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  ts!ap!a'xe  qa£s  k-oqa'lex  tEltEl- 
giita£yas  qa£s  ax£ii'lIlEles.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dEx  yikuya'£yasa  xa'xa- 
dzEme  qa£s  nEpa'lileq.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  lEqlEstE'ne  qa£s  LEbE- 
dzo'des    la'xa   ylkiiya'£ye.     Wa,   la  q!anepi£lii'laq   qa   *nEmala'ses  30 

i  Here  follows  a  description  of  how  the  chitons  are  cooked  and  eaten  (see  p.  483). 
-  Continued  from  p.  4S4,  line  18. 


294  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.aub.8b 

31  so  that  it  is  folded  the  same  size  |  as  the  box-cover.  Then  she  takes 
a  mouthful  of  the  liquid  of  the  |  chitons,  and  she  spreads  it  out  again. 
Then  she  blows  water  from  her  mouth  over  it.  |  She  takes  four 
mouthfuls  of  the  dirty  water  and  blows  |  it  on  it.     Then  the  seaweed 

35  gets  all  wet,  ||  and  she  folds  it  up  again  to  the  size  of  the  cover.  | 
Now  it  is  four  fingers  thick.  |  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  the  woman  takes 
the  soft  tips  of  |  cedar-branches  and  puts  them  in  the  bottom  of  the 
small  box.     Then  she  takes  the  |  seaweed  and  puts  it  on  the  branches ; 

40  and  she  takes  more  ||  cedar-branches  and  lays  them  over  the  seaweed. 
When  |  no  more  shows,  she  takes  another  piece  of  seaweed  and  | 
docs  the  same  as  she  did  to  the  first  one  which  is  in  the  |  little  box; 
and  she  does  not  stop  until  all  the  seaweed  is  in  the  |  small  box.     As 

45  soon  as  she  has  finished,  she  takes  a  long  ||  rope  and  ties  it  around  the 
small  box.  Then  she  draws  the  rope  tight,  |  because  she  docs  not 
wish  the  small  box  to  burst  open,  and  she  |  puts  stones  on  top  of  it. 
As  soon  as  she  has  finished,  she  takes  |  short  boards  and  measures  the 
size  of  the  top  of  the  small  box,  so  |  that  they  fit  the  corners  of  the 

50  inside  of  the  small  box.  Then  she  puts  it  down  flat  ||  on  the  seaweed. 
Then  she  takes  up  stones  and  puts  them  on  the  |  small  box  containing 
the  seaweed;  and  she  does  not  stop  until  there  is  no  |  room  to  put 
stones  on,  for  there  are  |  many  stones  to  put  on  the  top  of  the  box 

31  k'!o'xwa£yas  LE£wa  yikuya'£ye.  Wa,  la  ha'msgEmd  lax  £wa'palasa 
qlana'se  qa£s  e'tlede  LEple'dEq.  Wa,  la  sElbEx£wi'ts  lax  awa'ga- 
£yas.  Wa,  mo'plEna  ha'msgEmd  la'xa  neqwa  £wa'pa  qa£s  sElbEx- 
£wl'des  laq.     Wa,    laE'm   £na'xwaEm   la  LEx£e'deda   lEq!EstE'naxs 

35  la'e  e'tled  k"!o'x£wodEq  qa  £nEma'lases  LE£wa  yikuya'£ye.  Wa, 
la'xae  m5'dEn  la'xEns  q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£yex  yix  wa'gwasas.  Wa, 
g'i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  tEltElxuba'£yasa 
tsla'plaxe  qa£s  ts'.ak-  lEXLE'ndes  la'xa  xa'xadzEme.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa 
lEq!EstE'ne  qa£s  axyi'ndes  la'xa  tsla'plaxe.     Wa,   e'tled  ax£e'dxa 

40  tsla'plaxe  qa£s  haniElqEyi'ndes  la'xa  lEqlEstE'ne.  Wii,  g-iTmes 
k!eo's  la  ne'lalasexs  la'e  e'tled  ax£e'd  la'xa  lEqlEstE'ne  qa£s 
a'£mexat!  £nEgEltodxes  g"i'lx-de  gwe'gilasxa  la'g'itsla,  la'xa  xa'xa- 
dzEme.  Wa,  a'l£mese  gwalExs  la'e  £wl'£lts!amasxa  lEqlEstE'ne  la'xa 
xa'xadzEme.     Wa,   g'i'l£mese    gwa'lsxs  la'e   ax£e'dxa    g'i'ltla    dE- 

45  nE'maqa£s  qEX'ss'mdes  lii'xa  xa'xadzEme.  Wa,  laE'm  lEklutEle'da 
dEnE'me  qaxs  gwa'qlElaaq  yimltsle'da  xa'xadzEme  qo  xEqti- 
yl'ntsa  tle'sEme  laq.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa 
ts!a'ts!axusEme  qa£s  £mE'ns£Ides  lax  o'kuya£yasa  xa'xadzEme  qa 
bEnbane'qwes    lax    o'tslawasa     xa'xadzEme.     Wii,    la    pa'qEyints 

50  la'xa  lEqlEstE'ne.  Wa,  la  t!a'x£Idxa  tle'sEme  qa£s  le  t laqEyindalas 
la'xa  lEga'tsle  xa'xadzEma.  Wa,  a'lmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  k'leo's 
la  gwa'yak' lalas  e'tled  la  t!a'x£aLEleda  tle'sEme  qaxs  la'e  qle'- 
nEma  la  tlaqElaLEla  lax  6'kuya£yasa  lEga'tsle  xa'xadzEma.     Wa, 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  295 

containing  the  seaweed.  |  Sometimes  they  are  left  this  way  in  the 
house  for  one  month.  ||  When  the  woman  thinks  that  the  seaweed  55 
sticks  together,  |  she  takes  off  the  stones  when  it  is  a  fine  day.  | 
Then  she  takes  out  the  seaweed,  which  is  now  one  |  finger  thick.    Then 
she  takes  it  out  of  the  |  house  and  puts  it  fiat  on  the  beach,  where  it 
is  dry;  and  ||  when  it  is  evening,  she  takes  it  up  and  takes  it  into  the  60 
house.  |  Then  she  puts  it  back  into  the  small  box,  and  she  again  | 
puts  cedar-branches  between  them;  and  she  also  puts  |  stones  on  it 
again.     She  does  this  four  times;  and  after  |  she  has  done  so  four 
times,  she  puts  them  into  a  small  box,  ||  after  she  has  taken  out  the  65 
cedar-branches  and  also  the  |  stones  on  it.     Now  she  only  puts  on 
the  cover,  and  the  cover  is  |  tied  down.     Then  it  is  put  away.     That 
is  all  about  this.  | 

Curing  Seaweed  (2). — They  drive  into  the  floor  two  |  poles  half  a 
fathom  long,  and  sharp  at  the  ends.  Then  ||  they  split  cedar- wood;  70 
and  when  it  is  in  thin  pieces,  these  are  two  |  finger-widths  wide  and 
hah  a  finger-width  |  thick,  and  they  are  a  little  more  than  hah  a 
fathom  long.  |  Then  they  take  split  narrow  cedar-bark  and  tie  one  end 
to  the  pole   |   standing   alongside  of  the  fire,  and  they  do  the  same 


la     ena'lenBmp !Bna    £nE'msgEmgIlaxa    £mEku'la   he  gwae'le    la'xa 
go'kwe.     Wii,   g"i'l£rnese    k'o'teda    tsteda'qaq    laE'm    k!uto'x£wi-  55 
deda  lEqlEstE'naxs  la'e  tlaqaxodxa  tle'sEme  yixs  e'k'aeda  £na'la. 
Wa,    la   ax£wults!o'dxa   lEqlEstE'naxs    la'e    ena'l£nEmdEn    la'xEns 
q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£yex    yix    wa'gwasas.     Wa,    la    la'wElsas   la'xes 
g'o'kwe  qa£s  le  pa'x£alIsElas  la'xa  l tern a£isa  la'xa  lE'm£wese.     Wa, 
g'i'Pmese  dza'qwaxs  la'e  ax£ali'saq  qa£s  le  lae'Las  la'xes  g'Q'kwe.  60 
Wa,  la'xae  xwe'laxtslots   la'xa  xa'xadzEme.     Wa,  la'xae  ts!a'ts!E- 
k'odalasa  ts!a'p!axe  laq.     Wii,  la'xaa  e't!ed£Emxat!  la  tlii'qEyintsa 
tle'sEme    laq.     Wa,    la     moplEna  he  gwe'x,£IdEq.     Wa,   gi'Pmese 
mo'plEnaxs  la'e  gwa'la.     Wa,    laE'm   g'e'tslayo  la'xa  xa'xadzEme, 
yixs   la'e   la'woyEweda  ts!a'p!axe.     Wa,    he'£mesa   t!a'gEme   t!e'-  65 
sEiua.     Wii,    la    a'Eni    la   yikuyi'ntsoses  yikuya'eye.     Wa,    la   t!E- 
ma'k'intsE£wa.    Wa,  la  g'e'xasE£wa.    Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Curing  Seaweed (2) . — Wa,  la'xae  de'x£walelEma  malts!a'qe  dzo'- 
xuma  na'qlEbode  awa'sgEmasas.  Wa,  la  dzo'dzExubaa'kwa.  Wii,  la 
xo'x£witsE£weda  klwaxLa'we  qa  pE'lspadzowes.  Wa,  la  mae'maldEn  70 
hi'xEns  q!wa'q!wax'ts!ana£ye  awa'dzEwasas.  Wa,  la  klo'dEiie  we- 
wa'gwasas.  Wii,  la  hayaxk-  !6'db5de  awa'sgEmasas  la'xEns  ba'Lax. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tslEXEkwe  ts!eq!  dEnasa  qa£s  yll£aLElodes  oba£yas 
laxa  la  Lana'les  la'xa  lEgwI'le  dzS'xuma.  Wii,  la  e't!ed  he  gwe'x-- 
£ldxa    apsba'£ye.     Wa,    la    q!EL!Ets!a'qa    xo'kwe    k!waxLa'wa    la  75 


296  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Lbth.  abk.  m 

5  at  II  the   other   end.     There  are  six  split  cedar-sticks  |  tied  to  the 


poles  in  this  way: 
seaweed,  break  it 
are  thin  and  flat, 
SO  rack.  As  soon  as 
turned  over;  and 
taken  down  from 


When  it  is  done,  |  they  take  the 
in  pieces,  and,  when  |  the  pieces 
they  hang  them  over  the  [  drying- 
it  is  browned  by  the  fire,  ||  it  is 
when  it  is  browned  again,  |  it  is 
where    it    had    been    put,    and 


placed  on  dressed  deer-skin.  Then  it  is  made  into  a  bunch.  |  A  wedge 
is  taken,  and  with  it  it  is  beaten  as  it  is  |  lying  on  the  board  on 
the  floor  of  the  house.     Then  it  is  just  like  |  powder  after  it  has  been 

85  beaten,  and  it  is  shaken  into  the  ||  small  box.  Then  a  tight  cover  is 
put  on,  and  it  is  placed  in  a  |  dry  place  in  the  house. 

Boiled  Huckleberries. — The  woman  goes  |  to  get  driftwood  after 
she  has  picked  huckleberries,  |  when  she  has  many  and  they  have  been 
cleaned.  |  She  goes  herself  to  get  driftwood;  and  when  she  gets 
5  home,  ||  she  carries  it  up  the  beach  into  the  house,  and  |  she  throws 
it  down.  After  she  has  carried  in  all  the  driftwood,  she  takes  a 
medium-sized  |  basket  and  goes  down  to  the  beach  in  front  of  her 
house.     She  |  puts  stones  into  it,  as  many  as  she  can  carry.  |  Then 

10  she  carries  it  on  her  back  into  her  house  ||  and  puts  it  down.  Then 
she  continues  carrying  stones.  |  When  she  thinks  she  has  enough, 

76  yae'llala  la'xa  dzS'xume  g-a  gwii'lega  {fig.).  Wa,  g-f'l£mese  gwa'- 
Iexs  la'e  ax£etsE£wa  lEqtestE'ne  qa£s  pa'pEx'salasE£we.  Wa,  g't'l- 
£mese  la  pE'lspEla  g  I'lsg-ildEdzoxs  la'e  ge'x-£waLElodalayu  la'xa 
lEinxudEina.     Wa,  g-fl£mese  la  kulx£w!dExs  lae  £wl£la  le'x-£ItsE£wa. 

80  Wii,  gi'l£Emxaa'wise  la  ku'lx£wldExs  la'e  £wl'£la  axa'maxoya  qa£s 
axdzo'dayuwe  la'xa  £wa'dEkwe.  Wa,  la  q!Ene'psEmtsE£wa. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'tsE£weda  LE'mg'ayowe  qa£s  t!E'lx£w!dyowe  laqe'xs 
la'e  axdza'lilxa  pae'le  sao'kwa.  Wa,  laE'm  la  yo  gwe'x"sa  ts!o'- 
layoxs  la'e   gwal  t!ElxwasE£wa.     Wii,  a'£mese  la  laaxtslo'yo  la'xa 

85  xa'xadzEmaxs  lae  aEinxasE£wes  yikiiya'£ye  qa£s  ge'xasE£we  la'xa 
lEin£wI'le  la'xa  g'o'kwe. 
1  Boiled  Huckleberries  (Dzeg-Ek£  gwadEm). — -Wa,  heEm  gll  ax£e- 
tso£sa  ts!Edaqa  qlexale  lEqwa,  ylxs  g-alae  gwal  k-lElaxa  gwadE- 
me,  yixs  qlEyoLaaq.  Wa,  hiEmxaawise  ek  !EgEkwa.  Wa,  laEm 
gwalilaxs  lae  aneqaxa  q!exale.  Wa,  g-il£mese  giix  na£nakuxs  lae 
5  hex£idaEm  wex-wusdesElaq,  qa£s  la  wegiLElaq  laxes  gokwe,  qa£s 
lii  wex£alilaq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wi£losdesxa  qlexalaxs  lae  ax£edxahela 
lExa£ya  qa£s  la  lEntsles  laxa  L!Ema£isases  gokwe.  Wa,  la  xe£xu- 
tslodalasa  tlesEme  laq.  Wa,  a£mese  gwanala,  qa£s  lakwesexs  lae 
5xLEX,£Ideq  qa£s  g-axe  oxLOsdesElas  qa£s   lii  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  g-o- 

10  kwe  qa£s  la  oxLEgalllas.  Wii,  lii  hanal  XEqwaxa  tlesEme.  Wa, 
g-iJ£mese  k-6taq  laEm    helaxs    lae    ax£edxa    malts  !aqe    haa£yalag-it 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  297 

she  takes  two  medium-sized  |  pieces  of  driftwood   and   puts  them  12 
down  as  side-pieces  at  the  place  where  she  intends  to  |  build  her  fire, 
and  between  them  she    puts  kindling-wood.     When  |  the  kindling- 
wood  is  level  with  the  two  side-pieces,  ||  she    takes  short  pieces  of  15 
driftwood  and  puts  them  crosswise  over  the  side-pieces.  |  The  stones 
are  to  be  placed  on  these.     When  (the  wood)  is  all  on,  she  puts  the 
stones  on  top  of  it;  |  and  after  the  stones  are  all  on,  she  lights  |  the 
fire  underneath.     When  it  blazes  up,  she  takes  the  |  huckleberries, 
which  she  is  going  to  cook  in  a  high  square  box,  which  she  puts  down 
next  to  the  fire  which  she  has  made,  and  also  her  ||  long  tongs  and  a  20 
bucket  filled  with  water.     She  |  places  the  bucket  with  water  next 
to  the  fire,  so  that  it  may  get  warm.  |  After  doing  so,  she  takes 
spawn  of  the  humpback-salmon  and  |  puts  it  down  in  a  dish.     She 
takes  her  huckleberry-  |  baskets  and  pours  the  huckleberries  into  the 
high  box  in  which  ||  they  are  to  be  cooked.     When  the  box  is  nearly  25 
full,  she  stops  |  pouring  in  huckleberries;  and  when  the  stones  get 
red-hot,  |  the  woman  who  cooks  the  huckleberries  takes  her  |  tongs, 
picks  up  the  red-hot  stones,  and  |  dips  them  into  the  water  hi  the 
bucket,  so  that  the  ||  ashes  that  stick  to  them  come  off.     Then  she  30 
puts  them  into  the  huckleberries  which  she  is  cooking.  |  She  con- 
tinues doing  this,  and  the  hot  stones  sink  down  |  in  the  berries. 
There  are  not  very  many  stones  which  she  puts  in,  |  when  they  begin 


q!exala  qa£s   k'fikEdEnSdes    laxes    gwE£yo  qa£s    lEx£walilasxes    1e-  12 
qwela£ye.     Wa,  la  ax£odalases    g-alastayowe  laq.     Wa,  g'iPmese  la 
£nEmak-Eyeda    g'alastayowe    LE£wa    malts !aqe    xwexwalEnwa£yaxs 
lae    ax£edxa  ts!Elts!Exustowe    qlexala,  qa£s    gek'Eyindales   laq,   qa  15 
XE£xudEmasa  tlesEme.     Wii,  g-il£mese  ewIlgaaLElaxs  lae  XEquyinda- 
lasa   t!esEme   laq.      Wa,  g-iPmese    £wIlk-EyindExs   lae   mEnabotsa 
gulta   laq.      Wa,  g'iPmese    xiqostaxs  lae    ax£edxes  dzegats  !eLaxa 
gwadEme  Lawatsa,  qa  g-axes  kanalesxa  lEqwela£yas.     Wa,  he£mesa 
g-ilt!a  klipudaa.  Wa,  ke£mesa  nagats!e  qotlaxa  £wape.     Wa,  laEm  20 
hiinolisasa  £wabEts!ala   nagats!e  laxa  lEqwela£yas  qa    ts!Elxstax-£I- 
des.     Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  Sx£edxa  ge£na  hanone,  qa£s  g-axe 
hang-ali£lasexs   g-ets!ae  laxa  lalogiime.      Wa,  la  ax£edxes   gwegwa- 
dats!e    laElxa£ya,    qa£s   lii    guxts!alasa    gwadEme  laxa    Liiwatsaxa 
dzeg-ats!eLaq.     Wii,  gib'mese    Elaq    qotleda    Lawatsaxs    lae  gwal  25 
guqasa  gwadEme   laq.      Wii,  gil'mese  memEnltsEmx£Ideda   t!esE- 
maxs   lae    hex-£lda£ma    dzek"aLaxa    gwadEme    ts!Edaq    dax-£Idxes 
k-!ipLalaa,    qa£s    k'!ip!ldes   laxa    x-ixExsEmala    t!esEma,    qa£s    lii 
hanax£wid    hapstEnts    lax    £wabEts!awa     nagatsle,    qa     £wllawesa 
guna£ye    k'.wekltitalaq.     Wa,    la    kMipEyints    laxa    gwadEme    dze-  30 
k-aso£s.      Wa,  lii  hanal  he   gwegile    a£mese  hamEnsEleda  tslElqwa 
t!esEm  laq.     Wa,  k-!est!a  alaEm  q!enEma  tlesEme  la,  k- lip !EgEmse- 
qexs  lae   niEdElx£wida.     Wii,  la  k-ag'ililaxa   ge£nets!ala  laloguma, 


298  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [etu.  ann.  33 

to  boil.     Then  she  takes  the  dish  with  spawn  |  and  empties  it  on  the 

35  boiling  huckleberries.  Next  she  takes  ||  a  mat  and  covers  (the  high 
box),  so  that  the  steam  does  not  come  out;  |  and  she  piles  up  the  fire 
over  the  rest  of  the  red-hot  stones.  |  Then  she  rests  a  long  time  before 
she  takes  off  the  mat  covering.  |  When  she  sees  that  the  salmon- 
spawn  is  turning  white,  she  takes  a  |  broken  paddle  and  stirs  with  it 

40  the  huckleberries  which  have  been  ||  mixed  with  salmon-spawn.  As 
soon  as  they  are  mixed,  she  puts  down  her  |  broken  stirring-paddle.  She 
takes  the  tongs  and  |  feels  for  the  stones  which  are  piled  together  in 
the  bottom  of  the  box  in  which  the  |  huckleberries  were  boiled.  She 
puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the  |  fire.     When  they  are  all  out, 

45  she  takes  up  more  ||  red-hot  stones  that  are  on  the  fire.  She  first  | 
dips  them  into  the  bucket  with  water,  and  then  she  |  puts  them  again 
into  the  huckleberries  that  she  is  cooking;  and  she  only  stops  |  when 
the  huckleberries  mixed  with  salmon-roe  are  thoroughly  boiling.  | 

50  Then  she  spreads  the  mat  over  them.  |[  After  doing  so,  the  woman 
goes  into  the  woods  to  break  off  |  broad  leaves  of  skunk-cabbage. 
She  does  not  break  off  very  many  of  them,  and  |  takes  them  home. 
Then  she  |  takes  her  husband's  crooked  knife  and  cuts  off  the  veins  | 
in  the  middle  of   the  leaves.     As  soon  as  (the  veins)  are  all  rut 

55  off,  she  warms  the  leaves  by  the  fire  to  make  them  ||  pliable  and 

qa£s  guqEyindes  laxa  la  maEmdElqula  gwadEma.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa 

35  le£wa£ye,  qa£s  naxwodes  laq  qa  k-!eses  kExusaleda  k-'.alEla.  Wa, 
a£mese  q!ap!esgEmtsa  lEgwile  laxa  waokwe  x'lxExsEmala  t!esEma. 
Wii,  la  gagalaxs  lae  x-os£IdExs  lae  axodxa  £naxumallle  le£wa£ya. 
Wii,  giPmese  doqiilaxa  ge£ne  la  £DiEl£mElsgEmx"£Ida  lae  ax-edxa 
qtekwase  se£wayowa,  qa£s  xwetlldes   laxes  dzekasE£we  gwadEma, 

40  qa  lElgowes  LE£wa  ge£ne.  Wii,  guPmese  lslgoxs  lae  g-Ig-alllaxes 
xwedayowe  q!Ekwas  se£wayowa.  Wii,  la  ax£edxes  klipLfdaa  qa£s 
k"!ap  teles  laxa  tlesEmaxs  lae  xEqluxLales  laxa  dzeg-ats!axa 
gwiidEme  k'  IlmyaxLa,  qa£s  k'  lip  lalilEles  lax  maginwallsasa 
lEgwile.     Wii,  g"ilemese  £wFlostaxs  lae  etled  k!ip!ed   laxa  x-ix-ex- 

45  sEmfila  t!esEm  XExuL&lales  laxa  lEgwile,  qa£s  la  gag-alasela 
k-!ipstEnts  lax  -wabEtslawasa  nagatsle.  Wii,  laxae  et!ed  k- !3|>e- 
yints  laxa  dzekasE£waseda  gwadEme.  Wa,  iil-cEm  gwalExs 
lae  alak!iila  la  maEmdElqilles  dzek-asE£we  malaqEla  ge£ne  LE£wa 
gwadEme.      Wii,    laxae    ax£edxa    le£wa£ye,    qa£s    LEpEyindes    liiq. 

50  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  laxa  aLlexa  tslEdaqe,  qa£s  la  p!ox£wid 
laxa  iiwfulzoxLowe  k- !Ek- !aok!wa.  Wa,  la  k'!es  q!exse  plogwanE- 
masexs  gaxae  gEmxElaqexs  g'axae  nii£nakwa.  Wii.  hex£ida£mese 
iix£edEx  xEixwala  k-'.awayases  la£wiinEme,  qa£s  k'laxalex  tlEntlEn- 
xEdza£yas.      Wa,  gil£mese   £wi£laxs  lae  pEx-£IdEq  liixa  lEgwile,  qa 

55  lEnlEndEdzox£wides.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  la£wiinEmas  iix-'ed- 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  299 

thin;  and  after  she  has  done  so,  her  husband  takes  [  a  short  board  56 
and  makes  a  cover  for  the  box.     He  |  fits  it  so  that  it  will  not  leak. 
Then  his  wife  |  takes  olachen-fat  that  is  left  after  the  oil  has  been 
dried  out  of  the  olachen  in  |  Knight  Inlet.     She  puts  it  on  a  board, 
takes  a  stone  ||  and  hammers  it  until  it  becomes  a  thick  paste,  which  60 
is  very  sticky.  |  After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  her  tongs  and  with 
them  picks  the  |  stones  out  of  the  bottom  of  the  box  in  which  the 
huckleberries  with  salmon-spawn  have  been  cooked.  |  When  all  the 
stones  are  out,  she  takes  the  pounded  fat  |  and  puts  a  little  all  around 
the  opening  of  the  ||  box.     Then  she  fits  the  cover  on  the  box  so  that  65 
it  |  lies  on  the  olachen-fat  and  so  that  it  is  air-tight.  |  Then  her  hus- 
band sits  down  on  it,  and  the  woman  takes  more  olachen-fat  and  | 
smears  it  all  around  between  the  box  and  the  cover.     She  takes  | 
the  heated  skunk-cabbage  leaves,  cuts  off  a  strip  two  finger-widths 
wide,  ||  and  sticks  it  on  to  the  olachen-fat  |  all  around  the  box  cover.  70 
When  this  is  done,  she  puts  it  down  in  a  |  cool  corner  of  the  house. 
She  leaves  it  there  until  the  |  season  of  the  winter-ceremonial.  | 

I  have  forgotten   this.     She  spreads   the  heated  skunk-cabbage 
leaves  ||  over  the  boiled  huckleberries  mixed  with  salmon-spawn.  |  75 
She  spreads  them  smoothly  all  around  the  corners;  and  after  doing 
so,  she  puts  on  |  the  cover.     All  this  is  done  in  the  same  way  with 


xa    ts!ats!axusame,    qa£s   yikuyag-ileq    qaeda  Lawatsa.     Wa,  la£me  56 
babanaakwa  qa  k-!eses  hatsaleda  hasa£ye  laq,  yixs  laai.es  gEiiEme 
8x£edxa    qlaboqwe   yix   sEmyak-awa£yasa   sEmk-axa    dzax£une  lax 
Dzawade,  qa£s  lEgEclzodes  laxa  saxudzEse.    Wa,  la  axfedxa  tlesEme, 
qa£s  lEsElgEndes  iaq,  qa   alak-!ales    gEnx-£Ida,  qa  alak-!ales  k!uta.  60 
Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  k!tpLalaa,  qa£s  k-  !ip£ustales  laxa 
t !esEmaxs  lae  xEq luxLales  laxa  dzegikwe  malaqElaxa  ge£ne  LE£wa 
gwadEme,     Wa,  gil£mese  £wI£losteda  t!esEmaxs  lae  ax£edxa  lEdzE- 
kwe  q'.aboqwa,  qa£s  xaL!Ex'£lde  gEls£its  lax  awe£stas  awaxsta£yasa 
Lawatsa.      Wa,  la    axeedxa   ylkuya£ye,  qa£s   yikiiymdes  laq.     Wa,  65 
la£me  papaxk'Enaxa  qlaboqwe,  qaxs    aEmxaakwae.     Wa,  la  k!wa- 
kEyinde   la£wunEmaseqexs   laes  gEnEme    ax£edxa   qlaboqwe,    qa£s 
gEltse£stalis  lax  awe£stas  paqalaena£yasa  £yikiiya£ye.     Wa,  la  ax£ed- 
xa    pEnkwe  k!Ek'!a5k!wa,  qa£s  bExalexa  maldEndzayaakwe  laxEns 
q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.       Wa,    la    k!iideg-Ints    laxa    qlaboqwe    lax  70 
awe£stasa  yikiiya£ye.     Wa,    laEm  gwal   laxeq.     Wa,  la   hang'alilas 
laxa   wudanegwllases    g-okwe.     Wa,    laEm   lalaal  laxa  tsets!eq!En- 
xaxa  ts'.awunxe  h&£nel  laq. 

Wa,  hex5LEn  LlElewesoxs    LEpEyindaasa  pEnkwe    k-!Ek"!aok!wa 
laxa  dzeg-Ikwe   malaqElaxa  ge£ne  LE£wa    gwadEme.     Wa,  laEm  ae-  75 
k'!axs  lae  LEpEyints  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalE.xs  lawisLae  j-iku3-fnts 
yikiiya£yas.     Wa,  heEm  £nami£lal5te  gwag-ilasaxa  gwadEme  LE£wa 


300  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  86 

78  huckleberries,  |  with  large  blueberries,  small  blueberries,  and  scarlet 
berries  ( ?).  All  of  these  are  treated  in  the  same  way,  |  the  four  kinds 
that  I  have  just  named,  in  the  same  way  as  the  red  huckleberries  are 

SO  treated  when  they  are  ||  picked  and  eaten.  The  eating  of  the  large 
blueberries,  the  eating  of  the  small  blueberries,  |  and  the  eating  of  the 
mountain  scarlet  berries  (?)  is  the  same.  |  Another  name  of  the 
small  blueberries  is  "mouldy  blueberries."  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Viburnum1 -Berries  with  Oil. — Now  I  will  talk  about  |  the  viburnum- 
berries  mixed  with  oil,  for  there  is  only  one  way  of  cooking  them,  | 
as  I  have  described.  When  they  have  been  cooked,  |  they  pour  them 
5  into  the  large  swallo wing-basket  and  the  ||  medium-sized  swallowing- 
basket,  and  also  into  the  front-basket;  and  when  |  they  are  all  full 
of  steamed  viburnum-berries,  the  woman  takes  a  |  high  box,  which  is 

10  two  spans  |  wide  and  long,  |  and  which  is  three  spans  high.  ||  The 
cover  is  made  to  fit  on  (air-tight).  This  is  put  down  by  the  |  woman. 
Then  she  takes  a  large  dish  and  puts  it  down  next  |  to  her  seat,  and 
she  takes  oil  and  pours  it  |  into  the  large  dish.  When  it  is  half  full, 
she  stops  |  pouring  in  the  oil.     She  takes  a  small  basket,  goes  down 

15  to  the  beach,  ||  and  puts  six  stones  into  it.  She  carries  them  back  in 
one  hand,  |  coming  up  from  the  beach,  and  carries  them  into  the 
house,  and  |  she  puts  them  down  next  to  the  fire.     Then  she  puts 


78  sElEme  LE£wa  noxwa  LE£wa  tsEltsEle;  £naxwaEm  he  gwegilasE£wa 
mox-widalaxEn  LeLEqElasE£we  lax   gwayFliilasaxa    gwiidEinaxs  lae 

80  k-!ElfisE£wa  lQxs  lae  gwatgutsE£wa,  LE£wa  sEsElEmg-axa  SElEme, 
LE£wa  noxunaxwaxa  noxwa,  LE£wa  tsEtsEltsEleg'axa  tsEltsEle. 
HeEm  £nEm  LegEmsa  £noxwe  qQxalas.  LaEin  £wl£la  gwala. 
1  Viburnum'-Berries  with  Oil. — Wa,  la£mesEn  edzaqwal  gwagwex-s£alal 
laxa  Lliikwe  ttelsa  ylxs  £nEmaaLe  gweg-ilasaqexs  lae  L!aL!op!a- 
SE£wa  laxEii  g-ale  waldEma.  Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  gwfda  L!aL!op!aqexs 
lae  L!6pa.  Wa,  a£mise  giixtslalayo  laxa  nag-a£ye  LE£wa  heloma- 
5  gEine  lExa£ya  loxs  lE£maeda  nanaagEme  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gil£mese 
£nilxwa  qoqiitlaxa  q!5lkwe  t!Elsaxs  iaeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxa  Lawa- 
tsaxa  yIxusEme,  yixs  ma£lp!Enxse£stalae  laxEns  q!waq!wax*ts!a- 
na£yex,  yix  £wadzosgEmasas.  Wa,  laxae  heEm  g-ildo£latse.  Wii, 
la    yuduxup!Enk-e    £walasgEmasas     laxEns     q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex. 

10  Wii,  la  babanaakwe  yikwa£yas.  Wa,  heEm  g-ax  hang-ali£lEmsa 
tslEdaqe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  loqlwa,  qa£s  g'axe  hrmgalllas 
laxes  klwaelase.  Wii,  laxae  ax£edxes  L!e£na,  qa£s  la  guxtslots 
laxa  £walase  loqlwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  gwal 
guqas.     Wii,  la.  ax£edxa   lalaxame,  qa£s  la  iEnts!es  laxa  L!Ema£ise, 

15  qa£s  xE£xuts!odesa  qlELlssgEme  tlesEm  laqexs  g-axae  k-!oxk-!otE- 
laqexs  g'iixae  losdesEla,  qa£s  la  kMogweLElaq  laxes  g'okwe.  Wa,  la 
k!ogtinolisas  liixes  lEgwIle.     Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  xExuLEntsa  t!esEine 

1  Viburnum  pauciflorum  Pylaine. 


boas]  PRESERVATION   OF   FOOD  301 

them  I  on  the  fire,  and  she  takes  the  bucket  of  water  and  |  puts  it 
down  where  she  is  going  to  work.  She  takes  her  tongs  and  ||  puts  20 
them  down.  Then  she  takes  a  small  dish  and  puts  it  down.  |  Then 
she  takes  a  bucket  of  water,  and  she  pours  the  water  |  into  the  small 
dish.  Now  she  watches  the  stones  which  are  on  the  |  fire  until  they 
are  just  hot  enough  to  be  a  little  red.  |  As  soon  as  they  have  that 
color,  she  takes  her  tongs,  ||  picks  up  the  stones,  dips  them  into  the  25 
small  dish  with  water  |  in  it,  so  that  the  ashes  on  them  come  off,  and 
she  |  puts  them  into  the  oil.  She  does  the  same  with  the  other  | 
stones;  and  when  all  the  oil  is  melted,  she  takes  a  |  bucket  of  water 
and  pours  it  on  the  melted  |]  oil.  After  it  has  staid  there  a  little  while,  30 
she  picks  the  stones  out  |  and  throws  them  down  by  the  side  of  the 
fire.  After  she  has  taken  them  all  out,  she  |  takes  a  large  ladle,  dips 
it  into  the  oil  and  water,  and  moves  it  up  and  down.  |  When  she  has 
done  this  a  little  while,  the  oil  and  water  are  mixed,  and  |  they  get 
cold,  and  the  mixture  of  oil  ||  and  water  looks  white.  When  they  are  35 
well  mixed,  she  takes  a  basket  of  viburnum-berries  |  and  pours  the 
berries  into  the  high  box.  When  |  they  are  all  emptied  out,  the  box 
is  full.  Then  she  takes  the  dish  in  which  she  has  |  the  water  mixed 
with  oil,  and  places  it  across  the  corner  of  the  berry-box,  and  |  pours 
(the  contents)  very  slowly  over  the  ||  viburnum-berries.     Then  the  40 


laxes  lEgwile.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  nagatsle  £wabEts!alaxa  £wape,  qa£s  18 
g-axe   hang'alllas   laxes    eaxElase.     Wa,   la    ax£edxes  ts!esLala,    qa 
g'fixes  k'adela.     Wa,  lii   ax£edxa  lalogume  qa£s  g'axexat!  kag-all-  20 
las.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  nagatsle  £wabEts!alllxa  £\vape,  qa£s  la  guqa- 
sas  laxa   lalogume.     Wa,  la    dSqwalaxa    t!esEme   xExuLalales  laxa 
lEgwlla,    qa  aemes  helale  ts!Elqwalaena£yas  qa  halsEla£me  xIxsEm- 
x£lda.    Wii,  g-il£mese  he  gwegiisgEmx-£IdExs  lae  ax£edxes  ts!esLala, 
qa£s  k'!ip!ides   laxa    tlesEme,    qa£s   la  hapstEnts   laxa  ewabEts!ali-  25 
laxa    lalogume,  qa    £wielawesa    guna£ye    k!wek!iitsEmeq.     Wa,    la 
k-!tp!Eqas    laxa    t,!e£na.     Wa,    la     hanal    he    gweg-ilaxa    waokwe 
t!esEma.      Wa,  g11£mese    £wi£la    yax£Ideda    L!e-niixs    lae    axeedxa 
nagatsle  £wabEts!alllxa    £wape,    qa£s    la    guqlEqas    laxa    yaxEkwe 
L!efna.     Wa,    g-il£mese    gagalaxs    lae    k- !ip£tistalaxa    tlesEme    laq,  30 
qaEs    k- libEnolisEles   laxes   lEgwile.     Wii,  gil£mese  £wieloestaxs    lae 
tix'edxa  £walase  k-ats!Enaqa,  qa£s  tseg-ostalesa  L!e£na  LE£wa  £wape. 
Wa,  gil£mese  gegilllExs   lae  lElgoweda  L!e£na  LE£wa    £wiipaxs    lae 
wuda£stax-£Ida.     Wii,  laeme  alak'lala  la  £mElstowa  qElokwe  L!e£na 
LE£wa    £wape.      Wa,    gIPmese    lElgoxs    lae     ax£edxa    t  !et telts !ala  35 
laElxa£ya,  qa£s   lii    guxtslalas    laxa    yixusEme    Lflwatsa.     Wa,  gil- 
£mese  £wi£1osexs  lae  Elaq  qot!a.     Wa,  lii  kag-illlaxa  qEloxuts!iiliixa 
L!e£na  loqlwa,  qa£s   la   k-ag-agEnts   laxa    t!Elsts!ala    Lawatsa,  qa£s 
k!ese  ealtsilaxs  lae  qEbEenakulasa  qElokwe  L!e£na  lax  okiiya£yasa 
tlElse.     Wa,  he£mis  la  ts!axalts!alatsa  qElokwe   L.'e£na   lax  awaga-  40 


302  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKH'TL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

41  water  and  oil  run  down  among  the  |  berries.  She  keeps  the  dish  with 
the  mixed  oil  and  berries  turned  over  for  a  long  time,  |  because  the 
mixture  does  not  run  very  fast.  It  runs  in  among  the  |  viburnum- 
berries.  When  the  mixed  water  and  oil  does  not  run  in  any  more, 
she  puts  |  the  dish  upright  and  places  it  on  the  floor  of  the  house, 

45  for  ||  the  berries  are  now  covered  with  water  and  oil.  She  takes  the 
cover  of  the  |  box,  and  her  husband  takes  a  |  drill  and  his  straight 
knife  and  splits  good  |  red-pine  wood.  He  cuts  it  out  and  makes 
pegs  out  of  it.     When  |  he  has  done  so,  he  drills  through  the  cover 

50  and  the  edge  of  the  ||  box,  pulls  out  his  drill,  wets  the  pegs  with  his 
saliva,  |  and,  when  one  is  wet  all  over,  he  puts  it  into  the  |  drill-hole 
and  takes  a  stone  and  drives  in  the  peg.  |  The  drill-holes  are  three 

55  finger-widths  apart.  |  He  puts  a  peg  into  every  hole.  After  ||  he  has 
done  so,  he  puts  the  box  down  in  a  cool  corner  of  the  house.  That  is 
all  about  this.  | 
I  The  First  Dog-Salmon  of  the  Season. — Now  I  will  talk  |  about  the 
salmon  obtained  by  those  who  fish  [on  the  rivers]  at  the  mouth  of 
the  I  river,  when  they  are  going  to  eat  (the  salmon)  quickly.  When 
the  dog-salmon  are  seen  |  jumping  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  the 
5  man  at  once  ||  takes  his  fishing  box  and  opens  it,  and  he  takes 
out  |  his  two  harpoon  points,  and  he  prepares  them.     And  after  |  he 


41  £yasa  tlElse.  Wa,  la  gael  q6gu£nakulasa  qElogwats  !axa  L!e£na 
loq'.wa  qaxs  k'lesae  albaleda  qElokwe  L!e£naxs  lae  ts!ats!aqElaxa 
t'.Else.  Wa,  g-iPmese  gwal  ts!axEleda  qElokwe  L!e£niixs  lae  t!ax£id- 
xa  qEloxuts  lalaxa  L!e£na  loq!wa.     Wa,  lii  hang-alilaxa  loq!wa,  qaxs 

45  lE£mae  tlEpEyalaxa  qElokwe  L!e£na.  Wa,  la  ax£edEx  yikuya£yasa 
Llagwatslaxa  tlElse  Lawatsa.  Wa,  lii  &x£ede  la£wunEmasexes 
sElEme  LE£wa  nExx-ala  k-!awayowa,  qa£s  xox£widexa  eg'aqwa 
wunagiila.  Wa,  lii  k'  !ax£w!dEq,  qa£s  Lapelax-£Ideq.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
gwalExs   lae   sElx-£IdEx  yikuya£yas   hex-sala   lax    6gwaga£yasa   La- 

50  watsa.  Wa,  lii  lExuLElodxes  sElEmaxs  lae  mElx£untses  k!uneL!E- 
xawa£ye  laq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  la  klunxEnalaxs  lae  Lastots  laxes 
sEla£ye.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tlesEme,  qa£s  dexubEtEndesa  LabEme. 
Wa,  la  yaeyuduxudEne  awalagalaasae  sEla£yas  laxEns  q!waq!wax- 
ts!ana£yex,  ylxa  la  q  !walxostalaxa  LabEme.     Wa,  g  il£mese  gwalExs 

55  lae  hang-alllas  laxa  wtidanegwllases  g-okwe.  Wa,  laEm  gwala. 
1  The  First  Dog-Salmon  of  the  Season.1 — Wa,  la£me'sEn  gwa'gwexs£§- 
lal  laqe'xs  ga'lae  la'loL!asosa  wlwamets  !enoxwe  lax  o'x"siwa£yasa 
wa,  qa£s  hala'xwasE£wa.  Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  do'gula  gwaexni'se 
Ek'a  lax  6'xusiwa£yasa  wa.  Wa,  he'x-£ida£meseda  bEgwa'nEme 
5  ax'e'dxes wi'wakayEwa'ts!e  qa£sx-5'x£wldeq.  Wa,  lafix£wults!o'd- 
xes  ma£ltsE'm  mema'sa  qa£s  hashe'naqeq.  Wa,  gpi'l£mese  gwal 
hashe'naqaqexs  la'e  ax£e'dxes     t!a,'t!aq!wayowe    qa£s    hashe'naxe- 

i  Here  follows  a  prayer  to  the  salmon  (see  p  609,  also  p.  223). 


iioas]  PRESERVATION    OF   FOOD  303 

has  prepared   them,   he  takes   his  harpoon  shaft  and  prepares  |  it,  S 
putting  on  the  prongs,  so  that  they  fit  on  firmly.  |  As  soon  as  he  has 
done  so,  he  goes  to  the  beach  where  his  fishing  canoe  is.  ||  Then  he  goes  10 
to  spear  the  salmon,  which  swim  in  the  |  mouth  of  the  slough.     Then 
he  begins  to  spear  them.     If  there  are  many  |  dog-salmon,  it  does 
not  take  long  until  he  has  obtained  many.  |  Then  he  goes  home.1  | 
Then  the  woman  herself2  replies-  "Yes,"  and  goes  up  from  the  bank 
of  the  river,  and  ||  takes  an  old  mat  and  spreads  it  out  on  the  beach  15 
seaward  from  |  the  high-water  mark.     As  soon  as  she  has  done  this, 
she  goes  down  to  the  beach  |  where  the  spearsman's  canoe  is,  and 
she  puts  her  fingers  into  the  gills  of  two  |  dog-salmon,  two  in  each 
hand.     Then  she  carries  the   |  four  salmon  up  from  the  beach,  and 
she  puts  them  on  the  old  mat  which  is  spread  out  on  the  beach.  || 
After  she  has  taken  them  all  out,  she  takes  her  fish-knives  and  |  sharp-  20 
ens  them  on  a  whetstone;  and  after  she  has  sharpened  |  them,  she 
takes  a  small  mat  and  spreads  it  out  on  the  beach  by  her  side.     Then 
she  |  puts  the  salmon  on  it.     Then  she  can  just  reach  the  |  salmon, 
when  she  takes  it  to  cut  it  open.     Then  she  does  the  same  as  she  || 
does  when  she  is  cutting  open  dog-salmon  to  be  roasted,  and  she  25 
only  |  cuts  the  meat  thin  along  its  skin,  and  the  |  edges  of  the  cut 
salmon  are  left  on  in  this  manner.3  I   After  she  has  cut  it  on  her 


dex   dze'giimas  qa£s  bE'nx,£Idesa  me'mase  laq  qa  E'l£alales.     Wa,    g 
giTniese  gwa'lEXs  la'e  la'Ents!es  la/xes  t!a't!aq!waats!axs  ha£ne'- 
sae.     Wa,  laE'm  lal  t!a't!aq!walxa  k!o'tElaxs  niEna'lae  lax  o'xusi-  io 
wa-yas  wa'yalasas.  Wa,  la£me'se  t!ax£wl'da.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  q  !e'nE- 
meda  gwa£xnisaxs  la'e  k"!es  ge'x-£IdExs  la'e  qteyo'La.     Wa,  gax 
na'£nakwa.'     .     . 

Wa,   la  q!ule'x-s£Em2   wa'xeda    tsteda'qaxs   la'e    la'sdes    qa£s  le 
ax£e'dxes    k!a'k!obane    qa£s    ga'xe    LEp!a'lisaq     lax    L!a.'sa£yasa  15 
yaa'xmote.     Wii,    g'i'l£mese    gwa'lalise   axa'£yasexs   la'e    lE'ntsles 
lax  hae'ne'dzasasa  t!a't!aq!waats!exde.     Wa,  la  gasx'Ex£I'dxa  mae'- 
mal£e  gwa£xnis  lax  wa'xsoltslanas.     Wii,  la£me'se   gaso'sdesElaxa 
mo'we  k'!otEla  qa£s  le  klEgEdzo'dalas  la'xa  LEbe'se  k'!a'k!obana. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi£loltamasqexs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  xwa'xuLayowe  qa£s  20 
ge'xElalax£ideq    la'xa   ge'xesdEme.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ge'xa- 
qexs  lae  ax£edxes  amay£e  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  LEp!a'liseq  la'xa  o'gwage- 
lisas  k-!Eg"ats!a'sexa  k!o'tEla.     Wa,  a'£mese  he'ltslapElaxa  k!o'tE- 
laxs  la'e  da'x£IdEq  qa£s  xwa'l£ideq.     He'Emxaa  gwe'gilaqe  gwe'- 
gi£lasasa  xwaLiixa  L!obEkwelasE£'wa  gwa£xnise.     Wa,  le'x-a£mesex  25 
pEla'e  t!E'lsa£yas  yix  q  lEmElts  !a£yas  Lle'sas.     Wa,  he'£mesexs  k!a'- 
k" JswasEnxElaeda  t!Ele'kwe;  ga  gwii'leg-a  (Jig.3). 

Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  t!E'lsaq  laxes  t!Ele'dzowe  xag-agwa'lega4  la'e 

'  Here  follows  3  prayer,  p.  609.  '  She  answers  her  own  prayer.         >  See  first  figure  on  p.  304. 

1  On  a  slanting  board  supported  by  a  log    See  figure  on  p.  250. 


304  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  85 

cutting-board  in  this  manner,1  |  _rXv-.^  she  takes  her  basket 
30  and  puts  into  it  what  she  has  \|  Tj  cut-  Then  ||  she  car- 
ries it  up  on  the  beach  and  takes  it  \  \  /  /  into  her  house.  Then 
she  takes  the  |  drying-poles,  which  \  \  //  are  always  left  in  their 
places  in  the  houses  of  the  river  W_Z/  people.  |  Then  she 
hangs  the  cut  salmon  lengthwise  on  the  drying-poles  in  this  manner:  | 
After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  short  boards 
and  |  puts  them  under  the  place  where  she  has 
hung  up  her  cut  salmon.  She  does  ||  not 
allow  the  heat  to  strike  what  is  now  hanging 
lengthwise  on  the  |  drying-poles.  Sometimes 
it  hangs  for  one  day;  then  the  woman  |  looks 
at  it.  As  soon  as  it  is  half  dry,  the  woman  takes  it  down;  and  |  she 
gathers  together  the  drying-poles,  and  she  puts  the  cut  salmon  up 
40  again;  |  but  it  is  spread  out.  Now  it  is  spread  out  when  she  ||  puts 
it  up  again;  and  it  only  differs  from  preserved  skin  of  salmon  |  caught 
with  a  hook  in  the  upper  part  of  the  river,  in  that  (the  salmon)  is  not 
fat  |  when  it  is  found  spawning  |  in  the  upper  part  of  the  river, 
while  it  is  really  fat  when  it  is  speared  at  the  |  mouth  of  the  river. 
45  And  as  soon  as  they  finish  cutting  up  ||  the  speared  salmon,  the 
woman  at  once  gathers  the  slime  and  |  everything  that  comes  from 
the  salmon,  and  puts  it  into  the  basket,  and  |  she  goes  and  pours  it 
into  the  water  at  the  mouth  of  the  river. 

ax£edxes  lExa£ye   qa£s   axtslodaleses  t!Elsa£ye   laq.     Wa,  la  k!ox£- 

30  usdesElaq  qa£s  las  lae'Las  la'xes  go'kwe.  Wa,  la£mes  ax£e'dxa 
gayoqaxs  he'mEnala£mae  ax£a'laLEla  la'xa  wl'wamedzats!e  go'kwa. 
Wa,  la£me'se  ao'tslaqaleda  tlfile'kwe  la'xa  ga'yowe;  g-a  gwa'lega 
(fig.).  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  ts!a'ts!ExusEme  qa£s 
he'lEwabodes     la'xa     la     gila'laLElats     tlEle'kwe.      Wa,      laE'm 

35  k-!es  he'lqlalaq  xa£mag-aaLEleda  LleVala  la'xa  la  g'lla'laLEla  la'xa 
gayo.  Wa,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Eiia  xa£malaLElaxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  do'x- 
£w!dEq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  k!a'yax£widExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  fixa'xodEq 
qa£s  q!a'p!egaaLElodexa  gega'yowe.  Wa,  la£me'se  xwe'laqostod 
LEpIa'LElotsa  t!Ele'kwe    la'xa    e'k!e.     Wa,    laE'm   LEpa'laxs   la'e 

40  e'tled  e'k-!e£stEndEq.  Wa,  le'x'aEm  6'guqalayos  la'xa  t!E'lsa 
qa£s  xamsllaxs  ha'ela  ga'Le  £nE'ldzasa  waxs  la'e  ts  !e'nas£Ideda 
gwa£xnl'saxs  la'e  xwe'la£wa  la'xes  la  qla'nEm  qa£s  xwe'la£waas 
lax  £nE'ldzasa  wl'wa,  yixs  a'lae  tsE'nxweda  sEg'ine'te  lax  6xu- 
siwa£yasa    wl'wa.      Wa,    he£'mesexs    g'i'l£mae    gwal    xwa'LasE£wa 

45  sEg-ine'taxs  l'ae  hex,£ida£ma  tslEdaqe  q  lap  !ex"£Idxa  klele  LE£wa 
£na'xwa  g'ayo'l  la'xa  k' lotEla  qa£s  lExtsIo'des  la'xa  lExa'£ye  qa£s 
la  qEpstE'nts  laxa  6xusiwa£yasa  £wa. 

1  On  a  slanting  board  supported  by  a  log. 


IV.  RECIPES 

Roasted  Salmon. — This  is  when  the  man  goes  catching  salmon  |  at  1 
night.  That  is  what  is  called  by  the  river  people  "taking  salmon  | 
with  hooks  at  night  up  the  river,"  when  they  are  going  to  dry  |  the 
roasted  dog-salmon  for  winter.  Dog-salmon  are  speared  ||  by  the  5 
river  people  at  (he  mouth  of  the  river  when  they  are  going  to  eat 
them  at  once,  |  while  the  dog-salmon  are  still  phosphorescent. 
Then  they  will  not  |  keep  a  long  time  without  getting  mouldy  when 
they  are  roasted,  for  they  are  fat.  j 

Now  I  shall  talk  about  the  salmon  speared  at  the  mouth  of  the 
river  |  when  it  is  still  phosphorescent.  When  the  man  ||  who  spears  10 
the  salmon  gets  one,  he  goes  home  as  soon  as  he  has  |  speared  it. 
His  wife  at  once  takes  an  j  old  mat  and  spreads  it  over  her  back; 
then  she  takes  her  |  belt  and  puts  it  on  over  the  old  mat  on  her  back.  | 
Then  she  takes  along  a  large  basket  in  which  to  carry  the  dog-salmon 
on  her  back.  |[  She  goes  to  the  canoe  of  her  husband  and  puts  \  four  15 
dog-salmon  into  her  carrying-basket.  Then  she  goes  up  the  beach  to 
the  place  |  where  she  is  going  to  cut  them.  She  puts  them  on  an  | 
old  mat,  which  is  spread  on  the  ground  outside  of  the  house.  As  soon 
as  I  she.  has  thrown  them  on  the  ground,  she  takes  her  fish-knife  and 
sharpens  it;  ||  and  after  she  lms  sharpened  it,  she  cuts  off  the  gills  of  20 


Roasted  Salmon. — Wa,  he£maaxs  la'eda  bEgwii'nEiiie  ya'Pnsku-  1 
jaxa  ga'nuLe;  wa,  he'Em  gwE£yo'sa  wiwayii'laenoxwe  ncgwi'saxa 
ga'Laxa  gwa£xnl'saxa  ga'nuLe  la'xa  £nE'ldzasa  wa,  yi.xs  x  ile'Laxes 
L!o'pasoLe  gwa£xnl's  qae'da  tslawu'nxe.  Wa,  he'£mis  sEka'sosa 
wlwaya'laenoxwa  gwa£xnfse  lax  o'xusiwa£yasa  wiis,  ylxs  ha'labaleLe  5 
ha^ma'xs  he'£mae  a'les  bE'nkweda  gwa£xni'se,  qaxs  k!ea'sae 
gwe'x,£idaas  ga'la  k'les  x'lts!EX'£I'deda  L!o'bEkwaxs  tsE'nxwae. 

Wa,  he'tlaLEn  gwa'gwexs^alasLa  sEgine'te  lax  o'xusiwaJyasa  wa, 
ylxs    he'Emae  5,'les    bE'nkweda  gwaexnl'se.      Wii,    he'Jmaaxs    la'e 
sske'da     ya'l£nEk!wenoxwaxa     gwa£xnl'se.      Wii,    g  i'Fmese    gwal  10 
sska'xs  la'e  na'£nakwa.     Wii,  he'x,£ida£mese  gEnE'mas  la  &x£e'dxes 
k!a'k!obane  cpx-cs  LebEgi'ndes  la'xes  awl'g-a£ye.     Wii,  la  ax£e'dxes 
wuse'ganowe    qa£s    qEk'iyu'ndes    la'xes  Le'bega£ye    k!a'k!obane. 
Wa,  la£mes  o'xLEX£I'dxes    £wa/lase  o'xLaatslaxa  gwii£xnl'se.     Wii, 
la£me's   lax   ya'£yats !iises    la'£wuiiEme.     Wii,  lii£me's    k!Exts!o'tsa  15 
mo'we  gwa£xnl's  la'xes  o'xxaakwe  lExa'£ya.     Wa,  la£me's  la'sdets 
qa£s     les     la'xes     xwa'l£IdaasLaq.       Wa,    la£me's     axtslo'ts     la'xa 
k!a'k!ol)ane  LEplEsa'  lax    i.!ii'sana£yases  g-o'kwe.     Wa,  glTmese 
c[Ep!F.lsaqexs    lae   ax£edxes   xwiiLayowe  qa£s    t!ex£Ideq.     Wii,    gil- 
£mese    gwal    tleka'qexs     la'e    t!o's£IdEx     q!o'sna£yasa    gwa£xnise.  20 
75052  -L'l   -.".."  1:111— pt  1 20  305 


306  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.isn.35 

21  the  dog-salmon.  |  When  the  gills  are  off,  she  cuts  around  the  |  neck, 
but  she  does  not  cut  off  the  head  from  the  backbone.  Then  |  she  cuts 
from  the  back  of  the  neck  down  to  four  finger-widths  from  the  tail  on 
the  upper  side.  |  Now  a  thin  strip  of  flesh  is  left  on  the  backbone.  || 

25  As  soon  as  the  cut  reaches  down  to  the  belly,  she  turns  it  around,  | 
and  she  begins  to  cut  from  the  tail  upward  to  the  back  of  the  neck.  | 
As  soon  as  she  takes  off  the  backbone,  she  |  takes  her  roasting-tongs 
and  takes  the  slime  and  rubs  it  |  over  the  roasting-tongs,  so  that  they 

30  may  not  get  burned  when  they  stand  ||  by  the  fire  of  the  house. 
Then  she  winds  cedar-bark  around  the  tongs  one  |  span  from  the 
bottom  of  the  roasting-tongs;  |  and  when  this  is  done,  she  takes  one 
of  the  cut  salmon  and  |  puts  it  crosswise  into  the  roasting-tongs. 
Then  she  takes  cedar-bark  and  ties  it  |  tight  above  the  cut  salmon; 

35  and  after  she  has  ||  tied  it,  she  takes  another  salmon  and  puts  it  |  the 
other  way,  above  the  one  that  she  put  in  first.  |  Then  she  again  takes 
cedar-bark  and  ties  it  above  the  salmon.  |  After  she  finishes  tying  it, 
she  splits  cedar-wood, —  |  long  and  slender  pieces.   These  are  called  "the 

40  lock."  ||  Then  she  pushes  one  of  these  on  each  side,  two  finger-widths 
from  |  the  edge  of  the  salmon-meat,  through  between  |  the  legs  of  the 
roasting-tongs,  lengthwise  of  the  salmon;  |  and  after  she  has  finished 
this,  she  pushes  long  ones  across  |  the  salmon  and  the  "locks"  which 

21  Wii,  giTmese  lawa'masxa  q!o'sna£yaxs  la'e  t!o'tse£stE'ndEx  oxa'- 
wa£yas;  la  kMes  qako'dEX  he'xt!a£yas  lax  XEklii'dzas.  Wii,  la 
xwa'h'ldicx  <VxLaata£yas  ka'xEla  la'xa  mo'dEiie  lax  e'k'!a£yas 
ts  !a'sna£yas.     Wii,  laE'm  pEle'  q  !EmEldza/£yasa  xa'kladzowe.     Wii, 

25  giTmese  lii'gaa  lax  tEklases  xwa'LasE£waxs  la'e  xwe'HdEq.  Wii, 
la  ga'bEtEiid  xwaTedEx  wElxwa'xsda£yas  e'k!olEla  lax  o'xnaata- 
£yases  xwa'LasE£we.  Wa,giT"mese  lawii'masEX  xa'k'ladzasexs  la'e 
ax'e'dxes  Llo'psayowe  qa£s  ax£e'dexa  k!e'la  qa£s  yiltshd'E'ndes 
la'xa  Llo'psayowe    qa    k'le'seLEs    k!iiniElx£I'dEf    qo   lal    Lana'lesL 

30  la'xa  lEgwI'las.  Wii.  la  qEx-£I'tsa  dEna'se  la'xa  £nE'mp!F.nke 
la'xEns  q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£ye,  g-ii'x-£id  lax  6'xLa£yasa  Llo'psayowe. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwii'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  xwa'LEkwe  k!o'tEla  qa£s 
ge'ts'.odes  la'xa  Llo'psayowe.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  dEna'se  qa£s  yil£I'de 
lEkliide'ts    lax    e'k!a£yasa    xwii'LEkwe    kMo'tEla.     Wa,    gi'l£mese 

35  gwal  yiLa'qexs  la£e  e'tled  &x£e'dxa  £nE'me  k  lo'tida  qa£s  xwe'la- 
iemaseqexs  la'e  ge'ts  lots  lax  e'kleLElasa  gi'lxde  axts!o'yos.  Wa, 
la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  dEna'se  qa£s  yil£I'des  lax  e'k'!Enxa£yas.  Wa, 
gi'l£mese  gwa'le  yiLa/£yasexs  la'e  xci'x£wldxa  k  !wa£xxa'£we, 
wl'swulta,  la  gi'lsgilsta.     Wii,  he'Em  Le'gadEs  k'la'adEme.     Wa, 

40  la£me'se  La's£Itsa  £na'l£nEmts!aqe  lii'xa  ma'ldEne  g-a'x-£kle  lax 
ewii'nxa£yasa  q!E'mladza£yasa  kMo'tEla.  Wii,  la  na'qodalax 
e'wanuts!EXsta£yasa  Llo'psayowe  ao'ts!aqala  LE£wa  kMo'tEla.  Wii, 
gl'Pmese  gwa'lxe([    la'e    LaVltsa   g-i'lsgllstowe   lax  na'qawa£yasa 


boas]  RECIPES  307 

she  first  put  on.     Now  there  is  ||  one  on  each  side  of  the  roasting.  45 
tongs  in  this  manner:  |  Then  the  same  is  done  on  the 

other  side.  After  this  is  -^^^b*-?  finished,  |  the  woman  puts  (the 
tongs)  up  by  the  side  of  H-sU-f^  the  fire.  She  first  turns  |  the 
meat  side  towards  the  j^jM— i  firei  a]Ul  when  it  is  done,  |  she 
turns  it  around  to  the  XJ— j~TT  S^U1  side.  As  soon  as  that  is 
done,  the  ||  man  requests  ^^P^  permission  from  his  wife  to  in-  50 
vite  his  friends  |  to  come  and  eat  the  roasted  salmon  while 

it  is  warm.  \  As  soon  as  his  wife  tells  him  to  go  ahead  and  call 
them,  I  the  man  goes  and  invites  them.  Then  his  wife  takes  a 
mat,  I  which  is  to  be  the  food-mat  of  the  guests  of  her  husband; 
then  she  ||  spreads  a  mat  for  the  guests  of  her  husband  to  sit  on;  55 
and  it  does  not  |  take  long  before  her  husband  comes  back  fol- 
lowed by  his  guests,  for  |  they  try  to  come  before  the  roasted 
salmon  cools  off.  |  Immediately  they  sit  down  on  the  mat  that  has 
been  spread  out;  and  when  |  they  are  all  in,  the  woman  takes  the 
food-mat  and  ||  spreads  it  in  front  of  her  husband's  guests.  Then  60 
she  goes  back  |  and  takes  the  two  roasted  salmon  in  the  tongs;  and 
she  takes  them  out,  |  one  for  each  two  men.  Then  she  lays  them 
skin  down,  |  on  the  food-mat.  When  there  are  four  men,  |  there 
are  two  food-mats,  and  there  is  one  ||  roasted  salmon.     There  is  no  65 


klo'tEla  LE£wa  g"i'lx'de  ax£a'LEloyos  k"!a'adF.ma.  Wa,  laE'm  £nal- 
enEmts!aq  lax  wa'x'sot!Ena£yasa  Llo'psayowe;  ga  gwa'lega  (Jig.).  45 
Wa,  laxa'e  ke'Em  gwii'leda  apsii'dza£yas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs 
la'eda  tslEda'qe  La'nollsas  la'xes  lsgwl'le.  Wii,  laE'm  gwa'sala 
laxes  q!E'mladza£ye  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wii,  giTmese  l!o'pexs  la'e 
le'x£IdEq  la'xes  L!e'sadza£ye.  Wa,  g-i'Pmese  Llo'pExs  la'eda 
bEgwa'nEme  hana'k-axes  gEnE'me,  qaes  Le'£lalexes  Mie'iiEmo'kwe  50 
qa  ga'xes  liExlia'quxa  Lld'bEkwaxs  he'£mae  a'les  tslE'lqwe.  Wa, 
gi'Pmese  wii'xe  gEnE'mas  qa  Le'elalagis  la'e  he'x-£Idaemeda 
bEgwa'nEme  la  Le'^lala.  Wa,  la'La  gEnE'mas  ax£e'dxa  le'£wa£ye 
qa  ha£ma'dzoLEs  Le£hinEmLases  la''cwxinEme.  Wii,  la/xaa  LEpla'- 
lllax  k!wadzEswe'soLas  Le4anEmLases  la'£wunEme.  Wa,  k' !e'st!a  55 
gix'laxs  gii'xae  la'£wmiEmas  hogwi'k'Elaxes  Le£lanEmE,  qaxs 
ha£ya'lEmk-!aaqexs  k'leVmae  wudEx-£I'deda  L!o'bEkwe.  Wa, 
he'x£ida£mese  kliulzEclzo'lilxa  LEbe'le  le'£wa£ya.  Wii,  gi'Pmese 
£wI'lgalllExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  fix£e'dxa  ha£ma'dzowe  le'£wa£ye  qa£s 
le  LEpdzamolIlas  lax  Le£liinEmases  la£wunEme.  Wa,  giixe  aedaaqa  60 
qa£s  ax£e'dexa  L!5pts!a,'la  ma£l  LleLlo'bEkwa  qa£s  le  xlk- !EX*1'dxa 
£nE'me  qae'da  ma£lo'kwe  be'bEgwiinEma.  Wa,  la  nELEdzo'lllas 
la'xa  ha£ma.'dzowe  le'£wa£ya.  Wa,  gt'l£mese  mo'kwa  be'bEgwanE- 
maxs  la'e  ma'£la  ha£ma'dzowe  le'Elwa£ya;  wii,  la  £nal£nEmeda  l!o'- 
bEkwe.     Wa,  laE'm  k!ea's  L!e'£na  tslEpa's  qaxs  Lo'mae  tsE'nxweda  65 


308  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

66  oil  for  dipping,  for  the  |  dog-salmon  is  very  fat  while  it  is  still  phos- 
phorescent, when  it  is  jumping  in  the  mouth  of  the  rivers.  |  Then  the 
guests  themselves  break  it  and  eat  the  salmon  |  speared  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river.    Early  in  the  morning,  |  dog-salmon  speared  at  the  mouth 

70  of  the  river  is  not  eaten,  for  it  is  fat;  ||  it  is  only  eaten  in  the  after- 
noon and  evening.  |  Whenever  it  is  eaten  in  the  morning,  it  makes 
those  who  eat  it  feel  sleepy  the  whole  day  long,  |  for  it  is  very  fat. 
Therefore  they  are  afraid  |  to  eat  it  in  the  morning.     As  soon  as  the 

75  guests  finish  eating  it,  |  the  man  takes  what  is  left  and  eats  it  ||  with 
his  wife,  while  his  guests  drink  water  freshly  |  drawn.  After  they 
finish  drinking,  the  guests  go  out.  |  They  only  wash  their  hands  in 
their  houses;  and  |  after  the  man  has  finished  eating  with  his  wife, 

80  he  I  gathers  the  bones  and  the  skin  left  by  his  guests,  ||  puts  them 
on  a  mat,  and  throws  them  into  the  sea  on  the  j  beach.  This  is  all 
about  the  salmon  speared  at  the  mouth  of  the  river. 
1  Blistered  Salmon.  And  we  will  also  talk  about  the  green  |  salmon 
almost  dry.  The  woman  takes  the  almost  dried  green  |  salmon  from 
the  place  where  it  is  hanging.  !  She  takes  her  tongs  and  picks  up  the 
5  green  salmon,  and  ||  blisters  the  meat-side  of  the  green  salmon  by 
the  fire.  As  soon  as  j  the  green  salmon  gets  grey,  she  turns  it  and 
places  the  skin-side  |  towards  the  lire;  and  as  soon  as  the  skin  is 

00  gwa£xni'saxs  he'£mae  a/le£s  bE'nkwexa  mE£na'la  lax  o'xusiwa£yasa 
wl'wa.  Wa,  la  qlule'xsEm  LE'nqweda  klwe'laxs  hExha'qwaaxa 
sEg'ine'te  lax  o'x"siwa£yasa  wa.  La  k'  !es  gaa'xstexagaa'leda  liExha'- 
qwaxa  sEgine'te  gwa£xne'sa  lax  o'xusiwa£yasa  wa  qaxs  tsE'nxwae. 

70  A'l'Em  ha£mx£I'tsoxa  la  gwal  nEqa'leda  £naia  LE£wa  dza'qwa. 
G'iT'EinLa  hExha'x"soxa  gaa'laxs  la'e  loxu£me'qa  sE'nbexa  £na'lada 
ha£ma'paq  qaxs  XE'nLElae  tsE'nxwa.  Wa,  he'£mes  la'gilas  k'ilE'm 
ha£ma'xa  gaa'la.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  gwal  hExha'qwa  LedanEmaxs  la'e 
he'x£ida£meda  bEgwaiiEme  la  ax£edxa  ha'mote  qa£s  wa'waqlaayowe 

75  Lirwis  gEnE'maxs  la'aLal  nax£e'des  LedaiiEinaxa  a'lta  £wap  tsa'- 
nEins.  Wa,  g  i'k'mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ho'qiiwElseda  klwe'lde. 
Wa,  laE'm  a'b'Einl  ts!E'nts!Enkwal  la'xes  glgo'kwe.  Wa,  g'1'1- 
£meseda  bEgwa'nEme  gwal  wa'waqlaayo  LE£wis  gEiiE'maxs  la'e 
q!ap!e'x-£idxes->ha£mo'te  xaq   LE£wa  Lle'sases  klwe'ladzEmaxs  la'e 

80  axdzo'ts  la'xa  le'£wa'"ye  qa£s  le  k-!a£stE'nts  la'xa  dE'msxe  la'xa 
i.!Eina="ise.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xa  sEg  ine'te  lax  o'xusiwa£yasa  wa. 
1  Blistered  Salmon. — Wa,  he'Emlxains  gwa'gwex-s£alaLa  a'lxwase 
klo'loxwa.  Wii,  gi'l£Em  qa'tse£staleda  ha'"yalaxa  a'lxwase  k-!5'- 
loxwa  la'eda  tsbsda'qe  ax£e'dxa  k  lo'loxwe  la'xe  ge'xwalaase. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  ts!e'sLala  qa£s  k-!ip!e'des  la'xa  kMO'loxwe  qa£s 
5  pExa'les  E'lsadza£yasa  k- lo'loxwe  la'xa  gu'lta.  Wii,  gi'l£mese 
quxdzo'£nakuleda  klo'loxwaxs  la'e  lex-£IdEq  qa£s  gwaVldeq  iJe'sas 
la'xa  gu'lta.     Wa,  gi'k'mese  hami'.lgEdzo'deda  pE'nsa  lax  Lle'sasa 


boas]  RECIPES  309 

covered  with  blisters,  |  the  woman  knows  that  it  is  done.     Then  [  S 
she  puts  it  on  the  dish-mat.  || 

She  takes  water  and  sprinkles  it  over  it  to  make  it  soft;  |  and  after  10 
she  has  sprinkled  it  with  cold  water,  she  takes  the  |  oil-dish  and 
pours  oil  into  it;  and  alter  she  has  done  so,  she  |  takes  the  blistered 
green  salmon  and  puts  it  down  flat,  and  places  it  before  |  those  who 
are  going  to  eat  it.  Then  she  takes  an  oil-dish  and  puts  it  ||  outside  15 
of  the  blistered  green  salmon.1  .  .  .  As  soon  as  the  woman  |  takes  the 
cup,  the  man  breaks  off  a  piece  of  the  blistered  |  salmon  and  dips  it 
into  the  oil,  and  puts  it  into  his  mouth.  |  He  himself  breaks  off  bits 
from  what  he  is  eating.  | 

Scorched  Salmon.  —Dried2  salmon  is  the  breakfast  of  the  Kwakiutl.|| 
In  the  morning,  as  soon  as  they  arise,  the  wife  of  the  |  chief  takes  20 
dried  salmon  and  scorches  it  by  the  fire.  As  soon  as  |  she  finishes 
scorching  it,  she  pounds  it  on  a  mat  spread  out  on  the  floor,  to  f 
remove  the  scales  loosened  by  the  fire.  As  soon  as  she  finishes 
pounding  it  on  the  floor,  |  she  rubs  it  to  make  it  soft;  and  after  she 
has  rubbed  it,  ||  she  pounds  it  again  on  the  floor  of  the  house.  Then  25 
she  folds  up  the  scorched  dried  salmon  |  and  puts  it  down  on  the 
floor.     Then  she  takes  a  dish  and  puts  it  down  at  |  the  place  where 

k'lo'loxwaxs   la'e   qla'leda    ts  lEda'qaqexs  lEema'e   Llo'pa.     Wii,  la  8 
axdzo'ts  la'xa  he'laxsta'llle  le'£wa£ya. 

Wii,  la  ax-'e'dxa  £wa'pe  qa^s  xosEldzo'des  laq  qa  pe'qwes.  Wii,  10 
gi'Pmes  gwal  xo'sasa  wudassta'  £wiip  la'qexs  la'e  ax-e'dxa  ts!E- 
ba'tsle  qa£s  k!iinxts!o'desa  Lle'ma  laq.  Wa,  gi'lemese  gwa'la  la'e 
ax£e'dxa  la  nELdza'lilatsa  pE'nkwe  k"!5'loxwa  qa£sle  axdzamo'lilas 
lii'xa  haema'pLaq.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  le  k-a'x'£Its 
lax  L!a'sa£yasa  pE'nkwe  k'lo'loxwa1.  .  .  Wii,  gi'lEmesedats!Eda/qe  15 
da'x  £klxa  k!wa£stii'xs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  k"!o'p!ed  la'xa  pE'nkwe 
k'lo'loxwa  qa£s  ts!Ep!e'des  la'xa  ide'£na  qa£s  tslo'qtises  la'xeq. 
Wii,  laE'm  qlule'xsEm  k!o'pk!opa  la'xes  ha£inii'£ve. 

Scorched  Salmon. — Wa,2  he'sm  gaii'xstesa  Kwa'gula  xamia'se. 
Wii,  he'£maaxs  g'a'lae  La'x£wldxa  gaa'la,  wii,  la  ax£e'de  gF.nE'masa  20 
gi'gama£yaxa  xa-mii'se  qa£s  ts!Ex£I.  eq  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mese  gwiil  tslExa'q  la'e  xusxudzi'laq  la'xa  LEbl'le  lE,£wa£ya  qa 
hVwesa  tslExmo'tasa  gu'lta.  Wii,  g  iTmese  gwal  xusxiidzl'laqexs 
la'e  q!\ve'x£IdEq  qa  pe'x£wldes.  Wa,  gi'hmese  gwal  q!o'yaqexs 
la'e  e'tled  xiisxiidzllaq.  Wii,  la  k!o'xusEmdxa  tste'nkwe  xa£ma'sa  25 
qa£s  gi'g'allleq.  Wa,  la  ax5e'dxa  lo'qlwe  qaEs  axea'lileq  la'xes 
k!wae'lase.      Wii,  la  e'tled  3x£e'dxa  ts'.E'nkwe  xa£mii'sa  qa£s  ts!a- 

1  Part  of  the  description  of  the  eating  of  the  salmon  has  been  omitted,  it  being  a  repetition  of  pre- 
vious descriptions. 

2  Line!  19-22  repeated  from  Publ.  Jes.  Exp.  Vol.  V,  427-428. 


310  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

27  she  is  sitting,  and  she  takes  up  again  the  scorched  dried  salmon,  | 
opens  it,  and  spreads  it  out;  then  she  breaks  out  the  belly-part  |  and 
puts  it  down.     Then  she  breaks  the  dried  salmon  to  pieces  and  puts 

SO  it  into  the  ||  dish.  As  soon  as  she  has  finished,  the  woman  arises 
again  and  |  dips  some  oil  out  of  the  oil-box  which  stands  in  the 
corner  of  the|  house.  Then  she  takes  an  oil-dish  [dipping-receptacle], 
and  when  it  is  full  |  she  [comes]  and  puts  it  down  cm  the  floor  at  the 
place  where  she  is  sitting.1  .  .  .     After  (the  man)  |  has  taken  a  drink 

35  he  takes  a  piece  of  the  dried  salmon,  folds  it  up,  chews  ||  it,  and 
then  dips  it  into  the  oil. 
1  Preserved  Brittle  Salmon. — Many  men  |  like  to  eat  preserved 
brittle  old  salmon  roasted.  |  When  a  man  goes  to  visit  one  who  has  | 
5  preserved  roasted  salmon,  the  one  who  has  ||  roasted  old  salmon  at 
once  requests  the  one  who  comes  to  visit  him  to  go  himself  and  | 
invite  his  friends.  Immediately  the  man  goes  |  and  invites  his 
friends  who  are  sitting  on  the  summer-seat.  |  As  soon  as  the  one  who 
invites  them  comes,  |  they  all  go  out  of  (the  summer-seat),  and  they 
all  go  into  the  house  with  the  one  who  goes  to  visit.     Then  a  mat  || 

10  is  spread  out,  and  the  one  who  goes  to  visit  shows  the  guests  where 
to  sit.  |  Then  the  one  who  goes  to  visit  does  not  sit  among  |  his 
friends.  Immediately  the  woman  goes  and  opens  the  |  basket  in 
which  the  roasted  salmon  is  kept,  and  her  husband  tends  the  fire.  | 

28  x£wi'deq  qa  LEple'des.  Wa,  la'wisLa  kMo'podEx  tEkMEqa's  qa£s 
gi'galiles.    Wa,  la    k-!o'k!upsalaxa    xa£ma'se    qa   axtsla'les    la'xa 

30  lo'qlwe.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'la,  le  e'tled  Laxulileda  tslEda'qe  qa£s 
le  tsa'x£Id  la'xa  dE'ngwatsIe  L!e'£naxs  ha£nelae  laxa  one'gwilasa 
go'kwe.  Wa,  laE'm  la  da 'laxa  ts!Eba'ts!e.  Wa,  qo't!a£mesexs 
ga/xae  ka'galllaq  la'xes  klwae'lase.1  .  .  .  Wa,  gi'Pmes  gwill 
na'qaxs    la'e    ax£e'd    la'xa    xa£ma'se    qa£s     k-!o'xusEmdeq.      Wa, 

35  la ma'lexubEiidEq  qa£s  tslsple'des  la'xa  L!e£na. 
X  Preserved  Brittle  Salmon. — Wa,  la  q!e'nEma  be'bEgwanEine 
ax£e'xsd  qa£s  ha£ma'pexa  la  ge'masxa  tso'sa  tslEla'k-  Llo'bEkwa. 
Wa,  gi'pEm  la  qa'tse'staleda  enEmo'ku  bEgwa'nEm  la'xa  axno'- 
gwadasa  ge'mase  Llo'bEkwa;  wa,  la  he'x£ida£mesa  axno'gwadasa 
5  ts!Ela'ke  Llo'bEk"  axk!a'laxa  qa'tse-'stala  qa  les  q!iile'xs£Em 
Le'£lalaxes  £neenEmo'kwe.  Wa,  he'x-ida£mese  la  qa'sJideda  bEgwa'- 
nEme  qa£s  le  Le'£lalaxes  £ne£nEino'kwaxs  awa'qwalae  la'xa  ftwa'- 
qwa£ye.  Wa,  g'il£mese  leda  Le£laliiqexs  ga'xae  hoqiiwEls  qa6s  g'a'xe 
£wi'£laho'gwlL  la'xes  qa'tseestalase.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'leleda  le'£wa£ye 

10  LEbEgwilkwa.  Wa,  a'£mese  he'£ma  qa'tse£stalaxde  qla'xsldzexes 
Le'-'lanEme.  Wa,  la£me'seda  qa'tseestalaxde  k"!es  la  k!wa,-'g-I- 
lilxes  £ne£nEmo'kwe.  Wa,  he'x-£ida£mesa  tslEda'qe  la  xox£widxes 
L!o'bEgwats!e  Lla'bata.     Wa,  la'La  la'£wunEmas  he'laxes  lEgwi'le. 

1  Part  of  the  description  of  the  eating  of  the  salmon  has  been  omitted. 


boas]  RECIPES  311 

Then   the  one  who  went  to  invite  takes  roasted  salmon  and  puts  it 
down  flat  ||  on  the  fire,  with  the  skin  of  the  roasted  salmon  down.  15 
ward.  I  As  soon  as  the  skin  is  scorched,  he  breaks  it  quickly  to  pieces 
and  I  puts  it  on  the  mats  that  have  been  spread  out.     The  woman 
only  I  looks  on.     As  soon  as  he  has  done  so,  he  takes  the  dish  and  | 
puts  the  broken  roasted  salmon  into  it.     Then  he  also  takes  ||  oil  and  20 
pours  it  into  an  oil-dish;  and  |  after  he  has  done  so,  he  takes  up  the 
dish  and  the  oil-dish  which  he  puts  into  the  dish  |  at  the  farther  side, 
and  he  also  takes  water  for  them.  [  Then  they  rinse  their  mouths- 
and  after  they  have  rinsed  their  mouths,  |  they  drink.     After  they 
have  finished  drinking,  they  eat.  ||  Then  the  owner  of  the  house  just  25 
watches  the  one  who  |  came   to  visit  him  when  he  is  attending  to 
the  oil;  for  the  guests  take  much  oil  |  for  dipping.     They  sometimes 
drink  oil  |  when  they  get  choked ;  and  the  one  who  went  to  invite  will 
pour  in  oil  |  whenever  the  oil-dish  is  empty  [of  oil].     When  ||  they  30 
nearly  finish  eating,  the  one  who  went  to  invite  draws  fresh  water,  | 
and  he  does  not  stay  long  before  he  comes  back,  and  |  he  places  the 
bucket  with  the  water  in  it  in  front  of  liis  friends.  |  Then  he  takes 
away  the  dish,  and  puts  it  down  at  |  the  place  where  the  woman  is 
sitting,  and  the  guests  drink  at  once  of  the  ||  water.     After  they  have  35 
finished  drinking,  they  just  |  wait  for  the  second  course.     That  is 
the  end.  | 

Wa,  le'da  qa'tse£stalax-de    ax£e'dxa    Lid'bEkwe    qa£s    pElx-LE'ndes 
la'xa   lEgwIle.     Wa,  laE'm    bEna'dza£ye  Lle'sasa  Llo'bEkwe.     Wa    1.5 
g'i'Pmese  ts!Ex£I'de  Lle'sasexs  la'e  ha'labala  LE'nLEnxsEndEq  qaes 
axdzo'des  la'xa  le'£wa£ve  la  LEbi-.la'.     Wa,  a'£meseda  tslEda'qe  xi'- 
tslaxilaq.      Wa,    gi'l-'mese   gwa'lEXs    la'e    &x£e'dxa    lo'qlwe    qa£s 
k"!a'ts!odesa  LE'ngEkwe  Llo'biik"  laq.     Wa,  he'Einxaa-'wise  ax£e'd- 
xa   L!e'£na    qa£s    klGnxtslo'des    la'xa    tslEba'tsle..     Wa,    gi'1-mese  20 
gwa'lalllExs    la'e    k"a'x£Itsa    lo'qlwa  LE£wa  tslEba'tsle   la  kane'q 
lax  Lla'saneqwasa  lo'qlwa.     AA'ii,   he'Einxaa'wise    la'sa  £wa'pg  laq. 
Wa,  la£rne'se    ts'.Ewe'iJExoda.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese   gwfll  ts!Ewe'L!Exo- 
dExs  la'e  na'x£Ida.     Wa.    gl'Pmese   gwa.1  na'qaxs  la'e  hamx-£i'da. 
Wa,  la£me'da    axno'gwadasa   g-okwe    a'Em    x'i'ts laxilaxa   qa'tse-  25 
£stalax'daxs    la'e    aa'xsllaxa    L!e'£na,    qaxs    lE£ma'e    cj!e'q!Ebaleda 
klwe'laxa  L!e'£naxs  tslEpae.      Wa,  la  na'x£ede  ma'xwa  la'xa    l!c- 
£naxs  la'e  eniEk"!Exa'.     Wa,  he'£mis  la  k!iinxts!o'daatsa  cja'tse'"sta- 
laxdaxs  la'e  £wi'lg"Elts laweda  ts'r.ba'tslaxa  L!e£na.     Wa,  giPmese 
Ela'q  gwa'la  ha£ma'paxs  la'eda  qa'tse£stalaxde  tsax  a'lta  £wa.'pa.  30 
Wa,    k!e'st!a     ga'x-£IdExs     ga'xae     ae'daaqa.      Wa,    a'£mese     la 
ha'nxdzamolilasa     nagatsle'     £wa'bEts!ala     la'xes     £ne£nEmo'kwe. 
Wa,^he'x£ida£mese  ax£e'dxa  lo'qlwe  qa£s  le  ha'ng'alilas  lax  k!wa- 
e'lasasa      tslEda'qe.      Wii,    la    he'x£idaF.m     na'x£Ideda    klwe'laxa 
£wa'pe.  'Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  a'Em  la  awu'lgEiuga£lll  35 
qa£s  he'legintsE£we.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 


312  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.  35 

1  Cold  Roasted  Salmon. — But  now  this  is  finished  with  two  ways  of 
doing  with  |  rousted  salmon-backs, — the  fresh  roasted  salmon-backs;  | 
and  we  have  talked  about  the  old  soaked  roasted  |  salmon-backs. 
5  Now  we  wall  go  on  and  talk  about  the  ||  roasted  salmon-backs  when 
they  are  fed  to  young  men,  even  |  when  they  are  really  dry,  in 
winter.  When  they  are  |  given  to  young  men,  they  are  broken  into 
three  pieces  |  and  put  on  the  food-mat.  |  They  are  just  put  down  in 

10  front  of  the  guests,  ||  and  the  oil-dish  is  also  put  down  |  in  front  of 
what  is  to  be  eaten.  Then  water  is  taken  by  the  |  man  and  given 
to  Iris  guests  to  |  rinse  their  mouths,  and  they  drink  some  of  it  after 
they  have  finished  rinsing  their  mouths;  |  and  after  they  have 
finished  drinking,  they  eat  the  dry  salmon,  which  is  really  brittle;  || 

15  and  only  that  is  different  from  the  soaked  salmon,  |  that  they  do 
not  take  much  oil  when  they  dip  it;  but  they  take  |  much  oil  when 
the  brittle  salmon-back  is  dipped  in,  for  |  the  food  chokes  them. 
There  is  also  always  a  bucket  |  of  water  standing  in  front  of  those 

20  who  are  eating  the  roasted  salmon-back;  ||  for,  as  soon  as  those  who 
are  eating  it  get  choked,  they  |  take  some  water  and  wash  down  what 
chokes  them.1.  .  .  |  As2  soon  as  the  young  men  finish  eating,  they  drink 
much  I  oil;  namely,  the  oil  that  is  left  in  the  oil-dish;  |  anil  after 

1  Cold  Roasted  Silmon.  — Wa,  lar/mr.a  gwa'la  maele'dala  gwe'g'ilasxa 
Llo'bEdzowe  xa'k!adza.  Wa,  la£xa  a'lxwa£se  Llo'bEdzo  xa'kla- 
dza.  Wa,  la'x-dEns  gwa'gwex-s^ala  la'xa  ge'mase  t!elku  Llo'bE- 
dzo xa'kladza.  Wa,  la£me'sEns  wa'g'il  gwa'gwex"sealal  la'xa 
5  Llo'bEdzo  xa'k'ladzaxs  hamgi'layae  la'xa  ha£ya'l£a,  wa'x£mae 
la  a'lak' lala  la  lE'mxwaxa  tslawti'nxe.  Wii,  he'£maaxs  la'e 
hamgi'layo  la'xa  ha£yal£a  la  a/Em  ya'lyuduxusEnd  k'o'k'Ex's'En- 
tsE£wa  qa£s  axdzo'dayuwe  la'xa  he'lExstalile  ha£madzo'  le'- 
£wa£ya.      Wa,    a'£mis   la   axale'lEin   lax  Lla'sExdzama£yasa  Le'Ma- 

10  nEme.  Wii,  a'Emxaa£wise  la  ha'ng'alelEma  tslEba'tsle  lax  iJa'- 
sEnxellltsa  ha£me'L5.  Wa,  laE'mxaii'wise  he'Em  gil  ax£e'tsoesa 
bEgwa'nEma  £wa'pe  qa£s  le  tsa'x-eits  la'xes  Le£lanEme  qa  tslEwe'- 
LlExodes.  Wii,  la  na'xJId  la'qexs  la'e  gwal  tslEwe'LlExoda.  Wa, 
gi'l:mese  gwal  na'qaxs    la'e    hamx'"I'dxa  le    a'lak' !ala    la    tso'sa 

15  qae'xs  la'e  lE'mxwa.  Wa,  le'x-a£mesLaL  5'giicialayos  la'xa  tle'l- 
kwaxs  kle'sae  qle'c^lEbElaxa  Lle'£naxs  tslEpa'e.  Wii,  la'La  q!e'- 
qlEbalaxa  Lle'maxs  ts'.Epaa'sa  tsosa  Llo'bEdzo  xa'k'ladza,  qaxs 
mEkwae  laxo'x  ha£ma£yex.  Wii,  la  he'mEnil£Emxat  1  hameledana- 
gatsle    lax    Lla'sExdzamalllasa    ha£ma/pxa     Llo'bEdzowe    xa'kla- 

20  dza,  qa£s  g'i'Pmae  £mEk-lExo'weda  haema'paqexs  la'e  he'x£idaEm 
tsa'x'£id  la'xa  £wa'pe  qa  £mEkwa'xes  ^F.klExa'wa^yas.1  ■  ■  Wii,2 
g'i'l£mese  gwal  ha£mii'pa  ha£ya'laxs  la'e  q!a'q!ek-lEya  na'x£edxa 
Lle'£na,  yixe's  ane'xsa£ye  la'xa  L!e'£na.g-I'ts!axa  tslEba'tsle.     Wa, 

i  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V.,  p.  428. 
2  Continued  from  ibid.,  p.  428. 


BOAS)  RECIPES  313 

they  finish  drinking  the  oil,  they  drink  some  more  water;  ||  and  after  25 
they  finish  drinking  water,  the}*  wait  for  the  |  next  course.     That 
is  all.  | 

Old  Salmon,  roasted. — Now  I  will  talk  about  the  |  roasted  old 
salmon  when  it  is  eaten  before  it  is  quite  dry.  |  It  is  broken  to  pieces 
and  put  into  a  dish,  ||  and  the  oil-dishes  are,  filled  with  oil,  for  much  30 
oil  |  is  mixed  with  fresh  salmon  coming  from  the  upper  part  of  the 
rivers;  for  |  people  really  choke  with  this  food,  and  sometimes  those 
who  eat  |  the  roasted  old  salmon  have  to  drink  oil  when  they  gel  j 
choked.  The  host  always  pours  oil  into  the  ||  oil-dishes  of  his  guests.  35 
After  the  guests  finish  eating,  |  they  drink  much  water.  This  is 
also  the  breakfast-food  |  of  the  Kwakiutl,  and  they  also  do  the  same: 
they  rinse  |  their  mouths  with  water  before  they  eat.  Now  we  have 
finished  with  this.  | 

Boiled  Salmon. — Now  I  will  talk  about  the  cooking  of  salmon  that 
is  speared,  |  whenitisnotreally  dry.    When  |  the  speared  salmon  isl 
dry,  the  woman  takes  it  down.  |  Then  she  takes  a  kettle  and 
puts  it  on  the  ||  fire,  and  she  pours  water  into  it.     Then  she 
takesher  |  fish-knife  and  cuts  (the  salmon)  topiccesinthiswav: 
and  |  after  she  has  cut  it,  she  puts  it  into  the  kettle  before 


gl'l-'mese  gwal  na'qaxa  L!e'£niixs  la'e  e'tled  na'x£Id   la'xa  £wa'pe. 
Wii,    g'i'l£mese    gwal    na'qaxa    £wa'paxs    la'e    awu'lgamgalll    qa-s  25 
he'legintsE£we.     La-me  gwal. 

Old  Salmon,  roasted. — He'EinlxaEn  gwa'gwexs'alaLa  ts!Ela'ke 
Llo'bEkwa,  yixs  kamgi'layaaxs  k!e's-mae  lE'mx£weda  a'la-nia. 
Wa,  laE'm  k"!d'k!upsalasE£\va  qa£s  axtslo'yuwe  la'xa  lo'qhve.  Wii, 
la  qo'qutleda  ts!ets!eba'ts!axa  L'.e'ena  qaxs  q!e'q!Ebalaya£eda  30 
alxwa'se  tsle'nas  g'ii'yol  lax  -nE'ldziisa  wlwa',  qaxs  a'lak'Ia- 
lae  £mEkwa'  la'xox  ha£ma£yex.  Wii,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Ena  nax- 
na'qeda  ha£ma'paxa  tslE'lginete  L!o'bEx"xa  L!e'£niixs  la'e  £mE- 
k'lExa'.  Wa,  la  he'niEnala£ma  klwe'lase  giiqa'sa  L!e'£na  lax  ts  le- 
ts !Eba'ts!ases  Le'£lanEme.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwal  ha£mii'peda  k!we'-  35 
laxs  la'e  q!a'q!ek'!Eya  nii'x£edxa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  g'as'mxaat!  gaax- 
stesa  Kwii'gulaxa  gaa'la.  Wii,  he'F.mxaa  gwe'gilaxs  tslEwe'LlE- 
xodaaxsa  £wa'paxs  k!e's£mae  hamx,£i'da.     Wa,  la£mEns  gwal  liiq. 

Boiled  Salmon. — Wii,  la£me'sEn  gwa£gwex's£alal  la'xa  sEgine'taxs  i 
la'e  ha£me'x£sllasE£wa,  yixs  k'!e's£mae  a'laEm  lE'mx£wIda.  Wii, 
he'£maaxs  la'eda  sEg-ine'te  k'!a'ya£xuwida,  la'eda  tslEda'qe  axa.'- 
xodEq.  La£me's  ax£e'dxa  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  ha'nxLEndes  la'xa 
lsgwl'le.  Wii,  la  giixts!o'tsa  £wa'pe  liiq.  Wii,  la  ax-e'dxes  xw:i'-  5 
Layowe  qa£s  t  !o't  !Ets  lEndeq ;  g'a  gwa'les  t'o'sa-yeg-a  {fig.) .  Wa,  gi'l- 
£mese  gwiil  tlo'saqexs  la'e  ax£stE'nts  la'xa  ha'nx'Lanaxs  k-!e's£mae 


314  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.S6 

8  it  |  begins  to  boil.  Then  she  takes  a  stone  and  puts  it  on  top 
of  it  |  to  keep  it  under  the  water;  and   after  she  has  clone  so,  she 

10  takes  ||  a  dish  and  a  kelp  bottle  with  oil  in  it,  and  puts  them  |  at  the 
place  where  she  is  sitting;  and  she  does  not  leave  (the  salmon)  long  on 
the  fire,  |  before  it  is  done.  Then  she  takes  it  off,  and  at  once  she  | 
takes  her  tongs  and  lifts  it  out  and  puts  it  into  the  dish.  |  After  it  is 

15  all  out,  then  she  smoothes  it  in  thedish,so  ||  that  it  is  level.  Then  she 
takes  her  kelp  with  oil  in  it,  and  she  |  pours  it  over  the  quarter-dried 
salmon  in  the  dish.  |  After  she  has  done  so,  she  gives  water  to  those  | 
whom  she  is  going  to  give  to  eat.  As  soon  as  they  have  rinsed  their 
months,  they  drink;  |  and  after  they  finish  drinking  water,  she  puts  the 

20  dish  ||  before  those  whom  she  is  going  to  give  to  eat.  When  this  is 
done,  they  go  to  draw  |  fresh  water  for  them  to  drink  after  they  have 
eaten;  and  it  is  not  |  long  before  he  who  went  to  draw  water  comes 
back;  and  after  those  |  to  whom  she  has  given  to  eat  have  eaten,  the 
woman  takes  soft  |  white  cedar-bark  and  gives  it  to  those  to  whom 

25  she  has  given  to  eat,  to  wipe  their  hands  with,  ||  and  to  take  the  oil 
off  of  the  hands  of  those  to  whom  she  has  given  to  eat,  for  there  is 
really  much  |  oil  on  their  hands,  and  they  are  always  covered  with 
oil  when  I  key  are  eating  quarter-dried  |  speared  salmon  with  oil  for 
their  food.     After  they  have  |  wiped  their  hands,  the  woman  takes  | 

s  mF.dE'lx£wkla.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  tle'sEme  qa£s  emEkwayl'ndes  laq 
qa    wii'nsalayos.     Wa,  g*l'l£mese    gwfd    aa'xsilaqexs   la'e    8x£e'dxa 

10  lo'qlwa  lk'wcs  £wa'£wade  L!e'£nats!ala  qa£s  ga'xe  ax£a/lllas  la'xes 
klwae'lase.  Wii,  kle'stla  ge'x  i.aleda  ha'nLEndas  la'xa  lsgwl'laxs 
la'e  Llo'pa.  Wii,  la£me'se  ha'nx'sEndEq.  Wii,  he'x  £ida£mese 
ax£e'dxes  tse'sLala  qa£s  lF.xHlstE'ndeq  qa£s  axtsla'les  la'xa  loqlwe. 
Wii,    gi'Pmese    £wI'£lo£staxs    la'e    gwe'laltslots    la'xa    loqlwe    qa 

15  enEma'k"tyes.  ^Vii,  la  ax£e'dxes  £wa/£wade  J.  !e'£nats!ala  qa£s  klihi- 
gELEyi'ndes  la'xa  la  g'its!a'xa  lo'qlweda  klungEgEkwe  fcs!ets!ElE- 
mala.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwa'l^alilExs  la'e  tsii'x£Itsa  £wa'pe  la'xes 
ha£mgi'lasoLe.  Wa,  g'i'b'mese  gwal  ts lEwe'L texodEXs  la'e  na/x£Ida. 
Wa,  g-i'Pmese  gwal   na'qaxa    Ewa'paxs  la'e    kii'glmlilasa  lo'qlwe 

20  la'xes  ha£mgi'lasoLe.  Wa,  g1'l£mese  gwa'l£al!lExs  la'e  tsa'x£Itsi:- 
£weda  a'lta  £wap  qa  na'geglLEs  qo  gwal  ha£ma'pLo.  Wii,  kie'st  !a 
ga'laxs  g-a'xae  ae'daaqeda  tsa'xa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwfd 
ha£ma'pa  ha£mg"i'lasE£waxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  qlo'yaakwe 
ka'dzEkwa  qa£s  le  tslas   la'xes   ha£mgI'lasE£we   qa  dedE'nx£w!des 

25  qa  lawii's  q!E'lq!Elts!ana£yases  ha£mgi'lasE£we  qaxs  a'lae  q!e'nEme 
q!E'lq!Elts!ana£yas  qaxs  he'mEnala£mae  tlEbEgF.li'sa  k!u'nqa£yasa 
sEg'ine'te  ts!e'ts!ElEmalaxa  L!e'eniixs  ha£ma'£yae.  W«a,  gi'Pmese 
gwal  dedE'nkweda  ha£mg"I'lasE£waxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa 
o'gu£la£me   lo'qlwa    qa£s    qEptslo'desa  £wa'pe    laq.     Wa,  la   e'tled 


boas]  RECIPES  315 

another  dish  and  pours  water  into  it,  and  she  ||  puts  it  before  those  30 
to  whom  she  has  given  to  eat,  and  they  wash  their  hands.  |  After 
they  have  done  so,  the  woman  gives  them  water  |  to  drink.     After 
they  have  finished  drinking,  they  wait  for  |  the  next  course.     That 
is  the  end.  | 

Old  Dried  Salmon. — Now  we  will  again  talk  about  dried  salmon.  |   i 
That  is  the  way  of  cooking  fresh  dried  salmon,  what  I  said  first;1  |  and 
this  is  the  way  of  cooking  old  dried  salmon,  what  I  am  going  |  to  say. 
This  is  when  it  is  the  middle  of  winter,  when  ||  all  the  women  put  5 
down  the  soaking-boxes  in  the  corner  of  their  houses.  |  Then   (the 
woman)  puts  into  the  water  much  dried  salmon.     Now  she  soaks 
it  I  to  make  it  soft.     In  the  morning,  as  soon  as  day  comes,  the 
woman  |  takes  some  of  the  soaked  dried  salmon  and  folds  it  up;  then 
she  puts  it  I  into  a  kettle  and  places  it  over  the  fire  of  her  house.  |[ 
Next  she  pours  not  much  water  on  it.     Then  it  begins  to  boil;  |  and  10 
the  kettle  is  not  over  the  fire  long,  when  |  she  takes  it  off.     Then  the 
woman  takes  a  dish  and  |  puts  it  down,  and  she  takes  (the  salmon) 
out  with  her  tongs  and  |  puts  it  into  the  dish.     Then  she  waits  until 
it  gets  cool;  ||  and  as  soon  as  it  is  cool,  she  takes  it  and  breaks  it  15 
into  I  small  pieces.     Then  she  puts  it  into  the  dish;  then  |  she  takes 
the  oil-dish  and  pours  oil  into  it;  and  then  |  she  puts  it  before  him  to 
whom  she  is  going  to  give  to  eat.     Others  pour  the  |  oil  on  the 

qaxdzamo'lllas    la'xes    ha£mg'i'lasEfwe.     Wii,    laE'm    ts<E'nts!Eii-  30 
x'wlda.     Wii,  g  i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'eda  tsbada'qe  tsa'x£Itsa  ewa'pe 
laq  qa  na'xeIdes.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwiil  na'qaxs  la'e  awiiigEmgalil 
qa£s  he'legintsE£we.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 

Old    Dried    Salmon. — He'EmlxaEns   gwa'gwexsealasLa    xaema'se.  l 
Wa,  he/Em   hame'xsllaene£xa    a'lxwase    xaema'sEn   gl'lx.de    wa'l- 
dEina.     Wa,  he'£mis  hame'xsllaenexa  ge'mase   xa£ma'sg"in  la'i.Ek- 
al  wa'ldEma.'     Wii,  he'-cmaaxs  la'e  nEgEltsE'megi  tslawii'nxa  la'e 
£na'xwa£medats!e'daqe  axJa'lllxa  t!e'lats!e  lax  o'negwilases  g'o'kwe.  5 
Wa,  la  mo'stallltsa  qle'nEme    xa£ma's  laq.     Wa,  iaE'm  tle'laq  qa 
ti:'lx-wkles.     Wii,  giT'mese    £na'x"eidxa   gaa'laxs    la'eda  tslEda'qe 
axT'dxa  la'xa  tlelkwe  xafma'sa  qa£s  k- !o'xusEindeq  qa£s  axtslo'des 
Ia'xa  ha'nxxano  qaes  ha'nxLEiules  la'xa  lEgwIlases  go'kwe.     Wii, 
la  a'l-cEm  gii'qlEqasa    kle'se  qle'nEm    £wap  laq.     Wa,  le  mEdslx-  10 
ewlda.     Wa,  k!e's£Emxaa'wise  ge'xLfila  ha'nxxiila  la'xa  lEgwI'laxs 
la'e   ha'nxsEntsF/wa.     Wii,    la    ax£e'deda   tsteda'qaxa  lo'qwe  qafs 
ha'ngaliles.      Wii,    la     fix^e'dxes    ts!e'sLala    qa  kMipiistE'ndeq  qa 
k!ipts!o'des   la'xa   lo'q!we.     Wa,  la   k'a'k'Ewaq    qa    wudEX-eI'des. 
Wa,   g-i'Pmese    wudEx,£i'dExs   la'e    ax£e'dEq    (\afs   k-!o'k!upsE'nde  15 
qa    5m£Ema'yastowes     la'e    axtslodalas     la'xa    lo'qlwe.      Wii,    la 
ax£e'dxa  ts!Eba'ts!e   qa£s    k!unxts!o'desa   L!e'£na   laq.     Wii,  IaE'm 
ka'gEmlilas  la'xes  ha£mgi'las6£Le.    Wii,  le'da  wao'kwe  klu'nq  teqasa 


316  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.3j 

20  soaked  salmon  when  they  break  it  into  the  dish;  and  [|  the  Koskimo 
drink  the  liquid  of  the  soaked  salmon  as  they  eat  it,  for  |  they  have 
no  oil.  | 

Fresh  Dried  Salmon.     The  food  of  thosewho  catch  salmon  |  is  fresh 
dried  salmon.     Before  the  (dried)  salmon  is  dry,  j  it  is  taken  by  the 

25  woman  and  put  down  on  a  mat.  Then  ||  she  takes  her  fish-knife  and 
cuts  the  quarter-dried  salmon;  |  and  she  puts  it  into  a  keltic  and  she 
puts  the  kettle  over  the  |  fire  of  the  house.  Then  she  pours  water  in  In 
it;  |  and  it  does  not  stay  there  long  boiling,  when  she  takes  the  kettle 
off  the  fire.  |  Then  she  puts  it  down  on  the  floor,  and  takes  a  dish, 

30  and  oil  from  a  ||  kelp  bottle  in  which  the  oil  is  kept.  Then  she 
puts  (the  salmon)  down  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.  |  Then  she 
takes  her  largest  spoon  and  scoops  out  |  the  quarter-dried  salmon 
and  puts  it  into  the  dish.  As  soon  as  she  has  |  spread  out  the 
quarter-dried  salmon  evenly  in  the  dish,  she  takes  the  kelp  bottle 
in  which  the  oil  is,  and  pours  (the  oil)  over  the  food  to  be  served.  || 
1  Green  Salmon. — This  is  another  break  fa  si -food  of  the  |  Kwakiutl, 
when  they  live  at  the  river  catching  salmon.  It  is  the  "green 
salmon''  j  cut  straight  along  the  hack.  This  is  the  way  it  is  cut: 
At  this  time  it  is  not  |  really  dry,  and  therefore  it  is  called 
5  "half-dry  ||  green  salmon."  The  woman  just  takes  it  down 
from  where  it  is  hanging;   j  then  she  puts  it  on  a  food-mat, 

i.'F.'rna    la'xa  t  le'lkwaxs    la'e    k"!6'pts!Ewaku   la'xa    to'qlwe.     Wa, 
on  le'da  Go'sgimoxwe  na'xnaqax  £wa'palasa  tlelkwaxs  t!e'lt!alae  qaxs 
k-!ea'sae  L!e'£na. 

Fresh   Dried    Salmon.- -Wit.  he'Em   ha£ma'sa    wrwii'miseda    dze'- 

(l/Klmala  t!Ele'ku.     Wit,  he'£maaxs  he'£mae  a'les  dze'leda  xa-ma'se 

ia'as  axa'xayasa  tsbsda/qe  qa£s  axadzo'des  la'xa  le'c'wa-ye.     Wa,  la 

•  .y  ax£e'dxes  xwa'Layowe  qa£s  t !5't !Ets tendexa  dze'dzEhnala  xa£ma'sa. 

Wa.  la  axtslo'ts    la'xa    ha'nxi.anowe.      Wii.   la    ha'nx  i.Ents    la'xa 

lEgwilases    go'kwe.      Wii,    lawl'si.a    gu'qlEqasa   ewa'pe  laq.      Wa, 

k-  ie'st  lage'giltslla  maE'radslqulaxs  la'e  ha'nx'sEndxes  ha'nx'LEnde. 

Wa,  la  ha'ngalilasexs  la'e    fix£e'dxa  l5'q!we    le-'wTs  j.!e'-na.  la'xa 

UK  £wa'ewadets!alax"deL!e/£na,    Wii.  la  axea'lllas  la'xes  klwae'lase.    Wa: 

la  ax£e'dxa  Ewa'lega£yases  k'a'k'Ets lEnaqe,  qa£s  XElo'stEndes  la'xa 

dze'dzEhnala  qaes  axts!o'des  la'xa  lo'qlwe.     Wii,  g  iT'mese  -'wl'daxs 

la'e    £nEma'g'aalts!odxa    dze'dzElmalaxs    la'e    ax£e'dxa  ewa'ewade 

g  I'tsF/watsa  L!e'£na  qa£s  klii'nqlEqes  la'xes  ha£mgl'£layui.e. 

]       Green  Salmon. — Wa,  gaE'mxat!    £nEmx£idala    gaa'xstesa    Kwii'- 

gulaxs  la'e  g-o'kula  la'xes   wFwame'dzaseda   k!o'loxwexa  HEge'- 

ga£3Tas  xwa'La£ye.    A'Emgagwale  xwa'La£yasega  [fig.).   Wa,  lak'les 

a'laEm   lE'mxwa.     Wii,   he'£mis  hT'gilas     la    Le'gadKs     k!a'yaxwa 

5  klo'loxwa.     Wit,  laE'mxaa  a'£meda  tslEda'qe  axa'xr>dqexs  ge'xwa- 

laLElae.     Wa,  laE'm    axdzo'ts  la'xa    ha£me'xslladzE£we   le'£wa£ya. 


boas]  RECIPES  317 

and    she  takes   her   fish-knife    and    cuts    up   the  green  salmon.  |  7 
Then  what  she  is  cutting  is  in  small  pieces.     When  she  finishes  this 
work,  |  she  takes  the  kettle  and  puts  it  over  the  fire,  and  she  ||  pours  10 
water  into  it.     As  soon  as  it  boils,  she  takes  |  the  half-dry  green 
salmon  and  puts  it  into  the  |  boiling  water  on  the  lire.     However,  it 
is  not  on  the  fire  really  long,  when  she  takes  it  off.  [  Then  she  puts  it 
down  and  takes  a  dish, which  she  puts  down:   |  then  she  takes  oil  from 
the  kelp  bottle  and  puts  that  down;  then  she  ||  takes  an  oil-dish  and  15 
puts  it  down;  and  as  soon  as  |    all   these  things  named  have  been 
brought,  she  takes  the  tongs  and  takes  out  |  the  cut  pieces  of  green 
salmon  and  puts  them  into  the  dish.     She  |  takes  them  up  with  the 
tongs  because  they  are  [not]  quarter  dry,  and  they  are  not  j  dry.     This 
i<  called  "half-dry  green  salmon."     As  soon  as  the  dish  is  ||  full,  she  20 
levels  it  out  so  that  it  is  level.     Then  she   |   takes  an  oil-dish   and 
pours  the  oil  into  it.1  |  .  .  .  (The2  man  who  eats  it)  takes  what  he  is 
going  to  eat  and  folds  it  up.     He  chews  |  one  end  of  it;  and  as  soon 
as  what  he  has  chewed  is  soft,  he  dips  it  |  into  the  oil  and  puts  it 
into  his  mouth;  and  he  continues  doing  this  while  ||  eating.  |  25 

As  soon  as  he  finishes  eating,  the  woman  rises  from  her  |  place  and 
takes  the  dish  and  the  oil-dish.     Then  she  |  puts  them  down  near 

Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  xwa'Layowe  qa£s  tlo'tlEtsh.'nde  la'xa  kMo'loxwe.  7 
Wa,  laE'm  am£ama'yastowe  t!o'sa\yas.     Wa,  la  gwii'le  axa'£yasexs 
la'e  ax£e'dxa  ka'nx-Lanowe  qa£s  ha'nxLEndes  la'xa  lEgwI'le.     Wa, 
laguxtslo'tsa  -wa'pe  laq.     Wa,  g'iT'niese  mE(lElx£wI'dExsla'e  ax'e'il-  10 
xa    la    k'!a'yaxwa    klo'lox"   qaes   SxstE'ndes   la'xa    la    ha'nxxala 
maF.'mdElqula.      Wa,  k/!e'st!a  a/laEm  ge'x-Lalaxs    la'e  ha'nx-sEn- 
dsq.     Wa,  la  ha'ngalllaqexs  la'e  Sx£e'dxa  lo'q!we  qa£s  ha'ngalltes. 
Wa,  la  axee'dxes  L!e'ena  £wa'£wadets!ala  qa£s  ax£a'llles.    Wa,  la  e'tied 
ax£e'dxa    ts!Eba'ts!e    qa£s    ha'ng"aliles.     Wa,,  gi'l£mese  £wl£la  gax  15 
axe'lEn  Le'LEqElasE£waxs  la'e  ax'e'dxa  tslesLala  qa£s   k' Hpusta'lexa 
t  !o't '.Ets  laa'kwe  k' lo'loxwa  qa£s  k!ipts!a'les  la'xa  lo'q!we.     He 'Em 
la'gilas     k'  lipnstalaqexs     k' le'sae      dze'dzEhnala.      Wa,    la    k!es 
lE'mxwa.     He'Em  Ee'gadEs  kla'yaxwa  kloloxwa.     Wii,  gi'Pmese 
qo't!eda  lo'qlwaxs  la'e  £iiEma'gaalts!odEq   qa  £nEma'kiyes.     Wa,  20 
la  ax£e'dxa  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  k!iinxts!o'desa  L!e'£na  laq.1  .  .  Wii,2  la 
da'x-£ld  la'xes  haema'Le  qaes  k-!6'xusEmdeq.     Wa,  la  male'xul>Eii- 
dEq.     Wa,,  gi'Pmese  la  tE'lx£wkle   male'kwa£yasexs  la'e  ts!Ep!e'ts 
la'xa    L!e'£na     qa£s    ts!o'q!uses.     Wa,  he'xsa£mes    la    gwe'gilaxs 
lia£ma'pae.  25 

Wa,  gi'h'mese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'eda  ts!Eda/qe  Lii'xulll   la'xes 
klwae'lase  qa£s  le  5x£e'dxa    l5'q!we    LE£wa  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  g-a'xe 

i  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  129. 
•  Continued  from  ibid.,  p.  429. 


318  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  SB 

28  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.  Then  she.  "pours  |  the  green  salmon 
thatis  left  over  back  into  the  kettle  in  which  it  was  boiled.1  .  .  .  Then2 

30  the  man  sits  down  ||  and  waits  for  her  to  give  him  the  second  course. 
I  shall  |  talk  about  this  later  on,  for  I  am  talking  now  about  |  the 
breakfast.  | 
1  Soaked  Green  Salmon  (1). — Now  I  will  talk  again  |  about  soaked 
green  salmon, — the  food  of  those  who  do  not  go  to  catch  |  salmon  in 
green  salmon  that  have  been  dry  for  a  long  time.  |  They  are  always 
5  winter, — soaking  in  a  soaking-box,  which  stands  in  the  ||  corner  of  the 
house,  full  of  water.  Dried  green  salmon  are  always  kept  |  in  it.  After 
they  have  been  soaking  for  two  days,  |  they  get  soft;  then  the  soaked 
green  salmon  are  taken  |  and  folded  up.  The  kettle  is  taken,  |  and 
the  soaked  green  salmon  are  put  into  it.     Then  (the  kettle)  is  put  || 

10  over  the  fire  of  the  house.  As  soon  as  it  is  well  over  the  fire,  | 
water  is  poured  into  it;  but  now  it  is  a  longer  time  over  the  fire  | 
boiling  before  the  cook  takes  it  off .  Then  she  takes  |  a  dish  and  she 
puts  it  down,  and  she  again  takes  an  oil-dish  |  and  oil  and  puts  it  on 

15  the  floor  where  she  is  sitting.  Then  she  ||  takes  her  tongs  and  takes 
up  the  soaked  green  salmon  |  out  of  the  kettle  and  puts  them  into 
the  dish.  Then  she  |  waits  for  them  (to  cool  off).  Then  she  takes  a 
food-mat  and  spreads  it  |  before  the  one  to  whom  she  is  going  to  give 

28  ka'galilas  la'xes  klwae'lase.  Wa,  la  qapstE'ntsa  he£maxLa£ye 
k!6'loxu  la/xa  ha'nxLEiidaatslex'diiq.1  .  .   .  Wa,2  la  klwfig'alileda 

30  bEgwiinEm,  qa£s  awu'lgEmgalile  qa£s  he'legintsE£we.  Wa,  a'l£EmlwI- 
SEn  gwa'gwexs£alaL  laq  qaE'n  le'xaene£me  gwa'gwexs£alasa 
ha£ma/yaxa  gaa'la. 
1  Soaked  Green  Salmon  (1). — Wa,  he'-'niEn  lal  6'tledEL  gwa'gwex-s£a- 
lasLa  tle'lkwe  klo'loxwa.  Wa,  he'sm  ha£ma£yasa  kle'se  wl'£wa- 
mets lenoxwaxa  tslawunxa  la  ga'las  lEmo'kwa  k'lo'loxwa.  Wa, 
la  he'mEnalaEm  tle'lascV  la'xa  tle'latsliixs  ha£ne'lae  lax  one'- 
5  gwllasa  g'o'kwe  qo'tlaxa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  la  he'mEnalaEm  ax£sta'- 
dayoweda  hcmio'kwe  k'lo'lox"  laq.  Wa.  he'tla  la  malplE'n£stElsa 
t!e'lasE'we  klo'lox"  la'qexs  la'e  pe'x^wlda.  Wii,  la  ax£e'tsE£\veda 
tde'lkwe  klo'loxwa  qa£s  k-!5'x"sEintsE£we.  Wa,  la  ax£e'tsE£weda 
hanxLanowe   qa£s    axts!o'yoweda    tle'lkwe   k!o'loxu   laq.   Wa,   la 

10  ha'nx'Lano  la'xa  lEgwi'lasa  g'o'kwe.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  E'lgaaLElaxs 
la'e  gu'q!Eqas5sa  £wa'pe.  Wii,  la'"me'sLa  ge'gexxalaEm  maE'm- 
dElqulaxs  laeda  ha£mex'sllE]gise  hanx-sEndEq.  Wa,  la£mes  ax£edxa 
lo  q!\ve  qa£s  ax£a'llles.  Wii,  laEmxaa'wise  ax£e'dxa  ts!Eba'ts!e 
LE£wa   L!S'£na    qa£s    ax£a'liles    la'xes    klwae'lase.       Wa,   la   e'tled 

15  ax£e'dxes  ts!e'sLala  qa£s  k!ipu£sti;'ndexa  t!e'lkwe  k-!6'loxwa 
la'xa  hanxLauowe  qa£s  k'!ipts  lodes  la'xa  lo'qlwe.  Wa,  la 
ka'lvEwaq.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  ha£madzo  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  le  LEpEmli'- 

i  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  v,  p.  430. 
2  Continued  from  ibid.',  p.  430. 


boas]  RECIPES  3 1 9 

breakfast;   and  as  soon  as  the  soaked  (salmon)  are  lukewarm,  |  she 
breaks  them  in  pieces  small  enough  for  one  ||  bite.1  ...  20 

As  soon  as  she  has  finished  breaking  the  soaked  green  salmon, 
she  spreads  them  out  |  so  as  to  make  them  level  in  the  dish- 
Then  she  takes  the  oil-dish  |  and  pours  the  oil  into  it.  As  soon 
as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  |  the  dish  and  the  oil-dish  and 
puts  them  j|  in  front  of  the  one  to  whom  she  is  going  to  give  to  25 
eat.  She  puts  down  the  oil-dish  just  |  outside  of  the  dish;  and  after 
doing  so,  she  draws  water  and  |  gives  it  to  him  who  is  going  to  eat. 
Then  the  man  who  is  going  to  eat  takes  |  a  mouthful  of  water  and 
rinses  the  mouth;  and  after  [  rinsing  the  mouth,  lie  drinks.  After 
drinking,  he  takes  ||  a  piece  of  the  soaked  salmon  and  dips  it  in  the  30 
oil  and  puts  it  into  his  mouth.  |  He  never  chews  it,  because  it  is 
soft.  Then  he  keeps  on  |  doing  this  whde  he  is  eating;  and  when  it 
is  nearly  all  gone,  he  stops  |  eating2.   .   .   .  | 

After  he  finishes  drinking,  lie  waits  for  the  second  course.  ||  That  is  35 
the  end  of  this. 

Soaked  Green  Salmon  (2).-  -When  a  man  wishes  to  |  invite  his  tribe  1 
the  following  day,  he  |  asks  permission  of  his  wife  to  give  a  feast  (to 
his  friends)  on  the  following  day.  |  The  woman  at  once  makes  her 
husband  go  and  fetch  ||  water  and  pour  it  into  the  soaking-box.     5 

las  la'xes  gaa'xstala'matsE-'we.     Wa,  g'iTmese  k'o'x^wideda   t!e'l-  IS 
kwaxs    la'e    k'!o'k!upsEndF.q    qa    haya'lrastowes     lax    £nE'mp!En- 
qtetsla'ye.1     .     .     .  20 

Wii,  g-il£mese  gwal  klopaxa  t!elkwe  kloloxiixs  lae  goli£liilaq 
qa  £nEinagaalts!owes  laxa  loqlwe.  Wa,  la  ax^edxa  tsh.batsle, 
qa£s  k!unxts!odeq  visa  L!e£na.  Wa,  gih'mese  gwah:xs  lae  Sx£e- 
deda  tslEdaqaxa  loqlwe  Le£wa  ts!Ebats!e  qa£s  lii  kaxdzamotsa 
loqlwe  laxes  ha£mgllasE-we.  Wa,  lii  kax£Itsa  ts!Ebats!e  lax  L!a- 25 
sa£yasa  loqlwe.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwidExs  lae  tsex£idxa  Ewape  qa£s 
lii  tshis  laxa  ha£mapLe.  Wii,  lii  dax£ideda  ha£miipLaxa  Ewape, 
qa£s  hamsgEmdllaq  qa£s  ts!EweL!Exode.  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwal  ts!E- 
weLlExodExs  lae  nax£ida.  Wa,  g'ih'mese  gwal  naqaxs  lae  daxa 
laxa  t!elkwe  lclolox"  c[a£s  ts!Ep!edes  laxa  L!e£na  qa£s  ts!oq!iises.  'M) 
Wa,  laE'm  kewa'xa  ma'lex"bEndEq  qaxs  tE'lqwae.  Wii,  a'x'sa£mes 
he  gwe'g'ilaxs  ha£ma'pae.  Wa,  g'i'l£Emse  Ela'q  £wi'£laxs  la'e  gw&i 
ha£ma'pa.2     .     . 

Wii,  g'i'l£mese   gwal    na'qaxs  la'e  awE'lgEmgalil   cja£s  he'legin- 
tsE£we.       Wa,  laE'mxaa  gwa'la.  35 

Soaked  Green  Salmon(2).—  Wii,  he'£maaxs  la'e  £ne'keda  bEgwa'iiEme  1 
qa£s  Le'lahlxes  go'lgukulotaxa  la'La  e'tledEl  £na'x£IdEL.     Wa,  la- 
£mese  hana'kaxes  gEiiE'me   C[a£s  klwe'lasekjexa  la'La   £na'x£I(li'.i,. 
Wii,  he'x-£ida£mesa  tslEda'qe   axk-!a'laxes  lii'£wunEme  qa  les  tsiix 
£wa'pa  qa£s  qEpts!o'yoxa    t!e'lats!e.     Wii,  he'x'£ida£mese  la  tsa'ye  5 

>  Here  follows  p.  750,  lines  1-3.       2  The  description  of  the  eating  of  the  salmon  has  been  omitted. 


320  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann .36 

6  Her  husband  goes  at  once  |  and  pours  water  into  the  soaking-box,  that 
stands  in  the  |  corner  of  the  house;  and  when  it  is  half  full  of  water, 
the  |  woman  takes  roasted  salmon  and  puts  it  into  it;  and  |  when  it  is 

10  done,  the  man  goes  to  get  fire-wood  and  ||  takes  it  into  his  house. 
Now  it  is  evening.  As  soon  as  |  night  comes,  they  lie  down;  and 
therefore  in  the  morning,  when  daylight  comes,  |  the  man  arises  and 
builds  a  fire  in  his  house;  and  as  soon  as  the  |  fire  in  the  house  blazes 
up,  lie  sends  one  of  his  house-fellows  to  go  and  |  call  all  the  men;  and 

]  f)  it  is  not  long  before  the  messenger  ||  comes  back.  Immediately  they 
clear  the  house;  |  and  after  they  finish  clearing  it,  they  take  the 
kettle  and  |  put  it  down  in  front  of  the  fire;  and  the  woman  takes  | 
her  dishes  and  places  them  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting,  and  also  | 

20  the  oil-dishes  and  oil.  As  soon  as  this  is  all  ready  in  the  house,  ||  the 
man  goes  to  call  the  guests  again.  He  stays  a  long  time  outside 
calling  them,  but  |  the  men  come  in  one  by  one  into  the  house.  At 
last  they  are  |  all  inside.  Then  a  drum  is  taken  and  is  |  pxit  down 
on    the    right-hand    side    of    the   guests.     Immediately    the  |  song- 

25  leader  begins  to  sing  the  new  songs.  Now  they  ||  sing  a  feast-song, 
and  the  host  takes  the  soaked  |  salmon  out  of  the  water  and  puts  it 
into  the  large  kettle.  |  When  it  is  full,  it  is  put  over  the  fire,  and  | 
1  hen  water  is  poured  into  it.     It  does  not  boil  long  |  before  the  kettle 


6  ta'£wunEmas  qa£s  qEptsIa'les  laxa  tle'latslaxs  ha'ne'lae  la'xa 
o'negwilases  g'o'kwe.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  nEgo'yoxa  ewa'paxs  la'eda 
tsteda'qe  ax£e'dxa  Llo'bEkwe  qa£s  le  axstE'nts  laq.  Wii,  gil- 
miese  gwa'lExs  la'aseda  bEgwanEme  ane'x£edxa  lEqwa'  qa£s  ga'xe 

10  ax£a'hlas  Ia'xes  go'kwe.  Wii,  laE'm  dza'qwa.  Wii,  g-I'l£mese  ga'- 
nnlMdi'.xs  la'e  ku'lx£Ida.  Wii,  gi'lgll£mas  £na'x£idxa  gaa'laxs  la'- 
eda bEgwii'nEme  La'x£wid  qa£s  lEgwi'lexes  go'kwe.  Wii,  gTl£mese 
xi'qostawe  lEgwl'la£yasexs  la'e  '"ya'laqases  £nEina'elwiite  qa  les 
Lc'Malaxa  £na'xwa  be'ljEgwaiiEma.     Wa,  k!e'st!a   gii'laxs   g'a'xae 

15  ae'daaqeda  Le  £lalElg  ise,  wii,  he'x£ida£mese  e'x£wldxa  go'kwe. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  e'kwaqexs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  ha'nx'Lanowe  qa 
g'ii'xes  hami'i  la'xa  osta 'biases  lEgwiie.  Wii,  le'da  ts!Edii'qeax£e'd- 
xes  lo'slqlwe  qa  ga'xes  niExe'l  Ia'xes  klwae'lase.  Wa,  he'£misa 
ts!e'ts!Ebats!e  LE£wa  L!e£na.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wi£la  la  gwa'lila,  laasa 

20  e'tse£sta.  Wa,  lai:'m  ge'gilsa  e'tse£sta.  Wa,  laE'mLa  £nal£nEmo'- 
k!iimkeda  bEgwa'nEmaxs  g-ii'xae  hogwI'LEla.  Wa,  ladza'la£me 
nvl-laci.a.  Wii,  hex£ida£mese  ax£etsE£weda  mEna'ts!e  qa£s  le  axa- 
lelEm  lax  he'lk" lodEnuLEmalilasa  klwe'le.  Wa,  he'x£ida£mese 
na,'q!aq!a£yas   da'qalasa  a'ltsEine  c[!E'mdEma.     Wii,  la'x-£da£xu£me 

25  k!we'£lala  dE'nxEla.  Wii,  la'Leda  klwe'lase  ax£ustE'ndxa  t!e'l- 
kwe  Llo'bEk"  qa£s  ga'xe  axtslo'ts  la'xa  £wa'lase  ha'nxxanowa. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  qo'tlaxs  la'e  ha'nx'LEnts  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  a'l- 
£mese   guq'.Eqa'sa  ewa'pe  1;kj.     Wa,  k!e'st!a  ge'gilll  maE'mdElqu- 


boas]  RECIPES  321 

is  taken  off.     It  is  only  on  the  fire  waiting  ||  for  the  guests  to  finish  30 
singing.     As  soon  as  they  finish  singing,  |  the  man  takes  a  mat  and 
spreads  it  out,  and  he  takes  |  his  long  tongs  and  takes  the  roasted 
boiled  salmon  out  with  them.  |  Immediately  the  woman  takes  one 
roasted  salmon  and  |  puts  it  into  each  dish;  and  when  ||  one  roasted  35 
salmon  has  been  put  into  each,  the  woman  breaks  it  into  small  pieces  | 
just  the  right  size  for  our  mouths;   and  j    after  she  has  broken  it  in 
pieces,  she  pours  oil  into  the  |  oil-dish.     After  she  has  done  so,  the 
man  |  takes  the  drum  and  puts  it  down  by  the  door  of  the  house: 
and  ||  he  puts  down  the  dishes  and  gives  one  dish  to  each  two  men,  |   40 
when  really  all  the  tribes  are  guests  in  the  house;  |  and  as  soon  as  all 
the  dishes  have  been  put  down,  he  takes  a  bucket  and  |  places  it 
before  the  guests  highest  in  rank,  and  they  rinse  |  their  mouths ;  and 
after  they  have  rinsed  their  mouths,  they  ||  drink.     After  they  have  45 
finished  drinking,  they  begin  to  eat;  and  |  when  they  begin  to  eat, 
the  man  goes  to  draw  fresh  water,  for  |  they  drink  after  the}7  finish 
eating.     After  they  have  eaten,  |  the  man  takes  away  the  dishes  and 
takes  them  to  the  place  where  his  |  wife  is  sitting.     After  he  has 
taken  them  away,  lie  puts  the  bucket  jj  with  water  before  the  guest  50 
highest  in  rank;  then  he  dips  |  the  cup  into  it  and  gives  it  to  him; 

laxs    la'e    ha'nxsana.      Wit,    a£mesl'la    ha£ne'la    e'sEla    qa   gwa'- 
les  dE'nxEleda  Le'£lanEme.     Wa,  gi'l£mese   gwal    dE'nxElaxs    la'e  30 
ax£e'deda  bEgwa'nF.maxa  le'£wa£ye  qa£s  LEp'a'lileq.     Wa,  la  ax;e'd- 
xes  g'i'lt!a   ts!e'sLala    qa£s  LExusta'lexa  ha'nx'Laakwe    Llo'bEkwa. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£nieseda  ts'.Eda'qe  ax£e'dxa  £nal£iiE'me  Llo'bEkwa  qa£s 
axts!o'dales  la'xa  £nal£nEme'xLa  lo'Elqhva.      Wa,  gi'h'mese   qhva'- 
lots!Ewaxusa  Llo'bEkwaxs  la'eda  tsteda/qe  k-!o'k!upsalaq  qa  am£a'-  35 
mayastowes  qa  a'£mes  ha£ya'l£ats!Ekila  la'xEns  sE'msex.    Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mesegwal  k'!o'k!upsalaqexs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  k!'unxts!odalaxa  ts'.e'- 
ts!Eba'ts!asa  L!e'£na.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwa'l£alilExs  la'eda  bEgwa'nE- 
me  ax£e'dxa  mEna'ts!e  qa£s   les  la'xa  t!EX'i'lases  g'6'kwe.     Wa,  la 
k-a'x-£Itsa  lo'Elqlwe.     Wa,  laE'm  maema'lo'kwa  bEgwa'nEme  la'xa  40 
£nEme'xEal6'q!waxs  a'lae  £wI'£laeLEla  klwe'la  le'lqwalaLa£ye.     Wa, 
gi'l£mese  £wl'£lgallleda  lo'elq!waxs  la'e  klo'kulllxa  na'gatsle  qa£s 
les  lax  nExdzama'hlasa  nena'xsalasa  k!we'le.    Wa,  la'xda£xwe  ts!E- 
we'L!Exoda.     Wa,  gl'Pmese  gwal    tstewe'iJExodExs,    la'x-da£xwae 
na'x£ida.      Wii,    gl'Pmese    gwal    na'qaxs    la'e    hamxn'da.      Wa,  45 
gl'Pmese  hamx£idExs    la'e  tsayeda  bEgwa'nEmax  a'lta  £wa'pa  qa 
na'gegilts  qo  gwal    ha£ma'pL6.     Wa,  gi'Pmese    gwal    ha£ma'pExs 
la'eda  bEgwanEme  ka'g-illlxa  lo'Elqlwe  qa£s  les  lax   klwae'lasases 
gEnE'me.     Wa,  g  i'l£mese    £wi'£lamasEq  la'e  hangEmli'lasa  £wa'bE- 
tshila  na'gatsle  la'xa   na'xsalaga£yasa  klwe'le.     Wa,  la    tsa'x-£itsa  50 
k!wa£sta'  laq  qa£s  ts!Ewe's  laq.     Wa,  la'x'da£xwe  £wl'£la  na'x£ida. 
75052 — 21—35  eth— pt  1 21 


322  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.  35 

52  then  they  all  drink;  |  and  after  they  finish  drinking,  the  woman 
washes  |  four  dishes  and  pours  water  into  them,  and  the  |  man  puts 

55  them  before  the  guests.  Then  ||  they  all  wash  their  hands;  and  after 
they  have  washed  their  hands,  |  they  wait  for  the  next  course. 
That  is  the  end  of  this.  | 

Salmon  Preserved  in  Cellars. —  (It  has  been  described  before  [p.  237], 
how  salmon  is  kept  in  cellars  for  winter  use.) 
1  When  there  are  no  more  |  salmon  in  the  rivers,  the  cellar  is  dug 
up.  The  salmon  are  washed  in  water  |  until  all  the  clay  and  sand 
come  off.  As  soon  as  all  |  the  dirt  is  off,  they  are  soaked  in  the  river 
5  and  are  left  there  over  ||  night.  As  soon  as  day  comes,  the  woman 
takes  |  out  of  the  river  what  has  been  soaking.  Now  the  quarter- 
dried  |  green  salmon  are  thick;  they  are  just  like  fresh  salmon.  |  The 
woman  just  takes  her  fish-knife,  and  they  are  cut  this  way  |        /jtj\ 

10  into  twelve  pieces.  Then  she  puts  them  into  a  ||  kettle; 
then  she  puts  it  on  the  fire  and  pours  water  over  |  it. 
Then  it  is  boiled  a  long  time  before  it  is  taken  off.  |  She 
stirs  (the  meat).  As  soon  as  it  is  all  to  pieces,  she  |  puts 
the  kettle  back  over  the  fire.  Then  it  is  left  over  the  fire  a  very 
long  time.  |    When  it  is  done,  it  becomes  a  mush;   and  she  pours  || 

15  oil  into  it  while  it  is  still  over  the  fire,  and  it  is  stirred  again.  |  Then 
the  kettle  is  taken  off  and  put  down.     Then  |  spoons  are  given  to  the 


52  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  tslo'xug'indxa  mo- 
we'xLa  l5'Elq!wa  qa£s  guxtslo'desa  £wa/pe  laq.  Wa,  le'da  bE- 
gwa'nEme  hangalilas  lax  nExdzama/lIlasa   klwe'le.     Wa,  la£nie'se 

55  fna'xwa  ts!E'nts!Enx£wkla.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  tste'ntslEnkwaxs 
la'e  awu'lgEmgalll  qa£s  he'leg'intsE£we.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Salmon  Preserved  in  Cellars. — Wa,  gi'l£rnese  la  kleo's  k!o'k!u- 
tEleda  wl'£waxs  la'e  £la'p!Eqoya  qa£s  le  ts!o'x£w!tso£  la'xa  £wa'pe 
qa  £wl'£les  lawa'eda  L!e'q!a  LE%a  e'g'ise.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wl'£la- 
weda  tslEqwa'xs  la'e  t!e'l£IdEq  la'xa  wa.  Wa,  la  xa'mastalisxa 
5  ga'nuLe.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £na'x£idExs  la'eda  ts!Eda'qe  axwustE'nd- 
xes  t!e/lasE£we  la'xa  wa.  Wa,  laE'm  la  wa'kweda  dze'le£lakwe 
k!o'loxu.  Yu'Em  la  gwe'xsa  alo'mase  k-!o'tEla.  Wa,  a'£mesa 
tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxes  xwa'Layowe  qa£s  t!ot!Ets!E'ndeq;  ga  gwii'laga 
{fig.)   miilEg'Eyo'wexs  la'e  t!o't!Ets!aakwa.     Wa,  la  axts!o'ts  la'xa 

10  lia'nx'Lanowe.  Wa,  la£me'se  ha'nx'LEntsexs  la'eqEp!Eqa'sa  £wa'pe 
laq.  Wa,  la£mes  la  ge'giltse  laE'm  maE'mdElqulaxs  la'e  hanx'sE'n- 
dEq.  Wa,  la  xwe'tledEq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  q!we'q!ults!Exs  la'e 
xwe£laqa  ha'nxLEndEq.  Wa  la£me'se  la  a'la  la  ge'xpLala  ha'nx-- 
Lala;  wa,  gi'Pmese  la  l!o'pexs  la'e  xa's£ida.     Wa,  la  gu'q!Eqaso£sa 

15  L'.e'£naxs  he'£ma§  a'les  ha'nxxale.  Wa,  la  e'tled  xwet !etsE£wa. 
Wa,lawI'sLa  ha'nxsEntsE£wa  qa£s  ha'ngaliles.  Wa,  laE'm  tsla'yeda 
ka'kats  lEnaqe  la'xa  k  Iwe'le.   W  a,  la  ax£e'deda  ts  !Eda'qaxa  lelo'q  !we 


boas]  RECIPES  323 

guests,  and  the  woman  takes  the  dishes  |  and  she  pours  into  them  the  18 
quarter-dried  salmon  that  is  to  be  eaten  with  spoons.     Then  the 
dishes  are  nearly  |  full,1  .  .  .  They  are  not  given  a  second  course. 
Sometimes  ||  green  salmon  are  just  put  into  a  kettle  and  boiled  for  a  20 
short  time,  |  when  they  are  taken  off  and  cut  to  pieces.     They  are 
put  |  into  the  dish  without  water.     Then  oil  is  poured  over  them.  | 
The  man  only  takes  them  from  the  dish  with  his  hands  |  and  eats 
them.1  .  .  .  Then   (the  guests)  just  lie  down  on  their  seats  and  || 
wait  for  the  next  course  until  it  is  done.     Another  |  course  is  not  25 
given  when  they  have  eaten  with  spoons  the  quarter-dried  green 
salmon.     This  is  |  the  way  of  the  Denax'da£xu  in  Knight  Inlet. 

Middle  Part  of  Salmon,  cold  or  boiled. — The  description  of  a  feast 
continues  with  the  following  notes  on  the  preparation  of  middle  parts 
of  the  salmon 2 : 

(1)  Then  the  woman  J  takes  a  dish  and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  1 
where  she  is  sitting;  then  she  goes  |  and  opens  the  basket  in  which 
the  middle  part  of  the  salmon  is,  |  and  she  breaks  off  the  cedar-bark 
with  which  the  middle  parts  of  the  salmon  are  twined  together. 
When  there  are  four  ||  men,  the  woman  takes  eight  middle  parts  |  of  5 
salmon  and  breaks  them  up  into  two  dishes,  |  four  pieces  into  each 
dish.  As  soon  |  as  she  has  broken  them,  she  takes  her  oil-dish  and 
pours  |  oil  into  it.3  .  .  .  They4  take  up  what  they  are  going  to  eat 
and  ||  fold  it  over,  and  chew  it  to  make  it  soft,  and  then  they  dip  it  |   1 0 

qa£s    ts!ets!a'lesa    yEwI'kwe    dze'le£laku    laq.     Wa,  giTmese   Elaq  18 
qo'tlaxs1.   .   .  Wa,  laE'm  k!es  he'legintsE£wa.     Wa,  le  £nal£nE'm- 
plEna  a'Em  &xts!o'yo  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  ya'was£ide  mEdE'lx-  20 
£wk1exs  la'e  ha'nxsEntsE£waxs  la'e  t!o't!Ets!aaku.     Wa,  a'£mese  ax- 
ts'.o'yo  la'xa  lo'q'.we   k!eo's  £wit'paga£ya.     Wa,  la  k!iinq!Eqaso£sa 
L!e'£na.     Wa,  le'da  bEgwa'nEme  a'Em  dalta'laq  la'xa  lo'qlwaxs  la'e 
ha£ma'pEq. l     .    .    .     Wii,  hi'La    a'Em    t!e'k  imga£llla.      Wa,   laE'm 
e'sa-lll  qa£s  he'leg  intsE£we.     Wii,  laE'm   gwa'la.     Wa,  la/La   k!es  25 
he'leg"indgulExs  yo'sasE£waeda  dze'ledakwe  k'lo'loxwa.  Wa,  g'aE'm 
gwe'gilatsa  DEna'x-da£xwe  lax  Dza'wade. 

Middle  Part  of  Salmon,  cold  or  boiled. — 'Wa,3  le'da  ts'.Eda'qe  1 
ax£e'dxa  lo'q!we  qaes  k-a'g-aliles  la'xes  k!wae'lase.  Wii,  la  qaVid 
qa£s  le  x'o'x£widxa  Lla'bate,  yix  ge'ts!E£wasases  q!a'q!aga£ye.  Wa, 
la,  a'l£edxa  dEna'se  ya'polayosa  qlaq'.agaye.  Wa,  gi'l£Em  mo'kwa 
be'bEgwanEmaxs  lae'da  tsEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  ma£lguna'lExse  q!a'q!a-  5 
ga£ya,  qa£s  p!oxts!a'les  la'xa  ma£lEXLe'  loElqlwa.  Wa,  laE'm 
mae'moxse  p!o'xts!oyos  la'xa  £na'l£nEme'xLa  lo'qlwa.  Wii,  g'i'l- 
£mese  gwal  plo'qwaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  k!u'nxts!odesa 
L!e'£na  laq.3  .  .  .  Wa, 4  laE'm  ax£e'd  la'xes  ha£ma'Le  qa£s  k!5'xu- 
sEmdeqexs    la'e    male'xubEndEq    qa   tE'lx£wldesexs   la'e  ts!Ep!l'ts  10 

1  Here  follows  a  description  of  the  eating  of  the  food, which  has  been  omitted. 

2  Continued  from  Jesup  Expedition,  etc.,  Vol.  V,  p.  436,  line  24. 

s  Continued  from  ibid,  p.  431,  line  7.  '  Continued  on  ibid,  p.  430,  line  25. 


324  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

11  into  the  oil;  and  then  they  put  it  into  their  mouths  and  they  begin 
to  eat,1  .  .  .  and  (the  men)  wait  for  the  second  course.  |  That  is  the 
end.  | 

(2)  When  the  middle  parts  of  the  salmon  are  really  dry,  they  are 

15  soaked  ||  in  the  soaking-box,  which  stands  in  the  corner  of  the  house.  | 
It  is  always  filled  with  water;  and  the  woman  |  always  puts  the 
middle  parts  of  the  salmon  into  it,  so  that  it  is  full;  and  when  |  she 
goes  to  take  the  middle  parts  of  the  salmon  to  cook  them,  she  |  puts 
in  again  some  more  dried  middle  parts  of  the  salmon,  and  changes  || 

20  them  for  those  that  have  been  taken  out. 2  .  .  .  When  her  husband 
comes,  |  the  woman  takes  the  soaking  middle  parts  of  the  salmon 
and  j  counts  two  pieces  of  the  middle  parts  of  the  salmon  for  each  | 
man;  and  so  she  takes  twelve  pieces.     She  |  puts  them  into  the 

25  kettle;  and  her  husband  puts  the  kettle  ||  on  the  fire,  and  he  also 
pours  water  into  it.  |  Then  the  woman  takes  two  dishes  and  also  | 
two  oil-dishes,  and  puts  them  down  where  she  sits.  |  The  kettle  is 
not  very  long  over  the  fire,  when  it  is  taken  off;  |  and  the  man  also 

30  takes  the  tongs  ||  and  takes  out  the  soaked  middle  parts  of  the  sal- 
mon and  puts  them  also  into  |  a  large  dish  which  stands  on  the  floor 
of  the  house,  |  made  for  this  kind  of  cooking.3  .  .  .  | 

11  la'xa  L!e'£na.  Wa,  la'wisLa  tslo'q'.usas,  wa,  laE'm  ha£mx£I'dEx- 
daExwa. '  .  .  .  Wa,  laE'm  awu'lgEmgalll  qa£s  he'leglntsE£we. 
Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 

(2)  Wa,  gi'l£mese  la  a'la  la  lE'mx£weda  q!a'q!aga£yaxsla'e  tle'laso 

15  la'xa  t!e'lats!axs  ha£ne'lae  la'xa  onegvvllasa  go'kwe.  Wa,  laE'm 
he'mEnalaEm  la  q!o'ts!asosa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  la£me'sa  ts!Eda'qe  he'- 
mEnalaEmxat!  axsta'lasa  q!a'q!aga£ye  laq  qa  qo'tles.  Wa,he'£maaxs 
la'e  ax£wustE'ndxa  q!a'q!aga£ye  qa£s  ha£me'xsllasE£we.  Wa,  la 
a/Em  xwe'laqa    ax£e'dxa    lE'mxwa    q!a'q!age£  qa£s  L!a'yo£stE'ndes 

20  la'xes  la  axiista'na. 2  .  .  .  (Wa,  g-il£mese  g'axe  la£wunEmasexs) 
la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'd  la'xes  t!e'lasE£we  q!a'q!aga£ya.  Wa,  laE'm 
hS'sEmtsa  mae'ma£lExsa  q!a'q!age£  la'xa  £na'l£nEmokwe  begwa'- 
nEma.  Wa,  laE'm  ax£e'dxa  maelExsil'gEyowe.  Wa,  he'£mis  la 
axts'.o'yosexa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wa,  la£me'se  ha'nxLanos   la'£\vunE- 

25  mas  la'xa  h'.gwl'le.  Wa,  he'Emxaa'wise  la  gQ'q!Eqasa  £wa'pe  laq. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'deda  ts!Eda'qaxa  ma£lEXLa'  lelo'q.'wa.  Wa,  he'£misa 
ma£lEXLa£maxat!  ts!ets!Eba'ts!a  qa£s  le  k'a'galElas  la'xes  k!wae'- 
lase.  Wii,  la  k!es  a'laEm  ge'xxaleda  ha'nx'Lanax,  la'e  ha'nxsana 
la'xa  bsgwl'l.     Wa,  he'Em£xaa'wiseda  bEgwa'nEme  ax£e'dxa  tsle's- 

30  Lala  qa£s  k'lipwusta'lexa  t!e'lkwe  q!a'q!age  qa£s  k!ipts!a'les  la'xa 
o'gu£la£maxat !  £wa'las  lo'qlwa  g-ax  ha£ne'la;  hekwe'leEm  qae'da 
he  gwa'las  ha£me'xsllasE£we.3     .     .     . 

1  Continued  in  Jesup  Expedition,  etc.,  Vol.  V.,  p.  431,  lines  1-14. 
^Continued  in  ibid.,  p.  431,  lines  15-39. 
"Continued  in  ibid.,  p.  431,  line  40,  to  p.  432,  line  4. 


boas]  RECIPES  325 

Her  husband  breaks  to  pieces  the  soaked  middle  parts  of  salmon,  33 
and  |  he  measures  what  he  is  breaking  so  that  they  will  be  the  right 
size  for  our  mouths;  ||  and  his  wife  pours  od  into  the  oil-dishes;  j  and  35 
after  the  man  has  finished  breaking  what  he  is  working  at,  |  the  guests 

finish    singing.1  .  .  . _____^    Then  (the  man)  takes  up  two| 

oil-dishes  and  puts  |Y~"  c5  j)  them  |  in  the  far  side  of  the  dish,  | 
in  this  manner:2  lc^_  — -^Z>  ...  As  soon  as  (the  guests) 
finish,  they  wait  ||  for        X      x      x        the  next  course.  40 

Split-Backs. —  (The  split-backs  are  eaten  without  being  boiled  or  l 
blistered.  The  man  takes  the  "split-down"  and  folds  it  up  and  dips 
it  into  the  oil  and  puts  it  into  his  mouth.)  He  does  not  chew  it 
before  he  |  clips  it  into  the  oil,  for  it  is  really  soft.3  .  .  .  After  | 
the  men  have  finished  drinking,  they  wait  for  the  second  course.  | 
That  is  the  end  of  this.  For  they  never  soak  this  split-down,  ||  be- 
cause it  does  not  get  hard,  although  it  may  be  old.  Even  if  it  is  two  |  5 
years  old,  it  never  gets  hard,  for  it  is  really  worked  thoroughly.  There- 
fore |  it  keeps  always  soft.     That  is  the  end.  | 

Soaked  Backbones,  boiled  or  blistered  (1). — (The  woman)  takes  |  the 
soaked  backbones  out  of  the  water  in  the  soaking-box,  and  puts  them|| 
on  a  mat  that  is  spread  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.     Then  the  1 0 
man  |  breaks  them  into  three  pieces  and  puts  them  into  the  kettle.  | 

Wa,1  le  la'EwunEmas  p!o'xcwIdxa  tle'Ikwe  q!a'q!agasya.  Wa,  33 
lar/m  a/Em  JniE'nsases  p!o'qwa£ye  qa  heltslEqEles  la'xEns  SE'msex. 
Wa,  la/La  gEiiE'mas  k!u'nxts!otsa  L!e'£na  la'xa  ts!ets!Eba'ts!e.  35 
\V:i ,  g-l'lemese  gwal  plo'qweda  bEgwa'nEmaxes  axsE£wa'xs  lae 
gwal  dEnxEleda  klwele.1  .  .  .  Wa,  la'xaa  k-a'gilllxa  maJlEXLa' 
ts!ets!Eba'ts!a  qa£s  le  k'ane'qwas  lax  iJasaneqwasa  lo'qlwe;  ga 
gwa'leg'a  {fig.).2  ■  ■  ■  Wii,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  fiwii'lgEmgalil 
qafs  he'legintsErwe.  40 

Split-Backs. — Wa,  laE'm  k-!es  malex'bE'ndqexs  k'!e's£mae  ts!E-  1 
pll'ts  la'xa  L!e'£na  qaxs  a'lae  tE'lqwa.3  .  .  .  Wa,4  gi'lemese 
gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  awii'lgEmgallleda  bEgwa'nEme  qa£s  he'leg'intsE- 
swe.  Wa, laE'm  gwal  la'xeq  qa  k'!e'ts!enaeyas  t!e'lasEwa  Le'qwaxa, 
qaxs  hewii'xae  p!e's^IdEX  wa'xemae  la  gii'la,  wa'x-£mae  la  ma£lE'nxe  5 
ts!awu'nxas  la  hewa'xaEm  p!e's£id.  qaxs  a'lae  ae'k'!aakwa;  la'g'ilas 
he'mEnalaEm  tE'lqwa.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 

Soaked   Backbones,  boiled    or  blistered  (1). —     Wa,  la£me's   ax£us- 
tF.'nilxa    t!e'lkwe    xa'k'Iadza    la'xa   t!e'lats!e  qa£s  ga'xe  axdzo'ts 
la'xa  le'£wasyeLEbe 'la  lax  klwae'lasa.     Wii,  la£me'seda  bEgwa'nEme  io 
vrrivudux"sala  k'o'k'oxsalaq    cja£s   ha'ntslales  la'xa  ha'nxxanowe. 

■  Continued  in  Jesup  Expedition,  etc.,  Vol.  V,  p.  432,  lines  4-21. 
'  Continued  in  ibid.,  p.  432,  line  21,  to  p.  434,  line  40. 
3  Continued  in  ibid.,  p.  434,  line  40,  to  p.  435,  line  8. 
'  Continued  from  ibid.,  p.  435,  line  S. 


326  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUIL  [eth.  ann.  81 

12  After  he  has  done  so,  he  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire;  and  |  as  soon  as  it 
stands  there  firmly,  the  man  pours  water  into  it;  |  and  it  does  not 

15  take  long  before  it  begins  to  boil.  Then  the  kettle  is  taken  off;  ||  and 
the  woman  takes  five  dishes  and  |  puts  them  down,  and  also  five 
oil-dishes.  As  soon  as  |  it  is  all  on  the  floor,  the  man  takes  his  tongs, 
and  |  takes  the  soaked  backbone  out  of  the  water  and  puts  it  into  the 

20  dishes.1 1  .  .  .  When  they  finish  (eating)  they  wait  for  a  second  ||  course.] 

(2). — Sometimes  the  soaked  backbone  is  blistered  by  the  |  fire  of  the 

house  to  heat  it,  when  there  are  not  many  who  have  been  |  invited,— 

for  instance,  two  men, — or  when  the  owner  of  the  house  |  is  given  this, 

25  to  eat  by  his  wife.  She  just  goes  and  takes  some  ||  soaking  backbone, 
and  blisters  it  by  the  fire.  When  |  it  is  done,  she  puts  it  on  a  food- 
mat;  |  and  an  oil-dish  is  taken  and  oil  poured  into  it.  |  When  it  is 
put  on  the  food-mat  outside  |  of  the  blistered  soaked  backbone,  it 

30  is  eaten  by  the  one  ||  man  and  his  wife  and  his  children,  in  this  man- 
ner. |  Sometimes  old  people  desire  to  eat  it  blistered  in  this  |  way, 
for  it  has  a  different  taste  from  boiled  |  soaked  backbone,  and  there- 

35  fore  some  men  like  it.  |  They  never  sing  when  their  food  ||  is  going 
to  be  soaked  backbone;  for  this  is  going  to  be  their  food  when  few 

12  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwiiTExs  la'e  ha'nx'LEnts  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa, 
gi'l£mese  E'lxxalaxs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  gu'qlEqasa  £wa'pe  laq. 
Wa,   la£me'se    ge'giltsllaEm    la  maE'mdElqulaxs    la'e   ha'nx'sana. 

15  Wa,  le'cla  ts'.Eda'qe  &x£e'dxa  sF.k'Ie'xxa  lo'Elqhva  qa£s  g'a'xe 
mEx'a'lilas  LE£wa  sEk- !e'xLa£maxaeda  ts!ets!Eba'ts!e.  Wii,  g'i'l- 
£mese  £wi"'lgalllExs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  &x£e'dxes  tsle'sLala  qa£s 
k- ItpwEstalexa  tle'lkwe  xa'k'!adzo  qa£s  k-!ipts!a'les  la'xa  lo'Elqlwe.1 
.     .     .     (Wa,  gil£mese   gwala)  la'e    awu'lgEmgalll    qa£s  ke'legin- 

20  tsE^we. 

(2). — Wa,  la  £na'lEnEinp  \r.na,  pEne'sasE£wa  t  Is'lkwe  xa'k"  !adzo  la'xa 
lEgwI'lasa  g'o'kwe,  qa  ts!E'lx£w!des,  yfxs  k'le'sae  qle'nF.ma  Le'£la- 
nEme,  yixa  ma£lo'kwe  l)e'bEgwanEma  loxs  he'£maeda  go'gwadasa 
g'6'kwe   ha£mg i'las5£ses   gEnE'me.     Wa,    a'£mes    la    ax£e'd    la'xes 

25  t!e'lasE£we  xa'k!adza  qa£s  pEnnoli'seq  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wii,  g'i'1- 
£mese  Llo'pEx  .  la'e  a'Em  axo'dzoyo  la'xa  ha£ma'dzowe  le'£wa£ya. 
Wii,  la  iix£e'tsE£wa  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  k!u'nxts!otsE£wesa  L!e'£na. 
Wa,  a'£mes  la  ka'dzodayo  la'xa  ha£ma'dzowe  le'£wa£ya  lax  Lla'sa- 
lllasa  pE'nkwe  t!elku  xa'k'ladzo.     Wa,  laE'm  he'£mesa  £nEmo'kwe 

30  bEgwa'nEm  le£wi's  gEnE'me  L6£me's  sii'sEmeda  he  gwii'le.  Wa,  la 
£na'l£nEmp!Ena£ma  q!u'lsq!ul£yakwe  bebEgwa'nEm  ha£mae'xsdxa  he 
gwe'kwexa  pEnnOle'dzEkwe  qaxs  o'gilxplamae  la'xa  ha'nxLaakwe 
t!elku  xa'k'ladza.  Wa,  he'£mis  la'gulas  ax£e'xstso£sa  £nal£nEmo'- 
kwe  la'xa  bEgwa'nEme.     Wa,  la  k-!es   dE'nxElagilExs  ha£ma'£ye'- 

35  Leda  tle'lkwe  xa'kladza,  yix  ha£ma£e'Le  qaxs  h5'lalaeda  ha£mii'j>a<| 

i Continued  in  Jesup  Expedition,  etc.,  Vol.  V,  p.  436,  line  12,  to  p.  437,  line  22. 


boas]  EECIPES  327 

are  eating,  |  for  there  are  never  many  who  eat  this  kind  of  cooking;  I  36 
and  the  only  time  they  eat  this  is  in  the  morning.     That  is  |  all 
about  this.  | 

Fins  and  Tails  (1). — Now  I  will  talk  about  the  cooking  |  of  the.  pec-     1 
toral  fins  and  anal  fins  and  the  tails  of  the  |  dog-salmon.     These  three 
kinds  are  [never  not]  always  eaten  at  |  noon  and  in  the  evening. 
When  they  are  going  to  eat  pectoral  fins  ||  and  anal  fins  and  tails,  a    5 
soaking-box  is  taken,  |  and  water  is  poured  into  it.     Then  (several 
handfuls  of)  |  pectoral  fins  are  picked  up  and  put  into  it.     For  four 
days  they  are  soaking  in  it.  |   Then  they  are  taken  out  and  put  into 
a  kettle;  and  |  water  is  poured  on  them  before  they  are  put  on  the 
fire.  ||  When  they  are  covered  with  water,  they  are  put  on  the  |  fire.  10 
Sometimes  they  are  kept  boiling  until  it  is  nearly  noon,  |  for  they  try 
to  boil  the  bones  soft.     When  the  bones  are  boiled  to  pieces,  |  the 
kettle  is  taken  off  the  fire.     Then  the  |  woman  takes  a  dish  and  puts 
it  alongside  the  kettle.  ||  Then  she  takes  a  large  spoon,   |  and  ladles  15 
out  the  pectoral  fins,  and  she  pours  them  into  the  |  dish.     When  they 
are  all  in  it,  she  places  it  before  the  one  who  is  to  eat  it;  |  and  next 
water  is  given  to  drink  to  him  who  is  going  to  eat  it.    As  soon  |  as  (the 
guests)  finish  drinking,  they  eat.     No  oil  is  ||  dipped  with  it  when  20 

qaxs  kle'sae    qle'nEnienoxwa   haema'paxa    he  gwa/las  hafme'xsl-  36 
laene*.      Wa,    le'x'aEinxaa    hafma'pdEmqeda    gaa'la.      Wa,    laE'm 
gwa'la. 

Fins  and  Tails  (1). — Wa,  laeme'sEn  gwa'gwexs-Jalal  la/qexs  la'e  ha-     1 
£me'x-sIlasE£weda  pEL!Exa'wa'"ye  LEfwa  pELa'ga£ye  pfwa  ts!a'sna- 
£yasa  gwa^xni'se.     Wa,  k-  leya's  k-  !es  ha'£maEnxg-ada  yii'duxwldala- 
k  xa  nEqa'la  p£wa  dza'qwa.     Wa,  gi'l£Eni  ha£ma'La  pEL!Exa.'wa£ye 
LE£wa  pELa'ga^ye  LE'wa  ts!a'sna£yaxs  la'e  gEyo'l  axEe'tsE£wa  t!e'la-    5 
ts!e  qa^s  gtixtslo'yaeda    £wa'pe    laq.      Wa,  la£me'se  k-!a£stanoweda 
pEL!Exa'wa£ye  laq.     Wa,  he't!a  la  mo'p!EnxwaJstali'l  la/qexs  la'e 
ax£wusta'na  qa£s  axts!5yuwe  la'xa  ha'nxxanowe.     Wa,  la'xaa  gE- 
yo'l  guq!Eqa'sosa   £wa'paxs  k!e's£mae    ha'nxxana,   la'xa   lEgwi'le. 
Wa,  g-i'Pmese  la  qlo'giililxa  £wa'paxs  la'e  ha'nxxEndayo  la'xa  1e-  10 
gwl'le.     Wa,   la'mefse    £naPnEmp!Ena    Ela'qfEm   k'!es  snEqa'lagila 
maE'mdElqula,  qaxs    xa'xayasE£waes  xa'qe.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  xa's^i- 
deda  xa'qaxs  la'e  ha'nxsanowe.da  ha'nx'Lanowe.     Wa,  laeme'seda 
tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  lo'qlwe  qaJs  k'a'galiles  lax  o'na'^yasa  ha'nx'La- 
nowe.     Wa,  la£me'seda  ts!Eda'qe    ax£e'dxa   £wa'lase    k-a'ts!Enaqa  15 
qafs    xa'lostEndes  la'xa  pEL!Exa'waeye.     Wa,   la  xE'lts!alas    la'xa 
lo'qlwe.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  ewl'£lts!axsla'e  ka'gEmlllas  lax  ha£ma'pLaq. 
Wa,  laeme'sa  £wa'pe  ma'k'ilaq  qa  na'x£Itsosa  ha£ma'pLe.     Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  hamx£I'da.     Wii,  laE'm  k' lea's  L!e'£na  ts!E- 
pa'sos  ]aqexsha£mapaaxgada  pEL!Exa£waJye  LE£wa  pELfiga^ye  LEwa  20 


328  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

21  they  eat  these  pectoral  fins  and  anal  fins  and  |  tails.  After  they 
have  eaten,  the  woman  takes  |  the  dish  out  of  which  those  have 
eaten  to  whom  she  has  given  to  eat,  j  and  she  takes  water  and  pours 
it  into  it.     Then  she  puts  it  back  before  those  to  whom  she  has  given 

25  to  eat,  |  and  they  wash  their  hands  in  it.  After  ||  they  have  done  so 
they  are  given  water  to  drink.  |  Often  they  are  not  given  a  second 
course  after  eating  |  pectoral  fins  and  anal  fins  and  also  tails.  |  The 
guests  just  go  out  of  the  house.     The  |  old  people  always  eat  that, 

30  about  which  I  am  talking.  ||  Only  poor  people  have,  for  their  food, 
these  three  kinds  |  about  which  I  am  talking.     That  is  all.  | 

(2). — When  there  are  many  roasted  salmon-tails,  |  the  owner  invites 
his  friends  early  in  the  morning  to  come  [  and  eat  breakfast  in  his  house. 

35  As  soon  as  the  guests  are  all  in,  ||  the  man  who  invited  them  takes  a 
food-mat  and  spreads  it  on  the  floor  |  in  front  of  his  guests.  Then 
lie  takes  the  roasted  salmon-tails  |  and  puts  them  down  lengthwise 
on  the  food-mat.  Then  lie  takes  |  water  and  gives  it  to  them;  and 
after  they  finish  drinking,  |  they  begin  to  eat.     As  soon  as  the  guests 

Id  licgin  to  eat,  ||  the  man  takes  his  bucket  and  goes  to  draw  fresh  water 
for  I  drinking  afterwards.  As  soon  as  he  comes  back,  he  puts  down 
on  the  floor  the  |  bucket  with  water  in  it;  and  after  they  have 
finished   eating   the  salmon-tails,  |  the  man  puts  the  bucket  with 

21  ts!a'sna£ye.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£mapExs  la'e  ax£e'deda  tslEda'- 
qaxa  lo'qlwe.  yix  ha£maats!e'x-dasa  ha£mgi'lasE£was,  qa£s  ax£e'dexa 
ewa'pe  qa£s  guxtslo'des  laq.  Wa .  la  xwe'laqak'a'gEmlllas  la'xes  ha£m- 
gi'lasE£we.    Wa,  la£me'se  ts!E'nts!Enx£wIdEX"da£xu  laq.     Wa,  g't'l- 

25  £mese  gwa'lEXs  la'e  tsa'xltsosa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  laE'm  na'x£IdEX'- 
da£x"  laq.  Wii,  la  qiflna'la  kles  he'leg  intsE£weda  ha£ma'paxa  pE- 
LlExawaeye  t.tfwa  pELaga£ye.  Wa,  hemisLeda  ts!asna£ye.  Wii,  lasm 
a  1:111  ho'qiiwElseda  Le£lanEmxde.  Wa,  laE'mxaa'wiseda  qluls- 
qlu'lyakwe  he'mEnala  ha£ma'pEx   gwe'x'sdEmasgin  gwa'gwexs£a- 

30  lasEk-;  le'xa£meda  wi£wosElaga  hemawalanux"sg'ada  yu'dux"wl- 
dalagin    gwa'gwex-s£alasa.     Wa,    laE'm   gwala.     .     . 

(2). — Wa,  gi'Pmese  qle/iiEma  Llo'bEkwe  ts!a'sna£ya,  la'e  he'x,£i- 
da£ma  axno'gwadas  Le'£lalaxes  £ne£nEmo'kwaxa  gaa'la  qa  g"5'xes 
gaa'xstala  lax  g-o'kwas.      Wa,  la  g'i'l£Em  £wI'£laeLeda  i,e'£lanEmaxs 

35  la'eda  Le'£lalaq  ax£e'dxa  ha£madzowe  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEpliililes  lax 
L!a'sExdzama£yases  Le£lanEme.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  Llo'bEkwe  tsla's- 
na£ya  qa£s  le  kadEdzo'ts  la'xa  ha£ma'dzowe  le'£\\a£va.  Wa,  la 
&x£e'dxa  £wa'pe  qa£s  le  tsii'x£Its  laq.  Wa,  gl'hmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e 
ha£mx-£I'dEx'da£xwa.     Wii,  gl'l£mese  ha£mx£I'deda  Le£lanEmaxs  la- 

40  eda  bEgwa'iiEme  ax£e'dxes  na'gatsle  qa£s  le  tsiix  a'lta  £wa'pa  qa 
nage'glLEs.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  gax  ae'daaqaxs  la'e  k"!o'x£walilxa  na'- 
gatsle £wa'bEts!ala.  Wa,  gi'hmese  gwal  ha£mii'pa  ts'.etsla'snegaxs 
la'eda  bEgwa'iiEme  M'ng-imliltsa  £wa'bEts!ale  na'gatsle  laq.     Wa, 


boas]  RECIPES  329 

water  in  it  before  them,  and  |  immediately  they  drink  of  it.     After 
they  finish  drinking,  ||  they  go  out.     There  is  no  oil  to  dip  with  it,  4.5 
and  |  there  is  no  dish,  and  they  do  not  rinse  their  mouths;  for  |  the 
first  people  said  that  the  silver-salmon  would  disappear  |  if  these 
three  kinds  of  things  were  done.  |  Therefore  they  take  for  them  a 
new  food-mat;  and  ||  they  do  not  wipe  their  hands  when  they  eat  50 
roasted  salmon-tads  |  and  roasted  backbones  of  silver-salmon;  for 
often  the  guests  just  rub  [  their  1  ands,  after  they  finish  eating,  to 
dry  off  |  the  fat  of  their  food.     The  owner  of  the  |  salmon-tads  eats 
some  of  what  has  been  left  over  by  those  who  have  eaten,  ||  when  he  55 
gets  hungry,  and  he  does  the  same  way  with  roasted  |  backbones. 
That  is  all.  | 

Salmon-Cheeks. — As  soon  as  winter  comes,  (the  woman)  takes  |  her  1 
soaking-box  and  puts  it  down  in  the  corner  of  the  house;  |  then  she 
draws  water  (and  pours  it)  into  the  soaking-box  until  it  is  half  full 
of  water.  |  Then  she  takes  the  basket  in  which  she  keeps  the  "plucked 
cheeks"  and  pours  them  into  the  ||  soaking-box.  She  soaks  them  5 
four  days  in  the  house.  After  |  they  have  been  soaking  four  days, 
the  woman  requests  her  husband,  |  even  if  it  is  noon,  to  go  and 
invite  the  old  chiefs  |  to  come  and  eat  the  "plucked  cheeks,"  for  only 
the  chiefs  |  eat  this  kind   (of  food).     The  man  at  once  goes  and  j| 


he'x£ida£mese  na'x£IdExda£xu    laq.     Wa,   gi'l£mese   gwal   na'qaxs 
la'e  ho'quwElsa.     Wa,  laE'm    kMeo's    L!e'£na    tstepa's.     Wa,  he'- 45 
£mesexs  k"  !eo'sae  lo'q  !wa.   Wii'  he£misexs  k"  !e'sae  ts  lEwe'L  <Exod  qaxs 
£ne'kaeda    g-a'le     bEgwa'nEmqexs    he'x-£ida£mae    k' !eyo'x£wideda 
dza£wu'naqexs    ax£e'tsE£waeg"ada    yu'dux£wldalag-a.      Wa,   he'£mis 
la'gilas    ax£e'dg  Ilxa    aldzEwe'   ha£madzo'  le'£wa£ya.     Wa,  he'£mis 
la'gilas  k'lesxat!   dedE'nkweda  ha£ma'paxa  Llo'bskwe    ts!a'sna£ya  50 
i.o£ma  iJo'bEkwe  xa'k!adzosa  dza£wu'ne,  q!iina'lae  a'Em  dza'k'5- 
deda  Le'danEmaxes    efeyasowaxs  la'e  gwal  ha£ma'pa  qa  lE'mxwa- 
LElesa   tsE'nx\va£yeses  ha£ma'£ye.     Wa,  a'£mes  leda  axno'gwadasa 
ts!a'sna£jTe,  yix  k-  !e'ts!a£yaway£asox  le'xde  haJma'p  laha'mxliEmka 
lii'qexs  la'e   po'sq!EX'£ida.     Wa,    la  he'Emxat!  gwe'gilaxa   Llo'bE-  55 
kwe  xa'kMadza.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 

Salmon -Cheeks. — Wa,  gi'Pmese  ts!a£wii'nx£IdExs  la'e  ax£e'd-  l 
xes  t!e'lats!e  qa£s  le  ha'ngalllaq  la'xa  o'negwdases  go'kwe. 
Wa,  la  tsa'tslotsa  ewa'pe  laq,  qa  nEgoya'lesa  t!e'lats!axa  £wape. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  p!Elodzats!e  lExa'£ya  qa£s  giixstE'ndes  la'xa 
t!e'lats!e.  Wa,  la£me'se  mo'p'.Enxwa£s  t!e'ltahla.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  5 
mo'p!Enxwa£s  ta'llla,  la'eda  tslEda'qe  axk!alaxes  la'£wunEmaxa 
wa'x'£Em  la  nEqii'la  qa  les  Le'£lalaxa  q!ulsq!uTyaku  g'i'gigEma-'ya 
qa  g'axes  p!Ep!El6'sgaxa  phdose,  qaxs  le'x-a£maeda  g  i'g'igama^ve 
ha£ma'pxa  he  gwe'x-se.     Wa,  he'x£ida£mesa  bEgwa'nEme  la  La'lll- 


330  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  a» 

10  selects  the  chiefs  whom  he  intends  to  invite  in.  It  is  not  long  before 
they  all  come  into  |  his  house.  [I  have  forgotten  that  his  wife  |  at 
once  spreads  out  mats  for  the  guests  to  sit  down  on  the  floor.  |  Those 
who  have  been  invited  go  right  in  and  sit  down  on  |  the  spread  mats.] 

1 5  As  soon  as  they  are  all  in,  the  ||  man  takes  a  kettle  and  pours  water 
into  it,  |  and  he  puts  it  on  the  fire  in  his  house;  but  his  wife  goes  on 
with  her  work.  |  She  takes  a  basket,  and  takes  the  "plucked  cheeks" 
out  of  the  water  and  puts  them  into  the  |  basket,  and  pours  them 
into  the  kettle  which  |  is  boiling  over  the  fire  in  the  house.     Then  the 

20  woman  takes  dishes  and  ||  puts  them  down  where  she  is  sitting,  and 
she  also  takes  tongs;  |  and  when  she  thinks  that  (the  "plucked 
cheeks")  are  done,  her  husband  takes  |  the  kettle  from  the  fire. 
Immediately  the  woman  takes  her  tongs  |  and  takes  out  the  "plucked 
cheeks"  and  puts  them  into  the  dishes;  |  and  when  they  are  all  in 

25  the  dishes,  she  places  ||  one  dish  in  front  of  each  four  men.  As  soon  | 
as  this  is  done,  she  takes  a  bucket  with  water  in  it  and  places  |  it  in 
front  of  the  guests;  then  they  drink;  |  and  when  they  finish  drinking, 
they  begin  to  eat;  |  and  when  they  begin  to  eat,  the  woman  takes 

30  another  ||  dish  and  pours  the  liquid  of  the  "plucked  cheeks"  into  it. 
Then  she  counts  one  |  spoon  for  each  guest,  and  she  goes  and  gives 
them  each  one.     She  |  takes  up  the  dish  with  the  liquid  in  it  and 


10  qE£waxa  gi'g-igama£ye.  Wa,  k-  le'st  !a  ga'laxs  ga'xae  £wl'£la  h5'gwl- 
LEla  lax  g'o'kwas.  Wa,  he'xoLEn  L!Ele'wesE£we  gEnE'masexs  he'- 
x£ida£mae  LEp!a'lilElaxa  le'Elwa£ye  qa  k!udzEdza'll£lasLEsa  k!we'lE- 
La;  wa,  la'gllas  he£na'kula£ma  Le£lanEme  qa£s  le  kliidzEclza'lI- 
laxa  LEbEgwi'lkwe  le'El£wa£ya.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wI'£laeLExs  la'eda 

15  bEgwa'nEme  fix£e'dxa  ha'nx'Lanowe  qa£s  guxtslo'desa  £wa'pe  laq. 
Wa,  la  ha'nx'LEnts  la'xes  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  la'La  a'xuslle  gEnE'mas, 
ax£e'dxa  lExa'£ye  qa£s  le  kMo'stEndxa  plElo'se  qa£s  lc!ats!o'des  la'xa 
lExa'£ye  qa£s  lit  giixtslo'ts  la'xa  h&'nx'Lala  ha'nx'Lana.  Wit,  la£me'se 
maE'mdElqula    ge'gilila,  la'asa  ts'.Eda'qe    ax£e'dxa  lo'Elqlwe  qa£s 

20  ga'xe  &x£a'lllas  la'xes  klwae'lase;  wa,  he'£mlse  ts!e'sLala.  Wa, 
gi'l£mese  ko'taq  las'm  L!o'pa  la'e  ta'£wiinEmas  ha'nx'sEndxa 
ha'nx  Lanowe.  Wa,  he'x-£ida£meseda  tslEdii'qe  ax£e'dxes  tsle'sLala 
qa  k!ipwiista'lexa  plElo'se  qa£s  k-!ipts!a'les  la'xa  lo'Elqlwe.  Wa, 
gi'l£mese   £wi'£lt,s!a   la'xa  lo'Elqlwaxs    la'e    kax-dzam6'lllas    la'xa 

25  mae'mokwe  be'bEgwanEma  la'xa  £na'l£nEinexEa  lo'qlwa.  Wa,  gi'l- 
£mese  £wl£laxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  £wa'bEts!ala  na'gatslii  qa£s  le  ha'nx-- 
dzamolilas  la'xes  klwe'lekwe.  Wa,  he'x,£ida£mese  na'x£IdExda- 
£xwa.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'xpda£xwae  hS-£mx£I'da.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  hamx£I'dExs  la'eda  ts!Edaqe  ax£e'dxa  o'gii£la£maxat !  lo'- 

30  q!wa  qa£s  guxts!o'des  £wa'paliisa  plElo'se  laq.  Wa,  la'xaa  ho'sEmtsa 
ka'kEts!Enaqe  la'xa  k!we'le  qa£s  le  ts!as  laq.  Wa,  la'xaa  ka.'- 
g'llllxa  £wa'bEts!ala   lo'qlwa   qa£s  le   k'axdzamo'lllas  laq  qa  yo'- 


boas]  RECIPES  331 

places  it  in  front  of  them,  to  |  eat  it  with  spoons  while  they  are  33 
eating  the  "plucked  cheeks."     They  eat  (the  liquid)  with  spoons  | 
while  they  are  eating    (the  heads).     After  they  have  eaten,  ||  the  35 
woman  takes  up  the  dish  and  pours  out  what  was  in  it.  |  Then  she 
pours  some  good  water  into  it,  and  she  |  places  it  in  front  of  her 
guests  again.     Then  they  wash  their  hands;  |  and  after  they  have 
done  so,  the  bucket  with  water  in  it  is  put  before  them,  |  and  they 
drink  out  of  it.     After  ||  they  finish  drinking,  they  go  out;  for  no  40 
second  course  is  served  after  |  eating  the  "plucked  cheeks,"  and  also 
no  oil  is  dipped  with  it.  |  Therefore  only  liquid  of  the  "plucked 
cheeks"  is  drunk  while  they  are  |  eaten.     That  is  the  end.  | 

Fresh  Salmon-Heads. — Sometimes  they  eat  (the  salmon-heads)  at  1 
once  when  they  are  soft,  for  often  |  the  old  people  come  to  the  owner 
of  this  kind  (of  food  to  ask  to  be  invited).  |  Then  it  is  just  put  down 
on  a  food-mat  and  placed  in  front  of  those  ||  who  ask  to  be  invited.  5 
They  do  not  eat  it  in  the  morning,  only  |  at  noon  and  in  the  evening; 
and  those  who  eat  it  do  not  rinse  their  mouths,  |  for  that  is  only  done 
in  the  morning.     They  only  drink  water  |  before  they  eat  the  roasted 
heads,  and  they  also  drink  water  |  after  they  finish  eating;  and  then 
they  take  a  mouthful  of  water  ||  and  squirt  it  over  their  hands  to  10 
wash  them,  for  |  their  hands  are  greasy  from  the  fat  of  their  food, 

ts!ek'Eleseqexs     ha£ma'paaxa     p!Elo'se.      Wa,      la'xda£xwe     yo'-  33 
ts!ekilaqexs    la'e    ha£ma'pa.      Wii,    g-i'l£mese     gwal    ha£ma'pExs 
la'eda  ts!Eda'qe    ka/gilllxa    lo'slqlwe    qa£s  le    giix£I'dEx    g'l'tsla-  35 
xdiiq.     Wa,  la£me'se  guxtslo'tsa  e'k'e  £wap  laq.     Wii,  laEmxaa'wi- 
se  kaxdzam5'lllas  la'xa  klwe'lde.     Wa,   laxda£xwe  ts!E'nts!Enx- 
£wlda.      Wa,   gi'l£mese    gwalExs    la'e    ha'ngEmlllEma   £wabEts!ala 
nagatsla'.     Wa,    he'x-£ida£mese    na'x£IdExda£xu    laq.      Wa,    g'i'l- 
£mese  gwal  na/qaxs    la'e    ho'quwEls   qaxs    k'le'sae   he'leg  intsE£wa  40 
ha£ma'paxa   p!Elo'se.      Wa,    laE'mxaa     k" lea's     L!e'£na    tsEpa'sos. 
Wa,  he'Em  la'gllas   a'Em    na'qasE£we    £wa'palasa    plElo'saxs    ha- 
fma£yae.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 

Fresh    Salmon-Heads     (Xo'xiisde). — Wii,    la    £na'l£nEmp!Ena    he'-  1 
x£ida£Em  ha£mx£i'dqexs  he'£mae    a'les    tslE'lqwe,    yixs    q!una'lae 
qa'tse£staleda  qlulsq'ulyakwe  laxa  axnS'gwadiisa  he  gwe'x'se.     Wa, 
laE'm  a'Em  axdzo'yo  la'xa  ha5madzowe'  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  le  axdzamo'- 
li£lEm  la'xa  qa'tsecstala.     Wa,  la  k!es  ha£ma'xa  gaa'la,  le'xa£ma  5 
nEqa'la  LEEwa    dza'qwa.     Wa,  la  kMes    ts!Ewe'L!Exodeda    ha£ma'- 
paq  qaxs  la£me'x'de  gaa'xstala.     Wii,  laLa  na'x£i;laEmxa  £wa'paxs 
k!e'sfmae  ha£mx£I'dxa    xo'xiisde.     Wa,  lii'xaa   nii'x£idaEmxs   lae 
gwal  ha£ma'pa.     Wa,  he'£mis  laxat!  ha'msgEindaats    la'xa   £wa'pe 
qa£s   ha'mxts!anE'ndesexs    la'e    ts!E'nts!Enx£weda,  qaxs  qte'lqlEl-  10 
tsliinae  lax  tsE'nxwa£yases  ha£ma'£ye  qaxs  a'£mae  da'x"£idxa  se'sE- 


332  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ANN.  35 

12  for  they  just  take  |  the  whole  roasted  salmon-heads  and  hold  them 
when  they  eat  them,  therefore  |  their  hands  are  very  greasy.  As 
soon  as  they  finish,  |  they  go  out  of  the  house,  for  no  second  course  is 

15  served  after  fresh  ||  roasted  salmon-heads.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 
Preserved  Salmon-Heads. — Now  we  wdl  talk  about   the  |  roasted 
salmon-heads  when  they  cook  them  in  winter.     When  |  it  is  winter, 
the  common  people  are  invited  to  come  |  to  the  house  of  the  owner 

20  of  the  roasted  salmon-heads.  Then  ||  they  do  again  the  same  thing 
tli at  I  told  of  before,1  when  they  spread  out  |  mats  behind  the  fire- 
place of  the  house  for  the  guests  to  sit  down  on  |  when  they  come  in. 
As  soon  as  they  are  in,  |  they  are  led  by  the  woman  to  their  seats  on 

25  the  spread  |  mats.  When  they  are  all  in,  the  ||  woman  at  once  takes 
the  basket  in  which  she  keeps  the  salmon-heads,  and  she  puts  it 
down  |  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting;  and  her  husband  takes  a 
large  |  kettle  and  puts  it  down  also,  next  to  the  place  where  his  wife 
is  sitting.  |  At  once  the  woman  opens  the  top  of  the  basket,  |  and 
she  takes  out  the  roasted  salmon-heads   and  puts  them  into  the 

30  kettle.  ||  Then  she  places  them  in  it  so  that  all  stand  on  the  part 
where  |  the  head  has  been  cut  off,  and  so  that  the  faces  of  the  roasted 
heads  are  upward;  and  she  only  |  stops  when  the  kettle  is  full.     Her 


12  nala  x'6'xiisda  qa£s  deda'lalileqexs  la'e  ha£ma'pEq.  Wa,  he'£mis 
la'g'Ilas  XE'nLEla  qlE'lqteltslane.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'texs  la'e 
a'Em  ho'quwEls  qaxs  kle'sae  he'leg-intsE£wa  ha£ma/paxa  ii'lxwase 

15  x'5'xiisda.     Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Preserved  Salmon-Heads.1 — Wa,  la£me'sEns  gwa'gwexs£alal  la'xa 
xo'xtisdiixs  la'e  haeme'x-silaqexs  la'e  ts!a£wiVnxa.  Wa,  he'£maaxs 
la'e  ts!a£wu'nxa  la'e  Le'£lalasE£weda  be'bEgwanEmqlalaEm  qa  ga'xes 
lax  go'kwasa  axno'gwadasa   xo'xiisde.     Wa,  he'Emxaa'wis  gwe'- 

20  x£Tde  gwl'gilasasa  gig'I'leyin  wa'ldEma  laE'm  LEpla'lelEma  te'- 
£wa£ye  lax  o'gwlwalllasa  lEgwi'lasa  go'kwe,  qa  kiudzEdzo'lllasosa 
Le£lanEme  qo  gaxL  ho'gwlLo.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  g'ax  ho'gwlLExs 
la'e  q!a'x-sidzes6sa  tslEda'qe  qa  las  klfidzEdzo'lilEla  la'xa  LEbEl- 
kwe'     le'£wa£ya.       Wa,  gi'l£mese     £wi'£laeLExs     la'e     he'x£ida£ma 

25  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  x'o'xiisdaatsle  Lla'bata  qa£s  ga'xe  ha'ngahlas 
la'xes  klwae'lase.  Wii,  la'La  la'£wuriEmas  ax£e'dxes  £wa'lase 
ha'nx'Lana  qa£s  g'a'xe  ha'ngahlas  la'xaaxa  k!wae'lasases  gEnE'me. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£meseda  tslEda'qe  xo'x£wh1ex  tlEma'g  imasa  Lla'bate. 
Wii,  la  ax£wtilts!a'laxa   x'o'xusde    qa£s    le  axtsla'las   la'xa  ha'nx- 

30  Lanowe.  LaE'm  ae'k'Ia  k!uts!a'las  qa  £na'xwa£me  he  klwa'layoses 
qa'ka£ye.  Wa,  laE'm  e'k'lEgEmltsIaweda  x'o'xusde.  Wa,  a'l£mese 
gwa'lExs    la'e    qo'tleda    ha'nx'Lanowe.      Wa,    la'La    la'£wunEmas 


boas]  RECIPES  333 

husband  |  at  once  takes  up  two  buckets  and  goes  to  draw  water  |  33 
for  the  liquid  of  what  is  being  cooked.     As  soon  as  he  comes  back,  || 
he  pours  (the  water)  into  (the  kettle).     When  it  is  half  full  of  water,  |  35 
his  wife  takes  an  old  mat  and  covers  it  over,  so  |  that  the  steam  may 
not  come  through  when  it  boils.     As  soon  as  |  this  has  been  done, 
she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire.     Immediately  |  the  guests  begin  to 
sing  the  songs  of  their  ancestors.  ||  Four  songs  are  sung.     Then  the  |  40 
host  takes  the  dishes  and  puts  them  down  at  the  place  where  his  | 
wife  is  sitting;  and  when  that  is  done,  she  dips  up  some  water,  so 
that  |  everything  stands  ready  on  the  floor  of  the  house.     After  it 
has  been  boiling  for  a  long  time,  the  |  kettle  is  taken  off;  and  it  just 
stands  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  ||  for  she  wants    (what  is  being  45 
cooked)  to  swell  up.     After  the  guests  finish  singing,  |  and  when  the 
hostess  thinks  that  what  is  being  cooked  is  (thoroughly)  soaked,  |  then 
she  takes  the  tongs  and  takes  off  the  covering.  |  Then  she  takes  a  large 
long-handled  ladle  and  takes  out  |  what  has  been  cooked  and  puts 
it  into  the  dishes;  ||  and  she  only  stops  when  they  are  all  fuU  of  what  50 
lias  been  cooked.  |  Then  (the  host's)  wife  takes  an  old  [bad]  food- 
mat  and  |  spreads  it  out  in  front  of  the  guests.     After  she  has  done 
so,  |  her  husband  takes  up  the  dishes  and  places  them  before  his  | 
guests.     There  are  four  men  to  each  dish.  ||  After  this  has  been  done,  55 


he'x£idaEm  klo'qulllxa  ma£ltsE'me  nena'gats!a  qa£s  le  tsax  £wa/pa  33 
qa  £wa'palases  ha£ine'xsllasE£we.     Wa,  gi'l£mese   gax  ae'daaqaxs 
la'e   guqteqa's    laq.     Wa,    a'£mese    t!EpEya'x£Idxa    £wa'paxs   la'e  35 
ax£e'de     gEUE'masexa     k'!a'k'!obane    qa£s      nasEyi'ndes     laq     qa 
k'le'ses   kuxusa'leda   k!a'lEla    qo    mEdE'lx£wklLo.     Wa,  gi'l£mese 
gwa'lExs     la'e    ha'nxxEnts     la'xa     lEgwi'le.     Wa     he'x£ida£mese 
dE'nx£ededa    klwe'lasa    gi'lts!Eyalay5     q!E'mdEma.      Wa,    laE'm 
mo'sgEmeda   dE'nx£edayos   qlE'mqlEmdEma.      Wa,    la£me'.sLaLeda  40 
k!we'lase  ax£e'dxes  l5'Elq!we  qa  g'a'xese  niEX£a'lll  lax  k!wae£lasases 
gEnE'me.     Wa,    la  gwa'lExs    la'e    tsa'x£idxa    £wa'pe    qa   g'a'xese 
ha£ne'l    gwa'llla.       Wa,    la£me'se    ge'gilil£Em    la    maE'mdElquleda 
ha'nxLaiaxs    la'e   ha'nxsEndEq.     Wa,    a'Emxaa'wise    la   ha£ne'la, 
qaxs  £ne'kae  qa  po's£Ide.    Wa,  laE'mLa  gwal  dE'nxEleda  k!we'le.  45 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  ko't!ededa  k!we£lasaq  laE'm  poVides  ha£me'x-silaxs 
la'e  ax£e'dxa  ts  !e'sLala  qa£s  k!ip!l'des  la'xa  nayl'me  qa£s  axo'deq. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  £wa'lase  gi'lt!EXLala  ka'ts!Enaqa  qa£s  XElo'ltsiales 
la'xes    ha£me'xsilasE£we  qa£s    le    xElts!a'las   laxa   lo'Elqlwe.     Wa, 
a'l£mese  gwa'lExs    la'e    £wi'£lolts!amasxes    ha£me'xsilasE£we.     Wa,  50 
la£me'se  gEnE'mas  ax£e'dxa  £ya'x'SE£me    ha£madzo'  le'£wa£ya,  qa£s 
le  LEpdzamo'lilas   la'xes   Le£lanEme.     Wa,  g1'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e 
la'£wunEmas  k-a'gilllxa  lo'Elq'.we  qa£s  le    kax-dzamolilElas  la'xes 
Le£lanEine.    Wa,  laE'm  mae'malasE£wa  £na'l£nEmexLa  lo'qlwa.    Wa, 
g-i'l£mese  gwa'texs  la'e  tsa'x£Itsa  £wa'pe  laq  qa  na'x£Ides  laq.     Wa,  55 


334  ETHNOLOGY   OF  THE   KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

56  she  dips  up  some  water,  and  they  drink  it;  |  and  after  they  have 
finished  drinking,  they  begin  to  eat.  They  just  take  up  |  one 
sakaon-head  and  hold  it  in  their  hands  when  they  are  eating,  |  and 
they  throw  the  bones  on  the  food-  |  mat;  therefore  an  old  [bad] 

60  food-mat  is  used,  ||  for  the  fat  of  the  salmon-heads  sticks  |  to  the 
mat.  And  after  they  have  eaten,  the  woman  |  takes  up  the  eating- 
dishes  and  pours  out  into  the  kettle  |  the  food  that  was  left.  Then 
she  washes  them  out;  |  and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  pours  some 

65  water  into  them,  and  she  puts  them  again  ||  before  those  to  whom 
she  has  given  to  eat;  and  at  once  they  all  |  wash  their  hands;  and 
after  the  |  men  have  washed  their  hands,  the  host  draws  some  water, 
and  they  |  all  drink;  and  after  they  have  finished  drinking,  |  the 

70  oldest  one  among  the  guests  speaks,  praising  the  host;  ||  and  when  he 
stops  speaking,  the  host  thanks  them  for  their  |  words;  and  when  he 
stops  speaking,  they  wait  for  the  |  second  course.  That  is  all  of  this.  | 
1  Steamed  Salmon-Heads. — Now  I  will  |  talk  about  the  salmon- 
heads  steamed  (on  hot  stones) ,  |  — -the  heads  of  all  kinds  of  salmon. 
When  |  the  woman  cuts  the  salmon,  as  soon  as  she  finishes,  her  || 
5  husband  cuts  fire-wood;  and  after  he  has  done  so,  he  |  digs  a  hole 
on  the  beach.     Then  he  puts  the  split  fire-wood  lengthwise  |  into  it. 

56  g'iTmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ha£mx-£ida.  Wa,  laE'm  a'Em  da'x£Id- 
xa  £na'l£nEmsgErne  he'x't!a£ya  qa£s  da'lallleqexs  la'e  hafma'pEq. 
Wa,  la£nie'se  ts!EgEdzo'dalaxa  xa'qesawa£ye  la'xes  ha£madzo'we 
te'£wa£ya.     He'Em  la'g'Ilas    he    ax£e'tsosa  £ya'x"sa£me    ha£madz5' 

60  le'£wexs,  yixs  XE'nLElae  klii'teda  tsE'nxwa£yasa  he'xt!a£yasa  k"!6'- 
tEla  la'xa  le'£wa£ye.  Wa,  g'i'lmese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe 
ax£e'dxa  ha'£maats!ex'de  lo'Elq!wa  qa£s  le  guxts!o'tsa  kp!ets!a£yawa- 
yasa  ha£mii'x'de  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe.  Wa,  la  ts.'oxug'indEq.  Wa, 
gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  guxts!6'tsa  £wa'pe  laq,  qa£s  la'£xat!  e'tled 

65  kaxdzamo'lllas  la'xes  ha£mg'I'lasoxude.  Wa,  he'x-£ida£mese  £wl£la 
ts!E'nts!Enx£w!da.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwal  ts!E'nts!Enkwaxs  la'eda 
bEgwa'nEme,  yixa  Le£lanEmaq  tsa'x£Itsa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wa,  la'x"da- 
£xwe  £wi'£la  na'x£Ida.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ya'q!eg-a£le 
q!u'lyak!iiga£yasa    k!wel.      Wa,    laE'm    tslE'lwaqaxa    Le£IaiiEmaq. 

70  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  q!we'l£TdExs  la'e  m5'mElk!aleda  klwe'lasas  wa'ldE- 
mas.  Wii,  g'i'l£mese  q!we'l£edExs  la'e  awQ'lgEmga£lIl  qa£s  he'le- 
g-IntsE£we.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Steamed  Salmon-Heads  (K!wE£yaa'ku  hext'.e). — Wa,  la£me'sEn 
e'dzaqwal  gwa'gwexs£alal  la'xa  he'x"t!a£yaxs  la'e  nEk-a'sE£wa, 
yix  he'xt!a£yasa  £na'xwa  k'!o'k!utEla.  Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  xwa'- 
Leda  tslEda'qaxa  k-!o'tEla.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  la/£wu- 
5  nEmas  LE'mlEnox'sEndxa  lEqwa'.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e 
la'p'.alisa  la'xa  L!Ema£ise.     Wa,  la  Lo'xtslalasa  LE'mgEkwe  lEqwa' 


boas]  RECIPES  335 

After  he  has  done  so,  he  piles  stones  into  it;  |  and  when  the  fire-wood  S 
is  covered  with  stones,  |  he  puts  fire  under  the  pile  of  wood  and 
stones;  and  when  the  pile  of  wood  and  stones  blazes  up,  [|  he  goes  10 
back  into  the  woods  and  gets  |  skunk-cabbage  leaves;  and  when  he 
gets  many  of  them,  he  brings  them  and  puts  them  down  |  near  the 
pile  of  wood  and  stones;  and  he  takes  his  tongs  |  and  lie  brings  his 
bucket.     His  wife  takes  off  |  the  gills  from  the  salmon-heads,  and 
her  husband  takes  ||  eel-grass,  drifted  ashore;  and  after  this  has  been  15 
done  on  the  beach,  |  and  when  the  stones  are  hot  enough  the  man  takes 
his  tongs  |  and  takes  up  a  fire-brand  and  puts  it  down  on  the  beach, 
far  away  from  |  the  place  where  the  heads  are  to  be  steamed;  and 
when  all  the  fire  has  been  taken  out,  |  he  levels  the  stones;  and  when 
they  are  all  level,  ||  he  takes  the  eel-grass  and  puts  it  around  the  20 
stones;  |  and  when  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  the  skunk-cabbage 
leaves  and  spreads  them  |  over  the  stones;  and  he  only  stops  when 
there  are  four  layers  |  of  skunk-cabbage  leaves  spread  out.     As  soon 
as  this  is  done,  he  takes  the  |  salmon-heads  and  places  them,  nose 
upward,  on  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves.  ||  As  soon  as  they  are  all  on  25 
the  stones,  he  takes  several  skunk-cabbage  leaves  and  |  spreads  them 
over  the  salmon-heads;  and  when  these  are  spread  also  four  layers 
thick,   |  he  takes  his  bucket,  dips  up  sea-water  |  on  the  beach,  and 
brings  it  up  to  the  steaming-hole.  |  Then  he  takes  mats  and  places 


laq.      Wa,  gl'Pmese    gwa'lExs    la'e    XEquyindalasa   tle'sEnie   laq.  7 
Wa,    gTFmese    kamElqayi'ndeda     tle'sEme     la'xa    lEqwa'xs    la'e 
mEna'botsa  gu'lta  la'xes  t!eqwapa£ye.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  x'I'qostowe 
t  le'qwapa£yasexs    la'e    a'Le£sta    la'xa    a'lJe    qa£s    le    ax£e'd   la'xa  io 
k' lEk'lao'klwa.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese    qlEyo'LEqexs  g'a'xae  gE'mxalesaq 
la'xa  nExwa'la  la'xes  t!e'qwapa£ye.     Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxes  k'lipLa'la 
qa  ga'xes  k'ade'se  LE£wis  na'gatsle.     Wa,  la'La  gEnE'mas  axa'lax 
q!5'sna£yasa    he'x"t!a£ye.      Wa,  la'xae   la'£wiinEmas    ax£e'd    la'xa 
qulE'me  tsla'tslayi'ma.     Wa,  g1'l£mese  £wl'£la  gax  gwa'£lisaxs  la'e  15 
memEiiltsE'mx,£Ide.     Wa,    le'da    bEgwa'nEme    ax£e'dxa    kMIpLa'la 
qa£s  k'lipsa'lexa  gu'lta  qa£s  ax£a'llsEles  la'xa  qwa'qwesalaEm  la'xa 
nEg'a'sLaxa  he'x-t!a£ye.    Wa,  g1'l£mese  £wi'£lx-seda  gii'ltaxs  £nEma'- 
k-Eyindxa   tle'sEme.       Wa,   gi'l£mese    £w!'£la   £nEma'k-E£yaxs   la'e 
ax£e'dxa  ts!a'ts!Esmote  qa£s  le  axse£sta'las  lax  awe'£stasa  tle'sEme.  20 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'laxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  k-!ao'k!we  qa£s  LEp la'lodales 
la'xa    tle'sEme.      Wa,    a'l£mese     gwa'lExs    la'e    mo'xudzEk!weda 
LEplaa'kwe    k'lao'klwa.      Wa,    g-i'l£mese    gwa'lExs    la'e   ax£e'dxa 
he'x't!a£ye    qa£s    le    kludzEdzo'dalas    la'xa    klEk-!ao'k!wa.      Wa, 
gii£mese  £wl'£lgaalaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  wao'kwe  k"!Ek!ao'k!wa  qa£s  25 
LEpEyl'ndales   la'xa   he'x-t!a£ye.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  laxat!  mo'xudzE- 
kwalaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  na'gatsle    qa£s    le  tsa'x£Its  la'xa  dE'msx  e 
la'xa  LlEma£ise.     Wa,  g-a'xe   ha£no'hsas    la'xes   nE'kas5Le.     Wa, 
la    iix£e'dxa     le'Elwa£ye    qa£s    axno'lises    laq.      Wa,  la    ax£e'dxa 


336  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

30  them  by  the  side  of  it,  and  he  takes  a  ||  pointed  cedar-stick  and 
pokes  holes  through  the  covering  of  skunk-cabbage  leaves,  for  the 
water  to  go  through  when  he  pours  it  on.  When  |  all  this  is  done, 
lie  takes  the  bucket  of  water  and  pours  it  over  the  |  skunk-cabbage 
leaves;  then  he  takes  the  mats  and  covers  them  over  the  leaves,  |  so 
that  the  steam  can  not  come  through.     After  he  has  covered   (the 

35  steaming-hole)  ||  he  calls  his  friends  to  come  and  sit  down  on  the 
beach  at  the  place  where  he  is  steaming  |  salmon-heads.  After  they 
have  been  sitting  there  some  time,  the  man  uncovers  |  what  he  is 
-.teaming;  and  the  guests  at  once  |  sit  around  the  steamed  salmon- 
heads,  and  they  at  once  eat  by  picking  the  heads  |  with  their  hands 

40  while  they  are  still  hot;  ||  and  after  they  have  eaten,  water  is  drawn 
and  |  is  drunk  afterwards,  and  the  hands  are  washed.  After  they 
finish  drinking  |  water  and  washing  their  hands,  they  go  home.  | 
That  is  the  way  in  which  the  Indians  cook  the  heads  of  the  dog- 
salmon  |  when  they  are  first  caught,  and  of  the  humpback-salmon 

45  and  of  silver-salmon  caught  by  trolling,  and  ||  of  all  the  other  kinds 
of  salmon.  | 
1       Boiled   Salmon-Heads. — Now    I   will  |  talk   about  boiled  salmon- 
heads.  |  When    the   woman   finishes   cutting   the  |  dog-salmon    and 
5  silver-salmon,  when  they  are  first  caught,  ||  her  husband  at  once  takes 
a  kettle  and  pours  water  into  it,  |  and  his  wife  takes  off  the  gills  from 

30  e'xba  k!waxLa/£wa  qa£s  LlE'nqEmxs'ales  la'xa  nayi'me  klEkiao'- 
k!wa  qa  gayi'mxsalatsa  £wa'pe  qo  tsaVldLo.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  £wa'bEts!ala  nagatsla'  qa£s  tsa'tslELEyi'n- 
des  la'xa  k!Ek!ao'k!wa.  Wa,  la  Sx£e'dxa  le'El£wa£ye  qa£s  naVldes 
laq  qa  kMe'ses  kixusa'leda  k'lalEla.     Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwal  na'saqexs 

35  la'e  Le/£lalaxes  £ne£nEmo'kwe  qa  les  k!us£a'lis  lax  axa's  nEga'sa- 
sexa  he'x't !a£ye.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gaga'la  k!udze'sExs  la'e  lo'tlededa 
bEgwa'nEmaxes  nEk-a'.  Wa,  he'x£ida£mesa  le'da  Le£lanEme  qa£s 
le  k!utse£sta'laxa  nEg'Ekwe'  he'xt  !a£ye.  Wa,  he'x-£ida£mese  xamax-- 
ts'.a'na    ha£mx£i'dxa    he'x"t!a£ye,    yixs    he'£mae    a'les     tslE'lqwe. 

40  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'e  tsax£itsE£weda  £wa'pe  qa 
na'geges,  lo  qa  ts!E'nts!Egwayos.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxa 
£wa'paxs  la'e  ts!E'nts!Enx£wlda.  Wa,  la'xda£xwe  na'£nakwa.  Wa, 
he'Em  ha£me'x-silaene£sa  ba'klumaxa  he'x't !a£yasa  gwa£xnisaxs 
g'a'loLaiiEmae  i,EE\va  ha£no'ne  LE£wa  do'gwinete  dza£wu'na,  Lo£ma 

45  £na'xwa  klo'klutEla. 
1  Boiled  Salmon-Heads  (Ha'nxLaaku  hext!e£). — Wa,  la£me'- 
sEn  gwagwexs£alal  la'xaa  he'xt  !a£yaxs  ha'nxLaakwae.  Wa, 
he'£maaxs  ga'lae  gwal  xwa'Leda  tslEda'qaxa  ga'loLanEme 
klo'tElaxa  gwa£xni'se  L6£ma  dza£wu'ne.  AVa,  he'x£idamese  la'- 
5  £wtinEmas  ax£edxa  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  gdxtslo'desa  £wa'pe  laq. 
Wa,  laLa  gEnE'mas    axa'lax    q!o'sna£yasa  he'xt !a£ye.     Wa,  g'1'1- 


boas]  RECIPES  337 

the  heads.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  she  puts  the  salmon-heads  into    7 
the  kettle;  |  and  when  it  is  full,  she  takes  an  old  mat  and  |  covers  the 
salmon-heads  which  are  in  the  kettle.  ||  After  she  has  covered  them,  10 
she  puts  them  over  the  fire.  |  Then  they  invite  whom  they  like  to 
invite  among  their  tribe;  |  and  when  the  guests  come  in,  the  woman 
takes  |  her  dishes  and  her  spoons,  and  takes  them  to  the  place  where 
she  is  sitting.  |  The  kettle  has  not  been  boiling  a  long  time,  ||  before  15 
it  is  taken  off  the  fire.    Then  the  cover  is  taken  off.  |  The  woman  takes 
a  long-handled   ladle  made  for    the    purpose,   |  and   dips   out   the 
salmon-heads  one  by  one,  and  |  puts  them  down  into  a  dish.     Then 
she  counts  the  salmon-heads,  so  that  |  there  are  two  for  each  man.  [| 
There  are  eight  salmon-heads  in  each  dish  for  |  four  men.     After  she  20 
has  done  this,  a  |  food-mat  is  spread  on  the  floor  of  the  house  in 
front  of  the  guests,  and  |  an  empty  dish  is  taken  and  put  down  out- 
side |  of  the  food-mat  spread  on  the  floor.     Then  ||  the  dish  with  the  25 
heads  in  it  is  picked  up  and  placed  before  the  guests,  |  inside  of  the 
empty  dish  and  nearest  to  the  guests;  |  and  (the  woman)  also  takes 
the  spoons  and  distributes  them  among  the  guests.  |  The  guests  at 
once  pick  off  the  skin  of  the  salmon-heads  [  and  eat  it;  and  after  all 
the  skin  has  been  eaten,  ||  they  pick  off  the  bones  and  suck  them.  30 


£mese    gwa'lExs    la'e   axtsla'lasa    he'x-t!a£ye    la'xa    ha'nx'Lanowe.    7 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  qo'tlaxs  la'e  ax£5'd  la'xa  kMa'kMobane  qa£s  na'sE- 
yindes  la'xa  he'x-t!a£yaxs  la'e   g'e'tsla  la'xa   ha'nx'Lanowe.     Wa, 
gi'l£rnese    gwal    na'saqexs    la'e   ha'nx'LEnts   la'xa  lEgwi'le.     Wa,  10 
la    Le'elalaxes    gwE£yowe    qa£s    Le'£lalas6    la'xes    go'kulote.     Wa, 
gi'l£mese    gax    £wI'£laeLeda    Le£lanEmaxs    la'e    gEnE'mas    ax£e'd- 
xes  l5'Elq!we  LE£wis   ka'kEtslEnaqe  qa  ga'xes   axe'}  lax  k!wae'- 
lasas.     Wii,    k'!e'st!a   a'laEm    ge'g'illl    maE'mdElquleda    ha/nxLa- 
naxs    la'e   ha'nx'sana.     Wa,    he'x£ida£mese      axo'yuwe     na'sEya-  15 
£yas.     Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe    ax£e'dxa  hekwlla£ye  gi'ltlEXLala  k'a'- 
tslEnaqa    qa£s   £na'l£nEmsgEmEmke  xElo'ltsIalaxa  he'x't!a£ye  qa£s 
le  xE'lts!alas   la'xa    lo'q!we.     Wa,    laE'm    ho'saxa   he'x't!a£jTe    qa 
mae'ma£ltsEmk-!Esesa    £nal£nEmo'kwe    bEgwa'nEma.      Wa,    laE'm 
ma£lguna'ltsEma  he'x-t!a£ye  la'xa  £nEme'xxa  lo'qlwa  qae'da  mo'-  20 
kwe   be'bEgwanEma.     Wa,    gi'l£mese    gwa'lExs    la'e    LEp!a'lllEma 
ha£madzowe'   le'£wa£ya  lax  £nExdzamollltsa    klwe'le.      Wa,  la'xaa 
ax£e'tsE£weda  lo'pts!awe  lo'q!wa  qa£s  le  kla'dzodayo  lax  L!a'sEnxa- 
£yasa  la   LEbe'l    ha£madz5'    le'£wa£ya.      Wa,    lawe'sLa    k'a'gililxa 
he'xts!ala  l6'q!wa  qa£s  le    k'a'x'dzamolllas    la'xa    klwe'le.      Wa,  25 
laE'm  a'Lesa  lo'ptsla,  lo'q!wa  qa£s  le  ma'k'ala  la'xa  klwe'le.     Wit, 
a'xaa  ax£e'dxa  ka'kEtslEnaqe  qa£s  le  tslEwanaesas  la'xa  klwe'le. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£meseda  klwe'le  XElwa'lax  Lle'tsEma£yasa  he'x-t!a£ye 
qa£s  hamx£I'deq.      Wa,    g-i'l£mese    £wl£la    hamx£I'dxa    Lle'tsEma- 
£yasexs    la'e   xe'lx-£idEx  xa'qas  qa£s   k!ix£we'deq.     Wa,  gi'hmese  30 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 22 


338  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

31  Then,  |  after  all  the  good  meat  has  been  sucked  off,  they  throw  the 
bones  which  they  have  been  sucking  |  into  the  empty  dish  which  has 
been  put  down  for  the  |  bones  that  have  been  sucked  off,  to  be  thrown 
into  it.     After  all  the  |  bones  have  been  taken  out  of  the  head,  they 

35  pick  up  out  of  the  dish  with  their  hands  ||  the  edible  part  of  the 
salmon-head  and  eat  it;  and  after  |  they  have  finished  eating  it,  the 
man  takes  away  the  dish  with  the  bones  in  it,  |  and  pours  them  into 
the  kettle,  and  he  washes  |  the  dishes  out,  and  he  pours  water  into 
the  dishes  and  places  them  in  front  |  of  those  who  have  eaten  the 

40  salmon-heads,  and  they  wash  their  hands.  ||  After  they  have  finished 
washing  their  hands,  the  man  |  draws  some  water  for  them,  and  they 
drink  it;  and  after  they  have  finished  drinking,  |  they  go  out.  That 
is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Mush  of  Boiled  Salmon-Heads. — Heads  of  all  |  kinds  of  salmon, 
eaten  with  spoons, — that  is  what  I  am  going  to  talk  about.  This  is 
the  same  as  |  I  have  told  before;  and  the  only  difference  is  that  they 
are  not  |  covered  with  an  old  mat,  and  that  they  are  left  to  boil  a 
5  long  time  on  the  fire,  so  that  they  ||  fall  to  pieces.  The  reason  why 
the  salmon-heads  are  boiled  to  pieces  is  because  they  are  always  | 
stirred,  so  that  the  salmon-heads  are  broken.  Then  the  kettle  |  is 
taken  off  from  the  fire,  and  the  salmon-heads  are  dipped  out  into  a 
dish,  and  |  it  is  put  in  front  of  those  who  are  going  to  eat  it;  and  | 


31  £wl£la  k'lix'o'dEX  e'gE£masexs  la'e  ts  texts  !a/lases  k!a'xumote  xaq 
la'xa  lo'ptshi  lo'qlwa  qaxs  he'£mae  la'gllas  ha'ngalilEme  qaeda 
k'!axumote  xa'qa  qa  ts  texts  la'laseq.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  £wl'£lamasxa 
xa'xsEma£yasa     he'x't!a£yaxs     la'e     xa'max-ts!ana    da/gilts  !odxa 

35  hamtslawasa  he'x-t!a£ye  qa£s  ha£mx£Ideq.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  gwal 
ha£ma'paxs  la'e  he'x-£ida£ma  bEgwa'nEme  ax£e'dxa  xa'xtslala 
lo'qlwa  qa£s  le  qEptslo'dEs  la'xa  ha'nx'Lanowe.  Wa,  la  tslo'xu- 
g'indEq.  Wa,  la  qEpts!o'tsa  £wa'pe  laq  qa£s  le  hanxdzamo'lllas 
la'xa    hex'ha'xdaxa    he'x-t!a£ye.     Wa,    la'xda£xwe    tste'ntstenx- 

40  £weda.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwal  tste'ntstenkwaxs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme 
tsa'x'£Itsa  £wa'pe  laq  qa  na'x£Ides.  Wa,  g'l'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs 
la'e  ho'quwElsa.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Mush  of  Boiled  Salmon-Heads. — Yue'k"  he'x-t!esa  £na'xwa  k!o'- 
k'.utElagin  e'dzagumLEk'.  Wa,  he'Emxaa  gwii'leda  g'i'lxilEn 
gwa'gwexs£5lasa.  Wii,  le'x'a£mes  6'gu£qalayosexs  k!eo'sae  na'- 
yEm  k'!a'k-!obana.  Wii,  he'£misexs  ge'x-La£lae  maE'mdElqula  qa 
5  xa's£ides.  He'Em  la'gllas  xa'xts  !eda  he'x-t  !a£ya  qaxs  he'niEnel£mae 
xwe'tasE£wa  qa  lE'lx-sesa  he'x-t!a£ye.  Wa,  la  ha'nx'sanaweda 
ha'nxxano  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  la  tsatslo'dayo  la'xa  lo'q!we  qa£s 
le  ka'xdzam5lllas  la'xa  yfi'saLaq.  Wii,  la  ts!EwanaedzEma  ka'- 
k'EtslEnaqe     la'xa     Le£lanEme.     Wa,     la     he'x£idaEm     yoVidEq. 


boas]  EECIPES  339 

spoons  are  given  to  the  guests.     Then  they  at  once  eat  it.  ||  There  are  10 
hardly  any  bones  to  blow  out,  for  it  is  really  boiled  to  pieces.  |  After 
they  have  eaten  it,  water  is  drawn,  and  they  drink  it;  |  and  after 
they  have  finished  drinking  it,  they  go  out.  |  No  oil  is  taken  with  this, 
as  with  what  I  have  been  talking  about  before. 

Milky  Salmon- Spawn. — When  (the  salmon-spawn)  has  been  in  the 
house  for  some  time,  ||  it  is  cooked,  and  then  it  is  called  "milky."  |   15 
This  is  put  into  a  kettle,  and  some  water  is  poured  over  it;  |  then  it  is 
stirred,  and  they  just  stop  |  stirring  when  it  is  quite  milky.     Then 
the  kettle  is  put  |  on  the  fire,  and  the  man  watches  it;  and  when  || 
it  gets  warm,  the  man    takes  a   large  |  stirring-ladle  with  a  long  20 
handle,  made  for  this  purpose,  and  stirs  it  with  it,  |  and  he  continues 
stirring  it  while  it  is  boding.     It  is  not  |  left  to  boil  a  very  long  time, 
and  is  taken  off  from  the  fire  when  |  it  is  done.     The  mdky  spawn  || 
with  its  liquid  is  dipped  out  into  a  dish,  and  oil  is  poured  into  it.  25 
Then  |  it  is  placed  before  those  who  are  to  eat  it,  and  they  eat  it 
with  spoons.  |  After  they  finish  eating  with  spoons,  they  drink  fresh 
water,  |  and  they  drink  water  before  they  begin  to  eat  it.  |  This  is 
eaten  by  the  Indians  at  noon  and  in  the  evening.  ||  They  do  not  eat  30 
the  milky  spawn  in  the  morning,  for  it  makes  them  sleepy,  |  on 

Wa,    laE'm    ka'lsElaF.m    po'x'olax  xa'qas  qaxs   a'lae    xa'sa.     Wa,  10 
gi'l£mese  gwal   yo'saxs    la'e   tsa'x£Itsosa  £wa'pe.     Wa,  la   na'x£I- 
dEq.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal   na'qaxs  la'e  ho'quwElsa.     Wa,    laE'm- 
xaa  k' lea's  L!e'£na  laq  EE£wa  gi'lxdEn  wa'klEma. 

Milky  Salmon-Spawn. — .     .     .    .'  la'e  ga'gaelEla  la'xa  go'kwe  qa£s 
ha£me'xsIlasE£we.     Wii,   he'Em    Le'gadEs    dzEmo'kwe.      Wa,  he'-  15 
£maaxs  la'e  tse'ts!o£yo   la'xa  ha'nxLanowe,  wa,  la£me'se  guq'Eqa- 
sosa  £wa/pe.      Wa,    la£me'se    xwe't!etsE£wa.      Wa,    a'l£mese    gwal 
xwetasoxs  la'e  a'lak'Ialala  dzE'mxusta.     Wa,  lawi'sLa  ha'nxLana 
la'xa  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  la£me'seda  bEgwa'nEme  do'qwalaq.     Wii,  g  i'l- 
£mese  dzEs£e'dEXs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  ax£e'dxa  hekwe'la£ye  £wa'las  20 
xwe'dayo  k-a'ts!Enaqa   gl'ltlEXLala  qaes   xwe'tledes    laq.     Wa,  la- 
£mes  he'mEiialaEm    xwe'taqexs   la'e   mEdE'lx£wida.     Wa,   k'!e'st!a 
a'laEm    ge'gilil     maE'mdElqiilaxs   la'e     hii'nxsana.      Wa,    laE'm 
Llo'pa.     Wa,  la^me'se  tse'tsloyo  laxa  lo'cjlweda  dzEmo'kwe  ge'^ne 
le£wis  £wa'pala.      Wa,    la    k!u'nq!Eqasosa    L!e'£na.     Wa,    lawi'sLa  25 
k-a'x£idayo  la'xa  ha£ma'pLaq.      Wii,    laE'm    yo'sasa    k'a'tslEnaqe 
laq.     Wii,   g'i'Pmese   gwa'la  yo'siixs    la'e    na'gek  ilaxa  a'lta  £wa'- 
pa,  yixs  na'naqalgiwala£mexdiixa  £wa'paxs   k!e's£mex"de  y5's£ida. 
Wa,  yu'Em   ha£mii'sa  ba'k!umaxa   HEqii'la   LE£wa   dza'qwa.      Wii, 
la  k-!es  yo'saxa    dzEmo'kwe  ge'£nexa    gaa'la,    qaxs    kwalatslEmae  30 
qae's    tsE'nxwa£ye.      Wa,    la    la£me'sEn    gwii'gwex"s£alal    la'xaaxa 

'  Continued  from  p.  235,  line  14. 


340  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  3? 

32  account  of  its  fat.  Now  I  will  talk  also  about  the  |  milky  salmon 
when  it  lasts  until  the  winter.  |  Then  it  is  called  "clayey."  When 
the  |  old  men  are  invited  at  noon  or  in  the  evening  by  the  one  who 

35  owns  it, — for  this  also  is  not  ||  eaten  in  the  morning, — when  all  |  the 
guests  are  in,  the  owner  who  invited  them  takes  a  kettle  and  | 
washes  it  out  well,  so  that  it  is  quite  clean.  He  takes  it  up,  |  and  puts 
it  down  by  the  side  of  the  box  in  which  the  milky  spawn  was  |  before 

40  it  began  to  rot.  Then  he  takes  ||  a  large  clam-shell  and  dips  out  the 
really  |  rotten-smelling  spawn,  and  dips  it  out  into  the  kettle;  and 
when  |  the  kettle  is  half  full  of  salmon-spawn,  the  man  stops  dipping 
it  out.  |  Then  he  takes  up  the  kettle  and  puts  it  down  |  by  the  side 

45  of  the  fire,  and  pours  water  into  it;  and  he  only  ||  stops  pouring  into 
it  when  the  kettle  is  half  full  of  water.  He  does  not  |  stir  it.  As 
soon  as  it  is  done,  he  takes  another  |  kettle  and  washes  it  out  well 
with  water;  and  when  it  is  |  clean,  he  puts  it  down  on  the  floor  of 
the  house;  and   then  he   takes  from   the  floor  of   the  house  |  the 

50  kettle  in  which  the  salmon-spawn  is,  and  puts  it  over  the  fire;  ||  and 
when  it  is  on  the  fire,  he  takes  his  long-handled  stirring-  |  ladle  and 
dips  up  the  salmon-spawn  and  its  liquid,  and  pours  it  back  |  into  the 
kettle;  and  he  continues  doing  this  until  it  |  bods  over.  He  never 
stirs  it:  he  only  |  dips  it  up.     He  does  not  dip  it  up  for  a  long  time, 


32  ax£e'daasaxa  dzEmo'kwe  ge'£nexs  la'e  la'gaa  la'xa  la  tslawii'nxa. 
Wa,  laE'm  Le'gadEs  Lle'gEkwe  la'xeq.  Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'eda 
q!Qlsq!0'lyakwe  Le£lanEnixa  nEqa'la  L6£ma  dza'qwa,  yixs  k'!e's£ma- 

35  axat!  gaa'xstexa  gaa/la,  yisa  axno'gwadas.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  £wi'- 
£laeLeda  LedanEmaxs  la'eda  Le'£lala  ax£e'dxa  ha'nxxanowe  qa£s 
ae'kle  tslo'xtig'indEq  qa  a'lakMalese  la  e'giga.  Wa,  la  k'lo'qii- 
laq  qa£s  le  ha£no'lilas  la'xa  L!e'gEgwats!e  Lil'watsa,  yixs  dzEmo'- 
gwatslaaLExs  lc  !e's£mexde  q!al£e'deda  ge'£ne.     Wa,  la£me'se  ax£e'd- 

40  xa  xa'laesasa  mEt!a'na£ye  qa£s  xElo'lts!ode  la'xa  a'laklala  la 
q!alp!a'la  ge'£na  qa£s  le  XElts!a'las  la'xa  hanx'La'nowe.  Wa,  g'1'1- 
£mese  nEgo'yoxsdaleda  ha'nxxanoxa  ge'£naxs  la'e  gwal  XEltsIa'leda 
bEgwa'nEmaq.  Wii,  la  k-!o'qwaldxa  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  le  han5'- 
lisas  la'xa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  laguqlEqa'sa  £wa'pe   laq.     Wa,  a'h'mese 

45  gwal  gii'qaxs  la'e  nEgo'yaleda  ha'nx'Lanaxa  £wa'pe.  LaE'm  k-!es 
xwe'tledEq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'la,  la  ax£e'dxa  6'gfi£la£maxat! 
ha'nxxana  qa£s  ae'kle  tslo'xugintsa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
egEg'a'xs  la'e  ha'ngalilaq.  Wa,  lawi'sLa  k' !o'qwalilxa  ha'nx-- 
Lano,  yix  la  axtsE£wa'tsa  ge'£ne  qa£s  ha'nx'LEndes  la'xa   lEgwi'le. 

50  Wa,  gl'l£mese  la'xLalaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  gi'lt!Exi.ala  xwe'dayo  k  a'- 
tslEnaqa  qas  tse'gostalls  la'xa  ge'£ne  LE£wis  £wa'pe  qa£s  xwe'laqa- 
emexat!  guxstE'nts  laq.  Wa,  laE'm  hexsa'Em  gwe'gilaq  la'laa  lax 
tE'nx£IdEX-dEmLas.  Wa,  laE'm  hewa'xaEm  xwe'tledEq.  A'x'saEm 
tse'g'ostalaq.     Wa,   la   k-!es  gegllll  tse'g-ostalaqexs  la'e  ya'was£Id 


boas]  RECIPES  341 

before  it  ||  boils  a  little;  and  as  soon  as  it  boils,  over,  it  is  taken  off  55 
the  fire  |  and  poured  into  the  cold  kettle.     Then  it  |  is  done.     The 
reason  why  it  is  quickly  poured  into  the  |  cold  kettle  is,  that,  if  it  is 
allowed  to  boil  for  a  long  time,  then  the  |  water  gets  clear,  and  the 
spawn  separates  from  the  liquid.  ||  When  it  is  poured  into  the  cold  60 
kettle  |  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  boil  over,  then  it  is  just  like  boiled 
flour,  and  it  is  mushy.  |  Immediately  the  man  takes  the  dishes  and  j 
puts  them  down  close  to  the  place  where  the  kettle  is  standing  |  in 
which   the  clayey  spawn  is.     Then  he  takes  a  long-handled  [[  ladle  65 
and  dips  up  the  clayey 'salmon,  and  puts  it  |  into  the  dishes;  and 
when  the  dishes  are  full  of  the  |  clayey  spawn,  he  takes  oil  and  pours 
it  into  it, —  |  really  much  oil.     The  reason  why  they  take  much  |  oil  is 
that  it  chokes  those  who  eat  it.    After  (the  man)  finish  |[  putting  oil  into  70 
it,  he  puts  it  before  the  guests,  |  and  his  wife  takes  her  spoon-basket 
and  distributes  the  spoons  |  among  the  guests.     They  do  not  drink 
water  before  |  they  eat  it.     They  just  eat  it  right  away.     As  soon 
as  |  they  begin  to  eat,  the  man  draws  fresh  water  for  his  guests  to 
drink  ||  after  they  have  eaten.     As  soon  as  the  one  who  went  to  75 
get  water  comes  back,  |  he  puts  down  the  water  that  he  has  drawn, 
and  waits  for  his  guests  to  finish  |  eating;  and  after  they  finish  eating, 

niEdE'lx£wida.      Wa,    g'i'Fmese    tE'nx,£idExs    la'e    ha'nx-sEndayo  55 
qa£s    le    guqa'dzEm    la'xa  wiidEsgE'me    ha'nxLano.      Wa,    laE'm 
L,!6p    la'xeq.      Wa,    he'Em    la'gllas    ha'labala    guqa'dzEm    la'xa 
wiidEsgE'me  ha'nxxana,  ytxs  g-i'l£mae  ge'gilll  tE'ntEnkilaxs  la'e  la 
q!o'ltse£sta.     Wa,  laE'm   gwe'l£ideda  ge'£ne  LE£wis  £wa'pala.     Wa, 
gi'l£mese  he'x-£idaEm  guqa'dzEm  la'xa  wiidEsgE'me  ha'nxxanaxs  go 
g-a'lae  tE'nx£Ida;  wa,  la  yu  gwe'xsa  ha'nxxaakwex  quxa'  la  gE'n- 
k'a.      Wa,    he'x-£ida£meseda    bEgwa'nEme  ax£e'dxa   lo'Elqlwa  qa£s 
g'a'xe  mEx£alh*Elaq  la'xa  ma'kala£me   lax   ha£ne'£lasasa    hanxLa- 
nowe,  ylx  la  g i'ts  !E£watsa  L  le'gEkwe  ge'ma ;  wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  g  i'lt  !ex- 
La   k-a'ts!Enaqa  qafs    tse'x-£Ides  la'xa    l  le'gEkwe  ge'ena    qa£s   tse-  55 
ts!a'les    la'xa    lo'Elqlwe.      Wa,    gl'Pmese  qo'qutleda    lo'Elqlwaxa 
l le'gEkwe  ge'£nexs  la'e  axfe'dxa  L!e'£ne   qa£s  k!iiq!Eqe's  laq,  yisa 
a'lak-!ala    la    qle'nEma    L!e'£na.     Wa,    he'Em   la'gulas    qle'nEma 
L!e'£na  la'qexs  mEkwa'e   la'xox  ha£ma'£yex.      Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwal 
klu'nqasa  L!e'£na   la'qexs    la'e   kaxdzamo'lilas   la'xes   Le£lanEme.  79 
Wa,    la'La   gEnE'mas    axfe'dxes    k-a'yats!e    qa£s  le    tslEwanae'sas 
la'xa  klwe'le.     Wa,  laE'm  k'!es   na'naqalgiwalax  £wa'paxs  k!e's- 
£mae     yo'seida.     Wa,  laE'm  a/Em  he'x£idaEm    yo'sa.      Wa,    g'1'1- 
emese  yo's£idExs   la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  tsiix  a'lta  £wa'pa    qa    na'ge- 
g-eses  L6£lanEme  qo  gwa'lL  yo'saLo.     Wa,   g'l'l£mese   g-ax  ae'daa-  75 
qeda  laxde  tsaxs  la'e  ha'ng'alilxes  tsa'nEme  qa£s  e'sEle  qa  gwa'les 
yo'ses  Le£liinEme.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwal  yo'saxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  Io'eI- 


342  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [eth.  a.n.n.  35 

78  he  takes  the  dishes  |  and  puts  them  down  at  the  place  where  his  wife 
is  sitting.  |  Then  he  takes  the  water  and  places  it  before  his  guests,  || 

80  and  they  drink;  and  after  they  have  finished  drinking,  they  |  go  out. 
They  never  eat  anything  before  they  eat  salmon-spawn,  |  and  those 
who  eat  it  never  eat  a  second  course  with  it.  | 
1  Salmon-Spawn  with  Salmon-Berry  Sprouts. — When  |  salmon-berry 
sprouts  are  eaten,  the  dried  salmon-spawn  is  taken  and  eaten  with 
it,  I  for  it  is  not  dipped  in  oil,  for  dried  salmon-spawn  and  oil  do  not 
5  agree:  |  therefore  they  do  not  dip  it  into  it.  It  is  also  eaten  |[  with 
fern-root,  when  it  is  eaten  by  the  old  women  and  |  men.  It  is  eaten 
with  salmon-berry  sprouts  |  and  fern-roots,  because  it  makes  one 
feel  sick  when  it  is  eaten  alone,  |  when  it  is  not  eaten  with  these  two. 
It  does  not  make  one  feel  sick,  |  when  the  salmon-spawn  is  eaten 

10  with  salmon-berry  sprouts  and  fern-root.  When  ||  the  winter 
dancers  are  brought  back,  and  the  singing-masters  continue  to  sing,  | 
the  whole  length  of  the  night  in  the  winter,  and  |  when  the  speaker 
of  the  house  has  to  speak  every  time  (a  dancer)  goes  out  of  the 
house,  I  when  they  lose  their  voices,  they  take  dried  salmon-spawn  | 
and  pass  it  to  those  who  have  lost  their  voices,  that  they  may  eat 

15  it.  ||  They  chew  it  for  a  long  time,  and  they  swallow  the  juice  |  that 
is  in  their  mouths,  for  what  comes  from  it  is  just  like  what  comes  from 
gum.     Then  |  they  have  no  longer  lost  their  voices;  and  also  the 

78  q!we  qa£s  ga'xe  mEx£aiIlas  la'xes  klwae'lase  LE£wis  gEnE'me. 
Wa,  la   &x£e'dxa    £wa'pe    qa£s    le    hanxdzamo'lllas    la'xa   klwe'le. 

80  Wa,  la'xda£xu  na'x£Ida.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ho'qu- 
wElsa.  Wa,  hewa'xaEm  ha£malgiwaleda  ha£ma'paxa  ge'£ne.  Wa, 
la'xaa  k!es  he'ligintsE£weda  ha£ma'paq. 
1  Salmon-Spawn  with  Salmon-Berry  Sprouts. — Wa,  gi'Pmese  ha£nia'£ya 
qlwa'lEme,  la'e  ax£e'tsE£weda  la.'llEmfwe'dzEkwe  qa£s  ma'yEme  laq, 
yixs  k'le'sae  ts'.Epa'sE£weda  L§'£na,  qaxs  ao'ts!agaedala'llEin£wedzE- 
kwe  LE£wa  L!e'£na;  la'g'Ilas  k!es  tslE'pEla  laq.  Wa,  laxaa  ma'yEm 
5  la'xa  sagume,  yixs  ha'£mayaa'sa  q!ulsq!u'lyakwe  tsle'daqa  Lo£ma 
be'bEgwanEme.  Wa,  he'Em  la'gilas  ma'yEm  la'xa  qlwa'lEme 
LE£wa  sagume,  yixs  ts!E'xsEmts!E£maaxs  le'x-a£mae  ha£ma'£ya, 
yixs  k'le'sae  ma'yEma  ma£l£eda'la.  Wa,  la  k"!es  tslExsEmsEle'da 
ma'sasa  lallEm£we'dzEkwe   la'xa  qlwa'lEme   LE£wa   sagume.     Wa, 

10  he'£mesexs  gi'l£maeda  nena'gade  he'mEnalaEm  dE'nxElaxs  kiki'l- 
nElaeda  ts!e'ts!eqax  £wa'sgEmasasa  ga'nuLaxa  la  ts!awii'nxa  Lo£ma 
ya'yaq  lEntemelasexs  hemEnk'  !ala£mae  yaqlEntlalax  la'naxwaas  la- 
wElsa  yaexa.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  LlEml£edExs  lae  ax£etsE£weda  la'llEm- 
£we'dzEkwe  qa£s  le  tslEwa'nae'dzEm  la'xa  la  LleijE'mla  qa  hamx£- 

15  i'deseq.  Wa,  la  ge'g'illl  ma'lekwaq  qa£s  nEqwe'xes  £wa'paeL!xa- 
wa£yaxs  la'e  he  gwex's  gwa£le'k-eda  g'a'yole  laq.  Wa  he'x-£ida£mese 
gwal  L.'E'mla.     Wa,  he'£misa  k"!a'k'!Et!enoxwe,  g'i'l£mae  k-!a'taxa 


boas]  BECIPES  343 

painter,  when  he  paints  |  the  front  of  a  house,  takes  rubbed  cedar-  18 
bark  and  |  puts  it  into  1ms  mouth,  and  he  takes  dried  salmon-spawn 
and  ||  he  bites  a  piece  off  from  it,  and  he  chews  it  with  the  cedar-  20 
bark;  |  and  as  soon  as  his  mouth  is  full  of  that  which  is  just  like  gum 
and  nnlk,  |  he  spits  it  into  his  paint-dish,  and  he  does  not  stop  until 
the  paint-dish  is  nearly  |  full.     Then  he  takes  out  of  his  mouth  what 
has  been  chewed  |  and  puts  it  into  his  brush -box;  then  he  takes  a  || 
piece  of  coal  and  rubs   it   in   the   liquid   that  he  spit  out;  ]  and  he  25 
only  stops  when  his  paint  is  really  black.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Sticky  Salmon-Spawn. — As  soon  as  spring  comes,  then  [  the  bladder 
with  salmon-spawn  is  taken  down  from  where  it  hangs,  and  it  is  broken 
open  at  the  side.  ||  Then  a  piece  of  sticky  spawn  is  taken  out  when  |  30 
the  salmon-sprouts  are  brought  into  the  house.     They  peel  them, 
and  eat  the  sticky  spawn  with  the  |  salmon-berry  sprouts  when  they 
eat',  and  when  they  do  not  want  to  eat  the  sprouts  |  dipped  into  oil, 
for  od  and  sticky  spawn  do  not  agree;  |  and  some  men,  when  they 
have  no  sticky  spawn,  dip  salmon-berry  sprouts  into  ||  oil,  and  also  35 
fern-roots,    when  they    are    eaten  |  by   the    old  women    and   men. 
When  |  the  women  go  to  dig  fern-root,  they  |  come  home  when  they 
get  a  great  many.     Immediately  they  sit  down  by  the  fire  and  |  roast 
the  fern-roots  under  the  fire  in  the  house.     As  soon  as  ||  the  bark  is  40 
blackened  all  over,  it  is  done.     Then  she  takes  a  piece  of  fire-wood 

tsa'k'Ema£yasa  go'kwe  la'e  ax£e'dxa  q!o'£yaakwe  k'a'dzEkwa  qa£s  18 
axe'Les    la'xes    sE'mse.     Wa,  la    ax£e'dxa    la'llEm£wedzEkwe    qa£s 
q!Ex£I'de    laq.      Wa,    la    ma'mElek'oq    p£wa    k'a'dzEkwe.      Wa,  20 
gi'l'mese    qo't!a§L!xoxa    he    gwex's    gwa£le'k-a    dzE'mxust5,    la'e 
hamtsla'las  la'xes    k'!a't!aase.     Wa,  a'l£mese   gwa'lExs    la'e  Ela'q 
qo'tles    k"!a't!aase,    wa,    he'x£Ida£mese    axo'dxes    male'kwasoxde 
qa£s  g-e'ts!odes  la'xes  haba'yoatsle  ga'g  ildayEma.    Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa 
tstegu'te  qa£s  gexElts!a'les  lax  la  q!o'ts!Ewa'tses  hamts!a'layoxude.  25 
Wa,  a'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  a'lak'lala  la  ts!o'ltox£wIde  kMS'tElaLas. 
Wa,  laE'm£xaa  gwa'la. 

Sticky  Salmon-Spawn. — Wa,  g'i'l£mese  qlwa'xEnxEXs  la'e  axa'xo- 
yowa  q!E'ngwats!e  la'xes  te'kwalaase  qa£s  qwabEno'tsawe.  Wa, 
lii'naxwa  xa'L!ax-£Id  ax£e'tsE£weda  qlE'nkwe,  yixsga'xae  gE'mxela  30 
qlwa'lEme.  Wa,  la  se'x£Itso  qas  mayEmaeda  qte'nkwe  la'xa 
q!wa'lEmaxs  la'e  ha£ma'£ya,  ylxs  q!E'msae  ts!Epe'deda  se'x'axa 
qlwa'lEmaxa  L!e'£na,  qaxs  ao'tslagaeda  L!e'£na  LE£wa  qlE'nkwe. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  k- lea's  qlE'nkwa  wao'kwe  bEgwa'nEma  la'e  tslEpa'xa 
L!e'£naxs  se'xaaxa  qlwa'lEme.  Wa,  he'£mesa  sa'gumaxs  sa'x-sE-  35 
kwaeda  q!ulsq!u'lyakwe  Lo£ma  le'Elk!wana£ye.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  la 
sa'kweda  tslEdaqaxa  sa'gflme;  wa,  g'i'Pmese  qlEyo'lqexs  la'e 
na'£nakwa.  Wa,  he'x£ida£mese  k!wano'lisxes  lEgwI'le  qa£s  l!6'x£- 
idexa  sa'gume  lax  awa'bollsases  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  k!we- 
k!umElk!Enx-£IdExs    la'e    Llo'pa.     Wa,    la    ax£e'dxa    lEqwa'    qa£s  10 


344  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

41  and  |  puts  it  clown  on  the  floor  of  the  house;  and  she  takes  her 
shortest  wedge,  |  and  she  takes  the  roasted  fern-root,  and,  holding  it 
in  the  left  hand,  |  she  puts  one  end  of  it  on  the  fire-wood;  tnen  she 
begins  to  beat  |  it  with  the  wedge,  and  she  only  stops  beating  it 

45  when  it  is  flattened  out.  ||  After  she  has  beaten  it  soft,  she  measures 
off  lengths  of  |  four  finger-widths  and  breaks  them  off;  |  and  after 
this  has  been  done,  she  puts  them  on  a  food-mat.  |  Then  she  takes 
some  of  the  sticky  spawn  to  eat  with  the  roasted  [  fern-root,  and  they 
eat  the  fern-root.     When  there  is  no  sticky  spawn  to  eat  with  the 

50  fern-root,  ||  they  dip  it  into  od.  | 
1       Roasted  Salmon-Spawn. — Now  I  will  talk  again  about  the  spawn.  | 
When  various  kinds  of  salmon  are  first  caught  by  the  fishermen  who 
go  trolling,  |  the  woman  takes  the  whole  salmon-spawn,   and  she 
takes  the  roasting-tongs  |  and  she  puts  the  salmon-roe  into  them 
5  doubled  up  in  this  way:  ||  After  this  has  been  done,  she 

puts  it  up  by  the  side  of  the    -j^fLj^  fire;  and  when  it  is  |  white  all 
over,  she  takes  it  off.    Then  ^jhl EL  it    is    done.  I  It    is    eaten    at 


once,  whde  it  is  stdl  hot;  <9E=EL  for  |  it  is  not  eaten  afterwards 
when  it  is  cold;   and  it  is  ^fefeL  not  dipped  into  |  od,  but  they 
10  drink  much  water  after  hav-  ^QQ=  ing  eaten  ||  the  roasted  salmon- 
roe.     Then  a  flat  stone  is  put  on  the  fire;  |  and  when  it  is 

41  k-a't!a£lfieq.  Wii,  laxaa  ax£e'dxa  ts!Ek!wiVga£yases  LE'mgayo.  Wii, 
la  ax£e'dxa  LlE'nkwe  sa'gum  qa£s  da'leses  gE'mxolts!ana  la'qexs 
la'e  k-a't!ets  o'ba£yas  la'xa  lEqwa'.  Wa,  he'^mis  la  t  !E'lx£wIdaa- 
tseq,  yisa  LE'mgayo.     Wa,  a'l£mese  gwal  tlE'lxwaqexs  la'e  pepE- 

45  XEnx,£Ida.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwal  tlE'lxwaqexs  la'e  £mE'ns£IdEq  qa 
mo'dsnes  awa'sgEmas  la'xEns  q!wa'q!wax'ts!ana£ye,  la'e  aEltsla'laq. 
Wa,  g'i'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  axdzo'ts  la'xa  ha£madzo'we  le'£wa£ye. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'd  la'xa  qlE'nkwe  qa£s  ma'sesexs  la'xa  LlEnk"  sa'- 
giimxs  la'e  LlExxlaxa.     Wa,  gl'Pmese  k'lea's  qte'nkwa  LlExx!a'- 

50  x'axs  la'e  ts!Epa'xa  L!e'£na. 
1  Roasted  Salmon-Spawn. — Wa,  la£me'sEn  e'dzaqwaltsa  ge'£ne.  Wa, 
he'£maaxs  ga'lae  la'LanEma  k'!6'k!utElasa  d5'dEk!wenoxwe;  wa,  la 
axee'deda  tslEda'qaxa  sEne'ts!a£ye  ge'£nii  qa£s  ax£e'dexa  Llo'psayo 
qa£s  gwa'naxEndalesa  ge'£ne  laq,  g'a  gwa'lega  {fig-).  Wa,  gi'Pmese 
5  gwa'lExs  la'e  L&'nolisaq  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  fna'xwa 
£mE'PmElsgEmxeIdExs  la'e  a'xsana.  Wa,  lar.'m  Llopa  laxe'q.  Wa, 
he'x£ida£mese  hanix£I'tsE£wa,  ylxs  he'£mae  a'les  tslE'lqwe,  qaxs 
k"  le'sae  ha£ma'xs  la'e  wudEx-£J'da.  Wa,  k"  !e's£Emxaa  ts  tepEla'  la'xa 
l  !e'£na.     Wii,  la  q  !ek'  !Ets  !a£ya  £wa'paxs  la'e  na'x£Ideda  ha£ma'pdaxa 

10  Llo'bEkwe  ge'£na.  Wii,  la'xaa  lax'Lanoweda  pE'xsEme  tle'sEma. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  ts!E'lxsEmx-£idaxs  la'e  k'lipsana'weda  t!e'sEme  la'xa 


boas]  RECIPES  345 

hot,  the  stone  is  taken  off  from  the  |  fire  and  laid  by  the  side  of  the  12 
fire.     Then  the   |  whole  salmon-spawn  is   taken  and  is  laid  down 
lengthwise  on  the  hot  stone  |  in  this  manner:  ^P~^-^.  This  is 

named  "stuck-on-the-stone."     As  soon  ||  as  it  ^^^^^p^^  is  all  on  15 
the  stone,  it  is  put  up  edgewise  by  the  fire,  v\^^^'^     so  that  | 
the  spawn  is  heated.     As  soon  as  it  all  turns     ^^  white,  | 

it  is  done.  Then  it  is  taken  off  from  the  fire  and  scraped  off;  | 
and  it  is  eaten  at  once,  whde  it  is  still  hot;  it  is  also  |  not  dipped 
into  off  by  those  who  eat  it,  only  much  water  ||  is  drunk  after  it  has  20 
been  eaten;  also  it  is  not  used  for  inviting  people  of  |  another  house; 
only  the  owner  of  this  kind  of  |  spawn  eats  what  is  stuck  on  the 
stone.  | 

Boiled  Spawn  of  Silver-Salmon. — The  |  spawn  of  the  silver-salmon, 
when  it  is  first  caught  by  trolling,  is  also  boded.  ||  After  the  woman  25 
has  cut  open  the  salmon,  she  takes  |  a  kettle  and  puts  spawn  into  it. 
Then  she  pours  |  water  into  it,  until  it  covers  the  spawn.  |  Then  she 
puts  it  on  the  fire.  It  is  not  left  to  bod  long,  before  it  becomes  white.  | 
Then  it  is  taken  off  the  fire.  The  woman  just  takes  the  spoons  ||  and  30 
gives  them  to  her  children  and  to  her  husband,  |  and  the  woman  just 
puts  the  kettle  with  the  spawn  in  it  |  before  her  chfidren  and  her 
husband,  and   they  eat  it  with  spoons.  |  They  only  eat  quickly  the 

lEgwi'le  qa£s  paxale'lEme  la'xa  ona'lise.     Wa,  la£me'se  ax£e'tsE£wa  12 
sEne'dza£ye  ge'£nii,  qa£s  le  kadEdzdda/layo  la'xa  tslE'lqwa  t!e'sEma; 
ga  gwii'leg'a  {jig.).    Wa,  he'Em  Le'gadEs  k!ut!aa'ku.    Wa,gi'l£mese 
£wl'£la    la    axa'laxs    la'e    kMo'gunolidzEm    la'xa    lEgwi'le    qa    hes  15 
L!e'salasE£weda  ge'£ne.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £wl'£la  la  £mE'lx£IdExs  la'e 
L!5'pa.     Wa,  he'x£Ida£mese    axsa'no   qa£s  k'o'sElotsE£we.     Wit,  la 
he'x-eidaEm  ha£mx£itsE£wa,  ylxs  he'£mae  a'les  ts  !Elqu.    Wa,  laE'mxaa 
k"  lea's  L!e'£na  ts!Epa's5sa  ha£rna'paq.     Wa,  a'£mes  qle'nEma  £wa'pe 
na'geg'esa    ha£ma'paq.     Wa,    la'xaa    k'!es    Ledalayo     la'xa    6'gu-  20 
£lats!Ese    goku     be'bEgwanEma.     A'Em     le'xa£ma    axnS'gwadasa 
ge'£ne  he  gwe'gile  ha£ma'pxa  k!iit!aa'kwe. 

Boiled  Spawn  of  Silver-Salmon. — Wa,  la'xaa  ha'nxLEntsE£weda 
ge'£niixs  g'a'lae  la'i.anEmeda  do'gwinete  dza£wu'na.  Wa,  laE'm 
gi'l£Em  gwal  xwa'LasE£wa,  yi'sa  tslEda'qe.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  25 
ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  axtslo'desa  ge'£ne  laq.  Wa,  la  qEplEqa'sa 
£wa'pe  laq  qa  tlEpEya'lesa  ge'£naxa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  la  ha'nxLEnts. 
Wa,  k'!e'st!a  ge'gilll  maE'mdElqulaxs  la'e  £mE'l£mElsgEmx£Ida. 
Wa,  la  ha'nxsEndEq.  Wa,  a'£meseda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  ka'k'E- 
tslEiia'qe  qa£s  tslEwa'naeses  la'xes  sa'sEme  le£wis  la'£wunEme.  30 
Wa,  a'£mese  ha'nxdzamoldeda  ts!Eda'qasa  ha'nxLanowe  ge'£ne- 
tslala  la'xes  sa'sEme  LE£wis  la'£wunEme.  Wa,  la'xda£xwe  yo's£Ida. 
Wa,    laE'mxaa    a'l£Em    ha£ma'£ya    dze'le    hala'xEk"    ge'£nexs   la'e 


346  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.  3c 

fresh  salmon-spawn  |  at  noon  and  in  the  evening.     It  is  not  eaten  in 
35  the  morning,  for  ||  it  makes  one  sleepy.     After  they  have  eaten  the 
salmon-spawn,  |  they  drink  water.     That  is  all  about  the  salmon- 
spawn.  | 
1      Sockeye- Salmon. — Now1  I  will  talk  about  the  |  way  it  is  cooked. 
When  winter  comes,  the  |  woman  takes  her  soaking-box  and  puts 
it  down  in  the  corner  of   the  |  house.     Then  she  pours  water  into 
5  it.     When  it  is  half  full  ||  of    water,   she   takes   the   basket  with 
the  split  salmon  and  |  brings  it  out,    and  puts  it  down  near  the 
soaking-box.     Then  she  takes  out  the  |  split  salmon  and  puts  them 
into  the  soaking-box.     After  she  has  done  so,  |  she  takes  two  large 
stones  and  puts  them  on  top  of  |  the  split  salmon  that  are  to  be 
10  soaked,  to  keep  them  under  water.  ||  Sometimes  they  are  left  in  four 
or  six   |  days  soaking  in  the  house.     As  soon  as  they  are  soft,  the 
woman  |  takes  a  kettle  and  puts  it  by  the  side  of  the  fire;  then  |  she 
takes  out  the  split  salmon,  and  takes  them  where  the  kettle  is  stand- 
ing. |  Then  she  cuts  the  split  salmon  into  three  pieces  with  her  fish- 
15  knife,  ||  and  she  puts  them  into  the  kettle.  |  After  she  has  done  so, 
she  .takes  a  piece  of  old  mat  and  covers  over  |  the  split  salmon  that 
is  in  the  kettle.  |  After  she  has  tucked  in  (the  mat)  all  around,  she 
pours  a  little  |  water  over  it.     Then  she  puts  it  over  the  fire.     As 


nEqa'la    Lo£ma    dza'qwa.     Wa,    la    k'!es    ha£me'xa    gaa'la,    qaxs 

35  kwa'lats  !Emae.     Wa,    gi'Pmese    gwal    ha£ma'pa   yo'saxa   ge'£nexs 

la'e  na'gekllaxa  £wa/pe.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la  ge'£ne  la'xeq. 

I      Sockeye-Salmon.  —  Wa,1   la£me'sEn     gwa'gwexs£alal    la'qexs  la'e 

ha£me'x'silasE£wa.     Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  ts!awu'nx£Ida.      Wa,  le'da 

tslEda'qe    &x£e'dxes    tle'latsle    qa£s    h&'ngallleq    lax    one'gwilases 

go'kwe.     Wa,   la   giixtslo'tsa   £wa'pe    laq.     Wa,    g-i'l£mese    nEgo- 

5  ya'laxa    £wa'paxs    la'e    ax£e'dxes    q  Iwa'xsayaa'ts  !e    Lla'bata    qa£s 

g'a'xe  hano'lilas    la'xa    tle'latsle.      Wa,  la£me'se    L6'x£WElts!odxa 

q!wa'xsa£ye  qa£s  Lo'x£stalIs  la'xa  t!e'lats!e.    Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'lExs 

la'e    da'x-£Idxa     ma£ltsE'me     awa'     tle'sEma    qa£s     tla'qEyi'ndes 

la'xa  t!e'lasE£waseda  q!wa'xsa£ye  qa  £wu'nsales  la'xa  £wa'pe.     Wa, 

10  la£mes    £na'l£nEmp!Ena   m5'p!Enxwa£se   £na'las   loxs    q!EL!Ep!E'n- 

xwa£sae  £na'las  t  le'ltalila.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese  po's£IdExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe 

ax£e'dxa  ha'nxxanowe  qa£s   le  ha£no'lisas  la'xa  lEgwI'Ie.     Wa,  la 

Lo'x£wustE'ndxa  q!wa'xsa£ye  qa£s  les  lax  hft£ne'lasasa  ha'nxxanowe. 

Wa,     la£me'se     ya'lyuduxusala     t!o't!Ets!alasa    xwa'Eayowe    la'xa 

15  q!wa'xsa£ye.      Wa,   la£me's    mo 'ts  lots    la'xa  ha'nx'Lanowe.       Wa, 

gi'l£mese   gwa'lExs    la'e     ^xo'dxa    k' !a'k- lobana    qas    na'sEyindes 

lax  6'kwEya£yasa  q!wa'xsa£ye  la  gi'ts!a  la'xa  h3,'nxLanowe.    Wa, 

g'i'l£mese  gwal  tslo'pax  e'waneqwasexs  la'e  gflqlEqasa  ho'lalbida£we 

£wap  laq.     Wa,  la  hS,'nxLEnts  la'xes    lEgwI'Ie..    Wii,  gi'l£mese  la 

■  Continued  from  p.  240,  line  27. 


boas]  RECIPES  347 

soon  as  it  ||  boils,  she  strikes  with  her  tongs  the  covering  on  top,  |  so  20 
that  no  steam  may  come  through  the  cover  |  of  what  is  on  the  fire. 
It  boils  a  long  time.  |  Then  she  takes  it  off;  then  the  kettle  remains 
standing  on  the  floor  of  the  house.  |  Then  the  woman  takes  a  dish 
and  an  oil-dish  and  oil,  ||  and  takes  them  to  the  place  where  she  is  25 
sitting;  and  |  after  she  has  put  them  all  down,  she  takes  her  tongs  and 
takes  off  the  covering  of  the  |  kettle,  and  she  puts  it  down  with  her 
tongs  at  the  end  of  the  fire;  |  and  she  also  takes  out  with  the  tongs 
the  split  salmon  that  she  has  cooked,  |  and  she  puts  them  into  a  dish. 
As  soon  as  they  are  ||  all  out  of  the  water,  she  spreads  out  the  split  30 
salmon  in  the  dish;  |  and  when  this  is  done,  she  takes  od  and  pours  it 
into  the  |  od-dish;  and  after  this  is  done,  she  takes  a  food-mat  |  and 
spreads  it  before  those  who  are  given  to  eat.  |  After  this  is  done,  she 
takes  up  the  dish  and  the  od-dish  ||  and  places  them  in  front  of  her  35 
guests.     The  oil-dish  is  put  |  inside  of  the  dish.     When  this  is  done, 
she  |  dips  up  some  water  and  gives  it  to  those  who  are  going  to  eat.  ) 
At  once  they  rinse  their  mouths;  and  after  they  have  done  so,  they 
drink;  |  then  they  begin  to  eat.     They  themselves  break  to  pieces  || 
the  split  salmon  that  is  given  them  to  eat;  and  they  dip  it  into  od  40 
and  |  put  it  into  their  mouths;  and  after  they  have  finished  eating, 
the  |  woman  goes  and  takes  the  dish  and  takes  it  to  her  seat,  |  and 


maE'mdElqulaxs  la'e  kwe'xases  ts!e'sLala  lax  o'kwEya'yas  nayimas  20 
qaxs    k"!e'sae     he'lqlalaq     k"Exusa'leda     k'!a'lEla     lax   nayimases 
ha'nx'LEnde.      Wa,     la£me'se    ge'gilil£Em      maE'mdElqulaxs     la'e 
ha'nxs£EndEq.      Wa,    a'£rnese  la   h&£ne'leda   ha'nxLanowe.       Wa, 
la'Leda  tsteda'qe  ax£e'dxa  lo'q!we  LE£wa  ts!Eba'ts!e  LE£wa  L!e'£na 
qa    g'a'xes    axe'l    lax    klwae'lasas.      Wa,    g"i'l£mese    £wl'£la    gax  25 
ax£a'lilExs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  ts!e'sLala  qa£s  k!Ep!e'des  lax   nayimases 
ha'nxLEnde.     Wa,  la    k'!ip!a'lllas    la'xa  obe'xxalalllases  lEgwI'le. 
Wa,    laxaa   he'£ma  ts!e'sLala    k'!ip£usta'lay6sexes     ha£me'x'sIlasE- 
£weda  q!wa'xsa£ye  qa£s  le  k-!ipts!a'las  la'xa  lo'qlwe.     Wa,  gi'l£mese 
£wi'£lo£staxs  la'e  gwe'laltslotsa    q!wa'xsa£ye    la'xa    lo'q!wa.      Wa,  30 
gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs   la'e    ax£e'dxa   L!e'£na   qa£s    k!unts!5'des  la'xa 
ts!Eba'ts!e.     Wa,  g-i'l£Emxaa'wise  gwa'lExs    la'e   ax£e'dxa  ha£ma- 
dzowe'    le'£wa£ya    qa£s    le    LEpdzam5£hlas    la'xes    ha£mgi'lasE£we. 
Wii,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e    k'a'gllllxa  loq!we    LE£wa   ts!Eba'ts!e 
qa£s  le  k-axdzamo'l!las  la'xes  Le'£lanEme.     Wa,  la 'La  ka'ts!E£weda  35 
ts!Eba'ts!e    lax  o'tslawasa   lo'qlwe.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese   gwa'lExs   la'e 
tsa'x£idxa  £wa'pe  qa£s  le  tsa'£x£Its  la'xa  ha£ma'pLe.     Wa,  he'x£I- 
da£mese    tslEwe'LlExoda.     Wa,   g'i'l£mese   gwa'lExs   la'e   na'x£eda. 
Wa,  la'x-da£xwe  ha£mx,£I'da.     Wa,  laE'm   q!idexs£Em  k-!5'k!upsa- 
leda  ha£mg  i'lasE£waxa  q!wa'xsa£ye  qa£s  ts!Ep!ides  laxa  L!e£na  qa£s  40 
ts!o'q!uses   la'xes   sE'mse.      Wa,  g-i'l£mese   gwal    ha£ma'pa  la'eda 
ts!Eda'qe  la   k'a'gllllxa    l5'q!we    qa£s   les    la'xes  klwae'lase.     Wa, 


348  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

she  pours  out  into  the  kettle  the  food  that  is  left;  then  she  |  washes 
45  it  out  with  water;  then  she  pours  water  into  it,  and  she  puts  ||  it 
again  before  those  to  whom  she  has  given  to  eat.  At  once  |  they 
who  have  been  eating  wash  their  hands.  When  |  the  guests  begin 
to  eat,  the  husband  of  the  woman  draws  fresh  |  water;  and  when 
they  finish  washing  their  hands,  |  the  bucket  with  water  in  it  is 
50  put  before  them,  and  ||  they  drink;  and  after  they  finish  drinking, 
they  wait  for  the  |  second  course.  That  is  the  end  of  this.  |  And 
when  the  owner  gets  hungry,  she  takes  a  split  salmon  out  of  the 
soaking-box;  ]  then  she  takes  the  tongs  and  holds  it  between 
them,  and  scorches  it  by  the  |  fire  in  this  manner; 
55  and  as  soon  as  the  steam  comes  through,  ||  she 
knows  that  it  is  done;  but  this  is  called  |  "cooke'd. 
quickly  for  those  who  are  hungry,"  and  this  is 
also  dipped  in  oil  |  when  it  is  eaten.  That  is  all 
about  this.  | 

1       Silver-Salmon.1 — In  the  evening  the  man  invites  the  |  chiefs  to 

come  and  eat  with  spoons  the  fresh  silver-salmon.  |  When  all  the 

men  are  in  the  house,  he  takes  his  kettle  |  and  pours  water  into  it. 

5  Then  he  puts  it  on  the  fire.  ||  His  wife  takes  four  fresh  split  silver- 

43  la  qEpstE'ntsa  ha£mxsa£ye  la'xa  ha'nxxanowe.  Wa,  la£me'se 
tslo'xug  intsa  £wa/pe  laq.     Wa,  la    qEpts!o'tsa  £wa'pe  la'qexs  la'e 

45  xwe'laqa  kaxdzamo'lllas  la'xes  ha£mg  i'lasE£we.  Wa,  he'x£ida- 
£mese  ts!E'nts!Enx£wIdExda£xwa  ha£ma'pde.  Wii,  g-i'l£EmLa'xde 
ha£mx'jrdeda  Le'£lanEmaxs  la'e  la'£wunEmasa  tsteda'qe  tsax  a'lta 
£wa'pa.  Wa,  g1'l£mese  gwal  ts!E'nts!Enkweda  klwe'laxs  la'e 
ha'ngEmlllEma     £wa'bEts!ala     na'gatsle     laq.       Wa,     la'xda£xwe 

50  na'x£ida.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  awu'lgEmga£lll  qa£s 
he'legintsE£we.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq.  Wa,  gi'l£Erh  po'sq!eda 
axno'gwadas  la'e  a'Em  ax£wustE'ndxa  q!wa'xsa£ye  la'xa  t!e'lats!e 
qa£s  ax£e'dexa  ts!e'sLala  qa£s  k' !ipa'leqexs  la'e  pEX'a'q  la'xes 
lEgwI'le;  gagwa'leg-a  (fig.).    Wa,  gi'l£mesekixumxsa'wedak'!a'lEla 

55  la'qexs  la'e  q!a,'LElaqexs  lE£ma'e  Llo'pa.  Wa,  he'Em  Le'gadEs 
ha'laxwasE£wesa  p6'sq!a.  Wa,  laE'mxaa  tslspa's  la'xa  L!e'£naxs 
la'e  ha£ma'pEq.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Silver-Salmon.1 — Wa,  la  dza'qwaxs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  Le'£lalaxa 
g'I'gigama£ye  qa  ga'xes  yo'saxa  dze'le  o'klwinesa  dza£wu'ne.  Wa, 
g-i'l£mese  £wI'£laeLExs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  &x£e'dxes  ha'nxLanowe 
qa£s  guxtslo'desa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wa,  la  hanx-LE'nts.  Wa,  la'La 
5  gEnE'mas  ax£e'dxa  mS'we    dzel  xwa'LEk"    dza£wuna  qa£s  k-aqEla- 

'  The  first  silver  salmon  of  the  season  is  caught  by  trolling.  It  is  cut  in  a  ceremonial  manner,  head  and 
tail  being  left  attached  to  the  backbone .  These  are  roasted  and  eaten  at  once,  as  will  be  found  described  on 
p.  610.    The  meat  of  the  silver-salmon  is  boiled. 


boas]  RECIPES  349 

salmon  and  slices  their  meat  |  crosswise.     When  the  water  in  the    6 
kettle  is  boiling,  |  she  puts  the  four  fresh  silver-salmon  into  it.     The 
woman  only  |  stirs  it  when  it  has  been  boiling  for  some  time,  to 
break  it  into  pieces.  |  After  she  has  finished  stirring  it,  she  takes 
three  dishes,  ||  when  there  are  twelve  men  who  will  eat  with  spoons  10 
the  fresh  silver-salrnon,  |  and  she  takes   twelve  spoons  which   are 
really  new,  |  and  the  large  dipping-ladle.     As  soon  as  |  they  have 
all  been  put  down,  she  washes  out  the  three  dishes' and  the  spoons;  | 
and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  puts  the  meat  of  the  ||  silver-salmon  15 
into  the  dishes.     When  the  dishes  are  filled,  [  she  spreads  a  food-mat 
in  front  of  (the  men) ;  and  the  man  |  takes  up  the  dishes  and  places 
them  before  four  |  men,  and  he  places  another  before  four  |  others,  and 
again  one  dish  before  four  others.  ||  After  all  the  dishes  have  been  20 
put  down,  he  distributes  the  spoons  |  to  them;  then  he  gives  them 
water  to  drink.  |  After  they  have  finished  drinking,  the  one  highest 
in  rank  prays  the  same  |  prayer  that  they  said  when  they  first  ate 
the  roasted  eyes;1  [  and  after  he  stops  speaking,  they  begin  to  eat 
with  spoons.     When  ||  they  begin  to  eat,  the  man  takes  up  a  bucket  25 
and  goes  to  draw  |  fresh  water;  and  when  he  comes  back,  he  puts 
down  the  |  bucket  with  water  in  it,  and  waits  for  them  to  finish 
eating.     After  they  finish  |  eating,  the  man  takes  up  from  the  floor 

tE'mdeq.      Wa,    g-i'l£mese    niEdE'lx£w!deda    la    ha'nxxalaxs    la'e     6 
axstE'ntsa   mS'we    dzel    dza£wu'n    laq.     Wa,  a'l£meseda   tslEda'qe 
xwe't!edqexs  la'e  ge'g-illl    maE'mdElqula  qa  q!we'q!ults!es.     Wa, 
gi'l£mese  gwat   xwe'taqexs   la'e    ax£e'dxa  yu'duxiixLa  lo'Elqlwaxs 
ma£lo'gugiyoeda    be'bEgwanEm    yo'salxa    dze'le    dza£wti'na.     Wa,  10 
he'£niisa  nia£lEXLa'giyowe  keka'tslEnaqaxa  a/la  la  Elo'laqa.     Wa, 
he'£misa    £wa'lase    tsa'xLa     k'a'tslEnaqa.      Wa,    gi'Pmese    £wl'£l- 
galllExs  la'e  tslo'xiig'indalaxa  yu'duxiixLa  lo'Elq!wa  LE£wa  keka'- 
ts!Eiiaqe.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs    la'e  tsa'ts!odalasa  qlE'mlalasa 
dza£wu'ne    la'xa    lo'Elqlwa.      Wa,    g  i'Pmese    ewI'£lts!Ewakwa    la'e  15 
LEpdzamo£lilas5sa  ha£ma'dzowe  le'£wa£ya.     Wa,  le'da  bEgwa'nEine 
ka'gilllxa     lo'Elqlwe     qa£s     le     k-axdzamo'lllas     la'xa    mo'kwe 
be'bEgwa'nEma.     Wa,  la  e'tletsa  £nEme'xLa  l5'q!wa   la'xa  mo'xu- 
£maxat!.     Wa,  la  e't!etsa  £nEme'xLa  lo'qlwa   la'xa  mo'xu£maxat!. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wi'£lgalila  lo'Elq'.waxs  la'e  ka's£Itsa  k"a'k'Ets!Enaqe  20 
la'x-da£xwEq.     Wa,  la  tsa'x£itsa  £wa'pe  laq  qa  na'x£ideseq.     Wa, 
gi'l£mese  gwal    naqaxs  laeda   na'xsalaga£yas   ts!E'lwax£Ida,  yi'sa 
tslE'lwaqEliisa     gi'lx'de     ha£ma'pxa    Llo'bEkwe   xixExsto'wakwa.1 
Wa,  g'i'l£mese  q!we'l£edExs  la'x-da£xwae   yo's£ida.     Wa,  gi'l£mese 
yoVldExs  la'e  klo'qullleda  bEgwa'nEmaxa  na'gats!e  qa£s  le  tsax  25 
a'ltii  £wa'pa.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  g'fix  ae'daaqaxs  la'e  ha'ngallltsa  na'- 
gats'.e  £wa'bEts!ala,  qa£s  e'sEle  qagwfiles  j'5'sa.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwfd 
yo'saxs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme   klo'qulllxa  na'gatsle  £wa'bEtsala  qa£s 

'See  p.  611. 


350  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

the  bucket  with  water  in  it  and  |  puts  it  in  front  of  his   gue3ts. 

30  Then  they  drink,  and  ||  the  man  takes  up  the  dishes  and  puts  them 
down  at  the  place  |  where  his  wife  is  sitting.  Then  he  takes  the 
spoons  and  |  puts  them  down  at  the  place  where  his  wife  is  sitting. 
As  soon  as  |  this  is  done,  the  guests  go  out.     They  do  the  same  with  | 

35  the  dog-salmon  when  it  is  caught  for  the  first  time.  ||  They  also  do 
the  same  thing  with  the  dog-salmon  when  it  is  |  dried  for  winter, 
when  they  are  going  to  keep  it  in  the  same  way  as  the  |  silver-salmon. 
They  do  not  pour  oil  over  it,  because  it  is  really  |  fat:  therefore  they 
give  it  to  eat  only  in  the  evening.  |  This  is  also  the  way  when  silver- 
salmon  caught  by  trolling  is  eaten  with  spoons  in  the  morning.  || 

40  He  who  eats  it  is  never  strong;  he  always  feels  sleepy  the  |  whole 
day,  and  he  is  not  strong:  therefore  it  is  first  eaten  in  the  |  evening. 
As  soon  as  the  dog-salmon  coming  from  the  upper  part  of  the  |  river 
is  eaten,  they  pour  much  oil  over  it,  for  it  is  dry;  |  and  there  is  never 

45  a  time  when  they  do  not  eat  it  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  ||  in  the 
evening.  They  are  afraid  to  eat  it  in  the  morning,  when  it  just 
jumps  I  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  for  it  is  really  fat.  That  is  |  the 
cause  of  making  (those  who  eat  it)  sleepy.  That  is  the  end  of  this.  | 
1  Sun-Dried  Salmon  (G-wasila) . — When  winter  comes,  (the  woman) 
always  |  takes  sun-dried  salmon  for  breakfast-food;  |  and  when  she 
takes  some  of  it,  she  takes  her  tongs  and  puts  it  flat  between  |  them 

le  ha'nx-dzamollla  la'xa  k!we'le.     Wa,  la'x-da£xwe  na'x£Ida,  la'aL  a 

30  seda  bEgwa'nEme  k'a'gililxa  lo'Elqlwe  qa£s  le  k-a'g-alllElas  lax 
klwae'lasases  gEnE'me  loxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  ka'k'EtslEnaqe  qa£s 
la'xat!  ax£a'lllElas  lax  klwae'lasases  gEnE'me.  Wa,  gi'l£rnese 
gwa'lExs  la'e  hS'quwElseda  klwe'ide.  Wa,  he'Emxaa  gwegi'lasE- 
£weda  gwa'£xnesaxs  ga/lae  la'LanEma. 

35  Wa,  he'£mise,  he'Emxaa  gwe'gilasE£weda  gwa/£xnesaxs  la'e 
lE'mxwasEfwa  qaLe'da  tslawu'nxe,  yixs  axelakweLe  gwegl'lasaxa 
dza£wii'ne.  Wa,  laE'm  k!es  k!u'nq!Eqasosa  L!e'£na  qaxs  a'lae 
tsE'nxwa.  He'£mis  la'gllas  al£E'm  ha£mgI'layoxa  la  dza'qwa. 
Wa,  he'£maaxs  yo'sasE£waeda  do'gwinete  dza£wu'nxa  gaa'la.     He- 

40  wa'xatla  la  q!iiq!ula'x£Ideda  yo'saq.  A 'Em  he'mEnalaEm  la'lasaxa 
na'la,  k!es  la'loqula.  Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilas  a'l£Em  yo'sasoxa 
dza'qwa.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  he'deda  gwa'£xnise  gayo'l  lax  £nE'ldzasa 
wa,  yo'saso£wa,  la'e  k!ii'nq!Eqasosa  q!e'nEm  L!e'£na  qaxs  tsle'nasae. 
Wa,  he'EmLal  k' lea's  k-!es  yo'sdEmqxa  gaa'la  LE£wa  nEqa'la  Lo£ma 

45  dza'qwa.  Wa,  la  kllE'm  yo'sasoxa  gaa'laxs  he'£mae  a'les  mEna'la 
lax  5'xusiwa£yasa  wa,  qaxs  Lo'mae  tsE'nxwa.  Hr'Emxat!  lo'x"- 
megEme.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Sun-dried  Salmon. — Wa,  le  ts!awu'nx£IdExs  la'e  he'mEnalaEm 
ax£e'd  la'xa  ta'yaltslala  qa£s  gaa'xsta£yaxa  gaa'la.  Wa,  he'£ma- 
axs  la'e  ax£e'd  laq;  la£me's  ax£e'dxes  tsIe'sLala  qa£s  k-!EbEts!a'£yes 


boas]  BECIPES  351 

in  this  manner:  ]  Then  the  skin  side  is  first  blistered, 

not  ||   too  near    P      '  ^--^  the  fire,   so   that    all    the  scales   are  5 
blistered   off.    |  *\^  "^  Then,  when  it  is  covered  with  blisters, 

she  turns  it  over  V^"^       |  and  blisters  the  flesh  side.     And  as 

sood  as  it  is  all  f  gray,  |  she  takes  a  bucket  with  water 

in  it,  and  takes  a  mouthful  and  |  blows  it  over  the  flesh  side  of  the 
scorched  sun-dried  salmon  ||  to  wet  it  with  water;  and  after  she  has  10 
done  so,  |  she  takes  the  tongs  and  folds  over  what  she  is  cooking,  | 
so  that  the  skin  is  outside.  Then  she  puts  it  under  a  mat  and  |  steps 
on  it;  and  after  she  has  stepped  on  it,  she  takes  it  out  again  |  and  rubs 
it  in  the  same  way  as  women  do  when  washing  clothes;  ||  and  after  she  15 
lias  done  so,  she  strikes  it  on  the  floor,  so  that  the  |  scales  which'have 
been  scorched  drop  off.  After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  small  dishes,  | 
and  oil-dishes  and  pours  oil  into  them.  After  she  has  done  so,  |  she 
takes  the  scorched  sun-dried  sabnon  and  breaks  it  up  into  pieces  in 
the  I  small  dishes.  After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  some  water  and  || 
rinses  her  mouth  with  it.  Then  she  drinks  of  it;  and  after  |  she  has  20 
finished  drinking,  she  takes  the  broken  sun-dried  salmon  and  chews 
one  end;  |  and  when  what  she  has  been  chewing  is  soft,  she  dips  it 
into  the  |  oil  and  puts  it  into  her  mouth  and  chews  it  and  swallows 
it;  I  and  she  continues  doing  so;  and  she  only  stops  when  it  is  nearly 

laq  ga  gwii'lega  (fig.).  Wa,  la£me's  he  gil  pExa'sose  Lle'sas  k'!es 
XE'nLEla  ma'x'Lala'masEq  la'xa  lEgwIle  qa  £na'xwes  pE'ns£ede  5 
go'bEtas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  ha£mElgEdzo'deda  pE'nsaqexs  la'e  le'x£I- 
dEq  qa£s  pEX£I'dex  q!E'mladzE£yas.  Wa,  g  i'l£mese  £na'xwa  qux£I'- 
dExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  na'gatsle  £wa'bEts!;lla  qa£s  ha£msgEmde  laq. 
Wa,  la  sElbEx£w!ts  lax  q!E'mladza£3*asa  tslE'nkwe  ta/yaltslala 
qa  hamElx£a'LElesa  £wa'pe  lax  6'dza£yas.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  10 
la'e  axo'dxa  tsle'sLala.  Wa,  la  k' !o'xsEmdxes  ha£me'x-sIlasE£we 
he'  L!a'sadza£ya  Lle'se.  Wa,  la  glbabo'lllas  la'xa  le'£wa£ye  qaes 
t!e'p!edeq.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  t!e'paqexs  la'e  xwe'laqa  axee'dEq 
qa£s  q!Ewe'x,£Ideq  y6  gwe'giloxda  tslEda'qaxs  ts!o'xwaaxa  gwet- 
gwa'la.  Wa,  g'i'hmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  xusxiidze'Hts  la  q.'Qpa'-  15 
les  tslaxmotas.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  la'logume 
LE£we  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  k!uxts!o'desa  L!e'£na  laq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  tslE'nkwe  tayaltslala  qa£s  k'.'optslo'des  la'xa 
lalogume.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  tsa'x£Id  la'xes  £wa'pe  qa£s 
tslEwe'Ltexode  laq.  Wa,  la  na'x£Id  laq.  Wa,  giPmese  gwal  20 
na'qexs  la'e  ax£e'd  la'xes  klQbEkwe  tayalts!ala  qa£s  male'xubEndeq. 
Wa,  gf'l£mese  tE'lx£w!de  ma'lekwa£yasexs  la'e  ts!Ep!l'ts  la'xa 
L!e'£na  qa£s  ts!o'q!uses  qa£s  male'x£wldeq  qa£s  nEx£wideq.  Wa, 
he'x'sa£mise  gwe'g'ila.     Wa,    a'l£mise  gwa'lExs   la'e   Ela'q  £wl£laq. 


352  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

25  all  gone.  ||  After  she  finishes  eating,  she  drinks  water;  and  |  then  she 
puts  away  the  eating-dish.  I  have  forgotten  that,  when  the  woman  | 
first  takes  the  sun-dried  salmon  out  of  her  box,  she  scratches  |  the 
scales  from  the  skin  before  she  scorches  it,  so  that  it  may  be  well 
covered  with  |  small  blisters  after  she  has  scorched  it.     They  do  this 

30  way  only  ||  with  sun-dried  salmon.  It  is  also  soaked  when  it  is  | 
very  hard,  when  the  spring  of  the  following  year  approaches.  This  | 
is  done  the  same  way  as  the  soaking  of  all  kinds  of  soaked  salmon 
which  I  |  talked  about  before.  Sometimes  it  is  only  taken  out  of 
the  soaking-box  |  by  the    woman   and    by  her  husband;   and  (the 

35  woman)  takes  her  tongs  ||  and  puts  it  in  in  this  manner,1  and  she 
blisters  it  by  the  fire  [  while  it  is  still  wet,  and  she  turns  it  over  and 
over.  |  Then  the  scales  are  never  blistered  off,  because  it  is  wet. 
This  is  |  just  like  soaked  salmon  when  it  is  done.  When  it  is  |  done, 
she  put  it  down  on  the  food-mat  on  the  skin   side,  and   takes  off 

40  the  ||  tongs.  Then  she  takes  her  oil-dish  and  she  pours  oil  |  into 
it.  After  she  has  done  so,  she  dips  water  up  to  |  rinse  the  mouth; 
and  after  she  has  rinsed  her  mouth,  she  drinks;  |  and  after  she  has 
finished  drinking,  she  breaks  pieces  of  the  blistered  sun-dried  salmon  | 
which  is  lying  on  its  back,  and  she  dips  it  into  the  oil.     She  continues  || 

45  breaking  off  pieces  from  the  bkstered  sun-dried  salmon  which  is 


25  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'e  na'x£Idxa  £wa'pe.  Wa,  la 
g"e'xaxes  ha£maa'ts!ex'de.  Wa,  he'xoLEn  L!Ele'wIsE£wa  tslcda'qaxs 
gil£mae  axwultslo'dxa  ta'yalts!ala  la'xes  xatsE'me  q!fllEldzo'dEx 
g5'bEtadza£yas  Lle'sasexs  kMeVmae  ts!EX£I'dEq  qa  e'keLEs  amE'- 
ma£yastowe    pE'ns£IdaeneLas  tslEX'I'Las.     Wa,  laE'm    le'xaEm   he 

30  gwe'gilasE'weda  ta'yalts!ala.  Wa,  la'xaa  tle'lasoEmxaaxs  la'e  XE'n- 
LEla  ple'saxa  la  he'Enbax£Idxa  la  aps£yE'nxa.  Wa,  la  he'Em 
gwe'gilasE£we  t!e'lena£yaxa  £na'xwa  t!et!Ele'maxEn  ga'le  gwagwe- 
x-s£alasa.  Wa,  la'xaa  £na/l£nEinp  !Ena  a'Em  axwusta'no  la'xa  tle'la- 
ts!e,  yi'sa  ts!Eda'qe  L6fmes  la'£wunEme   qaEs   ax£e'dxes    ts!e'sLala 

35  k"!EbEts!a'£ves  laq,  g-a  gwa'leg'a1  qa£s  pEX-e'q  la'xa  lEgwI'laxs 
he'£mae  a'les  k!u'nqe.  Wa  la£mes  le'x-I£liilaq.  Wa,  la'La  hewa'- 
xaEm  pE'ns£ide  go'bEtas  qaes  k!unq!ena£ye.  Wa,  a'Em  yR'Em 
gwe'x'soxda  tle'lkwaxs  la'e  Llo'pExs  hanx'Laa'kwae.  Wa,gi'l£mese 
fdo'pExs  la'e  nELEdzo'ts  la'xes  ha£ma'dzowe  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  axo'dexa 

40  ts!e'sLala.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  k!u'nxts!odesa  L!e'£na 
laq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'texs  la'e  tsax-£idxa  £wa'pe  qa£s  tslEwe'- 
LlExode  laq.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  ts!Ewe'L!ExodExs  la'e  na'x£Id 
laq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  k-!o'p!ld  la'xa  la  nELEdza,'- 
llle  pEnku  ta'yalts!ala  qa£s  ts!Ep!e'des  la'xa  L!e'£na.    Wa,  a'xsa£mes 

45  la  k!o'pk'!opa  la'xa  pE'nkwe  ta'yaltslalaxs  nELEdza'lIlae  la'xa  ha- 

1  See  figure  on  p.  351 . 


boasj  RECIPES  353 

lying  on  its  back  on  the  |  food-mat,  and  she  dips  it  into  the  oil;  and  4G 
she  only  |  stops  when  what  she  is  eating  is  nearly  all  gone.  After 
she  has  finished  eating,  |  she  dips  up  water  and  drinks  it;  and  | 
after  she  has  finished  drinking,  she  takes  a  mouthful  of  water  and 
squirts  it  on  her  hands  ||  and  washes  her  hands;  and  after  she  fin-  50 
ishes  that,  she  |  puts  away  the  food-dish.  Then  she  takes  the 
second  course.  |  That  is  all  about  the  blistered  sun-dried  salmon.1  | 

Boiled  Silver-Salmon. — After  |  the  silver-salmon  has  been  caught  1 
by  trolling,  the  |  woman  takes  one,  the  head,  backbone,  |  and  tail 
of  which  have  been  cut  off,  and  the  split  silver-salmon  is  spread  open.  || 
Then  it  is  placed  on  an  old  mat  ]  which  is  spread  on  the  floor  near  the  5 
fire  of  the  house.  She  takes  her  small  kettle  |  and  washes  it.  After 
washing  it,  she  |  pours  it  half  full  of  water  and  puts  it  on  the  |  fire. 
She    takes   her    fish-knife    and  ..  cuts  crosswise  what  she  is  || 

going  to  cook,  in  this  maimer,  f~~J.  2  1  on  the  outer  (skin)  side;  |  10 
and  after  she  has  cut  it  cross-  t  ■  I  wise,  the  water  in  the  kettle 
on  the  fire  begins  to  boil.  |  \  i  I  Then  the  woman  takes  the 
cut  silver-salmon  |  and  puts  it  \  /  into  the  water;  and  when 
the  salmon  is  in  it,  |  the  water  N — '  in  the  kettle  stops  boil- 
ing.    Then  the  woman  ||  watches  to  see  when  it  begins  to  boil  again;  15 

miadzowe'  le'£wacya  qaEs  ts!Ep!e'des  lil'xa  ide'ena.  Wii,  a/Fmese  46 
gwalExs  la£e  Elaq  £wldaxes  ha£ma£ye.  Wa,  g  i'lmiese  gwal  hamia.'- 
pExs  la'e.  tsii'x£Id  lii'xa  Ewa'pe  qa£s  na'x-ide  laq.  Wii,  gi'Pmese 
gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ha'msgEmdxa  £wape.  Wii,  la  ha'mxtsliiiiEndala- 
sa  £wa'pe  qa£s  ts!E'nts!Enx£w!de.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  50 
gexaxes  ha'£maats!ex'de.  Wii,  laE'm  ax-ce'd  qa£s  he'legana.  Wii, 
laE'm  gwal  laxa  pE'nkwe  ta'j'altslala. 

Boiled    Silver-Salmon    (Ha/nxLaak"    dogwinet    dza£wii'n). — Wii,  1 
gi'l'Emxaa  gwal   xwai.asE£weda  do'gwinete  dza/wiina,  laeda   ts!E- 
da'qe  ax*e'dxa  MiE'me  la'wEyakwes  he'x-t!a£}re  le£w!s  xa'k'ladzowe 
Lomie's  ts!a'snaeye.     Wii,  lamie'se  a'lira    la   LEpa'leda   xwa'LEkwe 
dza'wu'na.     Wii,    la£me'se    k'ligEdzo'ts     la'xa     k!a'k!obane     le-  5 
bexxa/lalll    lax    lEgwi'lases    go'kwe.     Wii,  la    ax£e'dxes    hanE'me 
qa£s    tslo'xug  indeq.      Wii,    gi'l£mesc    gwal    tslo'xiig  indqexs    la'e 
gttxtslo'tsa  £wa'pe    laq,  qa   nEgo'yales.     Wa,  la  hanxxE'nts  la'xa 
lEgwI'le.     Wii,     la     ax£e'dxes      xwiiLa'yowe    qa£s     qii'qEtEmdexes    ■ 
ha'nx-LEntsoi.e;  ga  gwa'leg-a    {jig.)  Lla/satslEiidalax   Lle'sa.     Wii,  10 
gil£mese     gwal    qa'qEtEmaqexs     la'e    mEdE'lx£whleda    ha/nxxala 
ha'nEma.     Wii,  hex-£ida£mesa  tsteda'qe  ax£e'dxa  xwa'LEkwe  dza- 
£wi5'na  qa  la£stE'ndes  laq.     Wa,  g'i'rmiese  la£ste'da  klo'tEla  la'qexs 
la'e  gwal  maE'mdElqideda  ha'nxxanowe.     Wii,  la^me'sa  tslEda'qe 
q!a'q!ahilaq    qo    mE<lE'lx£widL5.      Wii,    g'l'lsmese  mEdE'lx£wklExs  15 

1  See  also  p.  612. 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 23 


354  ETHNOLOGY   OF  THE    KWAKIUTL  Leth.  ajw.  as 

16  and  when  it  begins  to  boil,  |  she  takes  her  spoon  and  pushes  the 
end  into  it,  so  that  the  |  meat  of  the  silver-salmon  is  broken  up; 
and  when  it  is  all  in  small  pieces,  |  she  stirs  it  a  little.     She  does  not 

20  let  it  boil  a  long  time,  |  before  she  takes  it  off,  for  it  is  done.  ||  Then 
she  takes  her  small  dish  and  dips  the  boiled  |  silver-salmon  into  it. 
After  she  has  done  so,  she  calls  her  husband  |  and  her  children  to 
come  and  sit  down;  and  when  they  are  all  |  seated,  she  gives  each  a 
spoon,  draws  some  |  water  and  gives  it  to  them  to  drink.     After  || 

25  drinking,  they  eat  with  spoons;  and  after  eating,  they  |  drink  some 
more  cold  water.  That  is  what  the  Indians  call  |  "cooling  down." 
After  drinking,  the  man  |  takes  the  dishes  and  pours  out  into  the  | 

30  kettle  what  is  left  in  them.  Then  he  takes  the  kettle,  carries  ||  it 
out  of  the  house,  goes  down  to  the  beach,  and  |  pours  the  contents 
into  the  sea,  and  he  washes  it  out  |  so  that  it  is  clean.  No  oil 
is  poured  in.  When  |  the  sockeye-salmon  is  first  caught  in  the 
salmon-weirs  |  up  the  river,  it  is  treated  in  the  same  way.     The  only 

35  difference  between  this  and  the  way  they  do  with  ||  dog-salmon 
caught  on  the  upper  part  of  the  river  is  that  they  put  |  much  oil 
into  it,  for  it  is  lean,  and  that  they  pour  out  |  outside  of  the  house 
what  is  left  over.     That  is  all  I  about  this.  I 


16  la'e  ax£e.'dxes  ka'tslEnaqe  qa£s  dzek"ilga£yes  laq  qa  q!we'q!iilts!es 
qlE'mlalasa  dza£wu'n.  Wa,  g  i'Pmese  £na'xwa  am£E'mayasta  la'e 
xa'L!Ex-ridaEm  xwe'tlidEq.  Wa,  k'!e'st!a  a'laEm  ge'g'ilil  mEdE'l- 
qulaxs  la'e  ha'nxsano  la'xa   lsgwl'le    qaxs    lE£ma'e    Llo'pa.     Wa, 

20  he'x£i<la£mese  &x£e'dxes  la'logume  qa£s  tsets!o'desa  ha'nxxaakwe 
ilzfrwii'n  laq.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  Le'£lalaxes  la'£wunEme 
LE'"wi's  sa'sEme  qa  g'a'xes  k!us£a'llla.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  g'ax  £wl'£la 
kludzl'la  la'e  ts!Ewa'naesasa  ka/kEtshmaqe  laq.  Wa,  la  tsa'x,£Idxa 
£wa'pe  qa£s  le  tsa'x,£Its   laq    qa    na'xrIdeseq.     Wa,  glPmese  gwal 

25  na'qaxs  la'e  yoVlda.  Wa,  g'i'Fmese  gwal  yo'saxs  la'e  e'tled 
na'x£idxa  £wap  wuda'£sta.  He'Em  gwE£yo'sa  ba'klume  k'6'- 
xwaxoda.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  k-a'- 
gililxa  la'logume  qa£s  le  k"Ep£stE'ntses  k-  !e'dzayawa£ye  laxa  han- 
xLanowe.     Wa,  la'xaa  k'o'kulilxa   ha'nx'Lanowe    qa£s   le  k'lo'qE- 

30  wElsElaq  la'xes  go'kwe,  qa£s  le  lE'nts!esElas  la'xa  L!Ema£ise  qa£s 
le  qEp£stE'nts  la'xa  dE'msx-e.  Wa,  la'xaa  he'Em  tslo'xug-indEq 
qa  e'gEgls.  Wa,  laE'm  k!eas  kMu'ngEms  L!e'£na.  Wa,  he'Emxaa- 
wise  gwe'gilasE£weda  mEle'k'axs  g'a'loLanEmae  la'xa  La'wayowe 
lax  £nE'ldzasa  wl'£wa.     Wa,  le'x-a£mes    6'guqalayosa    £ya'£yanEme 

35  gwa£xnl's  lax  £nE'ldzasa  wi'£wa,  yixs  k!iinq!EqasEwae  yl'sa  q!e'- 
iiEine  L'.e'£na  qaxs  ts'.a'qwae.  Wa,  he'£misexs  a'£mae  qEpEwu'l- 
ts'.Emes  ha'mx"sa£ye  lax  L!a'sana£yasa  go'kwe.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal 
la'xeq. 


boas]  RECIPES  355 

Boiled  Salmon-Guts. — After  the  woman  has  |  cut  open  the  silver-  1 
salmon  caught  hy  her  husband  by  trolling,  |  she  squeezes  out  the  food 
that  is  in  the  stomach,  and  the  |  slime  that  is  on  the  gills.     She  turns 
the  stomach  inside  out;  ||  and  when  she  has  cleaned  many,  she  takes  a  5 
kettle  I  and  pours  water  into  it.     When  the  kettle  is  half  full  of  |  water, 
she  puts  the  stomachs  of  the  silver-salmon  into  it.     After  |  they  are  all 
in,  she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire;  and  when  |  it  is  on  the  fire,  she 
takes  her  tongs  and  stirs  them.     When  ||  (the  contents)  begin  to  boil,  10 
she  stops  stirring.     The  reason  for  |  stirring  is  to  make  the  stomachs 
hard  |  before  the  water  gets  hot;  for  if  they  do  not  |  stir  them,  they  re- 
main soft  and  tough,  and  are  not  hard.    Then  the  woman  |  always  takes 
up  one  of  (the  stomachs)  with  the  tongs;  and  ||  when  she  can  hold  15 
it  in  the  tongs,  it  is  done;  but  when  it  is  slippery,  it  is  not  |  done. 
(When  it  is  done,)  she  takes  off  the  fire  what  she  is  cooking.  |  It  is 
said  that  if,  in   cooking  it,  it  stays  on    the   fire   too  long,  |  it  gets 
slippery.     Then  she  will  pour  it  away  |  outside  of  the  house,  for  it 
is  not  good  if  it  is  that  way.     If  ||  it  should  be  eaten  when  it  is  boiled  20 
too  long,  (those  who  eat  it)  could  keep  it  only  a  short  time.  |  They 
would  vomit.     Therefore  they  watch  it  carefully.  |  When  it  is  done, 
the  woman  takes  her  |  dishes  and  her  spoons,  and  she  puts  them 

Boiled    Salmon-Guts     (Me£stagi£laku). — Wii,    he'£maaxs  la'e  gwiil  1 
xwa'Leda  tslEda'qax  do'gwanEmases  la/£wunEme  dza£wii'na.      Wa, 
la    x!'x£wults!5dEX    gi'ts!axdax     ha£niaa'ts  !iis    po'xunsa    LE£wa 
k'le'la  lax  q!o'sna£yas.     Wii,  la  le'xsEmdxa  ha£maa'ts!e  po'xunsa. 
Wii,  g'i'l'mese    qle'nEme    axa'£yas,    la'e    ax£e'dxes    ha'nxLanowe  5 
qa£s  giixtslo'desa    £wap  laq.      Wa,  la    nEgo'yaleda    ha'axLanaxa 
£vva'paxs  la'e  axstE'ntsa  po'xunsasa  dza£wu'ne  laq.     Wii,  gi'l£mese 
£wi'£la£staxs  la'e   hanxxE'nts  hi'xa  lEgwi'le.     Wii,  g  i'Pmese  hela- 
LE'laxs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  k-!ipLa'la  qa£s  xwe'tElga£yes  laq.     Wii,  g'i'I- 
£mese  inEdE'lxnvidExs  la'e   gwiil    xwe'tElgeq.     Wii,  he'Em  la'gllas  10 
xwe'tElgeq  qa  -na'xwa£mese  la  L!eL!ii'xc'ededa  ha£maats!e  poxiinsa, 
yixs  g-fi'lae   ts!Exutsa£nii' killed  a  £wii'paga£ya,  qaxs    g't'Pmae    k'.'es 
xwe'tElgesoxs    la'e    lEtla'la  la  k-!es  Lla'xa.     Wii,    le'da    ts!Eda'qg 
he'mEnalaEm    k!ip!e'tsa    k!ipLa'la  lii'xa   EiiE'mts!aqe.     Wii,  gl'l- 
£mesek-!ip!aLEla  lii'qexs  la'e  Llo'pa.     Wii'xl  tsax/a'wa  la  k'!e's£Em  15 
Llo'pa.     Wa,    he'x£ida£mese    hanxsE'ndxes  ha'nx-LEntsE£we;    wii, 
gil£Em£la'wise  hii'yaqawlltod  lax   ge'xxalalax    ha'nxLiilalaxs  hl'- 
laxe    lE'ndElta'    lax    a'Emlax£wise    lii'lax    qEp£wEldzE'mlax   la'xa 
L!a'sana£ye,  qaxs    kle'sae  e'k-Exs  he'e  gwe'x-£ide,  qaxs  gi'Pmae 
ha£mii'xs  la'e  hii'yaqawlltod  Llo'pa;  wa,  a'£mese  ya'wasalis  hi'xEiis  20 
tEkla'xs  la'e  ho'x£widaya.     Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilas  XE'nLEla  q!a'q!a- 
lalasE£wa.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  Llo'pExs  la'e  ax£e'deda  tslEda'qaxes  lo'- 
Elqlwe  LE£wis  kii'k'EtslEnaqe  qa£s  g'a'xe  ax£ii'ldas  lii'xes  k!wae'lase 


356  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [  irnr.  ann.  35 

down  at  the  place  where  she  is  seated;  |  but  her  husband  invites 

25  whomever  he  wants  to  invite.  ||  When  the  guests  come  in,  his  wife 
takes  a  |  large  ladle  and  dips  the  liquid  out  of  the  kettle  into  the 
dishes.  |  When  they  are  half  full  of  the  liquid  of  what  she  has 
been  cooking,  |  she  takes  the  tongs  and  takes  out  the  boiled  |  stom- 

30  achs  and  puts  them  into  the  dishes.  When  all  the  dishes  are  ||  full, 
she  takes  food-mats  and  j  spreads  them  in  front  of  the  guests. 
Finally  she  takes  the  |  dishes  and  places  them  in  front  of  the  guests. 
There  is  one  dish  for  |  every  four  guests.     Then  she  gives  |  a  spoon  to 

35  each  guest.  Water  is  never  ||  given  with  this,  and  they  never  pour 
oil  on  it,  j  for  oil  does  not  agree  with  the  boiled  stomach;  and  [  there- 
fore also  they  do  not  drink  water  before  they  eat  it,  for  it  makes  those 
who  |  eat  it  thirsty.     Then  they  eat  with  spoons;  and  |  after  they 

40  have  eaten,  the  host  takes  the  dishes  and  ||  puts  them  down  at  the 
place  where  his  wife  sits.  Then  he  takes  |  water  and  gives  it  to  them . 
Then  they  rinse  their  |  mouths  on  account  of  the  salty  taste,  for  the 
boiled  stomach  is  really  salt.  |  After  rinsing  the  mouth,  they  drink  | 

45  some  water;  and  after  drinking,  they  go  out  of  the  house.  ||  This 
finishes  what  I  have  to  say  about  the  cooking  of  various  kinds  of 
salmon.  |  They  never  sing  when  eating  steamed  salmon-heads  |  or 
boiled  salmon-heads,  or  when  they  oat  boiled  stomachs,  |  for  these 

Wa,  la'La  la'£wimEmas  Le'£hilaxes  gwE£yo'  qa£s  Le'£lalasE£wa.     Wa, 

25  g1'l£mese  g'ax  £wI'£laeLe  Le'£lanEmasex  la'e  gEnE'mas  &x£e'dxa  ewa- 
lase  lca'tstenaqa  qa£s  tsiitsUVlis  £wa'paga£yas  lii'xa  lo'Elq!we.  Wa, 
gil£mese  £na/xwa  £naE'ngoyalaxa  £wa'paga£yasa  ha£me'x's!lasE£waxs 
la'e  ax£e'dxes  k"!ipLala  qa£s  k-!ik!Ep!Ene's  la'xa  ha'nx-Laa'kwe  po- 
xuns  qaes    k" !ipts la'les    la'xa  lo'slqlwe.     Wa,    g'i'l£mese    £wi'£la  la 

30  qo'qutleda  loElq!wiixs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  ha£madzowe'  le£wa£ya  qaes 
le  LEpdzamodllas  la'xa  Le'£lanEme.  Wa,  la'wisLa  ax£e'dxa  Io'eI- 
q!we  qa£s  le  kax-dzamo£hlas  lii'xes  Le£lanEme.  Wii,  laE'm 
mae'male'da  k!wxe'laxa  £na'l£ni:niexi.a  lo'qlwa.  Wii,  la  tslEwana- 
esasa  ka'k'Ets!Enaqe  la'xes  Le'£lanEine.     Wa,  laE'm  hewii'xa  na'- 

35  qamats  £wa'pa  laq.  Wii,  la'xaa  hewa'xa  k!ii'nc[!Eqas  L!e'£nii  laq, 
qaxs  ao'ts!agaeda  me'stagi£lakwe  LE£wa  L!e'£na.  Wii,  he'£mis 
la'gilas  k!es  na'naqalgiwalax  £wa'paxs  na'gEmaxa  £wa'pasa  ha- 
£ma'pax  gwe'x'sdEmas.  Wii,  la'x-da£xwe  y5's£IdEq.  Wii,  g'i'l- 
£mese  gwiit  yo'saqexs  la'eda  Le'danEmaq  ka'glhlxa  lo'Elq!we  qa£s 

40  le  k'a'g'alilElas  lax  k!wae'lasases  gEiiE'me.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa 
£wa'pe  qa£s  le  tsa'x-£its  laq.  Wa,  la'x-daexwe  ts!Ewe'L!Ex5d  qa 
la'weses  dE'mp!aeL!Exawa£e;  qii'Laxs  a'lae  dE'mp!eda  me'stag'i£la- 
kwe.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwal  ts!Ets'.Ewe'L!Exoxs  la'xda£xwae  na'- 
x£Id  lii'xa  £wa'pe.     Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwal    na/qaxs   la'e   ho'cjiiwElsa. 

45  Wii,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq,  yi'xEn  gwa'gwex's£alase  lii'xa  k'!o'k!utE- 
liixs  ha£me'xsdasE£wae.  Wa,  he'Ein  k!es  dE'nxElag'ila  he'xtla- 
£yaxs  nEgEkwa'e     loxs    ha'nxxaakwae    LE£wa    me'stag"i£lakwaxs 


BOAS]  RECIPES  357 

are  eaten  quickly  when  they  first  go  trolling  |  silver-salmon.  The 
stomach  of  the  dog-salmon  is  not  eaten  ||  when  it  is  first  caught  at  50 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  nor  when  it  is  caught  on  the  upper  part  of  the  | 
rivers;  hut  they  boil  the  heads  when  it  is  caught  |  in  the  upper  part 
of  the  river,  also  those  of  the  humpback-salmon.  At  last  it  is 
finished.  | 

Fresh  Halibut-Heads  and  Backbone. — Sometimes1  the  j  woman  boils  1 
the  heads  (of  halibut)  and  invites  the  |  friends  of  her  husband;  and 
when  the  men  are  invited  |  by  the  fisherman,  bis  wife  takes  the  || 
heads  and  puts  them  on  a  lug  on  the  floor.     Then  she  takes  an  |  ax  5 
and  chops  them  in  pieces.     The  pieces  are  not  very  small.  |  Then  she 
puts  them  into  a  kettle.     Then  she  takes  the  backbone  |  and  breaks 
it  to  pieces.     Then  she  also  puts  it  into  the  kettle.  |  As  soon  as  the 
kettle  is  full,  she  takes  |[  a  bucket  of  water  and  empties  it  into  it.    The  10 
water  hardly  |  shows  among  them  when  she  puts  it  on  the  fire.  |  She 
does  not  touch  it;  but  when  it  has  been  boiling  a  long  time,  |  she 
takes  it  off.     Then  she  takes  her  large  ladle  and  |  also  dishes,  and 
she  dips  it  out  into  the  dishes  with  her  ||  large  ladle.     As  soon  as  all  15 
the  dishes  are  full,  |  she  takes  her  spoons  and  gives  one  to  each  | 
guest,  and  she  spreads  a  food-mat  in  front  of  them.  |  At  last  she 

ha£ma'£yae,  qaxs    a'£mae    hala'xwasoxs   ga/lae    do'gwanEma    dza-  48 
£wii'ne.     Wii,  la  k!es  ha£ma/£ye  ha'£maats!e  po'xiinsasa  gwa£xnisax 
gilo'i.anEinae    lax    o'x"si\\;r"vasa    wi'£wa    Loxs  la'e    lax    £iiE'ldziisa  50 
wl'£wa,     Wa,  la/La  ha'nx-LEntsoeme  he'xt!a£yasexs  la'e  ga'yaiiEin 
1:1  x  £nE'ldzasa  wl'£wa  LE£wa  ha£nd'ne.      Wa,  lawI'sLa  gwal  la'xeq. 

Fresh  Halibut-Heads  and  Backbone. — Wii,  la£na'l£nEmp!Eneda  ts!E-  1 
da/qe    ha'nx'LEiidxa    ma'legEmanowe    qa£s     Le'£lalex     fneEuEm6'- 
kwases  lii'£wimEme.     Wa,    he'£maaxs    la'e    Le'£lalasE£wa  be'bEgwa- 
iiF.me,  ylsa  lo'qlwenoxwe,  wii,  la  gEns'mas   ax£e'dxa    ma'legEma- 
uowe    axE'ndales    la'xa  ka'dlle  lEqwa'.      Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa    so'ba-  5 
yowe  qa£s  tsatsExsa'les  laq.     Wii,  la  k'!es  xE'nLEla  ameEme'xsalaq, 
wa,  la  axtslo'ts  lii'xa   ha'nx'Lanowe.     Wii,    la    ax£e'dxa  hamo'mo 
qa£s  k-6k'ExsE'ndeq.     Wii,  laE'mxaa'wise  axts!o'ts  la'xa  ha'nxLa- 
nowe.       Wii,     gi'l£mese     qo'tleda     ha'nxi.anaxs     la'e     ax£e'dxes 
na'gatsle  £wal)Ets!ala    qa£s    guqlEqe's  laq.     Wii,  ha'lsEla£mese    ne-  10 
lEyax£Ideda    '"wa'pe    la'qexs    la'e    ha'nxLEntsa      lii'xes    lEgwI'le. 
Wii,    la   k!es    La'balaq.     Wii,    he'tlala    ge'gilll    maE'mdElqulaxs 
la'e    ha'nxsEndEq.     Wii,   la    ax£e'dxes    £wa'lase    ka'tslEnaqa;  wa, 
he'£mese    lo'Elqlwe.      Wii,  la    tsets'.o'dalas    la'xa    lo'Elq!we,    yisa 
£wii'lase     k-a'ts!Enaqa.      Wii,    gi'l£mese    £wl'£la    qo'qutleda     Io'eI-  15 
qlwiixs  la'e  axEe'dxes  ka'k'Ets!Enaqe  qa£s    le  ts!Ewanae'sas  la'xes 
Le'£lanEme.     Wii,    la'xaa  LE'pdzamoliltsa    ha£madzowe'    le'£\va£va. 

1  Continued  from  p.  249,  line  71. 


358  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ann.  35 

takes  up  the  dish  and  puts  it  down  in  front  of  her  |  guests.     Immedi- 

20  ately  thej-  all  eat  with  ||  spoons;  and  after  they  have  eaten  with 
spoons,  the  wife  of  the  host  |  takes  other  small  dishes  and  puts  them 
down  I  between  the  men  and  the  food-dish.  |  This  is  called  "recep- 
tacle for  the  bones."     As  soon  as  |  the  guests  find  a  bone,  they  throw 

25  it  into  the  small  dish;  ||  and  they  keep  on  doing  this  while  they  are 
eating.  After  |  they  have  finished  eating  with  spoons,  they  put 
their  spoons  into  the  dish  from  which  they  have  been  |  eating. 
Then  they  take  the  small  dish  in  which  |  the  bones  are,  and  put  it 
down  where  the  large  dish  had  been,  |  and  they  pick  up  the  bones 

30  with  their  hands  and  put  them  into  their  mouths  ||  and  chew  them. 
Therefore  this  is  called  "chewed;"  namely,  boiled  |  halibut-head. 
They  chew  it  for  a  long  time  and  suck  |  at  it;  and  after  they  finish 
sucking  out  the  fat,  they  blow  out  the  |  sucked  bones;  and  they  do 
not  stop  until  all  the  bones  have  been  sucked  out.  |  Then  the  woman 

35  takes  the  small  dishes  and  ||  washes  them  out,  and  she  pours  some 
water  into  them,  and  she  puts  them  |  down  again  before  the  guests. 
Then  they  wash  their  hands.  |  As  soon  as  they  have  done  so,  they 
drink;  and  after  they  have  finished  drinking,  |  they  go  out.  Then 
they  finish  eating  the  halibut-heads.  |  Halibut-heads  are  not  food  for 

40  the  morning,  for  they  are  too  fat.  ||  They  only  eat  them  at  noon  and  in 

18  Wii,  lawe'sLe  k'a'g'ililxa  lo'qlwe  "qa£s  le  k-ax-dzamolIlts  lit'xes 
Le'£lanEme.      Wa,  he'x£ida£mese  £na'xwa    yoVida,   yise's    k'a/k'E- 

20  tslEnaqe.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  yoVldExs  la'e  gEnE'masa  Le'£laiiEmiiq 
&x£e'dxa  6'gu£la£me  am£Ema'  lo'Elqlwa  qa£s  le'xat!  ka'x£Its  lax 
awa'gawa£yasa  be'bEgwanEme  LE£wa  haemaa'ts!as  lo'qlwa.  Wa, 
he 'Em  Le'gades  he'lomagEm  qae'da  xa'qe.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  tsa'- 
tsekineda  klwe'laxa  xa'qaxs  la'e  tslExtslo'ts  lax  ama'£ye  lo'qlwa. 

25  La  he'xsaEm  gwe'gilaxes  wa'wEsElilase  yo'sa.  Wa,  gl'Pmese 
gwal  yo'saxs  la'e  g'itslo'tses  yo'yatsle  k-a'k-Ets!Enaq  la'xes  gi'lx-- 
de  ha£maa'ts!ii.  Wii,  la  &x£e'dxa  ama'£ye  lo'qlwa,  yix  gi'ts!E£wa- 
sasa  xa'qe  qa£s  k'a'x'£Ide  lax  axa'sdasa  £wa'lase  lo'Elqlwa.  Wa, 
la£me'se  xa'maxtslanaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  xa'qe  qa£s  ts!o'q!uses.     Wa, 

30  la  male'x£wulEq,  la'gilas  la  Le'gadEs  male'kwa,  yl'xa  ha'nx'La- 
akwe  male'gEman5.  Wii,  la  ge'g'flll  male'kwa  qa£s  le  k'!EX£wi'- 
dEq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  k'lExa'lax  tsE'nxwa£yasexs  la'e  po'x'odxa 
klwa'xmute  xa'qa.  Wii,  a'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  £wl£la  k-!Ex£w!'dxa 
xaqe,  wii,  leda  ts!Eda'qe  ax£e'dxa  &m£Ema'£ye  lo'Elqlwa  qa£s  tslo'- 

35  xugindeq.  Wa,  la  qEptslo'tsa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wa,  la  xwe'laqa  k-ax-- 
dzamS'lilas  la'xa  Le'£lanEme.  Wa,  la'x'da£xwe  tslE'ntslEnx£wida. 
Wii,  g"i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  na'x£ida.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  na'qaxs 
la'e  ho'c[iiwElsa.  Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la  mEmEle'kwage  la'xeq.  Wa, 
laE'm  k'les  ha£ma'£ya  mEle'kwiixa  gaa'la  qaxs  xE'iiLElae  tsE'nxwa. 

40  Wa,  a'l£Em  ha£ma'xa    la    nEqii'la   LE£wa    dza'qwa,  qaxs  XE'nLElae 


boas]  RECIPES  359 

the  evening,  because  they  are  very  |  fat;  that  is  the  reason  why  they  41 
are  afraid  to  eat  them, — that  it  makes  one  |  sleepy.1! 

Halibut-Tips. —  (The  woman)  enters  her  house,  and  at  once  |  she  1 
takes  the  kettle  and  puts  the  halibut-tips  |  into  it.     She  pours  a 
little  water  over  them.     The  water  does  not  quite  |  show  on  top  of 
the  meat  of  the  halibut.     Then  she  puts  ||  the  kettle  on  the  fire.     As  5 
soon  as  it  begins  to  boil,  she  stirs  |   (what  is  in  the  kettle)  and  breaks 
it.     After  she  lias  stirred  it,  she  lets  |  it  boil  for  a  long  time,  and  then 
takes  the  kettle  off  the  fire.     Then  |  she  pours  oil  into  it,  when  they 
are  going  to  eat  out  of  the  kettle.  |  When  they  dip  it  out  into  dishes, 
when  there  are  many  ||  guests,  then  she  pours  oil  into  it  when  it  is  1" 
in  the  dish.  |  Then  they  drink  water  before   the}"   eat  with   spoons 
the |  boiled  meat  of  the  halibut,  and  they  also  drink  water |  after  they 
have  eaten  it  with  spoons.     She  puts  down  the  food-mat  when  the 
boiled  meat  of  the  halibut  is  given  at  a  feast.     It  is  ||  food  for  the  1"> 
morning  and  noon,  and  for  the  evening,  for  |  it  is  not  fat.     Therefore 
they  pour  oil  into  it.     The  only  |  difference  in  the  morning  is,  that 
they  do  not  put  much  oil  into  it,  for  then  only  |  a  little  is  poured  into 
it;  but  at  |  noon  and  in  the  evening  it  is  covered  with  oil.     No 
second  course  is  served  ||  after  this  has  been  eaten  with  spoons. 2 1  20 


tsE'nxwa.      Wa,  he'£mis   la'g'ilas   kllE'm  ha£ma'£ye,  qaxs  kwa/la-41 
dzEmae.1 

Halibut-Tips. — Wa,    la  lae'Las    la'xes    go'kwe.      Wa,   ke'x£ida-  1 
£mese  ax£e'dxa  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  axtslo'desa  t!o't!Esba£ye  p!a'£ye 
laq.     Wii,  la  guqlEqa'sa  holale  £wap  laq.     Wa,  laE'm  k-!es  a/laEin 
ne'l£ideda£wa'pe  lax  o'kiiya£yasa  q  lE'mlalasa  p!a'£ye.    Wa,  la  hanx- 
LE'nts  laxes  lEgwi'le.     Wa,  g1'l£mese  mEdElx£wi'dExs  la'e  xwe'tsl-  5 
gEndEq  qa  qlwe'q  !ults!es.      Wa,  gi'l£mese  xwe'taxs  la'e  gage'gili- 
lElaEm   maE'mdElqulaxs  la'e  ha'nxsEndxa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wii,  la 
k!u'nq!Eqasa  L!e'£na  laq,  yixs  ha'me'Le  ha£maa'ts!eLeda  ha'nxLa- 
nowe.     Wii,    gi'l£mese    tse'dots    la'xa    lo'qlwe,   yixs    q!e'nEmaeda 
Le£lanEme.      Wii,  a'Pmese   k!u'nq!Eqasa  L!e'£na    la'qexs  la'e   1exu-  1() 
tslala.     Wii,  la  nii'x£Id£Enixa  £wa'paxs  k!e's£mae  yoVldxa  ha'nx-- 
Laakwe  qlE'mlalesa  p!a'£ye.    Wa,  la'xaa  na'x£idaEmxa  £wa'paxs  la'e 
gwill  y5'saq.     Wa,  laE'mLeda  ha£madzo'we  le'£wa£ya  la'qexs  k!we'- 
ladzEmaeda  ha'nxLaakwe    qlE'mlalesa     p!a'£yt>.      Wa,    he'£misexs 
ha£ma'£yaaxa  gaii'la  LE£wa   £nEqii'la;   wa,  he'£misa   dza'qwa  qaxs  15 
kle'sae  tsE'nxwa,  lii'g'ilasa  L!e'£na  k!ii'nq!EgEm  laq.     Wa,  le'xa- 
£mesLa!  6'gu£qalayos  qae'da  gaii'liixs  kle'sae  q!eqxa  L!e'£na,  a'£mae 
xaLlaqasoxs    k!ii'nqEqasE£wae.     Wii,  la'La   t!Ep!EgEli's£Emxa  L!e'- 
£naxa     nEqii'la    LE£wa    dza'qwa.      Wii,  laE'm   k!es   he'leg  iiuIexs 
yo'saax  gwe'x'sdEmas.2  20 

'  Continued  on  p.  249,  line  71,  to  p.  251,  line  5.  'Continued  on  p.  251,  line  6,  to  p.  252,  line  33. 


360  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  36 

1  Dried  Halibut. — As  soon  as  there  is  no  dried  salmon  for  breakfast  | 
in  the  morning,  (the  woman)  takes  dried  halibut  and  breaks  it  into 
a  dish.  |  When  there  are  four  guests,  then  there  is  one  dish  |  into 
5  which  two  dried  halibut  are  broken:  and  when  there  are  six  ||  guests, 
then  there  are  two  dishes,  in  which  there  are  three  dried  halibut,  |  so 
that  there  is  one  and  a  half  in  each  dish,  and  |  there  are  three  guests 
to  each  dish;  but  they  also  use  the  food-mat,  |  which  is  spread  out  in 
front   of  the  guests,  |  and  the  woman  also  takes  her  oil-dish  and 

10  pours  ||  oil  into  it.  As  soon  as  she  has  clone  so,  she  places  the  dish  | 
in  front  of  her  guests.  Then  she  puts  down  the  oil-dish  |  and  puts 
it  in  the  corner  of  the  dish,  on  top  of  the  broken  dried  halibut,  |  on 
the  outer  side  of  the  dish.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she  dips  up  some  | 
fresh  water  and  gives  it  to  them  to  rinse  their  mouths.     After  they 

15  have  done  so,  ||  they  drink;  and  after  they  have  done  this,  the  one 
highest  in  rank  takes  |  some  broken  halibut  and  folds  it  over  and 
chews  it,  |  to  make  it  soft.  Then  lie  dips  it  into  the  oil,  and  finally 
he  [  puts  it  into  bis  mouth,  when  it  is  heaped  up  with  oil;  and  all  the 
guests  |  do   the  same  way  when   they  are  eating;  and  they  never 

20  forget  to  fold  over  the  ||  broken  dried  halibut  and  to  chew  it  soft, 
and  then  to  |  dip  it  into  the  oil.  The  reason  why  they  chew  it  is 
that  it  requires  much  |  oil,  for  the  dried  halibut  is  very  dry  food;  | 


1  Dried  Halibut.-  Wit,  gi'h'mese  k'lea's  xaemasa  gaa'xsta'laxa 
gaa'liixs  la'e  ax-e'dxa  klii'wase  qa£s  k"!opts!o'des  la'xa  lo'qlwe. 
Wa,  gi'l£Em  mo'kwa  Le'elanEmaxs  la'e  enEme'xLeda  lo'qlwe 
klo'ptslotsosa  ma'-'lExsa  kla'wasa.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  qbLlo'kwa 
5  klwe'laxs  la'e  ma'£lEXLeda  lo'qlwe;  wa  la  yu'duxuxseda  k'la'wase 
qa  nExsa'yunosElis  la'xa  cna'l£nEmexLa  lo'qlwa.  Wa,  laE'm  yae'- 
yuduxuleda  klwe'laxa  £nEme'xLa  lo'q!wa.  Wa,  laEmLe'da  ha£ma- 
dzowe'  le'£wa£ya  gi'lg'alelEm  LEpdzamS'llbsm  la'xa  i.e'MfmEma. 
Wa,  laEmxaa'wiseda  tslEda'qe  &x£e'dxes  tsteba'tsle  qa\s  k!unxts!o'- 

10  desa  Lle'£na  laq.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ka'x£itsa  lo'qlwe 
lax  nExdzamo'hlases  Le'£lanEme.  Wii,  la  ka'gilllxa  ts!Eba'ts!e 
qaes  le  kane'qwas  lax  d'kuva'yasa  k"!o'bEkwe  k'la'wasa  la'xa 
L'.a'saneqwasa  lo'qlwe.  Wa,  g't'Pmese  gwa'l£alelExs  la'e  tse'x,£Itsa 
a'lta  £wap  laq  ([a    ts!Ewe'L!Ex5des.     Wa,    gi'l£mese   gwa'lExs  la'e 

15  na'x£ida.  Wa,  g  i'h'mese  gwa'lExs  la'eda  naxsa'lagaeyas  da'x£Id 
la'xa  k'lo'bEkwe  k'la'wasa  qa£s  k!5'xsEmdeq  qa£s  male'xubEndeq 
qa  tElx£wI'desexs  la'e  ts!Ep!e'ts  la'xa  L!e'£na.  Wii,  lawl'si.a  ts!o'- 
q'.fisasexs  la'e  qo'loxbalaxa  i.!c,,£na.  Wa,  la  £na'xwa£ma  klwe'le  he 
gwe'g'ilaxs  la'e  ha£ma'pa,  yixs  kle'sae  LlEle'we  k-!o'xsEmdxa  k-!o'- 

20  bEkwe  kla'wasa  <pr"s  male'xubEndec[  qa  tE'lx£widesexs  la'e  tslE- 
pll'ts  la'xa  L!e'£na.  Wii,  he'Em  la'g'ilas  male'kwaq  qa  hama'- 
sexa    Lle'£na  qaxs  xE'nLElae  lE'mxweda  lEmo'kwe  k'la'wasExs  ha- 


boas]  RECIPES  361 

for  there  is  venT  little  fat  in  this  food.     As  soon  as  |  the  guests  finish 
eating,    fresh    water   is   drawn,    and    they   drink.  ||  After    they   have  25 
finished   drinking,   the  guests  wait  for  |  the  second  course.     Thus 
they  finish  eating  the  dried  halibut.  | 

Halibut-Skin  and  Meat. —  Now  I  will  talk  |  about  the  mixed  half-  1 
dried     halibut-skin    and     half-dried    halibut.    |    When    the    drying 
halibut  and  the  skin  are  half  dry,  the  |  woman  takes  the  half-dried 
halibut  and  cuts  it  down   in  strips  ||  one  finger-width  wide,  in  this  |   5 
As  soon  as  it  is  all  cut  up,  she  takes  the  skin  and  | 
also  straight  down  into  strips,  in  the  manner  in 
made  the  narrow  strips  of  [  dried  halibut.     As 
the  narrow  strips  are  done,  she  puts  |  one  narrow 
skin  and  one  narrow  strip  of  half-dried  halibut 
one   on   the   other,  ||  and  she.  rolls  them  up  into   a  ball:    and  she  1" 
just  tucks  the  end  |  under  the  top  of  the  tight  strip  of  |  skin  and 
half-dried  halibut.     This  is  the  size  of  an  egg  of  a   |   sea-gull.     As 
soon   as  all  that  she  is  doing   is    done,  she    takes   the  |  kettle   and 
pours  water  into  it,  and  she  only  stops  ||  pouring  water  into  it  when  15 
the  kettle  is  half  full.     Then  |  she  puts  it  on  the  fire;  and  when  it 
begins   to   boil,  |  she   takes   the  balls    of  skin   and   dried    halibut, 
and  puts  them  |  into  the  boiling  kettle  on  the  fire.     However,  she 

£mfi'£yae  yixs  ho'lalaeda  L!e£nfixs  hafma/£yae.     Wa  giT'mese  gwal  23 
ha£ma'pa  klwe'laxs  la'e  tse'x  £itsosa  a'lta£wa'pa  qa.na'x£Ides.     Wa, 
gi'Pmese  gwiil    na'qaxs  la'e    awE'lgEmgaMeda    klwe'le    qa£s   he'-  25 
leg  intsEc"we.     Wa,  laE'm   gwa'la  ha'ma'paxa   lEmo'kwe  kla'wasa. 

Halibut-Skin   and   Meat.-  Wa,   la-me'sEii    e'tledsl   gwa'gwexs£alal  1 
la'xa  mayima'kwasa  k'la'yaxwe  Lies   LE£wa   k'la'yaxwe  kla'wasa. 
Wa,   he'£maaxs  la'e  k'!a'yax£whleda    klii'wase  LE£wa  Lle'se,  le'da 
ts!Eda'qe  ax-e'dxa  k'!a'_yaxwe  k'!a'wasa  qa£s  iiEqEma'xode  k'!o!pa- 
laxa  £naT"iiEmdEndzayaakwe  hl'xEiis  tslEma'lax'tslamvyexg'a  gwii-  5 
lega  {fig.).     Wii,  gi'l£mese  £w!£we'1x'sexs  la'e  fix-'e'dxa  Lle'se  qa£s 
tlo'tlEtslE'ndexat !  nEqEmii'xodEq    lax    gwa'laasaseda  ts!elts!Eq!o' 
kla'wasa.     Wa,  giTmese  £wl£la  tsleltslF.qlaxs  la'e  pa'pEqoda'leda 
tslEda'qaxa  ts!e'lts!Eq!a   l!6s   LE£wa    ts!elts!Eq!a   k"!a'wasa.     Wii, 
la  le£xusE'mdEq  qa  les  lo'ElsEma.     Wii,  a'£mese  la  giple'ts  o'ba£yas  10 
lax  awa'biV'yasa  o'ba'ye  la'xa  la  lEkluta'la  qExsEme  g'a'yol   la'xa 
Lle'se    LE£wa    klii'wase.     Wii,  la    yu'Em    la    'wa'lasa   tsle'guna'sa 
tsle'klwe.     Wii,  g'iTmese  £wlela  gwa'le  axsE£wa'sexs  la'e  &x£e'dxa 
ha'nxLanowe   qa£s    guxtslo'desa    £wa'pe    laq.     Wa,   iiT'mese    gwal 
guqa'sa  £wa'pe    lii'qexs    la'e  nEgoya'leda   ha'nxxanowe.     Wa,    la  15 
ha'nxLEnts  la'xes    lEgwI'le.     Wii,    giTmese   mEdElx£wI'dexs    la'e 
ax£e'dxa    xwexule'xsEmakwe    L'es    LE£wa    klii'wase    qa£s  axsta'les 
la'xa  inaE'mdElqula  ha'nx'Lala  la'xa  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  k'le'stla  a'laF.ni 


362  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  Ann.  3b 

20  does  not  |  boil  it  long,  when  the  kettle  is  taken  off.  ||  Then  the  woman 
takes  her  dish  and  puts  it  down  at  the  |  place  where  she  is  sitting; 
and  she  also  takes  a  large  long-handled  ladle,  |  and  takes  out  the 
rolled-up  skin  and  |  dried  halibut,  and  puts  them  into  the  dish.  She 
does  not  take  any  gravy,  |  but  only  the  round  rolled-up  skin  and 

25  the  dried  halibut.  ||  As  soon  as  it  is  all  out  of  the  kettle  and  it  is  in 
the  |  dish,  the  woman  takes  a  food-mat  and  [  spreads  it  in  front  of 
her  guests.  Then  she  puts  the  dish  on  it.  |  As  soon  as  the  woman 
puts  the  dish  before  them,  she  |  draws  some  fresh  water  for  her 

30  guests.  When  it  is  in  the  morning,  ||  the  guests  all  rinse  their  mouths 
before  they  drink.  |  When  it  is  noon  or  evening,  they  do  not  rinse 
their  mouths,  |  hut  they  drink  water  before  they  eat.  |  As  soon  as 
they  have  rinsed  their  mouths,  at  breakfast  they  |  drink;  and  after 

35  they  have  finished  drinking,  they  take  up  with  their  hands  ||  the 
rolled-up  skin  and  the  dried  halibut  that  they  are  eating.  |  They 
just  bite  off  from  their  food.  After  |  they  have  eaten,  the  woman 
takes  the  food-dish  and  |  pours  into  the  kettle  what  is  left  over. 
Then  she  pours  |  water  into  it,  and  she  puts  (the  dish)  again  before 

40  their  guests.  ||  Then  they  wash  their  hands.  After  they  have  fin- 
ished, |  some  fresh  water  is  drawn.      After  they  finish  drinking,  they 


ge'gilll    In    maE'mdElqulaxs    la'e    ha'nx-sanoweda    hii'nxi.anowe. 

20  Wii,  le'da  tshxla'qe  ax£e'dxes  lo'qlwe  qa£s  ha'ngallles  la'xes 
klwae'lase.  Wa,  lii'xaa  axee'dxa  ewa'lase  gi'ltlEXLala  kii'tsh:- 
naqa  qa£s  XElostales  lii'xa  xwe'xule'xsEinakwe  Lies  LE£wa  k  !a'- 
wase  qa£s  le  xEltshx'las  lii'xa  loqlwe.  Wa,  laE'm  k'les  le  £wii'palas. 
A/Em  lexfrma  lo'F.lxsF.me  xwexiile'x'sEmakwe  Lies  LE£wak!a'wasa. 

25  Wii,  g'i'Pmese  £wI'losta  la'xa  ha'nxxanowe  qaxs  la'e  g'e'tsla  la'xa 
to'qlwaxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax-re'dxa  ha£madzowe'  le£wa£ya  qaJs  le 
LEpdzamo'lllas  la'xes  Le'-ianEme.  Wii,  la  kTi'dzotsa  lo'q!we  liiq. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  la  kaxdzamo'lilxa  lo'qhviixs  la'eda  tslEila'qe 
tse'x-£Itsa    a'ita   £wap    la'xes    Le/6lanEme.     Wii,  gi'Pmese  gaa'laxs 

30  la'e  £wl£la  ts!Ewe'i.!Exodeda  Le/£lanEmaxs  k'!e's£mae  na'x£Jda.  Wa, 
gl'lemese  nEqa'la  LF/wa  dza'qwiixs  la'e  k!es  tslEwe'LlExoda.  Wa, 
la'ra  nfi'naqalg'iwa'laEmxa  £wa'paxs  k'leVmae  ha£mx-£I'da.  Wa, 
gi'Pmese  gwal  tslEwe'iJExodExs  gaa'xstalae,  wa,  la'x-da£xwe 
na'x-Ida.      Wit,     gi'l£mese     gwal     na'qaxs     la'e     xa'maxtslanaxs 

35  da'ltslalaaxes  harina£yeda  xwextile'xsEmakwe  Lies  LE£wa  k  la'wase. 
Wii,  laE'm  a'Em  qlEgi'nwexes  ha£ma£ye.  Wii,  gl'Pmese  gwal 
ha£mii'pExs  la'eda  tslEdii'qe  ax£e'dxa  ha£maa'ts!exde  lo'q!waqa£s 
le  qEptslo'tsa  ha£mxs<\'£ye  lii'xa  ha'nxxanowe.  WTii,  la  guxtslo'tsa 
£wa'j>e  laq.     Wii,  la    xwe'laqa   ka'x'dzamolllas  la'xes  Le'£lanEme. 

40  Wii,  la'xda£xwe  ts!E'nts!Enx£w!da.  Wa,  g  i'Pmese  gwa'h:xs  la'e 
tse'x£Itsosa  a'ltaewa'pa.     Wii,  g'i'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ho'qu- 


boas]  RECIPES  363 

go  out,  I  for  no  second  course  is  served  after  the  rolled-up  skin  and  |  4- 
the  dried  halibut;  and  they  also  do  not  dip  it  into  oil,  for  |  the  skin 
is  very  fat;  and  only  the  men  highest  ||  in  rank  of  the  various  tribes  45 
eat  this  kind.     That  is  all  |  about  this.  | 

Blistered  Half-Dried   Halibut. — As  |  soon  as  the  drying  halibut  is  1 
half-dried,  when  the  halibut  is  first  caught,  |  then  the  men  of  high 
rank  enter  the  house  of  the  fisherman  in  the  morning,  and  |  sit  down 
in  the  rear  of  the  house;  and  at  once  ||  the  woman  takes  her  mat,  and  5 
asks  all  the  visitors  to  |  rise  from  the  place  where  they  are  sitting. 
As  soon  as  they  all  stand  up,  |  she  spreads  the  mat  on  the  floor;  and 
after  the  mat  has  been  spread,  |  she  asks  the  visitors  to  sit  down 
on  it.     As   soon    as    all    |    are   seated,  the  woman   takes  down  the 
half-dried  halibut  ||  and  blisters  it  by  the  tire.     After  she  has  finished  10 
blistering  it,  |  she  takes  a  mouthful  of  water  and  blows  it  on  the 
blistered  |  half-dried  halibut;  and  after  she  has  blown  water  |  on  it, 
she  takes  a  food-mat  and  breaks  the  |  blistered  half-dried  halibut, 
and  puts  it  on  the  food-mat.  ||  As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  15 
her  oil-dish  and  |  pours  oil  into  it.     After  she  has  finished  doing  so, 
she  puts  down  |  the  mat  on  which  the  blistered  half-dried  halibut  is, 
and  |  spreads  it  before  those  who  are  going  to  eat.     She  scatters  the 
broken  pieces  |  of  blistered  half -dried  halibut  over  the  food-mat. 

WF.lsa    qaxs   k!esae   heleg'intsE'wa  xwexulexsEmaxug'e  Lies    t,E£wa  42 
klawase.     Wa,  he'£misexs  k!e'sae  ts!Epa'xa  L!e'£na  qaxs  he'smae 
lagilasa  Lle'saxs  tsE'nxwae.     Wa,  laE'mxaa'wise  le'x'ameda  nena'- 
xsalasa  le'lqwalaLa£ye  ha£ma'pxa   he  gwe'kwe.      Wa,  laE'm    gwal  45 
la'xeq. 

Blistered   Half-Dried   Halibut    (PEiikwe   klayax11    k"!awasa).— W;'i.  1 
gi'lfEm  k!a'yax£wideda  k'la'wasaxs  g'ii'lae  la'LanEma  p!a'£ye.  wa, 
le'da  nena'xsala  ho'gwllxa  gaa'la  lax  go'kwasa  lo'qlwenoxwe  qa£s 
le     k!us£a'lllEla    lax     o'gwiwalllas     go'kwas.     Wa,    he'x"£Ida£mesa 
ts!i:da'qe  ax£e'dxes  le'£wa£ye  qa£s  axk'Ia'lexa  qa'tse£stala  qa  £wl£les  5 
qlwa'gilil    la'xes    kludze'lase.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wl£la  qlwa'g  illlnxs 
la'e  LEpIa'lilxa  le'£wa£ye.     Wa,  gi'Pmese   LEbela   le'£wa£yaxs   la'e 
axklii'laxa  qa'tse£stala  qa  kludzEdzo'lllesoq.     Wii,  gi'b'mese  £wl'1a 
k!us£a'hlExs  la'eda  ts!Etla'qe   axa'xodxa   la  k'!a'£yax£wltses  k'!a'- 
wase  qa£s  pEX£Ideq  la'xes  lEgwi'le.     Wii,  g-i'l£mese  gwal  pExa'qexs  10 
la'e    ha'£msgEmdxa    ewa'pe    qa£s    sElbExuldz5'des    la'xa    pE'nkwe 
k!a'yaxu    kla'wasa.      Wii,    gi'l£mese    gwal     sElbExwa'sa    ewa'pe 
la'qexs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  ha£madzowe'  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  k!o'k!upsEndexa 
pE'nkwe  kMa'yaxwa  k'la'was   qa£s  axdzo'dales    la'xa  ha£madzowe' 
le'£wa£ya.      Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  ts!Eba'ts!e  qaes  15 
k!unxts!odesa  L!e'£nalaq.     Wa,  g1'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  axslllxa  la 
gldza'yaatsa  pE'nkwe  k'la'yaxwa  kla'wasa  le'£wa£va  qaes  le  LEp- 
dzamo'lllas  la'xa  ha£ma'pLaq.     Wii,  la  guldzo'tsa  k.  !o'k!upsaa'kwe 
pEiiku  klii'wase    la'xa    ha£madzowe'    le'£wa£ya.     Wa,   la    axEe'dxa 


364  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [BTH.ANN.  85 

20  Then  she  takes  the  fl  oil-dish  and  puts  it  on  what  they  are  going  to 
eat,  and  she  also  |  takes  water  and  draws  it  for  them.  When  it  is 
in  the  morning,  |  the  guests  all  rinse  their  mouths.  After  they  have 
finished  |  drinking,  they  take  the  blistered  half-dried  halibut  and  | 

25  dip  it  into  the  oil.  Then  they  put  it  into  their  mouths.  ||  They  do 
not  chew  it  first,  for  it  is  brittlo,  but  they  take  much  |  oil  on  it. 
When  they  have  finished  eating,  the  woman  folds  up  [  the  food-mat, 
and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting,  |  together  with 
the  oil-dish.     Then  she  draws  water  for  them,   and  |  they  drink. 

30  After  they  have  all  finished  drinking,   they   wait  ||  for  the  second 

course.  | 

1       Boiled  Dried  Halibut. —  |  When  the  dried  halibut  has  been  in  the 

house  a  long  time,  it  turns  red,  |  and  it  is  also  hard  and  tough.     When 

5  it  is  this  |  way,  the  woman  takes  her  kettle,  and  she  takes  ||  the 

dried  halibut  and  folds  it  into  a  ball.     Then  she  puts  it  into  the 

kettle,  j  and  she  pours  water  over  it,  and  she  only  stops  |  when  the 

top  of  the  dried  halibut  is  covered  with  water.     Then  she  takes  a  | 

•  flat  sandstone  and  puts  it  on  top  of  it,  to  keep  the  dried  halibut  under 

water.  |  Then  she  puts  it  over  the  fire.     Then  it  boils  for  a  long  time.  || 

10  When  she  thinks  that  it  is  soaked  through,  |  she  takes  it  off,  and  she 
lets  the  kettle  stay  on  the  floor  of  the  house.     Then  |  the  woman 

20  ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s  le  ha'nqas  la'xa  ha£mii'Le.  Wii,  laEmxail'wise 
ax£e'dxa  £wa/pe  qa£s  le  tsex-£i'ts  laq.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gaa'laxs  la'e 
he'x,£idaEm  £na'xwa  tslEwe'Lbsxodeda  kbveie.  Wa,  giTmese  gwal 
na'qaxs  la'e  dii'x£Id  la'xa  pE'nkwe  kla'yaxwa  k'la'wasa  qa£s 
lIe'iixsI Endes  la'xa  L.!e'£na.     Wa,  la  ts!Eq!ii'sas  la'xes  sE'mse.    Wii, 

25  laE'm  k'!es  ma'lex"bendEq  qaxs  tso'sae.  Wii,  la'La  qle'qlEbalaxa 
L!e/£na.  Wii,  glTmese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  k'lo'xu- 
lllxa  ha£madzowe'  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  le  ax£a'lllaq  la'xes  klwae'lase 
LE£wa  ts!Eba'ts!e.  Wii,  la'xaa  tse'x'£Itsa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wii,  la'x-- 
da£xwe  na'x£ida.     Wii,  gi'l£mese   £wl£la  na'x£IdExs  la'e  fiwE'lgEm- 

30  gahl  qas  he'legintsE£we. 
1  Boiled  Dried  Halibut  (K- !Ek" la'wasgaxa  xamase  ha'nxLaakwa). — 
Wii.,  he'£maaxs  la'e  ga'leda  k'la'wase;  wii,  la  L!a'L!Egudzo'x£wIda. 
Wii,  la'xaa  p!e'sa.  Wii,  la'xaa  ts!Exa'.  Wii,  he'£maaxs  la'e  he 
gwe'x-£ide,  wii,  le'da  tslEdii'qe  ax£e'dxes  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  ax£e'de- 
5  xa  k"!a'wase  qa£s  k-!o'xsEmdeq.  Wii,  la  axts!o'ts  la'xa  lia'nxxa- 
nowe.  Wii.  la  giiq!Eqa'sa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wii,  ii'l£mese  gwal  gfiqa'sa 
£wa'paxs  la'e  t!EpEya'leda  k!a'wasaxa  £wa'pe.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa 
pExsE'me  dE£na'  t!e'sEma  qa£s  paqEyl'ndes  laq  qa  wii'nsala\  osa 
k!a'wase.     Wa,  la  ha'nxLEnts  la'xes  lsgwi'le.     Wa,  la£me'se  ge'g'i- 

10  lii£Ein  maE'mdElqfila.  Wii,  gITmese  ko'taq  laE'm  pEx£wi'da  la'e 
ha'nxsEiidEq.  Wa,  a'Kmxaa'wise  la  ha£ne'la  ha'nx'Lanowaxs  la'e 
ax£e'deda  tslEdii'qaxes    ts!Eba'ts!e    qa£s    k!iixts!6'desa  L!e'£na  laq. 


boas]  RECIPES  365 

takes  her  oil-dish  and  pours  oil  into  it.  |  Then  she  takes  a  small  dish  13 
and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she  sits.  |  At  last  she  takes  her 
tongs  and  takes  out  the  flat  piece  of  ||  sandstone,  and  she  puts  it  15 
down  at  the  end  of  the  fire,  j  Then  she  also  takes  out  with  the  tongs 
what  has  been  cooked,  and  she  puts  it  into  the  |  small  dish.     She 
puts  down  her  tongs,  and  takes  what  |  has  been  cooked  by  her  and 
spreads  it  out.     She  breaks  it  into  pieces  j  of  the  right  size  for  our 
mouths.     As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  ||  she  takes  her  food-mat  and  20 
spreads  it  out  before  those  |  who  will  eat  with  her,  and  she  puts  the 
small  dish  on  it.     Then  she  pours  |  oil  into  the  oil-dish:  and  she  also 
puts  it  at  the  outer  corner  |  into  the  small  dish.     Then  (those  who 
are  going  to  eat)  drink  fresh  water:  and  after  they  finish  |  drinking, 
they  begin  to  eat.     After    they   finish    eating,  ||   they  drink  water.  25 
Then  the  woman  takes  the  small  dish  and  |  empties  into  the  kettle 
what  is  left  over.     Then  she  pours  |  water  into  (the  dish)  and  washes 
it  out.     When  it  is  clean,  |  she  pours  fresh  water  into  it,  and  she  puts 
it  again   before   those  |  who    have    eaten.      Then   they  wash    their 
hands;  and  ||    after   they  have  finished,   they  wait  for   the   second  30 
course.     That  is  |  all  about  this.   | 

Scorched    Halibut- Skin. — When  |  the    skin    has    been    dried,    the  l 
woman  just  takes  it  down  from  where  it  has  been  hanging,  |  in  the 


Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  la'logume    qa£s    le    kii'galllas   la'xes  k!wae'lase.  13 
Wa,  la'wIsLa  ax£e'dxes  klipLa'la  qa£s  k!ip!e'des  la'xa  pa 'qEya£ye 
dE£na' t!e'sEma.    Wa,  la  k!ip!a'lllas  la'xa  ona'lisases  lEgwI'le.    Wa,  15 
la'xaa  k-!ip!e'ts  la'xes   ha="me'xsllasE£we  qa£s   le  k!Ipts!o'ts   la'xa 
la'logume.      Wa,    la    g-eg-alilxes  klipLii'la.      Wa,    la    dii'x-idxes 
ha£me'xsIlasE£we    qaEs    da'Hdeq.      Wa,    la    k!o'k!QpsE'ndeq    qa 
a'£mese  ha£ya'ladzEqEla  la'xEns  sE'msex.     Wa,  g  i'h'mese  gwa'lExs 
la'e    ax£e'dxes    ha£madzowe'     le'£wa£ya    qa£s    LEpdzamollles  la'xes  20 
hamo'tLe.     Wa,  la  ha'ndzotsa  la'logume  laq.     Wii,  la  k!ii'nxts!otsa 
L!e'£na  la'xa  ts!Eba'ts!e.     Wii,  la'xaa  katslo'ts  lax  Lla'saneqwasa 
la'logume.     Wa,    la    naxeIdxa    a'lta    ewa'pa.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese    gwal 
na'qaxs    la'e   ha£mx£I'da.      Wa,    gi'h'mese    gwal    ha£ma'pExs   la'e 
na'x£idxa   £wa'pe.     Wa,    le'da    ts!Eda'qe    ax£e'dxa   la'logume    qa£s  25 
qEpstE'ndeses  ha£msa'£ye  la'xa  ha'nx'Lanowe.     Wa,  la  guxts'.5'tsa 
£wa'pe    laq    qa£s    ts'.o'xug'indeq.      Wa,    gl'h'mese    e'g'igaxs    la'e 
guxtslo'tsa     a'lta    ewap     laq.      Wa,    la    xwe'laqa    k-ax'dzamolilas 
la'xa  ha£ma'pde.      Wii,   la'x-da£xwe   ts te'nts !Enxewida.     Wa,  gi'l- 
£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  awE'lgEmgalil  qa£s  he'legintsE£we.     Wii,  laF.'m  30 
gwal  hi'xeq. 

Scorched  Halibut-Skin   (Ts!Eiiku  Lies). — Wa,  gi'l£Em  lE'm£wEmx£-  1 
ideda    Llesaxs   la'eda    tslEda'qe    a'Em    axa'xod    la'qexs  ge'xwalae 


366  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

3  rear  of  the  house.  She  takes  her  tongs,  and  takes  up  |  the  skin  with 
them,  by  the  middle,  in  this  maimer:  «=— — — ^Jll)  Then  she  blis- 

5  ters  ||  its  edge  on  the  flesh  side;  and  \T~~~~~  --^v.  when  all  the 
fat  on  its  side  begins  to  cook,  |  then  ~~~^  she  blisters 

the  inner  side;  |  and  when  all  its  fat  ^^  j —  begins     to 

cook,  she  turns  it  over  and  |  scorches  — HI —  its  back.     As 

soon  as  it  is  covered  with  blisters,  |  it  is  done.     Then  the  woman 

10  takes  her  food-mat,  ||  and  she  takes  the  scorched  skin  and  puts 
it  on  a  (mat) ;  and  she  rolls  it  up  |  and  treads  on  it,  to  make 
it  soft,  and  also  that  the  |  scorched  parts  may  come  off.  After 
she  has  trodden  on  it  for  a  long  time,  |  it  is  done.  Then  she  opens 
it  out,  and  spreads  out   the  mat  that  she  has  been  using.  |  Then 

15  she  strikes  the  scorched  skin  on  the  middle  of  the  mat,  ||  so  that 
the  scorched  part  comes  off ;  then  she  stops.  |  Then  she  shakes  the  mat, 
so  that  the  scorched  part  comes  off.  Then  she  breaks  into  pieces 
the  |  scorched  skin  and  puts  them  down  on  the  food-mat.  |  Immedi- 
ately they  drink  water,  and  eat  it  quickly,  while  |  the  scorched  skin 

20  is  still  hot;  for  as  soon  as  it  gets  cold,  ||  it  becomes  hard.  After  they 
finish  eating,  |  they  drink  fresh  water.  Scorched  skin  is  not  given 
at  a  feast.  |  Only  the  owner  eats  it  when  it  is  scorched.  |  They  do  not 
dip  scorched  skin  into  oil,  because  it  is  very  |  fat.     That  is  all.  || 

3  la'xa  o'gwlwalllasa  go'kwe  qa£s  ax£e'dexesk!ipLii'la  qa£s  k!ip!e'des 
lax  nEgo'ya£yasa  Lle'se  ga  gwa'leg'a  (fg.).  Wii,  la  pExa'x  ewEn- 
5  xa£yas  la'xa  E'lsadza£ye.  Wii,  g1'l£mese  £na'xwa  la  niEdE'lx£wIde 
tsE'ntsEnxunxa£yasexs  la'e  pEx£I'dEx  6'tslawas.  Wa,  gi'Pmese 
£wl£la  la  mEdF.'lxewIde  tsE'nxwa£yasexs  la'e  le'x£IdEq  qa£s  ts!Ex£I'- 
dex  awl'ga£yas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  la  hamE'lgEdzSdeda  pE'nsaxs  la'e 
Llo'pa.    Wa,  la  ax£e'deda  tslEda'qaxes  ha£niadzowe'  le'£wa£ya.    Wa, 

10  la  ax£e'dxa  tslE'nkwe  L'.e'sa  qa£s  ])EgE(lz6'dcs  la'qexs  la'e  le'x£undEq. 
Wa,  la  t!e'p!edEq  ([a  pe'x£wldes.  Wa,  he'£mis  la  lawii'lisa 
tsla'xmote  axdzEwe'q.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  ge'gllll  tle'paqexs  la'e 
gwa'la.  Wii,  la  da'l£IdEq.  Wa,  la'xaa  LEpIa'lIlaxaaxes  axEleda  le'- 
£wa£ye.    Wa,  la  xusa'sa  tslE'nkwe  Lies  lax  nEgE(lza'£yasa  le'£wa£ye. 

15  Wa,  g-l'lemese  £wl£laweda  ts!a'x'motaxs  la'e  gwa'la.  Wa,  la 
k'!il£edxa  le£wa£ye  qa  lawayesa  tsla'xmote.  Wa,  la  k!o'k!iipsEnd- 
xa  ts'.E'nkwe  L'.e'sa  qa£s  axdzo'dales  la'xa  ha£madzowe'  le'£wa£ya. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£mese  na'x£ldxa  £wa'pe  qa£s  ha'labale  ha£mx£I'dqexs 
he'£mae  a'les  tslE'lkweda  tslE'nkwe  L!e'sa,  qaxs  g'i'Kmae  wudEX'- 

20  £I'da,  wii,  la  p!e's£Ida.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'e 
nii'x£idxa  a'lte  £wa'pa.  Wa,  la'xaa  k"!es  klwe'ladzEma  tslE'nkwe 
L!e'sa;  le'xa£meda  axno'gwadas  ha£ma'pqexs  tslE'nkwae.  Wii, 
la'xaa  k!es  ts'.Epa'sa  ts'.E'nkwe  Lies  la'xa  L!e'£na,  qaxs  a'lae 
tsE'nxwa.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 


boas]  RECIPES  .'567 

Poked  Halibut- Skin. — When  the  skin  has  been  |  kept  for  a  long  1 
time,  and  its  fat  turns  red,  it  is  not  |  good  to  be  scorched.  When  the 
owner  wants  to  eat  it,  |  she  takes  her  kettle  and  pours  water  ||  into  5 
it  until  it  is  half  full.  Then  she  puts  it  on  the  fire.  |  She  takes  down 
the  skin  from  the  place  where  she  has  hung  it  up,  in  the  rear  of  the 
house.  |  Then  she  takes  her  fish-knife  and  cuts  the  skin  into  pieces, 
in  |  this  manner:  |    «;;— — p-~^^ 

As  soon   as  she  >d~     [*">--,  finishes  cutting  it,  she  waits  for 

the  water  to  boil  ||  T~     |   J-3  in  the  kettle.     As  soon  as  it  be-  10 

gins  to  boil,  |  she  —  puts  the  pieces  of  skin  into  it; 

and  when  (the  skin)  is  all  in  (the  kettle),  she  |  takes  her  tongs  and 
pokes  down  on  top  of  the  skin,  so  as  to  |  keep  it  under  the  water  in 
which  it  is  being  boiled.  Therefore  |  it  is  called  "poked  skin." 
After  it  lias  been  boiling  for  a  long  time,  ||  when  she  thinks  that  it  is  15 
soaked,  she  takes  it  off  of  the  fire.  [  Then  she  takes  her  small  dish 
and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.  |  Then  she  takes 
her  tongs  and  takes  the  poked  skin  out  of  the  water,  and  |  puts  it 
into  the  small  dish.  As  soon  as  it  is  all  out  of  the  kettle,  |  she  drinks 
fresh  water,  when  it  is  not  ||  in  the  morning;  but  when  it  is  morning.  20 
she  rinses  her  mouth.  As  soon  as  |  she  has  finished  drinking,  she 
eats  it  I  while  it  is  still  hot;  for  when  it  gets  cold,  they  can  not  |  bite 

Poked  Halibut-Skin  (Q!o'dExu  Lies). — Wa,  g-i'Pmese  la  ga'la  la  1 
axe'lakwa  Lle'saxs  la'e  L!a'x£wlde  tsEnxwa£yas.  Wa,  la  k!e's 
la  ek%  lax  ts!EX'a'sE£we.  Wa,  gi'Pniese  ha£mae'xsdeda  axno'- 
gwadasexs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  ha'nxxanowe  qa£s  guxtslo'desa  £wa/pe 
laq  qa  uEgo'yalesexs  la'e  ha'nxLEnts  la'xes  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  la  5 
axa'xodxa  Lle'se  la'xes  ge'xwalaa'se  la'xa  o'gwlwalllasa  go'kwe. 
Wa,  la  ax-e'dxes  xwaLa'yowe  qa£s  t!o't!Ets!Endexa  L!e'se  ga 
gwalega  (Jig.). 

Wa,   gl'hmese    gwal    tlo'saqexs  la'e    e'sEla  qa    rnEdElx£wI'desa 
£wa'pe  lage'tslaxa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wa,  g  i'l'mese  mEdElx-wI'dExs  10 
la'e  axstE'ntsa  tlEwe'kwe  Lies  laq.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wi=la£staxs  la'e 
ax£e'dxes    klipLa'la    qa£s    qlo'dEiisales    la'xa  6'kuya£ye  Lle'sa    qa 
ls'iises  la'xa  £wa'pal;ises    ha£me'xsIlasE£we.     Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilas 
Le'gadEs  qlo'dEkwe    L!e'sa.     Wa,  la£me'se   ge'gilIl£Em  maE'mdEl- 
qula.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  k'5'taq  laE'm  pe'x£widaxs  la'e  hanxsE'ndEq.  15 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  la'logume  qa£s  ha'ngallles  la'xes  klwae'lase.     Wa. 
la  ax£e'dxes  klipLa'la  qa£s  kMipusta'lexa  qlo'dEkwe  L'.e'sa  qa£s  le 
k!ipts!a'las  la'xa  la'logume.     Wa,  gi'I£mese  £wi£losta  la'xa  ha'nx- 
Lanowaxs   la'e   he'x£idaEm   na'x£idxa    a'lta   £wa'pa;  yixs   k!e'sae 
gaa'la.      Wa'xe    gaa'laxs    la'e    ts!Ewe'L!Exoda.      Wa,    gi'l£mese  20 
gwa'lExs  la'e  na'x£kla.     Wii,  lawI'sLa  ha'yalomala  ha£mx£i'dqexs 
he'£mae  a'les   ts!E'lqwe,    qaxs  gi'l£mae   wudEX£I'da,    wa,  la  k!es 
q!e'q!ak!emaxs  la'e  p!e's£Ida.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  ha£ma'pa  la'xes 


368  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

it,  because  it  is  hard.     When  she  finishes  eating,  |  taking  it  up  with 

25  her  hands  as  she  eats,  she  puts  down  her  ]]  small  food-dish  and  pours 

out   (the  contents)  outside  of  the  house;  for  they  do  |  not  often  eat 

all  the  poked  skin,  |  and  also  it  is  not  good  when  it  is  boiled  again 

after  it  has  been  cold.  |  Therefore  it  is  only  thrown  away.     When  | 

the  woman  comes  in  again  into  her  house,  she  pours  water  into  (her 

30  small  dish)  ||  and  washes  it  out;  and  when  it  is  clean,  |  she  pours 

fresh  water  into  it,  and  they  all  wash  their  hands;  |  and  after  they 

have  finished,  they  do  not  oat  a  second  course.     Sometimes  the  old 

people  I  eat  with  spoons  the  liquid  of  the  poked  salmon,  and  they 

35  eat  |  dried  halibut  raw  and  dry  with  the  poked  skin.  ||  After  they 

have  eaten,  they  drink  fresh  water.  |  This  also  is  not  given  at  a  feast 

given  by  the  chief  to  his  tribe ;  |  only  the  owner  eats  it ;  and  they  do 

not  I  dip  it  into  oil,  for  it  is  really  fat.     That  is  [  all  about  this.  || 

1       Boiled  Halibut-Edges. — When  |  the  (halibut-)  edges  begin  to  be  dry, 

and  when  there  are  many  of  them,  |  they  are  tied  in  the  middle  with 

narrow  strips  of  cedar-bark,  and  they  hang  in  the  |  rear  of  the  fire  of 

5  the  house.     Then  the  owner  invites  ||  the  chiefs  in.     As  soon  as  they 

are  all  in  the  house,  the  woman  |  takes  a  kettle  and  puts  it  down  on 

the  side  of  the  I  fire  nearest  the  door.     She  takes  down  sometimes 


xa/maxts  !anaena£yaxs  ha£ma'pae,  wa,  la  ka'g  ililxc-s  ha£maa'ts!eda 

25  la'logume  qa£s    Ie  qEpEWE'lsaq    la'xa    Lla'samVyases  go'kwe  qaxs 

k!e'sae  qluna'la   £wi£la   haemx£I'dxa  q!o'dEkwe    Lle'sa.     Wa,  he'- 

6misexs  k'le'sae  ek"  lax    e'tlede    liii'nxi.Entsoxs    la'e   wiidEX'£I'da. 

Wa,    he'£mis    la'g'ilas  I'ehi    ts!EX£I'dayowe.     Wit,  gi'l£mese    ga'x 

edeLeda    tsteda'qe    la'xes    go'kwaxs    la'e    guxtslo'tsa   £wa'pe  laq 

30  qa£s    tslo'xugindexes    la'logume.      Wa,    gi'h'mese    e'gigaxs    la'e 

giixtslo'tsa  a'lta  £wap  la'qexs    la'e   £wlela  ts!E'nts!Enx£w!da.     Wa, 

gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  k!es  he'leginda.    Wit,  le'da  qlulsqu'h'yakwe 

£nal£nE'mp!Ena  yo'sax   ewa'palasa   cilo'dEkwe  Lle'sa  loxs  masaasa 

kla'wase    klidx-    a'Ein    lE'mxwa    la'xa    qlo'dEkwe    Lle'sa.     Wii, 

35  gi'1-mese    gwHl    ha£ma'pExs    la'e    na'x£Idxa    a'lta    £wa'pa.      Wa, 

k!e's-i:mxaa   ha/mg'llayo  la'xa  klwe'laseda  gl'gama£yaxes  g'o'kii- 

lote.      Le'xaEm    ha£ma'pqeda    axno'gwadiis.      Wii,    la'xaa    k'!es 

ts'.E'pEla  la'xa  L!e'£na  qaxs   a'laklalae    tsfi'nxwa.     Wa,  laE'mxaa 

gwill  la'xeq. 

1      Boiled    Halibut -Edges     (Ha'nxLaak"   xwa'xusEnxe£). — Wii,    he'- 

£maaxs  la'e  lE'mx£w!deda  xwa'xiisEnxa£yaxs  la'e    q!e'nEma  la'xes 

lae'na£ye  ylLo'yolaxa    ts!e'q!e    dEiia'sa.      Wii,    la  te'kiihiLEla    lax 

o'gwlwalllasa   lEgwi'lasa    g'o'kwe.     Wii,  le'da   axno'gwadiis  Le'£la- 

5  laxa    g-ii'xsa.     Wa,   gi'l£mese   gax    £wi£laeLElaxs  la'eda  ts!E(la'qc 

ax£e'dxa    ha'nx'Lanowe  qa£s    le   ha'ngalilaq  la'xa  obe'xLalalllasa 

lEgwi'le.     Wii,  la  axa'xodxa  £na'l£nEmp!Ena  sEk'Ia'xidoyola  xwa'- 


boas]  RECIPES  369 

five  bundles  |  of  edges  tied  in  the  middle,  and  she  puts  the  bundles    8 
into  the  kettle.  |  She  does  not  untie  the  tying  of  narrow  cedar-bark  hi 
the  middle.     It  ||  remains  in  the  wa}^  it  was  tied  into  bundles.     Then  10 
she  pours  water  into  the  (kettle) ;  |  and  when  it  is  half  full  of  water, 
she  takes  an  |  old  mat  and  covers  the  top  with  it.     As  soon  as  she 
has  done  so,  [  she  puts  it  on  the  fire.     As  soon  as  this  is  finished,  | 
the  chiefs  begin  to  sing  the  songs  of  olden  times;  but  the  ||  woman  15 
takes  her  dishes  and  puts  them  down  at  the  place  where  she  is  sit- 
ting, |  and  also  the  tongs.     Everything  is  ready,  and  |  (what  is  in 
the  kettle)  has  been  boiling  on  the  fire  for  a  long  time.     After  four  | 
songs  have  been  sung,  the  guests  stop  singing.  |  Then  the  kettle  is 
taken  off  of  the  fire;  and  the  woman  takes  her  tongs,  [|  and  takes  off  20 
the  old  mat  covering  and  puts  it  down  at  the  |  door-side  of  the  fire. 
Then  sire  takes  up  with  the  tongs  the  middle  of  one  bundle  of  |  edges 
and  puts  it  into  one  dish.     She  |  continues  doing  so  with  the  others, 
and  puts  each  into  one  dish.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  all  out  of  the  water, 
she  unties  the  narrow  ||  strip  of  cedar-bark  with  which  they  were  tied  25 
in  the  middle,  and  finally  she  divides  them  into  the  several  dishes.  | 
As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  a  food-mat  and  |  spreads  it 
before  the  guests.     Then  she  puts  the  dishes  |  on  it,  and  she  gives 
them  water.     After  they  finish  drinking,  |  they  begin  to  eat.     They 


xusEnxa£ya    qa£s    qu'lxts!odes    la'xa    ha'nxLanowe.      Wa,    laE'm    8 
k!es   giidEX£I'dEX   yiLo'yoyas   ts!e'q!a  dEna'sa.     Wa,  laE'm  hex- 
sa'Em  gwa'laxs   la'e    qu'lxtsloya.     Wa,  le  gtiqteqa'sa  £wa/pe  laq.  10 
Wa,    la'me'se    ne'lkEyax-£kla£meda   swa'pe    la'qexs    la'e    ax£e'dxa 
k!a'k!obane  qa£s  ae'k-!e  na'sEyinta  laq.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs 
la'e    ha'nxLEnts    la'xes    lEgwI'le.     Wii,   gi'Pmese    gwa'lExs    la'e 
dE'nx£Ideda  glgi'gama£yasa  gi'ldzE£yala  q!E'mdEma.    Wii,  la'Leda 
tslEda'qe  ax'e'dxes  lo'Elqlwe  qa£s  ga'xe  ax'a'lllas  la'xes  klwae'lase;  15 
wa,    he'£misa    k!ipLa'la.     Wa,    la£nie'se    £na'xwa    gwa'lllExs    la'e 
ge'gihl   maE'mdElquleda  ha'nxLala.     Wa,  gi'Pmese    mo'sgEmeda 
qlE'mdEme  dE'nxeedayosa    klwe'laxs   la'e  gwal  dE'nxEla.     Wa,  la 
h&nxsanoweda   hanxLanowaxs    laeda   ts!Edaqe  ax£edxes  k'lipLala 
qa£s  k!ip!i'des  la'xa   k!a'k-!obane  nayi'ma  qa£s  k!ip!a'liles  la'xa  20 
ona'llsases    lEgwI'le.     Wa,   la   k'libo'yodxa   £nE'mxkloyala    xwa'- 
xtisEnxa£ya    qa£s    k!tpts!5'des    la'xa   fnEme'xLa    lo'q!wa.     Wa,  la 
ha£na'l  he  gwe'gilaxa  wao'kwe  axts!a'las  la'xa  -nEme'xLa  lo'qlwa. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wI£lostaxs  la'e  gQdEx£I'dxa  yae'Loyuwexdas  ts!e'q!a 
dEna'sa.      Wa,    lawI'sLe    ts!a'lasi£lalas    la'xa    waS'kwe    lo'Elq!wa.  25 
Wii,  gl'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  ha£madzowe'  le'£wa£ya  qaes 
le  LEpdzamo'lfias    la'xa    klwe'le.     We,  la  k'ii'dzodaslasa  lo'Elqlwe 
laq.     Wa,  la  tse'x-£Itsa  £wa'pe    laq.     Wa,  g-l'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs 
la'e  ha£mx£I'da.     Wii,  laE'm   xa'max'ts'.ana  da'x'£Idxes  ha£ma'£ye 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 24 


370  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

30  take  up  the  food  with  their  hands  ||  and  bite  off  the  ends  of  the  long 
edges.  After  they  have  finished  |  eating  it,  they  drink  water,  and 
they  carry  home  for  their  wives  what  is  left.  |  Then  they  carry  it 
home  when  they  leave  the  |  house;  and  they  wash  their  hands  in 
their  own  houses.  |  No  second  course  is  given  with  this,  for  it  is  a 

35  valuable  food  for  feasts,  for  ||  this  kind  is  very  costly;  and  they  do 
not  dip  it  into  oil,  for  |  it  is  very  fat.  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Roasted  Halibut-Edges. — When  |  the  (halibut-)skin  is  half  dry,  the 
edge  is  torn  off.  |  Then  it  is  tied  in  the  middle  with  narrow  strips  of 
cedar-bark,  and  is  hung  up  in  the  |  rear  of  the  house;  Sometimes  the 
5  woman  and  her  ||  husband  desire  to  eat  of  it.  Then  the  woman 
requests  her  |  husband  to  make  roasting-tongs.  Immediately  |  he 
shaves  down  a  piece  of  red  pine,  and  splits  it  in  the  same  way  as  | 
fire-tongs  (are  split) ;  only  this  is  different,  that  below  it  has  a  sharp 
point  |  where  the  top  of  the  fire-tongs  is.     Then  the  woman  takes 

10  narrow  strips  of  ||  cedar-bark  and  ties  them  around  it  one  span  of 
our  fingers  |  from  the  sharp  lower  end.  When  this  is  |  done,  the 
woman  takes  the  half-dried  edges  |  and  puts  them  in  coils  into  the 
roasting-tongs,    in    this    manner:1     As    |    soon    as     they     are     all 

15  in  the  roasting-tongs,  she  ties  a  narrow  strip  of  ||  cedar-bark 
around    the    top,    so     that    the     tongs     may    not     spread     when 

30  qa£sq!Ex-ba'£yexa  g'i'lsgilt !e  xwa'xiisEnxa£ya.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal 
ha£ma'pqexs  la'e  na'x£ldxa  £wa/pe.  Wa,  la  mo'tledxes  E'nxsa£ye 
qae's  gEgEnE'me.  Wa,  laE'm  da'laqexs  la'e  ho'quwEls  la'xa 
go'kwe.  Wa,  a'l£mese  ts!E'nts!Enx-wId  la'xes  gigo'kwe.  Wa, 
laE'm    k'les    he'legintsE£wa    qaxs    £wa'lasae    k!we'ladzEma    qaxs 

35  la'xulae  gwe'x'sdEmas.  Wa,  la  k!es  tste'pEla  la'xa  L!e'£na  qaxs 
a'lae  la  tsE'nxwa.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Eoasted  Halibut-Edges  (L!o'bEku  xwa'xusEnxe£). — Wa,  he'£maaxs 
la'e  k'!a'yax£wldeda  Lle'saxs  la'e  xwaso'yuweda  xwa'xQsEnxa£ye. 
Wa,  la  yiLo'yotsosa  ts!e'q!e  dEiia'sa  qa£s  tex£waLE'lodayowe  lax 
o'gwiwalllasa  g"o'kwe.  Wii,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Eneda  tslEda'qe  LE£wis 
5  la'£wunEine  ha£mae'xsd  laq.  Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  axkla'laxes 
la'£wunEine  qa  Llo'psayogwllesex  L!o'psaya.  Wa,  he'x-£itla£mese 
k'!a'x£widxa  wuna'gule  qa£s  xo'x£wkle  qa  yu'wes  la  gwe'x'soxda 
k'lipLa'lax.  Wa,  le'x'a£mes  ogiiqaiayosexs  e'xbaeda  bE'nba£yas, 
yix   o'xta£yasa  klipLii'la.      Wa,  le'da   ts!Ecla'qe    ax£e'dxa  ts!e'q!e 

10  dEna'sa  qa£s  yil£I'des  la'xa  £nE'mp!Enke  lii'xEns  q!wa'q!waxts!a- 
na£yex,  ga'g'iLEla  la'xa  e'x-ba  la'x  bE'nba£yas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
gwa'lExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  k'!a'yaxwe  xwa'xiisEnxa£ya 
qa£s  le  q!E'lxts!odalas  la'xa  iJo'psayowe  ga  gwa'lega  (fig.).1  Wii, 
g-i'l£mese   £wl£la  la  axtsla'  la'xa  Llo'psayaxs  la'e  yil£e'tsa  ts!e'q!e 

15  dEna's  lax  6'xta£yas  qa  kle'ses  dEXEto'x£w!deda  Llo'psayowaxs  la'e 

1  See  figure  on  p.  344. 


boas]  RECIPES  371 

they  |  get  hot.     Then  she  takes  thin  cedar-sticks  and  |  puts  them  on  1(1 
lengthwise,  one  on  each  side  of  the  end  [  of  the  edges,  and  she  puts  a 
stick  crosswise,  one  at  each  end.  |  Then  she  puts  it  up  by  the  side  of 
the  lire,  and  it  is  not  long  before  she  turns  it  around.  ||  As  soon  as  it  20 
is  done,  the  woman  takes  her  food-  |  mat  and  spreads  it  out  at  the 
place  where  she  is  sitting.     Then  she  takes  the  |  roasted  edges  and 
puts  them  on  it  and  takes  them  out  of  the  tongs.  |  Then  they  drink 
water.     After  they  have  finished  drinking  water,   |  they  take  long 
strips  of  the  edges  and  bite  them  off  from  the  end.  ||  After  they  have  25 
finished  eating  them,  the  woman   takes  her  small  dish  |  and  pours 
some  water  into   it,  and  they  wash  their  hands.   |  After  they  have 
done  so,  the  woman  puts  away  what  is  left  over,  |  and  they  drink 
water.     It  is  not  put  into  a  |  dish  when  the}-  eat  it;  and  they  do  not 
dip  it  into  oil,  for  it  is  ||  very  fat;  and  also  this  is  not  given  to  the  30 
tribe  at  a  feast.  [  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Dried  Halibut-Head. — When  it  is  winter  |  and  they  can  not  catch  1 
halibut,   the  wife  of  the  |  fisherman  takes  dried  halibut-head  and 
soaks  it  in  bilge-water  |  of  the  fishing-canoe  of  her  husband.     After 
it  has  been  soaking  for  four  days  ||  in  the  fishing-canoe,  the  woman  5 
takes  her  kettle  |  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.     Then  she 


ts!E'lx£wida.     Wii,  la   ax£e'dxa  wi'swiiltowe  xoku  k!waxLa£wa  qa£s  16 
k'!aat!e'des.     Wii,  laE'm  wa'x'SEnxasyeda  £na't£nEnits!aqe  lax  o'ba- 
£yasa  xwa'xusEnxa£ye.     Wa,  la  ge'gebEntsa  £naTnEmts!aqe.     Wa, 
la£me'se  Lano'lisaq  la'xes  lEgwI'le.     Wii,  k!e'st!a  gii'laxs  la'e  le'x£I- 
dEq.     Wii,  gi'b'mese  l!o'pexs  la'e   ax£e'deda   tshida'qaxes  ka£ma-  20 
dzowe'  le/£wa£ya  qa£s  LEp!a'lItes  la'xes  k'.wae'lase.     Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa 
iJo'bskwe  xwa'xusEnxa;va  qa£s  axdzo'des  la'qexs  la'e  x'Ek"  !EX-£IdEq. 
Wa,  la'x-daexwe    na'x£Idxa   £wape.     Wii,    g  iT'mese    gwal    naqaxs 
la'e  dax'-Idxa  g'i'lsg  ilt  !EnaIa  xwaxusEnxe5  qa£s  cj!Egilba£yeq.     Wii, 
g'i'1-mese  gwal  ha£ma'pqexs  la'e  axEe'deda  tslEda'qaxes  la'logume  25 
qaes   guxts!o'desa  -wa'pe  laq.     Wa,   la'x da'xwe  ts!E'nts!Enx£w!da. 
Wa, gi'hmese gwa'lExs la'eda  ts teda'qe g  e'xaxes ha'mxsiV'ye.     Wii, 
la'x-£da£xwe    na'x£Idxa    £wa'pe.     AVii,    laF.'m    k-!es  axtslo'yo  la'xa 
lo'qlwiixs    ha£ma'yae    loxs    k'!e'sae    ts'.E'pEla    la'xa    L!e'c"na  qaxs 
xE'nLElae  tsE'nxwa.     Wii,  la'xaa  k!es  klwe'ladzEina  laxa  g'o'ku-  30 
lote.     Wii,  laE'm  gwal  la/xeq. 

Dried  Halibut-Head  (Ma'leqasde). — Wii,  he'£maaxs  la'e  tslawfi'n-  1 
xa,  la  kleo's    la  gwEEyo'Lasxa  p!a'£ye.     Wa,  le'da  gEUE'masa  lo'- 
qlwenoxwe  ax="e'dxes  ma'leqasde   qa£s  le  t!e'laq  la'xa  to'xsas  lo'- 
gwatsliises    la'£wunEme.      Wii,    he'tla    la    mo'p!Enxwa£se    '"na'liis 
t!e'ltalExs   la'xa   lo'gwatsliixs  la'e    ax£e'deda  ts!Edii'qaxes  hii'nx-  5 
Lanowe  qa£s  ha'ngaille  la'xa  ona'lisases  lEgwI'le.     Wii,  la  ax£e'd- 


372  ETHNOLOGY    OP   THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ann.  35 

7  takes  |  her  small  basket  by  the  handle  and  carries  it  out  of  the  house, 
and  she  |  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fishing-canoe.  Then  she 
takes  out  of  the  water  the  dried  heads  and  |  puts  them  into  the  small 

10  basket.  After  it  is  full,  she  ||  takes  it  up  by  the  handle  and  carries 
it  into  the  house.  Then  |  she  takes  out  the  dried  heads  and  puts 
them  into  the  kettle.  |  As  soon  as  it  is  full,  she  pours  water  into  it; 
and  when  |  it  is  filled  with  water,  she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire.  It 
is  I  left  to  boil  for  a  long  time,  and  then  the  kettle  is  taken  off  the 

15  fire.  ||  Then  the  woman  takes  her  dish  and  takes  her  |  long-handled 
ladle,  and  she  dips  up  the  dried  heads  and  |  puts  them  into  the  dish. 
As  soon  as  they  are  all  out  of  the  water,  she  drinks  |  water;  and  after 
she  finishes  drinking,  she  takes  up  with  her  hands  |  the  boiled  dried 

20  heads  and  puts  them  into  hor  mouth.  ||  Then  she  begins  to  eat.  This 
is  called  "eating  dried  heads."  Then  |  she  throws  into  the  fire  the 
bones  that  remain.  After  she  has  finished,  |  she  again  pours  into 
the  kettle  the  food  that  has  been  left  over.  |  She  pours  some  fresh 
water  into  the  food-dish  that  she  had  used.  |  Then  she  washes  her 

25  hands.  After  she  has  finished,  she  puts  away  the  ||  kettlo.  The 
remains  of  the  dried  heads  |  are  in  the  kettlo  in  the  water.  She  is 
going  to  put  them  on  the  fire  again  |  when  she  feels  hungry,  for  heads 
do  not  get  spoiled  even  if  they  are  |  put  on  the  fire  ten  times.  Then 
she  drinks  |  fresh  water.     The  dried  halibut-head  is  not  used  for 

7  xes  la'laxame  qa£s  le  kMo'qEWElsElaq  la'xes  go'kwe  qa£s  le  hano'- 
dzElsas  la'xa  lo'gwatsle.  Wa,  la  ax£wustE'ndxa  ma'leqasde  qa£s 
axts!o'dales    la'xa   la'laxame.     Wa,  gi'l£mese    qo't!axs   la'e  k'!o'- 

10  qulsaq  qa£s  le  k!o'gwlLElaq  la'xes  go'kwe.  Wii,  la£me'se 
axwultsla'laxa  ma'leqasde  qa£s  le  &xts!a'las  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe. 
Wa,  g  i'Pmese  qo'tlaxs  la'e  gugEqa'sa  £wape  laq.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
qo'tlaxa  £wa'paxs  la'e  ha'nxi.Ents  la'xes  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la£me'se 
ge'gilll  maE'mdElqulaxs  la'e  ha'nxsanoweda  ha'nxLanowe.     Wa, 

15  la£me'sa  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxes  to'qlwe  qa£s  ax£e'dexes  £wa'lase  g'i'l- 
tlE.xLala  ka'tslEnaqa  qafs  xElostEndexa  ma'leqasde  qaEs  le  xe'1- 
tslalas  la'xa  lo'q!we.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  £wi£lostaxs  la'e  na'x-idxa 
£wa'pe.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  da'xp£itses  e£eyasowe' 
la'xa  ha'nxLaak"  ma'leqasde  qa£s  ts!o'q!uses  la'xes  sE'mse.     Wa, 

20  laE'mha£mx£I'da.  Wa,  he'Em  i.e'gadEs  niEma'leqasde.  Wa,  laE'm 
ts  lEXLa'lases  xa'xmote  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs 
la'e  xwe'laqa  guxts!o'tses  ha£mxsa'£ye  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe.  Wii, 
la  guxts!o'tsa  a'lta  £wap  la'xes  ha£maats!e'x-de  lo'qlwa.  Wa, 
la    ts!E'nts!Eiix£wida.      Wa,     gi'Pmese    gwa'lExs     la'e    g'e'xaxa 

25  ha'nxxanowe.  Wa,  laE'm  ge£sta'leda  ha£mxsa'£ye  ma'leqasde 
la'xa  ha'nx'Lanowe.  Wa,  laE'm  a'Em  e'tledEl  ha'nx£iEndLEq 
qo  po'sq!Ex-£idLo,  qaxs  kie'sae  £ya'xsEmx£IdExs  wa'x,£mae  nEqa'- 
p!Ena  ha'nx'LEndayoweda  ma'leqasde.  Wii,  lawI'sLa  na'x£idxa 
a'lta  ewa'pa.     Wa,    laE'm    k'!es   Le'£lalaynweda   ma'leqasde    a'Em 


boas]  BECIPES  373 

inviting   (to  a  feast).  ||  Only  the  owners — that  is,  the  woman,  her  30 
husband,  |  and  her  children — eat  it;  and  this  also  is  not  dipped  into 
oil.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Dried   Halibut-Stomach,  boiled  |  and  soaked. —  (The  dried  halibut-  1 
stomach)  is  soaked  the  same  number  of  days  |  as  the  halibut-head, 
which  is  soaked  forfour  |  days  in  the  bilge-water  of  the  fishing-canoe 
of  the  fisherman.  ||  The  dried  stomach  is  also  soaked  in  the  fishing-  5 
canoe.  |  After  it  has  been  in  the  canoe  for  four  days,  it  swells  up.  | 
Then  the  woman  again  takes  her  small  basket  by  the  handle  and  puts  | 
it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fishing-canoe.     She  takes  the  dried  | 
stomach  out  of  the  bdge-water  of  the  fishing-canoe  and  puts  it  into 
her  small  basket.  [|  When  it  is  full,  she  takes  it  up  by  the  handle  and  10 
carries  it  |  into  her  house.     Then  she  puts  it  down  in  front  of  the 
fire.  |  Then  she  takes  her  small  kettle  and  washes  it  out.     As  soon 
as  |  it  is  clean,  she  takes  out  of  the  small  basket  tho  dried  stomach 
and  |  puts  it  into  the  small  kettle.     Then  she  pours  water  into  it 
until  ||  it  is  full,  and  puts  it  on  the  fire.     She  does  not  let  it  |  boil  15 
quickly.     There  is  only  little  fire  under  the  |  kettle.     The  water  gets 
hot  slowly,  |  and  it  is  on  the  fire  from  morning  until  noon.     Then  the 
woman  |  takes  the  kettle  from  the  fire  and  puts  it  down  at  the  place 
where  she  is  sitting.  ||  Then  she  takes  a  small  dish  and  puts  it  down  20 

le'xaemeda  axno'gwadas  haema'pEqxa  tslF.da'qe  le£wis  la'-'wuiiEme  30 
le£w!s  sa'sEme.     Wii,   la'xaa  k!es    tshVpEla   la'xa    L!e'£na.      Wii, 
laE'm  gwal  laxe'q. 

Dried    Halibut-Stomach,  boiled  and    soaked  (Mo'qwasdaxs    ha'nx-  1 
Laakwae    tte'lkwa). — Wii,  he'smxaa   wa'xse   ena'las  tte'lkwe  wii'- 
xaxsaasas    ena/lasa    nia'leqasdaxs    la'e    t!e'lasF/wa,  ylxs  mo'plEn- 
xwa^sae  ena'las   axsta'lExs   la'xa    to'xsasa  lo'gwatslasa  lo'qlweno- 
xwe.     Wa,    he'Emxaa'wise    le'da    mo'qwasdeda    lo'gwatsle    t!e'la-  5 
sE£we.     Wii,    gi'l£mese  mo'xse    £nalasexs    la'e   wiwo'xewIda.      Wa, 
laE'mxaa'wisa    tslEda'qe    k' !oqEWElsxes  la'laxame    qa£s  le    hano'- 
dzElsas    lax    onodza^yasa    lo'gwatsle.     Wa,  Ja  axewElsta'laxa  mo'- 
qwasde  lax  to'xsasa  lo'gwatsle  qafs  le  axts!a'las  la'xes  la'laxame. 
Wa,   gl'Pmese   qo'tlaxs  la'e   kMo'qulsaq  qa£s  le  k- lo'gwlLElaq  la'-  10 
xes   g'o'kwe.     Wa,    la    k!o'x£walilaq  la'xa   obe'x'Lalases   lEgwI'le. 
Wa,    la    ax£e'dxes    hasnE'me    qaJs    ts!o'xugindeq.     Wa,    gil£mese 
e'glgaxs    la'e    axwults lo'dxa  mo'qwasde  la'xa   la'laxame    qafs   le 
axts'.o'diilas   la'xa    ha£nE'me.     Wa,    la    giiqlEqa'sa    £wa'pe   laq  qa 
q5't!es.     Wa,  la  ha'nxxEnts  la'xes  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  la  k!es  helqlalaq  15 
ha'labala   mEdE'lx£wida.     Wii,    laE'm   ha'lsElaEm    x  I'qlExsdaleda 
ha'nxxanaxa  gu'lta.     Wa,  e'x-fmese  la  ts !Eguena'kule  £wa'paliisexa 
ga'g  iLEla   la'xa  gaa'la  la'laa  la'xa  nEqii'la.     Wa,  le'da  ts!Edii'qe 
ha'nxsEndxa  ha'nx'Lanowe  qaJs  ha'ng'alile  la'xes  k!wae'lase.     Wa, 
la    ax^e'dxes    lii'logiime    qaJs    ha^no'llle  lii'xa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wa,  20 


374  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ANN.  35 

21  by  the  side  of  the  kettle.  |  Then  she  also  takes  her  fish-knife  and  puts 
it  into  a  small  dish.  |  Then  she  takes  her  tongs  and  picks  up  the 
boiled  stomach  |  and  puts  it  into  the  small  dish.     As  soon  as  it  is 

25  all  out  |  of  the  kettle,  she  takes  a  thin  cedar-board  ||  four  fingers  wide 
and  one  span  and  four  |  fingers  long.  She  puts  it  down  crosswise 
by  |  the  side  of  the  small  dish.  Then  she  takes  the  dried  stomach 
and  puts  it  down  on  it.  |  She.  takes  her  fish-knife  and  cuts  it  into 
small  pieces  |  of  the  right  size  to  go  into  our  mouths.     After  the 

30  woman  has  ||  cut  up  what  she  is  cutting,  she  takes  the  kettle  and  | 
pours  out  the  liquid  of  the  dried  stomach  outside  of  the  house.  ] 
Then  she  carries  it  back  into  the  house  by  the  handle  and  puts  it 
down  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.  |  Then  she  pours  fresh  water 
into  it  and  washes  it  out  |  inside.     As  soon  as  it  is  clean,  she  pours 

35  it  out  again  ||  outside  of  the  house.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she 
brings  it  back  and  puts  it  down  |  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  Then  she 
pours  fresh  water  on  the  |  pieces  of  dried  stomach,  and  she  washes 
them  well.  As  soon  as  |  all  the  soot  is  washed  off  and  they  are  white 
outside,  she  |  puts  them  into  the  small  kettle;  and  when  they  are 

40  all  in,  she  pours  fresh  ||  water  over  them.  Now  the  small  kettle  is 
full  of  water;  and  she  makes  a  good  |  fire,  so  that  it  blazes  up  well. 
Then  she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  |  fire,  and  it  does  not  take  long 


21  la'xaa  ax£e'dxes  xwa'Layowe  qa£s  le  g-e'ts!ots  la'xa  la'Iogume.  Wa, 
la  ax£e'dxes  k'ipLa'la  qa£s  klip'e'des  la'xa  ha'nxxaakwe  mo'qwas- 
da  qa-s  le  k"!ipts!a'las  la'xa  la'Iogume.  Wa,  gl'1-mese  £wI£losta 
la'xa  ha'nxLanowaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  pio'ldzowe  klwa'gEdza,  la  mo'- 

25  (Ieiic  £wa'dzE£wasas  la'xEns  q!\\:Vq!waxts!ana£yex;  wa,  la  mo'dm- 
baleda  £nE'mp!Enke  la'xEns  ba'Laxs  la'e  gayo'sas  la'xa  o'gwaga- 
Eyasa  la'Iogume.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  mo'qwasde  qa£s  pagEdzo'des  laq. 
Wit.  la  ax'e'dxes  xwa'Layowe  qa£s  am£Eme'x-saIe  t!o't!Ets!a'laq  qa 
a'£mese  he'ladzEqEla  la'xEns   sE'msex.     Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qE  £wl£la 

30  t!6't!Ets!Endxes  t!o'sasE£waxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  !e 
qEpEWE'lsax  £wa'palaxdasa  mS'qwasde  lax  L!a'sana£yases  go'kwe. 
Wa,  gax  xwe'laqa  k!5'giiLElaq  qass  ha'ngalfleq  la'xEs  k!wae'- 
lase.  Wa,  laemese  guxtslo'tsa  a'lta  £wap  laq  qa£s  ae'k'le  tslo'xu- 
gmdEq.     Wa,    g  i'Pmese  la    e'g-ig-axs  la'e    e'tled  la    qr.pEWE'lsaq 

35  Ia'xes  iJa'sana've.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  g-a'xae  ha'ngahlas 
lax  ona'lisases  lEgwI'te.  Wa,  la  guqlEqa'sa  a'lta  £wap  la'xa  t!E- 
we'kwe  mo'qwasda.  Wa,  la'xae  ae'k-!a  ts!o'xEwIdEq.  Wa,  gi'Pmese 
la  £wi£laweda  qlwalobEsaxs  lae  mElmadzox£wida.  Wa,  la  axts  la- 
las  la'xa  ha£nE'me.     Wii,  g-l'l£mese  £wllts!axs  la'e  guqlEqa'sa  a'lta 

40  £wap  laq.  Wa,  la  qo't!a£ma  ha£nE'maxa '"wa'paxs  la'e  ae'k'  !ix-£Id- 
xes  lEgwI'le  qa  e'kes  x'I'x'IqEla.  Wa,  la  ha'nx'LEnts  Ia'xes  1e- 
gwl'le.     Wii,  k-!e'st!a  gii'laxs  la'e  mEdElx£wi'da.     Wa,  laeme'seda 


boas]  RECIPES  375 

before  it  boils.     Then  |  for  a  long  time  the  woman  watches  it  while  43 
it  is  boiling.  |  When  the  water  is  nearly  dried  up,  she  pours  fresli 
water  ||  into  it.     When  it  is  evening,  the  kettle  is  taken  off,  |  and  45 
then  it  is  done.     Immediately  the  woman  takes  her  |  spoon  and  dips 
the  dried  stomach  out  into  a  small  dish.  |  She  does  not  take  the 
liquid.     Only  what  is  edible  is  dipped  out  |  into  the  small  dish.     As 
soon  as  the  small  dish  is  full,  she  calls  ||  her  husband  to  come  and  sit  50 
down  in  the  evening.     Then  they  |  drink  water.     After  they  finish 
drinking,  the  |  woman  takes  pointed  cedar-sticks  and  pricks  |  into 
the  dried  stomach.     She  (eats)  the  same  way  with  the  pointed  cedar- 
stick  |  as  white  people  eat  with  forks:  she  |[  pricks  with  it  into  the  55 
dried  stomach  and  puts  it  into  her  mouth.  |  When  she  finishes  eating 
the  dried  stomach,  the  woman  takes  up  the  [  small  food-dish  and 
pours  back  what  is  left  over  |  into  the  small  kettle.     Then  she  pours 
fresh  water  into  it  and  |  washes  the  inside.     As  soon  as  it  is  clean, 
she  pours  more  water  ||  into  it,   and  they  wash  their  hands;  and  60 
after  they  finish,  |  they  drink  fresh  water.     Dried  stomach  is  also 
not  used  at  feasts;  |  and  they  do  not  dip  it  into  oil,  for  it  is  really  | 
fat,  | 

Soaked  Dried  Halibut-Fins. —  |  Dried  halibut-fins  are  also  soaked  1 
in  the  bdge-water  of  the  fishing-canoe;  |  only  this  is  different,  that 


tslEda'qe    qla'qlala    la'qexs    la'e     ge'gillt    maE'mdF.lqula.      Wa,  43 
gi'Pmese  Ela'q  lE'mxnvide   £wa'pasexs   la'e  guqteqa'sa  a'lta  £wap 
laq.     Wa,  g  i'Pmese  dza'qwaxs  la'e  ha'nx'sanaweda  ha'nx'Lanowe.  45 
Wa,      laF.'m     Llo'pa.      Wa,     he'x£ida£mesa     tslEda'qe     ax£e'dxes 
ka/tslEnaqe    qa£s    tsEyo'sesa    mo'qwasde    la'xa    la'logume.     Wa, 
laE'm  k"  !es -le  £wa'palas;  a/Em  le'xa£ma  ha-'mae'sas  la  tsEyo'dzEm 
la'xa  la'logume.     Wa,  gi'h'mese   qo'tleda  la'logumaxs   la'e  Le'£la- 
laxes  la'£wunEme  qa  ga'xes  klwa'galllxa  la  dza'qwa.     Wa,  la'x'-  50 
daexwe    na'x-'idxa    £wa'pe.     Wa,    g-i'l£mese  gwal    na'qaxs    la'eda 
tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  k"!a'k!Exubaa'kwe  k!wa£xLa'wa   qa£s   LlE'nqes 
la'xa  mo'qwasde.      Wa,  laE'm  yo  gwe'gilasa   e'x-ba   k!wa£XLa'we 
gwe'gilasasa    ma'malaxs    ha'ma'paasa    ha'mayowe'.      Wa,    laE'm 
LlE'nqas    la'xa   mo'qwasde  qafs    ts!o'q!uses    la'xes    sE'mse.     Wa,  55 
gi'l£mese    gwal   mEma'leqasdEgixs    la'eda    tslEda'qe    k'a'gililxes 
ha£maa'ts!e    ta'loguma   qa£s   xwe'laqe    qEp£stE'ntses    haEmx'sa'£ye 
la'xa  ha£nE'me.      Wa,    la    guxts!o'tsa    a'lta  £wap    laq   qa£s   ts!5'- 
xugindeq.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  e'gigaxs  la'e  e't!ed  guxts!o'tsa  £wa'pe 
laq.     Wa,  la'xda£xwe  ts!E'nts!Enx£wida.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  60 
la'e  na'x£Idxa  a'lta    £wa'pa.     Wa,  laE'mxaa  k'les  klwe'ladzEineda 
mo'qwasde.     Wa,  la'xaa   k!es  tslE'pEla   la'xa   L!e'£na,  qaxs  a'lae 
tsE'nxw  a. 

Soaked  Dried    Halibut-Fins  (PElpa'lxa    t!E'lkwe    pa'Lasde). — Wa,  1 
he'Emxae  t!e'lasE£wa  pa'Lasileda  to'xsasa  lo'gwats!e.    Wii,  le'xa- 


376  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

they  are  soaked  for  six  days  |  in  the  canoe,  for  they  are  thick. 
5  Therefore  they  are  soaked  for  a  long  time.  ||  As  soon  as  they  swell 
up,  the  woman  takes  her  small  basket  |  and  carries  it  by  the  handle 
to  the  side  of  the  place  where  the  canoe  is  on  the  ground.  |  Then  she 
takes  one  fin  and  washes  off  the  soot  that  is  on  it.  |  As  soon  as  it  is 
all  off,  she  puts  it  into  the  small  basket.     She  only  |  stops  when  the 

10  small  basket  is  full.  Then  she  carries  the  small  basket  ||  into  her 
house,  and  she  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  |  Then  she  takes 
the  small  kettle  and  washes  it  out  inside.  As  soon  as  it  is  clean,  ! 
she  takes  split  cedar-sticks.  She  breaks  them  into  pieces,  and  |  puts 
them  crosswise  in  the  bottom  of  the  small  kettle,  (forming  a  grating). 
As  soon  as  this  is  done,  |  she  takes  the  soaked  fins  and  puts  them  on  || 

15  the  crossed  split  cedar-sticks  in  the  small  kettle.  [  She  does  not  want 
what  she  is  cooking  to  be  burned:  therefore  |  she  puts  the  cedar- 
sticks  under  it.  When  the  small  kettle  is  full  of  |  dried  fins,  she 
pours  water  into  it;  and  she  only  stops  pouring  |  when  it  is  full. 

20  Then  she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire.  It  ||  stays  on  the  fire  for  a  long 
time.  Sometimes  it  is  put  on  the  lire  in  the  morning,  |  and  it  is  not 
done  until  afternoon.  As  soon  as  it  is  done,  |  the  woman  takes  her 
tongs  and  takes  the  |  kettle  off  the  fire.  Then  she  takes  her  small 
dish  anil  puts  it  down  at  the  |  place  where  she  is  sitting.     Then  she 


3  £mes  o£guqalayosexs  k'le'sae  a/Em  q!EL!EplE'nxwa£se  £na,'liis 
tle'lt  !fili:xs  la'xa  xwa'kluna,  qaxs  wo'kwae,  la'g'Jlas  ga'la  tle'la. 
5  Wa,  gi'l£mese  pe'x£w!dExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxes  la'laxame 
qa£s  le  k!o'x£wElsaq  lax  o'gwag-ay£asa  xwa'klunaxs  ha'nsae.  Wa, 
le  ax£e'dxa  £nE'me  pELa'  qa£s  tsloxa'lexa  q!wal5'bEse  axdzEwe'q. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wl'£hixs  la'e  axtslo'ts  la'xa  la'laxame.  Wii,  aTmese 
gwa'lExs   la'e   qo'tleda   la'laxame.     Wa,   le   klo'gwilxa   la'laxame 

10  la'xes  go'kwe  qa£s  le  k- !o'x£wal!laq  lax  ono'lisases  lEgwI'le.  Wa, 
la  ax£e'dxes  ha£nE'me  qa£s  ts!o'xug"i<:ndeq.  Wii,  g  iTmese  c'g'ig'axs 
la'e  ax£e'dxa  xo'kwe  k!wa£xLa'we.  Wa,  la  ko'k-E£xusE'ndEq  qa£s 
gayi£la'lax-£Ideq  lax  6ts!a'wasa  ha£nE'me.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs 
la'e    axwiilts !odxa     t!E'lkwe    pa'Lasde    qa£s     le     axdzodala    la'xa 

15  ga£yi£lii'£lakwe  xok"  k!wa£xLa'wa  lax  6'tslawasa  ha£nE'me.  Wa, 
lar/m  gwa'qlElaq  kluniElg  iltslowe  ha£me'x-sIlasE£was,  la'gilas 
bEna'xLEntsa  k!wa£xLa'we  laq.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  qo'tleda  ha£nE'maxa 
pii'Lasdiixs  la'e  gux£I'tsa  £wa'pe  laq.  Wii,  a'h'mese  gwal  gu'qaxs 
la'e    qo'tla.     Wii,    !a    ha'nxLEnts    la'xes    lEgwI'le.     Wa,    la£me'se 

20  ge'xxalaEm  ha'nxxala;  £na'l£nEmplEnaas  ha'nx'LF.ntsoxa  gaa'la. 
Wii,'laa'l£Em  Llo'pxa  la  gwal  £nEqii'la.  Wa,  i;i'l£mese  Llo'pExs 
la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxes  k'lipLa'la  qa£s  klwetsE'ndes  la'xa 
ha'nxLanowe.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  la'logume  qa£s  ha'ng-aldes  la'xes 
klwae'lase.    Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa  k"  lipLa'Ia  qa£s  k'  lipll'des  la'xa  pa'Lasde 


boas]  RECIPES  377 

takes  her  tongs  and  takes  out  the  dried  fins,  ||  and  she  puts  them  into  25 
the  small  dish.     When  the  small  dish  is  full,  |  she  calls  her  children 
and  her  husband  to  come  and  sit  down.  |  Then  they  drink  fresh 
water;  and  after  they  finish  drinking,  |  they  take  whole  pieces  of  dried 
fins  and  eat  them.     They  |  hold  them  in  their  hands  while  they  are 
eating.     After  they  have  finished  ||  eating,  the  woman  takes  the  small  30 
dish  and  pours  back  |  into  the  kettle  what  is  left  over.     She  pours 
some  water  |  into  (the  dish)  and  washes  it  out  inside;  and  when  it  is 
clean,  she  |  pours  more  fresh  water  into  it,   and  they  wash   their 
hands.  |  As  soon  as  this  is  finished,  they  drink  fresh  water.     That  is 
all  ||  about  this.     They  do  not  dip  it  into  oil,  for  it  is  fat;  |  and  it  is  35 
also  not  given  at  feasts  to  other  people,  for  |  only  the  owners  eat  it. 

The  Indians  always  |  drink  water  before  they  begin  to  eat  and  when 
they  have  finished;  |  for  the  people  in  olden  times  said  that  if  they 
should  not  drink  ||  water  when  they  were  about  to  eat,  those  who  -10 
should  forget  |  to  drink  water  before  they  eat  or  when  they  finis] i 
would  rot  inside.  |  The  reason  why  they  rinse  their  mouths  in  the 
morning  before  they  eat  is  to  |  get  off  the  sleepiness  of  the  throat. 
Therefore  they  do  this  way.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Halibut-Spawn. — Halibut-spawn  is  not  kept  for  a  long  time.  |  As  1 
soon  as  it  is  half  dried,  it  is  boded  |  in  a  small  kettle.     Some  water  is 


qa-s  le  k!ipts!o'des  la'logume.     Wii,  gt'h'mese  qo'tleda  la'logiima-  25 
sexs  la'e   Le'£liilaxes  sa'sEme  lf/wIs  la'£wunEme    qa  g-a'xes  k!us£- 
a'llla.     Wa,  le  na'x£Idxa  a'lta  £wa'pa.     Wii,  g1'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs 
la'e    dii'x£idxa    sEna'la    pa'i.asda    qa£s    ha£mx£i'deq.     Wii,    laE'm 
a'Em    dedii'lahlqexs    la'e    ha£mii'pa.     Wii,    g'i'l£Emxaii'wise    gwal 
ha£rna'pa  la'eda  tsteda'qe  ka'gilllxa  la'logume  qa£s  le  qEpstE'nd-  30 
xes   ha£rnxsa'£ye  lii'xa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wii,  la   giixts!o'tsa   £wa/pe 
laq.     Wii,  la  ts!o'xugindEq.    Wii.,  g  i'l£mese  e'gigaxs  la'e  xwe'laqa 
giixtslo'tsa  a'lta  £wap  laq.    Wii,  la'xda£xwe  ts!E'nts!Enx£w!da.    Wii, 
gi'l£mese  gwa'lsxs  la'e  nii'x£Idxa  a'lta    £wa'pa.     Wii,  laE'm  gwal 
la'xeq.     Wii,  laE'm    k!es   tslEpa'x   L!e'£na   qaxs  tsE'nxwae.     Wa,  35 
laE'mxaa  k-!es  klwe'ladzsm  la'xa  6'gii£la  bEgwa'nEma,  yixs  a'£mae. 
le'xaEm  ha£ma'qeda  axno'gwadiis.     Wii,  la  he'mEnalaema  bii'k!ume 
nii'naqalgiwalaxa  £wii'paxs  k!e's£mae  ha£mx-£i'da  loxs  la'e  gwii'la, 
qaxs  £ne'k'aeda    ga'le    bEgwii'iiEinxs    gi'l£melaxe    k!es  na'x£Idxa 
£wa'paxs  ga'le  ha'£maaxes  ha£mii'Le,  wii,  la  xaxe'x£idedaL!Ele'wa£ye  40 
na'x£Idxa  £wa'paxs  k!e's£mae  ha£mx,£i'da,  loxs  la'e  gwa'la.     Wii, 
he'£mis    la'g  ilas    ts!Ewe'L!Exodxa     gaii'liixs    gii'lae    ha'£maa    qa 
Iawa'}-eses  bEq!ii!e'L!Exawa£ye.     Wii,  he,'£mis  lii'g'Has  he  gwe'gile. 
Wii,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Halibut-Spawn  (Tsii'p!edza£ye). — Wii,  k'!e'sLa  gii'la  axe'lakwa  tsii-  1 
p!edza£yasa  p!a/£ye.    Gi'l£Em  k!a'yax£widExs  la'e  ha'nxLEntsE£wa 


378  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

poured  into  the  |  small  kettle,  and  it  is  put  over  the  fire  of  the  house. 
5  As  soon  ||  as  the  water  begins  to  boil,  the  woman  takes  down  the  | 
spawn  from  where  it  is  hanging,  and  puts  it  into  the  boiling  |  kettle 
on  the  fire.  After  it  has  been  boiling  for  a  long  time,  |  it  is  taken  off 
and  is  done.     Then  the  woman  takes  a  |  small  dish  and  a  spoon,  and 

10  she  dips  out  the  boiled  ||  spawn  and  puts  it  into  the  small  dish.  As 
soon  as  I  it  is  all  out  of  the  water,  they  drink  water,  and  they  just 
take  it  up  with  their  hands  |  and  bite  off  the  end  as  they  eat  it;  and 
they  do  not  eat  much  |  before  they  finish,  for  this  is  not  very  good 
food.  I  The  men  do  not  often  eat  the  spawn.     That  is  the  only  || 

15  reason  why  the  woman  boils  it,  that  it  brings  bad  luck  if  it  is  not  | 
boiled;  for  the  men  of  early  times  said,  that,  if  it  were  not  done,  | 
her  husband  would  not  get  a  bite, — if  for  once  |  the  woman  should 
not  boil  what  conies  from  the  halibut  caught  by  her  |  husband.     As 

20  soon  as  the  woman  finishes  eating,  ||  she  pours  out  what  is  left  over. 
Then  she  drinks  water.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Middle  Piece  of  Halibut. — I  have  forgotten  |  the  piece  in  the  mid- 
dle,— the  fat  that  is  under  the  skin  between  |  the  two  flat  sides  of  the 

25  halibut,  the  meat  just  on  top  of  the  ||  backbone.  As  soon  as  the  skin 
is  taken  off,  the  |  woman  cuts  off  the  piece  in  the  middle,  and  there 

3  la'xaaxa  hamE'me.  Wa,  laE'm  a/Em  guxtslo'yuweda  £wa'pe  la'xa 
ha£nE'me  qa£s  ha'nx'Lanowe  la'xa  lEgwi'lasa  go'kwe.  Wii,  g'i'l- 
5  £mese  mEdE'lx^wIdeda  ewa'paxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  axa'xodxa  tsa'ple- 
dza£ye  la'xes  ge'xwalaase  qa£s  ax£stE'ndes  la'xa  maE'indidqula 
ha'nxxanoxs  ha'nxLalamae.  Wa,  la  ge'g  ilfi£Em  maE'mdElqulaxs 
la'e  ha'nxsana.  Wii,  laE'm  ido'pa.  Wii,  le'da  tslEda'qe  ax-'e'dxes 
la'logiime    LE£wa    ka'tslEnaqe     qa£s    XElostEndexa    ha'nx'Laakwe 

10  tsa'pledza'ya  qa£s  le  XEltsIa'las  la'xa  la'logiime.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese 
£wI£lostaxs  la'e  na'x£ldxa  £wa'pe.  Wii,  a'£mese  da'x£itses  e£eyasowe' 
laq  qa£s  q!Eg i'lba£yexes  ha£ma£ye.  Wa,  la  k!es  a'laEm  q!e'k!Es 
la'qexs  la'e  gwa'la,  qaxs  k'  le'sae  a'laEm  ek'  ha£ma'£ya.  Wa,  la 
k'les  q!una'la  ha£ma'pa  bEgwii'iiEmaxa  tsii'p!edza£ye.     Wii,  le'x-a- 

15  £mes  la'gilas  tslEda'qe  ha'nxLEndEq,  qaxs  ae'kllae  k!es  hil'nx-- 
LEndEq,  qaxs  £ne'kaeda  ga'le  bEgwfi'nEmqexs  k-!e'selaxe  lil'lax 
q!Eka'so  la'xe  lo'gflyos  la'£wunEinas  qo  k"!e'slax  £nE'mp!Eiialaxeda 
tslEda'qe  h&'nx'LEndlaxa  ga'yole  la'xa  p!a'£ye,  ya'nEmses  la,'- 
£wiinEme.     Wii,  gi'l£mese   gwiil    ha£ma'pa    tslcda/qaxs   la'e    a'Em 

20  qEpEWE'lsxes  ha£mxsa'£ye.  Wii,  la'xae  na'x£idxa  £wa'pe.  Wii, 
laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Middle  Piece  of  Halibut. — Wa,  he'xoLEn  L!Ele'wesEewedaq!wa'q!u- 
sawa£ye,  yixa  ilxa'la  tsE'nxwe  la'xa  &wii'ba£yasa  Lle'se  la'xa  ewl'ga- 
£ye  lo£  ok!waedza£yasa  p!a'£ye,  yix  kluta'layosa  qlE'mlale  laxnEXE- 

25  na'£yasa  ha£mo'mo.  Wii,  gi'l£me  lawil'yeda  L!e'saxs  la'eda  tslE- 
da'qe  sapo'dxa   q!wii'q!usa'wa£ye.     Wii,  la   xu'lkwaleda  axa'sdiis. 


boas]  RECIPES  379 

is  a  groove  at  the  place,  where  it  was.  |  Then  the  woman  puts  her  27 
forefinger  into  this  groove,  |  and  she  opens  it  out  at  the  place  where 
the  (sides  of  the)  meat  meet,  along  the  |  backbone.     As  soon  as  the 
piece  in  the  middle  is  off,  she  ||  throws  it  into  a  basket  which  stands  30 
by  the  side  of  the  woman  when  she  is  working  on  the  |  halibut.     As 
soon  as  she  has  finished,  she  takes  the  basket  by  the  handle  and  | 
carries  it  into  the  house.     Then  she  splits  a  piece  of  red  pine  |  and 
makes  ro  as  ting-tongs  just  like  the  roasting-tongs  for  the  edges,  |  and 
the  piece  in  the  middle  is  put  in  in  the  same  way  as  the  edges  ||  when  35 
they  are  roasted;  and  it  is  eaten  in  the  same  manner.  |  What  is  left 
over  is  put  away;  and  they  eat  of  it  again,  |  even  when  it  is  cold. 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

I  have  also  forgotten  the  one  name  of  the  edges.     It  is  called  |  by 
the  Newettee  "standing-on-thc-edge."|| 

Fresh  Codfish  (1). — The1  wife,  at  once  breaks  |  some  dried  halibut  and  1 
puts  it  on  a  food-mat,  and  she  |  pours  oil  into  an  oil-dish;  and  after 
she  has  done  so,  |  she  spreads  out  a  food-mat  in  front  of  her  husband, 
and  she  ||  puts  the  oil-dish  on  it.  As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  5 
takes  her  |  small  basket  in  which  she  keeps  her  two  fish-knives. 
She  |  is  going  to  remove  the  guts  of  the  codfish.  She  takes  her 
fish-knives,  |  and  takes  a  codfish  so  that  the  head  turns  towards 


Wa,  a.'£mesa    tslEda'qe    la   ts!E'mgilts!axstalases  ts  lEma/lax'ts  !a'-  27 
na£ye  laq,  qa  aq6'x£wldesa  awE'lgodaeyas  qlE'mlalas  nEXEmVyaseda 
hamo'mowe.     Wa,  gi'Pmese    lawa'yeda  q!wa/q!usa'wa£ye,   wii,    la 
ts  texts  la'las  la'xa  lExa'£ye  hano'dzllisxa  tsteda'qaxs  la'e  e'axalaxa  30 
p!a'£ye.     Wii,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lsxs  la'e  k- lo'qiillsxa  lExa'£ye  qa£s  le 
klo'gwi'LElaq    la'xes    g-5'kwe.     Wii,    la    k!;Vx£wIdxa    wuna'gule 
qa£s  Llo'psayogwlleq,  he  gwe'x'se  L!6'psayaxaxwa'xiisEnxa£ye.    Wa, 
he'Emxaa'wise  gwa'leda  q!wa'q!Qsawa£ye  gwii'laasasa  xwa'xusEnxa- 
£yaxs   la'e   L!o'pasE£wa.      Wii,  he'Emxaa'wise  gwe'gilaxs   la'e  ha-  35 
£ma/£ya.    Wii,  la  ge'xasE£weda  ha£msa'£ye  qa£s  e't  !ede  ha£mx£i'tsoxs 
la'e  wa'x£Em  la  wxida'.     Wa,  las'm  gwal  laxe'q. 

Wa,    heEmxaawesEii   L!ElewesE£wa  £nEme  LegEmsa  xwaxiisEnxa- 
£yeda  q!waq!iisEnxa£ye  laxa  LlaL'.asiqwala. 

Fresh  Codfish  (1). — Wa,1  a/£mise  gEnE'mas  he'x£idaEm  k'!o'p!edxa  1 
kMa'wase  qa£s  axdzo'des  la'xa  ha£madzowe'  le'£wa£ya.  Wii,  la 
k!u'nxts!otsa  L!e'£na  la'xa  ts!Eba'ts!e.  Wii,  gl'l£mese  gwa'lExs 
la'e  LEpdza'molIltsa  ha£madzowe'  le'£we£  la'xes  la'£wiinEme.  Wii,  la 
ka'dzotsa  ts!Eba'ts!e  laq.  Wii,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  5 
la'laxame,  yix  gi'ts!E£wasases  ma£lEXLa  gEltslE'ma.  Wii,  laE'm 
la'wiy5dLEx  ya'xyEgilasa  ne'tsa!£ye.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxes  gEltslE'me. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  £nE'me  la'xa  ne'ts!a£ye  qagwasta'les  lax  k!wae'ts!e- 

i  Continued  from  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V.,  p.  482. 


380  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

the  place  where  she  is  sitting.  |  She  first  cuts  off  the  pectoral  fins.  || 

10  She  cuts  them  out  in  one  piece  with,  the  gills.  Then  she  cuts  across 
the  bone  in  the  neck,  |  and  she  pulls  out  the  guts.  She  at  once  | 
cuts  off  the  intestines  and  throws  them  away  on  the  |  beach.  Then 
she  turns  the  stomach  inside,  out  and  puts  it  down  on  the  |  beach. 
As  soon  as  all  her  work  is  finished,  she  goes  up  from  the  beach  || 

15  and  takes  her  fish-basket.  She  carries  it  by  the  handle  down  | 
to  the  beach,  and  takes  the  stomachs  of  the  codfish  and  puts  them  | 
into  it.  As  soon  as  they  are  all  in  it,  she  carries  the  basket  by  the  han- 
dle |  into  the  house.     Then  she  puts  it  down  in  front  of  the  fire  of 

20  her  |  house.  She  takes  her  kettle,  pours  ||  water  into  it,  and,  when  it 
is  half  full  of  water,  she  puts  it  |  on  the  fire.  Then  her  husband 
invites  in  his  friends.  |  As  soon  as  all  the  guests  are  in,  the  woman  | 
takes  the  stomachs  and  puts  them  into  the  boiling  water  of  the  | 
kettle;  and  when  they  are  all  in  the  water,  the  woman  takes  her  || 

25  tongs  and  stirs  what  is  being  cooked.  Then  |  she  lets  it  boil  for  a 
long  time  before  she  takes  it  off  from  the  fire.  |  At  last  the  woman 
takes  her  spoons  and  distributes  them  |  among  her  guests.  When 
they  have  one  each,  she  takes  the  |  kettle  by  the  handle  and  puts  it 

30  down  in  front  of  her  guests.  Then  ||  she  takes  a  bucket  with  water 
and  puts  it  down  in  front  of  her  |  guests.     They  drink  water  from  the 


na£yas.      Wil,    he'emis    gil    xwa'Htsose    pEL!xa/wa£yas.      Wa,    la 

10  £na'£nEmgoq  LEewis  q!o'sna£ye.  Wa,  la  ge'xsEndEx  t!E'mq!Exii'- 
wa£yas.  Wit,  a/£mese  la  ne'xults!odEX  ya'xyig'Ilas.  Wa,  he'x£i- 
da£mese  t!o'salax  tslEiie'xas.  Wa,  la  ts!EqE'nts!esaq  lii'xa 
Lh;ma£ise.  Wa,  la  LleptexsE'mdxa  moqiiliis  qa£sax£a'lisEles  la'xa 
L!Ema£ise.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £wl£la  la  gwa'le  axsE£wa'sexs  la'e  hVsdes 

15  qa-s  le  ax£e'dxes  k!o'gwats!e  lExa'£ya.  Wa,  la  k!o'qunts!e'sElaq 
la'xa  L!Eina£ise.  Wa,  laax£e'dxamo'qulasa  ne'ts!a£ye  qa£s  axtsla'les 
laq.  Wa,  g  i'Pmese  £wl£lts!axsla'e  k*  lo'xwusde'sElaq  qa£s  k'lo'gwe- 
LElaq  la'xes  go'kwe.  Wa,  la  k!o'x£walilas  la'xa  osta'lilases 
go'kwe.     Wa,  la  he'x£idaEm    ax£edxa   lift'iixxano,    qa£s  guxtslo'- 

20  desa  ewa'pe  laq.  Wa,  la£mese  £nEgo'yolaxa  £wa'paxs  la'e  ha'nx-- 
LEnts  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wil,  la  Le'£lale  la'£wflnEmasexes  £ne£nEmo'- 
kwe.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gax  £wi£laeLeda  Le'£lanEmaxs  la'etla  tsteda'qe 
ax£e'dxa  m5'qula  qa£s  ax£sta'les  la'xa  la  maE'mdElqula  £wfipsa 
ha'nxLala.     Wii,  gi'l£mese  £wl£la£staxs   la'eda  ts!Eda'qe  ax£e'dxes 

25  k'KpLa'la  qa£s  xwe'tElga£yexes  ha£me'x-sdasE£we.  Wa,  la£me'se 
ge'gilll  qa£s  maE'mdElqfdaxs  la'e  ha'nxsana,  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wa, 
!a£mese  ts!Eda'qe  ax£e'dxes  k'a'k'EtslEnaqe  qa£s  le  tslEwa'naesas 
la'xes  Le'£lanEine.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  £wI£'Ixtoxs  la'e  k'!o'qu£lIlxa 
ha'nxLanowe  qa£s  le   ha'nxdzamo'lllas  la'xa  Le'£IanEme.     Wa,  la 

30  &x£e'dxes  £wabEts!a'la  nfi'gatsla  qa£s  le  ha'nxdzamo'lllas  la'xes 
Le'£lanEine.     Wii,  la'xda£xwe  xama'g'iigexa  na'gatsliixs  la'e  na'x£id 


boas]  RECIPES  381 

corner  of  the  bucket.   |  After  they  have  finished  drinking,  the  bucket  32 
is  put  away.  |  Then  they  eat  with  spoons  out  of  the  kettle.  |   The 
woman  takes  her  small  dishes  and  ||  puts  them  down  behind  the  35 
kettle  from  which  they  are  eating;  [  and  as  soon  as  they  find   a 
stomach  with  their  spoons,  they  put  it  into  the  small  dish;  |  and 
when  they  finish  eating  the  gills  and  the  liquid  with  their  spoons, 
they  put  down  the  spoons  |  with  which  they  have  been  eating,  and 
they  take  the  stomachs  with  their  hands  |  and  bite  them  off;  and 
after  they  have  finished  eating  them,  the  ||  woman  takes  the  small  40 
dish  and  pours  back  what  is  left  over  |  into  the  kettle  from  which 
they  have  been  eating.     Then  she  pours  some  water  |  into  (the  dish) 
and  washes  it  out;  and  when  it  is  clean,  she  again  [  pours  fresh  water 
into  it.     Then  she  places  it  before  her  guests,  |  and  they  wash  their 
hands;  but  the  woman  ||  takes  by  the  handle  the  kettle  from  which  45 
they  have  been  eating,  and  puts  it  down  at  the  |  outer  end  of  the  fire. 
After  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  the  bucket  |  with  water  and  places 
it  before  her  guests,  and  |  they  again  drink  from  the  corner  of  the 
bucket.  |  Then  the  woman  takes  the  dish  in  which  they  washed  their 
hands  and  ||  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.     Then  the  50 
guests  go  out.  |  This  kind  of  food  is  also  not  a  food  for  the  morning, 
and  no  |  oil  is  poured  into  it,  and  it  is  not  used  at  feasts  for  many  | 


la'xa  £wa'pe.     Wa,    la'xda£xwe   gwal    na'qaxs   la'e  ge'xasE£weda  32 
na'gatsle.      Wa,     la'x'da£xwe    yoVwilltsalaxes     yo'sasE£we     la'xa 
ha'nxLanowe.     Wa,  le'da    tslEcla'qe    ax£e'dxa   la'Elogiime    qa£s  le 
ka'galilElas    lax   a/La£yasa   ha'£maats!e£ye  hii'nxLana.     Wa,  gf'l-  35 
£mese  yayo'skinaxa  mo'quliixs  la'e  ge'tslots  la'xa  l&'logume.     Wa, 
gi'Pmese  gwal  yo'saxa  q!o'sna£ye  LE£wa  £wa'palaxs  la'e  gl'gallltses 
yeyo'yatslexa      ka'kEtstenaqaxs     la'e     xa'maxtslana    da/x£Idxa 
mo'qiila  qa£s  qlEgi'lbEyeq.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£ma'pqexs  la'eda 
tslEcla'qe  ax£e'dxa  la'logume  qa£s  le  xwe'laqa  guxtslo'tsa  ha£mx-  40 
sa'£ye    la'xa    ha£maa'ts!e    ha'nxxana.     Wa,   la  guxts!o'tsa  £wa'pe 
laq.     Wa,  la  tslo'xug IndEq.     Wii,  gi'l£mese  e'g-ig'axs  la'e  xwe'laqa 
guxtslo'tsa  a'lta£wap  laq.     Wa,  la  kaxdzamo'lilas  la'xes  Le£lanEme. 
Wa,   la'xda£xwe   ts!E'nts'.Enx£wida.     Wii,  la'Leda   tslEcla'qe  k-!o'- 
qfllilaxa   ha£maa'ts!e  ha'nxxana  qa£s   le    ha'ngalilas  la'xa  6'bex--  45 
Lalilasa  lEgwi'le.     Wa,  gi'l£mesegwa'lExs  la'e  klo'qulllxa  na'gatsle 
£wa'bEts!ala  qa£s  le  ha'nx'dzamo'illas  la'xes  Le'£lanEme.     Wa,  la'x- 
da£xwe  e't!ed  xa'magiigexa  na'gats!axs  la'e  na'x£Idxa  £wa'pe.     Wa, 
la'Leda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  ts!E'nts!Engwats!e  lo'qhva  qa£s  le  ka'- 
g'alilas  la'xes  klwae'lase.    Wa,  laE'm  ho'qiiwElseda  Le'£lanEme.    Wii,  50 
laE'mxaa  k- !es  ha£ma'£ye gwe'xsdEmasexa  gaa'la.     Wa,  la'xaa k' !es 
k  !unq  lEqasosa  L!e'£na.     Wa,  la   k-!es  klwe'ladzEm  la'xa  qle'nEme 


382  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.3s 

men,  and  the  numaym  is  not  invited  to  it.  |  Only  four  or  six  friends  of 

55  the  ||  one  who  caught  the  codfish  eat  of  the  bull-head,  for  that  is  its 

name  |  when  it  is  eaten;  and  the  one  who  invites  his  friends  says,  | 

"We  will  eat  bull-head  to-morrow."     Thus  he  says.     And  the  reason 

why  its  name  is  |  "bull-head"  is  that  the  stomach  of  " the-one-who- 

pulls"  is  never  full,  and  also  |  the  stomach  of  the  black  cod  and  of  the 

60  kelp-fish  and  of  the  xuldzos.     That  is  its  other  ||  name  when  it  has 

been  cooked  and  when  it  has  been  caught  by  the  |  fisherman;  for  the 

fisherman  does  not  allow  |  the  guts  of  the  codfish  and  of  the  halibut 

to  stay  in  the  body  over  night;  for  it  is  said,  that,  if  |  his  wife  should 

not  do  so,  he  would  never  again  have  a  |  bite  from  the  halibut  or  || 

65  codfish  or  black  cod  or  qlwa'qEla  and  also  the  t!ot!op!e  and  also  the 

gwaxugu£wa  and  |  also  the  gwtflek'.    There  is  only  one  |  way  of  doing 

with  these  nine  kinds  when  they  are  first  caught  by  the  fisherman.   | 

That  is  all  about  this.  | 

1       Fresh  Codfish  (2). — Sometimes  the  |  woman  cooks  at  once  these  eight 

kinds  besides  the  |  halibut,  and  the  eight  kinds  of  fishes  are  eaten 

5  fresh  |  when    the   tribes   are  really  hungry;   and   they  also  do  ||  so 

when  they  get  rotten.     The  only  difference  when  they  are  |  fresh  is, 

that  the  woman  cuts  the  codfish  right  away.  |  Both  sides  of  the 

neck  of  the  codfish  are  cut,  and  then  around  |  the  back  of  the  head; 

53  be'bEgwanEma,  L6£nie'da  £nE£me'mote  k"!e's£Emxaa  Le'£la£Iayo  laq. 
A'Em     le'xa£meda     mo'kwe     loxs     qlELlo'kwae    £ne£nEmo'kwasa 

55  ya'nEmaxa  ne'ts!a£ye  hafma'pxa  k!iime'se,  qaxs  he'£mae  Le'gEmse 
wa'xi  ha£ma/£ya.  Wii,  la  ene'keda  Le'£laliixes  ^ne^nErno'k11 : 
"K!wok!ume'sgELEnsa'i,"  £ne'ke.  Wa,  he' Em  la'gllas  Le'gadEs 
klume'saxs  kle'sae  qo'tlaenoxwe  mo'quliisa  ne'ts!a£ye,  LE£wa  mo'- 
qulasa  na'lEmE  LE£wa'   pExi'te  LE£wa'  xu'ldzose.     He'Em  £nE'me 

60  Le'gEmasexs  la'e  ha'nxLEntsE£wa,  loxs  ga'l5La'nEmae  ylsa' 
ba'kii£lenoxwaq,  yixs  k!e'sae  lielqlale'da  ba/ku£lenoxwaq  xa£mala 
k-!es  la'woyowe  ya'xyigllasa  ne'ts!a£ye  LE£wa  p!a'£ye  epixs  gi'l£me- 
laxe  kle'slaxe  gEnE'mas  he  gwe'x£Idlaxe  laE'm£la'wise  k!e'slax 
la'lax    e'tledlax    q!Eka'soxs    la'e   e't!ed  ba'kulaxa  p!a'£ye    LE£wa 

65  nets!a£ye  LE£wa  nalEme  LE£wa  qlwa'qEla;  he'£misa  tlo'tlople.  Wa, 
he'£misa  gwa'xugu£wa;  wa,  he'£misLeda  gwE£le'k-e.  He'Em  £nE'me 
gwe'gilase  qae'da  £na'£nEmax-£Idalaxs  ga'lae  ga'xalisEleda  ba'ku- 
laq.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Fresh  Codfish  (Ge'ta  ne'ts!e£)  (2). — Wa,  £na'l£nEmp!Enaemeda 
tslEda'qe  he'x£idaEm  ha£me'xsilaxa  ma£lguna'lldala  6'gu£la  la'xa 
p!a'£ye.  Wii,  Ie'xa£mes  halaxwaso'gwiltsa  ma£lguna'lldala  mamae'- 
masExs  a'laklalae  pa'leda  le'ElqwalaLa£ye.  Wa,  la  he'Emxat!  gwe'- 
5  gilasexs  la'e  q!ap!a'lax£ida.  Wa,  le'x"a£mes  o'gii£qala'y6sexs 
ge'tae,  yixs  he'x£ida£maeda  tslEda'qe  la  xwa'l£Idxa  ne'ts!a£ye.  Wa, 
he'Em  gil  xwa'l£itsose  wa'xsanolxa'wa£yasa  ne'ts!a£ye,  he£stiila 
lax   6'xLaata£yas.     Wa,  la    xwa'LaxodEx    awi'ga£yas    hii'xEla   lax 


boas]  RECIPES  383 

and  she  cuts  down  its  back  way  down  to  its  |  tad.  She  cuts  close  to 
the  backbone,  and  ||  she  only  stops  cutting  when  she  gets  down  to  the  10 
belly.  Then  she  turns  it  over  |  so  that  its  head  turns  away  from  her; 
and  she  cuts  along  the  upper  side  of  the  dorsal  fin  |  again  close  to  its 
backbone,  |  and  she  only  stops  cutting  when  the  cuts  meet  at  the 
belly.  |  Then  she  takes  the  head  and  pulls  it  off  with  the  ||  backbone;  15 
and  she  puts  it  on  an  old  mat  which  is  spread  on  the  floor  of  the 
house.  |  Then  she  takes  cedar-rope  and  ties  it  around  the  flesh  side 
of  the  |  codfish,  in  this  manner:  Then   the  flesh-side  is 

on  the  outside,  |  and  the  scales  |  a r e   on    the   inside. 

After  she  has  finished  many  of  (         |      ~)  these,  |  she  sends  her 
husband  to  call  his  tribe  to  come  ||  l^'  to  a  feast.     As   soon  20 

as    her    husband    is    gone,    the  woman  takes  |  her  large 

kettles  and  puts  them  down  inside,  by  the  |  door  of  the  house.  Then 
she  takes  buckets  and  carries  them  |  to  the  place  where  the  kettles  are, 
and  also  long-handled  |  tongs,  and  also  a  basket;  and  she  asks  some  || 
young  men  of  her  husband's  numaym  to  come  and  help  her  build  a  25 
fire  in  the  middle  of  the  |  house  where  the  feast  is  to  be.  As  soon  as 
the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house  blazes  up,  |  the  young  men  pick 
up  the  buckets  and  go  to  draw  water;  |  and  when  they  come  back, 
they  pour  it  at  once  into  the  |  kettles;  and  they  only  stop  when  they 
are  half  full  of  water.  ||  When  they  have  finished,  the  young  men  go  30 


ts!a'sna£yas.  Wa,  la  ma'kiklzodalax  XEm6'mowega£yas.  Wa, 
a'l'mese  gwfd  xwa'Laxs  la'e  la'gaa  lax  tEk'lii's.  Wa,  la  xwe'l£IdEq  10 
qa  qwe'sgEinales.  Wa,  la'xaa  e'k!6ddzoda'laxa  q!wii'ga£yasexs 
la'e  xwa'HulEq.  Wa,  laE'mxaa  ma'k  iklzoda'laxa  xEmo'mowe'g-a£ye. 
Wa,  a'l£mese  gwal  xwa'Laxs  la'e  lE'lgowe  xwa/La£yas  lax  tEk- la's. 
Wa,  a'£mese  la  da'x-£Idxa  ke'x't!a£ye  qa  ne'xodeq  le£wI's  XEmo'- 
mowega£ye  qa£s  ge'dzoiles  la'xa  LEbe'le  k!a'k"!obana.  Wa,  la  15 
ax£e'dxa  dE'nsEne  dEiiE'ma  qa£s  yiltsE'mdes  la'xa  qlE'mlalasa 
ne'ts!a£ye  ga  gwii'leg'a  (fig.).  Wii,  laEm  L!asadza£yeda  q!Emladza£ye. 
Wa,  la  na'q!Ega£ya  go'bEtadza^ye.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'la  qle'nEmaxs 
la'e  £ya'laqaxes  la'£wiinEme  qa  les  Le'Jlalaxes  go'kiddte  qa  ga'xes 
k!we'la.  Wa,  g  l'l£mese  le  la'£wunEmasexs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'd-  20 
xes  awa'we  ha'nhEnxLana,  qa£s  g'a'xe  hansto'hlas  la'xa  awi'LEliis 
tlexi'liises  go'kwe.  Wii,  la  ax£e'dxa  nena'gats!e  qa  g'a'xes 
ha£ne'l  lax  axa'sasa  ha'nhEnxLanowe;  wa,  heiemises  gl'lsglltla 
k!ek!ipLa'la;  wii,  he'Jmisa  lExa'£ye.  Wa,  la  he'laxa  g"a'yole 
haEya'bca  lax  £nE£me'motases  la'£wunEme  qa  g'ii'xes  la'qolllxa  25 
k!we'ladzats!eLe  g'5'kwa.  Wii,  gi'Pmese  xi'qostaweda  laqawa'- 
lllaxs  la'eda  ha£yii'l£a  k!o'qfdltxa  nena'gats!e  qa£s  le  tsiix  ewa'pa. 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  ga'xExs  la'e  he'ts!alaEm  guxtsla'las  la'xa  ha'n- 
hEnxxanowe.  Wa,  a'l£mese  gwil'lExs  la'e  £naE'ngoyalaxa  £wa'pe. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  e'tse£steda  ha£yal'£axa  k'.we'iA     Wii,  30 


384  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.su. 

31  about  again  to  call  the  guests.  |  The  woman  spreads  out  the  mats  for 
the  feasters  all  round  the  |  house.  As  soon  as  she  has  finished,  she 
takes  out  her  box  with  dried  salmon,  |  and  her  oil,  and  also  food- 
dishes  and  oil-dishes.  |  When  they  are  all  ready,  the  guests  enter;  || 

35  and  when  they  are  all  in,  they  |  first  take  the  dried  salmon  out  of  the 
box.  Then  they  are  scorched  |  in  the  way  I  told  first,  when  I  spoke 
about  a  real  feast  given  to  the  |  invited  tribes;  for  dried  salmon  is  the 
first  course.     After  |  they  have  eaten  the  dried  salmon,  the  kettles 

40  are  put  ||  on  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house.  They  do  not  put 
the  |  meat  of  the  codfish  at  once  into  the  kettles  that  were  put  on  the 
fire.  |  When  (the  water)  begins  to  boil,  the  woman  takes  her  |  basket 
and  places  it  in  the  boiling  water.     Then  |  she  takes  her  tongs  and 

45  picks  up  with  them  the  meat  of  the  ||  codfish  that  is  tied  together,  and 
she  puts  it  with  the  tongs  into  the  basket  which  is  in  the  water  |  in 
the  kettle.  She  only  stops  doing  so  when  it  is  all  in  the  water.  | 
The  woman  does  not  allow  it  to  be  in  the  water  for  a  long 
time.  Then  she  takes  her  |  tongs  and  pushes  them  through  the 
handles  of  the  basket  and  lifts  it  out  of  the  water.  |  Then  she  puts  it 

50  into  a  large  dish.  Then  she  at  once  unties  the  ||  ropes  which  had 
been  tied  around  (the  meat).  Then  the  woman  spreads  out  the 
meat  |  of  the  codfish,  and  she  takes  a  spoon  and  scrapes  off  the  | 
scales.     As  soon  as  they  are  all  off,  she  breaks  the  meat  into  pieces  | 

31  le'da  tslEda'qe  LEpse£stali'lElasa  klwe'Le  le'£we£  lax  awl'£stalllases 
go'kwe.  Wa,  gi'l£niese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ha£no'lt  !alllxes  xa'myatsle 
xEtss'ma  le£w!s  L!e'£na;  wa,  he'£misa  lo'slqlwe  LE£wa'  ts!e'ts!E- 
bats!e.     Wa,  gi'l£niese    -na'xwa   la  gwa'xgulIlExs  ga'xae  ho'gwl- 

35  LEleda  Le'£lanEme.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wI£laeLeda  klwe'Laxs  la'e  he 
g  il  ax£wults!a'layasa  xama'se  la'xa  XEtsE'me.  iWa,  la  ts!Ex£I'tsE£wa 
la'xEn  la'x£Ida  gwa'gwexs£alasa,  qaxs  a'laklalae  k!we'lasa  Le'£la- 
laxa  le'lqwalaLa£ye,  la'giltsa  xama'se  ts!a'gidzEma.  Wa,  gi'l£niese 
gwal  ha£ma'pxa  xama'saxs  la'e  ha'nx'LEndayoweda  ha'nxLanowe 

40  la'xa  la'kawallltsa  g'o'kwe.  Wa,  k'!e'st!a  he'x£Id  ax£stE'ntsa 
qlE'mlalasa  ne'ts!a£ye  la'xa  lahanxxala  la'xa  lEgwi'leda  hanliE'nx-- 
Lanowe.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  mE(lE'lx£wIdExs  la'eda,  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa 
lExa'£ye  qa£s  han£stE'ndes  la'xa  maE'mdElqula  £wa'pa.  Wa,  la 
ax£e'dxes  k!ipLa'la  qa£s  k!ip!e'des   la'xa  yiltsEma'la  qlE'mlalasa 

45  ne'ts!a£ye.  Wa,  la  k-!ipts!o'ts  la'xa  lExa'£ye  la  ha'n£stala  la'xa 
ha'nxxanowe.  Wa,  a'l£mese  gwal  he  gwe'gilaxs  la£e  £wl£la£sta.  Wa, 
la£me'seda  tslEda'qe  k!es  he'lqlalaq  ge£sta'laxs  la'e  L!E'nxts!otsa 
klipLa'la  lax  k'  !a'k'  !ogwaasasa  lExa'£ye  qa£s  k!wet£wEstE'ndeq.  Wa, 
la  ha'ndzots  la'xa  £wa'lase  lo'q!wa.     Wa,  he'x£ida£mese  qwe'lalaxa 

50  dedEnE'me  yae'ltsEmes.  Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  LEple'dxa  qlE'mla- 
lasa ne'ts!a£ye.  Wa,  la  &x£e'dxa  ka'ts!Enaqe  qa£s  kexa'les  la'xa 
gd'bEtas.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese    £wi£laxs    la'e    k!u'lk!upsalaxa   qlE'mlale 


boas]  RECIPES  385 

and  puts  it  into  another  large  dish.  As  |  soon  as  she  has  done  so 
with  (all  the  meat),  she  takes  the  kettles  ||  from  the  fire,  and  she  also  55 
takes  a  long-handled  ladle  |  and  puts  it  into  the  liquid  of  what  has 
been  cooked,  and  she  |  dips  out  the  scales  which  came  off  from  the 
skin  of  the  codfish  when  she  |  put  them  into  the  water.  As  soon  as 
this  is  all  done,  she  takes  the  large  dish  |  in  which  is  the  broken  meat 
of  the  codfish,  and  she  ||  pours  (the  hquid)  into  the  kettle.  Then  she  60 
puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire  |  again;  and  when  it  begins  to  boil,  the 
woman  takes  her  |  long  ladle  and  dips  up  the  hquid  of  what  is  | 
being  boiled,  and  pours  it  back  into  what  is  boiling.  |  She  does  the 
same  thing  as  long  as  the  food  that  is  being  cooked  ||  is  boiling.  65 
She  only  stops  doing  so  when  the  food  that  is  being  cooked  is  done.  | 
The  reason  why  she  does  so  with  the  liquid  that  is  |  being  boiled  is 
that  the  fat  and  the  liquid  become  mixed;  |  and  for  this  reason  the 
liquid  becomes  thick,  and  the  hquid  also  becomes  really  |  milky. 
It  looks  as  though  flour  had  been  poured  into  it.  [|  When  it  is  done,  70 
she  takes  the  kettles  off  the  fire,  |  and  the  young  men  at  once  take 
the  dishes  and  place  them  on  |  each  side  of  the  kettles;  and  she  takes 
again  her  long-handled  |  ladle  and  dips  the  cooked  codfish  out  |  into 
the  dishes.  She  only  stops  doing  so  when  the  dishes  are  full.  || 
There  is  no  food-mat  used,  for  |  the  liquid  always  drips  from  their  75 

qafs    le'xat!    axtsla'la   la'xa    o'guelaemaxat !  £wa'las  lo'qlwa.     Wa,  53 
gi'Pmese  Ewl£la  he    gwe'x£Idqexs   la'e  ha'nx'sEndxa  ha'nliEnxLa- 
nowe  la'xa  lEgwi'le.     Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  git!EXLa'la  ka'tslEnaqa  55 
qa£s    tse'g  ilisEles   la'xa   £wa'palases    ha'nx'LEntsE-'we    qa£s  XE'lgi- 
llses  hVxa  go'bEte,  yi'xa  lawa'ye  la'xa  Lie  'sasa  ne'ts!a£yaxs  la'xde 
la'£stana  laq.     Wa,  g  i'l£mese  £wFlaxs  la'e  ax=e'dxa  '"wa'lase  lo'qlwa. 
yix  la  gl'tslE-'watsa  qlwe'lkwe   qlE'mlalesa  ne'ts!a^ye  qa£s  le  giix- 
stE'nts    la'xa    hanE'nxxano.     Wa,  la    hanxLE'nts   la'xes  lEgwi'le  go 
e't!eda.     Wa.gi'Pmese  mEdElxJwi'dExs  la'eda  tsteda'qe  ax£e'dxes 
gi'lt!EXLa'la  k!a'ts!Enaqa  qa£s  tse'gostales  £wa'palases  ha£me'x"- 
s!lasE£we    cja£s     xwe'laqe     tse£st.E'nts     la'xa    maE'mdEkiula.     Wa, 
laE'm    he'xsaEm     gwe'gllaq   lax   £wa'£wasElllasas   maE'mdElqiilas 
haJme'xsIlasE£we.     Wii,  tVl-'mese  gwal  he  gwe'gilaxs  la'e  Llo'peda  65 
hafme'xsilasE£was.     Wa,  he'Em  hl'gilas  he  gwe'gilaxa  £wa'palases 
ha-me'x'silasE-we  qa  lE'lgEwesa  tsE'nxwa£yas  LEJwa  £wa'pala.     Wa, 
he'emis   la'g'ilas    la    gE'nkeda  ewa'pala.     Wa,  la'xaa   a'lak'Iala  la 
dzE'mx"stowe  ewa'palas,  he'la   gwe'x'sa  gu'xstaaxusa   qii'xe:     Wa, 
g  i'l'mese    Llo'psxs    la'e     ha'nxsEndxa     ha'nliEnx'Lanowe.      Wa'  70 
he'x£ida£mesa  ha£ya'Pa   ax^e'dxa    l5'Elq!we  qa's  mExea'l!lEles  lax 
waxsana'lllasa  hehE'nxLanowe.     Wa,  la'xaa  axJe4dxa  gi'ltlEXLala 
ka'ts!Enaqa  qa£s  tse'x£Ides  la'xa  ha'nxLaakwe  ne'ts!afya  qa£s  le 
tsets!a.'las  la'xa  lo'Elq!we.     Wa,  a'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  qo'qutleda 
lo'EkjIwe.     Wa,  laE'm  k!ea's  haJmadzo'   le'Jvva="ya  qaxs  he'mEna-  75 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 25 


386  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

76  mouths  when  they  are  eating  the  boiled  codfish  with  spoons.  |  She 
only  distributes  spoons  among  the  guests.  |  As  soon  as  they  have  one 
each,  they  put  the  dishes  in  front  of  them;  |  and  when  all  this  has 

80  been  done,  the  young  men  take  buckets  by  their  handles  and  ||  place 
them  before  the  guests,  and  they  all  drink;  |  and  after  they  finish 
drinking,  they  eat  with  spoons;  and  after  they  have  finished,  |  the 
young  men  take  away  the  dishes,  and  they  carry"  the  rest  to  the 
wives  |  of  the  guests.     Other  |  young  men  give  water  to  the  guests. 

85  This  was  called  by  ||  former  generations  [the  first  past  men]  "cooling 
down  when  they  drink  water  after  |  having  eaten  with  spoons  boiled 
fish."  After  they  finish  drinking,  |  they  go  out.  That  is  all 
about  this.  | 
1  Tainted  Codfish. — I  first  talked  about  the  fresh  boiled  |  codfish. 
Now  I  will  talk  about  |  what  the  Indians  like  best, — tainted  boiled 
codfish.  |  When  the  codfish  has  been  kept  for  a  very  long  time  in  the 
5  corner  of  the  house,  ||  and  when  it  begins  to  be  tainted,  the  woman 
takes  the  tainted  codfish  |  and  puts  it  into  water  that  is  in  a  large 
dish.  |  As  soon  as  the  body  is  soaked,  she  puts  it  on  the  fire  |  and 
turns  it  over  and  over;  and  when  the  body  is  warm,  |  she  rubs  off 

10  the  scales.     Then  the  woman  ||  takes  an  old  mat  and  spreads  it  out 


76  la£mae  tsa/xulExstaleda  yo'saxa  ha'nxxaakwe  ne'ts!a£ya.  Wa, 
le'xa£mesa  ka'k"Ets!Enaqe  la  tslEwanaedzEm  la'xa  klwe'le.  Wa, 
gi'l£niese  £wi'lxtoxs  la'e  kaxdzamo'lllasosa  lo'Elqlwe.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mese    £wl£laxs   la'eda    ha£ya'l£a    k"!o'qulilxa    nena'gatsle    qa£s    le 

80  hanxdzamo'lilas  la'xa  klwe'le.  Wa,  la'x-da£xwe  £wi£la  na'x£Ida. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  y6's£Ida.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs 
la'eda  ha£ya'l£a  k'a'gilllxa  lo'Elqlwe  qa£s  le  mo'tlots  lax  gEgEnE'- 
masa  k!we'le  be'bEgwanEma.  Wa,  15'i.e  e'tlededa  wao'kwe 
ha£ya'l£a  naqa£matsa  £wa'pe  la'xa  klwe'le.     Wa,  he'em  gwE£yo'sa 

85  g'i'lxda  bEgwa'nF.m  k'6'xwaxodeda  na'x£idaxa  £wa'paxs  la'e  gwal 
yo'saxa  ha'nxxaakwe  mamao'masa.  Wa,  g  i'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs 
la'e  ko'qiiwElsa.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Tainted  Codfish  (Q!al  ne'ts!e£). — Wa,  he'Em  ge'ta  ha'nx'Laak" 
ne'ts!a£yEn  g'i'lx'de  gwa'gwex's£alasa.  Wa,  la£me'sEn  gwa'gwex'- 
s£alal  lax  ex-a'g-a£yasa  ba'klumeda  la  q!al  ha'nx'Laak"  ne'ts!a£ya. 
Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  ga'la  axe'la  ne'ts!a£ye  lax  one'gwilasa  g'6'kwe. 
5  Wa,  g;i'l£mese  la  qla'HdExs  la'eda  tslsda'qe  ax£e'dxa  q!a'le  ne'ts!a- 
£ya  qa£s  le  axstE'ndEq  la'xa  £wa'pe  q!o'ts!a  la'xa  £wa'lase  l5'q!wa. 
Wa,  g'i'Pmese  po's£Ide  6'k!wlna£yasexs  la'e  axLE'nts  la'xes  lEgwi'le 
qa£s  le'xi£laleq.#  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £wi£la  la  ts!EX£wi'de  o'k!w!na£ya- 
sexs  la'e  xi'tEmg  iEE'le  go'bEtas.     Wa,   la£me'seda  ts!Eda'qe  ax£- 

10  e'dxa  k!a'k'!obane  qa£s  LEpla'files  lax    ona'lisases    lEgwi'le.     Wa, 


boas]  RECIPES  387 

by  the  side  of  the  fire;  |  and  she  puts  the  heated  codfish  on  it.     Then  11 
she  takes  |  thin  cedar-sticks  and  scrapes  off  the  scales,  for  [  they  are 
all  loose.     When  they  are  all  off,  she  takes  a  wedge,  |  and  she  also 
takes  fire-wood  and  puts  it  down  by  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.  || 
Then  she  takes  the  scraped  codfish  and  |  puts  it  down  on  the  belly-  15 
side,  holding  the  head  of  the  fish.     Then  she  takes  the  |  wedge  and 
beats  it,  and  she  only  stops  beating  it  when  |  the  body  of  the  cod- 
fish is  really  soft.  |  The  reason  why  they  beat  it  is  that  the  meat 
comes  off  at  once  from  the  ||  bones  when  it  is  cooked;  and  they  just  20 
pick  out  the  bones  when  it  is  |  done,  and  only  the  meat  is  left  in  the  | 
kettle.     As  soon   as    (the  woman)  has  finished 
scraping   the  body,   she  takes    her   |   fish-knife 
and  cuts   the    body  crosswise,  in  this  manner: 
After  I  she  has  finished  cutting  crosswise,  she 
takes    the    kettle    and    pours  ||  water    into    it  until  it  is  half  full. 
Then  she  takes  the  scraped  codfish,  |  bends  it,  and  puts  it  into  the 
kettle  on  the  fire.  |  As  soon  as  it  begins  to  boil,  the  woman  takes 
her  tongs  |  and  stirs  what  she  is   cooking.     At   once   |  the  meat 
comes  off  from  the  bones.     Then  she  lifts   (the  bones)  out  of   the 
water  ||  and  throws   them   into  the   fire.     Only    the  head   is   not  |  30 
taken  out.     As  soon  as  all  the  bones  are  out,  she  takes  a  |  long- 


la£me'se   yagiidzo'tsa    LlExT'dEkwe  ne'ts!e£  laq.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  11 
wl'ltowe    k!wa£XLa'wa    qa£s    kexa'les    la'x     go'bEtas,    qaxs     la'e 
ewiela  la  klina'la.     Wa,  g-i'1'mese  £wl£laxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  LE'mga- 
yowe.     Wa,  la'xaa  ax£e'dxa  lEqwa'  qa's  k"at!a'llles  la'xes  khvae'- 
lase.      Wa,    la'xaa    &x£e'dxa  la    kle'xklEk"    ne'ts!a£ya.      Wa,    la  15 
k'lo'talaxs  la'e  da/lax  xo'msas,  yix  he'x't  !a£yas.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa 
LE'mgayowe  qa£s  ttelxwl'tes  !aq.     Wa,  a'h'mese  gwal  t'E'lxwaqexs 
la'e    a'lak'Iala    la   lE'ntlede   6'k!wlna£yasa  ne'ts!a£ye.     Wa,  he'Ein 
la'gilas    t!E'lxwetaq    qa    he'x£ida£rnese    la'weda    c[!E'mlale    la'xa 
xa'qaxs  la'e  LlS'pa.     Wii,  a.''mese  la  klwe'tustalayuweda  xa'qaxs  20 
la'e  L.'o'pa.     Wa,  a'£mese  la  le'x'ama  qlE'mlale  la  ge'£stala  la'xa 
ha'nx'Lanowe.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ke'xetaqexs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  gEl- 
ts!E'me.    Wa,  laqate'tledEciga  gwa'leg-a  (fig.).    Wa,  g  i'Pmese  gwal 
qatetaqexs     la'e     ax£e'dxa    ha'nxxanowe.      Wa,    la    giixtslo'tsa 
£wii'pe    laq  qa  nEgo£ya'les.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  qate'dEkwe  ne'tsla-  25 
£ya  qa   gwa'naxts!odes  laq.     Wa,  la    M'nxLEnts    la'xes    lEgwi'le. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese    mEdE'lx-'widExs    la'eda    tsteda'qe    ax£e'dxes  k!ip- 
La'la    qa£s    xwe't!edes    la'xes    ha£me'xsdasE£we.      Wa,    he'x£ida- 
£mese    lawa'yeda   qlE'mlale    la'xa    xa'qe.     Wa,   la    k!we'tii£stalaq 
qa£s  tslEXLa'leq  la'xes  lEgwi'le.      Wa,  ie'x-a£mesa  he'x't!a£ye  kMes  30 
ax£wu£sta'nos.     Wa,    gi'l£mese  £wi£laweda    xa'qaxs    la'e    ax£e'dxa 


388  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

33  handled  ladle  and  dips  up  the  liquid  of  |  what  is  being  cooked  by  her, 
so  that  it  becomes  milky;  and  when  it  is  really  |  milky,  she  takes  the 

35  kettle  from  the  fire.  Then  ||  it  is  done.  At  once  she  calls  her  hus- 
band and  her  |  children  to  eat  with  spoons  what  is  in  the  kettle,  for 
the  tainted  codfish  is  not  |  used  to  invite  many  people.  It  is  |  only 
food  in  the  house  for  the  married  couple  and  their  children.  As 
soon  I  as  they  have  eaten  it  with  spoons,  the  man  takes  the  head.  || 

40  The  first  thing  to  be  eaten  are  the  eyes;  and  |  when  he  finishes  them, 
he  breaks  the  head  and  eats  the  |  fat  of  the  skull;  and  when  this  is 
finished,  he  takes  a  |  spoon  and  eats  the  meat  and  the  liquid;  but 
first  I  they  drink  water,  and  they  also  cool  themselves  with  water  || 

45  when  they  have  finished  eating.  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Codfish-Head. — When  the  head  of  the  codfish  is  |  really  tainted 
and  has  been  kept  for  a  long  time  in  the  |  corner  of  the  house,  the 
woman  takes  her  kettle  and  |  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  the 
5  heads  are.  Then  she  puts  ||  the  heads  into  it.  They  are  put  in  so  that 
the  face  is  upward.  |  As  soon  as  the  kettle  is  full,  she  takes  an  old 
mat  and  |  covers  them  over.  Then  she  takes  a  bucket  of  water  and  | 
pours  it  over  the  old-mat  covering.     She  |  only  stops  pouring  water 

JO  when  it  shows  all  ||  around  the  mouth  of  the  kettle.     The  reason  why 


32  gi'lt!EXLa'la  ka'tslEnaqa  qa£s  tsegustalex  £wa'palases  ha-me'x-- 
sllasE-we  qa  dzE'mxustox£w!des.  Wa,  gi'1-mese  a'lak!ala  la 
dzE'mxustox'wIdExs  la'e  ka'nxsEndEq  la'xa  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  JaE'm 

35  Llo'pa.  Wa,  a'£mese  he'x'£idaEm  Le'£lalaxes  la'£wunEme  LE£wis 
sa'sEme  qa£s  yoVldeqexs  g'e'tsloe  la'xa  ha'nx'Lanowe,  qaxsk!e'- 
sae  Le'£l5layo  la'xa  qle'nEme  bEgwa'nEma  la  q!al  ne'ts!a£ya,  yixs 
a'£mae  ha'£ma£yaeltsa  haya'sEkala  LE£wis  sa'sEme.  Wa,  g'1'1- 
£mese  yo's£IdExda£xwa    la'e  he'deda  bEgwa'nEme  ax£e'dxa  he'x*- 

40  t!a£ye.  Wa,  he'£mis  gll  ha'mx-£Itsoseda  gEbElo'xsta£ye.  Wa,  gi'l- 
£mese  £wl£laqexs  la'e  wEWE'xusEndxa  he'xt!a£ye  qa£s  hS£mx,£I'dex 
dE'ngwap!a£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laqexs  lae  ax£e'dxa  k'ii'tslE- 
naqe  qa£s  yo's£idexa  qlE'mlale  rfwa'  £wa'pala.  Wa,  laE'mLeda 
£wa'pe    gll    na'x£Itsos.     Wa,    la'xaa    ko'xwaxodaEmsa    £wa'paxs 

45  la'e  gwal  yo'saq.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Codfish-Head  (He'xt!e£sa  ne'ts!a£ye). — Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  a'la- 
k'!ala  la  q!a'la  he'x-t!a£yasa  ne'ts!a£yaxs  la'e  gael  g'ae'l  lax  one'- 
gwllasa  go'kwe.  Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  &x£e'dxes  ha'nx-Lanowe 
qa£s  le  ha'ngalllas  lax  axe'lasasa  he'xt!a£ye.  Wa  la  axtsla'lasa 
5  he'xt!a£ye  laq.  Wa,laE'm  e'k!EgEmlts!axs  la'e  axtsla'laq.  Wa, 
g-i'l£mese  qo't'.eda  ha'nxLanaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxa  k' !a'k-!obane  qa£s 
nasEyi'ndes  laq.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  £wa'bEts!ala  na'gats!a  qa£s 
guqEyi'ndes  lax  6'kiiya£yasa  na'sEma£ye  k-  !a'k'  !obana.  Wa,  a'l- 
£mese  gwal  giiqa'sa  £wa'paxs    g'a'xae  ne'l£id  lax  6'kuya£yas  e£wa- 

10  ne'qwas   awa'xsta£yasa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wii,  he'Em  la'gilas  guqE- 


boas]  RECIPES  389 

she  |  pours  water  over  the  old  mat  is  that  it  does  not  catch  fire  |   11 
when  the  kettle  is  put  on.     As  soon  as  she  finishes  |  covering  it  up, 
she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire,  and  the  kettle  stays  on  the  fire  |  for 
a  long  time;  and  after  it  has  been  kept  boiling  for  a  long  time,  ||  it  is  15 
taken  off.     Now  it  is  done.     Then  the  woman  takes  |  a  large,  dish 
and  her  largest  spoons.  J  She  puts  the  dish  by  the  side  of  the  kettle 
and  takes  off  the  |  mat  covering  of  what  is  being  cooked  by  her,  and 
she  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  |  Then  she  takes  the  large 
spoon  and  takes  out  of  the  kettle  one  by  one  ||  the  whole  heads.     She  20 
puts  them  |  into  the  dish,  and  she  only  stops  doing  so  when  the  heads 
are  all  out.  |  When  this  is  done,  the  woman  calls  her  |  house-mates  to 
come  and  eat  the  heads  of  the  codfish.  |  As  soon  as  they  come,  they 
sit  down,  and  she  puts  the  dish  before  them.  ||  They  drink  water:  25 
and  after  they  have  finished  drinking  water,  |  they  take  up  with  their 
hands  each  one  |  head  and  begin  to  eat  it;  and  they  continue  to  eat. 
first  |  the  eyes,  and  after  that  the  fat  of  the  skull;  |  and  they  suck  the 
bones  and  throw  them  into  the  fire.  [|  As  soon  as  they  have  finished,  30 
the  woman  takes  the  food-dish  |  and  pours  into  the  kettle  the  food 
that  is  left  over.     She  pours  |  water  into  it  and  washes  it  out;  and 
as  soon  as  it  is  clean  inside,  |  she  pours  the  water  out  by  the  side  of 

yi'ntsa  £wa'pe  la'xa  k- !a/k- lobana  qa  klu'nqes  qa  k'le'ses  xi'x£e-  11 
dExs  la'e    ha'nxxala    la'xa    lEgwi'le.     Wa,  gi'l£mese   gwal  na'sa- 
qexs    la'e    ha'nxxEnts  la'xes   lEgwi'le.     Wa,    la£me'se    g-e'xxala 
ha'nxLala  la'xa  lEgwi'le.     Wa,  he'tla  la  ge'gilll  maE'rndElqulaxs 
la'e  ha'nx'sana.     Wa,  laE'm  Llo'pa.     Wa,  le'da    tslEda'qe  ax£e'd-  15 
xa    £wa'lase    lo'qlwa    LE£wa  £wa'lega£yases   ka/kxtslEnaqe.     Wa, 
la  hano'llltsa  lo'qlwe  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe.     Wii,  la  na'sodxa  k-  !ak-  !o- 
ba'ne  na'sa£yases  ha£ine'xsllasE£we  qa£s  g-e'nolises  la'xa  lEgwi'le. 
Wa,  laax£e'dxa£wa'laseka'tslEnaqaqa£s  £na'l£nEmsgEmEmke  sa'yi- 
nalaa  xE'lx£Idxa  he'xt!a£ve  la'xa  ha'nxxanowe.     Wa,  la  xEltsla'las  20 
la'xa  lo'q!we.     Wa,    a'l£mese    gwal    he    gwe'gilaxs    la'e    ewFlosa 
he'xt!a£ye.      Wa,    gi'h'mese  £wi£laxs  la'eda    tslEda'qe    Le'£lalaxes 
£nEma'elwute    qa   g-a'xes  he'x-hax-xa  het!a'£yasa  ne'ts!a£ye.     Wa, 
gl'l£mese  gax  k!iis£a'hlExs  la'e  k"a'x-dzamolilasosa  lo'qlwe.     Wa, 
la'x-da£xwe    na'x£Idxa   £wa'pe.     Wa,    gi'l£mese  gwal   na'qaxs  la'e  25 
xa'maxts!5nases   e£eyasa'.xs   la'e  da'x-£Idxa   £na'i£nEmsgEme  la'xa 
he'xt  !a£yaxs  la'e  ha£mx,£i'dEq.     Wa,  laE'm  he'xsaEm  g  il  ha£mx£i'- 
tsose    gegE£ya'gEsas.     Wa,    la    a'lEbfsdalax  dE'ngwap  !a£yas.     Wa, 
la'Ea  klE'xwaEmxa    xa'cjas  cja£s    tslEXLa'leq   la'xa  lEgwi'le.     Wa, 
gi'l£mese   gwa'lEXs   la'eda  tslEda'qe  fix£e'dxa   ha£maa'ts!e  lo'qlwa  30 
qa£s  leguxts  lo'tsa  ha£mx-saeye  la  'xa  ha'nx'i.anowe.  Wa,  la  giixtslo'tsa 
£wa'pe  laq  qa£s  tslo'xiig-indeq.     Wa,    g'i'h'mese    la    e'gigaxs    la'e 
qEbEno'lisxa  £wa'pe    la'xa  lEgwi'le.     Wa,    la  xwe'laqa  guxts lo'tsa 


390  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

the  fire,  and  she  pours  |  fresh  water  into  it  and  puts  it  down  before 
35  her  guests;  ||  and  they  all  wash  their  hands,  and  they  also  wash  them- 
selves I  around  the  mouth,  for  the  fat  of  the  [  heads  sticks  all  around 
the  mouths  of  those  who  eat  this  kind  (of  food).     After  |  finishing 
they  drink  fresh  water.     This  kind  (of  food)  |  is  also  not  used  to  invite 
40  many  men  or  the  ||  numaym.     Only  the  housemates  of  the  |  owner 
eat  it;  and  no  oil  is  poured  into  it,  for  it  is  really  |  fat.     That  is  all.  | 
1       Roasted  Codfish. — When  many  |  codfish  have  been  caught  by  the 
fishermen,  the  woman   |  cuts  them  in  the  same   manner   hi  which 

she  first   cut  them,  |  this  way:     _- 7   As   soon    as   she  fin- 

5  ishes   cutting   them,  she   takes  L^"  ^  I    a  ||  piece  of  pine  that 

is  easily  spht  to  make  roasting-  ^~~~-- —  \  tongs.  |  Four  codfish 
are  put  into  each  pair  of  roasting-tongs,  |  in  this  manner.1  A 
strip  of  cedar-bark  is  tied  between  each  (two)  |  codfish  and  also  at 
each  end,  so  that  the  roasting-tongs  do  not  spread  open.  |  As 
soon  as  this  is  done,  she  puts  (the  tongs)  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  || 
10  The  flesh  side  is  first  roasted.  As  soon  as  it  is  done,  she  |  turns  it 
over  and  roasts  the  skin  side;  and  when  |  it  is  blackened,  she  takes 
it  away  from  the  fire.  Then  it  is  done.  |  Sometimes  this  is  eaten  at 
once,  while  it  is  still  hot.  |  They  do  not  dip  it  into  od  when  it  is  still 

a'lta  £wa/p  laq.     Wa,  la   k'axdzamo'lllas  la'xes  Le'£lanEine.     Wa, 

35  la'x-da£xwe    £wl£la    ts!E'nts!Enx£wIda.     Wa,     la'xaa     ts!5'x£w!dEx 

awi'£stases    sEmses,     qaxs     £na'xwa£mae      kluta'le    tsE'nxwa£yasa 

he'x't!a£ye  lax  sE'msasa  ha£ma'pax  gwe'x'sdEinas.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese 

gwa'lExs   la'e  na'x£idxa    a'lta  £wa/pa.     Wa,  laE'mxaa   k!es  Le'la- 

£layuwe     gwe'xsdEmas    la'xa     qle'iiEme     be'bEgwanEma     LE£wa 

40  £nE£me'mote.     LaE'm  a'Em  le'xaEm  ha£ma'pqeda  £nEma'elwutasa 

axno'gwadas.     Wa,  la'xaa  k" lea's  L!e'£na  k!u'ngEms,  qaxs  a'lak'la- 

lae  tsE'nxwa.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'la. 

1      Roasted   Codfish  (L!o'bEku  ne'sasde). — Wa,  he'£maaxs   qle'iiEmae 

ba'kulanEmasa  ba'ku£lenoxwexa   ne'ts!a£ya.     Wa,  le'da    tslEda'qe 

xwa'l£IdEq   lax  gwii'laasa    xwa'La£yasexs   g'i'lae   xwa'l£IdEq   xag-a 

gwa'lega  {fig.).     Wa,    g'i'l£mese    gwal    xwii'Laqexs    la'e    ax£e'dxa 

5  e'gaqwa  lax     xa'sE£we     wuna'gula     qa£s     Llo'psayugwlleq.     Wa, 

laE'm  mo'weda  ne'ts!a£ye  la  ge'k'Itne  la'xa  £na'l£iiEmts!aqe  Llo'p- 

sayo  ga  gwa'le  g-a  {fig.1).     Wa,   laE'm  yaLa'leda  £nal£nE'me  ne'- 

tslexa  dEna'se  LE£wa  wa'x-sba£ye  qa  k'le'ses  ax£e'deda  Llo'psayowe. 

Wa,  gi'l£mese    gwa'lExs    la'e    Lano'lisas    la'xes    lEgwile.     Wa,  la 

10  he'Em  gil    Llo'pasose    q!E'mladza£yas.     Wa,    gi'l£mese    l!o'pexs 

la'e  le'x£IdEq  qa£s   Llo'pledex  L!e'sadza£yas.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese   k!ii- 

mE'lx£IdExs  la'e   axsE'ndEq.     Wa,  laE'm   Llo'pa.      Wii,  la   £na'l- 

£nE'mp!Eiia    he'x£idaEm  ha£mx-£i'ts6xs    he'£mae    a'les    tslE'lqwe. 

Wa,  la  k"!es  tslEpa's  la'xa  L!e'£naxs  he'£mae  a'les  ts!E'lqwe,  qaxs 

'See  first  figure  on  p.  241. 


boas]  RECIPES  391 

hot,  for  ||  it  is  still  moist  with  fat  inside.  As  soon  as  |  it  gets  cold,  15 
it  gets  dry  inside;  and  when  it  is  |  given  as  food,  they  dip  it  into  oil. 
This  also  is  not  used  to  invite  |  many  people.  Only  the  married 
couple  |  and  their  children  eat  this  kind  (of  food) ;  and  the  ||  roasted  20 
codfish  is  also  eaten  cold  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the  even- 
ing; |  but  it  is  not  eaten  hot  in  the  morning,  for  it  is  fat,  |  and  it  is 
bad  if  it  is  eaten  when  still  hot  in  the  morning.  |  They  drink  water 
before  and  after  they  have  finished  eating  it.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Another  Kind  of   Eoasted  Codfish. — When  I  the  woman  does  not  25 
want  to  boil  the  codfish,  she  just  |  takes  the  cut  codfish  and  puts  it 
down  by  the  side  of  the  |  fire.     Then  the  belly  is  first  roasted;  and 
when  |   the  belly  is  done,  she  puts  it  down  on  the  belly-side  and 
roasts  the  right-hand  side;  ||  and  when  (the  surface)  is  all  blackened,  30 
she  turns  the  head  the  other  way  and  roasts  |  the  left-hand  side ;  and 
when  that  also  is  blackened.  |  it  is  done.     [It  is  done  after  this.]     Then 
the  woman  takes  a  |  food-mat  and  puts  the  roasted  codfish  |  on  it, 
and  she  calls  her  husband  to  come  and  eat  it.  ||  Now  the  woman  first  35 
takes  water,  and  they  drink  it.  |  After  they  have  finished  drinking  it, 
the  woman  takes  off  the  skin  and  |  throws  it  into  the  fire;  and  after  the 
skin  is  all  off,  |  she  breaks  the  meat  into  pieces,  and  then  her  husband 


he'-'mae  a'les  k!u'nk!iinq!EqElases  tsE'nxwa£ye.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  15 
la  wiidEX£I'dexs  la'e  lE'mlEmox£wida.  Wa,  gi'1-mese  having  I'la- 
£yaxs  la'e  tste'pEla  la'xa  L!e'£na.  Wa,  la'xaa  k!es  Le'£lalayo 
la'xa  q!e'nEme  be'bEgwanEma;  a'Einxaa  le'xa'ma  ha'yasEk'ala 
le£wis  sa'sEme  hanna'pEx  gwe'x-sdEmas.  Wa,  la'xaa  ha£ma'£ya 
wuda'  L!o'bEku  ne'tslexa  gaa'la  LE£wa'  nEqa'la  L5£ma  dza'qwa.  20 
Wa,  la'La  k"!es  ha£ma'£ya  ts!E'lqwaxa  gaa'la  qaxs  tsE'nxwae, 
yixs  £ya'x'sE£maaxs  ha£ma'yaaxs  he'£mae  a'les  tslE'lqwexa  gaa'la. 
Wa,  laE'niLeda  £wa'pe  na'naqalg'iwes  loxs  la'e  gwiil  ha£ma'pa. 
Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Another  Kind  of  Roasted  Codfish  (Mae'dzEku   ne'ts!e£). — Wa,  gl'l-  25 
£mesa    tsEda'qe    q!E'msa     ha'nxxEndxa     ne'ts!a£yaxs    la'e    a'Em 
ax£e'dxa  la     ts!e'x-Ewaku    ne'ts!a£ya    qa£s   le    qE'lgunolisas    la'xes 
lEgwi'le.     Wa,  laE'm   he    gll    Llo'pasose   tEk!a's.     Wa,  gi'l£mese 
LlS'pe  tEkla'sexs  la'e  k'!6't!alisas    qa£s  Llo'pex  he'lk-!ot.'Ena£yas. 
Wa,  g  i'l-"mese  £na'xwa  k!umE'lx-£idExs  la'e  xulEll'saq  qa£s  Llo'ple- 30 
dex   gE'mx6t!Ena£j-as.     Wa,  g-i'l£Emxaa'wise  k!umE'lx£IdExs    la'e 
Llo'pa.      Wa,    laE'm    Llop  la'xeq.     Wa,  la  fix£e'deda    tslEda'qaxa 
lnVmadzowe'    le'£wa£ya     qa£s     ya'gudzodesa   mae'dzEkwe    ne'ts!e£ 
la'qexs  la'e  Le'£lalaxes  la'£wunEine   qa  ga'xes  ha£mx£I'dEq.     Wa, 
la£me'se  he  gil  ax'e'tsosa  ts!Eda'c[eda  £wa'pe  qa£s  na'x£Ideq.     Wa,  35 
gi'l£mese    gwiil    na'qaxs    la'eda    tslEda'qe    axa'laxa    L!e'sas    qa="s 
ts!EXLa'leq  la'xa  lEgwi'le..    Wa,  g-i'l£mese  wi£laweda  Lle'saxs  la'e 
LE'nx£widEX  qlE'mlalas.     Wa,  la  la'£wunEmas  ha£mx£I'dEq.     Wa, 


392  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

40  begins  to  eat  it.  |  After  he  has  eaten,  the  woman  takes  the  food-  ||  mat 
on  which  are  the  remains  of  food  and  the  bones,  and  |  shakes  it  into 
the  fire.  Then  the  woman  also  dips  up  some  |  water  and  drinks,  and  her 
husband  also.  After  |  they  have  finished  drinking,  he  squirts  a 
mouthful  of  water  over  |  his  hands;  and  his  wife,  on  her  part,  puts 

45  her  hands  ||  under  the  hands  of  her  husband.  Then  he  and  his  | 
wife  wash  their  hands  together.  The  man  takes  four  |  mouthfuls  of 
water  and  squirts  it  over  his  hands.  After  he  has  |  squirted  over  his 
hands  four  times,  he  finishes.  This  kind  of  food  is  not  used  to  invite  | 

50  many  people;  and  the  codfish  is  not  ||  dipped  into  oil  when  it  is 
(cooked)  this  way,  and  |  the  head  is  not  eaten.  That  is  all  about 
this.  | 

Red  Cod. — The  same  is  done  witli  the  red  cod,  the  one  kind  of  cod- 
fish |  and  with  the  nalEm,  the  (jweHeIc,  the  q.'wa'gEh,  |  the  t.'ot.'op.'e 

55  and  the  LEWErlgame£.  Only  that  is  different  ||  with  the  xuldzos: 
that  is  not  dried,  and  also  the  kelp-fish,  for  they  are  |  very  small. 
At  last  it  is  done.  | 

Black  Cod. — I  have  forgotten  about  the  black  cod,  |  for  this  one  is 
treated  in  the  same  way  as  dried  salmon  when  it  is  dried;  and  that 
also  |  is  done  in  the  same  way, — it  is  scorched  as   they  do    dried 

60  salmon  when  it  is  eaten  ||  in  the  morning;  and  it  is  also  soaked  when 


g'l'Pmese  gwfll  ha£ma'pExs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  fix£e'dxes  ha/madzowe' 

40  le'£wa£ya,  yixs  he'£mae  ge'dza£ye  ha'mxsa£yas  LEewa'  xa'qe  qa£s 
laa'xEEiides  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la'xaeda  tslEda'qe  tse'x£Idxa 
ewa'pe  qa£s  na'x£Ide,  wa,  la  6'gwaqe  lii'£wiinEmas.  Wa,  gil£mese 
gwill  na'qaxs  la'e  ha'msgEmd  la'xa  £wa'pe  qa£s  ha'mxtslanEnde 
la'xes   e£eyasowe'.     Wa,  la'xaa  gEnE'mas  LEla/bE£weses  e£eyasowe 

45  lax  e£eyasa'ses  la'£wunEme.  Wa,  laE-m  £na£nE'mp!Eng'lla  tste'n- 
tslEnkwa  LE£wis  gEiiE'me.  Wa,  le'da  bEgwa'nF.me  mo'p!Ena 
ha'msgEmd  la'xa  £wa'pe  qa£s  hamxtsla'nEndes.  Wa,  g"Il  mo'- 
p!Ena  ha'mxts'.anEntsexs  la'e  gwa'la.  Wa,  laE'm  k!es  Le'£lalayo 
la'xa  qlE'nEme  be'bEgwanEine  gwe'xsdEmas.     Wa  laE'mxaa  k!es 

50  tslE'pEla  la'xa  iJe'^ia,  yixs  hil'e  gwe'kweda  ne'ts!a£ye.  Wa,  la 
k!es  ha£ma'£ye  he'xt!a£yas.     Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Red  Cod. — Wit,  he'£meda  L!o'xsEme,  yl'xa  ne'ts!a£ye  £nE'me  gwa'- 
yi£lalasaq  LE'wa'  nfllE'me  LE£wa'  gwE£le'ke,  LE£wa'  q!wa'cjEla, 
LE£wa'  t!5't5p!e,  EE£wa'  LEWE'lgama£ye.     Wa,  le'x'a£mes   o'gii£qa- 

55  la£yasa  xu'klzosaxs  k'le'sae  k!a'wasdasE£wa  LE£wa  pExI'te  qaxs 
XE'nLElae  am£ama'ya.     Wa,  lawi'sLa  gwa'la. 

Black  Cod.  —  Wa,  he'xoLEn  LEle'wesE£wa  na'lEme,  yixs  ya'e 
gwa'leda  xamasaxs  la'e  lE'mxwasE£wa.  Wa,  he'Enixaa'wise  gwe'- 
g"ilas5xs  la'e  ts!Exa'sE£wa  lax  gwe'gilasaxa  xama'saxs  la'e  ha/ma'- 

60  xa  gaa'la.     WTa,  la'xaa  t!e'lasE£wa,  yixs  la'e    ga'la  axe'lakwaqexs 


boas]  RECIPES  393 

it  has  been  kept  for  a  long  time  and  |  when  it  is  boiled.     They  dip  61 
it  into  oil;  and  this  is  also  |  used  for  inviting  many  people,  when  the 
host  has  no  dried  salmon  |  and  no  dried  halibut.     That  is  at  last  all 
about  this.  | 

Kelp-Fish  (1). — Now  I'll  talk  about  the  kelp-fish,  which  is  |  the  same  1 
as  the  xii'ldzos.  Its  name  is  "heated  body,"  |  because  its  body  is 
heated  over  the  fire  in  order  to  loosen  the  scales,  |  and  because  also 
hot  water  is  poured  over  it.  ||  Then  the  scales  come  off  from  the  skin,  5 
and  I  therefore  it  is  called  the  "heated  body;"  and  the  reason  why 
it  is  called  "fast  swimmer"  (xil'ldsos)  |  is  because  it  swims  very 
quickly  whenever  it  is  frightened.  | 

Now  I  will  tell  how  they  are  cooked,  for  |  they  do  not  begin  right 
away  to  cook  them  when  they  are  fresh,  for  they  only  [|  begin  to  10 
cook  them  after  they  have  been  in  the  house  for  a  long  time.  Some- 
times I  they  are  kept  five  days,  or  even  more;  for  they  try  to  obtain 
for  it  a  I  strong  smell,  so  that  the  bones  will  come  off  from  the  meat, 
and  also  so  that  they  |  may  be  fat.  The  first  people  said  so,  and 
therefore  people  |  of  recent  times  imitate  them;  and  (therefore)  also 
the  kelp-fish  becomes  tainted  (before  it  is  used).  ||  The  woman  takes  15 
the  kettle  and  puts  it  by  the  side  of  the  |  fire  of  the  house.  Then  she 
takes  her  drinking-bucket  and  draws  |  fresh  water.  As  soon  as  she 
comes  home,  she  pours  |  the  water  that  she  has  drawn  into  the 

ha'nxLEntsE-cwae.      Wa,  la   ts!E'pr.la    la'xa   L!e'£na.     Wa,    la'xaa  61 
LE/£lalayo  la'xa  qle'iiEme  be'bEgwanEma,  yixs  k'!ea'sae  xa'matsa 
khve'lase,  loxs  klea'sae  k"!a'wasa.     Wa,  lawI'sLa  gwfil  la'xeq. 

Kelp-Fish  (1). — Wa,  la£me'sEn  gwa'gwexs£alal  la'xa  pExi'te,  yixs  1 
£nEma'e  LE£wa  xu'ldzose.  Wa,  he'Em  la'gilas  Le'gadEs  psxi'te, 
yixs  pExa'sEwa£es  6'k!wina£yaxs  la'e  la'lawa£yasE£wes  go'bEte  la'xa 
lEgwi'lasa  go'kwe,  loxs  guqe'tasE£waasa  tsls'lxsta  £wa'pa.  Wa, 
he'x£ida£mese  £wl'£wexap!e'de  go'bEtas  la'xa  Lle'se.  Wii,  he'Em  5 
la'gilas  Le'gadEs  pEX'I'te.  Wii,  he'£mis  la'g-ilas  Le'gadaxaas  xul- 
dzo'sas,  yi'x'ae  lax  max£ide  yixs  he'ltsaases  k'il£e'dayowe. 

Wa,  la£me'sEn  gwa'gwexs£alal  la'qexs  la'e  ha£me'xsilasE£wa,  yixs 
k'.e'sae  he'x-£id  ha£me'xsilasoxs  he'£mae  a'le  ge'te,  qaxs  a'lmae 
ha£mexsilasoxs  la'e  gael  axe'l  la'xa  g-6'kwe  £na'l£nEmp lEnae  10 
sEk-!a'p!Eiixwa£se  £na'las  loxs  haya'qaaq  qaxs  q!a'q!alaaq  qa 
q!alp!a'les,  qak'!E'nx-£ides  xa'qas  la'xes  q!E'mlale.  Wa,  he'£misexs 
tsE'nx£wklae,  £ne'kaeda  g  a'le  bEgwa'nEma.  Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilasa 
a'le  bEgwa'nEm  na'naxtslEwaq.  Wa,  he'£maaxs  la'e  qlaH'deda 
pExi'te,  lada  ts!Eda'cje  ax£edxa  ha'nxxanowe  qa£s  hano'lises  lax  15 
lEgwI'lases  g'6'kwe.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  na'gatsle  qa£s  le  tse'x£IdEx 
a'lta  £wa'pa.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gax  na'£nakuxs  la'e  guxtslo'tses 
tsa'iiEme     £wap     la'xa     ha'nxLanowe,    qa    nEgo'yoxsdales.     Wa, 


394  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

kettle,  until  it  is  half  full.  |  and  she  leaves  it  by  the  side  of  the  Ore. 

20  Then  she  takes  the  kelp-fish  and  ||  puts  them  into  a  small  basket, 
and  she  places  it  near  the  |  side  of  the  fire.  Then  she  takes  the 
short  |  wedges  which  are  always  kept  in  the  house,  and  also  a  short 
wall-board.  |  Generally  she  uses  the  stem-seat  of  a  small  canoe.  She 
puts  it  down  |  close  to  the  small  basket  in  which  the  kelp-fish  are 

25  kept,  and  she  does  the  same  ||  with  the  short  wedge.  Then  she  takes 
one  kelp-fish  out  of  the  |  little  basket.  She  holds  the  head  of  the 
kelp-fish,  and  puts  its  |  body  into  the  fire.  Then  she  turns  it  over; 
and  as  soon  as  |  she  sees  that  the  scales  begin  to  come  off  from  the 
skin,  [  she  puts  it  down  on  an  old  mat  that  has  been  spread  out  on 

30  the  floor  of  the  house.  She  takes  her  ||  knife  and  scrapes  off  the  scales 
that  are  loose.  Then  she  turns  |  the  fish  over  and  over  as  she  scrapes 
off  the  scales.  As  soon  as  all  |  the  scales  are  off,  she  puts  the  fish 
on  its  belly  on  the  [  stern-seat  of  the  small  canoe,  on  which  the  fish 
is  beaten.     She  holds  it  with  the  left  hand,  by  the  |  head.     With  the 

35  right  hand  she  takes  the  flat  point  of  a  ||  short  wedge,  and  with 
the  top  end  beats  the  |  back  of  the  kelp-fish,  beginning  at  the  back  of 
the  head,  and  beating  down  to  the  tad.  |  She  only  stops  beating  when 
the  body  of  the  kelp-fish  is  ^_^-z____^^  soft.  |  After  she  has 
beaten  it,  she  takes  her  |  fish-  <^2)j)jJ--D--^  ^mfe   and   cuts   the 

40  body  across  in  this  manner.  After  ||  she  has  cut  it 

o'xsa£mese  hama'lis  la'xa  lEgwI'le.      Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  pExTte  qa/s 

20  k!Exts!o'des  la'xa  la'laxame.  Wa,  la  ha'ngalilas  la'xa  ma'kala 
lax  ona'lisasa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la'xae  ax£e'dxa  tsteklwa'  hemEnel 
LEmg"ayasag'6'kwe.  Wa,  he'£niisa  ts  !Exusto  ts!ats!axusEma.  He'Em 
q  '.lina'la  a'xsE£wa  g'ixsa'sa  xwa'xwagume.  Wa,  la  pax£a'llla  la'xa 
ma'ginwalllasa  pExI'dats!e  la'laxama.     Wa,  he'Emxaa'wise  ax£a- 

25  ll'lasa  ts!Exusto  LE'mg'aya.  Wa,  la  daltslo'dxa  £nE'me  pExi't  la'xa 
la'laxame.  Wa,  la  da'la  he'xt !a£yasa  pEXi'taxs  la'e  k'a'tLEnts 
6'k!wina£yas  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la  le'xi£lalaq.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese 
do'qulaq  la  £wl£la  £wi'£wexap  lededa  go'bEte  la'xa  Lle'saxs,  la'e 
axdzo'ts   la'xa   LEbl'le   k'!a'k-!obana.     Wa,   la    ax£e'dxes    xwa'La- 

3Q  yowe  qa£s  k'exa'les  la'xa  la  k'  lina'la  go'bEta.  Wa,  laE'm  le'x-i- 
£lalaxa  pEXi'taxs  k-exa'laax  go'bEt  !Ena£yas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wl£la- 
weda  go'bEt  !Ena£yaxs  la'e  ma'dzotsa  pEX'I'te  la'xa  ttelo'dzo 
g'ixsS'sa  xwa'xwagume.  Wa,  la  da'lases  gE'mxoltsIana  lax 
he'xt !a£yas.      Wa,  la  da'x£Itses  he'lk-!ots!ana£ye  lax    pE'lba£yasa 

35  ts!Exustowe  LE'mgaya.  Wa,  la  t!E'lx£w!ts  o'xta£yas  lax  awl'g'a- 
eyasa  pExi'te  ga'giLEla  lax  6'xxaata£yas,  he'bEndala  lax  o'xsda- 
£yas.  Wa,  a'l£mese  gwal  tlE'lxwaqexs  la'e  lE'ntlede  o'k!wina£yasa 
pEX'I'te.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  tlE'lxwaqexs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  xwa'- 
Layowe  qa£s    qatetle'dex    6'k!wina£yas   g'a  gwa'leg'a    (Jig.).     Wa, 

40  gil£mese  gwal  qatetaqexs  lae  ma£stE'nts  lax  £wa'bEts!alasa  h&nx- 


boas]  RECIPES  395 

crosswise,  she  puts  the  fish  head  first  into  the  water  in  the  |  kettle.  41 
She  never  cuts  off  the  head ;  for  the  first  people  |  said  that  a  good  taste 
is  given  to  the  meat  of  the  |  kelp-fish  by  the  fat  of  the  eyeballs  and 
the  |  brain.     Therefore  she  puts  it  all  into  the  kettle;  ||  and  she  does  45 
this  to  all  the  other  kelp-fish,  if  there  are  to  be  many  |  guests.    As  soon 
as  the  kelp-fish  is  in  the  kettle,  |  she  puts  it  over  the  fire;  and  when  it 
begins  to  boil,  |  the  woman  takes  the  fire-tongs  and  stirs  it;  [  and  after 
stirring  it  for  some  time,  she  takes  it  down.     Then  ||  she  takes  her  large  50 
long-handled  stirring-ladle  and  stirs  with  it  |  for  a  short  time  what  is 
being  cooked.    She  does  not  |  stir  it  long,  before  she  dips  the  spoon  into 
what  is  being  |  cooked  and  pours  it  back  [on  the  top  of  where  she  took 
it  from] ;  |  and  she  continues  this  for  a  long  time.    It  may  be  |[  half  an  55 
hour  according  to  the  clock  that  the  woman  |  dips  up  the  water  of  what 
she  is  cooking  and  pours  it  back  again.  |  She  only  stops  when  the 
liquid  of  what  she  is  cooking  is  really  milky.  |  This  shows  that  the  fat 
of  the  fish  is  well  mixed  |  with  the  liquid.     That  is  the  reason  why 
the  woman  dips  up  ||  the  liquid  of  what  she  is  cooking,  so  that  the  60 
liquid  |  and  the  fat  of  the  kelp-fish  ma}'  be  well  mixed;  for  if  the  | 
liquid  of  the  kelp-fish  should  not  be  milky  when  it  is  given  by  the 
host  to  his  friends,  |  then  the  guests  at  once  whisper  among  them- 

Lanowe.      Wa,    laE'm    hewa'xaEm     qako'dEx    he'x-t!a£yas    qaxs  41 
£ne'lraeda  ga'le  bEgwa'nEmqexs  he'£mae    yo'sp!ayasa  qlE'mlalasa 
pExi'te    tsE'ntsEnxstaeyas   gegEbElo'xsta£yas  gegEyagEsas    LE£wes 
lEqwa'.      Wa,  he'£mis    la'g'ila    £wI£la£stEnts    la'xa    ha'nxLanowe. 
Wa,  la  6wielaBm  he  gwe'x£Idxa  wao'kwe  pExi'ta,  yixs  qle'nEmae  45 
Le'£lanEmas.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese  £wl£la£steda  pExi'te  la'xa  ha'nxxano- 
waxs  la'e  ha'nx'LEnts  la'xa   lEgwI'le.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  mEdE'lx£wf- 
dExs   la'eda   tslEda'qe    ax£e'dxa    tsIe'sLala    qa£s  xwe'tlldeq.     Wa, 
k!e'st!a  ge'giltsela  xwe'tasa  ts!e'sLalaxs  la'e  kat!a'lilas.     Wa,  lii 
ax'e'dxes  £wa'lase  gilt!EXLala  xwe'dayo  k-atslEiiaqa,  qa£s  ya'£was-'-  50 
Ide     xwe't!ets     la'xes     ha£mexsI'lasE£we.     Wa,    k- !e's£Emxaa'wise 
ge'g  iltsela  xwetas  laqexs  la'e  tse'gostalas  lax  £wa'palases  ha£mex-- 
sI'lasE£we  qaes    xwe'laqe   tsestE'nts   lax  o'kiiya£yases  gaya'nEma- 
saq.     Wa,   la    ge'glltselakas   he    gwe'gile.     Wa,  walaanawise  lo£ 
nExsEg'iLEla  la'xa q!aq!alak"!a£ye  £wa'£wasdEmasa  tslEda'qe  tse'go-  55 
stalaxa  £wapalasa     ha£me'x'sIlasE£was    qa£s     xwe'laqe    tse£stE'nts. 
Wa,  a'l£mese  gwa'lExs   la'e   a'lak!fda  la  dzE'mxustowe  £wa'palasa 
ha£mexsi'lasE£was,   qaxs  la'e  a'lak'Iala  la  qEl5'kwe  tsE'nxwa£yasa 
pExite  LE£wis  £wa'pala.     Wa,  he'Ein  la'gllasa  tslEda'qe  tse'g'ostala 
Ewa'palases    ha£me'xs!lasE£we   qa  a'lak-lalese  lE'lgoweda  £wa'palas  60 
LE£wa  tsE'nxwa£yasa    pEX'i'te,  qaxs    g'l'Pmae    k-!es    dzE'mxustowe 
£wa'palasa    pEX'I'taxs    hamgi'layaaseda  Le'£lalaxes    £ne£nEmo'kwe. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£mese  dEndE'msa  k!we'ldaxs  la'e  ho'qQwEls  lax  go'- 


396  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  85 

selves  when  they  leave  the  house  |  of  their  host,  and  they  say  about 

65  the  woman  that  she  is  lazy,  ||  although  she  maybe  of  chief's  blood  and 
a  chief's  wife.  However,  |  the  wives  of  those  who  are  not  of  chief's 
blood  do  not  give  up  |  trying  to  get  milky  the  liquid  of  the  kelp-fish 
that  they  are  cooking.  When  |  the  liquid  of  the  kelp-fish  is  really 
milky,  the  |  kelp-fish  kettle  is  taken  off  the  fire,  and  now  it  is  done.  || 

70  Then  the  woman  brings  out  of  her  room  her  dishes,  which  |  she  keeps 
in  the  inner  room.  She  puts  them  down  on  the  floor  next  to  the  j 
kettle  in  which  the  kelp-fish  were  boiled;  and  she  takes  the  same 
large  |  ladle  with  which  she  dipped  up  the  liquid  of  the  kelp-fish 
when  she  was  cooking  it,  |  and  she  dips  up  with  it  the  boiled  kelp-fish 

75  from  the  ||  kettle,  and  she  pours  them  into  the  dishes.  Both  the 
liquid  and  the  |  meat  are  put  into  the  dishes.  As  soon  as  the  dishes 
are  filled  evenly,  |  — for  they  are  not  entirely  full  |  of  liquid  and 
meat, — and  as  soon  as  everything  |  i-^  ready,  the  spoons  are  distrib- 

S0  uted  among  the  small  party  of  guests.  ||  Then  the  dishes  are  placed 
before  the  guests;  and  there  is  always  |  one  dish  for  four  men.  | 
First,  they  drink  some  cold  water;  and  after  they  have  finished 
drinking,  |  the  host  speaks  to  his  guests,  and  says,  |  "Think  of  your 
throats  and  do  not  swallow  the  bones!"     Then  they  all  begin  to 

S5  eat  with  ||  spoons.     It  takes  them  a  long  time  to  eat  the  boiled  kelp- 

kwas  Le'elanEmax-daq.    Wa,  laE'm  £ne'x'sE£weda  tslEda'qaxs  qlE'm- 

65  tslEXLae,  yi'xa  gi'qamene  yixs  gEnF.'maasa  g-I'gama£ye.  Wa,  la/La 
£na'xwa£me  gEgEnE'masa  wa'x£me  k!es  gi'qamen  k!es  ya'x'Id  qa 
dzEmxustox£wIdes  £wa'palas  haeme'xsilas  pExI'ta.  Wa,  g'l'l'mese 
a'lak!ala  la  dzE'mxustox£wIde  ewa'palasa  pEXi'taxs  la'e  ha'nx- 
sEntsEeweda  pEXi'te£lats!e    ha'nxLana.     Wii,   laE'm    Llo'pa.     Wa, 

70  he'x£ida£meseda  ts'.Eda'qe  ax£wult!all'laxes  IdE'lqiwaxs  lia'xde 
k'imts!a'llla  6ts!a'llle  qa£s  g-a'xe  ka'galllElas  lfix  ma'ginwalllasa 
pExi'te£lats!e  ha'nxLana.  Wa,  he'£mis  ax^e'tsoseda  £wa'lase  k-a- 
tslEna'q,  yix  tsegostalayo'sex  £wa'palases  ha'nxLEntsE£we  pEx  I'ta. 
Wa,  le  tse'yoltslots    la'xa    ha'nx'Laakwe    pExI'ta   la'xa  ha'nxxa- 

75  nowe  qa£s  le  tsets!a'las  la'xa  lo'Elqlwe,  £na'xwa£me  £wa'palas  LE£wa 
qfemla'le  la  tsetsla'layo  la'xa  lo'Elqlwe.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  la  £nEma'x-e 
awa'xatslEwasasa  lo'Ekjlwaxs  £na'xwa£mae  k!es  a'laEm  qo'qu- 
tlaxa  £wa'pala  LE£wa  qlE'mlale.  Wa,  gl'l£mese  £wl£la  la  gwa'- 
lalaxs    la'e    ts!Ewanae'dzEma    ka'k'EtslEnaqe      la'xa     k!wa'k!we- 

80  lEmaxs  la'e  kil'x-£Idayuwa  lo'Elqlwe.  Wa,  he'mEnalaEm  mae- 
ma'leda  be'bEgwanEmaxa  Ena'l£nEmexLa  lo'qlwa.  Wa,  le  na'£na- 
qalgEyoEmxa  wiida£sta'  £wa'pa.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs 
la'e  ya'qlEgaleda  k!we'lasaxes  Le'£lanEme.  Wa,  la  £ne'k-a:  "  £ya'- 
x-da£xu     mElq luxa'lano     qaox    xa'qas."     Wa,    la   £wl£la    y5's£itses 

85  ka'kEtslEnaqe.     Wa,  la    ge'g  illl  yo'saxa  VEwe'kwe  pExi'ta  qaxs 


boas]  RECIPES  397 

fish,  for  |  in  eating  it  they  are  very  much  afraid,  for  it  happens  often  |  SG 
that  they  are  hurt  when  swallowing  fish-bones,  and  therefore  they  do 
not  eat  fast  |  [with  spoons]  when  it  is  boiled;  and  after  they  have 
eaten,  they  |  cool  themselves  with  fresh  cold  water.     Then  they  || 
go  out  of  the  feasting-house  at  once.     The  kelp-fish  is  not  given  |  to  90 
a  large  number  of  people,  for  they  never  |  obtain  many  when  they 
are  catching  them.     Therefore  it  is  given  only  to  the  |  numaym  and  to 
a  single  family;  that  is,  the  sons,  and  their  |  wives,  and  their  children, 
and  the  daughters  and  their  ||  husbands  and  their  children.     That  is  95 
what  is  called  a  family  of  single  origin.  |  Only  these  are  invited  by  the 
owner  of  the  kelp-fish  and  also  his  |  friends.     That  is  all  about  the 
boiled  kelp-fish.  | 

Kelp-Fish  (2). —  (The  man)  first  takes  the  small  basket  of  his  wife.  I  i 
As  soon  as  he  arrives  at  the  beach  of  his  house  he  puts  j  the  fish 
caught  with  the  line  into  the  basket.  He  goes  up  and  enters  the  | 
house.  Then  his  wife  spreads  an  old  mat  ||  and  carries  up  the  small  5 
fish-basket  and  |  places  it  by  the  side  of  the  old  mat.  She  sits  down 
by  the  side  of  the  old  mat,  which  j  is  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
fish-basket.  She  takes  |  one  of  the  fish  with  her  left  hand,  and  she 
does  in  the  same  way  as  I  |  described  before.  When  the  intestines 
and  the  gills  have  all  been  removed,  ||  she  takes  her  fish-knife,  which  is  10 

a'la£mae  kllE'ma  pExi'taxs  ha£ma'ya£e  qaxs  q!iina'lae  ga'yalases  86 
xii'qaxs    nEX£we'tsE£wae.      Wa,    he'£mis     la'g-ila     k!es    a'lbaleda 
yo'siiqexs    ha'nxLaakwae.     Wa,    gi'l£mese    gwa'la    yo'saxdaqexs 
la'e   koxwaxotsa    a'lta   wudaesta'    £wa'pa.     Wa,  he'x£ida£mese   la 
ho'qiiwEls    la'xes    k!we'layats!exde.      Wa,    k-!e's£Emxaa    khve'la-  90 
dzEma    pExI'te    la'xa     qle'nEme     be'bEgwanEma     qaxs     kMe'sae 
q!EyoLanEmenoxuxs       la'Lan  Emae.        He'£mis     la'g  ila     le'xa£ma 
£nE£me'mote    LE£wa    £iiE'mxi.ala  £nE£me'ma,  yixa    sa'sEme    LE£wis 
gEgEiiE'me  LE£wis  sa'sEme,    LE£wa    tsle'daqe   sa'sEma  LE£wis  le'la- 
£wunEme  LE£wis  sa'sEme.     Wa,  he'Em  gwE£yo'  £iiE'mxLala  £nEme'-  95 
me.      Wa,    le'x"ames  Le'£lalaso£s    axno'gwadasa    pExu'te  Lo£me'da 
£ne£nEino'kwe.     Wa.  laE'm  gwal  la'xa  ha'nxLaakwe  pExi'ta. 

Kelp-Fish  (2). — Wa,  he'£mis  g'il  &x£etso£seda  la'laxamiixses  gEnE'-  1 
maxs  gl'lae  la'g-alis  lax  LlEma'isases  go'kwe.  Wa,  la  k"!ixts!o'- 
tses  Llil'ganEmeda  pEX'I'te  laq.  Wa,  la,  la'stsas  qa£s  la  lae'Las  la'xes 
go'kwe.  Wa,  he'x£ida£mese  gEnE'mas  la  LEp!a'lilaxa  k'!a'k!o- 
bana.-  Wa,  la  kMo'qidilxa  pExi'datsle  la'laxama  qa£s  la  hanE'n-  5 
xslllas  la'xa  k'!a'k-!obana.  Wa,  lii  klflnxEhlxa  k!a'k!obana  lax 
he'lklodEiiwalllasa  pEX'i'datsIe  la'laxama.  Wa,  la£me  dolts!odxa 
£nE'mepExi'tsesgE'mxolts!ana£ye.  Wa,  he'£misgwe'gilaqr;n  gi'lx-- 
£Ide  wa'ldEma.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  ewi£lawe  ya'xyigile  LE£wa  qlo'sna- 
vaxs  la'e  ax£e'dxes  xwa'Layowe.     He' Em  £nEm  Le'gEmsa  xwa'La-  10 


398  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [kth.  ann.  35 

11  also  called  j  mussel-shell  knife,  for  the  first  people  used  the  mussel- 
shell  for  a  knife  |  (this  was  sharpened  by  Deer  when  he  met 
Q!a'neqe£lak").  |  The  woman  takes    the  fish  in  her  left  hand  |  and 

15  puts  it  down  on  t  lie  old  mat  with  the  ||  tail  of  the  fish  towards  the 
woman  and  the  stomach  turned  towards  the  left  |  of  the  woman. 
She  holds  her  knife  in  her  right  hand,  |  cuts  off  the  head,  and  when 
it  is  off  she  cuts  open  J  the  back  all  the  way  down  to  the  tail,  cutting 
along  the  upper  side  of  the  backbone.  |  She  only  stops  cutting  when 

20  the  fish  is  spread  open.  |  Then  she  puts  it  back  on  the  old  mat.  Then 
she  takes  |  another  fish  and  she  does  the  same  to  it,  and  |  she  does 
the  same  with  all  the  others.  Now  her  husband  |  makes  roast ing- 
tongs  of  red  pine,  for  they  are  going  to  roast  the  fish.     As  soon  |  as 

25  the  work  is  finished,  he  gives  them  to  his  wife,  and  the  woman  ||  takes 
the  roasting-tongs  and  she  takes  a  long  strip  of  split  |  cedar-bark  and 
winds  it  about  one  span  [  from  the  lower  sharp-pointed  end  of  the 
roast  ing-tongs.  ]  She  pulls  it  tight  as  she  winds  it  around  it,  and  ties 
it  on.     Then  the  roasting-tongs  will  not  |  split  when  she  puts  the  fish 

30  into  them.  As  soon  as  ||  the  woman  has  finished  this,  she  takes  one  of 
the  fish  that  have  been  cut  open  |  and  rubs  it  over  the  roasting-tongs. 
When  these  are  |  covered  with  blood  and  slime,  she  puts  into  it  one 
of  the  fish  that  have  been  |  cut  open.     It  is  put  in  crosswise.    Then 


11  yowe  gElts!E'me  yixa  xo'las  qaxs  he'£mae  xwa'Layasag'a'la  bEgwa'- 
nEma  (ylxs  gexasE-was  ge'x-ustalaxs  la'e  ba'k  o  lo£  Q!a'neqe- 
elakwe).  Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  dFt'x£Itses  gE'mxolts!ana£ye  la'xa  pE- 
xite  qa£sya'gudzodes  la'xak'  !a'k'  !obana.    Wa,  laE'm  gwa'saxsdaleda 

15  pEX-I'te  la'xa  tslEda'qe.  Wa,  la  gwe'k- laesala  lax  gEmxoltslana- 
£yasa  ts  lEda'qe.  Wa,  la  da'lases  he'lk'  lots  lana'ye  la'xes  xwa'Layaxs 
la'e  qak'6'dEX  he'xt  !a£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  la'waxs  la'e  xwalbEtE'n- 
dEX  o'xLaata£yas  qa£s  ha'xEle  lax  ts!a'sna£yas  e'k*!ot!Endalax  xa- 
kladzas.     Wa,  a'l£mese  gwal  xwa'Laqexs  la'e  a'lak'lala  la  LEpa'la. 

20  Wa,  la  axdzo'ts  la'xaaxa  k-!a'k!obanaxs  la'e  e'tled  ax£e'dxa 
£nE'me  pExi'ta.  Wa,  laxae  he'Emxat!  gwe'x-£IdEq.  Wa,  la'na- 
xwaEm  he  gwe'x£idxa  wao'kwe.  Wa,  la'La  la'£wunEmas  Llo'psa- 
vogwilaxa  wuna'gdle  qaxs  Llo'peLaxa  pExi'te.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese 
gwa'le  axa'£37asexs  la'e  ts!as  la'xes  gEnE'me.     Wa,  la'da  tslEda'qe 

25  ila'x£ldxa  Llopsayowe.  Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  giltla  ts!eq!adzo  dzEXE'k" 
dEna'sa.  Wa,  la  qEx-£aLE'lots  la'xa  £nE'mp!Enke  la'xEns  q!wa'- 
c[!waxts!ana£ye  g-agiLEla  lax  bEnba£ye  ex-beseda  Llopsayowe.  Wa, 
la  lEk!uta'la£me  qExa£yasexs  la'e  yi£la'LElots.  Wa,  laE'm  k'lesL 
xo'xusLa  L'.d'psayowe  qo  lal  L!o'pts!odayoLa  psxi'te  laq.    Wa,  g'i'l- 

30  £mese  gwa'lExs  lae'da  tslEda'qe  da'x""Idxa  £nE'me  la'xa  xwa'LEkwe 
pEX'I'ta  qa£s  ts'.Ek'itle'des  la'xa  L!5'psayowe.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
mEgug'e'txa  E'lkwa  LE£wa  k'le'liixs  la'e  Llo'ptslotsa  £nE'me  xwa'- 
LEku     pExi'ta.      Wa,    laE'm    ge'k!Ena£yaxs     la'e    ax£e'dxa    dzE- 


boas]  KECIPES  399 

she  takes  |  split  cedar-bark  and  winds  it  around  just  over  the  edge 
of  the  fish,  and  ||  she  pulls  it  tight  and  ties  it  down.     Then  she  puts  35 
another  fish  just  over  it.  |  It  is  turned  the  way  opposite  the  one  just 
put  into  the  tongs.     Then  she  |  winds  cedar-bark  just  above  it,  and 
she  pulls  it  tight  when  she  |  ties  it  around.     Then  she  takes  another 
fish  and  puts  it  in.  |  Its  tail  is  turned  again  the  opposite  way,  for  all 
of  them  are  turned  so  that  the  tails  are  in  alternate  directions  ||  in  the  40 
roasting-tongs.     Sometimes  there  are  four  |  fish,  or  even  six,  put  into 
one  pair  of  long  roasting-tongs.  |  Then  she  ties  cedar-bark  around  the 
top  of  the  roasting-tongs.  |  Then  the  woman  places  them  by  the  side 
of  the  fire  of  her  house.  |  First  the  flesh-side  is  roasted;  and  as  soon 
as  it  is  almost  ||  black  on  the  surface  of  the  meat,  she  turns  them  over  45 
and  |  changes  to  roast  the  skin-side.  When  the  skin-side  is  really  black- 
ened, |  they  are  done.    Then  she  pulls  the  tongs  out  of  the  ground  and  | 
places  them  not  far  from  the  fire,  so  that  the  heat  of  [  the  fire  reaches 
them,  and  so  that  they  keep  hot.     Then  the  ||  man  calls  his  friends,  50 
and  sometimes  he  calls  his  |  numaym  to  come  and  eat  the  roasted  kelp- 
fish.  |  Those  whom  he  has  called  come  in  immediately;  and  as  soon  | 
as  they  are  all  in,  the  woman  spreads  long  food-  |  mats  in  front  of 
those  who  are  going  to  eat  the  roasted  kelp-fish.  ||  The  woman  takes  55 
the  roasted  fish  in  the  roasting-tongs,  and  takes  |  it  out  of  the  roasting- 

XEkwe'    dEna's    qa£s    qEx£a'LElodes    lax    ek- !Enxe'LElas.     Wa,   la 
lEk!u'tElaxs  la'e  yll£a'LElodEq.     Wa,  la  e'tletsa  £nE'me  lax  e'k!e-  35 
leI&s.      Wa,    laE'm     xwe'laleda    a'le    L!o'pts!oyos.      Wa,    la'xae 
qEX£Itsa  dEna'se  lax  e'k- lEnxELElas.     Wa,  la'xae  lEk!utE'laxs  la'e 
yil£aLEl5dEq.     Wa,  laxae  e'tled  &x£e'dxa  £nE'me  qa£s  L!o'pts!odes. 
Wa,  laE'mxae    e'tled    xwelala    qaxs    £na'xwa;mae    xwe'xwalaleda 
la  L!o'pts!5yos    la'xa   L!o'psayowe,  yixs  £nal£nEmp  tenae    mo'weda  40 
pExi'te  lo£xs    q!EL!a'e    L!o'pts!ala    la'xa    gi'lt!asa    Llo'psayowe. 
Wa,  la£me    a'Elaak"  qExta'£yeda    dEna'se  lax  o'xta£yasa   Llo'psa- 
yowe.    Wa,  lada  tslEda'qe  Lanolisaq  lax  hogwi'lases  go'kwe.     Wa, 
las'm  he    gil   L!o'p!etsoseda    qlEmlalas.     Wa,  gll£mese   naxsaapla 
lo£    kliimle    o'kiiya£yas    qlE'mlalasexs    !a'e    le'x£idEq  qa   hes    la  45 
Llii'yo  Llo'p'ede  L!e'sadza£yas.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  la  alaklala  klumle 
L!esadza£yasexs    la'e    Llo'pa.     Wa,    la  k'!iqulelaq    qa£s  ga'xe  La'- 
galilaq  la'xa  kle'se  qwe'sala    la'xa  lEgwI'le  qa  la'gaes  Lle'salasa 
lEgwI'le  laq,  qa  ts!Elqwaxsa£mese.     Wa,  la  he'x£ida£meda  bEgwa'- 
nEine  la    Le'£lalaxes    £ne£nEmo'k\ve  loxs    ha'e    Le'£lalasE£wes    £ue-  50 
£me'mote  qa  ga'xes    LlELlo'bEguxa    Llo'bEkwe    pEx-I'ta.     Wa,  la 
he'x'£idaEm     gax     ho'gweLEleda      Le'£lanEme.      Wa,      gi'l£mese 
£wPlaeLExs    la'eda    ts!Eda'qe    LEpIa'lIlxa    gildEdzowe    ha£mad/j'' 
le'£wa£ya  lax  Lla'salllasa  L!EL!obEgflLaxa  Llo'bEkwe  pExi'ta.     Wa, 
la'da  ts!Eda'qe  &x£e'dxa  L!o'pts!ala  Llo'bEk"  pExi'ta  qa£s  xik!ol-  55 
tslo'deq  la'xes  Llo'psayowe.      Wa,  la  naE'nLF.mlllElasa    £nal£nE'me 


400  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.sis 

57  tongs.  She  puts  them  down  with  the  skin  below  in  front  j  of  the 
guests,  and  she  pours  oil  into  oil-dishes,  |  and  she  puts  down  one  in 
front  of  every  four  men.  |  The  feasters  themselves  break  the  fish;  || 

60  and  when  it  is  all  broken  in  pieces,  they  begin  to  eat.  |  Then  they  dip 
it  in  oh,  for  all  the  fat  comes  out  while  |  it  is  being  roasted,  and. there- 
fore it  is  dry.  As  soon  as  they  have  finished  |  eating  the  roasted  fish, 
they  drink  fresh  water;  |  and  after  they  have  finished  drinking  they  go 

65  out.  Roasted  kelp-fish  is  not  ||  given  at  a  feast  to  many  tribes,  for  they  | 
never  catch  much  of  it.  Therefore  only  the  friends,  husband  and 
wife,  |  or  the  numaym,  or  strangers,  eat  roasted  |  kelp-fish.  Now, 
that  is  aU  about  this. 
1  Kelp-Fish  (3). — Oh,  I  forgot  to  talk  about  |  wind-dried  kelp- 
fish.  It  is  cut  in  the  same  way  as  the  roasted  |  kelp-fish. 
The  only  difference  is,  that  the  backbone  is  taken  out,  [  and 
the  scales  are  left  on  in  the  same  way  as  the  scales  are  left 
5  on  ||  roasted  fish.  They  do  not  eat  the  skin  of  the  roasted 
kelp-fish,  for  |  they  only  eat  the  meat.  After  the  feasters 
have  eaten  the  roasted  kelp-fish,  ]  they  throw  away  the 
skin.  When  |  the  woman  finishes  cutting  open  the  kelp-fish, 
she  splits  thin  pieces  of  |  cedar-sticks  and  spreads  the  fish 

10  with  two  of  them  so  as  to  keep  it  open,  ||  in  this  manner: 

57  la'xes  Le'£lanEme.  Wa,  la  k!u'nxts!otsa  Lle'-'na  la'xa  ts!e'ts!Eba- 
ts!e  qa£s  la  k'ag  imlllElas  lax  L!a'sa£yasa  mae'mokwe  be'bEgwa- 
nEma.     Wa,  la  q!ule'xs£Em   LE'nqweda   klwe'laxa   pEX'I'te.     Wa, 

60  g'i'l£mese  £wI'we1xs  LE'ngEkuxs  la'e  £wl£la  ha£mx£I'da.  Wa, 
las'm  tslEpa's  la'xa  L!e'£na  qaxs  £wl£lamae  tsE'nxwa£yasexs  la'e 
L!o'pasE£wa.  Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilas  lE'mxwe.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  gwal 
L !el lo'bEgiixa  Llo'bEkwaxs  la'e  na'gek'Elaxa  a'lta  £wa'pa.  Wa, 
gi'Pmese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ho'qiiwElsa.     Wa,  k"!e's£Emxaeda  l!o'- 

65  bEkwe  pEx  I't  klwe'ladzEm  la'xa  qle'nEme  !eiqwalaLa£ya  qaxs 
k!e'sae  qliina'la  qlEyo'LanEma,  la'gilas  le'x'a£meda  £ne£nEmo'kwe 
EE£wa  ha£yasEkala  LE£wa  enE£me'mote  LE£wa  ba'giinse  l!el lo'- 
bEgiixa pExI'te.  Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Kelp-Fish  (3). — A,  he'xoLEn  e'tledsl  gwa'gwexs£alasLeda  xi'l- 
kwe  pEXI'ta.  He'Em  gwa'le  xwa'La£yase  xwa'La£yasa  Llo'bEkwe 
pioxl'ta.  Wa,  le'x-a£mes  6'gux£Idayosexs  la£wEyakwa£es  xa'k'Ia- 
dzowe.  Wa,  la  axa'laEmxae  go'bEtas  he  gwa'le  go'bEtasa  Llo'bE- 
5  kwaxs  axa'la£mae.  Wa,  la  k'les  ha£ma'e  L!e'sasa  Llo'bEkwe  yixs 
le'xa£mae  ha£ma'e  qlE'mlalas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  LlELlo'bEgwe- 
da  k'.we'laxs  la'e  a/Em  ts  !Ex£edayoweda  Lle'sas.  Wa,  g'l'l£Em 
gwa'leda  ts!Eda'qe  xwa'Laxa  pexl'taxs  la'e  xo'x£wIdxa  wiswEltowe 
k!wa£xLawa  cpa£s  qEt!l'desa  ma'lts!aqe  la'xa  pEX-I'te  qa  LEpa'les 

10  gagwa'leg-a  (fig.). 


boas]  RECIPES  401 

After  she  has  done  so,  she  hangs  them  up  just  over  the  |  fire;  and  12 
after  they  have  been  hanging  there  for  four  days,  |  they  are  half  dried. 
Then  the  owner  takes  them  down;  |  and  when  he  wishes  to  boil  them, 
she  takes  the  ||  small  kettle  and  puts  it  over  the  fire.  She  takes  her  |  fish-  15 
knife  and  cuts  the  kelp-fish  into  two  pieces  lengthwise,  |  and  she  also 
cuts  it  in  halves  crosswise.     Now  each  of  the  dried  kelp-fish  is  in  four 
pieces.  |  When  the  kettle  begins  to  boil,  she  |  puts  the  pieces  of  kelp- 
fish  into  it.     It  doesnot  ||  boillong  beforeshe  takes  the  kettleoff  thefire,  20 
for  then  |  it  is  done.     Then  the  woman  takes  her  dish  and  puts  it  down  | 
at  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.     She  takes  her  tongs,  and  with  them 
she  lifts  |  the  boiled  fish  and  puts  it  into  the  dish.  |  When  it  is  all  in 
the  dish,  she  takes  her  oil-dish,  |[  pours  oil  into  it,  and  puts  it  down  25 
in  front  of  the  persons  for  whom  she  has  cooked  it.  |  They  drink  water 
before  they  begin  to  eat;  |  and  after  drinking  water  they  eat.     They  ,| 
dip  it  into  oil.     They  do  not  eat  the  skin  with  it,  for  |  the  scales  are 
still  on  it.     They  only  eat  the  meat.  ||  After  they  have  eaten,  a  bucket  30 
of  water  is  placed  in  front  of  them.  |  They  put  their  mouths  at  the 
corner  and  take  a  mouthful  |  of  water.     Then  they  squirt  the  water 
into  the  hands  and  wash  them;  |  and  after  they  have  washed  their 

Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs  la'e    teta'k'ostodayo    lax   na'qostiVyasa  1 1 
lEgwIle.      Wa,    gi'Pmese    md'p  !Enxwa£se    ena'las    te'ta'k'ostowexs 
la'e  k!ayax£wlda.     Wa,    laE'm   axa'xoya.    yls    axno'gwadas.     Wa, 
gi'l'niese    £ne'ke    axno'gwadas    qa£s    hanx'LE'ndeq,     la    ax£e'dxa 
ha£nE'me   qass  ha'nxLEndes     la'xes     lsgwi'le.     Wii,  la    ax£e'dxes  15 
xwa'Layowe  qa's  t!o'ts!Endexa  pExi'tasde  la'xes  gi'ldolase.     Wa, 
laxae  ge'xsEndEq  nExsE'ndEq.     Wii,  laE'm  mae'moxuseda  £nal£nE'- 
me   pExI'tasd.     Wa,  gi'l£mese    niEdElx'wIde  ha'nx'LEnasexs    la'e 
axstE'ntsa  t!o't!Ets!aakwe  pEXi'tasd    laq.      Wii,    k!e'st!a  ge'gilil 
maE'mdElqulaxs    la'e    ha'nx'sanoweda    ha'nxLanowe,  qaxs  laE'm  20 
L!o'pa.     Wii,    le'da    tslEtla'cj    ax-e'dxes    lo'qlwe    qafs    ka'gallles 
la'xes    klwae'lase.     Wa,    lii    ax^e'dxes     tsle'sLala    qaJs    k'llpli'des 
hx'xa  ha'nxxaakwe    pExi'tasde  qa£s   lii  k!ipts!a'las  la'xa  lo'qlwe. 
Wa,    gi'l£mese    £wFlts!a    la'xa  lo'qlwiixs  la'e  ax'e'dxes  ts!Eba'ts!e 
qa£sk!unxts!o'desa  L!e'!na  laq.      Wii,  lii  ka'gEinlllas  la'xes  ha£mesi'-  25 
lagilaq.     Wii,  lii  na'naqalgiwfdaF.mxa  £wa'paxs  k' leVmae  ha-mx£- 
I'da.     Wa,  gi'Fmese    gwiil    na'qaxs    la'e  ha£mx£I'da.     Wa,  laE'm 
ts!E])a's   la'xa   L!e'£na.     Wii,  la  k!es  hamga'q   LE£wis  Lle'se,  qaxs 
axa'lae  go'bEtas,  qaxs  le'xamae   ha'''miise    q!e'mlaliis.     Wii,  g'i'l- 
£mese  gwal  haema'paxs  la'e  hangF.mle'lEma  na'gats!e  £w;i'bEts!alaxa  30 
£wa'pe.     Wa,  a'-mese    xwa'£magageses    sE'msaxs  la'e   hamsgE'md 
la'xa  £wa'pe,  qa£s  hamxts!anE'ndes    qa£s   ts!E'nts!Enx£wlde.     Wa, 
gih'mese  gwal  ts!E'nts!Enkwaxs  la'e   e't!ed  hamgagEiitses    sE'mse 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 26 


402  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

hands,  they  put  their  mouths  |  to  the  corner  of  the  bucket  and  drink 

35  water.     Now  that  also  is  finished.  || 

1       Broiled  Dried  Kelp-Fish.—  Sometimes  other  people  want  |  to  eat 

soaked  half-dried  kelp-fish.   |  The  woman  first  takes  her  tongs  and 

puts  them  down  |  where  she  is  sitting.     Then  she  takes  down  the 

5  kelp-fish  that  has  been  hung  up  to  dry,  ||  and  she  puts  it  down  at  the 

place  where  the  tongs  are.     She  dips  up  some  |  water  and  places  it 

with  the  dried  kelp-fish.     Then    !  she  takes  the  fire-tongs  and  lifts 

the  dried  kelp-lish  in  the  middle,   |  in  this  manner: 

Then  she  holds  it  in  the  tongs  over  the  fire,  the  flesh- 

10  side  first  ||  turned  down;  and  as  soon  as  the  steam 
puffs  out  all  over,  ]  she  turns  it  over  and  she  broils 
the  skin-side;  and  when  |  the  skin  becomes  all  black, 
she  stops  |  broiling  it,  for  it  is  done.  Then  she  puts 
it  down  |  on  the  mat  with   the  skin  down.     She  drinks  water:   and 

15  after  ||  drinking,  she  begins  to  eat  the  meat.  She  only  |  takes  off 
the  meat  from  the  skin  and  puts  it  into  her  mouth.  |  She  does  not 
dip  it  into  oil,  for  this  kind  is  fat.  | 

I  forgot.     As  soon  as  she  finishes  broiling  the  half-dried  |  kelp-fish, 

20  and  when  it  is  done,  she  takes  a  cup  with  water,  |j  takes  a  mouthful, 
and  blows  the  mouthful  of  water  over  the  flesh-side  of  what  she  |  has 
cooked.     Then  it  gets  really  tender,  and  |  therefore  old  women  ami 


lax  o'gwaga£vasa   nagatsle'  qa£s  na'x£idexa  £wa'pe.     Wa,  laE'mxae 

35  gwa'la. 
1  Broiled  Dried  Kelp-Fish.  Wa,  lit  Ena'l£nEmp  tena  he  ha£ma- 
e'xstso£sa  wao'kwe  be'bEgwanEin  pE'nkwe  klayaxwa  pEx'i'tasda. 
Wa,  he'i'.m  gil  a\re'ts<Vsa  tslEda'qes  tsle'si.fda,  qa£s  katlaliles 
la'xes  klwae'lase.  Wa,  lii  axaxo'd  la'xa  x  ilicla'i.Ela  pEx'i'tasda 
5  qa£s  g'e'g'aliles  lax  kade'.lasasa  tsle'sLfda.  Wa,  la  tse'x£id  la'xa 
'"wape  qa£s  ga'xe  hangalilas  lax  gae'lasasa  pEX'I'tasde.  Wa,  la 
da'x£Idxa  tsle'si.fda  qa£s  k"lp!l'des  lax  nEgo'yacyasa  pEX-I'tasde 
g-a  gwalega  (Jig.). 

Wa,  lii  k'lipfi'lases  tsle'sLala  laqexs  la'e  pEX'a'x  q  In'mladza-'vas 

10  qaxs  he'£mae  gile'£lale.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  k'Exumxsaweda  kla'li.la 
la'qexs  la'e  le'x£IdEq  qa£s  pEx-I'dex  l  !e'sadzE£yas.  Wa,  laE'm- 
La  klu'mleq.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £na'xwa  klu'mla  Lle'sasexs  la'e  gwal 
pExa'q  ([axs  lE£mae  Llo'pa.  Wa,  a,'£mese  nELEdzo'ts  la'xa  ha- 
£madzo'we  le'£waryaxs  la'e    na'x£ed    la'xa    £wa'pe.     Wa,  g  i'Pmese 

15  gwal  na'qexs  la'e  hamx£i'dxa  qlE'mlale.  Wii,  laE'm  a'sm  axa'- 
laxa  qlE'mlale  lax  Lle'sas  <|a£s  tslo'qliises  la'xes  sE'mse.  Wa, 
laE'm  klea's  L!e'£na  tslEpa's  qaxs  tsE'nxwae  gwe'x  s  lEmas. 

He'xoLEn  Llsle'wesoxs  gihinae  gwfd  pEX'a'xa  lrla'yaxwa  pExi'- 
tasdExs  la'e  Llo'pa.     Wii,  la  da'x,£idxa  k!wa£sta'  £\va'bEts!aIa  qa£s 

20  ba'msgEmde  laq  qa-'s  sElbExu'mdes  lax  q!E'mladza£yases  ha£mex- 
si'lasE£we.     Wii,  he'£mis  la'gilas  a/lak"  lala  la  tE'lqwe.     Wii,  he'sm 


boas]  RECIPES  403 

old  men  are  |  fond  of  broiled  half-dried  kelp-fish,  |  because  it  is 
tender.  As  soon  as  the  woman  finishes  eating,  ||  she  drinks  water.  25 
When  the  dried  kelp-fish  is  really  dry,  |  it  is  soaked  like  dried  salmon 
when  it  is  soaked;  |  and  it  is  cooked  in  the  same  way  as  the  |  half- 
dried  kelp-fish  is  cooked  when  it  is  broiled  and  when  it  is  boiled.  | 
That  is  all  about  this.  J| 

Split  Kelp-Fish. — Now  I  will  talk  again  about  the  |  kelp-fish  split  1 
in  two.     When  the  man  goes  home  who  has  (gone  out)  |  with  the  fish- 
trap  to  catch  kelp-fish,  as  soon  as  he  has  many,  |  the  woman  takes 
her  fish-knife  and  sits  down  at  the  ||  edge  of  the  old  mat  on  which  the  5 
fish  has  been  put.     Then  she  takes  one  of  the  kelp-fish  with  her  left 
hand.  |  Its  tail  is  towards  the  woman,  |  and  its  stomach  is  turned 
towards  the  left  side,  when  she  puts  it  down.  |  Then  she  cuts  oft'  the 
head;  and  when  the  head  has  been  cut  off,  |  she  cuts  into  the  back 
and  cuts  all  the  way  down  to  the  tail,  ||  cutting  through  along  the  ]o 
upper  side  of  the  backbone.     When  it  is  spread  open,  |  she  pulls  out 
the  intestines;  and  when  all  the  intestines  are  out,  she  |  cuts  along 
the  under  side  of  the  backbone  and  takes  it  out  close  j  to  the  tail, 
and  then  she  breaks  it  off.     She  |  throws  away  the  backbone.     The 
(ail  is  left  on  (he  ||  split  kelp-fish.     Then  she  cuts  it  down  lengthwise,  15 

la'g'ilasa  hiE'lk!wana£ye  LE£wa  no'iiEmase  be'bEgwiinEm  he'niEiiii-  22 
hiEm  ax£e'xsdxa  pE'nkwe  k'la'yaxwa  pExi'tasd  qa£s  ha£ma'peq, 
qaxs  tE'lqwae.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£mii'pa  tslEda'qexs  la'e  mV- 
x£Idxa  £wii'pe.  Wa,  gi'1-mese  a'laklala  la  lE'mxeda  pExi'tasdaxs  25 
la'e  a'Em  t  !e'laso  he  gwe'gilasE£weda  xama'saxs  t  !e'lasE£wae.  Wii,  la 
he '1:111  gwe'gilasoxs  la'e  ha£me'xsIlasE£we  ha£mexsilaena-yaxa 
khi'yaxwa  pexi'tasda  la'qexs  pE'nkwae  loxs  ha'nxLaakwae. 
Wii,  laE'mxae  gwal  la'xeq. 

Split  Kelp-Fish. — Wa,  la£me'sEii  e'dzaqwal   gwa/gwex's£alal  lii'xa  1 
pExi'taxs  qlwii'gEkwae.     Wa,  he'£mexs  g'axae  na/£nakweda  LEqa'- 
dases  LEgE'me  la'xa  pEX"i'te;  wa,  gu'bmese  cjlEyo'LExs  la'e  he'xJ- 
ida£ma  ts!Edii'c[e    ax£e'dxes    xwa'uxyowe    qa£s   kliinxElIlexa    k!ii'- 
gEdzowe  k!a'k'!obana.     Wii,  le  da'x-citses  gE'mxolts!a'na£ye  la'xa  5 
£nE'me  pEX'I'ta.     Wa,  laE'mxae  gwa'saxsdfda  la'xa  tslEila'qe.     Wii, 
la  gwe'k'  !aesala  lax  gE'mxolts  !ana£yas  la'xes  qE'lkwalae'na£ye.     Wii, 
liL  (pxko'dEX  he'x't!a£yas.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  la'waye  he'xt !a£yasexs 
la'e  xwa'lbEtEndEx  o'xLaata£yas.     Wit,  lii  ha'xEla  lax  ts!ii'sna£yas: 
e'k"!ot!Endalax  x;i'k!adzas.     Wii,  g'i'l£mese  la  LEpa'laxs  la'e  gE'l-  10 
x-£odEx  ya'xyigilas.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  £wi£lawe  ya'xyigilasexs  la'e 
xwal£e'dEX    bEna'dzE£jas:i    xa'k'!adzowe    qa£s    lii'weyodeq  gii'gE- 
LEla    la'xa    ma'kaliixa    ts!a'sna£yasexs     la'e    k'o'cjodEq.     Wii,    lii 
ts!EX£e'dxa    xa'k'  ladzowe.     Wii,    laE'm     axa'ie    ts!a'sna£yas    la'xa 
xwa/LEkwe  pEX"T'ta.     Wii,  lii  qla'xsEndEq  qa  ma'ltsles  ha'xEla  g'a'-  15 


404  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ANN.  36 

16  beginning  at  the  neck,  down  |  to  the  belly,  until  she  comes  to 
the  |  tail,  in  this  manner:  j~7      Now  it  is  called  "split  |  kelp- 

fish."  As  soon  as  this  has  /j\\  keen  done,  she  hangs  it  up 
over  the  |  fire  of  the  house;    /     \    \  and  when  it  is  half  dried,  it  is 

20  cooked.  ||  First  she  takes  /     /         j  her  small  kettle,  pours  some  | 

water  into   it,  and,  when  L— '   I 1  it  is  half  full,  she   puts  it  on 

the  fire.  |  She  takes  down  the  split  fish  and  cuts  it  into  two  parts,  | 
and  she  cuts  one  side  into  three  pieces;  and  she  does  |  the  same  to 

25  the  other  side,  in  this  manner:  Fl     Now  it  is  in  six  pieces.  ||  She 

throws  away  the  tail,  and  ff\\  throws  the  pieces  |  of  fish 
into  the  kettle  in  which  the  /~f\\  water  is  boiling.  |  I  think 
the  length  of  time  that  it  is  on  /__/  I — \  the  fire  is  more  than  half  | 
an  hour  by  the  watch,  and  then  [ J     I — I  it  is  done.     She  |  takes  the 

30  kettle  off  the  fire.  She  takes  a  small  dish  ||  and  puts  it  down  by  the 
side  of  the  kettle.  |  She  takes  her  tongs  and  with  them  she  lifts 
the  fish  and  puts  it  |  into  the  small  dish;  and  when  it  is  all  in,  she 
drinks  water;   |  and  after  drinking,  she  takes  a  piece  of  the  |  boiled 

35  kelp-fish,  pinches  off  the  meat,  and  puts  it  into  her  ||  mouth.  Now 
she  is  eating  the  meat.  She  does  not  eat  the  |  skin,  on  account  of 
the  scales:  therefore  she  just  puts  it  back  into  the  |  dish.  After 
she  has  eaten,  she  takes  the  |  small  dish  from  which  she  has  eaten, 


16  g'ii/Ela  lax  o'xawa£ya  hii'xEla  lax  tsk'Ia's  la'gaa  lax  o'xLa£yas 
ts!a'sna£ya  ga  gwale  g'a  (/?.'/•)■  Wa,  laE'm  Le'gadEs  q!wa'gEku 
pExi'ta.  Wa,  gi'l£niese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ge'xEw!ts  lax  nEqa'stawasa 
lEgwI'lases  go'kwe.     Wa,  gi'Fmese  k"  !a'yax£wIdExs  la'e  ha£me'xsi- 

20  lasF/wa.  Wa,  he' Em  gil  ax£e'tso£ses  ha-nEme.  Wa,  la  guxts  lo'tsa 
swa'pe  laq  qa  nEgo'yoxsdalesexs  la'e  ha'nxLEiits  la'xes  lEgwi'le 
Wa,  lii  axaxo'dxa  qlwa'gEkwe  pExi'ta  qaes hex'sE'nde  t !o'ts lEndEq. 
Wa,  lit  yu'dux"sEnd  t !o't  !Ets lalaxa  apsode'le.  Wa,  la'xae  he'Em- 
xat!  gwe'x  -idxa  apso'dlle  g-a  gwa'leg-a  (Jig.).     Wit.  hii:'m  qlELla'- 

25  xsea.  Wa,  la/La  ;*i'ehi  tslExfe'dxa  ts !a'snaeyas.  Wa,  la  axstE'ntsa 
tlEwe'kwe  pExi't  la'xa  ha'nxxala  h&'nxxanaxs  la'e  maE'mdElqtiles 
Ewa'pe.  Wa,  k'o'tat !EnLaq  haya'qax  aESEgiLE'la  la'xa  q!a'q!a- 
lak!a£vaxEns  £na'laqe  £wa'£wasLalasasexs  la'e  Llo'pa.  Wa,  lai:'m 
ha'nxsanoweda    ha'nxi.anowe.    Wa,   he'emis  ax-'etso'ses  la'logume 

30  qaes  ga'xe  k'a'galllas  lax  ma'glnwalllasa  ha'nxLanowe.  Wa,  la 
ax£e'dxes  ts!e'sLala  qaesk-!lp!i'des  la'xa  pi:x  I'te  qa£s  la  k-  !tpts la'las 
la'xa  la'logfime.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  £wl£lts!axs  la'e  na'x£Idxa  ewa'pe. 
Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwal  na'qaxs  lae  da'x£Idxa  £nE'me  la'xa  tlEwe'kwe 
ha'nxxaaku  pExi'ta  qa£s  epa'lex  qlE'mlalas  qa£s  ts!6'q!Qses  la'xes 

35  sE'mse.  Wa,  laE'm  ha£ma'pEx  qlEmlalas.  Wa,  la  k'.'es  ha£ma'pEx 
Lle'sas  qaxs  axa'fae  go'bEtas  la'gilas  a'Em  xwe'laq  axts!alas  laxa 
lo'qlwe.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  ha£ma'pExs  la'e  da'x£Idxes  ha£ma'ts!e 


boas]  RECIPES  405 

and  pours  into  the  kettle  what  is  left  in  it.  |  She  pours  some  water 
into  the  dish  and  washes  her  hands;  and  ||  after  doing  so,  she  drinks  40 
fresh  water.  This  also  is  not  |  given  at  a  feast  to  many  tribes.  It 
is  only  eaten  by  the  |  husband  and  wife,  or  by  friends  whom  they 
invite,  or  by  the  numaym,  for  J  the  woman  does  not  cure  many  in 
this  way.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Boiled  Kelp-Fish  Gills  and  Stomachs. — Immediately1  |  (the)  wife  1 
goes  to  meet  (her  husband  i,  carrying  a  small  basket  made  of  split  | 
spruce-root.  She  puts  it  into  the  small  canoe  which  has  been  used  in 
fishing  kelp-fish.  |  Then  she  puts  the  kelp-fish  into  the  basket. 
When  ||  it  is  full,  she  takes  it  out  of  the  canoe  and  carries  it  to  her  5 
house,  |  and  pours  the  fish  on  the  coarse  plaited  mat  made  of  split 
cedar-bark  |  which  she  has  spread  out  to  pour  the  kelp-fish  on.  | 

As  soon  as  she  has  carried  up  all  the  kelp-fish,  she  sits  down  on  the 
floor  and  |  begins  to  take  out  the  intestines.  The  woman  takes  hold 
of  t  the  ||  kelp-fish  with  the  left  hand  and  squeezes  at  the  back  of  its  10 
head,  |  the  belly  being  turned  towards  the  woman.  She  puts  the 
thumb  of  her  |  right  hand  into  the  gills,  and  puts  the  |  forefinger  of  her 
left  hand  at  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  while  she  puts  her  thumb  into 
the  gill  at  |  the  right  side.  Then  she  squeezes  it  and  pulls  at  it;  || 
and  as  soon  as  the  gills  become  loose,  she  puts  her  thumb  |  at  the  15 


la'loguma  qa£s  guxtslo'deses  ane'x'sa£ye  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe.  Wa,  38 
la  giixtslo'tsa  £wa'pe  la'qexs  la'e  ts!E'nts!Enx£wida.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  nax£ldxa  a'lta  ewa'pa.  Wa,  laE'mxae  k'!es40 
k'.we'ladzem  la'xa  q!e'nEme  le'lqwalaLa£ya.  A'Em  le'x-a£meda  ha£- 
yasEk'ala  loxs  Le-lalayaaxa  £nr'nEmo'kwe  lf/wr  £nE£me'rnote  qaxs 
kMe'sae  q!e'nEine  axa£yasa  ts!Eda'qaxs  axa'ax  gwe'x-sdEmas.  Wa, 
hu-'/m  gwa'l  laxe'q. 

Boiled  Kelp-Fish  Gills  and  Stomachs. — Wa,1  he'x'eidaemese  gEnE'-  1 
mas  la  la'lalaq  klo'qtilaxa  la'laxame  dzEdE'xusEm  Llo'plEk'sa 
ale'wase  qa£s  lii.  ha'ng'aalEXsas  la'xa  pa'panayoxusIelats!e  xwa'- 
xwaguma.  Wa,  la  k- llxts lodalasa  pEX'I'te  liiq.  Wa,  gi'Pmese 
qo'tlaxs  la'e  k"  !o'xeultodEq  c[aJs  las  la'xes  g'o'kwe.  Wa,  !;i  5 
giigEdzo'ts  la'xa  awa'dzoledkwas  k-!ita'£ye  le'£waJya,  yix  LEp!ale'- 
lEmas  qa  g'e'dzayaatsa  pExI'te. 

Wa,  gi'lemese  '\\iJlosdesa  pExi'taxs  la'e  k!wa'g-allleda  tslEdJi'qe 
cpi£s  t!o'x£w!deq.  Wa,  he'emaaxs  la'e  da'x£ideda  tslEda'cjaxa  pEX'i'- 
tases  gE'mxolts!ana.  Wa,  laE'm  qlwe'salax  o'xLaata£yasa  pEx-I'te  10 
qa  gwa'sk'  lae'sales  la'xa  tslEda'qe.  Wa,  la  ax£a'LElots  qo'mases 
he'lk!olts'.ana£ye  lax  q!o'sna£yas.  Wa,  la'xae  ts'.E£ma'botses  ts!E- 
ma'la  lax  gE'mxot!xawa£vas  yixs  ha'aLal  liis  qo'meda  he'lkMot!- 
xawaeye  q!o'sna£yas.  Wa,  la  f[!we'srId<[exs  la'e  ne'x£edEq.  Wa, 
g-i'l£mese  k!i'nx£ldeda  q!o'sna£yaxs  la'e  e'tled    ax£a'LEl5tses  qo'ma  15 

1  Continued  from  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  4."-S,  line  21. 


406  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKII'TI.  [hth.  ANN.  36 

16  inside  of  the  pectoral  fin,  and  puts  her  forefinger  on  the  outside.  | 
Then  she  bends  it  outward  and  twists  the  skin  off  at  that  place.  | 
Then  she  turns  the  fins  back  and  pulls  them  off  |  with  the  intestines 

20  and  the  gills.  When  she  has  finished,  ||  she  throws  the  intestines  into 
a  small  hand-basket.  |  .She  puts  the  clean  kelp-fish  back  on  the 
spread  |  mat,  and  she  does  not  stop  until  all  the  kelp-fish  have 
been  cut.  |  Then  the  woman  takes  in  one  hand  the  small  basket 
containing  the  intestines,  and  carries  it  |  to  the  beach  and  pours  the 

25  contents  of  the  small  basket  ||  into  the  salt  water.  She  puts  the 
small  basket  into  the  water  and  |  washes  off  the  slime  outside  and 
inside.  After  she  lias  done  so,  |  she  puts  down  the  little  basket  on 
the  beach,  and  then  she  takes  some  of  the  |  intestines  of  the  kelp-fish 
and  pulls  it  off  from  the  |  stomach.     She  leaves  the  gill  at  one  end 

30  of  it.  ||  Then  she  washes  the  intestines  so  thai  all  the  blood  comes  off; 
and  she  pulls  it  through  |  (between  her  thumb  and  fingers),  so  that  all 
the  food-contents  come  out.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  |  she  turns  it 
inside  out,  so  that  the  stomach  is  turned  inside  out;  |  and  she  washes 
it,  and  finally  throws  it  into  the  |  small  basket.     She  does  the  same 

35  to  all  the  others;  ||  and  as  soon  as  all  the  stomachs  have  been  washed, 
the  woman  |  takes  up  the  basket  containing  the  gills  and  puts  it  | 
into  the  sea-water,  and  shakes  it  so  that  all  the  blood  and  the  |  slime 

10  lax  o'tslawasa  pepELlxawa£ye.  Wa,  la  Lla'sadza£ye  tslEma'lax'tsla- 
na£yasexs  la'e  Llo'tiedEq.  Wa,  he'£mis  la  qwa'pledaats  Lle'sas. 
Wa,  la£me  nELa'we  pepEL!xa'wa£yas.  Wa,  a'£mes  la  nExo'dEq 
£wi'£la  LEEwa'  tslEyl'me  LE£wa  q!o'sna£yas.     Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'lExs 

20  la'e  tslExtslo'ts  la'xa  k'lo'gwatsle  la'laxameda  yax'yEg'ile.  Wa, 
la'i.a  xwe'laqaEm  ax£adzo'Ialasa  la  tlEgi'k"  pEX"I't  la'xa  Licbe'le 
le'£wa£ya.  Wa,  la  aTi:m  gwa'lExs  la'e  Ewl£la  la  tlK.g'i'kwa  pEX'i'te. 
Wa,  lii'da  tslEda'qe  k"!o'qiihlxa  yaxyjgilatsle  la'laxama  qa£s  les 
la'xa     L!Ema£ise.      Wa,    le    guxsta'lisxa    gi'tslax'daxa    la'laxame 

25  la'xa  dE'msxe  £wa'pa.  Wa,  la  axstE'ndxa  la'laxame  qacs  ts!o- 
xa'lexa  k!e'lasgEma£yas  LF/wes  o'ts'.awe.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwa'- 
lExs la'e  hang  a'lisaxa  la'laxame.  Wa,  lii,  dfl'x£Idxa  ga'yole  la'xa 
ya'xvig  Ilasa  pExi't.  Wa.,  la  aLa'laxa  tslEyi'me  la'xa  ha£maa'- 
ts!e  po'xuntsa   pExi'te.     Wa,  la    axba'£ya   qlo'sna^e  la'qexs  la'e 

30  ts!o'x£wldEq  qa  Ewiela'wesa  E'lkwa.  Wa,  he'£misexs  la'e  xix-£e'dEq 
qa  £wi£la'wese  la'ltslawe  hamk- !ae'dza£yas.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'- 
lExs la'e  L !ep IsxsEmdEq  qa  L!ep!ExsEma'lesa  Msmaa'ts!e  po'xlun- 
sa.  Wa,  la'xae  ts !6'x£widEq.  Wa,  lawe'sLe  ts!Exts!ots  la'xa 
la'laxame.       Wa,   la    ''na'xwaEm    he    gwe'x£I<lxa     wao'kwe.      Wa, 

35  g'i'Pmese  £wlela  la  tslo'kwa  ha£maats!axs  la'eda  tslEda'qe 
klo'qfdesxa  qlo'siuryaa'tsle  la'laxama  qa£s  lii  k'lo'xstEndEq 
la'xa  dE'msxe  £wa'pa  cpaEs  nalElta'leq  qa£wi£lawesa  E'lkwa  LE£wa 


boas)  RECIPES  407 

ci off.     As  soon  as  she  has  finished  this,  she    takes  the  |  basket 

containing  the  gills  out  of  the  water  and  carries  it  ||  to  the  house.  40 
She.  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire  of  her  house.  |  She  takes  a 
kettle  and  pours  some  water  into  it,  and  j  when  it  is  half  full  she  puts 
it  over  the  fire.      When  |  the  water  begins  to  boil,  she  takes  the 
IcIUmes  (for  that  |  is  the  name  of  the  gills  when   they  are  cooked) 
out   of  the  little  basket  ||  and  throws  them  into  the  boiling  water.  45 
When  they  are  all  j  in,  she  takes  her  fire-tongs  and  stirs  (what  is  in 
the  kettle).     The  kettle  is  not  |  kept  long  on  the  fire,  perhaps  for  | 
half  an  hour  or  a  little  longer.     Then  it  is  taken  off.  |  Now  it  is  done 
and  she  invites  all  those  who  like  to  eat  gills  with  her.  ||  As  soon  as  50 
those  come  who  are  going  to  eat  gills  with  spoons,  she  takes  |  the 
spoons,  gives  one  to  each  of  those  who  are  going  to  eat  with  it,  then  | 
the  woman  takes  the  water  and  gives  a  drink  to  those  who  are  going 
to  eat  with  spoons.  |  After  they  have  drunk,  they  eat.  with  spoons.  | 
The  guests  eat  with  spoons  the  liquid  and  the  stomachs  of  the  kelp- 
fish  ||  and  its  gills.     They  just  blow  out  of  their  mouths  the  bones,  55 
for  there  are  bones  |  in  the  gills  of  the  various  kinds  of  fish.     After 
they  have  eaten,  |  the  woman  takes  water  and  gives  it  to  those  who 
eat  with  spoons  with  her.  |  Then  she  cools  with  cold  water  those  who 
had  eaten  the  gills  with  spoons,  |  for  those  who  eat  gill-soup  perspire.  || 

k'le'la.      Wa,    g  i'l£mese    gwa'lExs   la'e    k"  !o'x£WEstEndxa   q!5'sna- 38 
-vaatsle  la'laxama  qa£s  lii  k"  !6'x£wEsdesElaq  qa£s  la  k- lo'gweLElaq 
[a'xes  go'kwe.     Wa,  lii  k"!o'gunolisaq  lax  lEgwI'lases  go'kwe.     Wa,  40 
la  ax£e'dxa    ha'nxxanowe  qa£s  guxts!o'desa  £wa'pe  laq  qa  £nEgo'- 
yoxsdalesexs  la'e  ha'nxLEiits  la'xes  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  mE- 
dElx£wI'dExs   la'e  '"nfiT'iiKinrnik  a  da'ltslalaxa  k!u'mese  (qaxs  he'- 
Mime  laLe'gEinsa  q!o'sna£yas  la'e  hemex'si'lasE£wa),  la'xa  la'laxame 
qa's  lii  axsta'las  la'xa  maE'mdElqula   ewa'pa.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi'-  45 
da£staxs  la'e  axc"e'dxes  tsle'sLala  qa£s  xwe'tElga£es  laq.    Wa,  k!e'st!a 
a 'la  Em      ge'xxala     ha'nxxala     la'xa     lsgwile,     walaanawise    lo£ 
■iiK.xsEg  iLE'la  la'xa  q!a'q!alak"!a£ye  lo£  h&ya'qaxs  la'e  ha'nxsEn- 
dEq.     Wa;    1  .i-ine    ido'pa.     Wa,    lii    Le'dalaxes   k" !o'k- lomlsg'otLe. 
Wa,  <i  iTmese  £wl£la  g'a'xeda  yoVwutaasexa  klumesaxs  la'e  ax£e'd-  50 
xa    k"a'k-ats!Enaqe    qa£s    ka's'iiles  la'xes    y6's£wutLe.     Wa,  la£me 
ax£e'deda    tslEda'qaxa   £wa'pe    qa£s    tse'x£ides    la'xes    y6's£wutLe. 
Wa,    gil£mese    £wl£la  la.    gwal  na'qaxs    la'e    yo's£ida.     Wa,    laE'm 
fwidaEm    yo'seda    klwe'lax    ewa'pas    LE£wa    ha£maats !asa    pExi'te 
i.o-nies  q!o'sna£ye.     WTii,  a'£mese  poxa'laxa  xa'qe  qaxs  xagadae'da  55 
q!o'sna\yasa    £na'xwa    mamao'masa.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwiil  yo'saxs 
la'eda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  £wa'pe  qa£s  tse'x-'ides  la'xes  yoVwutda. 
Wa,     Ia£me    k'oxwaxaliseda    yo'sax'daxa    k'.Qmese   visa    wnda'sta' 
-"wii'pa,    qaxs    a'la£mae    gegosEmale'da   yo'saxa    k'  lomst  ag  idakwe. 


408  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ANN.  35 

60  Therefore  they  always  say,  "Let  us  |  now  cool  ourselves  with  cold 
water!  "  and  therefore  the  host  |  gives  his  guests  fresh  water  to  cool 
themselves.  |  Then  those  who  have  eaten  the  gills  go  out  of   the 

65  house.  |  This  is  not  given  at  a  great  feast  to  many  tribes,  for  ||  they 
never  catch  enough  of  these  fish.  Therefore  those  who  catch  them 
just  |  eat  them  with  their  wives,  children,  and  relatives.  |  That  is  the 
end.  | 
1  Roasted  Kelp-Fish. — If  (the  woman)  is  really  hungry,  |  she  takes 
one  of  the  kelp-fish,  puts  it  down  on  its  stomach  at  the  right-hand 
side  |  of  the  fire,  close  to  it,  the  woman  facing  towards  the  rear  of 
5  the  |  house.  The  roasting  fish  also  faces  the  rear  ||  of  the  house. 
As  soon  as  the  steam  puffs  out  from  the  body  |  of  the  fish,  she  turns  it 
around  so  that  it  faces  the  |  door  of  the  house;  but  it  is  still  lying  on 
its  stomach.  It  does  not  take  long  |  before  it  is  cooked.  Then  the 
woman   takes  a  long  |  eating-mat,  spreads  it  out  outside  of  the  place 

10  where  ||  she  is  sitting  (that  is,  away  from  the  fire),  and  she  takes  the 
roasted  kelp-fish  and  places  it  on  its  stomach  on  the  |  mat.  Then 
she  eats  it.  She  does  not  |  take  out  the  intestines  and  the  gills  before 
she  puts  it  down  to  be  roasted  |  by  the  fire,  for  she  takes  them  off 
when  she  begins  to  eat  it.  |  Just  before  she  begins  to  eat  she  takes  a 

15  piece  of  cedar-wood  ||  about  a  span  long.     With  it  she  |  scrapes  off 

60  Wa,  ke'£mis  la'g-ilas  £ne'keda  yo'sax  gwe'x'sclEmas:  "Wegax  ins 
k-6x\v.-ixahsas  wuda-stii'  ewa'pa."  La'gilasa  klwelase  he'x-ri(lai:ni 
la  tsiix  a'ltii  wuda-sta'  -wfi'pa  qa  kox'w  axaledzKinses  k!wele'kwe. 
Wa,  laE'm  a/Em  hf/quwElseda  k  !wo'k  lumesg  ixcliixa  k  lume'se.  Wa, 
kMe'sae  klwe'ladzEma  kliime'se  la'xa  qle'nEme  le'lqwalaLa£ye  qaxs 

05  k!e'sae  qlEvo'LanEmenoxwa,  la'g-ilas  le'xa'meda  axa'nEmaq 
h&£ma'pEq  LEEwis  gEnF.'me  i.E-wi's  sa'sume  Lo£mis  LeLELa'la.  Wa, 
laE'm  gwii'la. 
1  Roasted  Kelp-Fish.  —  Wa,  g-i'l£mesc  a'lak'lala  po'sqlaxs  la'e 
da'x-£Idxa  £nE'me  pEX'I'ta  qa£s  mano'lises  lax  helk" lodEnwa'li- 
sases  lEgwI'le  yixs  gwe'gEmlilaeda  ts!Eda'rje  la'xa  o'gwiwahlases 
g'o'kwe.  Wa,  la  gwe'gEmld£Emxaeda  pExu'te  la'xa  o'gwiwall- 
5  lasa  g'6'kwe.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  k'ixu'mx'siiweda  k"!i'lEla  lax  o'klwi- 
na£jTasa  pExItaxs  la'e  xwe'lElIlaq  qa  gwe'gEmx-£Ides  la'xa  t!exi'- 
liisa  go'kwe.  Wa,  laE'm  mano'litsii'ma.  Wii,  k"!e'st!a  gae'- 
Iexs  la'e  L!o']>a.  Wa,  lie'x£ida£mesa  tslEda'qe  axfc'dxa  g-ildE- 
dzowe  haemadzo'  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  LEplall'les  lax  L!a'sa£yases  k!wae'- 

10  lase.  Wii,  lii  ax^e'dxa  mae'dzEkwe  pEx'It  qa£s  madzo'des  la'xa 
le'£wa£ye.  Wa,  hi"''x-£ida£mese  LlE'xwaq.  Wii,  la£me  hewa'xa  la'- 
WEyodx  tslEyi'mas  le£wis  q!o'sna£yaxs  k-!e's£mex-de  mano'lisaq 
la'xes  lEgwi'le  qaxs  a'l£mae  la'wiyodqexs  la'e  ha£ma'pEq.  Wa, 
he'£misexs   g-iTmae  ha'£maaqexs    la'e  a'Em  &x£e'dxa  k!wasXLa'we 

15  wa'laanawise  lo£   £nE'mp!Enk-  la'xEns  q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£yex  qa£s 


boas]  RECIPES  409 

the  scales  and  the  skin ;  and  when  it  is  all  off,  |  she  eats  it.    She  does  not  1 7 
dip  it  into  grease,  because  it  is  very  fat.  |  I  have  forgotten  this,  that 
the  woman  also  beats  |  the  body  of  the  kelp-fish  before  she  puts  it 
down  on  its  stomach  to  roast  by  the  fire,  ||  so  as  to  loosen  the  bones  20 
from  the  meat.  | 

After  she  has  eaten  the  kelp-fish,  she  drinks  |  water,  but  not  much, 
for  it  tastes  salt.  That  is  the  reason  why  she  does  not  drink  much  | 
water,  for  she  knows  that  she  has  to  keep  on  drinking  water.  |  Only 
the  one  who  has  caught  the  fish  eats  it  roasted  by  the  fire  while  lying 
on  its  stomach;  ||  for  she  only  does  this  with  the  kelp-fish  when  she  25 
is  very  hungry  |  when  she  comes  home,  after  having  been  fishing 
with  her  fish-trap.  |  That  is  the  reason  why  she.  puts  one  kelp-fish 
down  on  its  belly  by  the  fire,  |  for  it  takes  a  very  short  time  to  be 
done.  Old  women  |  eat  kelp-fish  roasted  by  the  fire  while  lying  on 
its  belly;  for  it  is  ||  too  dirty  for  young  women,  because  the  |  intes-  30 
tines  and  the  gills  are  in  it,  and  the  scales  are  also  on  it;  for  |  they 
are  afraid  to  eat  the  scales  of  the  fish,  because  it  often  kills  |  those 
who  eat  them  with  the  meat,  because  they  stick  in  the  throat  and 
the}-  can  not  get  out  |  the  scales  when  they  eat  the  kelp-fish.  There 
is  no  way  of  getting  them  out  when  they  are  ||  stuck  hi  the  throat,  35 
and  our  throat  gets  sore  when  we  |  swallow  them.  Now  I  have 
finished  talking  about  this.  I 


k'exa'lex    g5'bEtas     LE£wis    Lle'se.       Wa,  gi'l£mese    ewlelaxs  la'e  16 
harnx£I'dEq.      Wit   las'm  k'les  tslEpa's   la'xa  Lle£na  qaxs     tsE'n- 
xwae.     Wa,    he'xoLEn    LlEle'£wesoxs     tlE'lx-'wIdamaeda      tslEda,'- 
qax  o'k!wina£yasa  pEX'i'taxs  k'!e's£mae  mano'lisas  la'xes  lEgwI'le 
qa  k-!E'nx-£Ides  xa'qas  la'xes  qlEmlale.  20 

Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwiil  ha£ma'pxa  pExi'taxs  la'e  nage'k'ilaxa 
'wa'pexa  k'le'se  qle'nEma  qaxs  dE'niplae,  la'gila  k-!es  qle'k'.'Esxa 
Sva'pe  qaxs  q!o'LEla£maaxs  he'mEnePmeLe  na'qalxa  £wa'pe.  Wii, 
iaE'mxaa  lex'aEm  ha£ma'pxa  mano'lidzEkwe  pExiteda  axa'nEmaq 
qaxs  le'x'a-'mae  he  gwe'x-£idaatsexa  pExi'texs  a'lak'lalae  po'sqlaxs  25 
g'a'xae  nii'£nakiixs  LEqex-diises  LEgE'me  la'xa  pEX'I'te.  Wa, 
he'£mis  la'g'ila  ha'labala  mano'lisasa  £nE'me  pEX'I't  la'xes  lEgwI'- 
laxs  Lo'max-£Idae  £nEma'l£IdExs  la'e  Llo'pa.  He'£meda  laE'lklwa- 
na£ye  ha£ma'pxa  mamVlidzEkwe  la'xa  lEgwI'le  pExi'ta  qaxs  k-!El- 
ta'maaseda  ealostii'gase  ha£ma'pEq  qaxs  £wl£la£mae  axa'les  yax--  30 
yig'ile  LE£wis  q!o'sna£ye,  wa,  he'misLaLeda  go'bEt!Ena£yas,  y?xs 
k'ilE'mae  ha'£ma£yeda  go'bEtasa  pEX'i'te  qaxs  qlilna'lae  ga£yala- 
tsa  ha'mg;iku  LE£wis  qlEmlale,  juxs  paqlExa'eda  k'le'se  kwe'sodxa 
go'bEtaxs  ha£ma'paaxa  jiEX'I'te.  Wii,  la  k- lea's  gflyo'Lasqexs  la'e 
klude'l  la'xEns  qloqlo'nex.  Wa,  ;i£mes  la  xas£e'de  q.'o'qlonasa  35 
hamk'i£na'lacj.     Wii,  la£niEn  gwiil  gwa'g\vex-s£ala  laq. 


410  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

1  Perch  1. — The1  wife  cuts  open  the  perch,  so  that  |  the  gills  come  off, 
and  the  intestines:  and  as  soon  as  all  the  intestines  |  and  the  gills 
have  been  taken  out.  she  throws  them  out  of  the  house.  She  cuts 
(the  perch)  open  with  her  fish-knife,  and  she  scrapes  the  body  so 
5  that  the  ]|  scales  come  off.  When  they  are  all  off,  she  cuts  across 
the  body,  in  this  manner:  J  ^-fTTT>>^  ^  s00n  as  sne  Qas 
finished,  she  takes  her  kettle  Q°J)j  I  I  I  I  ]T~1  anc^  pours  some 
water  into  it:  and  when  it  is  ^  half  full,  she  put- 
it   on  the     tire.     When  it  boils,  she  takes  the  opened     perch  and 

in  puts  them  into  it.  When  they  are  all  in.  the  man  takes  his  tongs 
and  stirs  them.  They  stay  for  about  half  an  hour  according  to 
the  watch  boding  over  the  fire.  Then  they  are  taken  off  of  the 
fire.  Now  the  boded  perch  is  done.  Then  the  woman  takes  her 
>ns  and  gives  one  to  each  of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  ||  boded 
perch.  When  each  lias  one  spoon,  they  put  the  kettle  of  boiled 
perch  in  front  of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  boiled  perch,  and  they 
begin  to  eat  it  with  spoons.  First  they  take  out  the  backbone  and 
tiie  ribs:     and  when  they  have  all  been  taken  out.  they  take  out  the 

20  heads  and  suck  them,  for  |  they  are  very  fat:  and  when  the  fat  is 
all  off.  they  suck  out  the  eyes:  and  when  these  are  off.  they  break 
them     to  pieces  and  suck  out  the  brains:  and  when  these  are  out. 

1  Perch  (1). — Wii,1  la-me  gEiiEmas  t!Ex£widxa  Lamawe  qa  la  waves 
q!osna£yas  LE£wes  yiixvig  lie.  Wii.  gil£niese  Ewielawa  yaxyiglle 
i.E-wa  q!osna£yaxs  la'e  k'ladsq  lax  l  !asana£y  ases  g"6kwe.  Wa. 
laEin  heEm  t  lEkfdases  xwai.avowe.  Wa,  la  koset!edEq  qa  lawales 
5  gobEt  !Ena£yas.  Wa.  gil£mese  -w  idaxs  lae  qatet  ledsq  g  a  gwalega 
g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£e  lxes  hanxLanowe  qa£s 
guxtslodesa  Ewape  laq  qa  nEgoydxsdalesexs  lae  hanxLEnts  taxes 
lEgwTle.  Wa.  gil="mese  niEdElx£widEXs  lae  iix-edxa  t  .'Egikwe 
i.amawa      qa£s     axstEn  les     Laq.       Wa,     gil£mese    £wl£la£staxs    lae 

10  dax£ideda  DEgwanEmaxes  ts!esLala  qa£s  xwetledeq.  Wa.  laxEiit.'a 
nExsEg  tLElagUa  lax  q!aq!alak'!a£yaxEns  ="nalax  yix  Ewa£wasLalasas 
laxa  lEgwIle  maEmdElqulaxs  lae  hanxsano  laxa  lEgwile.  Wa, 
laEm  Llopa  LEmxnstagi£lakwe  laxeq.  Wa.  hex-ida-mesa  tslEdaqe 
ax£e  lxes     k'ak'Ets lEnaqe     qa£s     la     tslEwanaesas     laxa     yosaLaxa 

1  5  LF.mxJstag  rdakwe.  Wa.  g  il£mese  Ewllxtoxa  kak'EtslEnaqaxs  lae 
hanxdzamSlllEma  leiiix  -  _  ts!e  hanxLanolaxa  LELEnix-staa- 
guLaxa  LEmxustagi£lakwe.  Wa.  laxda-xwe  £yos£Ida.  Wa.  laEm 
he  g  il  xF.lostayoseda  xEmomowega£yas  LE£wa  xaqe.  Wa. 
g  il£mese   Ewi£lostaxs  lae  xElostalax  hext!a£yas  qa-'s  klExweq  qaxs 

20  Ldmae  tsEnxwa.  Wa.  g  iPmese  Ewi£lawe  tsEnxwa£yasexs  lae 
k!umt  !ults!alax  gegEbEloxsta£yas.  Wa.  giPmese  -wi£lax  lae  wewe- 
xsEnd  qa£s  klumt Iilltslodexa  lEqwas.     Wa.  g"il£mese  £wl£laqexs  lae 

'Continued  from  p.  1S4,  line  21. 


boas  J  RECIPES  411 

they  throw  the  sucked  head-bones  into  the  fire,  j  When  this  is 
done,  they  eat  the  liquid  with  the  meat;  ||  and  when  they  have  had  -1"1 
enough,  they  stop  eating  with  spoons  and  they  drink  a  little  water.  J 
That  is  what  the  Indians  refer  to  as  "cooling  off;"  and  when  they 
finish,  |  they  go  out.  That  is  all  about  one  way  |  of  the  Kwakiutl 
of  cooking  perch.     There  is  only  one  way  of  cooking  it.  | 

(2)  This  is  the  manner  in  which  the  perch  is  cooked  by  the  Koskimo. 
It  ||  is  cut  open  in  the  same  way  as  I  said  first,  and  the  scales  arc  30 
scraped  off.   |  When  the  intestines  and  the  gills  and  the  |  scales  arc 
off,  the  woman  squeezes  out  the  stomach  and  the  guts,  and  |  she 
squeezes  out  the  slime  of  the  gills.     After  she  has  done  so,  she 
throws  (the  perch)  into  a  dish,  and  she  does  this  with  all  the  others.  || 
When  this  is  done,  she  takes  her  kettle  and  pours  some  [  water  into  35 
it,  a  little  less  than  half  full.     Then  she  puts  it  on  the  fire.   |  When 
it  begins  to  bod,  she  takes  the  whole  perch  |  and  puts  them  into  the 
kettle;  and  when  they  are  all  in,  |  she  takes  the  intestines  thai  had 
been  squeezed  out,  the  stomach,  and  the  ||  gdls,  and  puts  them  in.  40 
She  lets  this  boil  for  maybe  more  than  |  half  an  hour  according  to 
the  watch.  |  Then  the  kettle  is  taken  off  the  fire.     Now  it  is  done.  ] 
They  never  stir   it,  for   it   is  called  "whole  perch."  |  The  woman 

tslExLEndxes    k!waxumdte    xaqsa    liext  !a\ve    laxa    lEgwile.     Wii,  23 
gil-mese    gwiilExs    lae   £yos£Idxa    £wapala    i.k'wii    qlEmlale.      Wa, 
g  il'mese  pol£ldExs  lae  gwal  £yosa.     Wa,l  a  xiiLEx-ld  nax£Idxa  £wape.  25 
HeEm.  gwE£yosa  bakliime  koxwaxoda.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalsxs  lae 
hoquwElsa. .  Wa,  laEm  gwala  £nEmx-£idala  ha£mexsllaenexa  i.aniawe 
yisa  Kwagule.  yixs  £nEmx£idala£mae  ha£mexsilaena£yaq. 

(2)  Wii,  ga£mes  h.Vmexsllaenesa  Gosg'imoxwaxa  Lamawe,  yixs  he£- 
maegweg'ilaxs  lae  t  !F,kwaqlaxEn  gale  waldr.ma  i.oxs  lae  k'osalayiwes  30 
gobEte.  Wra,  gil-'niese  ;\\i"la\\e  vaxvigilas  LE£wa  q!osna£ye  LE£wa 
gobEtasexs  laeda  tslEdaqe  x  Ix""Ii1ex  moqulas  LE£wis  ts!i:nexe.  Wii, 
la  qlwesalax  klelasa  q!6sna£ye.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalsxs  lae  ts!F.x- 
tslots  laxa  loqlwe.  Wii.  lii  £naxwaEm  he  gwex-£idxa  waokwe.  Wii, 
gil£mese  £wi£la  gwalExs  lae  ax£etlxes  hanx'Lanowe  qa£s  giixts!odesa  35 
£wape  laq.  Wii,  la  bEnk" !oldza£yaxs  lae  hiinx  i.E.nts  laxes  lEgwile. 
Wii,  gil-mese  mEiiElx'wIdExs  lae  ax'edxa  amEmk- Ilnala  Eamawa 
qa£s  axstEndes  laxa  hiinx  Lanowe.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wPlastaxs  lae 
ax-'clxa  xigikwe  tslEnexa  qa£s  axstEndes  LE£wa  moqfila  ir/wa 
q!osna£ye.  Wii,  lit  mF.dElx-'wida.  Wa,  laxi-:nt  !a  hayaqax  qexse- 40 
glLElagila  laxEns  q !aq !alak- layaxsEns  Enalaqe  £wa£wasLalasas  ma- 
EmdF.lqfdaxs  lae  hanxsanowa  laxa  lEgwile.  Wa,  laEm  l  !opa.  Wii, 
laEm  hewiixa  xwet  letsE'wa  (|axs  he£mae  LegadEs  amstaekwe  i.ama'ya. 
Wa,  lada  tslEdaqe  axedxes   loqlwe  LE£wis  gEiEmx'ii  XElyowa  qa£s 


412  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  85 

45  takes  her  dish  and  her  rib-strainer,  and  ||  she  puts  down  the  dish  by 
the  side  of  the  kettle  with  whole  perch;  |  and  she  takes  the  rib- 
strainer  and  lifts  out  the  whole  boiled  perch  |  and  puts  them  into 
the  dish.  She  puts  |  all  the  perch  crosswise  into  the  dish.  |  When 
they  are  all  in  the  dish,  she  goes  and  puts  (the  dish)  down  in  front  of 

50  those  ||  who  are  going  to  eat  the  whole  perch.  The  men  immediately  | 
pick  off  (the  meat)  and  put  it  into  the  |  mouth.  When  they  have 
nearly  eaten  everything,  the  host  takes  |  spoons  and  gives  one  to 
each  of  his  guests;  and  as  soon  as  |  each  has  one,  he  takes  up  the 

55  kettle  in  which  the  perch  had  been  boiled  and  ||  pours  the  liquid  of 
the  boiled  perch  into  the  dish.  |  He  pours  it  on  what  is  left  over 
of  the  boiled  perch.  |  As  soon  as  the  dishes  are  nearly  full,  he  goes 
back,  carrying  the  kettle;  |  and  he  puts  it  down  at  the  end  of  the 
fire,  towards  the  door.     Then  |  the  men  eat  with  spoons  the  liquid 

60  and  the  gills  and  the  stomach,  ||  as  it  has  been  boiled,  and  the  intes- 
tines; and  when  they  have  eaten  enough,  they  stop.  |  That  is  what 
the  ancient  Indians  call  "washing  down  the  food."  Then  |  they  go 
out.  They  never  drink  water,  for  they  know  that  they  |  will  drink 
water  when  they  notice  a  salty  taste  of  what  they  have  eaten,  |  and 

65  it  is  not  very  long  before  they  wish  to  drink  water.  Then  ||  they 
drink.     That  is  all.  I 


45  hanolilesa  loq  !we  laxa  fimstaakwilats!axa  Lamawe  hanxxanowa. 
Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  gElEmxa  xElyowa  qaes  xElostalexa  amEmk" linala 
hanxxaak"  Lamawa  qa£s  la  xEltslalas  laxa  loqlwe.  Wa,  laEm 
£naxwaEm  geyaleda  Lamawaxs  lae  yeyaxuts!a  laxa  loq!we.  Wa, 
gil£mese  £wl£la  la  yaxuts!a  laxa  loq!waxs  lae  kaxdzamolllas  laxa 

50  amEmk- linalagiLaxa  Lamawe.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese  xamaxtsla- 
naleda  £niixwa  bebEgwanEmxs  lae  epaq  qa£s  ts.'oqhlsEles  laxes 
sEmse.  Wa,  g'ibmese  Elaq  £wl£laqe,xs  laeda  Le£lanEmaq  Sx£edxa 
k-ak"Ets lEnaqe  qa£s  lii  ts!Ewanaesas  laxes  Le£lanEme.  Wa,  g'il- 
-mese  £wllxt6xs  lae  k!oqflldxa    amEmk!inalag'I£lats!e  hanxxanowa 

55  qa£s  lii  guqosas  £wapalasa  LEmxustag-i£lakwe  laxa  loq!wa.  Wa, 
lai:m  aEm  gugeglnts  laxa  ha£motasa  LEmxuLaxwaxa  Lamawe.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  Eliiq  qotlaxs  lae  xwelaqa  k!6xstolilElaxa  hanxxanowe 
qa£s  lii  hfingalllas  laxa  obexxalalilases  lEgwile.  Wa,  laxda-'xwe 
£yos£ideda  bebEgwaiiEmaxa  £wapalas  LE£wa  q!osna£ye  LE£wa  moqu- 

60  laxs  lae  L!opa  LE£wa  tslEnexe.  Wa,  gibmese  pol-'IdExs  lae  gwslla. 
Wa,  heEm  gwE£yosa  g-ale  bak!iim  niEkwaxalise.  Wa,  laEm  hoqfl- 
wElsa.  Wa,  laEm  hewaxa  nagekilax  £wapa  qaxs  q!aLEla£maaxs 
nax£ida£meLaxa  £wilpe  qo  lal  qliikalqexs  dEni])!aes  ha£max-de. 
Wa,  k-!est!a  alaEm  giilaxs  lae  nanaqlesdgilaxa  £wape.     Wa,  he:mis 

65  la  nagatse.     Wa,  laEm  gwala. 


boas]  RECIPES  413 

Roasted  Perch. — Perch  is  roasted  by  the  side  of  the  fire;  and  |  they  66 
take  the  perch  just  out  of  the  basket  and  put  it  down  |  under  the 
side-pieces   of   the  fire   of   the  house.     They  never  |  take   out   the 
intestines  and  gills  and  scales.    'When  ||  the  scales  are  scorched,  (the  70 
woman)   turns  it  over  so  that  what  was  the  outer  side  is  inside,  j 
Then  the  woman  watches  it  until  the  steam  comes  through  |  on  the 
inner  side  all  along  the  body.     She  does  not  |  let  the  steam  come 
through  for  a  long  time,  before  it  is  done.  |   Then  she  takes  her  food- 
mat  and  spreads  it  out  outside  ||  of  her  seat.     She  takes  her  tongs  75 
and  with  them  lifts  the  |  roasted  perch  and  puts  it  on  the  food- 
mat,  |  and  she  takes  a  piece  of  broken  cedar-stick  and  with  it  she 
scrapes  off  the  scorched  |  scales.     When  they  are  all  off,  she  picks 
off  the  |  meat  with  her  fingers  and  puts  it  into  her  mouth.     After 
she  has  finished,  she  ||  takes  water,  takes  a  mouthful  and  squirts  it  80 
into  her  |  hands  and  washes  them;  and  as  soon  as  she  has  done  so, 
she  |  rinses  her  mouth;  and  after  that  she  drinks  a  little  |  water. 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Flounder. — When  it  is  calm  weather  and  the  tide  is  coming  in,  |   1 
the  flounder-fisherman  launches  his  small  flounder-fishing  canoe,  | 
and  he  puts  the  flounder-spear  on  the  left-hand  side  of  his  |  flounder- 


Roasted    Perch.  —  MaedzEk"    Lamawa   laxa    lEgwile,    yixs    a£mae  66 
dolts  loyEweda  Lamawe  laxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  la  manolidzEm  lax  awa- 
btVyasa   kak-EdEnwa£yasa  lEgwIlasa  gokwe.      Wa,    laEni    hewaxa 
lawoyiwe  yaxyigilas  LE£wes  q!osna£ye  LE£wis  gobEte.    Wa,  gil'mese 
k!uniElx£kle  gobEtasexs    lae    xwelEllsaq    qa   L!asot!Endesa  §Lot!E-  70 
nexde.     Wa,  likla  tslsdaqe  doqwalaq    qa  kixumxsawesa   klalEla 
lax  aLot!Ena£yas    Lo-ine  £wasgEmasas   ogwida£yas.     Wa,  k!es£inese 
alaEm  gegilll  k'Exumxsaleda  k!alEla  lax  ogwlda-yasexs  lae  Llopa. 
Wa,  la  ax-edxes  ha£madzowe  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEp!alIleq  lax  Llasallla- 
ses  klwaelase.     Wa,  la  ax£edxes  tslesLala  qa£s  k!ip!edes  laxa  mae-  75 
dzEkwe  Lamawa  qa£s  la  k'  !ibr,dz6ts  laxa  ha£madzowe  te£wa£ya.    Wa, 
a£mese  ax£edxa  k-oq!a£ye  k!wa£XLa.wa    qa£s    k'exales    laxa   k!um£la 
gobEta.      Wa,  gil£mese    ewPlaxs    lae    xamaxts!anaxs     lae    epaxa 
qlEmlale  qa£s  ts!oq!usEles  laxes  sEmse.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laxs  lae 
ax£edxa    £wape    qa£s    hamsgEmdeqexs     lae    hamxtsIaiiEnts    laxes  80 
e£eyasowaxs    lae     ts tents !Enx£wada.      Wa,     gil£mese    gwalExs    lae 
tslEweLlExoda.      Wa,    g'iPmese    gwalExs    lae    xai.!Ex-£Id  nax£klxa 
£wape.     Wa  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Flounder. — Wa,  giPmese  k!imaqElaxa  yo£naknlaxs  lae  wi£xustEn-  1 
deda  hanx£enoxwaxa  paesaxes    papayaats !§Le  xwaxwaguma.     Wa, 
la    k-at!alExsaxes    papayayowe   saEntslo    lax  gEmxaga£yasa   papa- 


414  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAK1UTL  [bth.  ann.  35 

5  fishing  canoe,  the  prongs  pointing  to  the  place  ||  where  the  fisherman 
is  sitting  in  the  stern  of  the  flounder-fishing  canoe.  |  He  paddles 
seaward  with  his  flounder-fishing  paddle.  As  soon  |  as  he  comes  to 
a  place  where  the  water  is  two  fathoms  deep,  he  |  looks  down,  resting 
on  his  left  hand,  looking  for  |  flounders.     He  backs-water  with  his 

10  flounder-fishing  paddle,  and  is  j|  going  astern.  As  soon  as  he  discovers 
a  flounder,  he  paddles  ahead  |  to  stop  his  flounder-fishing  canoe;  and 
when  I  the  canoe  stops,  he  puts  the  flounder-fishing  paddle  into  the 
canoe,  and  |  he  takes  his  flounder-spear  and  puts  it  into  the  water, 
anil  he  spears  |  the  flounder  in  the  middle,  pulls  it  up,  and  shakes 

15  it  off  in  the  bow  ||  of  his  flounder-fishing  canoe;  and  he  just  goes  on 
in  the  same  way  with  the  |  others.  As  soon  as  he  has  caught  many 
flounders,  he  goes  home  to  his  |  house.  | 

When  he  arrives  at  the  beach  of  his  house,  his  wife  |  comes  and 

20  picks  up  a  small  basket,  and  she  goes  down  to  the  beach  carrying  ||  the 
small  basket.  Then  she  puts  it  down  in  the  middle  of  the  flounder- 
fishing  I  canoe.  She  takes  the  flounders  and  puts  them  into  the 
small  basket;  |  and  when  the  flounder-basket  is  full,  she  lifts  it  out 
of  the  canoe  |  and  carries  it  up  the  beach  into  her  house,  and  |  she 
puts  it  down  in  the  corner  of  her  house.  || 

25       Then  she  takes  her  small  kettle  and  pours  some  water  into  it,  and 
she  washes  it  out    until   it  is  clean;  and  as  soon  as  ah  the  dirt  is  out,  | 

yaats!e  xwaxwaguma  lasm  gwasbale  dzedzeguraas  lax  k!wax- 
5  dzasasa  papayaenoxwe  lax  oxLa£yases  papayaats!e  xwaxwaguma. 
Wa,  la  sex£wut!ases  papayax'sa£yase  sewayowa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
lagaa  laxa  malplEiikas  Ewalaedzas  laxEns  baLaxs  lae  IiexMze- 
gEinx'Ida  qa£s  qslkwalexes  gEmxot!Ena£yaxs  lae  hanxEnsEla  alax 
paesa.     Wa,  lae    pElkislala£masxes    papavax'sa£yase   sewayoxs  lae 

10  k!ik!E£nakfda.  Wa,  gil£mese  dox£waLElaxa  paesaxs  lae  sasewala 
qa  wulgaaLa£yeses  papayaatsle  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  gil£mese 
-wiclgaaLExs  lae  kat  !alExsaxes  pepayax'sa£yase  sewayowa  qa£s 
dax£idexes  papayayowe  sai:nts!axs  lae  mEclEnsas  qaes  sEx,£Idexa 
nEgEdza£yasa  paesaxs  lae  nexostodEq  qaEs  k!ib"fdExses  lax  ag'iwa- 

15  £yases  papayaatsle  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  a£mese  la  hexsa  gwegilaxa 
waokwe.  Wa,  gil£mese  qlEyoLxa  paesaxs  lae  na£nakwa  laxes 
gokwe. 

Wa,  g'iPmese    lag'alis    lax   L!Ema£isases   g'okwaxs    lae  gEiiEiuas 
kMoqulIlxa   Lalaxame  qa-'s  la.  tentsIesEla  h"ixa  iJEma£ise  k'loqtilaxa 

20  lalaxame  qaes  la  hang'aalExsas  lax  nEgoya£yasa  papayaatsle  xwa- 
xwaguma. Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  paese  qa£s  la  k!ixts!illas  laxa  lalaxame. 
Wa,  gihmese  qotleda  payatsle  lalaxamaxa  paesaxs  lae  klogiilExsaq 
qaes  la  k' !6x£wiisdesElaq  qa£s  la  kMogwlLElaq  laxes  gokwe  qa£s  lii 
k!ox£wal!laq  lax  onegwilases  gokwe. 

25  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  ha£nEme  qa£s  giixtslodesa  £wiipe  laqexs  lae 
ts!oxugindEq  qa  exts!owes.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£lawe  £yflgiga£yasexs 


boas]  EECIPES  415 

she  pours  away  the  dirty  water  with  which  she  washed  it  out:  and  27 
she  pours  in  some  more  water,  |  until  it  is  half  full,  and  she  puts  il 
on  the  fire.     After  |  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  her  fish-knife  and  sits 
down  alongside  of  the  ||  flounder  basket;  and  she  takes  out  one  of  the  30 
flounders   and  cuts  open  |  the  belly,  which  contains  the  intestines, 
in  this  manner  at  X  :         ^^^^^^      I  ^s  soon  ^  sne  turns  over  the 
white  side,  she  pulls  \^^        /-JJ)    out    the   intestines.   |  She   cuts 
off  the  intestines  close  ^^^^s^^"^    to  their  end.  at  the  gills.  |  She 
does  not  take  off  the  gills  from  the  head.  ||  As  soon  as  she  has  taken  35 
out  the  intestines,  it  is  in  this  way:  |  /-—>  Then  she  cuts 

down  to  the  bone  on  each  side  cross-  jv.^^^"^'3^  wise,    in    this 
manner:     |  ^r-T~n\    Wien  ^lls  ^~^S\~^JCX^  has  been  done, 

she  puts  it r^- — - <M      i((°)  on  an  ohl  ^unL7         mat  that  lias 

been  spread  ^~^^LJ_l-\^  out,  |  and   she   does   the   same  with   the 
others;  and  Ls       when  that  lias  been  done,  she  |  cuts  off 

the  tails:  and  when  they  have  been  cut  off,  the  water  in  the  floun- 
der-kettle begins  to  boil.  ||  She  takes  it  off  and  puts  it  down  by  the  hi 
side  |  of  her  fire,    and  she   takes  spht    cedar-sticks   and   measures 
them  off  |  so  that  they  are  the  size  of  the  flounder-cooking  kettle 
crosswise.  |  Then  she  breaks  off  eight  of  them.     When  she  has  clone  • 
so,  she  puts  |  four  on  the  water  of  the  flounder-cooking  kettle,  ||  and  45 
she  takes  the  four  others  and  puts  them  crosswise  over  the  four  that  are 


lae  guqodxa  neqwa  tsloxiigindmot  £wapExs  lae  guxtslotsa  £wape  27 
laq  qa  nEgoyoxsdalisexs  lae  hanxLEnts  laxes  lEgwIle.  Wa,  gll- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax-'edxes  xwaLayowe  qa£s  lit  klwagiigilllxa 
pa  vats  !e  lalaxama  qaes  dax'Idexa  £nEme  laxa  paese  qa£s  xwaltse-  30 
£stalex  yax'yig'Hatslas  tEk'lasa  paesexa  ga  gwalega  (fig.)  yix  x. 
Wa,  gll'mese  nELawa  emEladza£yaxs  lae  gElxndts !odxa  yaxyigile. 
Wii,  la  t!osodEX  magaamVyasa  awana£yasa  yaxyigile  laxa  q!os- 
na£ye.  Wa,  laEm  k!es  axodxa  q!osna£ye  laxa  hex"t!a£yas.  Wa, 
g  il£mese  £wl£lawa  yaxyigllaxs  lae  ga  gwalega  (fig.).  35 

Wii,  laqaqEdEdzodEx  wax-sadzaeyas  g'a  gwalega  (fig.).  Wa,  gil- 
Emese  gwalExs  lii  k!igEdzots  laxa  k"!ak"!obane  LEbela.  Wa,  la 
lieEmxat!  gwex£Idxa  waokwe.  Wa, gil£mese  £wl£la  gwalExs  lae  t!o- 
salax  ts!asna£yas.  Wa,  gll'Enixaawise  £wl£laxs  lae  maEmdElqule  pa- 
stag'riats !as  hanx  Lanowa.  Wa,  lil  hanx-seEndEq  qa£s  hamolises  40 
laxes  lEgwIle.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  xokwe  k!wa£xLiiwa  qa£s  niEns£Ides 
liix  wadzEq lExsdaasasa pastag"ielats !e hanxxanowaxs  lae kokoxsEn- 
dsq  qa  malgiinalts  !aqes.  Wa,  g'il'mese  gwalExs  iae  LExustEntsa 
mots  !aqe  laxa  £wabEts  !awasa  pastagi£lakwe  hanx  xanowa.  Wa,  laxae 
ax£edxa  motslaqe  qa£s  gek  iyindes  laxa  la  LExustala  motslaqa  (fig.1).  45 

1  See  figure  on  p.  416. 


416 


ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL 


[ETH.  ANN.  35 


46  in  it.  (Then  it  is  this  way:)  ,,-rv.  |  Now  the  broken  cedar-sticks 
are  floating  on  the  hot  |  water;  /~~~N  and  she  takes  the  clean  floun- 
ders and  lays  them  on  top  \ -j  of   the  |  cedar-sticks;  and  she 

takes   three  more   pieces   of      4-1^K    broken  |  cedar-sticks  and  lays 
511  them  on   the  flounder  lengthwise;    and  ||  she  takes    another  floun- 
der-and  lays  it  on  top  of  it,  so  that  it  is  crosswise  |  on  the  first  one; 
and  she  takes  three  pieces  of  broken  |  cedar-sticks  and  lays  them  on 

and  she  does  this  to  every 
water  enters  between  them, 
sticks  laid  between  boiled 
broken  cedar-sticks  in  the 
are  called  |  "  cross-cedar- 
When  all  |  this  has  been 
the 


top  of  it,  in  this  way: 

one,  |  so  that  the  hot 

Tins  is  called  |  "  cedar- 
55  flounders;"  and  ||  the 

bottom  of   the   kettle 

sticks   of   the  whole  boiled   flounders.' 

done,  she  puts  her  flounder-cooking   kettle   on   the  fire;    and 

flounders  stay  on  the  fire  boding  for  about  half  an  hour  according 
60  to  the  watch.  |  Then  she  takes  them  off  the  fire  and  puts  ||  them 

down  outside  of  the  place  where  she  is  sitting.     Then  she   takes 

a  disli  and  |  the  bone  strainer,  and  she  puts    (the  dish)   down  by 

the  side  of    the    kettle   in  which   the   whole   flounders  have  been 
•  cooked.  |  She  puts  the  bone  strainer  under  the  topmost  one  of  the  | 

flounders,  so  that  it  docs  not  break  to  pieces  when  she  lifts  it  out,  and 

she  puts  it  into  the  |  dish  of  the  one  who  is  to  eat  the  flounder;  and 
65  she  does  the  same  with  the  others.  ||  As  soon  as  she  has  taken  the 

boiled  flounders  out  of  the  kettle,  she  puts  them  into  a  dish  |  in  front 

46  Wa,  laEm  pEX'aleda  k-6k-oxsaakwe  k!wa£xLawa  laxa  ts!Elxusta 
£wapa.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tslewalagEkwe  paes  qa£s  paqEyindes  laxa 
k!waexLawe.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  yuduxuts!aqe  kokoxsaakwe 
k  !wa£XLawa  qa£s  kak'EdEdzodales  laxa  paese  laxes  gildolase.    Wa, 

50  laxae  ax£edxa  £nEine  paesa  qa£s  paqEyindes  liiq  qa  gEyales  laxa 
gllx'de  axtsloyos.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  yuduxuts!aqe  kogEk"  k!wa£x- 
Lawa  qa£s  kak"EdEdzodes  laq,  g"a  gwaleg'a  {jig.)-  Wa,  la  £naxwaEm 
he  gwex£IdEq  qa  lalak'esa  ts!Elxusta  £wape  laq.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs 
k-ak  Etawa£yasa  pastag'Wakwe  k!wa£xi,awa.     Wii,  he£mis  Legadeda 

55  banaxxa£ye  k  okoxsaaku  k!\va£xLawa  lax  banaxLa^yasa  hanxLanowe 
gayaxLe  k!\va£xLa,9a  amstaekwe  pastagi£lakwa.  Wa, gilfmese  ewPla 
gwalExs  lae  hanxLEnts  laxes  paeselaxdEma  lEgwIla.  Wa,  laxEnt!a 
nExsEgiLElagila  laxsns  q!alak'!ayaxEns  £nalaqe  £wa£wasLalasas  laxa 
paeselaxdEma  lEgwIlExs  lae  hanxsEndF.q   laxes  lEgwfie  qa£s  hang'a- 

60  files  lax  Lhisalllases  k!waelase.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  loq!we  LE£wa 
xf.Ivowc  xaxxit  qa£s  la  ha£nohlas  laxes  amstaekwe  pastagi£lakwa. 
Wa,  lii  aekilaxs  lae  xElabotses  xaxx-a  XElyo  laxa  Ek!Ek'Eya£ye 
paesa  qa  k'leses  q!wel£Idaxs  lae  xElostEndEq  qa£s  la  xEltslots  laxa 
paspEts  !ats  !6l6  loqlwa.     Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  he  gwex-£Idxa  waokwe. 

65  Wa,  glPmese  £wegilteda  pastagi£lats!e  hanxxanoxs  lae  kagEmll- 


boas]  RECIPES  417 

of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  boiled  whole  flounders;  and  |  immedi-  07 
ately  those  who  arc  to  eat  the  flounders  begin  to  eat,  taking  them  up 
in  the  hands.  |  Some  Indians  call  this  "flounder-eating."  They 
suck  |  the  bones  and  the  head  and  the  gills  while  they  are  eating  the  || 
meat.  When  they  have  eaten  it  all,  then  water  is  given  to  them  to  |  70 
rinse  their  mouth,  and  they  drink.  This  is  all  about  |  one  manner 
(of  cooking  flounder).  | 

Flounder  eaten  with  Spoons. — The  |  cutting  of  the  flounder  is  the 
same  as  the  cutting  of  the  whole  boiled  flounder,  ||  the  only  difference  75 
being  that  there  are  no  broken  cedar-sticks,  for  |  it  is  just  put  into 
the  water  when  it  begins  to  boil.     When  it  has  been  |  boiling  a  little 
while,  it  is  stirred  so  that  it  breaks;  and  when  j  the  meat  comes  oft' 
from  the  bones,  it  is  done.     Then  [  the  flounder-cooking  kettle  is 
taken  off  the  fire,  and  ||  a  little  oil  is  taken  and  poured  into  it.     Then  |  SO 
the  woman  takes  the  spoons  and  distributes  them  among  those  who 
are  to  eat  |  the  boiled  flounder.  The  woman  takes  dishes  and  a  |  large 
spoon,  and   puts  the  dishes  down  by  the  side  of  the  |  flounder-cook- 
ing kettle:  and  she  takes  the  Large  spoon  and  ||  dips  the  boiled  floun-  85 
dcr  out  of  the  kettle,  |  and  puts  into  the  flounder-dish  all  the  liquid 
and  the  meat.     The  dishes  are  half  full  of  it.  |  Then  it  is  placed  in 
front   of   the   flounder-eaters,  who   immediately  |  eat   the   flounder. 

Ieiii  liixa  paspEsLaxa  amstaek"  hanxLaakwe  paesa.  Wa,  hex-£i- 
ihr'mese  piispESLaq  xamaxts lanases  e£eyasowaxs  lae  hamx£IdEq.  66 
Wa,  la  £nekeda  waokwe  bakluma  paspEs£eda.  Wa,  laEm  k-  Ilxwax 
xaqas  LE£wa  hext!a£yas  lo£  q!osna£yas,  ylxs  laaLal  q!Emlq!alEX 
qlEmlalas.  Wa,  gi"l£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  tsex-Ttsa  £wape  laq  qa 
tslEweLlExoyos.  Wa,  lii  nax£Idexs  lae  gwala.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxa  70 
-iiKiux'-'idala. 

Flounder  eaten  with  Spoons  (;yi;wek"  paes).  Wa,  heEm  gwale 
xwax.a£yasa  paese  xwaLa£yasa  amstaekwe  hanxLaakwe  paesa.  Wa, 
lexa-'mes  ogiiqalayosexs  k'leosae  kokoxsaak"  k!waeXLawa  ylxs 
a£mae  axstEndayo  laxa  Ewapaxs  lae  maEmdElqiila.  Wa,  lii  gagala  75 
maEmdElqulaxs  lae  xwet!etsE£wa  qa  q !weq liilts !es.  Wa,  giPmese 
kMinEmgiLEleda  qtemlale  laxa  xaqaxs  lae  rdSpa.  Wii,  laEm  hanx-- 
sanoweda  pastagidatsle  laxa  pastag"ilax"dEm  lEgwIla.  Wii,  lii  ax£e- 
tsE£wa  holale  L!e£na  qaJs  k!unq!Egi;nie  Laq.  Wii,  la£me  ax£ededa 
tslEdaqaxa  k-ak-Ets!Enaqe  qa£s  ts lEwanaeses  laxa  pEpastaguLaxa  SO 
pastagi£lakwe.  Wii,  lii  ax£ededa  tslEdaqaxa  loElqlwe  LE£wa 
ewalase  k'ats!Eiiaqa.  Wa,  la  mEXEnolilElasa  loEkjIwe  liixa  pasta- 
gi£lats!e  hanxxanowa.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  £walase  katslEnaqa  qa£s 
tsaj*olts!ales  laxa  pastagi-lakwe  qa£s  lii  tsetslalas  laxa  piispEyats!eLe 
loq!wa  £wl£leda  £wapala  LE£wa  qlEmlale.  Wii,  lii  naEiigoyoxsdaleda  85 
loElqlwaqexs  lae  kagEmlelEm  laxa  paspESLaq.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese 
75052 — -\ — 35  kih — pt  1 27 


418  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  86 

They  eat  it  with  spoons;  and  |  when  tliey  have  eaten,  they  drink  a 
90  little    water   to  cool   themselves;  ||  and  alter  drinking,  they  go  out. 
That  is  all  |  about  it.  | 
1       Steamed    Flounder   (Flounders     steamed    standing    on     edge    on 
stones). —  (The  man  gathers  driftwood,  and  when  he  thinks  he  has 
enough  to  steam  on  stones  the  flounders  put  on  edge,  he  goes  home  to  his 
house.      When  it   is  high  water,  he  throws  out  the  driftwood  on  the 
beach  of  Ins  house;)  and  '  when  all  the  driftwood  is  out,  |  he  takes  two 
medium-sized  pieces  of  |  drift  wood  not  quite  one  fathom  in  length,  | 
5  and  puts  them  down  above  high-water  mark.     They  are  four  ||  spans 
apart.     He    takes  |  easily-splitting  cedar-wood   and    splits  it   into  | 
thin  pieces  to  start  the  lire,  ami  he  puts  them  down  between  the  |  two 
side-pieces  of  the  fire.     Then  he  takes  medium-sized  dry  |  driftwood 
and  puts  it  down  on  top,  so  that  the  top  is  on  the  same  level  as  the  || 
10  two  side-pieces.     Then  he  puts  driftwood  crosswise  over  them.  |  As 
soon  as  it  reaches  from  one  end  to  the  other  the  whole  length  of  the 
two  side-pieces,  he  |  takes   a  medium-sized  basket   and  goes  to  pick 
up  medium-sized  fresh  stones,  |  and  puts  them  into  his  stone  carrying- 
basket.     When  it  is  full,  J  he  carries  it  up  and  pours  the  stones  on  top 
15  of  the  cross-pieces  on  which  the  flounders  are  to  he  steamed.  ||  He 
continues  doing  this,  and  does  not  stem  until  the  stones  are  thick  | 
over  the  top  of  it.     Then  he  lights  a  fire  under  |  them  at  each  end. 

88  paspEs£edExda£xwa.  Wii,  lai'.m  £yos£itses  kfik  Ets!Eiiaqe  laq  Wa, 
g  ih'mese  £wl-'laqexs  lae   \aL!K\""Id  nax-iilxa  £wape  qa£s  k'oxwaxodes 

90  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  naqaxs  lae  boquwElsa.  Wa,  laEin  gwal 
laxeq. 
1  Steamed  Flounder  (£nEg-Eku  k!ot!aaku  paes).  Wii,  gtl£mese  £wl- 
£!<>lta\\a  qlexalaxs  lae  hex  £idaKm  ax-edxa  £nialts!aqe  ha£yal£agit 
<l  lexalaxa  halsEla£me  k!es  £nEmp!Eiikes  awiisgEmase  laxEns  biii.ax 
qa£s  k  ;it  F.mgalises  lax  5La£vasa  £yax"mute.  Wa,  lii  mop!Enke 
5  awalagalaasas  laxEns  q !waq  !wax"ts !ana£yex.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa 
egaqwa  lax  xasEwe  k!waexLawa  qa£s  xoxox"sEiideq  qa  am£ama- 
yastowes  qa£s  galastoya.  Wa,  lii  LoLaxots  lax  awagawa£yasa 
Emalts!aqe  k'ak"EdEnwa£ya.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  ha£vala£stowe  Innixwa 
qlexala    qafs    LoxQylndales    laq.     Wa,  giPmese   enEmakiya   i.E£wa 

10  £malts!aqe  kak  EdEnwexs  lae  gekiyindalasa  qlexale  laq.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  lslbEnd  lax  £wasgEmasasa  £malts!aqe  kak'EdEnwa£ye,  lae 
ax£edxa  hi'ta  li:xa£va  qaes  lii  niEnaxa  ha£yal£a  alEXSEm  t!esEma 
qa£s  lii  t!axts!alas  hixes  t!iigats!e  h;xa£ya  Wii,  g  ihinese  qotlaxs 
lae  k'!ox£usdesaq  qa£s  lii  qEpEyints    laxes   t leqwapdEmaLaxa  ]>aese. 

15  Wit,  lii  hexsiiEm  gwegile.  Wii,  al£mese  gwiilsxs  lae  wakwa 
tlesEine  la  hamElqEye  lax  6ku£ya£yas.  Wii,  hex£ida£mese  tsena- 
botsagulta  lax  £waxsl)a'\as      Wa,  g11£mese  xlqostaxs  lae  ax£edxa 

1  Continued  trom  p.  lxl,  line  62. 


boas]  RECIPES  419 

As  soon  as  it  flames  up,  he  takes  the  |  basket  in  which  he  carried  up  18 
the  stones,  and  |  carries  it  down  to  his  fishing-canoe.     Then  he  takes 
the  flounders  ||  and  places  them  in  the  basket.     When  it  is  full,  he  |   20 
takes  up  the  flounder-basket  and  carries  it  to  the  wood-pile.  |  He  takes 
an  old  unit  and  spreads  it  out  on  the  beach.     Then  |  he  takes  the 
flounder-basket  and  pours  the  flounders  on  to  the  old  \  mat,  so  that 
they  lie  on  it-     Then  he  goes  back  to  the  beach  and  ||  brings  up  the  25 
rest  of  the  flounders.     As  soon  as  he  reaches  his  fishing-canoe,  |  he 
takes  the  flounders    and    puts  them  into  the  flounder-basket;  |  and 
when  they  are  all  in,  he  picks  up   (the  basket )  and    |  carries  it  up  the 
beach,  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  i  the  old  mat  on  which  the 
flounders  have  been  placed;  and  he  goes  up  the  beach,  and  takes  the 
tongs  out  of  his  house,  ||  and  a  bucket,  and  also  old  mats  for  covering,  |  30 
and  also-cedar  wood;  and  lie  takes  these  and  puts  them  down  by  the 
wood-pile.  |  Then  lie   takes   the  long  tongs,   picks   out    the   red-hot 
stones,  and  j  puts  them  down  on  the  beach  not  far  from  |  where  he 
stands,  for  he  never  moves  his  feet  when  lie  puts  down  the  ||  red-hot  35 
stones.     He  puts  them  down  on  a  level placeon  the  beach.  j  When  all 
the  stones  have  been  taken  out  of  the  (ire,    he  levels  the  |  hot  stones 
with  his  tongs;  and  when  they  have  all  been  levelled  down,  j  he  takes 
his  bucket  with  fresh  water  in  it  and  i  sprinkles  a  little  on  the  red-hot 

lrcxa;"ye  yix  tlagatslexdasexa  tlesEme  qa£s  la  dalaq  qa£s  lit  k-!ox-  IS 
-"walK.xsas  laxes  idagedzatsle  xwaxwaguma.     AYii,   la    ax£edxa  paese 
qa£s    lii    k"!Exts!alas    laxa     lExa£ye.      Wa,    gil-mese    qotlaxs    lae  20 
klogfdfsaxa   payatsle   lExa£ya  qa£s   la   klogfmolisas  laxa  tleqwabE- 
gwese.      Wa,    lii    ax£edxa    k!ak"!obane     qa£s    LEplalises.     Wii,    la 
ax£edxa  payatsle  lExa£ya  qa£s  lii  gflgEdzotsa  paese  laxa  kligEdzowe 
k-!ak-!obana.      Wa,   lii    xwelaqants  !es    laxa  i.!Eiiia-~ise  qa£s  lii.  etled 
laxes  anex'sa£ye  laxa  paese.     Wa,  gil-mese  lag  aa  laxes  Llagedzatsle  25 
xwaxwagumxs  lae  ax£edxa   paese  qa£s  lii  k!ixts!alas  laxa  payatsle 
lnxa£ya.     Wit,  g-il£mese  £wi£lts!axs    lae  klogulEXsaq  qa£s    lit  k!ox- 
£wusdesElaq   qars    lii    haiiEnxElIsas     laxa    k- lEgEdzayaasasa    paesa 
klftklobana.     Wa,  lit  lasdesa  qa£s  la  ax£edxa  kltpLalaa  laxes  gokwe 
i.F/'wa  tsayatsle  uagatsla.     Wit,  hemtisa  nenayime  k!ak'!Ek'!obana.  30 
Wa,  lieMuisa  k!wa-xi.awaxs  lae  dalaq  qa£s  lii  ax£alisas  laxes  tleqwa- 
liEkwe.     Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  ax£edxa  gilt  !a  klipLalaa  qaes  k'llplldes 
laxa  xIxixsEmala  tlesEma    qa£s  kllplalesEles   laxa  k'lese  qwesala 
laxes  Lawedzase  qaxs  hewaxae  Leqiillse  goguviisexs  lae  k-!lp!edxa 
xixixsEmala   tlesEma    qa£s    k!ip!alises    laxa  'nF.madse.     Wa,  gil-  35 
£mese  £wllg'ilqeda  gultiixa  tlesEmaxs  lae  golgilqases  kMIpLalaa  laxa 
xixixsEmala  t  lesEma  qa   •iiEmak  iyax£Iiles.      AVii.  g  il-mese  EnEma- 
k  iyaxs  lae  ax£edxa  nagatslaxs  lae  £wabEts  lalaxa  £WE£wap lEme  qa£s 
\:ii.!EX""Ide  xodzELEyints  laxa  xixixsEmala  tlesEma  qa ''widawesa 


420  ETHNOLOGY    OP    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  SB 

40  stones,  so  that  the  ||  ashes  that  stick  on  them  come  off.  When  he 
has  sprinkled  water  |  over  the  whole  surface,  lie  takes  split  cedar- 
sticks  not  |  really  thick,  and  measures  oil'  one  span  |  and  four  finger- 
widths,  and  breaks  it  off;  and  |  this  is   the  measure  for  the  other 

15  cedar-sticks,  when  he  keeps  on  breaking  off  ||  many  of  them, — all 
cedar-sticks  of  the  same  length.  When  he  thinks  ]  that  he  lias 
enough,  he  puts  them  end  down  between  the  red-hot 

stones,  ]  in  this  manner:  Ac\-\3<\<^A  l'"\v  are  one  span  apart  | 
lengthwise  and  crosswise;  ami      the    cedar-sticks 

standing  on  end  among  the  red-hot  stones  are  called  "holders  of  the 

50  steamed  flounders  standing  on  edge  on  stones."  ||  The  name  of  the 
red-hot  stones  is  " steaming-place  for  flounders  standing  on  edge  on 
stones."  When  all  |  the  cedar-sticks  stand  on  edge  on  stones,  the 
man  takes  the  flounder-  j  basket  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of 
the  steaming-place.     He  never  |  cuts  the  flounders  to  take  out  the 

55  intestines.  He  takes  out  one  |[  flounder,  and  lays  it  flat  on  the 
cedar-sticks.     so  that  it  stands  on  its  edge  on  the  I 


hot     stones. 

of  the  '  cedar 


Each   flounder  leans    against  one 

sticks.     When  he  has  finished,  it  is 

in  this  way:   I    \]yy^^V^3V2 1    j  When  he  has  put  them  all  on, 

lie   takes    the  ■ ■ old    mats   and    |    lavs   them    down 

60  close    to    his    steaming-place.     When    this    has    been    done,    ||    he 


40  guna£ye  k!wek!utsEmeq.  Wa,  g'IPmese  £wi£la  xosElglntsa  Ewape 
lax  EwadzEqayayaasasasexs  lae  ax£edxa  xokwe  k!wa£xLawa  k-!es 
alaEm  i.F.si.F.kwa  qa£s  -niK.nsfIdesa  EnEmp!Enke  laxEns  q!waq!\va\- 
ts!ana\ve,  hcmiisa  niodi:ne  esEg'iwaEyasexs  lae  k'oqodEq.  Wii. 
he£mis  la  emEnyayosexa  wadkwe  k!wa£xLiiwaxs  lae  hanal  k'ok-oxs£a- 

4.">  laxa  (|  ienEme  best  a  awasgF.m  xok"  k  !wa£xxawa.  Wa,  gil'niese  k-otaq 
laKin  heb'fdaxs  lae  q  Iwagaalodalas  laxa  xix  ixsEinfila  tlesEma  g'a 
gwalega  {fig.),  yixs  :nal-iiF.mp!Enkae  laxEns  q !waq Iwaxts !a- 
na£yaqe  awalagalaasas  laxes  glldolase  LE£wis  ts!eg-oIase.  Wa, 
liesin  LegadES  k'  !ot!aasdEmasa  mEg'lkwe  paesa  k  !wa£XLawe  qlwaaak" 

50  laxa  xIxixsK.mala  t  lesF.ma.  Wa,  he£mis  Legadeda  xLxixsEmfila 
tlesEinas  EnEx-dEmaxa  k!ot!aakwe  paesa.  Wa,  gihniese  £wl£la  la 
qlwaaakwa  klwaxi.awaxs  laeda  bEgwanEme  ax£edxa  payatsle 
lExa'va  qa£s  la  k- logdnolisas  laxes  mEgasLaq.  Wii,  laEin  hewiixa 
t!ox"w!dxa  paese  qa  lawayes  tslEnexas.     Wa,  la  dolts  lodxa  £nEme 

55  paes  qa£s  paxEndes  laxa  k!wa£xLawe  qa  k'lotalesexs  lae  axa  laxa 
ts'.F.lqwa  tlesEma.  Wa,  la  Enal£nEma  paese  laxa  £nal£nEmts!aqe 
k!wa£xLawa.  Wii,  gibmese  gwfdExs  lae  ga  gwaleg-a  (fig.). 
Wa,  g-il£mese  Ewllg"aalaxs  lae  ax£edxa  k-!ak!Ek'!obana  qa£s  la 
LEplElsElas    lax    mag  inwalisases  mEkasoLe.      Wa,  gibmese   gwa- 

60  Iexs   lae    ax£edxa   wEwa.p!Emts!S.la    nagatsla    qaEs     tsadzEi.Eyindes 


boas]  RECIPES  421 

takes  the  bucket  with  fresh  water  and  pours  it  |  over  the  flounders  (il 
standing  on  edge  on  the  stones.     When  the  water  has  been  poured 
out,  |  he  quickly  takes  up  the  old  mats  and  throws  them  over  them;  I 
and    it   does    not    take  long  before  he  takes  off  the  covering,  for 
(the  flounders)   are  now  done.  |  As  soon  as  he  has  taken  off    the 
whole   covering   of   old    mats,  the   man  ||  calls   his   numaym  to  sit  G5 
around   the  place  where  the  flounders  were  steamed,  |  to   eat  the 
steamed  flounders.     The  men  all  come  and  sit  around  |  what  they 
are  going  to  eat.     When  they  are  all  there,  |  each  man  takes  one  j 
flounder,   and  they  pinch  off   (the  meat)  and  put  it  into  their  months; 
and  ||  after  each  has  eaten  one  flounder,  they  take  another  one  and  7(1 
eat  it;  |  and  when  there  are  many  flounders,  then  all  the  men  try  to 
eat    many  |  flounders;  and    sometimes    each    man    will    eat    four  [ 
flounders   when   there    are    many.     And   when    the    flounder-eaters 
finish,  |  they  go  home  to  their  houses,  and  they  wasli  their  hands; 
and  ||  after  they  have  done,  so,  they  drink  a  little  water,  after  |  rinsing  75 
their  mouths  for  the  salty  taste  to  come  out.     The  reason  why  they 
do  not  |  drink  much  water  is  because  they  are  afraid  to  drink  much 
when  they  first  |  taste  the  flounders  steamed  standing  on  edge  on 
stones,  for  then  they  would  |  always  want   to  drink  water.     There- 
fore they  only  ||  drink  a  little  water  to  wash  down  what  they  have  SO 
eaten.  |  This  also  is  not  given  at  a  feast  to  many  tribes.     That  is  | 
all  about  this.  | 

laxa   k'!ot!aakwe   paesa.     Wii,  gil£mese    nvllg  iltslawa   £wapaxs  lae  6i 
hanakwila    dax,£idxa    k  !fdc  iF.k'obana   qa£s    nasEyindes    laq.     Wa, 
k"!est!a    alaEm    galaxs   lae    nasodExa   nayi'me  qaxs  lE£mae  rddpa. 
Wa,  g'ilEmese  £wFlaweda    k"  !ak"  tek-  lob  ana    nayimxs   laeda  bEgwa- 
nEme  Ledalaxes  £nE£memote  qa  liis  k  !utse£stalaxa  £nEgasaxa  paese  65 
qa£s  paspEsexa  mEg'Ek"  paesa.     Wii,  la  £wi£laEm  la  k!iitse£stalIsE- 
leda    bebEgwaiiEmaxes    ha-mfu.e.     Wii,    gil£mese   £wilgalisExs    lae 
liex="idaEm  dax£Ideda enalenEmokwe  bebEgwanEmxa  enal£nEme  laxa 
paesaxs  lae  epaxElaq  qa£s  ts!oq!usEles  laxes  skuisc.     Wii,  gih'mese. 
£wi£laxa  £nEme    paesExs    lae   etled  ax'edxa 'uF.me  qa£s  hamx£ideq.  70 
Wii,  g-il£mese  qlenEma  paesaxs  laeda  'naxwa  bebEgwanEm  q!aq!e- 
k-!Esap!axa  paese,  yixs  £nalenEmp lEnae  moklusa  £nEmokwe  bEgwa- 
iiEmxa    paesaxs    qleiiEniae.     Wii,    g'll£mese    gwala    paspEsaxs    lae 
na£naku  laxes  gig'okwe  qa£s  !ii  tslEntslEnkwa  laq.     Wii,  g'ih'mese 
gwalEXs  lae  xaL!EX'£id  nax-Idxa   EwE£wap!Eme    yixs  lae  gwiil  ts!E-  75 
weLlExoda  qa  lawiiyeses  dEmp  !a§L !Exawa£ye.     Wii,  heEin  kMeselts 
q!ek!Esxa    -wape    qaxs    kilElae    gEyol    q!ek!EsEq    qaexs   g-il£mae 
p!EX£aLEleda  ha'"maagolaxa  k!ot!aakwe  £nEgik"    paesExs  lae  aEiu 
la    hemEnaliiEm    la    naqlexsdxa   £wape.     Wii,  he£mis    lagilas    anm 
xiiLlEx-'Id  nax£idxa  -wape    qa£s    ts!EwEndzEmxes    hamiix'de.     Wii,  SO 
laxae   k'les   klweladzEm    laxa    qleiiEnie    !elqwalaLa£ya.     Wii,  laEm 
gwal  laxeq. 


422  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

1  Fresh  Herring-Spawn  on  Cedar- Branches.  Now  I  will  talk  about  | 
(herring-spawn  on)  cedar-branches,  for  thai  is  also  done  in  the  same 
manner  as  with  the  hemlock-branches,  \  when  they  arepul  into  the 
sea;  and  the  only  difference  is.  thai  they  are  |  not  often  dried,  for 
5  they  arc  only  put  ||  into  the  spawning-place;  and  as  soon  as  herrings 
stop  spawning,  then  j  the  cedar-branches  with  the  spawn  on  them 
arc  given  [  to  the  tribe  to  eat.  The  raw  spawn  is  eaten  fresh,  j  It  is 
bad  when  it  is  dried,  for  it  quicklj  gets  a  strong  taste,  |  and  it  quickly 

10  gets  red;  and  it  also  !!  tastes  of  cedar-branches  when  it  gets  dry;  and 
the  only  j  reason  why  it.  is  put  into  the  sea  is,  that  it  is  easy  to  wipe 
off  |  the  herring-spawn;  and  it  is  not  cooked  in  kettles.  | 

Soaked  Herring-Spawn. — A  [  large  steaming-box   is  taken,  and  the 

15  box  with  herring-spawn  is  taken,  ||  and  it  is  put  down  on  the  Left-hand 
side  of  the  house.  |  Then  they  untie  the  rope  of  the  cover,  ami  they 
pour  (the  herring-spawn)  into  the  steaming-box;  j  and  as  soon  as  it 
is  nearly  full,  they  pour  fresh  water  into  it;  and  they  only  stop 
pouring  water  into  it   when  it   covers   the  :  spawn.      This  is  done  in 

20  the  morning,  ami  it  is  just  j|  left  that  way  until  noon.  Then  the  old 
women  are  asked  j  to  come  and  rub  the  herring-spawn;  and  when 
the  old  women   j  come,  they  sit  down  in  the  house,  one  on   each  side 


1  Fresh  Herring-Spawn  on  Cedar-Branches.  Wa,  laEme'sEn  e'dza- 
qwaltsa  ts!ap!axe  yixs  he'Ema.axat!  gwale  gwa'laasasa  qlwa'xe, 
yixs  lae  glwa'la  la'xa  di:'msxe.  Wa,  le'x"aEme  o'gtiqalayosexs 
k!e'sae  qluna'la  li:'nix\\asK;wa,  yixs  le'xaEmae  la'g"ilas  axsta'no 
5  laxa  wa'yade  qaxs  gi'Pmae  gwal  wa'seda  wa'naEyaxs  la'e  he'x"EI- 
dai.in  axwilsta'noweda  EiiEndKxi.a'la  tsla'plaxa  qaEs  la,  hauig'i'layo 
la'xa  go'kiilote.  \\*;V ,  laE'm  halaxwa  k!i;'lxk!axxa  aE'nte. 
Wa,  la  Eya'x-sEmxs  lE'mxwasEEwae.  He'Em  ba'labala  la  klExpIa- 
x-Ei'de;    he'Emesexs    ha'labalae    !a    i.!ax;wt'da.      Wa,  la'xaa    la'se 

10  gwe'plaasasa  ts!a'p!axe  la'qexs  la'e  lF,m.x-wIda.  Wa,  le'x'aEmes 
la'gilas  axsta'no  la'xa  di'/insxiixs  ho'licnda'axs  la'e  qusa'laya 
an-'F.'nte  laq.     Wa,  la'xae  k!es  h3/nxxEntsEEwa. 

Soaked    Herring-Spawn    (Wuse'laxa    aE'nte).     Wa,  he'Eniaaxs  la'e 
axEe'tsEEwa  Ewa'lase  qlo'latsle.     Wa,  laEme'se  8,xEe'tsEEwa  aiida'tsle 

15  xEtsr.'nia  qaEs  g'a'xe  hS/ngalilas  lax  gEmxotsalilasa  go'kwe.  Wa, 
la,  qwelEyi'ndEx  t  !Ema'k'EyaEyas.  Wa,  la  guxts  !§/las  la'xa  q!eq!o- 
datsle.  Wa,  gl'Pmese  Ela'q  qo'qutlaxs  la'e  qEplEqa'sa  a'lta  Ewap 
laq.  Wa,  a'lEmese  gwaJ  qEpa'sa  Ewa'paxs  la'e  nelkEya'x"EId  la'xa 
aE'nte.     Wa,  he'Em  he'xdsms  gwe'xEIdeda  gaa'la.     Wii,  a'£mese 

20  la  bawa'plEs  Wa,  gl'Pmese  nEqa'laxs  la'e  he'lasEEwa  hiE'lklwa- 
naEye  qa  ga'xes  wiisa'xa  aE'nte.  \Vii,  ^i'Pmeseg'a'xeda  laE'lklwa- 
na-'yaxs  la'e   k !usEa'lileda   EnalEnEmo'kwe   lax  Ewa'x-sanalllasa  Enal- 


boas]  RECIPES  4  2  3 

of  each  steaming-box;  and  as  soon  as  they  have  sat  down,  they  rub 
the  |  herring-spawn.  After  they  have  continued  rubbing  it  for  a 
a  lung  time,  they  shake  out  with  the  back  ||  of  the  hand  the  hemlock-  25 
leaves,  and  they  draw  the  spawn  towards  themselves;  and  |  when  all 
the  spawn  is  on  the  near  side  of  the  steaming-box,  |  then  all  the 
1  emlock-leaves  are  on  the  far  side;  and  the  old  woman  |  skims  them 
off  with  her  right  hand,  and  puts  them  into  a  |  small  dish  that  stands 
on  the  floor;  and  when  all  the  hemlock-leaves  are  out,  she  ||  rubs  the  30 
spawn  again;  and  she  rubs  (among)  it  for  a  long  time,  |  doing  in  the 
same  way  as  she  had  done  before,  when  she  first  worked  at  the  | 
spawn,  shaking  her  hands  so  as  to  remove  the  hemlock-leaves  to  the 
outer  side  |  of  the  steaming-box;  and  she  also  does  the  same,  skim- 
ming off  the  |  hemlock-leaves  and  throwing  them  into  the  small  dish. 
She  keeps  on  ||  doing  this,  and  only  stops  when  all  the  hemlock-leave-  '■'<■> 
are  out.  |  As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,  a  large  kettle  is  taken,  and  | 
the  spawn  is  poured  into  it.  When  the  kettle  is  full,  |  the  man  calls 
his  tribe;  and  [  when  all  the  guests  are  in,  they  first  eat  ||  scorched  40 
dried  salmon.  After  they  have  eaten  it,  they  put  the  |  kettle  with 
herring-spawn  on  the  fire,  and  |  the  young  men  at  once  stir  it;  ami 
when  it  begins  to  boil,  |  it  is  taken  off  the  fire.  Then  it  is  |  done. 
Then    dishes    are    taken,    and  ||  long-handled    ladles,    and    with    the  45 


£nEmsgEine  q!o'lats!a.      Wa,,  gi'Rmese  k!us£a'lllExs  la'e  wus£e'dxa  '_>."> 
aE'nte.    Wa,  gi'l£mese  ge'g  illl  wiisK'lgeqexs  la'e  nEln'ts  awe'ga'ya- 
ses  e£eyaso'  la'xa  k"!a'Emo£mo.     Wa,  la  go'laxa  aE'nte.     Wa,  gi'l-  25 
£mese  £wl'£la  ga'xeda aE'nte  la'xa  gwa'saneqwasa  q!o'lats!axs  la'e 
ewi'eleda  k!a'£mo£mo  la'xa  qwe'saneqwe.     Wa,  le'da  te'k  !wana'£ye 
go'lx£Ttses  he'lk" Jolts !ana    la'xa  k!a£mo£mo  <ja£s  guxts!o'des  la'xa 
la'logume  ha£ne'la.     Wa,  g  i'1-niese  £wl'£leda  k  !a'£mo£moxs  la'e  e't  led 
wiisgE'ndxa  aE'nte.     Wa,  g  i'hmese    la   ge'gibTl    wusE'lgeqexs    la'e  30 
e'tled   he  gwe'x£IdEq  lii'xes  g  i'lxde    gwe'gilasExs  la'e  ga'laqaxa 
aE'nte  qa£s  £nE'lexes  e£eyaso'  qa  la'sa  k!a'£mo£mo  la'xa  i.la'sane- 
qwasa  q!o£lats!e.     Wa,  la'xaa  he'Em  gwe'x£IdExs  la'e  go'x£widxa 
k'!a'£mo£mo  qa£s  la  giixtslo'ts   la'xa  la'logume.     Wa,  la  he'xsaEm 
gwe'g'llaq.      Wa,    a'lmese    gwa'lExs    la'e    £wi'£laweda    k!a'£mo£mo.  35 
Wa,  g'i'Pmese  gwa'la  la'e  ax£e'tsE£weda  a'wa'we  ha'nEnxLano  qa£s 
gttxts la'yaesa    aE'nte    laq.     Wa,  gi'l£mese    la    Ewl'ela   qo'qutleda 
lia'nx  Lanaxs     la'e     Le'£laleda     bEgwa'nEmaxes     g'5'kulote.      Wa, 
g  i'l£mese    £wi'£laeLeda   Le'£laiiEmaxs  la'e  g'a'galaslla  hfi'mx  £I'dxa 
tslp/nkwe  xama'sa.     Wa,  g-J'l£mese  gwa.1    hS.£ma'pqexs  la'e  hanx--  40 
i.a'noweda    eEnttslala    hanxi.a'no     la'xa     lEgwi'le.      Wii,    lafme'se 
be'x£ida£meda  luVyfi'ha  xwe'taq.     Wa,  g  i'l-mese    mEdElx£wI'dEXs 
la'e  ha'nxsanoweda  hanE'nxxanowe    la'xa    lEgwi'le.      Wii,  laE'm 
Llo'pa.      Wii,  la  &x£e'tsE£weda  lo'slqlwe.     Wii.  la'xae  ax£e'tsE£weda 
gi'ltlEXLala    k'atslEnaqa.       Wii,    le      tsEyolts lalasa      ka'tslEiiaqe  45 


424  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

46  ladles  they  dip  [  the  herring-spawn  out  of  the  kettle  and  put  it  into 
the  dishes.  |  As  soon  as  (the  dishes)  are  full,  oil  is  taken  and  is 
poured  |  on  the  spawn  in  the  dishes;  and  they  only  stop  pouring  on 
the  oil  |  when  the  liquid  of  the  spawn  is  covered  with  it.     Then  it  is 

50  put  before  the  ||  guests,  and  the  guests  at  once  cat  it  with  spoons,  for 
before  this  |  spoons  are  given  to  them.  They  do  not  drink  water 
before  it,  |  for  they  have  eaten  dried  salmon;  therefore  they  do  not  | 
drink.  As  soon  as  they  finish  eating  herring-spawn,  they  |  cool 
themselves  with  fresh  water.  That  is  all.|| 
1  Half-Soaked  Herring-Spawn. — They  |  do  the  same  with  the  herring- 
spawn  as  I  have  told  before.  |  Only  this  is  different,  that  it  is  not. 
left  in  the  steaming-box  for  a  long  time,  |  and  it  is  rubbed  before  the 
5  herring-sp  awn  swells;  ||  and  when  all  the  hemlock -leaves  are  taken  out , 
the  spawn  is  taken  out  |  and  made  into  balls  large  enough  to  lit  into 
the  hands  |  put  together;  and  the  reason  why  it  is  made  round  is,  | 
that  it  is  put  into  the  dishes,  and  two  halls  are  made  for  |  each  man. 

10  When  there  are  eight  ||  balls  of  herring-spawn  put  into  each  dish,  | 
it  is  put  before  four  men.  Immediately  j  the  guests  take  out  eachone 
ball  of  |  herring-spawn,  and  they  eat  it;  and  alter  they  have  eaten  it, 
the  wife  ]  of  the  host  takes  her  spoons  and  puts  them  down  on  the  || 

46  la'xa  aE'nte  la'xa  hit'nxi.anowe  qa£s  la  tsetsla'las  la'xa  lo'Elqlwe. 
Wa,  g'iTmese  qo'qutlaxs  la'e  ax'e'tsEwa  i.lema  q.r's  klunqEyl'nde 
la'xa  lox"ts!a'la  ai:'ril a.  Wa,  aTmise  gwal  klu'nqasa  rje^naxs 
la'e  t!a'x£lde  £wa'palasa    aE'nte.     Wa,  lit  k"ax-dzamole'lEm  la'xa 

50  klwe'le.  Wa,  la  he'x"eida£ma  klwe'le  ryo's£Idqexs  ga'lae  ts!a'£ya 
ka'k-Ets!Enaqe  laq.  Wa,  laE'm  k'les  na'naqalg'ewalax  £wa'pa 
qaxs  laMiie'xde  ha£ma'pxa  xama'se.  Wa,  h.e'emis  la'gilas  k'les  la 
na'x£ida.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  E'ntlatxa  aio'ntaxs  la'e  ko'xwa- 
xotsa  a'lta  £wa'pa.  Wii,  laE'm  gwii'la. 
1  Half-Soaked  Herring-Spawn  (DExda'xxa  aE'nte). — Wii,  he'Emxaa 
gwe'g'ilaxa  aE'ntes  gwe'g'ilasaxa  gi'lx'dicn  gwa'gwex-s£ala'sa.  Wa, 
le'x'a£mes  o'guqalayo'sexs  k"!e'sae  ge'stalila  la'xa  q!oelats!axs 
la'e  wtis£e'tsE£wa  yixs  k"!e'sEmae  eEL!ExsEmx£Ideda  aE'nte.  Wii, 
5  gi'l£mese  £wl'£laweda  k'!a£mo£maxs  la'e  te'tExsEmdalaxa  aE'nte 
qa  Io'eIxseiucs  qa  a'£mes  he'£lala  muxuts!owes  la'xEns  e£eyasa'xs 
go'xsEinesE£wae.  Wii,  lie'£mis  la'g'Ilts  la  Io'eIxsehixs  la'e  nnlx"- 
tsla'layo  la'xa  lo'qlwe.  Wa,  la  £mae'£maltsEmg-i£laku  la'xa  ''na'l- 
£nEmo'kwe  be'bEgwanEma.     Wa,  gi'l'mese  Ema'lgunaltSEma  Io'eIx- 

10  sEme  a'Ent  la  xEXuts!o  la'xa  £na'l£nEmexLa  lo'Elqlwaxs  la'e 
k-ax-dzamo£le'lEm  la'xa  mo'kwe  be'bEgwanEma.  Wii,  he'x-£ida- 
£meseda  klwe'le  da'g'ilts lodxa  Enal£nE'msgEme  la'xa  Io'eIxseiiic 
aE'nta  qa£s  ha£mx£I'deq,  wa.  gi'l£mese  hamix-Tdi:xs  la'eda  gEin:'- 
masa    k'.we'lase    ax£e'dxes    k-a'k"Ets!Enaqe    qa£s   lii    axegEnts   lax 


boas]  BECIPES  425 

inner  side  of  the  dish.     She  dips  up  sonic  fresh  water  and  |  pours  it  15 
on  to  the  halls  of  spawn  which  are  in  the  dish;  and  !  when  the  guests 
eat  the  halls  of  spawn,  they  take  the  spoons  \  and  eat  the  spawn  with 
its  liquid  witli  spoons;  and  when  |  they  finish,  they  go  out.     This 
half-soaked  spawn  is  often  given   at   feasts  ]|  to  the  tribe,   and   also  20 
dried  salmon  is  eaten  before  it,  j  before  they  eat   the  half-soaked 
spawn.     No  oil  goes  with  it.     That  is  |  all  about  this.  | 

Eating  Herring-Spawn. — When  a  man  desires  to  eat  herring-spawn,  || 
he  just  goes  into  the  house  of  a  man  who  owns  |  some  good  dried  25 
spawn,  and  he  sits  down  in  the  house.  |  Then  they  tell  the  wife  of  the 
man  that  they  want  to  eat  spawn.  |  At  once  the  woman  takes  her 
food-mat  |  and  spreads  it  outside  of  the  men.     Then  she  takes  her  || 
small  basket  and  fills  it  with  herring-spawn.     Then  she  pours  |  the  30 
herring-spawn  on  the  food-mat,  and  she  scatters  the  spawn  over  it.  | 
She  also  takes  her  oil-dish  and  pours  oil   into  it,  and  I  she  places  it 
among  the  spawn.     Then  the  men  take  |  the  spawn,  dip  it  into  (lie 
oil,  and  put  it  [|  into  their  mouths.     Then  they  take  much  oil  with  it,  35 
for  |  dried  herring-spawn  is  very  rough    to  eat.  j  After  they    finish 
eating,  some  fresh  water  is  fetched,  and  they  drink;  j  and  after  they 
finish  drinking,  they  go  out.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

a'Lotaga£yasa  lo'qlwe.  Wa,  la  tse'x£Idxa  a'lte  £wa/pa  qa£s  lii  15 
qEp'.E'qas  la'xa  Io'eIxskuic  as'nt  getsla  la'xa  lo'qlwe.  Wa,  g'i'l- 
'mese  £wl'£leda  klwe'laxa  Io'eIxskiuc  aE'nta,  la'e  ax£e'dxa  kak'E- 
tsbsna'qe.  Wa,  la  ey6's£Idxa  ewa'paqEla  aE'nta.  Wa,  gi'l£mese 
£wl'£laxs  la'e  ho'qiiwElsa.  Wa,  he'Em  qliina'la  k!we'ladzEm  la'xa 
go'kQloteda  dE'nkwe  aE'nta.  Wa,  la'xaeda  xama'se  ga'galal-  20 
giwe  ha£mx-£i'tsE£wa,  yixs  k!es£mae  di:xdaxi'dxa  dE'nkwe 
aE'nta.  Wit,  laF.'m  k  lea's  i.le'-'na  Ia£yo  laq.  Wa,  laE'mxae 
gwal  la'xeq. 

Eating  Herring- Spawn  (Seq la'xa  aE'nte). — Wa,  gi'lfEm  seq!ae'.\s- 
deda  bebEgwa'nEme,  wa,  la  a'Ein  hogwe'La    lax  go'kwasa  axno'-  25 
gwadasa    lie'laxiis    lE'mx£wIdaenaeyes     aE'nte.     Wa,   la    k!us£alila, 
Wii,  la  ne'laEmxa  gEiiE'masa  bEgwa'nEmaxs  seq!ae'xsdae  lax  aE'nta. 
Wa,   he'x£idaEmeseda    tslsda'qe    ax£e'dxes    ha-'madzo'we    le'£waJya 
qa^s  LEp.'ii'lileq    lax    L!a'sa£yasa    bebEgwanEme.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes 
lalaxame    qa£s    le    k-!ats!o'dEq    la'xa    aE'nte.     Wa,    le  gugsdzo'ts  30 
la'xa  ha^ma'dzowe  le'£wa£ya.     Wii,  la  giildzo'tsa  aE'nte  laq.     Wa, 
la'xae    ax£e'dxes    ts!Eba'ts!e  qa£s    k!iinxts!o'desa  ide'£na.     Wa,  la 
ha'nqas    la'xa    aE'nte.      Wii,  la'xda£xweda    bebEgwanEme    dax-£- 
Idxa      aE'nte      qa-'s      tslsple'des      la'xa     L!e'£na     qa£s     ts!oq!uses 
la'xes  sE'mse.     Wa,  laE'm  qle'qEbalas  lii'xa  L!e'£na  qaxs  xe'ule-  35 
lae    kMo'Leda    ar/ntaxs    ha£ma'£yaxs    lE'mxwae.       Wa,    gi'h'mese 
gwal  ha£ma'pa   la'e   tse'x£ItsF/wa  a'lta  £wa'pa  qa    nax£ides.     Wit, 
g  i'l'mese  gwal  na'qaxs  la'e  ho'quwiclsa.     Wii,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 


426  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

1  Herring- Spawn  with  Kelp. — When  |  a  man  wishes  to  invite  his  trihe 
in  for  the  morrow,  |  then  in  the  evening  his  wife  takes  the  steaming- 
box  |  and  pours  some  fresh  water  into  it  until  it  is  half  full.  Then 
.")  she  takes  a  J|  bundle  of  kelp  (with  spawn)  tied  in  the  middle,  and  she 
unties  it  in  the  middle.  Then  j  she  puts  it  into  the  steaming-box  in 
the  evening.  Now  it  is  soaking  in  the  house  during  the  whole  | 
night.  In  the  morning,  when  day  comes,  |  the  man  invites  his  tribe 
in;  but  his  wife  clears  |  the  house,  so  that  it  may  be  clean;  and  after 

10  she  has  finished  clearing  it,  ||  she  spreads  the  mats  around  the  house; 
and  as  soon  as  she  has  finished,  |  she  takes  the  kettles  and  puts  them 
down  by  the  door  of  the  [  house;  and  after  she  has  finished,  she  takes 
her  dishes  and  |  puts  them  down  near  the  door  of  the  house;  and 
when  she  has  finished,  |  she  takes  her  oil  and  her  spoon-basket,  and  || 

1")  these  also  are  put  down  by  the  door  of  the  house,  and  also  |  two 
buckets,  and  sometimes  even  four  buckets,  |  for  there  is  much  water 
(needed)  with  the  kelp  with  herring-spawn  when  it  is  boiled.  |  Now 
everything  is  ready.     As  soon  as  |  her  husband  conies,  he  starts  the 

-'(i  lire  in  the  middle  of  the  house;  and  when  ||  the  fire  blazes  up,  he 
waits  fof  the  young  men  of  his  nuinaym  |  to  come  in.  As  soon  as  they 
come,   he  sends    them    to   call  ;  his    tribe    again.     Immediately   the 


1  Herring-Spawn  with  Kelp  (Qa'x"q!Elis  aE'nt). — Wa,  he'emaaxs 
la'e  me'nkle.v'Jdeda  bEgwa'nEme  qa£s  i.e'-ialexes  g"5'kulotaxa  Ie'u- 
se.  .Wa,  la  dza'qwaxs  la'e  ax:e'deda  gEiiE'masexa  q!o'elats!e. 
Wa,  la  gfjxtslo'tsa  a'lte  £wap  laq  qa  nEgoya'les.  Wa,  la  ax'e'dxa 
5  yae'Loyala  q!axq!Eli'se.  Wa,  la  qwe'lalax  yae'i.nya'vas.  Wii,  la 
axsta'las  la'xa  q!5'lats!axa  dza'qwa.  Wa,  laE'm  tle'italll  sE'nbex 
Ewa'sgKmasasa  ga'nuLe.  Wii,  giTmese  Ena'x-Cidxa  gaa'laxs  la'e 
Le'elaleda  bEgwii'nEmaxes  go'kiilote.  Wii,  la'i.a  gEHE'mas  e'kwa- 
xes  g'o'kwas  qa    e'klEgwIles.   •  Wa,  gi'Pmese  gwal    e'kwaxs    la'e 

10  LEpse€stali'lElasa  klwadzo'we  le'Elfwa£ya.  Wa,  g  i'Pmese  gwii'lExs 
la'e  ax£e'dxa  hanEnxxa'nowe  qa  g-a'xes  liF.xhani'l  la'xa  osta'lilasa 
g"5'kwe.  Wii,  gi'h'mese  gwa'texs  la'e  axfe'dxes  lo'Elqlwe  qa 
ga'xes  mi<:x£ii'liia  laxaaxa  osta'lilasa  g'o'kwe.  Wii,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'- 
Iexs  la'e  axee'dxes    L!e'ena    i.K-wes   ka'yatsle    yibElo'sgEma..    Wii, 

15  ga'x-F.mxaa  ax£a'lilF.las  la'xa  osta'lilases  g-o'kwe.  We,  he/£meLeda 
miE'ngatsle  '"maltsr.'ma.  Wii,  Miah'iiE'mplEna  mo'sgEineda  naE'nga- 
ts!e  qaxs  i]  !e'i)F.maeda£wa'pel  a'xa  qla'x'qlElIsaxs  ha'nx'LEntsEewae. 
\\';i,  laic'm  Mia'.xwaEm  la  gwalata.  Wii,  g'i'Kmese  g'a'xe 
la'swunEmsexs    la'e     he'x£idaEm     la'cjolllxes     g-6'kwe.     Wii,    g'i'l- 

20  £mese  xi'qostaxs  la'e  e'sEiax  ha£ya'l£ases  £nE£me'mote  qa  ga'xes 
ho'gwlEa.  Wii,  g  i'b'mese  ga'xEXs  la'e  £ya'laqaq  qa  les  e'tse£sta- 
xes  g'o'kulote.      Wii,  he'x'£ida£mesa    hacya'l£a   la  xwe'laqa    ho'ciu- 


boas]  EECIPES  427 

young  men  go  out  again  |  to  call  the  guests  again.     Not  long  and  \ 
all  the  guests  come.     Immediately  the  woman  takes  her  ||  box  of  25 
dried  salmon  and  puts  it  down  near  the  door  of  the  house.  |  Immedi- 
ately the  young  men  untie  the  cover,  and  they  scorch   (the  salmon  I, 
and  several  |  of  them  draw  fresh  water  fur  the  guests  to  drink  first. 
Now  we  have  |  finished  with  the  eating  of  the  dried  salmon,  for  I  have 
already  talked  |  about  this.     Then  the  young  men  take  the  kelp  and  || 
break  it  into  pieces  small  enough  for  our  mouths.     As  soon  as  j  it  is  30 
all  in  pieces,  it  is  taken  out  of  the  steaming-box  with  the  hand,  and 
put  into  |  the  kettles;  and  when  they  are  full,  fresh  water  is  poured 
on;  |  and  they  only  stop  pouring  on  fresh  water  |  when  it  shows  over 
the   pieces  of  kelp.     Then   the  ||  kettles   are  put  on  the  fire.     The  35 
young  men  |  take  the  tongs  and  stir  with  them.     They  keep  on 
stirring  until  it  begins  to  boil;    and  when  it  has  been  |  boiling  for  a 
long  time,  the  kettles  are  taken  off  the  [  fire.     Now  it  is  done.     At 
once  the  young  men  take  ||  dishes  and  put  them  down  in  a  row  behind    |n 
the    kettles;      and    then    the    woman    takes    the    large   long-handled 
dipping-ladle  [  and  gives  it  to  the  young  men.     This  is  used  to  dip  j 
out  the  kelp  from  the  kettle  and  put  it  into  the     dishes.     They  only 
stop  dipping  it  into  the  dishes  when  (the  dishes)  are  nearly  ||  full.     A-  ■!•> 
soon  as  they  have  finished,  they  take  oil  and  |  pour  it  on,  and  they 

wElsa  qa£s  le  e'tse-staxa  Le'MaiiKinLe.      Wit,   k!e'st!a  ga'laxs  ga'-  '_>.'! 
xae  -wI'Maei.a    Le'danEme,  wii,    he'x-eida£mesa    tsEda'qe    ax£e'dxes 
xE'myatsle    xEtsE'ma  qa£s  ga'xe    ha'nstolllas  lax    o'stalilasa  go'-  25 
kwe.     Wii,  he'x£ida£mesa  ha'ya'1-a  x-a'x£wIdEq.      Wii,  le'da  wao'- 
kwe  tsa'x  alt ii  £wa'pa  qa  na'naqalg'iwesa  klwe'le.     Wii.  hiE'niLEns 
gwal  la'xa  xr/msxasaxa  xa£ma'se   <|axg  in  la'x£ida£mek'  gwa'gwe- 
xs£ala  laq.     Wii,  le'da    ha£ya'l£a    a.ve'dxa    q!a'x!Ell'se  qa£s  k!o'- 
k!upsa'le  qa    a'£mes    he'ldzEqEla    la'xF.ns    sE'msex,    wii.    g  i'rinese  30 
£wPwu1xsexs  la'e  g6'x£ults!alayo  la'xa  q!o'lats!e  qa£s  le  giixtsk/- 
yo  la'xa    haiiE'nx-i.auowe.      Wii,  g  iTniese    qo'qutlaxs  la'e  giiqlE- 
qasosa  a'lta  £wap.     Wii,  aTmese  gwal   gii'qasa  a'lta  £wap  la'qexs 
la'e  neTid  lax  o'kiiya£yasa  klo'liKkwe  q  la'xq  lElIsa.     Wii,  le  hii'nx- 
i.Endayoweda   haiiF.'nxLanowe   la'xa    lEgwI'le.     Wii,  le'da   ha,£ya'-  35 
l;a  ax£e'dxa    k- !e'k- lEpLala    qaes  xwe'tes  laq.     Wii,  la    hS'mEnala- 
g  ilIl;Em  la  xwe'taqexs    la'e    maE'mdElqula.     Wii,  he'tla  la  ge'g'i- 
hl    maE'mdElqulaxs    la'e    hanxsa'noweda    hanE'nxLanowe     la'xa 
lsgwi'le.     Wii,  laE'm  L!o'pa.     Wii,  he'x'£ida£mesa  InVyaTa  axee'd- 
xa   lo'Elq'.we    qa£s    mEX£all'lElis    lax    a'l.ahlasa    hanE'nxLanowe.  41) 
Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  ax£e'dxa  tse'xi.axa  gilt  IhXLala  -wa  'las  katslE- 
na'qa  qa£s  ts!owe's    la'xa    liiryftT'a.     Wii,   he'£mis    la   tsEyo'lts!a'- 
layos    la'xa    ha'nxLaakwe    q!ii'xq!El!sa    qa£s    le    tsets!a'las  la'xa 
lo'slqlwe.     Wa,  aTniese  gwal    ts!ets!a'laxa    lo'Elqhvaxs  la'e  Ela'q 
qo'qut  !a.       Wii,    gi'Pmese    gwa'lEXs    la'e     ax'e'dxa    L!e'£na    q:i;s  45 
k!unx£i'des    laq.       Wii,    aTmese    gwal    k!ii'nqasa    L!e'£naxs    la'e 


428  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

47  only  stop  pouring  oil  on  when  |  the  liquid  of  the  kelp  is  all  covered 
with  it.  Other  |  young  men  pass  the  spoons  around  among  the 
quests;  and  as  soon  as  |  every  one  has  a  spoon,  the  dishes  are  put 

50  before  them,  and  they  ||  begin  to  eat  with  spoons;  and  they  eat  for  a 
long  time,  then  they  have  finished.  Then  they  [  cool  themselves 
down  with  fresh  water.  As  soon  as  they  finish  drinking,  the  j  young 
men  take  up  the  dishes  and  take  them  to  the  wives  of  the  |  guests. 
Then  the  guests  go  out.     Kelp  with  herring-spawn  is  not  eaten  j  dry. 

55  It  is  only  eaten  soaked,  and  ||  it  stays  on  the  fire  a  long  time  when  it  is 
being  boiled.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Herring-Spawn  with  Salmon-Berry  Shoots. — One  thing  |  I  have  for- 
gotten about  the  herring-spawn.  It  is  eaten  dry  with  salmon-berry 
shoots,  j  and  it  is  dipped  into  oil  with  salmon-berry  shoots  when  it  || 

60  is  eaten.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1       Mountain-Goat  Butchering. — Now  I  will  talk  |  about  the  mountain- 
goat  brisket.     If  is  cut  oil'  beginning  at  the  |  soft  place  between  the 
lowTer  ends  of  the  ribs  and  the  breast-bone,  |  in  this  wTay : 


IUWC1    lllll^  III     nil     lllir.  mm    111.     uivik.ii    „yjm,    ,    „i  „,uo   ,,»,  .  /""""/l' 

Assoonasit  has  been  taken  off ,  fl  it  is  hung  up  right  over  /fjjjjjj 
the  fire  of  the  house.    If  it    — ]  1 1 1 1 1 1 1  /III/  's  veiT  I 
fat,  then  the  side-ribs  are      \  f /(//         1/     cut   off 


m 


from    the     backbone  |  all         Vy-A  \  ,  , , '         tne  way  dovm  to  the 
flanks,  and  it  is  in  this  way;  v-~AAATy  an,|  ]  it,   is  also   hung 

up  just    over    the    lire  of   the   house,  and  the  other  piece    also.  | 

47  ha:niK]c[F.vi'ndEx  '"wa'paliisa  qla'x'qlEllse.  Wa,  le'da  wao'kwe 
lnVyiiTa  tslEwanaesasa  k  a'k'EtslEna'qe  la'xa  klwe'le.  Wa,  gi'l- 
Emese  Ewl'lxt6xs  la'e  kax'dzamolllEma   lo'Elqlwe    laq.     Wa,  la'x- 

50  da£xwe  £yoVida.  Wa,  le  ge'g'illl  £yo'saxs  la'e  gwa'la.  Wa,  le 
ko'xwaxotsa  a'lta  £wa'pa.  Wa,  g  i'l£mese  gwfd  na'qaxs  la'eda 
ha'va'ha  ka'gililxa  lo'Elqlwe  qa£s  le  mo'tlots  lax  gEgEiiE'masa 
klwe'le.  Wii,  la  hoqiiwElseda  klwe'lde.  Wa,  IaE'm  kle's  hama£ya 
q!a'xq!Ellsaxs  lic'mxwae.     Le'xaEm  ha£ma'pdEmqexs  la'e  tle'lkwa. 

55  Wa,  la'xaa  ge'gixLalaxs  la'e  ha'nxLEntsE£wa  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa, 
IaE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 

Herring-Spawn  with  Salmon-Beiry  Shoots.  -Wii,  he'£mesF.n  £iiEm 
i.!i:le'\\esF.-wa,  aic'ntaxs  ma'yimaaxs  lE'mxwae  la'xa  qlwa'lEme. 
Wii,   la  ts!E])F'laF.m  la'xa    L,!e'£na  yixa  aE'nte  LE£wa  qlwa'lEinaxs 

GO  se'x  asKwae.  Wii,  laEm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Mountain-Goat  Butchering.  —Wii,  la'niesEn  etledEl  gwftgwex  sTdfd 
laxa  loq  lubanosa  emElxLowe.  Wii,  hemiexs  lae  t!osoya  g  iigiLEla 
lax  tetEx"baEyas  awiilgawa£yas  gElsmas  LE£wa  xaqasa  loq  !uba- 
nowe.  Wa,  lii  ga  gwaleg-a  (jig.).  Wa,  g  i'Pmese  lawaxs  lae  tex"- 
5  stots  lax  nExsta£yasa  lsgwllases  gokwe.  Wa,  gilmiese  alaklala 
tsEnxwaxs  lae  tsEk'odEX  gElganodzaeyas  laxes  xE£momoweg'a£ye 
lagaa  lax  pElspanodza£vas.  Wii,  lii  ga  gwiileg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  laxae 
texustots    lax    nEqostawas    lEgwIlases    gokwe    LE£wa    apsodE<|las 


boas]  RECIPES  429 

Then  it  is  smoked  mountain-goat  meat;  i'or  that  is  its  name  when 
it  is  done  ||  this  way.     (The  man)  also  spreads  the  suet  at  a  place,  not  10 
too  |  near  the  fire,  and  he  cuts  out  the  kidney-fat.      He  puts   it 
into  a  dish  containing  water.      As  soon  as  all  the  kidney-fat  |  has 
been  taken  out,  he  washes  it  well  in  the  dish  with  water.  |  He  takes  it 
out  and  puts  it  on  a  well-made  new  mat.     He  ||  pours  off  the  water  1  ."> 
that  was  in  the  dish,  and  puts  the  dish  down  at  the  place  where  lie 
sits.  |  Then  he  takes  up  the  kidney-fat  and  bites  off  a  piece,  which  he 
chews.  |  After  chewing  it  to  pieces,  lie  takes  it  out  of  his  mouth  and  | 
puts  it  into  the  dish.     He  does  the  same  with  other  pieces,  [  and  he 
only  stops  when  he  has  chewed  it  all  and  ||  put  it  all  into  the  dish.  20 
Then  he  goes  down  to  the  beach  and  takes  some  |  fresh  stones.     He 
puts  them  on  the  fire  of  his  house.  |  Then  he  takes  another  dish  and 
puts  it  down  near  |  the  one  containing  the  chewed  kidney-fat.     He 
pours  some  water  |  into  it,  so  that  it  is  not  quite  full.     Then  he  also 
pours  some  water  ||  into  the  dish  containing  the  chewed  kidney-fat ;  25 
but  this  dish  is  half  full.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  the 
smaller  dish  and  |  washes  it  well.     As  soon  as  it  is  clean,  he  puts  it 
near  the  j  fire,  with  the  inside  towards  the  fire,  in  order  to  dry  it. 
After  this  has  been  done,  he  goes  down  |  to  the  beach  and  searches  for 

Wii,  laEm  x'il.vEld  EmEl£mElq  lEgarya  qaxs  he'mae  LegEmsa  he 
gwekwe.  Wa,  laxae  LEpliiLalotsa  yixusEina£ye  laxa  k'lese  alaEm  10 
£nEx\vfda  laxa  lEgwIle.  Wa,  lii  t  losalax  mEtlosas  qa£s  ax-stEti- 
des  laxa  ewabEts!ala  loqlwa.  Wa,  g'il-mese  -widamasxa  mEtlo- 
saxs  lae  aekla  ts!ox£wklEq  lax  EwabEts lawasa  loqlwe.  Wii,  la 
ax£ustEiulEq  qa£s  gidzoliles  laxa  eke  alomas  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  lii 
gux£edEx  £wabEts  lawasa  loqlwe.  Wii,  lii  hangalilas  laxes  klwae-  15 
lase.  Wa,  lii  ax'edxa  niEtlose  qa£s  q!Ex£Ide  laqexs  lae  malex- 
£widEq.  Wa,  gihmese  £wi£we1xexs  lae  diix£IdEq  laxes  sEinse  qa£s 
lExtslodes  laxa  loqlwe.  Wii,  lii  hanal  he  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe. 
Wii,  almese  gwiilExs  lae  £wl£la  la  malegikwa  cpi£s  lii  'wida  la  If.x- 
ts!:i  laxa  loqlwe.  Wii,  lii  lEntsles  laxa  i. !Ema£ise  qa£s  xEx£wic!exa  20 
alExsEme  t!esEinaqa£s  lii  xExuLEnts  lax  lEgwilases  gokwe.  Wa, 
laxae  ax£edxa  ogudame  loqlwa  qa£s  gaxe  hangalilas  laxa  mak  ala 
lax  lExtslEwasasa  malegikwe  niEtlosa.  Wii,  lii  guxtslotsa  £wape 
laq  xa  ha'lsEla£me  kles  qotla  laq.  Wa,  laxae  giiqlEqasa  ewape 
lax  la  lExtslEwatsa  malegikwe  mEtlosa.  Wii,  laLa  nEgoyoxsdfda.  L'.j 
Wa,  gih'mese  gwiilEXs  lae  axT'dxa  ama've  laxes  loqlwa  qa£s  aek' !e 
tsloxugindEq.  Wii,  gil£mese  la  egig'axs  lae  pEX-ElgindEq  laxes 
lEgwIle  qa  lEmxug'ax^Ides.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  lEntsles 
laxa  LlEinadse  qa£s  alex£idex  ewa£wada.     Wa,  gil'inese  q laqexs  lae 


430  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

30  a  piece  of  kelp.  When  he  lias  found  it,  ||  he  cuts  off  a  piece  two  spans 
long  |  from  the  head.  He  carries  it  up  and  puts  it  down  |  by  the 
side  of  the  dish.  Then  he  takes  down  a  spoon  and  |  puts  it  down. 
Now  the  stones  are  white-hot.     Then  he  |  takes  his  tongs  and  lifts 

35  the  red-hot  stones,  ||  dips  them  into  the  water  in  the  dish,  so  that  the 
ashes  that  stick  on  the  stones  come  off,  |  and  then  he  puts  them  into 
tin'  chewed  kidney-fat.  |  He  continues  doing  this;  and,  before  a 
great  many  red-hot  |  stones  have  been  put  in,  the  water  in  the  dish 
containing  the  chewed  kidney-fat  begins  to  boU.  |  Then  the  chewed 

40  kidney-fat  begins  to  melt;  and  when  it  is  all  ||  melted,  he  takes  the 
tongs  and  with  them  lifts  the  stones  |  out  of  the  "dish  in  which  the 
fat  is  melted,"  for  that  is  the  name  of  the  dish,  j  He  puts  them  down 
by  the  side  of  the  fire.  When  he  has  taken  them  all  out,  [  he  takes 
the  spoon  and  takes  the  kelp  (bottle)  and  places  its  opening  upward;  | 

45  and  he  skims  off  the  fat  that  is  now  floating  on  the  water,  ||  and  he  pours 
it  into  the  kelp  bottle.  When  it  is  Idled,  he  puts  |  it  down  in  the 
corner  of  the  house  where  it  gets  stiff  quickly.  |  (Some  people  say  that 
in  this  manner  "it  gets  hard"  quickly.)  Then  he  goes  back  |  to  the 
dish,  for  the  fat  is  not  all  done  yet.     He  just  |  takes  a  piece  of  short 

50  broken  cedar-wood,  and  with  it  he  lifts  the  skum  off  from  the  ||  fat; 
and  when   it   is   all  out,  he   takes   up    the  dish   and  pours  the  con- 


30  ploqodxa  £malp!i:nke  la.xKns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  ylx  £wasgEmasas 
gagiLEla  lax  5xLii£yas.  Wa,  gaxe  dasdesElaq  qa£s  gigahles 
lax  niakaga£yasa  loqlwe.  Wa,  lii  etled  ax£edxa  katsbmaqe  qass 
g'axe  hangahlas.  Wa,  la'ine  memEnltsEmx"£Ideda  t  lesEme.  Wa,  la 
ax£edxes  tsIesLala  qa£s  k"!ip!ides  laxa  xIxixsEinala  tlesEma  qa£s  la 

35  hapst  Kilts  laxa  EwabEts!ala  loqlwa  qa  lawiiyesa  gCvna£ye  lax  dsgEina- 
Eyas.  Wii,  la  axstF.nts  laxa  licxtslEwasasa  maleg  ikwe  £mEt!osa.  Wa, 
lli  hanal  he  gwegile.  Wa,  klestla  ahiKin  qlenEma  xTxixsEmala 
tlesEmxs  lae  mEdElx£wIde  £wapalasa  malegikwe  £niEt!osa.  Wii, 
he£mes  la    yax£Idaatsa    malegikwe  'niEt  !osa.      Wa,   g ibinese  £wi£la 

40  yaxMdicxs  lae  xwelaqa  ax£edxes  tslesi.ala  qa£s  k"  lipustalexa  t  lesEtoe 
laxa  la  tsexatsle  loqlwaxa  £yasEkwe  qaxs  he£mae  i.cgEmsa  loqhve. 
Wa,  lii  k  !ibi:nollsF.laq  laxa  lsgwlle.  Wii,  gibmese  £wI£lostaxs  lae 
ax£edxa  k'atslEnaqe.  Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  £wa£wcde  qa£s  eklaxstala- 
maseq.     Wii,  lii    ax£witsa  katshsnaqe  laxa  la  pEX-a'leda  £yasEkwe 

45  qa£s  lii  tsets'alas  laxa  £wa£wade.  Wa,  g  ihmese  qotlaxs  I;  e  i.iig  alT- 
las  laxa  onegwilases  gokwe  qa  halabales  L!ax-£Ida.  (Wii.  la  £nek-eda 
waokwe  bEgwaiiEma  qa  halabales  L6x£wida.)  Wii,  la  aedaaqa 
laxa  loqlwe  qaxs  k!es£mae  £wl£leda  £yasEkwe.  Wa,  a,£mese  la 
ax£edxa  k"5q!a£ye    k!wa-"xLawa    qa£s    ktlwustalexa    tsletslEinotasa 

50  £yasEkwe.      Wii,  gib'mese  £wPlostaxs    lae  dagilllaq  qa£s  guxts!5des 


boas]  BECIPES  431 

tents  |  into  the  small  dish  for  fooling  tallow.     In  most  cases  the  51 
water  |  in  it  goes  with  the  fat.    He  takes  it  to  the  corner  of  the  house, 
to  a  |  level  place,  so  that  it  does  not  cant  over  to  one  side  as  it  stands 
on  the  floor,  so  that  the  cake  of  tallow  will  not  be  |  thicker  on  one 
side  than  on  the  other,  so  that  it  may  be  just  even.  ||  After  it  has  been  55 
in  the  corner  for  one  night,  the  owner  goes  to  take  it.  |  He  puts  down 
the  ice-cold  tallow  in  the  dish  by  the  side  of  the  fire,  so  that  |  the 
upper  side  gets  warm;  and  when   it   is  warmed  through,  he  turns  it 
around  |  so  that  the  upper  side  also  becomes  warm;  and  when  that 
is  also  warm,  |  the  tallow  is  melted  all  around.     Then  the  [|  man  00 
lifts  up  the  ice-cold  tallow  cake  and  raises  it  on  one  side,  |  and  immedi- 
ately the  cold  tallow  cake  slips  out  of  the  dish.  |  Then  he  takes  a  broad 
piece  of  soft  white  cedar-bark  and  wraps  it  all  around  |  it  and  puts  it 
into  a  box.     He  takes  the  kelp  bottle  |  and  just  breaks  it  off;  and 
when  he  gets  all  the  tallow  out  of  the  ||  kelp  bottle,  he  takes  soft  65 
cedar-bark  and  wraps  it  around  it;  |  and  he  puts  it  into  a  small  box, 
which  he  keeps  by  his  side.  |  It  is  the  box  in  which  his  wife  keeps  her 
comb  and  her  j  cedar-bark  towel;  for  the   Indians  use  the  kidney- 
tallow  of  the  goat  to  grease  their  |  faces  in  cold  weather  in  the 
winter,  ||  for  it  is  hard  and  the  color  of  snow.     When  the  day  is  hot  |   70 
in  summer,  the  men  and  the  women  also  rub  tallow  on  their  faces,  | 
so  that  they  may  not  be  sunburned;  and  when  it  is  very  cold  in  | 


Ifixa  ama£ye  L!oxwats!axa  ;yasEkwe  loqlwa.    Wa,  la  lanux"me  ewapa-  51 
ga£yasa  syasEkwe  laq.      Wa,    laxaes   laxa   onegwllases  gokwe  laxa 
MiEmaele  qa  k'!eses  tsetaleda  loqlwaxs  ha£nelae  qa  kleses  wakwa- 
gawa£ya  apsba£yasa    Eyasekwases    apsba£ye    qa    a£mese  EnEmokwa. 
Wa,  gil£mese  xamael  laxa  onegwllaxs  lae  ax£ededa  axnogwadaseq  55 
qa£s  lii  ha£nolisasa  idoxwatslaxa  £yasEkwe  loqlwa  laxes  lEgwIle  qa 
ts!Elx£wides  6sgEmaeyas.     Wa,  giPmese   ts !e1xus&xs  lae  xwetelllaq 
qa  ogwaqesa  apsotaga£ye  ts!Elx£w!da.     Wa,  gil'Emxaawise  ts.'Elx"- 
saxs  lae  yax£ide  awFstiisa  'vasF.kwe.     Wa,  he£mes   la  dax-£idaatsa 
bEgwanEmaxa  l loxwats laxa  £yasEkwe  loqlwa  <|a:'s  qox'wideq.     Wa,  60 
hex,£ida£mesa    LloxEkwe  £yasEku    tsax£widts!a    laxa  loqlwe.      Wii, 
hex-£ida£mese  ax£edxa  ewadzowe  emEla  k'adzEk"  qa£s  qlEnepsEindes 
laq.     Wa,  la  gitslots    laxes    xEtsEme.     Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  £wa£wade. 
Wa,    a£mese    wEk'olaq.       Wii,  g-llemese    £wi£lag"ilEna   £yasEkwaxa 
£wa£wadaxs  laaxat!  ax£edxa  k'adzEkwa  qa£s  qteneplEndes  laq.     Wa,  65 
la£xae    g'itslots  laxes    he£mEnala£me     hanodzilel     xaxadzEma     lax 
giyimts tewasases    xEgEme   LE£wis    dedEgEmyiwe    q!oyaaku   £mEla 
kadzEkwa  yises  gEnEme  qaxs  he£mae  JyasF.kidasa  baklumaxes  go- 
guma£yaxa  £wudalaxa  tslawiinxeda  £yasEkwas  emEt!osasa  EmElxLOwe 
qaxs    plesae  loxs    yae   gwestowa  naye.     Wa,  giPmese   tslElkweda  70 
enalaxa  heEnxe.,  wa,  laxae  £yasEkumdnaxweda  bebEgwanEme  LE£wes 
tsleilaqe  qa£s  k- !ese    kluxwa.     Wa,  gil'mese    Loma  £wflda£xstalaxa 


432  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ANN.  35 

winter,  the  tallow  is  taken  and  chewed;  and  |  when  it  is  all  in  pieces, 

7.")  it  is  put  in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand.  ||  (The  man)  pushes  the  palm 

of  las  left  hand  over  it  and  rubs  the  hands  together,  |  so  that  all  the 

fat  is  between  the  hands.     Then  he  presses  it  all  over  |  his  face;  and 

when  the  face  is  covered  with  it,  it  is  white  all  over  |  with  tallow. 

Then  the  cold  and  the  |  wind  do  not  go  through  it.     Generally  it  is 

so  the  woman  who  works  on  the  ||  kidney-fat  of  the  mountain-goat  when 

it  is  melted;  but  sometimes  the  |  man  melts  the  kidney-fat  of    the 

mountain-goat,  when    his  wife  does  not  know  |  how  to  do  it,  for  not 

everybody   knows   how    to    melt    it   and  |  how   to   handle    it.     The 

kidney-fat  of  the  goat  is  not  used  as  food,  |  for  it  is  only  good  for 

greasing  the  face.      That  is  all  about  this.  || 

)       Stomach-Fat     of     Mountain-Goat. — Now    I    will    talk  |   about    the 

stomach-fat  when  it  is  eaten.     When  the  mountain-goat  hunter  has 

much  of  it,  |  he  keeps  it.     Sometimes  lie  has  eight  |  large  boxes  of 

the  stomach-fat  of  mountain-goats.  || 

5      The  mountain-goat  hunter  does  not  often  give  a  feast  of  the  | 

stomach-fat,  for  the  head  chief  of  the  tribe  |  always  gives  leasts  of 

stomach-fat  of  the  mount  ain-goal ,  when,  if  the  hunterhas  thedaughter 

of  the  head  chief  for  his  wife,  |  he  gives  as  a   marriage-present  the 

stomach-fat   |  to    his  father-in-law;    and    when    the   chief    has  no 

10  daughter,  ||  a  canoe  will  be  due  the  mountain-goat  hunter,  or  his  son 

73  tslawunxaxs  lae  iix£etsE£weda  £yasEkwe  qa£s  male.y'wldeq.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  la  £wi6we1x-sexs  lae  axdzox-ts!anF.nts  lax  iiEgEdza£  vases  hel- 

7.5  k"  !5tdzaya£ye.  Wa,  lii  LaxeItses  gEinxolts  !ana£ye  laqexs  lae  dzak'odEq 
qa  las  gwegflldzod  laxes  ewax-solts  !ana£yaxs  lae  k!wa'k!uxew6ts 
laxes  gogumaeye.  Wit,  g-il£mese  hamElqiimxs  lae  aEm  £mElgEmes 
gogiima£yasa  £yasEkwe.  Wa,  laEin  £wexsEwatsa  £wiidala  LE£wa 
yala  laxeq.     Wa,  lat'.int.a  q!imala  hededa  ts lEdaqe  eaxalaxa  £mEt !o- 

80  sasa  £mElxLowaxs  lae  tsexaq.  Wii,  la  £nab"n  torn  pinna  he£meda 
bEgwaiiEme  tsexaxa  £mEt  losasa  emElxLaxs  klesae  q!aLEles  gEnEmax 
gwegilasasa  tsexacj  qaxs  k!esae  £naxwa  q!a\LEleda  tsledaqax 
gwegilasaq.  Hesm  k!es  ha£ma£yeda  £mEt!osasa  £mElxi,owe  qaxs 
lexamae  eklllax  eyasEkulaxa  goguma£ye.  W'u,  laEin  gwal  laq. 
1  Stomach -Fat  of  Mountain  -  Goat. — Wii,  la£mesEn  gwagwexs£alal 
laxa  £yExusEma£yaxs  lae  ha£ma£ya.  Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  qleiiEme  la 
axelax"sa  tEwe£nenoxwaxa  £niElxLowe  ylxs  £nal£iiEmp!Enae  qoqut!e- 
da  tnaltsE'me  aw*V  xexEtsEmxa  £yExusEma£yasa  £mElxxowe. 
5  Wii,  la  k!es  qlunala  he  klwelasa  tEwe£nenoxwaxa  £mElxLowasa 
£VEX"sEjna£ye  qaxs  haeda  xamagEina£ye  gigamesa  lelqwalaLa£ye  he- 
mEnala  klwelatsa  £yEx"sEma£yasa  £niElxLowe  yixs  gEg-adaas  xuno- 
kwas.  Wa,  la  wrawadzeda  tEwe£nenoxwaxa  £niElxi.ases  £yEx"sEma- 
£yasa  £niElxLowe  laxes  nEgumpe.     Wa,    gil£mese   k'leas    xunokwa 

10  tEwe£nenoxwaxa  £niElxLowe  lae  g-alasa  xwakluna  laq  loxs  xwesaaq 


boas]  RECIPES  1X3 

will  receive  a  marriage-present  |   (from  the  chief) ,  or  he  will  give  all 
marriage-present  |  to   the  wife  of  the  mountain-goat  hunter. '     He 
must  give  a  marriage-feast  of  stomach-fat  of  the  mountain-goat  |  to 
the  chief,  although  she  is  his  own  wife.  Nowhe  hasgivenfor  a  marriage- 
feast  |  the  stomach-fat  of  the  mountain- goat,  and  the  dried  brisket,  || 
and  the  dried  sides,  to  his  father-in-law;  and  sometimes  |  there  are  15 
as  many  as  eight  large  boxes  full.     When  it  is  thoroughly  dried,  | 
his  wife  puts  it  into  boxes;  and  when  he  gives  it  |  to  his  father-in-law 
to  give  a  marriage-feast,  then  the  people  at  once  take  a  new  |  small 
canoe  and  carry  it  into  the  house  of  the  chief.     They  put  ||  it  down  at 
the  left-hand  side  of  the  door  of  the  house.     They  carry  in  |  much  20 
water  and  pour  it  into  the  small  canoe;  |  and  when  it  is  nearly  half  full, 
they  stop  pouring  in  the  water,  |  and  they  open  the  boxes  of  dried 
brisket  and  the  boxes  of  dried  sides.  |  They  put  them  into  the  water 
in  the  small  canoe.  |[  There  they  are  soaked.     When  they  are  all  in, 
they  put  |  short  boards  over  them;  and  they  take  large  stones  and  25 
put  them  |  on  to  keep  the  dried  brisket  and  the  dried  sides  under 
water.  |  After  they  have  been  soaked  for  three  days,  the  chief  calls  | 
all  the  tribes  to  come  and  eat  dried  ||  mountain-goat  briskets.     As 
soon  as  the  one  who  invites  |  all  the  men  goes,  the  chief's  numaym  carry  30 
up  |  many  fresh  stones  and  put  them  into  the  fire  in  the  middle  of 


qass  bEgwaiiEme  xunokwa,  loxs  hec"mae  xwesag'Ilxa  tEwe£nenoxwaxa 
'"mElxLowe  gEiiEmas.     Wa,  la  wawadzEs  -yExusEma-yasa  ^ueIxlowS  11 
laxa  g'igama£ye  qaxs  qEs£maaq  gEnEina.     Wa,  la£me  £wl£la  wawa- 
dzEsa  £yEXusEma£yasa  -melxLowe    LE£wa    xilkwe  ISqhtbano.     Wa 
htrmisa    xilkwe    ewanudze    laxes    nEgu'mpe,   yixs    £nal£nEmp  lEnae 
!malgunaltsEm  awa  xexEtsEma  qaxs  g  il£mae  alak!ala  lEinx£wedExs  15 
lae    gEnEmas    hantslots    laxa    xexEtsEme.     Wii,    giPmese    wawa- 
dzEX-£Idxes    nEgiimpaxs    lae    hex£IdaEm    ax£etsE£wa  alolaqe    xwa- 
xwaguma  qa£s  la  LEliLas  lax  gokwasa  g  Igama£3Te  qa="s   la  hanga- 
'llEm  laxa  gEmxotsalllasa  tlEX'ilasa  gokwe.     Wa,  la  tsex£ItsE£wa 
q!enEme  £wa,pa   qa£s    la   gux£alExsElayo    laxa  xwaxwagume.     Wa,  20 
giPmese    Elaq    nEgoxs    lae    gwal  gux£alExsElasa   °"wape    laq.     Wa 
la  x'ox£w!tsE£wa   loq!iibanoats!e    xexEtsEma   LE-wa    ewanodzaatsle 
xexEtsEma    qaEs    la    ax-stalayu    lax    toxsasa    xwagwagiime.      Wa 
laEm    t!elasE£wa.      Wa,    gil£mese    £wl£la£staxs    la'e    pageg'intsosa' 
ts!ats!axusF.me.     Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda  awawe  tlesEm  qa£s  la  t!agi-  25 
dzoyo  laq  qa  tlebEkilisa  xilkwe  loqlubano  LE'wa  xilkwe  ewano_ 
dza£ya.     Wa,  het!a    la   yuduxuxse    £nalas    t.'elkwaxs    lae    Le/laleda 
gigama£yaxa  qlenEme  le]qwalaLa£ya  cpa.  gaxes  xixilg'Exa  xilkwe 
loq!ubanosox  £mElxxowe.     Wa,  gil£mese   gaxa    la    Le£lalaxa    £na- 
xwa   bebEgwanEmxs    lae  £nE£memotasa  glgama£ye   XExiisdesElaxa  30 
qlenEme    SIexseiu   tlesEma     qafs     le    xExuLalas    lax    laqawalilasa 

1  As  though  the  hunter's  son  or  his  wife  were  the  chief's  daughter. 
7.-,{ir,2— 21— 35  eth— ft  1 28 


434  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  86 

the  |  feasting-house.      Others  go  to  get    large  oil-boxes,  |  and  put 

35  them  down  at  the  end  of  the  fire,  towards  the  door  of  the  ||  house. 
Still  others  go  to  get  long  tongs,  and  put  |  them  down.  As  soon  as 
everything  is  ready,  |  the  stones  are  white-hot,  and  the  oil-boxes  are 
filler!  |  with  water  that  has  been  carried  in  by  others  of  the  chief's 

40  numaym.  |  When  the  guests  come  in,  young  men  take  the  tongs  j|  and 
take  up  the  red-hot  stones,  and  put  them  into  the  |  water  in  the  oil- 
boxes.  When  the  water  begins  to  boil,  some  of  the  |  young  men  take 
large  baskets  and  put  the  soaked  |  briskets  and  side-pieces  into  them. 
When  |  the  baskets  are  full,  they  put  them  into  the  boiling  water; 

45  and  when  ||  they  are  all  in  it,  they  put  more  red-hot  stones  |  outside 
around  the  baskets.  Then  the  water  boils  hard;  |  and  after  it  has 
been  boiling  quite  a  while,  it  is  done;  they  take  |  broad,  short  boards 
and  put  them  down  next  to  |  the  oil-boxes  on  the  side  towards  the 

50  door  of  the  house.  ||  They  take  the  baskets,  one  man  lifting  on  each 
side,  take  them  out  of  the  oil-box,  and  |  pour  out  the  contents  on  the 
short  boards.  Some  of  the  |  young  men  go  to  get  long  roof-boards, 
which  are  laid  down  flat  |  in  front  of  thefeasters.  They  pull  to  pieces 
the  cooked  brisket,  so  that  |  there  will  be  enough  for  all  the  feasters. 

55  As  soon  as  they  finish,  the  young  men  take  ||  the  pieces  of  brisket, 

33  k!weladzats!e  gokwa.  Wa,  lada  waokwe  ax£edxa  awawe  k'!ek"!Em- 
yaxLa  qa£s  la  £mExst5lilElas  lax  gwena£yasa  lEgwile  laxa  tlExtlasa 

35  gokwe.  Wa,  lada  waoku  ax£edxa  gflsgllt!a  kllklEpi.ala  qa  gaxes 
gwalll  katk'Edlla.  Wa,  g'iPmese  £wl£la  la  gwaxgulilExs  lae 
memEnltsEmeda  tlesEme.  Wa,  laEmxae-  naEngoyoxsdaleda  k'!e- 
k"  !EinyaxLaxa  £wape  tsanEmsa  waokwe  lax  £nE£memotas,  wa, 
gil£mese  g"ax  £wI£laeLa  klwelaxs  lae  ax£ededa  ha£yal£axa  klipLalaa 

40  qa£s  k'!ip!edes  liixa  xixIxsEinala  t!esEma  qa£s  la  k'lipstalas  lax 
£wabEts!awasa  k-  !lk-  KmyaxLa.  Wa,  gilemese  mEdElx£wedExs  laeda 
waokwe  haeyal£a  ax£edxa  awawe  lelExa  qa£s  mots!alesa  t!elku 
loqlubano  laq  LE£wa  ewanodza£yasa  EniElxLowe.  Wa,  g11£mese 
qotlaxs  lae  k!5xstEnts   laxa    maEmdElqiila  £wapa.     Wa,  gil£mese 

45  £wl£lastaxs  lae  et!ed  klipstalayowa  xixExsEmala  tlesEm  lax 
awl£stasa  laElxa£ye.  Wa,  la£me  alak'lala  la  maEmdElqfde  £wapas. 
Wa,  het!a  la  gegllll  maEmdElqiilaxs  lae  Llopa.  Wa,  la  ax£etsE£wa 
£wI£wadzowe  ts!ats!ExusEma  qa£s  gaxe  pax£alelEm  laxa  maglnwali- 

•     lasa  k- !lk- limyaxLa   laxa    gunallle    laxa    tlExiliisa    g-okwe.     Wa, 

50  la  dadanotsE£wa  lExa£ye  qa£s  k' !oxiistanowe  laxa  k!imyaxxa  qa£s 
la  gugEdzodayuwe  glts!awaq  laxa  ts!ats!Exusame.  Wa,  la  ax£ededa 
waokwe  ha£yal£axa  gildEdzowe  saokwa  qa£s  la  pax£alllas  lax 
Llasalilasa  klwele.  Wa,  la  k!u!k!upsalasE£wa  Llope  loqlubano  qa 
heltslExtowes    laxa    klwele.     Wa,    g11£mese    gwalExs  lae  ax£ededa 

55  ha£yal£axa    k!idk!upsaakwe    l5q!ubana    qa£s    la    gedzodalas    laxa 


boas]  RECIPES  435 

place  them  on  |  long  boards  in  front  of  each  guest.     When  they  have  56 
all  been  put  down,  |  the  chief's  speaker  speaks,  and  |  tells  the  guests 
to  take  the  meat  and  to  eat  it.     Then  |  all  the  guests  stretch  out  their 
hands,  take  up  the  cooked  soaked  brisket,  and  eat  it.  ||  They  do  not  60 
drink  water  before  they  begin  to  eat;  for  they  are  afraid  to  drink  | 
when  eating  fat  brisket,  for  fear  that  the  cold  water  might  make  hard 
the  |  tallow  in  their  stomachs.     After  they  have  eaten,  the  guests  | 
take  home  to  their  wives  what  is  left.     The   feasters   are   told  |  to 
sing  their  feasting-songs,  and  the  guests  at  once  begin  to  ||  sing  their  65 
feasting-songs.     Immediately  the  young  men  |  open  the  boxes  con- 
taining the  stomach-fat.     They  take  a  new  |  woven  mat  and  spread 
it  to  the  left  of  the  door  of  the  |  house.     They  take  stomach-fat  out 
of  the  box  and  |  put  it  on  the  mat.     After  it  has  all  been  taken  out, 
two  ||  young  men  count  the  number  of  guests.     They  carry  a  number  70 
of  split  |  long  slender  cedar-sticks  that  have  been  counted,  and  they 
give  one  stick  to  |  every  one  of  the  guests.     These  are  used  to  put  the 
stomach-fat  |  at  one  end  of  the  cedar-stick  when  they  melt  it  in  the 
fires  of  their  own  houses.  |  There  may  also  be  more  sticks  than  the  num- 
ber of  feasters.    As  soon  as  they  know  the  ||  number  of  the  guests,  they  75 
cut  the  stomach-fat  into  pieces,  so  that  every  |  guest  gets  one  piece. 
When  it  has  all  been  cut  up  into  pieces,  they  distribute  |  it.     When 

yagudzowe  lax  £nEqEma/lJlasa  yeyagwadas.     Wa,  g'll£mese  £wllga-  56 
IiIexs     lae  yaqlEga£le    yayaq lEntemllasa    glgama£ye.      Wa,  laEm 
waxaxa    klwele   qa    daxalag'is    qa£s    qlEs£Ide.      Wa,    hex£ida£mese 
£naxwa  daxeda  klwelaxa  Llope   t!elku   loqlfibana,   qa£s  hamx£Ideq. 
Wa,  laEin   hewaxa    nanaqalg'iwalax   £wapa  qaes   kilEma£e  naqeda  60 
qlEsaxa  tsEnxwa  loqlubanaxa   £wiida£sta   £wapa   qo   l!ox£wk1  laxa 
tsEnxwa£yas,   lax   tEk'las.     Wa,  g11£mese  gwal  qlEsaxs  lae  motlo- 
yiwe  mamotasa  klwele  laxes  gEgEnEme.     Wa,  la£mese  waxasE£wa 
klwele  qa£s  k!welg-a£le  dEnxEla.     Wa,  hex-£Ida£mese  klwele  dEnx£- 
etsa  k  Iwelayalayowe  qlEmdEma.      Wa,  laLe  hex-£Ida£meda  ha£yal£a  65 
xoxu£wklxa  £yExusEma£yaats  !e  xexEtsEma.     Wa,  la  ax£etsE£wa  alo- 
niase  klEta  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEplalllEme  laxa  gEmxotsalllasa  tloxilasa 
g'okwe.     Wa,  la  ax£wfdts!alasE£wa  £yExusEma£yasa   £mElxxowe  qa£s 
la  g-IdzolIlElas  laxa  le£wa£ye.     Wa,  gih'mese  £wl£laxs  laeda  ma£lokwe 
ha£yal£a    gilpax  £waxaasasa    klwele,  yixs    dalaaxa   hEwekwe   xoku  70 
gilsg'iltla  wiswElto   k!wa£XL§wa.     Wa,  la  yaqwasa  £nal£nEmts !aqe 
laxa  £nal£nEm5kwe  laxa  klwele.     Wa,  heEm  axba£yaasltsa  £yExusE- 
maeyeda  k!wa£xLawe  qo  lal  tsexaLEq  laxa  lEgwilases  gigokwe.    Wa, 
laxae    hayaqax    £waxaasasa     klwele.     Wa,    gil£mese     q!al£aLElax 
£waxaasasa  k  Iwelaxs  lae  t  !5t  lEts  tendxa  £yExusEma£ye   qa£s  hosEmdes  75 
lax  £waxaasasa  klwele.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wIwidxsExs  lae  yax£widayo 
laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ts lElwax£etso£sa  £ya£yaq lEntemelasa 


436  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ass.35 

78  this  has  been  done,  the  chief's  speaker  begins  to  praise  them.  | 
The  guests  never  eat  any  of  the  stomach-fat  |  of  the  mountain-goat, 

80  but  go  out.  This  important  feast  ||  is  given  to  many  tribes;  namely, 
dried  brisket  and  sides,  |  and  also  the  stomach-fat  of  the  mountain- 
goat;  for  there  is  a  myth  about  it  and  |  about  the  seal,  for  it  is 
valued  more  highly  than  an  oil-feast  by  [  many  tribes.  As  soon  as  the 
former   guests    enter  their  houses,  |  they  distribute  the  split  cedar- 

85  sticks,  for  all  the  guests  carry  them  ||  to  theirwives  with  the  stomach- 
fat.  The  women  at  once  |  bite  off  a  piece  of  the  fat  and  chew  it; 
and  after  it  has  been  chewed,  |  they  put  it  on  the  end  of  a  split  cedar- 
stick,  so  that  there  is  a  knob  of  fat  at  the  end,  |  for  they  only  wish 
it  to  be  large  enough  to  go  into  the  mouth.  They  put  the  knob  | 
into  the  fire;  and  when  the  stomach-fat  is  melted,  they  put  it  into 

90  the  ||  mouth  and  suck  the  knob.  When  all  the  melted  tallow  has 
been  sucked  off,  |  they  put  the  knob  into  the  fire  again;  and  when  it 
begins  to  drip  |  with  the  melted  fat,  they  put  it  back  into  the  mouth; 
and  they  |  only  stop  when  there  is  only  skin  left  at  the  end  of  the 
fat-stick.  They  only  |  suck  it  off  and  eat  it.  That  is  all  about  this.  || 
1  Mountain- Goat  Brisket. — When  there  are  two  rival  |  chiefs  in  one 
tribe,  and  each  lias  a  |  son-in-law  who  is  a  mountain-goat  hunter, 
they  watch  each  other  |  when  they  give  feasts.  When  the  chief's 
5  mountain-goat  hunter  ||  has  ten  boxes  of  dried  briskets  and  |  sides 


78  gigama£ye.  Wa,  laEm  hewiixaEm  hanix£Tdeda  klwelaxa  £yExusE- 
ma£yasa  £mElxLowaxs    lae  hoqiiwElsa.     Wa,  heEm  awilgala  k!wel- 

80  tsdsa  qlenEme  lelqwalaLa£ya  xilkwe  loqlubano  LE£wa  ewanodza£ye; 
wa,  he£misLeda  £yExusEma£yasa  £mElxLowe  qaxs  nuyambalae  LE£wa 
megwate;  yixs  he£mae  nallLElasa  L!e£naxs  klweladzEmae  laxaaxa 
q!enEine  lelqwalaLa£ya.  Wa,  gil£mese  laeLeda  klwelde  laxes  g'igo- 
kwaxs  lae  ts!asa  xokwe  k!wa£XLa  qaxs  £naxwa£me  daleda  k.'weldaq 

85  laxes  gEgEnEme  LE£wa  £yExusEma£ye.  Wa,  hex£ida£niesa  tsledaqe 
q!Ex£Id  lftxa  £yExusEma£ye  qa£s  malex£wideq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl- 
weIx'sexs  lae  axbEnts  laxa  xokwe  k!wa£xLawa  qa£s  la  qoloxbeq; 
yixs  a£mae  £nex"  qa  heldzEqEles  laxes  sEmse.  Wii,  la,  tsexLEnts 
laxes  lEgwIle.     Wa,  gil£mese  yax£Ida  £yasEkwaxs  lae  axeLas  laxes 

90  sEmse  qa£s  klExfdtsEmayeq.  Wa,  giPmese  £wi£lawa  yaxayasEkuxs 
lae  xwelaxLEnts  laxes  lEgwIle.  Wa,  g  il£Emxaawise  la  ts!ets!aoku- 
laxs  lae  xwelaqa  axeLas  laxes  sEmse.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae 
aEm  la  L!esa  axba£yaxa  tsexpleqe  k!wa£XL&wa.  Wa,  a£mese  la 
khuntodEq  qa£s  ha£mx£Ideq.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Mountain-Goat  Brisket. — Wa,  gil£mese  £waxsek!iisa  £ma£lokwe 
g-Igigamesa  £nEmsgEmakwe  lelqwalaLa£ya,  wa,  la  qlwalxoEm  ne- 
nEgwiiyatsa  tetEwe£nenoxwaxa  £mElxxowe,  wa,  lalaxalaxs  doqwa- 
laplae  yisa  k Iwelatsayase.  Wa,  gil£mese  laLa  tEwe£nenoxwasa 
5  g-Igama£yaxa   nF.qasgEme  xexEtsEm  xilku  loq!ubanowats!a   LE£wa 


boas]  RECIPES  437 

and  the  stomach-fat  of  the  mountain-goat,  |  then  the  mountain-goat  6 
hunter  of  the  chief  of  the  other  side  tries  to  get  also  |  that  number  of 
boxes  which  is  the  number  of  goats  obtained  by  his  rival;  and  this 
is  also  the  same  |  in  recent  times,  when  they  have  kettles.     When 
the  ||  mountain-goat  hunter  gives  the  marriage-present  to  the  chief  10 
his  father-in-law,  the  latter  |  soaks  the  meat,  as  I  described  before 
the  soaking  of  dried  briskets  and  |  sides  when  they  soak  them  in  a 
small  canoe.     After  three  |  days  they  call  all  the  tribes;  and  as  soon 
as  |  the  messenger  comes  back,  they  build  a  fire  in  the  chief's  house.  || 
They  take  large  kettles  and  place  them  by  the  side  |  of  the  fire,  and  15 
the  young  men  go  to  draw  water  and  pour  it  into  the  |  kettles. 
When  they  are  half  filled  with  water,  the  |  young  men  take  the 
soaked  briskets  out  of  the  soaking-eanoe,  |  and  they  go  and  put  them 
into  the  kettle.     They  only  stop  when  ||  these  are  filled.    They  do  this  20 
with  the  other  kettles  too.  |  Then  the  young  men  put  them  on  the  fire; 
and  when  the  water  |  begins  to  boil,  the  young  men  go  again  to  invite 
all  the  tribes.  |  Then  the  rival  chief  goes  in  first  with  his  numaym.  | 
They  enter  the  house  and  sit  down  at  their  seats,  for  they  do  not 
wish  ||  the  rival  chief  to  say  that  he  is  afraid  to  go  to  the  feast;  and  25 
after  him  come  all  the  |  other  guests.     Then  they  start  singing  the 
feast-songs,  |  and  they  sing  the  feast-songs  |  of  the  rival  of  the  host. 


ewanodza£yaats!a;    wa,  he£mesa  £yExusEma£yasa  £m.E'lxLovve.     Wa    6 
la    tEwemenoxwas   apsllasa   glgame£  ogwaqa  laloL.'axa   he£niaxat! 
£waxasgEm  XEtsEme  £waxaasas  yanEmases  doqwalap  !6te,  ogwaqaxwa 
ale  £nalilsa  lax  axnogwatsa  hanxxanowe.     Wa,  gil£mese  wawadzeda 
tEwe£nenoxwaxes  glgaina£ve  nEgumpaxs  lae  hex£idaEni  nEgEtEwex  10 
t  !elalaena£yasa  galEn  gwagwexs£filasa  laxa  loq!ubanoweLE£wa  ewa- 
nodza£yaxs  lae  t!elaso  laxa  xwaxwagume.     Wa,  laxae  yuduxup!En- 
xwa£se  £nalasexs  lae  Le£lalasE£wa  £naxwa  lelqwalai.a£ya.     Wa,  o-il- 
£mese  g-axeda  Le£lalElg  isaxs  lae  hex£idaEm  laqoh~lasE£wa  gokwasa 
gigama£ye.    Wa,  la  ax£etsE£wa  awa£we  hanxxanowa  qa£s  ha£nolllEme  15 
laxa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  la  tsada  ha£yal£axa  £wape  qa£s  la  guxtslalas  laxa 
hehanxxanowe.     Wa,  gil£mese  naEngoyoxsdalaxa  £wapaxs  lae  fix- 
wustEndeda  ha£yal£axa  t!elkwe  loq!ubano  laxa  t!elats!e  xwaxwaofim 
qa£s   la  axstEnts    laxa    hanxxanowe.     Wa,   al£mese  gwalqexs   lae 
qot!a.     Wa,  la    £naxwaEm    he    gwex£Idxa    waSkwe    hanEnxxana.  20 
Wa,  lada    ha£yal£a    h&nxxEnts   laxa  lEgwIle.     Wa,    g-il£mese   ms- 
dElx£widExs  laeda  ha£yal£a  etse£staxa  £naxwa   lelqwalaLa£ya.     Wa 
hex-sa£mesa    epsile     g-Igame£    galaeLa     LE£wis    £nE£memote    gax 
hogwiLa  qa£sk!us£allle  hixes  k!wek!wa£}-e  qaxs  gwaqlElaq  £nexso£ses 
apslle  glgame£  k'ilElas  k!weladzEmas.     Wa,   gaxe  £wl£la  alxLa£ve  25 
waokwe  klwelwutLEs.     Wa,  hex,£ida£mese  waxaso£  qa£s  k!we]o-a£le 
dEnxElasa  k!we£lala  qlEmdEma.     Wa,  he£mis  dEnx£edayuwe  k!we- 


438  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

As  soon  as  they  sing,  |  the  rival  of  the  host  rises;  and  when  his  song 

30  is  ended,  ||  he  promises  a  feast.  After  he  has  done  so,  he  sits  down. 
Then  the  |  boxes  of  stomach-fat  are  opened,  and  the  stomach-fat  is 
taken  |  out  of  the  boxes  and  placed  on  mats.  It  is  cut  into  pieces  | 
by  the  young  men.     When  it  is  all  cut  up,  the  kettles  |  are  taken 

35  from  the  fire  and  placed  around  the  ||  fire,  so  that  they  are  slightly 
heated  on  one  side  and  that  they  hardly  |  boil  on  one  side.  Then 
the  stomach-fat  which  has  been  cut  into  pieces  |  is  taken  and  put 
into  the  boiling  liquid  of  the  boiled  goat-briskets.  |  As  soon  as  it  is  all 
in,  the  young  men  take  |  spoons  and  put  them  down;  and  when  the 

40  brisket  is  done,  ||  they  take  many  dishes  and  put  them  down,  and 
they  also  take  long  tongs.  |  With  these  they  take  out  the  boded  | 
briskets  and  put  them  into  the  dishes.  There  |  is  one  brisket  in 
each  dish.     When  |  it  is  all  in,  the  spoons  are  distributed  among  the 

45  guests.  Then  ||  the  dishes  are  distributed,  one  dish  to  each  two 
guests.  I  Two  young  men  carry  the  kettle,  one  on  each  side,  |  and 
put  it  down  in  front  of  the  rival  of  the  host.  Then  one  |  of  the  young 
men  says,  "Now,  eat,  chief!"  and  the  chief  says,  |  "I  shall  do  so." 

50  Then  the  young  men  do  the  same  with  the  other  kettles  ||  to, the  other 
guests.     Then  they  all  eat  with  spoons  |  the  tallow  that  is  on  top 

28  la£yala£yasa  apselasa  klwelase.  Wa,  g11£mese  dEnx£idEXs  lae 
Lax£ulileda  apsllasa  klwelase.     Wa,  gil£mese  labe  qlEmdEmasexs  lae 

30  qaso.  Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  klwagallla.  Wa,  la  x'ox£witsE£wa 
£yExusEma£yaats  !e  xEtsEma.  Wa,  la  ax£wults!alayuwa£yExusEma£ye 
laxa  xEtsEme  qa£s  axdzolelEme  laxa  le£wa£ye.  Wa,  la  t!ot!Ets!a- 
lasE£wa  yisa  ha£yal£a.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wI£we1xsexs,  lae  hanEmxs£a- 
lasE£wa    haiiEnxxanowe    laxa     lEgwIle    qa£s    hane£stalayuwe    laxa 

35  lEgwlle  qa  halsEla£mese  xigEn£wala.  Wa,  la  halsElaEm  la  mE- 
dElqule  epsana£yas.  Wii,  la  ax£etsE£wa  t!ot!Ets!aakw§  eyExusEme 
qaes  la  axstano  lax  £wapalasa  hanx'Laakwe  loqlubanosa  £mElx- 
Lowe.  Wa,  giPmese  £wi£la£staxs  laeda  ha£yal£a  ax£edxa  k'ak'E- 
tslEnaqe  qa£s  gaxe    ax£alilas.      Wa,    gil£mese    Llopa    loqliibanaxs 

40  lae  ax£etsE£wa  qlexLa  loElqlwa  qa£s  gaxe  niEX£alelEma.  Wa, 
laxae  ax£etsE£wa  giltla  kMipLala.  Wa,  la  lEx£ustEndxa  hanxxa- 
akwe  loqlubana  qa£s  la  axtslalas  laxa  loElqlwe.  Wa,  laEm 
£nal£nEmts!aweda  loElq!waxa  l5q!ubanowe.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£lo- 
£staxs  lae  tslEwanaedzEma    kakEtslEnaqe    laxa    klwele.     Wa,   la 

45  kax£idayowa  loElqlwe  laEm  maemaPeda  k!welaxa  £nal£nEmexLa 
loqlwa.  Wa,  la  £waxsanodeda  £ma£lokwe  ha£yal£axa  hanx'Lanowe 
qa£s  la hangEmlllas  lax  apsllasa  klwelase.  Wa,  la  £nek-eda  £nEmokwe 
hel£a:  "LaEms  hamx£IdLol  glgame£."  Wa,  la  £neka  gigama£ye: 
"HeLEn  gwalaLe."     Wa,  la  hanala   ha£yal£asa  waokwe   hanhanx'- 

50  Lano  laxa  waokwe  klwela.  Wa,  hex,£ida£mese  £naxwa  £yos£idxa 
eyasEkwe  lax  okuya£yasa  £wapalasa  hanxLaakwe  loq!ubano.     Wa, 


buas]  RECIPES  439 

of  the  liquid  of  the  boiled  briskets.  |  After  they  have  eaten  the  52 
tallow,  they  eat  the  boiled  briskets.  |  However,  they  do  not  eat  much; 
and  when  they  finish  eating,  they  go  out.  |  They  never  drink  water 
after  eating.  ||  At  this  time  the  host  gives  a  name  to  his  children  55 
on  account  of  this  kind  of  food,  and  also  |  (when  he  gives)  seal  and 
oil;  and  the  rival  of  the  chief  |  gives  the  same  kind  of  a  feast  as  the 
host.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Steamed  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — There  is  another  way  of  |  cooking  1 
mountain-goat  meat  when  it  is  fresh;  that  is,  steaming  it  on  |  red- 
hot  stones.     After   the  mountain-goat  has  been  caught  by   the  | 
hunter,  the  latter  skins  it  in  his  [|  house,  so  that  the  skin  comes  off  5 
witli  the  hair.     After  he  has  skinned  it,  he  first  goes  |  into  the  woods 
and  breaks  off  tips  of  hemlock  branches.  |  When  he  thinks  he  has 
enough,  he  carries  them  home  |  and  puts  them  down  in  his  house. 
Then  he  takes  a  basket  and  |  carries  it  down  to  the  beach  in  front  of 
his  house.     He  picks  up  ||  fresh  stones  and  puts  them  into  it.     He  10 
carries  them  on  his  back  and  puts  them  down  |  in  his  house.     He 
takes  his  wedge  and  his  hammer  and  ]  wedges  into  pieces  fire-wood 
[so  that  the  pieces  are]  of  medium  size;  and  he  puts  one  piece  down 
crosswise  |  at  the  end  of  the  fire  for  heating  stones,  and  there  is  a| 
crosspiece  only  at  one  end;  and  he  puts  the  two  side-pieces  down  on 
the  sides;  ||  and  he  puts  pieces  across  on  top  for  the  stones  to  lie  on.  |   15 

giPmese  £wllaxa  yasEkwaxs    lae  q!Es£edxa  L!ope  toq!ubana.     Wa,  52 
k!est!a  q!ek'!Es  laqexs    lae    gwal    q!Esa.      Wa,    la£me    hoquwEls 
laxeq.     Wa,  laEm  hewaxa  nax£IdEX  £wapaxs  lae  gwal  qtesa.     Wa, 
heEm  Legadaats  sasEmasa  klwelasasa  he  gwex"s  hemaomase  LE£wa  55 
megwate;  wa  he£mesa  L!e£na.     Wa,  aEmxaawise  apsilas  naqEmgil- 
tax  gwayrdalasasa  klwelasde.     Wa,  laEmxae  gwala. 

Steamed  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — Wa,  ga£mes  £riEmx£idala  ka£mex-  1 
silaenexa  £mEl£mElq!Ega£yaxs  getaegaxa  £nEx,£alodaq  laxa  x'ixix- 
sEmala    t!esEma.     Wa,    he£maaxs    galae    laLanEma    £mElxLowasa 
tEwe£nenoxwe.      Wa,  la  sap!edEq  qa  lawayes   habEsEna^yas   laxes 
g'Qkwe.     Wa,  gll£mese    gwal  sapaqexs    lae    he    gil    ax£etsoxs    lae  5 
laxa  aLle    qa£s    LlEqalexa    mEmxbalts!ana£yas    LlEnakasa   q!wa- 
xase.     Wa,  g-il£mese  k-otaq  helales    axanEmaxs    gaxae   gEmxElaq 
qaEs  gEmx£ahles  laxes  g'Skwe.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  la  da- 
laqexs  lae  lEntsles    laxes    L!Ema£isases    g'okwe.     Wa,  la  xExuts!a- 
lasa  alExsEme  tlesEm  laq.     Wa,  la  oxEosdesaq  cpa£s  la  hangalilas  10 
laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  la  axeedxes  LEmgayuwe  LE£wis  pElpElqe.     Wa, 
la  LEmlEmx'SEnts  laxa   lsqwa  qaEs    ha£yaastowes.     Wa,  la  gEbEn- 
tsa  hel£astowe  lax  ogwiwalllasa  t!eqwapa£ye.     Wa,  laEm  apsba£ya 
geba£yas.      Wa    la    kakEdEnodEq    yis    k'il,kEdEnwa£yas.     Wa,   la 
gayi£lalax,£idEX    okuya£yas    qa     xExudEmasa    t!esEme.      Wa,   gil-  15 


440  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

16  After  this  is  done,  he  takes  the  basket  of  stones  and  pours  them  on 
top  I  of  this;  and  after  that  is  done,  he  lights  the  fire  under  it.  As  | 
soon  as  it  begins  to  burn,  he  cuts  the  mountain-goat  meat  into 
slices,  I  and  he  cuts  holes  in  them  so  that  they  will  cook  quickly.  || 

20  When  this  is  done,  he  takes  two  buckets  and  draws  |  fresh  water. 
He  brings  them  back  and  puts  them  near  the  fire  for  heating  stones.  | 
Then  he  takes  his  tongs,  so  as  to  have  them  ready,  and  |  he  takes 
many  old  mats,  which  he  puts  down.     Now  |  all  the  stones  are  white- 

25  hot.  Then  he  takes  his  tongs  ||  and  picks  off  from  the  fire  the  wood 
that  has  been  burned.  After  |  it  lias  all  been  taken  off,  he  levels 
off  the  top  of  the  red-hot  stones.  After  |  this  has  been  done,  he  takes 
hemlock-branches  and  lays  them  down  over  the  |  red-hot  stones. 
When  there  is  a  thick  layer  of  hemlock-branches,  he  takes  |  thin  slices 

30  of  goat-meat  and  spreads  them  over  it;  ||  and  when  (the  hemlock- 
branches)  are  all  covered/he  takes  split  cedar-wood  and  puts  it  down 
crosswise  |  over  the  meat  which  is  spread  over  the  hemlock-branches, 
in  this  way:  |  s~jG$2?K.  Then  he  takes  the  goat-meat  and  spreads  |  it 
over  the  pieces  ((KWjuQ  which  are  two  spans  square.  When  |  (the 
meat)  is  all  on,     *4oi>^    he  takes  old  mats  for  covering  it,  and  || 

35  spreads  them  down  by  the  side  of  it.  As  soon  as  everything  is 
ready,  |  he  takes   up   the   buckets  with   water    and    empties  them 

16  £mese  gwalExs  lae  &x£edxa  t!ets!ats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  guqEyints 
laq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  £menabotsa  gulta  laq.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  x'lqostaxs  lae  pElspadzogwIla  sakwaxa  £niEl£mElq  !Ega£ye. 
Wa,  la  L!6LlEbasJid   bEXEmxsalaq   qa  halabales   L!opa.     Wa,  g'il- 

20  £mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  £maltsEme  naEngatsla  qa£s  la  tsas  laxa 
£wE£wap!Eme.  Wa,  gaxe  hanEmg-alllas  laxa  maginwalilases  t!e- 
qwapa£ye,  wa  laxae  ax£edxes  k'lipLalaa  qa  gaxes  gwfdila.  Wa,  la 
ax£edxa  qlenEme  k!a'k'!obana  qa£s  g-axe  ax£allias.  Wa,  la£me 
£naxwa  la    memEnltsEmx£Ideda  t!esEme.     Wa,  la  ax£edxes  k- !ipLa- 

25  laa  qa£s  klipsales  laxa  xixiq!ayawa£yasa  lEqwa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
£\vllx-axs  lae  £nEmakiyindxa  x'lx'lxsEmala  tlesEma.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  q!waxeqa£s  tslaklyindes  lax  6kuya£yasa  x'l- 
x'ixsEmala  tlesEma.  Wa,  gIPmese  la  wakwa  qlwaxaxs  lae  ax£ed- 
xa    pElspadzowe  sagiiku    £mEl£mElq  !Ega£ya  qa£s    LEpEylndales  laq. 

30  Wa,  gil£mese  hamElqEyaxs  lae  ax£edxa  xokwe  k!wa£XLawa  qa£s  xwa- 
lEylndesa  motslaqe  lax  okuya£yasa  laLEpE£yexa  q!waxe  ga  gwalega 
{fig.).  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  £mEl£mElq !Ega£ye  qa£s  LEpEyindes 
laxa  maldEnas  awagwidas  laxEns  q!wa'q!waxts!ana£yex.  Wa, 
giPmese    £wl£laxs   lae    ax£edxa    nayimLe    k'!ak-!obana    qaes    gaxe 

35  LEplalllElas  lax  maginwalllas.  Wa,  g11£mese  la  £wl£la  gwalllExs 
lae  k-!oqii!ilaxa  nagatsle  £wabEts!ala  qa£s  tsadzELEyindes  iax  okii- 


boas]  RECIPES  441 

over  |  (the  place)  where  the  cut  meat  is  spread;  and  he  does  the  37 
same  quickly  |  with  the  other  one.     When  (the  buckets)  are  emptied, 
he    quickly    takes    up  |  the    mat    covers    and    spreads    them    over 
(the  meat) ;  and  he  only  ||  stops  when  hardly  any  steam  is  coming  40 
through.      Then  |  the  man  who  is  steaming   it   rests   for  a  while; 
but  he  does  not  leave  it  long,  before  it   is  uncovered;    |  for    then  it 
is  done,  for  goat-meat  is  done  quickly  when    it    is  steamed.   |    He 
just  invites  all  the  men  to  come  and  sit  |  around  the  place  where 
it  has  been  steamed.     They  take  some  of  it  and  eat  it;  ||  and  when  45 
they  all  have  eaten  enough,  they  carry  home  the  rest  for  their  wives 
in  their  |  houses.     This  is  called  "steamed  fresh  goat-meat,"  which  | 
is  treated   in  this   manner.       It    is  called  "boded  soaked  brisket  | 
covered  with  tallow"  when  the  soaked  brisket  is  boiled.  | 

Cooking  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — As1  soon  as  he  arrives  at  his  house |  1 
he  skins  (the  goat),  as  goats  are  skinned.  |  After  he  has  skinned  it,  he 
cuts  off  the  head  so  that  it  comes  off,  and  he  )  puts  it  down  in  the 
corner  of  the  house.  Then  he  cuts  up  the  meat  of  the  ||  hind-legs  5 
and  fore-legs  and  the  meat  of  the  back.  |  He  cuts  it  into  strips. 
Then  he  takes  a  basket,  and  puts  |  the  meat  of  the  mountain- 
goat  that  has  been  cut  up  into  it.  He  goes  to  the  beach 
and  |  picks  up  some  stones,  which  he  puts  on  the  fire  in  the 
house.     When  he  has   |   enough   stones,  he  takes   his   cooking-box 


ya£yasa  la  LEpE£ye  £mEl£mElq  !Ega£ya.     Wa,  la  haalbala  he  gwex--  37 
£Itsa  £nEmsgEme.     Wa,  giPmese   widg"Ilts!axs  lae  halabala  dagih- 
laxa  mayime     k!ak!obana    qa£s    £nasEyindes    laq.     Wa,    al£mese 
gwalExs  lae  halsElaEm  la  k'Exusaleda  k'!alEla.     Wa,  la-me  £yawas£Id  40 
xos£Ideda  £nEkaq.     Wa,  k'!est!a  alaEm  gEyaxs  lae  lot!etsE£wa  qaxs 
iE£maeL!6pa  qaeda  £mEl£mElq  !Ega£yaxs  L!op!alae  laxox  £nEkasE£we. 
Wa,  afmese  Le£lalasE£wa    £naxwa  bebEgwanEm    qa£s  gaxe  k!utse; 
£stalaxa  mEgasaq.     Wa,  lax-da£xwe  km  dax,£id  laq  qa£s  q!Es£edeq. 
Wa,  gil£mese  maxwa  pol£IdExs  lae  motieda  qaes    gEgEnEme  laxes  45 
gigokwe.     HeEm  LegadEs  mEgEkwe  geta  £mEl£mElq !Ega£yaxa  he 
gwekwe.      Wa,  he£mis  LegEmsa  hanxLaakwe  tlelkwe  loqliibanowe 
tlEplEgilisxa  £yasEkwe  hanxxaak"  t!elku  loq!ubano. 

Cooking  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — Wa,  g'il£mese  lag'aa  laxes  gokwaxs  1 
lae  h("'x-£idaEm  sap!edEq  laxox  sapalaena£yaxa  £niElxLowe.  Wa, 
gil£mese  gwal  sapaqexs  lae  qax-£idEq  qa  lawiis  xEweqwas.  Wa,  la 
g'eg'alilas  lax  onegwllases  g'okwe.  Wii,  la  sESExusEndEx  Eldzas 
alEmxLa£yasLE£wes  g'alEmalg'iwa^e.  Wa,he£mes  Eldzeg-a£yas.  Wa  5 
la  L!oL!Ebas£edEq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  lExa£ya  qa£s  axtslodesa 
sEsExusaakwe  £mEl£mElq !Ege  liiq.  Wii,  lii  laxa  LlEma£ise  qa£s  xex- 
wusdeseq  laxa  tlesEme  qa£s  lii  xExuLEnts  laxes  lEgwIl.  Wii,  hi 
helaleda  t!esEmaxs  lae  ax£edxes  q!o£lats!e  qa£s  ha£noleses  laxa  ma- 

1  Continued  from  p.  174,  line  35. 


442  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

10  and  places  it  ||  near  the  fire.  Then  he  takes  his  buckets  and  goes  to 
draw  |  water,  and  pours  it  into  the  box.  When  it  is  half  full  |  of 
water,  he  stops  pouring  it  in.  He  takes  his  |  tongs  and  picks  up  the 
red-hot    stones,  which  he  |  puts  into  the  cooking-box.     When   the 

15  water  begins  to  boil,  ||  he  takes  up  the  basket  with  the  pieces  of  moun- 
tain-goat meat  and  places  the  basket  with  its  contents  |  in  the  boiling 
water.  As  soon  as  the  basket  has  been  put  |  in,  he  takes  his  tongs, 
takes  up  more  |  red-hot  stones,  and  places  them  outside  the  basket.  | 

20  Then  the  water  begins  to  boil  hard  all  around  the  basket  ||  containing 
the  pieces  of  niountain-goat  meat.  It  does  not  take  |  really  long 
before  it  is  done.  Then  he  takes  a  short  |  piece  of  board  and  lays  it 
down  by  the  side  of  the  cooking-box.  He  |  puts  down  a  narrow  strip 
of  split  cedar-board  in  front  of  those  who  |  are  to  eat  the  meat  of  the 

25  mountain-goat.  Then  he  takes  the  tongs  and  ||  picks  up  the  cooked 
goat-meat  and  puts  it  on  the  |  short  board.  When  it  is  all  out  of  the 
basket,  |  he  takes  the  cooked  mountain-goat  meat  and  places  it  on  | 
the  long  strip  of  board  in  front  of  each  of  those  who  are  to  eat  the 
mountain-goat  meat.  |  Before  they  begin  to  eat  the  meat,  they  drink 

30  water;  ||  and  after  they  have  drunk,  the  men  take  up  the  pieces  of  { 
mountain-goat  meat  and  bite  off  a  piece,  and  they  eat  it,  and  then  all 
the  |  others  begin  to  eat.  After  they  have  eaten,  they  drink  |  water. 
Then  they  go  out. 

10  g-inwalisasa  lEgwllas.  Wii,  la  ax£edxes  nagatsle  qa£s  la  tsa  laxa 
£wape  qa£s  la  guxtslots  laxa  q!o£lats!e.  Wii,  g'iFmese  nEgoyoxs- 
dalaxa  £wapaxs  lae  gwal  guxtslalaq.  Wii,  la  ax£edxes  k-!ip- 
Lala  qa£s  k'lipledes  laxa  xux-ixsEmala  tlesEin  qa£s  la  k"!ip- 
tslalas    laxa    q!o£lats!e.      Wii,    g'iPmese    mEdElx£wededa    £wapaxs 

15  lae  k'loqulilxa  sagugwatsle  £mEl£mElq  !Ege  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  han- 
£stEnts  laxa  la  maEmdElqula  £wapa.  Wii,  g-il£mese  han£steda  lExa£ye 
laqexs  lae  et  led  ax£edxes  k-  lipLalaa  qa£s  et  !ede  k-  !ip  lets  laxa 
x'ix'ixsEmala  tlesEma  qa£s  la  kMipstalas  lax  ewana£yasa  lExa£ye. 
Wa,  lawisLe  alak'  !ala  maEmdElquleda  £wape   lax  awe£stasa  lExa£ye 

20  yix  la  motslawatsa  sagukwe  £mEpmElq!Ega£ya.  Wa,  k-!est!e 
illaEm  geg-ililExs  lae  Llopa.  Wii,  h(';x-£Ida£mese  &x£edxa  tegudzowe 
ts!ats!axusama  qa£s  pax£aliles  lax  mag'inwalilasa  q!o£lats!e.  Wa,  la 
pax£alilasa  ts!6q!adzowe  gildEdzo  lat!aaku  klwiigEdzo  lax  Liasall- 
lasa  qlEsaLaxa  £niEl£niElq!Ega£ye.      Wa,  la  dax,£Idxa  k'  lipLalae  qa£s 

25  k-!ip!ides  laxa  q  !6£lkwe  £mEl£mElq  !Ega£ya  qa£s  la  k'lEbEclzots  laxa 
lEgudzowe.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wi£losts!a  laxa  lExa£yeda  £mEl£mElq!E- 
ga£yaxs  lae  ax£edxa  q!o£lkwe  £mEl£mElq  !Ega£ye  qa£s  lii  axdzolalas 
laxa  yagudzo  lax  nenEqEmalllasa  qlEsaLaxa  £mEl£niElq!Ega£ye. 
Wii,    laxda£xwe     nanaqalg'iwalaxa    £wapaxs    k-!es£mae    q!Es£eda. 

30  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwiil  naqaxs  laeda  bebEgwanEme  dax£idxa  qlolkwe 
£mEl£mElq  !Ega£ya  qa£s  q!Ex-£ide  laq  qa£s  q!Es£ideq.  Wii,  la  £nax- 
waEm  la  qlEseda  waokwe.  Wa,  g'iPmese  gwala  qlEsaxs  lae  nax£ed- 
xa  £wape.   Wa,  laEm  h5qiiwEls  laxeq. 


boas]  RECIPES  443 

Roasted  Monutain-Goat  Meat. — And  also  roasted  mountain-goat  |  1 
meat,  this  also  is  taken  from  the  hind -legs  of  the  mountain-goat.     It  is 
cut  up,  |  for  they  only  cut  along  the  thigh-bone  of  the  mountain- 
goat,  so  that  |  it  comes  off.     When  it  is  off,  it  is  sliced  so  that  it 
forms  one  thin  ||  wide  piece.    .    .    .    The  thin  slice  of  meat  is  placed  |  5 
between  the  legs  of  roasting-tongs.     Cedar-bark  is  tied  |  on  the  top 
of  the  tongs.     After  this  has  been  done,  the  man  takes  |   thin  split 
cedar  and  puts  it  crosswise  (so  as  to  keep  the  meat  open),  in  this  | 
After  this  has  been  done,  he  places  it  by  the 
the  fire;  ||  and  when  it  is  burnt  black  on  one  10 
turned  over;  j  and  when  that  side  is  also  burnt 
is  done.     Then  it  is  taken  |  and  put  down  in 
those  who  are  to  eat  it.     Immediately  |  they 
up  and  eat  it.     This  kind  of  food  is   always 
eaten  entirely.  |  In  this  also  they  do  not  drink  water.  || 

Mountain-Goat  Skin. — An  important  food  of  the  ancestors  of  the  15 
DEnax-da£xu,  |  when  they  stay  for  a  long  time  on  the  upper  course 
of  Knight  Inlet,  is  (also)  mountain-goat  skin.  |  "When  the  mountain- 
goat  skin  has  been  [  in  the  house  for  four  days,  the  man  takes  the 
collar-bone  of  the  eagle  and  breaks  off  one  side  of  it.  ||  Now  (he  takes)  20 
one  half  of  it,  ||  and  he  pulls  off  the  wool  from  the  mountain-goat  skin. 
He  puts  |  the  wool  that  he  has  plucked  off  into  a  basket  for  his 
wife  to  make  blankets.  |  When  the  wool  is  all  off,  he  puts  in  the 

Roasted  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — Wa,  ke£mesa  LlobEkwe  £mEl£niElq  !e-  i 
ga£ya  heEmxae  gayola    alEmxLa£yasa   £mElxLowa   la  sax£w!tsE£wa 
yixs    a£mae    t!ots!ElEntsE£wa    xaqasa  alEmxLa£yasa   £m.ElxLowe   qa 
lawes.     Wa,  g  iPmese  lawaxs  lae  t  !Els£itsE£wa  qa£s  la  £nEinxsa  pEldz5 
la   wadza.     .     .    .     Wa,    la    ax£edxa   pEldzowe   Eldza    qa£s   axodes  5 
lax     xEwela£yasa   L!opsayowe.      Wa,    laxae    qEx-£aLElotsa  dEnase 
lax   ek- !Eba£yasa  l lopsayowe.     Wa,   gil£mese   gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa 
wlswiiltowas   xoye   k!waxxawa  qa£s  k!aat!edes  laq.      Wa,    la    ga 
gwalega  (Jig.).     Wa,  g'il£niese  gwalExs  lae  Lanolisas  laxes  lEgwile. 
Wa,    g'il£mese    k!umax£ide    apsadza£yasexs     lae     lex'£IdEq.      Wa,  10 
gil£Emxaawise   k!umElx"£IdExs    lae   Llopa.     Wa,    la£me  ax£etsE£wa 
qa£s  !a  paqEmlelEm  lax  nExdzama£yas  qlEsaLaq.     Wa,  hex£ida£mese 
k!ulpap!Eq  qa£s  q!Es£edeq.     Wa,  la  hemEnalaEm  £wIlasoxs  qlEsasE- 
£wae    gwex'sdEmas.     Wa,   laEmxae  k'  !es  nax£Idxa  £wape. 

Mountain-Goat  Skin. — Wa,  he£mesahemawalasagalaDEnaxda£xwa  15 
laxs  hemaole  gokfde  £nEldzas  Dzawadexa  pEsk-enasa  £mElxLowe, 
y!xa  pEsEna£yas.  Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  mop  lEnxwadzile  pESEna£yasa 
£niElxLowaxa  £nala  laxa  gokwe,  wa,  la  ax£ededa  bEgwanEmaxa  hanas- 
xawa£j7asa  kwekwe.  Wa,  la  koqodEX  apsba£yas.  Wa,la  nExsaakiixs 
lae  gal£Its  lax  p!alEmasa  pEsEiia£yasa  £mElxLowe.  Wa,  la  axtsloda-  20 
lases  gaLanEme  p  !alEm  laxa  lExa£ye  qa  p  !alEmsgEmgilaso£s  gEnEmas. 


444  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  86 

23  bone  hook  and  |  plucks  off  the  long  hair.  When  it  is  all  off,  he 
spreads  it  out  |  over  his   fire   in   order  to  singe  off   the  hair   that 

25  is  left  on.  As  soon  as  it  is  ||  all  off,  the  skin  shrinks,  and  then 
becomes  thick  on  account  of  the  heat  when  |  it  is  put  over  the 
fire.  Then  he  spreads  it  on  a  short  board,  and  |  takes  his  knife, 
whatever  it  may  be,  a  stone  knife  or  |  bone  knife.  Then  he  cuts  it 
into  strips;  and  |  after  it  has  all  been  cut,  he  puts  stones  on  the  fire.  || 

30  After  he  has  done  so,  he  goes  into  the  woods  and  takes  hemlock- 
branches  and  |  much  skunk-cabbage.  He  carries  them  home  and 
puts  them  down  in  his  |  house.  Then  he  takes  a  digguig-stick  and 
digs  a  hole  |  near  the  fire,  two  spans  long  and  |  the  same  width,  and 

35  also  the  same  ||  depth.  As  soon  as  he  has  finished,  he  goes  to  get 
water  with  his  bucket.  |  He  brings  it  and  puts  it  down.  Then  he 
takes  the  tongs  and  picks  up  |  red-hot  stones  and  places  them  in  the 
hole.  |  As  soon  as  there  are  many  stones  in  it,  he  takes  hemlock- 
branches  and  |  places  them  over  the  stones;  and  when  there  are 

40  enough  on  them,  he  spreads  skunk-cabbage  ||  over  the  hemlock- 
branches.  When  this  also  has  been  done,  |  he  takes  cedar-wood 
and  pokes  holes  through  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves.  He  |  takes  the 
skin  that  has  been  cut  into  strips  and  coils  (the  strips)  up  on  the  | 
skunk-cabbage.  When  it  is  all  in  the  hole,  he  takes  more  skunk- 
cabbage  leaves  and  |  spreads  them  over  (the  whole).     When  they  are 

22  Wa,  gil£mese  £wllaweda  plalEmaxs  lae  gexaxes  gaLayowe  q!as 
plElwalex  sExsEk-E£yas.  Wa,  g'tl£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  LalabELalas 
laxes  lEgwIle  qa£wl£lawes  ts!ex£Ide  habEdzEdza£yas.     Wa,  g-ll£mese 

25  £wi£laxs  lae  t!Emx£wida  qa£s  la  wax£wida  qa  hasa  gultaxs  lae 
aaxELalaya.  Wa,  la  LEbEdzots  laxa  ts!ats!Ex"same.  Wa,  la 
ax£edxes  kleLEnxe  laxes  gwexsdEmganEma  lo£  tlesxa  lo 
xaxxa  k'lawaya,.  Wa,  la  bEX£edEq  qa  t  lelts  teq !  astowes.  Wa, 
gil£mese  £w!£we1x'sexs  lae  xExuLEntsa  t lessme  laxes  lEgwIle.     Wa, 

30  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  laxa  aLle  qa£s  ax£edexaaxa  qlwaxe  LE£wa 
qlenEme  klaoklwa.  Wa,  g-axe  gEmxElaq,  qa£s  gEmxahles  laxes 
gokwe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tsloyayaxa  LEX'sEme  qa£s  £lap!allle  laxa 
maginwalisases  Isgwile  malplEnk'as  £wasgEmase  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana£yex,  wa,  la  heEmxat!    £wadzExtowe;  wa  la  heEmxat! 

35  £walabEtale.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  tsex£Idxa  £wape  yisa  naga- 
ts!e.  Wa,  g-axe  hang'alllaq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  k!ipL&laa  qa£s  k'!ip!l- 
des  laxa  x-ix-ixsEmala  tlesEm  qa£s  la  k!ipts!alas  laxa  £labEkwe. 
Wa,  g'll£mese  q!ets!axa  t!esEinaxs  lae  ax£edxa  qlwaxe  qa£s  ts!a- 
x-£alodes  laxatlesEme.     Wa,  la  helalaxs  lae    ax£ed  laxa  k"!aok!we 

40  qa£s  la  LEpEyints  laxa  qlwaxe.  Wa,  gil£Einxaawise  gwalExs  lae 
&x£edxa  k!wa£xLawe  qa£s  LlEiiqEmsoles  laxa  k"!aok!we.  Wa,  le 
ax£edxa  t  lelts  !Eq  lastowe  pEsk'ena  qa£s  la  qlElxuyhidalas  laxa 
k-!aok!we.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wilts!axs  lae  ax£edxa  k'!aok!we  qa£s 
LEpEyindales   laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  la  wakuxs    lae    ax£edxa  k!wa£x- 


boas]  RECIPES  445 

thickly  covered,  he  takes  a  piece  of  j|  cedar-wood  and  pokes  holes  in  45 
the  middle  of  the  top  of  the  skunk-cabbage.     When  |  the  holes  have 
been  made,  he  takes  the  bucket  of  water  and  pours  it  into  the  |  hole 
over  the  skunk-cabbage ;  and  when  he  thinks  the  water  is  enough ,  he  | 
takes  one  leaf  of  skunk-cabbage  and  puts  it  over  the  place  where  he 
poured  |  the  water  in.     Finally  he  covers  it  over  with  soil.     This  is 
done  in  the  evening  |j  when   the  skin  is  boiled  underground.     He  50 
leaves  it  in  there  during  the  night.  |  In  the  morning,  when  day  comes, 
he  digs  it  up.     Immediately  |  he  invites  some  one  to  eat  it  with  him 
while  it  is  still  hot;  for  it  is  tender  |  while  it  is  hot,  but  it  gets  tough 
when  it  gets  cold:  therefore  |  it  is  eaten  right  away.     This  is  called 
"eating  skin  steamed  underground."  ||  After  they  have  eaten  the  55 
skin,  they  go  home.  | 

Boiled  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — Now  also  boiled  fresh  |  mountain-  1 
goat  meat.     The  meat  from  the  hind-leg  of  the  |  mountain-goat  is 
taken  and  cut  into  pieces.     After  this  has  been  done,  the  man  takes  | 
the  kettle  and  puts  the  meat  into  it.     He  pours  some  ||  water  into  it;  5 
and  when  the  meat  is  covered,  he  puts  it  over  the  fire.  |  As  soon  as  it 
boils  up,  the  boded  blood  floats  on  the  liquid,  |  and  all  the  guests  take 
the  spoons  and  skim  off  the  boded  blood,  |  and  they  eat  it  with  spoons. 
They  only  stop  skimming  it  off  when  it  is  finished.     It  does  not  | 
bod  a  very  long  time,  before  the  kettle  is  taken  off  [|  of  the  fire.     Short  10 
boards  are  taken  and  put  down  by  |  the  side  of  the  kettle  in  which  the 


Lawe  qa£s  LlEnxsodes  lax  nEqEya£yasa  k-!aok!we.  Wa,  gil£mese  45 
laxsaxs  lae  ax'edxa  £wabEts!ala  nagatsUl  qa£s  guxstodes  lax  kwa- 
xiiya£yasa  k!aok!we.  Wa,  giPmese  kotax  heleda  £wapaxs  lae 
ax£edxa  £nEmxsa  k!aok!wa  qa£s  le  LEpstots  laxa  guxstodaasasesa 
£wape.  Wa,  lawesLe  dzEmkiyintsa  dzsqwa  laqexa  la  dzaqwa 
laxes  kunsasErwe  pEskena.  Wa,  la£me  hexsii  gwaelxa  ganuLg.  50 
Wa,  g'iPmese  £nax£Idxa  gaalaxs  lae  lap!EqodEcf.  Wa,  hex£Ida- 
£mese  Le£!alaxes  ha£motLaqexs  he£mae  ales  ts!Elqwe  yixs  tElqwaaxs 
he£mae  ales  tslfilqwe.  Wa,  la  plesaxs  lae  £wudEx£Ida,  lag  lias 
hex-£idaEin  ha£mx£ItsE£wa.  Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  kunek"  pEskcne. 
Wa,    g'd£mese    gwala    pEspiisaxa    pEsk'enaxs    lae  na£nakwa.  5.5 

Boiled  Mountain-Goat  Meat. — Wa,  he£mesa  hanxLaakwe  geta  £iiie1-  j 
£niElq !Ega£ya.  Wa,  la  ax£etsE£vva  gayole  lax  alEmxLa£yasa  £mElx- 
Lowe  qa£s  sEsExusEntsE£we.  Wa,  gi!£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax'edxa 
hanxLanowe.  Wii,  lii  axtslotsa  Eldze  laq.  Wa,  la  guqlEqasa 
£wape  laq.  Wii,  gil£mese  tlEpEyaxs  )ae  hanxLEnts  laxes  lEgwde.  5 
Wa,  gil£mese  maEindElq !waxs  gaxae  pExwaLa£ye  ts!ex-as.  Wa,  lii 
S,x£ededa  Le£lanEmaxa  k'ak'Etstenaqe  qa£s  lii  tsegolaxa  ts!ex'g 
qa£s  £yos£ideq.  Wa,  al£mese  gwrd  tsegolaxs  lae£  wl£la.  Wa,  k-  !est  !a 
alaEm  gegtlll  maEmdElqidaxs  lae  hanx'sanoweda  hanx-Lanowe  laxa 
lEgwlle.     Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda  ts!ats!Exusame  qa£s  pax£alelEme  laxa  10 


446  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

12  mountain-goat  meat  has  been  cooked.  (The  host)  takes  the  |  tongs, 
takes  the  boiled  meat  out  (of  the  kettle)  and  |  places  it  on  the  short 
boards.     When  it  is  all  out  of  the  kettle,  |  he  takes  long,  narrow 

15  roof-boards    and   places   them   in  front   of  ||  the  guests.     These  are 
called   "things  on  which  to  place  the  meat."      He  |  picks  up  the 
cooked  meat  and  places  it  in  front  of  each  |  man.     When  every  one 
has  a  piece,  they  begin  to  eat;  and  |  after  they  finish,  they  go  out. 
They  never  drink  |  cold  water  with  tins  while  they  are  in  the  f easting- 
house.     That  is  all  about  this.  || 
1       Porpoise. — As  soon  as    (the  hunter)   arrives  on  the  beach  of  his 
house,  |  he  himself  pulls  the  porpoises  out  of  his  little  canoe,  |  and  he 
places  them  the  head  landward.     He  takes  out  the  two  mats  on 
which  he  and  the  steersman  were  sitting,  and  |  everything  that  was 
5  in  his  hunting-canoe.  ||  As  soon  as  everything  is  out,  he  washes  the 
canoe,  so  that  all  the  blood  |  is  out;  and  when  it  is  clean  inside,  he 
carries  it  up  the  beach  and  |  puts  it  down  above  high-water  mark.  | 
After  eating,  lie  takes  his  butcher-knife   and  |  goes  to  the  place 

10  where  the  porpoises  are  lying  on  the  beach.  He  cuts  off  the  ||  tail 
and  puts  it  down  on  the  beach;  and  he  cuts  the  back  of  the  head 
down  to  |  the  joint  of  the  jaws;  and  he  cuts,  beginning  from  the 
mouth  |  towards  the  place  which  he  has  cut  along  the  sides  of  the 
head.     Then  he  twists  |  the  head  off,  but  the  lower  jaws  are  left  on 


11  maginwalllasa  £mElqe£lats  !e  hanxxanowa.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  ts!es- 
Lala  qa£s  lEx£widexa  hanxxaakwe  £mEl£mElq!Ega£ya  qa-s  la  lEgti- 
tslodalas  laxa  ts!ats!axusame.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wl£ldlts  !axs  lae 
ax£edxa  gilt!adzowe  ts!eq!a  saokwa  qa£s  la  pax£alllaq  lax  l!jIsex- 

15  dzama£yasa  k!wele.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  yagudzowe.  Wa,  la 
dagililaxa  Llope  Eldza  qa£s  la  gklzolllas  lax  nenExdzama£yasa  be- 
bEgwanEme.  Wa,  g-il£mese  qlwalxogEms  lae  q!Es£eda.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  hoquwElsa.  Wa,  laEinxae  hewaxaEm  nax£IdEx 
wuda£sta  £wapa  laxes  wawasElelase.  Wa,  laEmxae  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Porpoise. — Wa,  g11£mese  lag'alis  lax  L!Ema£isases  gokwaxs  lae 
hex,£idaEm  q!iilexs£Em  nex£ultalaxa  k!olot!e  laxes  xwaxwagiime 
qa£s  aLEtogwaliseq.  Wa,  la  mOltodxes  k!wek!wa£ye  leEl£wa£ya  LE£wis 
k!waxLa£ye  he£mesa  £naxwa  g'ex'gaxs  laxes  alewasELEla  xwaxwa- 
5  guma.  Wa,  g11£mese  £wlloltaxs  lae  ts!oxugmdEq  qa  £wllawesa 
Elx"£Elguxse.  Wa,  Egil£mese  la  eg'ExsExs  lae  LElLElbEndEq  qa  las 
ha£nes  laxa  aLa£yasa  yaxumutasa  £walase  yExwa. 

Wa,  g  il£mese  gwal  LlExwaxs  lae  ax£edxes  sExux-a  k'lawaya  qa£s 
la  laxa  yaxyigwedzasasa  k!ek!olot!e.     Wa,  la  tlosodEX  kitslExs- 

10  da£yas  qa£s  gigaliseq.  Wa,  la  t!os£edEx  6xLaataeyas  £walabalaxa 
oxLa£yas  q!wayosas.  Wa,  la  gagiLEla  lax  sEmsasexs  lae  t!os£edEq 
lalaa  laxa  wiilba£yasa  t  !osa£yas  lax  ewan5lxawa£yas.  Wa,  la  sElpOd- 
xa    x'otas.      Wa,  laLa    axala£me   bEnk-!odExsta£yas    laxa  oklwina- 


boas]  RECIPES  447 

the  body  |  of  the  porpoise.     He  puts  the  porpoise  down  on  its  belly 
and  cuts  ||  into  the  right  side  on  the  back  of  the  neck,  down  along  the  15 
right  side  of  the  |  dorsal  fin.     When  he  reaches  the  meat,  he  cuts 
under  the  |  blubber;  and  when  he  reaches  the  end  of  the  |  ribs  and 
the  breast-bone,  he  cuts  through  the  cartilage.  |  Then  he  pulls  it  open 
and  spreads  it  out.     Now  the  ||  butchered  porpoise  is  spread  open.  20 
He  takes  out  the  kidney  and  the  tongue,  |  the  lungs,   and  liver. 
Often  the  stomach  is  also  taken.  |  He  throws  the  intestines  into  the 
sea.  I  He  gives  head  and  tail  to  the  steersman,  for  |  that  he  receives 
for  steering.     Then  the  hunter  cuts  up  the  ||  tongue,  kidney,  liver,  25 
and  stomach,  and  |  puts  them  into  a  kettle.    He  cuts  off  four  strips  | 
one  finger  wide  of  the  |  blubberfromthebackof  the  porpoise  all  theway 
down  to  the  root  of  the  tail.  |  These  pieces  are  one  span  in  length.  ||  He  30 
puts  them  into  the  kettle  and  there  is  fat  on  them.     He  pours  in 
some  I  water.     Now  they  are  covered  with  water.     Then  he  puts  them 
on  the  I  fire  of  the  house,  and  they  are  called  "boiled  insides."  |  After 
they  have  been  boiling  for  a  long  time,  they  are  done.  Then  the  hunter  | 
calls  his  fellow-hunters,  and  also  the  steersman,  to  come  and  eat  the 
boiled  insides.  ||  When  they  are  in  the  house,  he  gives  to  each  two  35 


£yasa    k"!5lote.      Wa,    la    kax£wahsxa     klolotlaxs     lae    bEx£edEx  15 
helk'!ot!EXLaata£yasa     k'lolotle     la    hexsdEndalas    helk lot  tendalax 
Laga£yas.     Wa,  giPmese  lagae   bExa£yas   laxa  Eldzaxs  lae  saple- 
dEX    xiidzas.      Wa,    gil£mese    lagae    sapa£yas    lax    tEltElxuba£ya 
gElEmas  LE£wa  haqlwayax  lae  bEx£edxa  tEltElxuba£ye.     Wa,  la£me 
aEm  la  gElx£IdEq  qa£s  £wa£waxsaakwe.     Wa,  laEni  £yil£Ideda  £yimEl-  20 
kwe  k"!olot!a.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  galgene,  wa,  hec"mis  klilEmas,  wa, 
hemis  kwaxwas,  lo£    tlewanas.     Wa,  la    qlunala    ax£etsE£wa  tslEs- 
gunwa£yas.     Wa,  la    tslExstEndxa   tslEyimas  laxa  dEmsxe  £wapa. 
Wa,  la  tslasa    x-6ta    LE£wa    kits!Exsda£ye  laxes  k!waxLa£ye  qaxs 
he£mae  k!waxLayanEin.     Wa,  laLeda  ale£wInoxu  sESExusEndxa  k' !i-  25 
lEine  LE£wa  galgene  LE£wa  t!ewana,  wa,  he£misa  ts  !Esgunwa£ye  qa£s 
axts  lodes  laxa    hanxxanowe.     Wa,    la    sEx£wIdxa    motslaqe    £nal- 
£nEmdEndzayaakwe  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  yix  awadzEwasasa 
xudze  g-ag-iLEla  lax  oxLaata£yasa  k'lolotle  la  hexsdEndala  laq.    Wa, 
la  £nal£nEmp lEnke  awasgEmasas  laxEns  qwaq!waxts!ana£yex.     Wa,  30 
la  axts  lots    laxa    hanxxanowe   qa  tslExolEms.     Wa,  la,  guq  lEqasa 
£wape    laq.     Wa,  laEm    tlEpEyalaxa    £wapaxs    lae    hanxxano  laxa 
lEgwilasa  golnve.      Wa,   heEm  LegadEs    yax-yigiltagi£laku.      Wa, 
gil£mese  gegilll  maEmdElqulaxs  lae  Llopa.     Wa,  lada  alewinoxwe 
Le£lala  esElewinoxute  qa  g'axes  yaxyigilg-a  LE£wis  k!wek!waxLa£ye.  35 
Wa,  g11£mese    £wPlaeLEXs    lae    yax£wItso£sa    maemaltslaqe    xudza. 


448 


ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL 


36  strips  of  blubber,  |  and  after  it  the  boiled  insides.  First  the  |  boiled 
insides  are  eaten.  Then  they  mix  them  with  blubber  and  chew 
them  together.  |  After  they  have  eaten,  they  go  out  and  wash  their 
hands  in  their  |  houses.     That  is  all  about  this.  || 

40  Only  the  steersman  boils  the  head  and  the  |  tail  of  the  porpoise  for 
his  friends,  the  steersmen  of  the  other  |  hunters;  for  the  steersmen 
never  change.  |  They  just  take  off  the  blubber  from 
the  head.  When  it  is  all  off,  |  they  cut  it  in  strips  and 
put  the  (strips)  into  the  kettle.      (The  steersman)  || 

45  cuts    the    tail  in    pieces,  cutting   in   this    manner: 
He  puts  |  the  pieces  into  the  kettle  and  pours  water 
into  it.     When  |  it  is  half  full  of  water,  he  puts  it  on  the  fire;  and  | 
after  it  has  boiled  for  a  long  time,  he  takes  the  kettle  off  the  fire.  | 

50  Then  it  is  done.  Then  he  takes  it  out  and  puts  it  on  ||  short  boards. 
He  does  in  the  same  way  as  he  does  when  eating  |  boiled  insides  [when 
they  eat  it];  and  (the  guests)  just  go  out  of  the  house  at  once  |  after 
eating;  and  they  wash  their  hands  in  their 
houses.  | 

After  the  butchered  porpoise  has  been 
in  the  house  for  one  night,  |  they  cut  it 
to  pieces.      (The  hunter)  cuts  off  the  blub- 

55  ber;  and  when  ||  it  is  off,  it  is  in  this  way: 

He  cuts  it  crosswise  and  places  it  on  the  fire.   |   If  he  intends  to 


40 


36  Wa,  la  makileda  yaxyig'Ilaq.  Wa,  heEm  g'il  q!Es£ItsE£wa  yax- 
yig'Ile.  Wa,  la  mas£itsa  xudze  laq.  Wa,  la  mamElegoq.  Wa, 
glPmese  £wl£laxs  lae  hoquwElsa.  Wa,  al£mese  ts  Isnts  !Enx£wId  laxes 
gig'okwe.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Lexa£ma  k!waxLa£yaxs  ogwaqa£mae  sakwllaxes  x-ota  LEEwa 
k  its!r.xsda£ye  qaes  £ne£nEm5kwe,  yix  k!wek!waxLa£yasa  waokwe 
T'sElewInoxwa  qaxs  k'lesae  iJaiJayokula  k  !wek  !waxLa£yas  yixs 
a£mae  sapodEx  xutsEina£yasa  x'ota.  Wa,  g'il£mese  lawaxs  lae 
xuselax£IdEq    qa£s    axts  lodes    laxa    hanxxanowe.     Wa,  la  sesexu- 

45  sEndxa  kits!Exsda£ye  ga  gwaleg-a  {fig.)  yix  sakwa£yas.  Wa,  la  ax- 
ts  lots  laxa  hanxxanowe.  Wa,  la  guq  lEkasa  £wape  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese 
nelEyax'£Ideda  £wape  laqexs  lae  hanx  LEndEq  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa, 
g"il£mese    la   gegllll    maEmdElqulaxs  lae    h&nx"sano    laxa   lEgwile. 


Wa, 


laEm    Llop 


Wa, 


la    lExwetsE£wa   qa£s    axdzodayuwe    laxa 
50  ts!ats!Exusame  lEgudza.     Wa,  heEm  gwegile  gwegilasasa  qlssaxa 
yaxyigllaxs    lae    qlssaq.     Wa,  la   km    hex£idaEm   hoquwElsExs 
!ae  gwal  q!Esa  qa£s  la  ts '.Ents !Enkwa  laxes  gigokwe. 

Wa,   glPmese  xamaela    £yimElkwe.  k'!5lot!a    laxa  g'okwaxs    lae 

sESExusEntsE£wa.      Wa,    laEm    sapoyEwe    xudzas.      Wa,    g-il£mese 

55  lawaxs  lae  g-a  gwale  g'a  (fig.).     Wa,  lagEgexsEndqexshanxxEnde- 

Laq.     Wa,  g'il£mese  £nEk"aLEq  laxa  x'lx'ixsEmala  t!esEmxs  lae  aF.ni 


boas]  RECIPES  449 

steam  it  on  red-hot  stones,  he  |  spreads  it  out  in  the  way  it  is,  being  57 
cut,  but   not   cut   through.  |  If    it   is    to  be   boiled,  then  it  is  cut 
into   pieces    along   the   lines    marked    in    the    sketch.    |  The   meat 
is  also  cut  into  pieces;  and  when  it  is  all  in  pieces,  ||   the  kettle  is  60 
put  on  the  fire,  water  is  poured    |  into  it,   and    when    it  is   half 
full,  the  cut  pieces  of  meat  are  put  |  into  it.     When  the  meat  is  all 
in,  he  waits  for  the  water  to  boil;  |  and  after  it  has  been  boding  for 
a  long  time,  the  blubber  is  put  in  [  on  top  of  the  meat.     It  does  not 
boil  very  long,  ||  before  it  is  done.     Then  the  kettle  is  taken  off  the  65 
fire;  |  and  then  it  is  done  as  they  do  when  eating  the  boded  insides.  | 
The  oidy  difference  when  it  is  steamed  is,  that  it  is  cut  up  |  after  it  is 
done,  and  also  that  they  put  |  the  pieces  of  meat  and  blubber  in  with 
the  red-hot  stones,  ||  and  they  pour  four  bucketfuls  of  water  over  70 
them.     Then  they  |  put  an  old  mat  over  them  so  as  to  keep  the  steam 
in.     It  does  not  |  take  long  before  (what  is  in  the  kettle)  is  done; 
and  they  also  do  |  the  same  as  they  do  when  eating  boiled  insides. 
This  is  oidy  eaten  when  it  is  |  hot.     When  it  is  cold,  they  throw  it 
away.  ||  That  is  all  about  this.  |  75 


LEplalots  laxes  laena£ye  bEXEkwa.     Wa,  la  k!es  hayimxs£a.     Wa,  57 
g  il£mese  h&nxLaakuxs   lae  hayimx-s£a   nEgElEnexa  xwexuldEkwe. 
Wa,  laxae  sEsExusEntsE£we  Eldzas.     Wa,  gih'mese  £wPwe1x'sexs  lae 
hanxLEndayuweda  hanxxanowe  laxa  lEgwile.     Wa,  lit  giixtsloyowa  60 
fwape  laq.     Wii,  gil£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  axstonowa  sag  ikwe 
Eldze  laq.     Wa,  g'llemese  ewldastaxs  lae  esElasoe  qa  mEdElx^wldes. 
Wa,    het!a    la    gegilll    maEmdElqulaxs   lae   sestanowa    xiidze    lax 
okiiyacyasa  Eldze.     Wa,    k!est!a  xEiiLEla    gegihl    maEmdElqulaxs 
lae    Llopa.     Wa,  laEm  h&nxsEndayoweda  hanxLano  laxa  lEgwile.  65 
Wa,  la  ;xEm  nEgEltowe  gwegilasasa  qlEsaxa  yaxyigilaxs  lae  q!Esfe- 
dEq.     Wa,  lex-aemes  ogu£qalayosa  £nEg'ikwra    al£mae  hayimxs^End 
sEsExusEntsoxs    lae  Llopa.     Wa,   hefmesexs  £nEmax£Ida£mae   ax£a- 
lodayo    laxa    xIxixsEmala    tlesEma    sEsExusaakwe     Eldze    LE^wa 
xudze.     Wa,  la   tsas^etsosa  mowexxa  nagatsle   £waj>a.     Wa,  la  na-  70 
seItsosa  k'!rik-!obane  qa  k'leses  k"Exusaleda  k'lalEla.     Wa,  k!est!a 
alaEm   gEyaxs  lae   Llopa.      Wa,    aEmxaawise    naqEmgiltax    gwe- 
gilasasa    qlEsaxa    yaxyigile.      Wa,    la    lexaEm    haemapdEmqexs 
tslElqwae.     Wa,   giPmese    wudEx-£idExs  lae    a,Em  k'ladaya.     Wa, 
laEm  gwal  laxeq.  ^^ 


70052—21—35  eth— pt  1 29 


450 


ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL 


These  are  the  names  belonging  to  the  hotly  of  the  porpoise:- 


1.  Head. 

2.  Eyes. 

3.  Blow-hole. 

4.  Mouth. 

5.  Chin. 

G.  Jaw-bone. 

7.  Collar-bone. 

8.  Place  for  cutting 

off  head. 

9.  Occiput. 

10.  Ear. 

11.  Tongue. 

12.  Fins. 

13.  Backbone. 

14.  Ribs. 


15.  Breast-hone. 

1C>.  Spine. 

17.  Kidney. 

18.  Liver. 

19.  Lungs. 

20.  Windpipe. 

21.  Diaphragm. 

22.  Milt. 

23.  Gall. 

24.  Stomach. 

25.  Intestines. 

26.  Belly. 

27.  Bladder. 

28.  Rectum. 

29.  Heart. 


30.  Dorsal  fin. 

31.  Side  of  back  part 

of  dorsal  fin. 

32.  Place  for  butcher- 

ing. 

33.  Tad. 

34.  Small  of  hack. 

35.  Side-. 

36.  Cheeks. 

37.  Flukes. 

38.  Place    for    cutting 

oil'  tad. 

39.  Nipples. 

40.  Blubber. 

41.  Meat. 


This  is  the  number  of  the  names  of  the  body  of  the  porpoise. 


\Y;i.  g-aemes  LeLEgEms  ogwida'yasa  k"!olot!e: — 


1.  x'ota. 

2.  gEyagEs. 

3.  k'E£was. 

4.  SEU1S. 

5.  6xLasx'a£ye. 


15.  haqlwayo. 

16.  dogwil. 

17.  galgene. 

18.  tlewana. 

19.  kwaxwa. 


6.  wEyoq !uxxasx'aeye.    20.  pEts!Exa£we. 

7.  hanasxa£waeye.  21.  sael. 


8.  qag'asxa  x'ota. 

9.  oxLaata£ye. 

10.  hoLagalas. 

11.  k-lilEm. 

12.  bftsbEle. 

13.  hamomo. 

14.  gElganodze. 


22.  tsalayo. 

23.  tEx'Jnas. 

24.  tslEsgwEwe. 

25.  tslEyim. 

26.  tsk-!e. 

27.  texatsle. 
2s.  awage. 


29.  paxwa. 

30.  Lag"aeye. 

31.  ewanots  lExsde. 

32.  eyimlas. 

33.  kitslExsde. 

34.  awagoLe. 

35.  &wanodze£. 

36.  awanoLEine-. 

37.  plewayoxsde. 

38.  tsEkodaas. 

39.  dzEmdzEmxulas. 
4(1.  xudz. 

41.  mas.  Eldz. 


Wii,  heEin  ewaxe  LeLEgEmas  ogwida'yasa  k'!6lot!e. 


boas]  RECIPES  451 

Seal  Butchering. — As1  soon  as  (the  seal-hunter)  arrives  on  the  beach,  1 
he  brings  |  his  hunting-canoe  sideways  to  the  beach.     Then  he  pulls 
out  the  [  hair-seals  so  that  they  remain  in  shallow  water,  for  |  gen- 
erally the  hunter  comes  home  at  high  tide.  ||  When  they  are  all  out,  5 
he  washes  his  hunting-canoe.  |  When  it  is  clean,  he  and  his  steersman 
carry  it   up  and  |  put  it  down  above  the  line  of  the  spring  tide. 
After  |  eating,   he  goes  down  to   the  beach,   takes  |  another  small 
canoe,  and  goes  to  get  driftwood  to  singe  off  the  hair  of  the  ||  seal  and  10 
to  steam  it.     When  the  little  canoe  is  full,  |  he  goes  home.     As  soon 
as  he  arrives  on  the  |  beach,  he  unloads  the  driftwood  that  he  has 
gathered;  and  when  it  is  |  all  out,  he  takes  two  logs  and  puts  them 
down  on  the  beach.  |  These  are  two  spans  apart.  ||  They  are  the  side-  15 
pieces  of  the  fire  on  which  the  seal  is  singed.     Then  he  |  splits  dry 
driftwood  and  makes  a  fire  on  the  beach.     As  soon  as  it  |  begins  to 
burn,  he  hauls  up  the  seal  and  lays  it  across  with  the  |  head  on  the 
seaward  side-piece,  for  the  head  and  neck  are  singed  first.  |  When  all 
the  hair  of  the  head  and  neck  ||  has  been  singed  off,  he  turns  it  over  20 
and  singes  the  hair  on  the  back  of  the  head.     He  |  shoves  it  forward, 
and  keeps  on  rolling  it  over.     When  he  comes  to  the  |  flippers,  he 
takes  the  tongs  and  spreads  out  the  flippers  |  so  that  the  fire  reaches 


Seal    Butchering. — Wii,1  gil'mese  lag'alis  laxa  L!Ema£isaxs  lae  ge-  1 
galisases  alewasELEla  laxa  L!Ema£ise.     Wa,  la   nexEmoltodxa  me- 
gwate     qa     he£mes     niEkumstalisa    dEmsxe    £wapa    qaxs     hemE- 
nala£mae     wawElgEmexs     gaxae     na£nakwa    esElewenoxwe.     Wa, 
gil£mese    '"widoltaxs  lae  tsoxug  indxes    alewasELEla   xwaxwaguma.  5 
Wa,  gilnnese  egigaxs  lae  LElLElbEndEq  LE£wis  k!waxLa£ye  qa£s  la 
hangallsas    lax    aLa£yasa  £ya£xumotasa   £walase  £yixwa.     Wa,    g'il- 
£mese  gwal  LlExwaxs  lae    lEnts!es  laxa  L!Ema£ise  qaes    la.    ax£edxa 
ogii£la£me  xwaxwaguma  qa's  lii  qlexaxa  q'.exala  qa£s  ts!ExclEmaxes 
megwate.     Wa,  he^mis  qa's  qloldEmaq.     Wa,  gih'mese  qot!e  xwa-  10 
xwagiimas  lae  na'"naku  laxes  gokwe.      Wa,  giPmese  lagalis  laxes 
L!Ema£ise   lae    hex"£idaEm    moltodxes    q!exanEme.      Wa,    gib'mese 
£wPloltaxs  lae  ax£edxa  £malts!aqe  qa£s  katEmgallses  laxa  L!Ema£ise. 
Wa,  lit  Emalp!Enk"  laxsns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  awalagolidza- 
sas.     Wa,   lieEm   kak'EdEnwIltsa  ts!ExdEmaxa  megwate.     Wii,  la  15 
mEnmEiidzExsEndxa    lEmxwe    qlexalaxs    lae   lEgwesa.      Wa,    gil- 
•mese  x'lqostaxs    lae    nex£usdesxa   megwate    qa£s    la    galotEyindes 
xotiis  laxa  L!asa£ye  xwalEnwa£ya    qaxs  hae  gil  tslExasose  xotas 
LE£wes  cjloqlone'".     Wa,  gil£mese  ewFla  tslEnkwe  x-otas  LE£we  q!5- 
qloniixs   lae   lex£IdEq  qa£s  ts!EX£Idex  oxLaata£yas.     Wa,  la  wegu-  20 
Enaktilaq  waxdzala  lexi£lalaq.     Wa,  gil£mese  lag'ae  ts!Ex-a£yas  lax 
gElq!ayasexs  lae  ax£edxa    ts!esLala    qa£s    klwetales    laxa  gElqlayo 
qa  lalagodesa   x'lqEla  lax  awagawa£yas    LE'wa  ewanodza£yasa  me- 

>  Continued  from  p.  17S,  line  9. 


452  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

the  folds  and  the  sides  of  the  seal.  |  As  soon  as  the  flippers  have  been 

25  singed,  he  strikes  them  ||  with  the  tongs  until  the  singed  off  (hair) 
comes  off.1  .  .  .  Then  |  he  pushes  it  ahead  and  turns  it  over;  and  as 
soon  as  he  passes  the  middle,  |  he  pulls  it  off  the  fire  for  singeing  on 
the  beach.  He  turns  it  the  other  way,  and  |  takes  a  split  cedar- 
stick    and    lays    it    across    the    hind-flipper    so    as    to  |  spread    it 

30  open,  in  this  way,  and  _pppp^  he  does  the  same  with  the  ||  other 
hind-flipper.  When  Vvi_Yy  t'1*s  *s  d°ne>  ne  Puts  **  I  backward 
on  the  fire,  so  that  \\\  //  the  hind-flippers  are  over  the  fire  for 
singeing.  When  |  all  \  /  the  hair  has  been  singed  off,  he  pushes 
it  backward  and  rolls     q,  it  around;  and  when  |  he  comes  up 

to   the   place  where      ^  it    had   been   singed    before,  in    the 

middle,  he  rolls  it  from  the  |  fire  for  singeing.     Now  he  is  through 

35  with  the  singeing.  ||  Then  he  takes  a  short  board  to  cut  open  the  seal. 
He  lays  it  down  by  the  |  side  of  the  seal.  He  takes  a  short  block  of  | 
driftwood  one  span  in  diameter  |  and  lays  it  crosswise  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  cutting-board.  |   He  takes  another  block  of  driftwood  of 

40  the  same  length,  a  little  ||  less  in  diameter  than  the  first  one,  and  puts 
it  down  at  the  upper  end  of  the  cutting-  |  board.  He  puts  it  cross- 
wise so  as  to  keep  the  |  cutting-board  off  the  beach.  Then  he  takes  a 
dish  and  puts  it  |  under  the  lower  end  of  the  cutting-board,  in  this 


gwate.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£la  tstenkweda  gElqlayaxs  lae  kwexEltsE- 

25  mesats!esLala  laxa  la,  tslEnkwaqa  lawalesa  ts!ax-mote. '  .  .  .  Wa, 
la  wi£xuwklEq  qa£s  lex  Flaleq.  Wa,  g'il£mese  hayaqax  nEgoya£ya- 
sexs  lae  nexsEiidEq  laxa  ts!ExdEma  lEgvvesa.  Wa,  lit  xwel£edEq  qa£s 
ax£edexa  x5kwe  k!wa£xLawa.  Wa,  la  kit  lets  laxa  dzek!waya  qa 
dzedExales  ga  gwalega  (Jig.).     Wa,  laxae  heEin  gwex£idxa  apsol- 

30  tsedza£ye  dzekhvaya.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  k'laxxEnts  qa 
nEXLalesa  dzek!wayowe  laxa  tslEX'dEma  lEgwIsa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
£wPla  ts!Ex£IdExs  lae  wIexuw!dEq  qa£s  lex-fIdeq.  Wit,  gfl£mese  la- 
g-ae  ts!Exa£yas  laxa  ts!EX-a£ye  laxa  nEgoya'yaxs  lae  lexs£EndEq  laxa 
tslExdEma  lEgvvisa.     Wa,  laEm  gwala    laxes  ts!Enena£ye.     Wa,  la 

35  ax£edxa  ts!ats!ExusEine  £yimEldzoxa  megwate  qa£s  pax£aliseq  laxa 
maginodzelesasa  megwate.  Wa,  iii  Tix£edxa  ts!Exustowe  tEmg-iku 
qlexalaxa  £iiEmp!Enxsawas  £wagidas  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex 
qa£s  gayaabodes  lax  ek!Eba£yasa  eylmEldzowe  ts!ats!ExusEma.  Wa, 
la  ax£edxa  hemaxat!  £wasgEme  tEmgiku   qlexala.     Wa,  la  wawila- 

40  lagawesa  g  ilxde  ga£yaabolidzEms  laxa  ek'!Eba£yasa  £yimEldzowe 
ts  !ats  !ExusEma.  Wa,  la  ga£yaabolisas  laxa  bEnba£ye  qa  waesesa 
£yimEldzowe  ts!ats!ExusEma.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  loq!we  qa£s  k'aabodes 
laxa  bsnba£yasa  £yimEldzowe  ts!ats!ExusEina  ga  gwaleg-a    (fig.). 

1  Continued  on  p.  607,  line9,  to  p.  608,  line  14. 


453 

This  dish  serves  to  let  the 
into  it.  ||  Then  he  takes  45 
and  puts  it  on  the  board 
head  |  towards  the  beach, 
lower  end  of  the  cutting- 
Then  he  takes  his  butcher- 
makes  a  cut  under  the 
the  seal  down  to  the 
He  |  cuts  along  each  side  of  the  tongue  and  pulls  it 
out.  Then  he  cuts  around  ||  the  neck;  and  when  he  has  cut  all  50 
around  it,  he  turns  the  |  seal  over  so  that  it  lies  on  its  belly,  and  cuts 
the  back  of  the  neck  towards  |  the  hind-flippers.  The  cut  goes 
between  the  right  hind-flipper  |  and  the  tail.  When  his  cut  passes 
through  the  |  blubber,  he  cuts  under  it  towards  the  ||  belly  of  the  55 
seal.  The  shoulder-blade  and  the  fore-flipper  remain  |  with  the 
blubber.  When  he  reaches  the  cartilage  between  |  the  ribs  and 
the  lower  end  of  the  breast-bone,  |  he  cuts  through  along  it.  He  fol- 
lows along  and  cuts  open  the  |  belly.  Then  the  blood  begins  to  run 
into  the  dish.  Then  ||  he  takes  hold  of  the  tongue  and  pulls  at  it  60 
while  he  cuts  with  his  butcher-knife  |  underneath  the  windpipe,  and 
pulls  at  it,  cutting  towards  the  |  lower  end  of  the  hair-seal,  and  cutting 
under  the  backbone  and  the  diaphragm  and  |  the  kidneys.  He  cuts 
all  this  off  with  the  intestines,  |  liver,  and  stomach.     When  he  reaches 

Wa,  laEm  k'akalasa  loqlwe  qa  ts!asxuts!alatsa  Elkwa.  Wa,  la 
dag'llisxa  megwate  qa£s  lii  yagiidzots  laq.  Wa  laEin  Llastala  45 
laxa  L!Eina£ise  lax  bEnba£yasa  £yiniEldzowe  ts!ats!ExusEma.  Wa, 
lit  ax£edxes  sEx"xii  k!awaya.  Wa,  he£mis  g'il  bEx£ets5£se  axLas- 
xa£yasa  megwate  lagaa  laxa  wuq  !Exawa£yas.  Wa,  la  bebE- 
xEnodzEiidEX  k'!ilEmas  qaes  gElxEviqodeq.  Wa,  la  tlotsEstalax 
oxawaeyas.  Wa,  gil£mese  la£sta  t!osa£yasexs  lae  iex£idxa  me-  50 
gwate  qa  liExwaLElIsexs  lae  t>EX£edEX  oxLaata£yas  guyolEla 
lax  dzeklwayas.  Wii,  la  naqodalax  helk!otsedza'ye  dzeklwayas 
LE£wa  L!odzayoxsda£ye.  Wii,  g11£mese  lax-sawe  bExa£yas  laxa 
xudzaxs  lae  sap!edEq.  Wa,  laEm  gwagwaacje  sapa£yas  lax 
tEk'Iiisa  megwate.  Wa,  la  kliidEdzoya  LacjliidEne  LE£wa  gElqlayowe  55 
liixa  xudzas.  Wa,  glPmese  lag-ae  sapa£yas  lax  &WElgawa£yas  tEl- 
tElxba£yasa  gElEme  lo£  tEltElxba£yas  ek"!Eba£yasa  xaqasa  haqlwa- 
yaxs  lae  nEgElEnd  bEbExsEndEq.  Wa,  hebEnda£mese  la  £yiml£IdEX 
tEk'  !as.  AVii,  he£mis  la  tsaxuts lalatsa  Elkwa  laxa  loq  !wa.  Wa,  la  lieEm 
gil  dax£Its6se  k'  !ilEmas  qa£s  nexaleqexs  lae  bExases  sExux-a  k'  !awayo  60 
lax  awabiVj^asa  pets  !Exawa£yas.  Wii ,  lii  nexax'axsiimq  guyolElas  lax 
bEnba£}Tasa  megwataxs  bExaax  awabo£yasa  dogwele  LE£wa  saele  lo£ 
awabti£yasa  galgene.  Wii,  laEm  £wl£la  axalacj  EE£wa  ts  lEyime  LE£wa 
tlewana  LE£wa   poxunse.     Wii,    giPmese    lagaa    laxa    awana£yasa 


454  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

65  the  lower  end  of  the  ||  intestines,  he  cuts  thorn  off.  He  takes  a  basket 
and  puts  |  it  down  close  to  where  he  butchered  the  seal.  He  takes 
the  j  guts  and  throws  them  into  the  basket.  Then  he  |  carries  (the 
basket)  down  to  the  beach,  and  he  also  carries  his  butcher-  |  knife. 

70  Then  he  first  cuts  off  the  tongue  and  puts  it  down.  ||  He  cuts  off  the 
heart  and  the  lungs.  He  |  cuts  off  the  liver  and  kidney,  and  cuts  off 
the  gall  and  the  |  milt,  and  throws  them  away.  Then  he  cuts  off  the 
upper  end  of  the  intestines  j  from  the  stomach.  He  cuts  along  them 
so  as  to  stretch  them  out  the  whole  length.  |  As  soon  as  they  arc 

75  opened  out,  lie  squeezes  out  wdiat  is  inside  of  the  intestines;  ||  and 
when  they  are  empty,  he  puts  them  down.  |  Then  he  does  the  same 
with  the  stomach.  As  soon  as  it  is  empty,  |  he  takes  a  basket  and 
washes  it  out.  He  does  not  |  wash  the  blood  off  the  tongue,  the 
kidneys,  lungs,  |  and  liver,  for  it  is  said  that  the  blood  gives  it  a  good 

80  taste.  Then  ||  he  puts  all  into  a  basket.  He  washes  the  empty 
intestines  |  and  throws  them  on  top  of  the  insides  that  are  in  the 
basket,  and  also  the  stomach.  |  He  carries  (the  basket)  up  the  beach, 
and  puts  it  down  |  by  the  side  of  the  fire.     He  takes  a  kettle  and 

85  places  it  j  by  the  side  of  the  fire,  and  he  takes  a  cutting-board  ||  and 
puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  basket  with  the  insides  in  it.  |  Then  he 


65  ts!Eyimaxs  lae  bExsEiidEq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  lKxa£ye  qa£s  lii  hanga- 
lisas  lax  maginodzelisases  £yimlasE£we  megwata.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa 
yaxwigile  qa£s  lii  lsxtslots  laxa  yaxyigi£lats!e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la 
lEntsles  laxa  LlEma£ise  k'loqtilaq.  Wa,  laEm  dalaEinxes  sEx'xii 
klawaya.     Wa,  he£mis    gll    tlosoyoseda    k'lilEme  qa£s   geg'alises. 

To  Wii,  la  etled  tlosodxa  £mEk!uba£ye  LF/wa  kwaxwa.  Wa,  la  etled 
tlosodxa  tlewana  i.E£wa  galgene.  Wa,  lii  t  losodxa  tEX'mase  LE£wa 
tsalayo  qa£s  tslEx£ede.  Wa.  lii  tlosodEx  awana£yasa  tslEyime 
laxa  poxunse.  Wa,  lii  bEXElEneq  qa  dal£Ides  liixes  £wasgEmase. 
Wa,  gilemese  la  dElkuxs  lae  xixidedEcj    qa  £wI£lolts!awes  gits!a- 

75  waq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  EwIelolts !awe  g'ltslawaqexs  lae  lExallsaq. 
Wii,  la  hcEinxat!  gwex-£idxa  poxunse.  Wa,  g'll^Emxaawise  £wI£lol- 
ts!fi.we  getslawaqexs  lae  ax£edxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  ts  !6xusEmdeq.  Wa  laLa 
kMes  ts'.oxodEx  Elkwasa  k'lilEme  LF/wa  galgene  LE£wa  kwaxwa  le- 
£wa  tlewana  epixs  hemaaEl  egimses  Elkwaxs  axillae  laq.     Wii,  laEm 

80  axtslots  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa,  laxa  ts!ox£wklxa  xigikwe  tslEyima  qa£s 
lEqEyindes  laxa  la  g'ets  !axa  yaxvig'i£lats!e  lExa£va  i,E£wa  poxunse. 
Wa,  la  k- !ox£usdesElaq  laxa  i.!i:ma£ise  qaes  lii  hang'ahlag  lax  ma- 
g'inwalisases  lEgwIle.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  hanxLanowe  qaes  hangall- 
les  laxa  maginwalllases   lEgwIle.     Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  sagudzowe  ts!a- 

85  ts!axusEma  qa£s  pax£aliles  laxa  maginwalTlasa  yaxvigl£lats!e  1e- 
xa£ya.     Wa,  la  axwultslodxa  poxunse  qa£s  la  gexas  laxa  onegwi- 


boas]  RECIPES  455 

takes  out  the  stomach  and  puts  it  in  the  corner  |  of  the  house.     He  87 
goes  back  and  sits  down  by  the  basket,  |  takes  his  butcher-knife,  and 
takes  out  the  tongue,  |  places  it  on  the  cutting-board,  and  cuts  it  into 
two  ||  pieces  lengthwise.     He  cuts  each  half  in  two  |  lengthwise  and  90 
puts  the  pieces  into  the  kettle.     He  also  takes  out  |  the  kidneys,  puts 
them  on  the  cutting-board,  |  and  does  the  same  to  them.     He  cuts 
each  into  four  pieces  lengthwise.  |  He  takes  out  the  liver,  places  it  || 
on  his  cutting-board,  and  cuts  it  into  pieces,  |  each  strip  one  finger-  95 
width  wide  is  the  width  of  the  |  cut  liver.     When  it  is  all  cut  up, 
he  throws  it  into  the  |  kettle;  and  he  takes  the  lungs,  puts  them  on 
the  |  cutting-board,  and  he  cuts  off  the  heart  ||  and  cuts  it  into  four  100 
pieces,  which  he  puts  into  the  kettle;  and  he  cuts  the  |  lungs  in  the 
same  way  as  lie  cut  the  liver,  |  and  puts  it  into  the  kettle.     He  takes 
the  intestines  |  and  makes  a  braid  of  them,  beginning  to  pull  through 
one  end  [I  |  shall  send  you  a  thread  to  show  how  the  gut  is  braided]. 
When  ||  the  intestines  are  four  fingers  long,  |  he  cuts  them  off;  and  5 
he  does  the  same  to  the  rest.   |    He  makes  them  into  braids  of  the  same 
length,  and  throws  them  into  the  kettle.  |  Then  he  pours  water  on; 
and  when  it  shows  over  the  insides,  |  he.  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire. 


ases  gokwe.      Wa,  la  aedaaqa  qaes  la  klwanolilaxa   lsxa'ye.     Wa,  87 
la  diix-Idxes    sex"x'&    k'lawaya.     Wa,  laxae    dolts lodxa    klilF.me 
qa£s  g'edzollles  laxa  sagudzowe  ts  !ats !axusEma.     Wa,  lasExusEnd  qa 
maltsles  laxes  gfldolase.     Wii,  laxae  maltstendxa  apsodile  laxaaxes  90 
gildolase  qaes  axts!odes  laxa  hfinx-Lanowe.     Wa,  laxae  axwiiltslod- 
xa  galgene.     Wa,    laxae   gldzots   laxa   sagudzowe    ts  !ats  !axusEma. 
Wa,     heEmxaawise    gwex'IdF.q     maemox"sendEq     laxes    g  ildolase 
laxa   -nal-nEme.     Wii,    laxae   axwtilts  !5dxa  tlewana  qa£s   gldzSdes 
laxes  sagudzowe   ts !ats !axusEma.     Wa,  la   sESE£xusEndEq   qa  *nai-  95 
£nEindEne  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!anaeyex   yix    awadzF.wasasa  t!ewa- 
naxs   lae   sagikwa.     Wii,  g  il£mese  ewFwe1xsexs  lae  axtslots    laxa 
hanxLanowe.      Wii,    laxae    axJedxa    kwaxwa    qa£s    axdzodes    laxa 
sagudzowe  ts!ats!axusEma.     Wa,  lii    sakodxa   £mEk!iiba£ye.      Wa, 
moxusEndEq  qass  axts!odes  laxa  hanxLanowe.     Wa,  laxae  sEsaJxu-  100 
sEndxa   kwaxwa    laxes   gwex£idansaxa    tlewanaxs    lae   sEX£w!dEq. 
Wii,  laxae  axtslots    laxa   hanx'Lanowe.     Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  tslEyime 
qa£s  q!al£edeq  qa  q!Elkwes  laxes  aeneEm  nexsalax  obaEyas.      (He- 
laxs^EmLEiiLas  gwiilasasa  tslEyimaxs   lae  qtelkwa.)     Wii,  g'iPmese 
modEn  laxEiis  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,ylx  -wasgEmasasa  qlElkwe  ts!E-  5 
yimxs  lae  tlotslEiitlEq.    Wii,  laxae  etledxa  waokwe.  Wa,  la  he£staEm 
awasgEma  qlElkwe  tslEyima. .    Wit,  lii  axtslots  laxa  h&nx'Lanowe. 
Wii,    lii  giiq!Eqasa  fwape!aq.     Wa,  gil'mese   tlEpEyaxs    lae  hanx-- 
LEnts     laxes    lsgwlle.      Wa,  lii    lEntsles    laxa    LlEma£ise    dalaxes 


456  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  ss 

10  Then  he  goes  down  to  the  beach,  carrying  his  ||  butcher-knife,  to  the 
place  where  he  left  the  singed  seal.  He  cuts  off  |  a  strip  one  finger 
wide  of  the  |  blubber,  beginning  at  the  neck  of  the  seal,  |  and  follow- 
ing the  line  where  he  cut  it  open  down  to  the  back;  and  when  it  comes 
off,  |  he  carries  it  up;  and  he  also  takes  up  the  dish  of  blood.     Then 

15  he  coils  the  ||  blubber  on  the  cutting-board  and  cuts  it  into  pieces  | 
four  finger-widths  in  length.  After  |  the  insides  have  been  boiling 
quite  a  while,  he  puts  the  blubber  into  the  water.  |  He  takes  another 
kettle  and  washes  it  out.     When  |  it  is  clean,  he  pours  water  into  it 

20  until  it  is  half  full.  ||  Then  he  puts  it  on  the  fire.  He  takes  some  water 
and  pours  it  into  the  |  blood  in  the  dish.  He  stirs  it;  and  when  it  is 
well  mixed,  lie  pours  |  it  into  the  water  in  the  new  kettle  that  he  put 
on,  |  and  he  stirs  it  again.     He  watches  it  closely.  |  He  stirs  it  for 

25  awhile,  and  looks  at  the  end  of  his  stirrer.  ||  When  the  blood  changes 
color,  he  takes  it  off  |  the  fire.  He  does  not  let  it  bod  up.  Then  the 
"blood-soup"  is  done,  |  for  that  is  its  name.  An  expert  |  cook  boils 
the  soup  this  way.     If  he  is  inexperienced,  he  lets  it  boil  up.  |  Then 

30  it  is  cooked  too  much,  and  the  ||  boiled  blood  goes  down,  and  there  is 
only  water  on  top.  |  If  the  cook  is  experienced,  it  is  thick.  When  it  is 
done,  he  takes  the  kettle  |  off  the  fire,  and  lie  also  takes  off  the  kettle 


10  sExuxa  k!awaya  lax  axfisasa  tstenkwe  megwata.  Wit,  la  dEne- 
kodxa  £nEmdEne  laxEns  q  !waq  Iwax'ts  !ana£yex  yix  £wadzEwasasa 
xiidze.  Wa,  laEm  gag  ileIS  dEnek-a£yas  lax  oxawa£yasa  megwate  la 
mag  ilEne  £yimlase  laq  qa£s  la  hexsdEndalaq.  Wa,  gil£mese  lawiixs 
lae  dalaq.      Wa,  he£mesa  Elxuts!ala  loq!wa  qa£s   la  qlElodzolIlaxa 

15  xudze  laxa  sagudzowe  tsats!axusEina.  Wa,  la  sEsExusEndEq  qa 
modEnes  awasgEmasas  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!;ma£yex.  Wii,  het!a  la 
gegilll  maEmdElqfdeda  yaxyig  ilaxs  lae  axstEntsa  xudze  laq.  Wa, 
la  ax£edxa  6gu£la  hanxLanowa  qa£s  ts!oxugindeq.  Wa,  giPmese 
egigaxs  lae  guxtslotsa  £wape  laq  qa   nEgoyoxsdallsexs  lae  hanx-- 

20  LEnts  laxa  lEgwIle.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £wape  qafs  gtiq!Eqes  laxa 
lExuts!ala  Elkwa  qa£s  xwetledeq.  Wa,  gil£mese  lElgoxs  lae  guq!E- 
qas  laxa  £wabEts!awasa  ale  hanx'LEndayos  hanxxanowa.  Wa, 
laxae  xwetledEq.  Wa,  la£mese  fdaklala  la  q!aq!alalaq.  Wa,  la- 
naxwa   yawaseid   xwetledEq  qa£s  dox£w!dex  oba£yases  xwedayowe. 

25  Wa,  gil£mese  k!exuwkleda  Elkwaxs  lae  hex-£idaEm  hanxsEiidEq 
laxes  lEgwIle.  Wa,  laEm  hewiixa  mEdElx£widExs  laa  Llopa  e1xu- 
stagi£lakwa  qaxs  he£mae  LegEmse.  Wa,  heEm  gwegilatsa  egil- 
wate  Elxustag'i£lakwa.  Waxida  £yag11wate,  la  helq!alaq  mEdF.lx- 
£wida.       Wa,     hex,£ida£mese    q!6ltse£sta.     Wa,    laEm     hex,£ida£ma 

30  iJope  Elku  la  £wl£la  £wuns£Ida.  Wii,  .Vines  la  q!okuyaleda  £wape, 
waxida  egllwate  la  gEnk-a.  Wa,  g-il£mese  L!opExs  lae  hanx-sa- 
noweda  hanxLanowe  laxa  lEgwile.     Wii,  laxae  hanx'sF.ndxa  yax'yi- 


boas]  RECIPES  457 

with  the  |  insides.     He  takes  a  short  board  |  and  puts  it  down  by 
the  side  of  the  kettle  containing  the  insides.  ||  Then  he  takes  his  tongs  35 
and  lifts  out  the  insides.     He  |  puts  them  on  the  board.     When  they 
are  all  there,  he  takes  |  the  board  and  puts  it  on  a  long  split  cedar- 
board,  which  he  |  lays  down  in  front  of  those  who   are  to  eat  the 
insides  (of  the  seal).  |  After  this  has  been  done,  he  sits  down  by  the 
side  of  the  board.     He  takes  a  ||  piece  of  blubber,  and  a  piece  of  the  40 
tongue,  |  kidney,    liver,  |  lungs,    heart,    and  |  also    a    piece    of    the 
braided  intestines.     He  does  |  in  the  same  way  for  all  of  those  who 
are  to  eat  the  insides.  ||  As  soon  as  he  has  put  down  a  number  equal  45 
to  that  of  the  |  men,  he  takes  up  the  boards  and  puts  them  in  front 
of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  insides.  |  Then  he  puts  them  down.     As 
soon  as  they  are  all  there,  |  he  takes  spoons  and  gives  them  to  those 
who  are  to  eat  |  the  insides;  and  he  carries  the  kettle  with  boded 
blood  ||  and  puts  it  down  in  front  of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  "blood-  50 
soup,"  for  |  that  is  its  name.     Then  they  eat  the  insides,  |  and  they 
eat  with  spoons  the  soup.     Generally  they  |  eat  with  spoons  both  the 
blood-soup  and  insides.  |  As  soon   as  they  have  eaten,  they  go  out. 
Only  ||  chiefs   are  invited  to  eat  the  insides  of  seals.     Generally  |  55 
blood-soup  is  given  with  it.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

gili£lats!e  hanxxanowa.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  lEgiidzowe  ts !ats !ax"sEme  33 
qaes   pax£allleq    lax    maginwalllasa   yaxyiglli£lats!e   h&nxLanowa. 
Wa,  la   ax£edxes    ts!esLala   qa£s    lEx£w!dexa   yaxyig  lie  qa£s  la  1e-  35 
giidzots  laxa  lEgiidzowe.     Wii,  gil£mese  £wI£ladzodExs  lae  ax£edxa 
yagiidzowe  gildEdzo  ts!eq!adzo  lat!aaku  khvagEdzo  saokwa  qa£s  la 
paxdzamolllas    laxa    yax'yigllgiLaxa   yaxyigile.       Wa,    gil£mese 
gwal£alilExs  lae  kliinxElIlaxa  lEgiidzowe.     Wii,  ax£edxa  £nEints!aqe 
xiidza    LE£wa   £nEme    gayol    laxa    k' lilEine     LE£wa    gayole    laxa  40 
galgene   LE£wa    £nEme    g'ayol   laxa   t!ewana    LE£wa    £nEine    gayol 
laxa   kwaxwa   LE£wa    £nEme   gayol    laxa    £niEk!iiba£ye.      Wii,  he- 
£misa  £nEints!aqe   laxa  qlElkwe  tslEyima.     Wii,  la,   £naxwa  Em  he 
gwiile  ax£alelEmas  qaeda  waokwe  yaxyigilgElxa  yaxyigTle.    Wa, 
giPmese  q IwalxogEmalole  ax£alelEmas  lax  £wiixaasasa  bebEgwiinE-  45 
maxs  lae  diigihlaq  qa£s  lii    axdzamollhisa    yaxyigile  laxa  q!EsiiLa. 
Wa,  laEm   g'edzolllElas  laxa   yagudzowe.     Wii,  gihmese   £wllgall- 
Iexs  lae    ax£edxa   kalcEts!Enaqe  qa£s    kas£ide-s  laxa   yaxyigllgE- 
Laxa  yaxj^igile.     Wii,  lii  kloqiilllxa  Elxustagi£lats!e  hanxLanowa 
qa£s   !a   hanxdzamolllas    laxa  ElxU£axuLaxa    Elxustagi£lakwe    qaxs  50 
he£mae  LegEmse.     Wii,  laxda£xwe   q!Es£Idxa  yaxyigile.     Wa,   la- 
naxwe  £yos£Id  laxa  Elx"stagi£lakwe.     Wa,  la  he£mEnalaEm  £wa£wi- 
laa  £yos£Idxa    Elx"stag'i£lakwaxs    LE£wa    yaxyigilaxs  yax-yigilae. 
Wii,  glPmese  £wl£laqexs  lae  hoquwElsa  yixs   lex'a£maeda   g'lg'iga- 
ma£ye  Le£lalaso  qa  lii  gilgEsEX  yaxyigilasa  megwate.     Wa,  la£masa  55 
Elxustagi£lakwe  laq.     Wa,  laEin  gwal  hixeq. 


458 


ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL 


[KTII.  ANN.  35 


57      The  blubber  of  the  hair- 
seal  is  cut  after  the  manner 

of  this  sketch  of  a  seal. 

If  there  are  from  four  to 

ten  seals,   and  when    ]    a 

seal-feast  is  given  to  not  very  many  people,  then  the  blubber  is  cut| 
60  the  whole  length  of   the    seal.     When  there  are  from  eighty  to  a 

hundred,  |  they  give  a  feast  of  blubber  to  many  tribes.     That  is  a 

great  seal-feast.  |  Then  they  cut  off  the  blubber  from  the  meat  (as  in 

skinning  deer).  |  Itis  spread  open, 

and  the  blubber  is  cut  from  one 

end  to  the  other,  in  this  way: 
1  and  2,  the  hind-flippers,  are 

given    to    the    young    chiefs; 
65  3   and   4,   the   fore-flippers,   are 

given    to    the   next   ones;  ]  and 

the    chest    (5)    is   given  to    the 

head  chiefs.    |    The    long    strips    of    blubber    are    given    to    the    | 

common   people.     As    soon   as   a    |   man  receives   a  long  strip   of 
70  blubber,  he  stands  up  in  the  house,  ||  takes  it  and  puts  it  around 

lus    neck,    and   at   once    he    bites   the   blubber    |    from    the   skin, 

and  bolts  it,  for  they  try  to  cat  quickly  the  |  blubber  of  the  skin; 

and  when  they  have  swallowed  all  the  blubber,  |  they  throw  away 

the  skin  and  ask  for  another   |   long  strip  of  blubber;    and  when 
75  it  is  given  to   them,   they  ||  put   it    around    the   neck,    and   they 


57  G'aEm  gwalaats  xusela£ye  laxa  megwate  g'ada  megwatbolak  k'  !ata- 
£ya  (fig.)  yixs  m5sgEmaeda  megwate  loxs  nEqasgEma£e  yixs  sakwl- 
lasE£wae  qaeda  k'lese  q!enEm  bebEgwanEma.      Wa,  laxa  hayolise 

60  xuselacyasa  megwataxs  malgunaltsEmgusta£e   lox  lak!Endae,  yixs 

dokiillLaxa  qleiiEm    lelqwalaLa£ya.      Wa,   heEm    swalas    sakwelexa 

megwate.     Wa,  aemese  sapoyEwe  xusEna£yasa  megwate  laxes  Eldze. 

Wa,  la,  LEp  lalidzEma  qaes  hayimbEnde  xfiselasE£wagag\valega  (fig.). 

Wa,  laEm  yaq!wemasa  aio£sta  gigigama£ya  (!)  lo£   (2)  xa  dze- 

65  k!wayowe.  Wa,  he£mis  yaqlwemasa  makiliiqe  (:>)  lo£  (4)  gElqla- 
yowe.  Wa,  he£mis  yaqlwemasa  xamagEina^ye  g'Igigama£ya  (5) 
haqhvayowe.  Wa,  la  yax£wida}^oweda  g  ilsgilstowe  xuse£laku  laxa 
bebEgwfuiEmq  ialame.  Wa,  heemaaxs  lae  yax£witsi:£\va  ena,l£nEmokwe 
bEgwanEmsa  gilsg  ilstowe  xiiselakwa,  wii,  la  hex£idaEm  Laxeulila 

70  qa£s  dax£ideq  qa£s  qEnxodes.  Wii,  lii  hex,£idaEm  q  tekalaxa  xudze 
laxa  k!udzega£ye  cja£s  mEkeq  laxes  hahanakwap!aena£yaq!Ek-alaxa 
xiidze  laxa  k!udzega£ye.  Wa,  giPmese  £wl£hiwe  xudzaxs  lae  ts!E- 
xalilxa  k!tidzega£ye  qa£s  etlede.  dak'.'ala  qa£s  yax£witsE£wasa 
g'ilsgilstowe    xuse£lakwa.     Wa,   gil£mese  yax£w!tsE£waxs  lae  et!ed 

75  qEiix5ts.     Wa,  laxae   et!ed    qlEkalaxa    xudze    qa£s  mEk'eq.     Wa, 


boas]  RECIPES  459 

again  bite  off  the  blubber  and  bolt  it.  |  Those  who  are  experts  can  76 
eat  six  long  strips  of  blubber.  |  Then  they  have  enough;  and  (who- 
ever does  that)  is  proud  of  having  eaten  so  much,  for  he  is  |  an 
expert.  Not  even-body  is  expert  at  bolting  it;  |  but  the  chiefs  do 
not  eat  fast,  as  they  eat  the  limbs.  This  ||  is  called  "feast  of  long  80 
strips  of  blubber."  It  is  the  great  feast  |  given  of  many  seals.  When 
it  is  done,  they  go  out.  |  Then  those  who  have  bolted  the  seal  go 
and  wash  themselves,  for  they  are  quite  |  covered  with  oil,  because 
they  had  the  blubber  around  the  neck.     That  is  |  all  about  this.  || 

Seals  are  also  boiled  with  stones  in  the  same  way  as  |  horse-clams  85 
are  boiled.     The  only  difference  is,  that  they  do  not  dig  a  hole  |  for 
heating  the  stones  when  steaming  the  seal.     When  the  fire  is  lighted 
under  it,  |  and  it  has  burned  out,  (the  owner)  calls  some  men  of  his 
numaym  |   to  bring  many  oil-boxes.     They  ||  put  them  down  by  the  90 
side  of  the  heated  stones,  so  that  the}-  stand  close  together,  |  in  this 
way.1    When  this  is  done,  they  take  large  buckets  |  and  go  to  draw 
water.    The  man  pours  it  into  the  oil-boxes.  |  When  they  are  less  than 
half  full,  lie  stops.    Then  he  takes  the  long  |  tongs,  sometimes  four,  and 
he  takes  one  ||  mat  for  each  oil-box.    When  these  are  all  |  ready  and  the  95 
stones  are  red-hot,  the  |  young  men  of  his  numaym  take  the  tongs, 

leda  egllwate  £naPnF.mp!Ena  q!EL!Ets!axk!Esxa  gilsgilstowe  xtise-  76 
£lakuxs  lae  polJida.  Wa,  la  LEmqe  naqa£yasexs  q!ek'!Esaexa  egll- 
wate  qaxs  k"!esae  Enaxwa  eg'ilwata  bEgwanEme  mEkaq.  Wa, 
lai.eda  glg1gama£ye  ex-im  haEyalag'ilJl  qlF.saxa  LasLala.  Wa,  hci.ni 
LegadEs  dokwasEewasa  gilsgilstowe  xuseElakwaxa  £walase  sakwe-  80 
laxa  qlenEme  megwata.  Wit,  gib'mese  gwalExs  lae  hoquwElsa. 
Wa,  hex^ida^mese  la  laestax-da£xweda  memEk"  lenoxwe  qaxs  £niixwa- 
emae  qtelses  5gwldaeye  qaxs  qEnxalaaxa  xwexuse'lakwe.  Wa,  laEm 
gwal  laxeq. 

HeEm  gwale  t  !eqwapa£ye  qa  q!o£lasxa  megwate,  gwalaasasa£nEka-  85 
xa  mEt!anafye.    Lexemes  ogu£qalavosexsk!e^ae£lap£wnlts!Ewakwa 
yix  t!eqwapa£ye  qaq!o£lasxa  megwate.     HeEmaaxs  lae  tsenabEwak". 
Wa,  gilfmese   xiqostaxs  lae   Le£lalaxa    g'ayole  lax  enE£meEmotasa 
sakwelaLaxa  megwate  qa  ax-edesexa  qlenEme  k'!ek!imyaxLa  qafs 
la  niEXElsElas    laxa    maginwalasasa    tleqwabEkwe    qa  mEinkolses  90 
ga  gwalega1.     Wa,  g11£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax'edxes  awawe  naEnga- 
ts!a  qa£s  la  tsa  laxa  £wape  qa£s  la  guxtslalas  laxa  k-!ek!imyaxLi>. 
Wii,  gihmese  bEnk'!olts!exs  lae  gwala.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  gilsgilt!a 
k!ek!ipLalaa,  £nal£nEmp!Enae    motslaqa.     Wa,  he£misa   £nal-'nEme 
1e£w6£  qaetla  £nal£nEmsgEme    k!ek!imyaxLa.     Wa,  gilemese  HvFla  95 
gwalalaxs  lae  memEnltsEmx^ideda  t  lesEmaxs  lae  hex-£ida.Eiu  axsede 
ha'yaT'as  £nE£memotasxa  k!ek!ipLalaa  qafs  k'!ip!ides  laxa  xlxix- 

1  Six  boxes  side  by  side;  opposite'the  middle  of  the'fire,  about  two  feet  away  from  the  Are. 


460  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.  35 

pick  up  the  red-hot  |  stones,  and  throw  them  into  the  water  in  the 
200  oil-boxes.  |  When  the  water  begins  to  boil,  they  take  ||  long  strips  of 
blubber  and  throw  them  into  the  boiling  |  water.  When  the  boxes 
are  nearly  full,  they  take  the  tongs,  |  pick  up  the  red-hot  stones,  and 
put  them  on  top  of  the  |  blubber  that  they  are  steaming.  When  the 
water  is  boiling  hard  |  in  the  oil- boxes,  they  take  the  mats  and  spread 
5  them  ||  over  them, so  that  the  water  dues  not  boil  over.  Then  the  young 
men  leave  them.  |  Afer  the  water  has  been  boiling  a  while,  they  go  to 
look  at  them;  |  and  when  it  stops  boiling,  they  take  off  the  mats  and 
put  them  away.  |  They  take  cutting-boards  and  lay  them  down  back 

10  of  the  I  oil-boxes.  They  take  the  tongs,  and  ||  take  out  the  blubber 
and  place  it  on  the  cutting-boards.  |  When  it  has  all  been  taken 
out,    the  young  men  call  those  who  are  to 

eat  it.  I  .^§^^^^^^1^  I  sP°ke  about  this  on  page  458 
of  this  .<^p||5||§§i§§l§|||^  writing.  |  They  cut  the  blubber 
length-  l\\((f(f//f^^^^^^^^^W\  wise.  When  |  there  are  more  than  a 
hun died  I W^y^^^^^^^^^jJJ]}])     seals,    the}'    cut    it   spirally,    in 

15  this  way:  \§§s§§§^=^^^%^  so  tnat  ^  is  II  one  l°ng  strip  of 
blubber.  ^^S^^S^^Hi^  This  is  done  when  two  rival 
chiefs  try  — "^^S^gi^     to  give  great  seal-feasts  to  out- 

do    each  ^<g^^    other.      Two     |     chiefs    of    one 

tribe    do  \^    this;    and     the     long     strip     is 

given    |  to    the    speaker    of    the     rival 


98  sEmala  tlesEma  qa£s  la  k'lipstalas  laxa  £wfibEts!awasa  k!ek!im- 
yaxLa.  Wii,  gil£mese  £naxwa  la  maEmdElqiilaxs  lae  ax£edxa 
200  g  ilsgilstowe  xiise£lakwa  qa£s  axstEndes  laxa  maEmdElqula 
£wapa.  Wa,  giPmese  Elaq  qotlaxs  lae  &x£edxa  klipLala  qa£s 
k!ip!edes  laxa  xlx  ixsEmala  tlesEma  qa£s  le  klipEyindalas  laxa 
xfise£lakwe  q!olaso£s.  Wa,  gil£mese  alak'Iala  la  maEmdElqula 
£naxweda  k- !ek' limyaxLaxs  lae  ax£edxa  leElwa£ye  qa£s  LEpEjindales 
5  laq  qa  kleses  mEdElx£wultale  £wapaliis.  Wa,  a£mese  la  baweda 
ha£yal£iis.  Wa,  gil£mese  gegils  maEmdElqiilaxs  lae  dox£wklEq. 
Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  mEdElqfilaxs  lae  ax£edxa leElwa£ye  qa£s  gexeq. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  awadzowe  ts!ats!axusEma  pax£aleseq  lax  aLanalisasa 
k'!ek!imyaxLa.     Wa,  laxda£xwe  ax£edxa  k' !ek- !ipLalaa  qa£s  saw5- 

10  £stEndes  laxa  xuse£lakwe,  qa£s  la  sedzodalas  laxa  sedzowe  ts!ats!axu- 
sEma.  Wa,  g'iPmese  £wI£ladzodExs  lae  Le£laleda  ha£yal£axa  q!E- 
saxe.  Wa,  he£mesEn  waldEm  lax  (458)  xsa  k-!adEkwa.  Lae  km 
hayimx'sEiits5£  sEsExusEntsE£wa  laxes  gllddlase.  Wii,  g'il£mese 
hayaqax  lak"  lEndeda  megwataxs,  wa  la  sEx"se£stalasE£wa  ga  gwaleg'a 

15  (Jig.)  qa  gilsgilstowes  xuse£lakwa,  yixs  sakwelaplaeda  £waxsek!Ese 
g'ig-igamesa  £nEmsgEmakwe  lelqwalaLa£ya.  Wa,  he£mis  yax£wlda- 
yoxa    ayilkwasa    apsek'!Ese    glgama£ya    sEnala  giltla  xuse£lakwa 


boas]  RECIPES  461 

chief.    A  whole  length  of  blubber   j    is  coiled  into   the  feast-dish.  18 
Then  they  pour   |   olachen-oil  on  it,   and   place  it  in  front  of   the 
speaker.     Then    he  arises,   ||    takes   one   end  of   the    blubber,   and  20 
puts    it   around   his   neck.    |    He   bites  off   the  blubber  from    the 
singed   skin   and   swallows   it.     If   he    |    is    an    expert   at    bolting 
it,    he    eats   almost   three    |    fathoms    of   blubber.      If   he   is   not 
expert,  he   can   not  |  eat   more    than  one-half  of  a  fathom.     Then 
he  gives  up.      Then    the    speaker  of    the   chief    just    promises    a 
seal-feast.    ||    They  do   not.  cut  the   blubber   spirally    |    to   give   it  25 
to  those  who  do  not  belong  to  the  rival  chief.     They  only  receive 
strips  of  blubber  cut  |  lengthwise,  cut  as  written  on  page  458.  |  They 
also  put  the  blubber  around  their  necks  and  bolt  it.  |  They  do  not 
pour  oil  on  it,  for  they  only  pour  oil  on  the  blubber  given  to  the  || 
speaker  of  the  rival  chief.     As  soon  as  they  finish,  [  they  go  out  and  30 
vomit  all  behind  the  house,  |  for  it  really  makes  one  feel  squeamish. 
After  finishing,   they  wash  themselves  |  in   hot   water    and  urine. 
That  is  all.  | 

Steamed  Seal-Meat. — Steaming  of  seal  and  porpoise  is  done  in  the  1 
same  way,  |  on  heated  stones,   as  clams  are  steamed.  |  The  only 
difference  is  that  |  skunk-cabbage  and  many  hemlock-branches  are 
taken  and  are  put  down  by  the  side  of  the  ||  red-hot  stones.     When    5 
the  coals  are  taken  away  from  the  |  red-hot  stones,  the  hemlock- 

yixs    lae    q!Elxuts!a    laxa    loqulile.     Wa,    he£mis    la    k!uqEyaakusa  18 
L!e£na.     Wa,  g'il£mese   la  kagEmlllEin   laxa  ayilkwaxs    lae   Lfix£u- 
llla    qa£s    dabEndex    oba£yasa  xuse'lakwye  qa£s    qEnxodesexs    lae  20 
qtekalax    xudzas    laxa    k!iidzeg'a£ye  qa£s  mEkeq.     Wa,    gil£niese 
egilwata  he  gweg'ilaxs  lae  halsElaEin    k!es    yuduxup  !Enk"   laxEns 
baxax,  yix  M£maakwas.     Waxa  £yagilwate;  wa,  lak'!es  nEqlEbode 
hamx"£ItsE£wasexs    lae   yax-£ida.     Wa,  a£mese   la    qasa    megwatxa, 
yixa  ayilkwasa  gigama£}Te.     Wa,  laLa   k'!es   sExuse£stalakwe  ylya-  25 
qlwemasa  k!ese  apsaklEtsa  glgama£ye    qaxs  nEqaolisae  sakwa£ya 
gilsgilstowa  xuse£lakwe  he    gwale    sakwa£yasa  k- !adEdza£yax  458. 
Wa,  la,  qEnxodaEmxaasa   xudze.    Wa,  laxae   niEk-aEmxaaq.     Wa, 
la  k!es  k!unq!EgEk"sa  L!e£na  qaxs  lexaEmae  k!unq!EgEkwe  loqulas 
ayilkwasa     apsak'tese     g'igama£ya.      Wa,    g'iFmese     gwatexs     lae  30 
hex'£idaEm    hoquwElsa    qa£s    lii    hox£w!ts    lax    aLana£yases   gokwe 
qaxs  alak'  !alae  ts!Enk!ulEma.     Wa,,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  la£stEx-£Ida 
laxa  q!oltaakwe  £wa,pa  LE'wa  kwatsle.     Wa,  laEm  gwala. 

Steamed    Seal-Meat. —  £nEgiku   megwata;     yixs    he£mae    gwaleda  1 
t  !eqwapa£ye  qa  £nEg-asxa  megwate  LE£wa  k'  !olot  !e  gwiilaasasa  £nEga- 
saxa  mEt!ana£ye.    Wa,  lex-a£mes  oguqalayosexs   lae    axsE£wa  k!E- 
k!aok!wa    LE£wa    q!enEme    q!waxa    qa£s    la    axnolIdzEm    laxa    la 
x,£x  LxsEmala  t  !esEma.    Wa,  g-il£mese  £wI£loqawedagfdtalaxax!xix-    5 
sEmala  t  lesEinxs  lae  ax£etsE£weda  q  !waxe  qa£s  xEs£alodalayiwe  lax 


462  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

7  branches  are  put  |  on  top  of  the  hot  stones;  and  when  there  is  a  thick 
layer,  they  |  spread  the  skunk-cabbage  over  the  hemlock-branches. 
They  stop  when  there  is  |  one  layer.     Then  the  man  takes  the  pieces 

10  of  seal- meat,  ||  places  them  on  the  skunk-cabbage,  and  when  they  are 
all  on,  he  |  takes  sharp  cedar-sticks  and  pokes  holes  in  the  skunk- 
cabbage,  so  that  [  there  are  holes  in  it  for  the  water  and  steam  to 
pass  through.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  strips  of  blubber  | 

15  which  he  has  cut  as  described  on  page  458.  He  spreads  them  ||  over 
the  pieces  of  meat.  After  they  have  been  spread,  he  takes  |  mats 
and  puts  them  down  next  to  the  place  where  he  is  going  to  steam  the 
seals.  |  Each  one  of  four  young  men  takes  a  large  bucket  filled  with 
fresh  water,  |  and  he  pours  it  |  over  the  cut  seal-meat.     Then  other  || 

20  young  men  take  up  the  mats  and  cover  (the  meat)  with  them.  I 
think  |  they  keep  it  there  for  three  hours.  After  this  time  |  it  is 
done.  Now  it  is  done.  Then  they  take  off  the  mat  cover  |  and 
spread  it  that  it  may  get  dry,  and  also  so  that  the  steamed  |  seal  may 

25  cool  off.     Then  they  take  short  boards,  ||  put  them  down,  and  then 
they  do  as  I  described  before.  |  They  put  the    cooked  meat  on  the 
hoards  and  they  eat  it.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1       Seal-Head. — Now  oidy  the  head  is  left,  which  is  given  to  the  steers- 
man |  of  the  seal-hunter.     They  do  not  cut  off  the  head  |  until  the 

7  okuya£yasa  xIxixsEmiila  tlesEina.  Wa,  gil-mese  wakiixs  lae  ax£ed- 
xa  k'Ek!aok!wa  qa£s  LEpEyindales  laxa  qlwaxe.  Wa,  a£mise 
£nEmxdzEkwalaxs  lae  gwala.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  sESExusaakwe    Eldz 

10  qa£s  axdzodes  laxak"!Ek'!aok!wa.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wFladzodExs  lae 
ax£edxa  ex'ba  k!wa£xLawa  qa£s  LlEnxsales  laxa  k!Ek!aok!wa  qa 
kwakwodzEwe  qa  gayimxsalatsa  £wape  LE£wa  klalEla.  Wa,  gtl- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  sEsExusaakwe  xuse£laku  he  gwiile 
sakwa£ya    k!adEdzayax     45S     k"!adEkwa     qa£s    LEpEyindes     laxa 

15  sag  ikwe  ELdza.  Wa,  gilnnese  £wl£la  la  LEpEyexs  lae  ax£edxa 
leEl£wa£ye  qa£s  ax£Elses  lax  inaginwa£yasa£nEkasoLe  megwata.  Wa, 
la  ax£edxa  mosgEme  awa  naEngatsle  qoqutlaxa  £wE£wa'p!Eme 
q IwalxEWEgwesa  mokwe  ha£yiil£a.  Wa,  laxda£xwe  tsadzELEyints 
lax  Gkuya£yasa  sESExusaakwe   megwata.    Wa,  hex£ida£mesa  waokwe 

20  ha£yal£a  dax£Idxa  leEl£wa£ye  qa£s  nas£ides  laq.  Wii,  Ieii  kpotaq 
yuduxuts!agELElagila  laxa  q!aq!alak-!ayaxEns  £naliiqe  £wa£wats!aa- 
sasexs  lae  Llopa.  Wa,  la£me  Llopa.  Wa,  la£me  !et!etsE£wcdanayime 
qa£s  LEplalidzEme  qa  lEmx£wides.  Wa,  he£mis  qa  k-akox£wida- 
lisa £nEgikwe  megwata.     Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda £wadzowe ts !iits !axusE- 

25  ma  qa£s  pax£allseq.    Wa,  a£mes  la  nEgEltodxEn  g'ag'ileye  waldEmaxs 

lae   sedzoyo    laxa   sedzowe   ts!ats!axusEina    lo£xs  lae  q  !Es£etsE£wa. 

Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

1       Seal-Head. — Lex-aEm    leda  xota   yixs  he£mae  k IwaxLa'yaiiEinsa 

k!waxi,a£yasa     hanLlenoxwaxa   megwate,    yixs    al£mae    qax,£itsoxs 


boas]  eecipes  463 

hair  has  been  singed  off.     Then  it  is  given  to  the  steersman.     If  |  3 
there  are  many  seals,  the  hunter  does  not  give  the  head  to  his  | 
steersman,  but  he  pays  him  five  pairs  of  blankets  for  |  one  hundred  5 
seals,  which  are  equal  to  five  dollars;  for  |  the  head  is  always  left  on 
the  body  when  there  are  many  h air-seals.     When  |  they  let  the  chief 
buy  the  seal,  then  the  head  is  cut  off,  and  |  it  is  given  to  the  old 
people,  for  it  is  never  given  with  the  ||  meat  in   a   seal-feast.     The  10 
old  people  just  take  off  the  blubber  of  the  head  |  and  cut  it  into  strips, 
in  this  manner:         #fflnt\       ^  ^s  Just  Put  m^°  a  I  kettle,  water  is 
poured    into   it,     /%OT/I  nllV     ant^  tne  kettle  is  put  on  the  |  fire  of  the 
house.     It  takes  ffly/fl ////  1\\\\  a  l°n&   time   to   boil  it   before   it   is 
done.   |  When   it  ^MjUIxo^  is  done,  the  boiled  head  is  taken  off 
the  fire.  ||  They  take  a  small  dish   and  put   it  down  alongside  of  15 
the  kettle  with  boiled  head.   |  They  take  tongs  and  take  hold  of 
the  |  blubber  of  the  boiled  heads,  and  put  it  into  the  small  dish.  | 
When  it  is  all  in,  they  take  dried  halibut,  break  it  into  pieces,  and 
put  it   into   |   another  small  dish.      Now  it  is  to  be  eaten  with  the 
strips  of  blubber  of  the  ||  boiled  seal-head.     If  there  is  no  dried  hali-  20 
but,  dried  salmon  is  eaten  [  with  it;  and  the  dried  salmon  and  dried 
halibut  are  eaten  with  strips  |  of  blubber  which  is  not  eaten  at  the 
great  seal-feast  which  is  given  when  there  are  many  seals.  |  This  is 

lae   gwal   ts!ExasE£wa  qa£s  la  tstewe  laxa  k!waxxa£ye.     Wii,  gil-  3 
miese   qlenEma  megwataxs   lae  yaxstodzEinsa  hanidenoxwe  laxes 
k!waxLa£ye.     Wii,  aunise  halaqa  visa  sEk-!axsa  p lElxElasgEm  qaeda  5 
lak!Ende  megwata  '"liEmaxis  lo£  sEk'!asgEm  dala,  qaxs  hemEna- 
laemae  axaleda  axotaxs  qlenEmaeda  megwate.     Wii,  gilmiese  layl- 
weda  megwate  laxa  glgama^yaxs  lae  hex'idaEm  qaxnd  qa£s  ts!E- 
£wes  x-otas   laxa  q!ulsq!ulyakwe    qaxs  k!esae    layowenox  laxa  sa- 
kweliixa  megwate.    Wa,  asmesa  q!ulsq!ulyakwe  sapodEx  xutsEma-  10 
£yas  qa5s  xuselaxudeqg-agwalega  (fig.).    Wa,  amies  la  axts!ots  laxa 
h&nx'Lanowe  qac"s  giiqlEqesa  ewape  laqexs  lae   hanxLEnts   lax  1e- 
gwltases    g'okwe.     Wa,   lamiese    gegilll  maEmdElqulaxs  lae  idopa. 
Wa,g"il£mese  LlopExs  lae  hanxsEudxes  xotstagiJlats!e  hanxLanowa. 
Wa,  la  ax'edxa  lalogume  qa°"s  kagallle  laxa  mag  inwalllasa  xotsta-  15 
g'i£lats!e  hanxLanowe.     Wii,  la  ax°"edxa  tslesi.ala  qaes  k"!lp!ides  laxa 
xutsEma£yasa  x'otstag'i'lakwe  qa£s  lii  k'!ipts!ots  kixa  lalogume.   AYii, 
lae  giPmese  ewielaxs  ax£edxa  klawase  qa£s  la,  k'!opts!ots  laxa  ogu- 
Elaeme    laloguma.     Wii,    la-'me    mayimnoxllLEs  laxa    xutsEma'yasa 
xotagi'dakwe.     Wa,  g  il£mes  k!eas  klawatsexs  lae  xamase  mayimas  20 
laq.     Wa,  laxaa  mayima  xamase  p£wa  klawase  laxa  g  ilsgllstowe 
xuse£lakuxs    mamotae  laxa   Ewalase  sakwelaxa    qlenEme  megwata. 


464  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.  ann.  35 

23  called  "eating  seal-heads,"  what  I  am  |  describing  now.  That  is  all 
about  the  seal.  || 
1  Whale.  (A  whale  found  dead  on  the  beach). — When  |  the  hunter 
finds  a  dead  whale,  he  goes  home  to  his  |  house;  and  when  he  comes 
to  the  beach  in  front  of  his  house,  he  stands  |  up  in  the  bow  of  his 
5  small  hunting-canoe  and  promises  ||  a  whale-feast  to  his  people. 
Then  his  people  learn  that  he  has  |  found  a  dead  whale.  He  gives 
to  his  daughter  the  name  Place-of-cutting-Blubber,  for  he  invites  them 
on  her  behalf.  Then  the  tribe  |  make  ready.  They  sharpen  their 
butcher-knives  that  day.  |  In  the  morning,  when  daylight  comes,  the 

10  whole  tribe  launch  their  small  canoes  ||  for  carrying  whale-blubber. 
Their  |  wives  steer  the  canoes  when  they  start.  He  who  |  found  the 
dead  whale  goes  ahead  of  his  tribe.  When  |  they  arrive  at  the  place 
where  the  whale  is  lying,  his  father,  if  he  has  one,  goes  up  to  the  | 
whale  with  the  daughter  of  the  one  who  found  the  whale;  that  is, 

15  with  Place-of-cutting-Blubber.  ||  They  stand  behind  the  neck  of  the 
whale;  and  when  the  |  guests  arrive  at  the  beach  where  the  dead 
whale  lies,  |  his  father  speaks,  and  says,  "O  tribe!  come  and  cut 
the  blubber  of  the  |  salmon  of  Place-of-cutting-Blubber,  for  it  is 
very  fat."     Then  he  speaks  again,  |  calling  the  head  chief  of  the  tribe. 

20  He  says,  "You  shall  have  for  your  dish  ||  the  dorsal  fin,  Chief  Place- 


23  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  xlx-otagaxa  x'otasa  megwate  yixEn  la  waldEma. 
Wii,  laEm  gwal  laxa  megwate. 
1  Whale.  (GwE£yim  yixs  ledzElae  laxa  L!Ema£is). — He£maaxs  lae 
lesEleda  haniJenoxwaq,  wa,  la  hex£ida£mese  la  nii£nakwa  laxes 
gokwe.  Wa,  gil£mese  lagaa  lax  L!Ema£isases  gokwaxs  lae  Lax£u- 
Iexs  lax  agiwa£yases  hanaL!aats!e  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  la  qasa 
5  gWE£yimxa  qaes  gokiilote.  Wa,  laEm  q!al£aLEle  gokulotasexs 
lesElaaxa  gwE£yime.  Wa,  la  Lex£ets  K"!amaxalase  laxes  xuno- 
kwe  qaxs  he£rnae  Le£lalagile.  Wa, hex£ida£mesalelqwalaLa£yexwii- 
naluda.  Wa,  laEm  tlEqaxes  sesExux-a  k- !ak- lEwayaxa  £nala.  Wa, 
g11£mese  £nax-£Idxa  gaalaxs    lae    £wl£la    wi£xustEndeda    lelqw&laLa- 

10  £yaxes  k  '.wayats  leLaxa  gwE£yime  xwaxuxwaguma.  Wii,  la£me 
£wPlaEm  k  !wek  !waxLalaxes  gEgEnEmaxs  lae  alex£wlda.  Wa,  he£mis 
galagiwa£ya  lesElaxa  gwE£yimases  gokulote.  Wa,  gil£mese  lagaa 
lax  yagwidzasasa  gwE£yimaxs  lae  ompas  qo  ayadlaxo  lasgEmexa 
gwE£yime  lo£  xunokwasa  lesEliixa  gwE£yime,  ylx  Klamaxalase  qa£s 

15  la  Laxwala  lax  oxLaata£yasa  gwE£yime.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gax  mExa- 
La£ya  Le£lanEme  lax  LlEma£isa  yagwidzasasa  gwE£ytmaxs  lae  yaqlE- 
g-a£le  ompas,  wa,  la  £neka:  "  Wa,  gelaga  k'  !ex-£idEx  gokulot  laxg-a 
klotElagas  K- lamaxalase,  laEmga  tsEnxwa."  Wa,  la  etse£sta 
xamagEma£ye  gigameses  g'okulote.     Wa, la  £nek-a:"  LaEms  loqlwa- 

20  dEs   nExsEmeLEla   Lag'a£3Te   glgame£    YaqoLas,"     yixs   L!aL!asiqu- 


boas]  RECIPES  465 

of-Property;"  that  is,  if  the  Seaward-Dwellers  |  are  invited.     Then  21 
he  calls  the  common  people.  |  His  tribe  goes  ashore  at  once,  and  they 
stand  at  the  right-hand  side  |  of  the  whale.     They  stand  according  to 
their  seats  |  at  the  feast;  but  Place-of-Property  stands  near  the  dorsal 
fin  ||  of  the  whale.     The  whale  lies  on  its  belly,  and  (the  head  chief)  25 
holds   in   each  hand  |  a  butcher-knife.     He    puts    these    on   the  | 
back  of  the  whale's  neck,  and  measures  one  fathom.  [  Then  he  moves 
backward,  cutting  along  the  two  sides  of  the  whale  |  towards  the 
tail,   back  of  the  dorsal  fin.     Then  he  stops.     The    (people)  ||  cut  30 
around  the  neck  of  the  whale,  beginning  at  the  back  of  the  |  whale's 
head;  and  the  one  next  in  rank  to  Property-Place  cuts  off  a  piece  of 
blubber    half  |  a   fathom    wide,    beginning    at    the    cut    made  |  by 
Property-Place,  downward  to  the  belly  of  the  whale.  |  The  one  next 
in  rank  cuts  a  piece  of  the  same  width,  ||  and  all  the  men  receive  35 
pieces  of  the  same  width  as  they  |  cut  off  the  blubber  crosswise  down- 
ward.    As  soon  as  all  |  the  blubber  is  off,  the  women  |  cut  a  hole  in 
the  thin  side  of  the  whale,  and  cut  off  the  inside  fat.  [  When  it  is  all 
off,  they  put  it  aboard  the  canoes.  ||  Next  they  cut  off  a  piece  of  the  40 
tail  of  the  whale;  |  and  when  it  is  all  off,  they  go  home  to  their 
houses.  |  Then  they  unload  the  blubber  and  put  it  down  above  | 


laeda  LedfuiEine.    Wa,  la  Le£lalaxa  ogwida£ye  gokulots.    Wa,  hex£i-  21 
da£mese  hox£wultowe  gokulotas  qa£s  la  q Iwagalis  lax  helklodEiio- 
dza£yasa  gwE£yime.     Wa,  la  heEm  Lax£walaatses  k'wayaxs  klwelae 
laxa  gokwe,  yixs  laaLe  YaqoLase  Laxwala  lax  HExsEmeLElas  Laga- 
£yasa  gwE£yime.     Wa,  la  he  gwig-Endxa  gwE£yime  laxes  £wax'SEn-  25 
kidaena£yaxa    sESExuxa     k*  !ak"  lEwaya.       Wa,    he£mis    hax£waLEle 
6xLaata£yasa  gwE£yimaxs  lae   baHdxa  £iiEmp!Enke  Mxeiis  b&Laxs 
lae    k!a£nnakula    xuldE£nakiilaxa    nvax  sf>dega£yasa   gwE£yime    la 
hexsdEndala  lax  gwak' lot  !EXLa£yasa  Lag'a£yaxs  lae  £wala.      Wa,  la 
k' !astEntsE£wa    5xawa£yasa  gwE£yime    gagiLEla  lax    oxxaata£yasa  30 
gwE£yime.      Wa,    leda    makilax     YaqoLase  k!ex£Idxa    nEqlEbode 
laxEns  baLax  yixs  £wadzEwasasa  klEyole,  gagiLEla   lax  awunxa- 
£yas  axa£yas  YaqoLase,   babanaaqa   lax    tsklasa   gwE£yime.     Wa, 
laxae    ogwaqeda    makilaq,    heEmxae   £wadzowe    k!ayas.     Wa,    la 
£naxwaEm  he  awadzowe  klayasa  £naxwa  bebEgwanEina  laxes  gE-  35 
gexsalaena£yaxes    k!amaxElasE£we.      Wa,    gil£mese    £naxwa    k"!e- 
kuxs  lae    sapodxa  k'!ek!Ey6le.     Wii,  gih'mese  £wl£laxs  laeda  ts!e- 
daqe  k"!exsodEx    pElnodza£yasa    gwE£yime  qa£s  kex£idex    tsEnx- 
tsEnwIlas.     Wa,  gpil£mese  £wI£lamasExs  lae  moxsaq  laxes  ya£yats!e. 
Wa,    laEinxaawise   £wi£la    k'!ayap!xa     kits!Exsda£yasa    gwE£yime.  40 
Wa,  gil£mese  £wI£loLqexs  lae  na£nakwa  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  hex-£i- 
da£mese    moltodxa   k-!Eyole  qa£s    ax£alisEles   lax    a,La£yasa   £walase 
75052—21—3"!  eth— pt  1 30 


466  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

43  high-water  mark.  After  it  has  all  been  taken  up,  the  man  takes  |  a 
short  hoard  for  cutting  blubber.     He  puts  it  down,  takes  the  blub- 

45  ber,  ||  and  puts  it  on  the  board  to  be  cut.  He  measures  it  so  that  it  is 
cut  in  pieces  four  |  finger-widths  wide.  He  continues  this  the  whole  j 
length  of  the  blubber.  After  a  piece  is  off,  he  |  cuts  it  crosswise,  so 
that  it  is  half  a  finger-width  thick.  |  After  it  lias  all  been  cut  up, he  puts 

50  the  pieces  into  a  kettle  for  boding.  ||  He  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire  on 
the  beach  |  to  try  out  the  od.  He  takes  the  tongs  and  stirs  it,  and  | 
he  continues  stirring  it.  His  wife  takes  a  box  and  |  places  it  by  the 
side  of  the  fire  on  which  the  oil  is  being  tried  out.  She  also  takes  a 
large  shell  of   a  horse-clam.     When  it  bods  up,  she  takes  the  large 

55  clam-shell  ||  and  skims  off  the  whale-oil  and  pours  it  into  the  box.  | 
She  only  stops  when  aU  the  whale-oil  is  off  the  boiled  blubber.  |  Then 
she  takes  a  large  basket,  takes  the  boiled  blubber  |  out  of  the  kettle, 
and  puts  it  into  the  basket.     When  |  it  is  all  in,  she  puts  it  down  in 

60  the  corner  of  the  house.  ||  The  people  also  take  the  od-boxes  at  each 
end  and  another  man  [  puts  them  down  in  the  corner  of  the  house. 
(The  owner's)  wife  |  takes  cedar-bark,  splits  it  into  long  strips,  and  | 
carries  it  to  the  basket  containing  the  boiled  blubber,  next  to  which 
she  sits  down.  |  Then  she  takes  out  one  of  the  pieces  of  boded  blubber, 

05  and  she  ties  it  in  the  middle  with  the  cedar-hark.  ||  She  takes  another 

43  £ya£xumota.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wI£losdesExs  lae  ax£ededa  bEgwanEmaxes 
bExdzowe  ts!ats!a£xusEma  qa£s  pax£aliseq.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  kMEyole 

45  qa£s  pagEdzodes  laxes  bExdzowe.  Wa,  la  mEns£Idxa  modEiie  laxF.ns 
q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  ([a  £wadzEwatsak!Eyolaxs  lae  bEx£edEq  haxE- 
la  lax  £wasgEinasasa  k'lEyole.  Wa,  gil£mese  lawiixs  lae  gEgexsEla 
bEX£edEq  qa  k!ocli:nes  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  yix  wiwogwa- 
sas.      Wa,gil£mese£wi£wElxsExs  lae  axtslots  laxa  sEmg'ats!e  hanx-- 

50  Lanowa.  Wa,  la  hanx'LEnts  laxa  lsgwlse  laxa  LlEma£ise  sEinx'dE- 
maxa  k' lEyole.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tslesLala  qa£s  xwetElga£yes  laq.  Wa, 
lii  liemEnalaF.m  xwetElgeq.  Wa,  la  gEiiEmas  ax£edxa  Lawatsa  qa£s 
ha£nolises  laxa  sEinxxlEma  lsgwisa;  he£misa  £walase  xalaetsa  mEt!a 
na£_ye.     Wa,  g  ihmese  mEdElx£widExs  lae  ax£edxa  £walase   xalaetsa 

55  mEt!ana£ye  qa£s  ax£wldes  laxa  gweklese  cja£s  la  axts!alas  laxa  Lawa- 
tsa. Wa,  la  al£Em  gwfdExs  lae  £wi£ltiweda  gweklese  laxa  sEmyaka- 
wa£ye,  laas  axEedxa  £walase  lExa£ya  cpi£s  ax£wults  lalexa  sEmyak-awa- 
£ye  laxa  hanxxanowe  cja£s  lii  axts'.alas  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa,  giPmese 
£wdts!a  laxa  lExa£yaxs  lae  hanegvvdas  laxa  onegwllases  gokwe.    Wa. 

60  laxae  dadanodxa  gwek!edzats!e  Lawatsa  LE£wa  6gu£lame  bEgwa- 
nEina  qa£s  la  banegwilas  lax  onegwilases  g'okwe.  Wa,  hiLagEHEmas 
ax£edxa  dEnase  (pi's  dzEdzExsEiideq  qa  ts!elts!Eq!as  gilsg-ilsta.  Wa, 
la  dalaci  qa£s  lii  k!wanohlxa  sEmyak'awayaatsIe  lExa£ya.  Wa,  la, 
daltslodxa  £nEints!aqe  sEmyak-awaya  qa£s  mdg'oyotsa  dEnase  laq. 

65  Wa,  la  et!ed  ax£edxa  £iiEme  qa£s  mog-oyodes  lax  ek'leLElas.     Wa,  la 


boas]  EECIPES  4G7 

one  and  ties  it  in  the  middle.  |  She  continues  doing  so,  and  does  not  66 
stop  until  the  |  strips  of  split  cedar-hark  are  all  used  up;  and  when 

it  is  done,  it  is  in  this  way: Now,   |  the  name  of  the  boiled 

blubber  is  changed,  and  it       h       is  called  "tied  in  the  middle."  | 
After  all  this  has  been  done,      2?       she  hangs  up  the  pieces  ||  over  70 
the  fire  of    the   house,  and      £p        evaporates  them  until  they  are 
dry.  I  After  they  have  been  hanging  there  for  one  month,  she 

takes  a  small  kettle  and  |  puts  into  it  one  string  of  blubber  tied  in 
the  middle,  together  with  the  cedar-bark.   |  She  pours  water  on  it; 
and  when  the  water  shows  on  |  top,  she  puts  it  on  the  fire.     After  it 
has  been  boihng  a  long  time,  ||  she  takes  it  off.     She  takes  a  |  small  75 
dish  and  puts  it  down  near  the  kettle  in  which  the  pieces  tied  in  the 
middle  have  been  cooked.  |  She  takes  the  tongs  and  takes  hold  of  the 
boiled  I  pieces  and  puts  them  into  the  small  dish.     After  |  she  lias 
taken  them  all  out  of  the  kettle,  she  tries  to  eat  it  at  once,  ||  while  it  80 
is  still  hot,  for  it  is  tender  whde  it  is  hot,  |  but  it  gets  tough  when  it 
gets  cold.     After  she  has  eaten  enough,  |  she  puts  away  what  is  left ; 
and  when  she  wants  to  eat  more,  she  |  takes  her  kettle,  pours  water 
into  it,  and  puts  it  on  the  |  fire  of  the  house.     When  it  begins  to  boil, 
she  takes  it  off  ||  the  fire.     She  takes  the  cold  pieces  of  blubber  tied  85 
in  the  middle  |  and  places  them  in  the  hot  water;  and  when  she 
thinks  that  they  are   |   hot,  she  takes  them  out  with  her  tongs  and  | 

hanal  he  gwegile.     Wii,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  qlulbeda  gilsgilstowe  66 
dzEXEk"  diinasa.   Wa,  la  g'a  gwalaxs  lae  gwala  (fig.).    Wa,  la£me  l!S- 
yowe  LegEinasa   sEmyakawa£ye  laxeq.     LaEm  LegadEs   momxusE- 
maku    laxeq,    wii  g-il£mese  £wl£la  he  gwex£Idqexs  lae  texustots  lax 
nEqostawases  lEgwIle.     Wa,  la£me  xilaq  qa  lEmx'wides.     Wa,  c-il-  70 
£mese  la   £nEinsgEingllaxa  £mEkuliixs  lae  ax£etsEewa  lmriiEme  qa£s 
axtsloyaeda  £nEints!aqe  momxusEinak\va  Ewi£la  LE£wa   dEnase  laq. 
Wii,   lii   guq!Eqasa   £wape    laq.     Wa,  g'iHmese  nehideda  £wape  lax 
okiiya£yasexs  lae  hanx'LEnts  laxes  lEgwIle.     Wii,  gil£mese   gagegi- 
lllEla  maEindElqulaxs  lae  hex-£idaEm  hanxsEiidEq.     Wii,  la  ax^edxa  75 
lalogiime   qa£s  h&£noliles  lax    maginwahlasa   momxusEmakwe£lats!e 
hanxxana.     Wii,  lii  axeedxa  ts!esLala  qa£s  k'liplldes  laxa  hanxxaa- 
kwe  momxusEma  qa£s  lii  k'!ipts!alas  laxa  lalogume.     Wii,  gil£mese 
£wI£lo£sta  laxa  hanx'Lanowaxs  lae  hex£idaEm  hayalEmk- !a  q !Es£ed- 
qexs    he£mae    ales    tslElqwe    qa£s    tElqwaaxs    tslElqwae.     Wa,    lii  80 
hex,£idaEm  p!es£IdExs  lae  £wudEX£ida.     Wa,  g-d£mese  poh'IdExs  lae 
gexaq  yix  hamxsa£yas.     Wa,  giPmese  et!ed  hamaexsd  laqexs  lae 
ax£edxes  ha£iiEme  qa£s  guxtslodesa  £wape  laq  qa£s  hanxLEndes  lax 
lEgwllases  g'Skwe.      Wa,  gil£mese  mEdElx£w!dExs  lae  hfinx'sEndEq 
laxa   lEgwde.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £wiida  hanxi.aak"  momxusEmakw a  85 
qa£s  axstEndes  laxa  ts!Elxusta  £wapa.     Wii,  gil£mese    kotaq  laEm 
ts!Elx£w!dExs  lae  xwelaqa  k- !ip£wustEntses  ts!esLala  laq  qa£s  xwe- 


468  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAK1UTL  [urn.  ANN.  35 

places  them  in  small  dishes,  and  they  eat  it  |  before  it  gets  cold. 

90  After  she  has  eaten  enough,  ||  she  puts  it  away,  and  she  just  heats  it 
whenever  she  wants  to  eat  of  it.  |  This  is  called  "  eating  boiled  blubber 
tied  in  the  middle." 
1  Boiled  Whale-Tail. — And  this  is  eating  boiled  |  whale-tail  while  it 
is  fresh.  When  the  man  goes  and  takes  |  a  piece  of  the  tail,  he  cuts 
it  in  strips  two  |  finger-widths  thick,  and  he  cuts  it  the  same  length,  || 
5  so  that  the  pieces  are  square.  The  length  of  the  square  is  |  one  span. 
As  soon  as  many  pieces  have  been  cut,  |  the  man  takes  his  kettle  and 
pours  water  into  it.  |  When  it  is  more  than  half  full,  he  puts  it  on  the 
fire  of  his  house;  and  when  |  it  is  on,  he  takes  a  piece  of  blubber  of  the 

10  whale-tail,  ||  and  he  bites  the  end  of  it,  holding  at  the  same  time  the 
opposite  end  and  stretching  it.  |  Now  he  pulls  it;  and  after  he  has 
stretched  it,  |  the  blubber  of  the  whale's  tail  is  two  spans  long.  |  It 
is  now  as  thick  as  the  little  finger.  |  He  does  this  to  all  the  pieces; 

15  and  after  he  has  done  so,  ||  he  waits  for  the  water  to  boil.  When  it 
boils  up,  |  he  takes  the  pieces  one  by  one.  He  takes  the  stretched 
blubber  |  of  the  whale's  tail  and  puts  it  into  the  boiling  water.  |  He 
puts  it  into  it  quickly.     When  the  pieces  are  all  in  the  kettle,  he  takes 

20  the  |  tongs  and  stirs  the  water  quickly.     After  doing  so  ||  he  takes 


88  laqe  k-!ipts!alas  laxa  lalogume.  Wa,  hex,£ida£mese  ha£ya'lo£mala 
q!Es£edqexs  k-!escmae  £wiidEx£Ida.     Wa,  g-il£Einxaawise    pol£IdExs 

90  lae  gexaq.  Wa,  a£mise  ts!Elxuts!Elqwaqexs  ha£maexsdaaq.  Wa, 
heEm  LEgadEs  momxusEmagugExa  hanxxaakwe  momxusEinakwa. 
1  Boiled  Whale-Tail. — He£misa  ts!Ets!asnegaxa  hanxxaakwe  ts!as- 
nesa  gwE£yime,  yix  he£mae  ales  gete.  He£maaxs  lae  ax£eileda 
bEgwaiiEmaxa  gayule  laxa  ts  !asna£ye.  Wii,  la  bEx£edEq  qa  maldEnes 
wagwasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex.  Wit,  la£xae  heEm  £wadzoxs 
5  lae  bEx£edEq  qa  k!EwElx£unes.  Wa,  la  £nEmp!Enk-  laxEns  (|!\\a- 
q!\vax  ts!ana£yex  yix  £wasgEmasas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  qlenEme  bExa- 
£yasexs  lae  ax£edxes  hanx xanowe  qa£s  guxts!odesa  £wape  laq.  Wa, 
la  ek!olts!exs  lae  hanxxEnts  lax  lEgwIlases  gpokwe.  Wa,  gil£mese 
hanxxalaxs  lae  dax£Idxa  £nEmts!aqe  xuse£lakwe  kits!Exsdesa  gwE- 

10  £yime.  Wa,  la  qlExbeqexs  lae  dalax  apsba£yasexs  lae  ts!as£edEq. 
Wa,  laEm  nexaq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  tslasaxs  lae  malplEnke 
laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,  yix  la  £wasgEinatsa  xflse-iakwe  ki- 
ts lExsdesa  gwE£yime.  Wa,  la  yuEin  la  £wagitEns  sElt!axts!ana£yex. 
Wa,  la,  £naxwaEm    he    gwex£Idxa   waSkwe.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£laxs 

15  lae  esEla  qa  mE(lElx£witlesa  £wape.  Wa,  gil£mese  mEdElx£w!dExs 
lae  hex£idaEm  £nal£nEmts!aq!Emka  ax£edxa  tslakwe  xtise£laku 
kits!ExsdesagwE£yimeqa£s  axstales  laxa  maEmdElqula  £wapa.  Wa, 
la  halabalaxs  lae  axstalas.  Wii,  gil£mese£  wl£la£staxs  lae  S.x£edxa 
tslesLala    qa£s    halabale    xwet!edEq.     Wa,    gil£mese    gwalExs    lae 

20  hanx-sEndEq    laxa   lEgwile.     Wa,  la    halabala   gux£edEx    £wapalas 


boas]  EECIPES  469 

the  kettle  off  the  fire  and  pours  off  the  liquid.  |  When  the  water  has  21 
all  been  poured  off,  he  takes  a  small  dish  and  |  places  it  by  the  side 
of  the  kettle  in  which  the  tail-blubber  has  been  cooked.  |  He  takes 
hold  of  the  kettle  on  each  side  and  pours  the  contents  |  into  a  small 
dish.     The  people  eat  it  while  it  is  still  ||  hot;  and  when  they  have  25 
eaten  enough,  they  put  away  the  rest.  |  As  soon  as  the  owner  wants 
to  eat  more,  he  puts  the  kettle  |  over  the  fire  of  the  house;  and  when 
the  water  boils,  |  he  takes  the  kettle  off  the  fire,  and  he  takes  the 
boiled  |  whale-tail  and  puts  it    in;  and  ||  when  he  thinks  that  it  is  30 
warm  enough,  he  takes  it  out  and  eats  it,  |  for  it  is  tender  while  it  is 
warm.     Not    many  tribes  are   invited  |  to  this  food,  for  only  the 
owner  |  eats  the  boiled  whale-tad,  |  but    they  do  not  stretch   the 
blubber  of  the  dorsal  fin  when  they  bod  it.  ||  This  is  cut  in  the  same  35 
way  as  the  tail-blubber  of  the  whale  is  cut,  |  and  after  a  short  time 
it  is  put  into  boiling  water.  |  When  it  is  all  in,  the  kettle  is  taken  off 
the  fire  |  and  the  liquid  is  poured  out.     Then  the  blubber  ]  of  the  dorsal 
fin    of    the     whale   shrivels    up.      When    it   is    done,  the   (woman) 
puts  it  ||  into  a  small  dish.     She  does  not  eat  this  at  once,  for,  |  40 
although  the  blubber  of  the  dorsal  fin  gets  cold,  it  never  |  gets  tougli 
when  it  is  cold :  therefore  she  cooks  much  of  it  at  the  same  time.  | 
When  she  has  eaten  enough  of  the  fin-blubber,  |  she  puts  it  away; 


Wa,  giPmese  cwI£lolts  !awe.  £wapalasexs  lag  ax£edxa  lalogume  qa£s  21 
halabale    kanoldas    laxa    k  its!Exsdegi-lats!e    hanxLanowa.      Wa, 
a-mise   tetEgEnodxa  hanx  Lanowe    qa£s    guxts  lodes   gets!oxude  laq 
laxa    lalogume.      Wa,    laxda£xwe    hex'idaEm    q!Es£Idqexs    he£mae. 
ales  tslElqwe.     Wa,  giPmese  pol'IdExs  lae  gexaxa  waokwe.     Wa.  25 
gil£Emxaawise  et!ed   ha£nv  exsd  laqexs  lae  hanxxEndxes  hanxLa- 
nowe  laxa  lEgwIlases   g'okwe.     Wa,  g  Il£mese   mEdElxcwIde  ewapa- 
sexs  lae  hanxsEndEq  laxa   lEgwIle.     Wa,  la  ax-edxa  hanxxaakwe 
xiise£Iakwe   kits!Exsdesa  gwE£yime  qa£s  axstEiides  laq.     Wa,  gil- 
£mese  kotaqlaEm  ts!Elts!Elq!fixfedExs  lae  ax£wiistEiidEq  qa£s  q!Es£e-  30 
deq,    qa£s   tElqwaaxs    tslElqwae.     Wa,    laEm    k!es    Ledalayo    laxa 
qlenEine    lelqwalaLa£ye  gwexsdEmas  qa£s  lexamaeda   axnogwadas 
hiVmapxes   haEmexsda£ye  xuse£laku  kltslExsdesa   gwE£yime.     Wa, 
laLa  k!es  ts!akwe  xuse£lakwasa  Liig'a£yaxs  ha£mexsffasEewae.     Wa, 
laLa   heEm    gwale   bExa£yase   xttseelakwe    kits!Exsdesa    gwe£yime.  35 
Wa,  liL  Lomax£Td  £iiEmal£IdExs  lae  axstano  laxa  niEdElqida  £wapa. 
Wa,   gll£mese  £wi£la£staxs  lae    xwelaqa  hanxsEndxa  hanxLanowe 
qa£s    gux£Idex    £wapalas.     Wa,  a£mese   la    t!Einkwametaleda   xuse- 
dakwe  LagesagwE£ylmaxslae  Llopa.    Wa,  laEm  Llopayixs  lae  axtslo- 
yo  laxa  lalogume.     Wa,  la£mes  ex'Ein  yalag  ihlExs  lae  hamx£IdEq,  40 
cjaxs  wax£mae  la  £wiideda  xuse£lakwe  Laga£ya.    Wa,  la  hewaxa  p  !es£- 
Jda   lae   £wudEx-£Ida.     Wa,   he£me   lagilas   q!eq!EnEmxs   hamexsl- 
lasE£wae  qaxs  gil£niae  pol£ideda  qhcsaxa  xfise;lakwe  Laga£yaxs  lae 


470  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

45  and  when  she  wants  to  eat  some  more,  she  just  takes  the  ||  cold 
shrunk  blubber  of  the  dorsal  fin  and  eats  it,  for  |  it  never  gets  tough. 
That  is  all  about  this.  [ 
1  Boiled  Devil-Fish. — When1  this  is  done,  (the  man)  goes  to  catch 
devil-fish- at  |  low  tide;  and  when  he  finds  the  hole  of  a  devil-fish,  he 
puts  the  end  |  (for  feeling)  of  the  devil-fish  spear,  into  the  entrance  of 
the  hole;  and  when  |  be  feels  the  body  of  the  devil-fish,  he  pulls  out 
5  the  devil-fish  harpoon,  and  lie  pushes  ||  the  thick  end  of  the  harpoon 
into  the  hole.  When  he  |  feels  the  hard  part,  he  pushes.  |  For  a 
short  whde  he  leaves  the  devil-fish  harpoon  alone  until  it  stops 
moving,  for  [  the  devil-fish  catcher  watches  the  spear  as  it  is  moving 

10  about.  I  When  it  stops  moving,  he  takes  the  spear  and  jerks  it  ||  out 
of  the  entrance  of  the  devil-fish  hole.  Then  the  devil-fish  |  comes  out 
on  the  end  of  the  spear.  |  He  pulls  the  spear  out  of  the  devil-fish,  and 
strikes  the  devil-fish  |  on  the  rock;  and  when  it  turns  white,  he  pulls 
out  the  entrails.  These  are  called  by  the  Indians  "phosphores- 
cence." I  When  he  gets  them  off,  he  strikes  it  again  on  the  rock  to 

15  kill  it  entirely,  ||  and  to  make  it  tender  when  it  is  eaten.  Then  |  the 
hunter  goes  home,  and  puts  down  the  devil-fish  in  the  house.  |  Then 
he  takes  his  kettle,  pours  water  into  it  |  until  it  is  more  than  half 
full,  and  puts  it  on  the  fire  of  his  house.  |  When  the  water  is  boiling 


g-exaq.  Wa,  giFmese  etled  qlEts!exsdEx£idExs  lae  km  fix£edxa 
45  £wuda  tlEmgik"  xiisedak"  Lagesa  gwE£yime  qa£s  q!Es£edeq,  qa£s 
hewaxae  p!es£eda.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

1  Boiled  Devil-Fish. — Gll£mese  '  gwalExs  lae  nesaxa  tEqlwaxs  lae 
x'atslaesa.  Wa,  gib"mese  q lax  gokwasa  tEqlwaxs  lae  segeLas  ple- 
way5ba£yases  nedzayowe  lax  t  lioxiliisa  tEgwatsle.  Wii,  glPmese 
p!ex-waLF.laxa    tEqlwaxs    lae    xweHdxes    nedzayowe    qa£s    segeLes 

5  LExuba£yases  nedzayowe  laxa  tlExilasa  tEgwatsle.  Wa,  la  ple- 
xwaxa  plesa.  Wa,  giPmese  p!ex£waLElaxa  plesaxs  lae  sex£edEq. 
Wa,  la  yawas£Id  bases  nedzayowe  qa  sEltledesa  tEqlwa  qaxs 
doqula£maeda  nets  lenoxwaxes  nedzayaxs  yalae  yawexila.  Wa, 
gil£mese  sEltledExs  lae  daklindxes  nedzayowe  qa£s  6dax£Ide 
10  nexewulsaq  lux  tlExilasa  tEgwatsla.  Wa,  gax£Em  axba£ya  tEqlwa 
laq.  Wa,  la  lEkodxa  nedzayowe  laxa  tEqlwa.  Wa,  la  xusxiitslo- 
dEq  laxa  awlnaklwa.  Wii,  giPmese  la  £mElx,£Ideda  tEqlwaxs  lae 
lawayodEX  bexbek"  lasxa  yaxyigllas  gwE£yasa  baklume  bexbekla. 
Wa,  gilemese  lawiixs  lae  etled  xusxutsledEq  qa  a'lak' lales  tela. 
15  Wii,  heEmis  qa  tElqwes  qo  lid  tExtaxnvIdLEq.  Wa,  hexfida£mese 
la  mVnakwe  netslenoxwe  laxes  gokwa.  Wii,  la  ax-aldasa  tEqalwiixs 
lae  hex  "idaEin  ax-edxa  hanxLanowe  qaes  gfixtslddesa  £wape  laq 
qa  ek!oldza£yes.  Wii,  liL  hanxLEnts  lax  lEgwdases  g'okwe.  Wa, 
gil-'mese  mEdElx£wide  £wfd>Ets!fiwasexs  lae    gasx  igililaxa   tEqlwa 

'  Continued  from  p.  152,  line  36. 


boas]  RECIPES  471 

he  takes  up  the  devil-fish  ||  and  puts  it  into  the  kettle  which  is  on  the  20 
fire.  |  When  it  is  in  the  kettle,  the  man  who  is  cooking  the  devil-fish 
takes  the  |  tongs  and  stirs  it;  and  after  stirring  it  for  some  time,  he  | 
lets  it  boil  again.     Then  he  stops  stirring  it.     He  may  keep  it  |  for 
about  an  hour,  according  to  the  watch,  ||  boiling  this  length  of  time.  25 
Then  the  devil-fish  is  done.  |  He  takes  the  kettle  off  the  fire,  and 
places  it  at  the  |  door-side  of  the  fire.     He  takes  a  dish  and  |  puts  it 
by  the  side  of  the  kettle  in  which  the  devil-fish  is  cooked,  |  and  he 
pours  fresh  water  into  the  dish.     Then  he  takes  the  ||  tongs,  lifts  the  30 
devil-fish,  and  puts  it  into  the  |  dish.     He  takes  a  knife  and  cuts 
around  the  upper  end  of  the  |  arms  close  to  the  body,  and  he  cuts  off 
the  |  stomach  close,  to  the  upper  end  of  the  body.     Then  he  puts 
down  |  his  knife,  takes  off  the  arms,  and  pulls  off  the  ||  loose  skin  that  35 
hangs  together  at  the  end,  and  |  he  pulls  off  the  loose  skin  along  the 
side  of  the  suckers;  |  and  when  the  loose  skin  is  off,  he  gives  it  to  one 
of  those  who  are  to  cat  the  devil-fish.  |  He  goes  on  and  does  the  same 
with  the  other  arms.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  he  takes  the  stomach 
and  pulls  off  the  loose  skin;  ||  and  after  this  has  been  done,  he  bites  40 
off  the  joint  over  the  head  and  |  spits  it  out.     He  looks  for  the  four 
shells    which   are  on   I   each  side  of  the  stomach  of   the  devil-fish. 


qa£s  gax'sEts  lodes  laxa  hanxxala  laxa  lEgwile  hanxxanowa.    Wa,  20 
gil£mese   la£staxs  laeda  bEgwiinEmexa   tEqweliixa  tEqlwa  ax£edxa 
ts!esLala  qa£s  xwetledes  laq.     Wa,  giPmese  gegild  xwetaqexs  lae 
et!ed    mEdElx'weda.     Wa,  hesmis    la   gwalats  xwetaq.     Wa,  wala- 
anawise    lo£    £HEmts!agELElagila    laxa    q!aq  !alak!ayaxEns  '"naliiqe 
£wa£wasElllasas  maEmdElqulaxs  lae  iJopa  tEqweliixa  tEqlwa.     Wa,  25 
la    hanx'sEndxa    hanxxanowe    laxa    lEgwIl    qa£s    hang'allles    laxa 
obexxalalllases  lEgwile.     Wa,la  axeedxa  tayaxuse£lats  !e  loqhve  qa£s 
hamoliles    laxa    maginwalllasa    fcEqweelats!e    hanxxanowa.      Wa, 
la  giixts!otsa  £wiidafsta  £wE£wap!Em  laxa  loqlwe.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
tsIesLala    qa£s    k!ip!ldes   laxa    tEqlwa     qa£s    lii    k*!lpts!ots     laxa  30 
loqlwe.     Wa,   lii    ax£edxa    kMawayo  qa£s  t !otse£stalex    ewaxLa£yas 
dzedElEinas    mak'abala    lax     bakawa£yas.      Wit,    laxae    tlosodEx 
gawas    makabala   lax   ek'!ana£yasa  bakawa£ye.     Wa,  la  geg-a£lll- 
xes    klawayuwe    qa£s    dagiltslodexa   dzedzElEme    qa£s    klulpodxa 
£nEmts!aqe    laqexs    he£mae    ides  Elagalases  lEnp!Ena£ye.     Wii,    la  35 
xikodEx  lEnp!Eiia£yas  walabala  lax  £waxsanodza£yas    k!umt!Ena- 
£yas.     Wa,  g11£mese  £wi£lawe  lEnp  !Ena£yasexs  lae  tslas  lax  tExtaqu- 
Laq.     Wa,   a£mese  la  he  gwe-'nakulaxa  waokwe  dzedzElEma.     Wa, 
gil£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  &x£edxa   gawiis.     Wii;  lii    nexalax  lEnpsEma- 
£yas.     Wa,  g  il£Emxaawise  £wl£laxs  lae  qlEkodEx  q!EnxLiir>as  qa£s  40 
k\ves£6deq.      Wii,    lii     alex£Idxa     motslaqe     daptenk-     axilla    lax 
£\v;ixsan5LEma£yas  gawasa    tEqlwa.      Wa,    gil£mese    q laqexs    lae 


472  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

4.3  When  he  finds  them,  |  he  pulls  them  out  and  throws  them  away. 
Then  he  breaks  it  into  strips,  |  and  gives  a  strip  to  each  of  his  guests.  || 

45  He  who  eats  the  body  takes  off  the  loose  skin,  |  and  pulls  out  the 
mouth-parts  of  the  devd-fish  and  eats  them,  |  and  he  eats  the  body. 
After  |  they  have  eaten  enough,  they  go  out.  They  only  invite  the  | 
numaym  to  eat  devil-fish.     They  do  not  cook  devd-fish  for  many  || 

50  tribes.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Scorched  Devil-Fish. — -When  the  devil-fish  hunter  |  comes  home, 
he  takes  his  knife  and  |  cuts  off  one  of  the  arms.  |  He  puts  it  by  the 

55  side  of  the  fire,  with  its  loose  skin;  and  when  ||  the  outside  is  scorched, 
he  turns  it  so  that  the  |  raw  side  is  towards  the  fire;  and  when  it  is 
also  scorched,  he  |  takes  it  off  and  pulls  off  the  loose  skin.  When  it  is 
all   off,  |  he   eats   it.     Some   Indians   call   this   "eating   devil-fish  | 

60  roasted  by  the  fire,"  although  oidy  the  legs  are  roasted;  ||  and  they 
call  it  "eating  devd-fish."  Only  the  |  females  are  roasted  this  way; 
for  they  are  afraid,  when  they  are  boded,  |  that  they  will  get  an 
itchy  eruption  and  have  to  scratch  themselves  |  wherever  the  liquid 
touches  the  skin,  when  the  female  devil-fish  is  boded.  |  Therefore 

65  they  do  not  wash  the  female  devd-fish,  and  ||  therefore  also  it  is  not 

43  lEkumodEq  qa£s  ts!Ex£6deq.  Wa,  la  k!fdk!ulpsE(lEq  qa  ts!elts!E- 
qlasiowesexs  lae   ts£Ewanaesasa  £nal£nEme    luxes    Le£lanEme.     Wa, 

45  laLa  heEm  bEbak'aweg-xa  bak'awafyaxs  lae  lawiyodEx  lEnpsE- 
ma£yas.  Wa,  he£mis  gil  gElxoyose  gwawilba£yasa  tEq!wa  qa£s 
gugwawegix£kleq.  Wa,  la  hamx£idxa  bakawaeye.  Wa,  gil£mese 
poTldExs  lae  hoquwElsa.  Wa,  laEm  lex'aEm  tEqwelagilaxa 
tEqlweda    £nE£memote.     Wa,  laEm    k!es    tEqwela    qaeda  qlenEine 

50  lelqwalaLa£ya.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Scorched  Devil-Fish  (Ts!edzEku  tEq!wa). — Wa,  he£maaxs  galae 
g'ax  na£nak\veda  netslenoxwaxa  tEqlwa,  wit,  la  ax£edxes  k'lawa- 
yowe  qa£s  tlosodexa  £nEints!aqe  laxa  dzedzElEinasa  tEqlwa.  Wa, 
la  k'adnollsas  laxes  lEgwIle  £wl£la  le£wis  lEnp!Ena£ye.     Wa,  gil£mese 

55  k!um.Elx£Ide  L!asot!Ena£yas  laxa  lEgwIlaxs  lae  lex£idEq  qa  L!aso- 
tlEndesa  k-!ilxk' !5dEiia£ye.  Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  k!umElx£IdExs  lae 
ax£edEq  qa£s  xikalex  lEnp !Ena£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  -'wPlaxs  lae 
hamx£klEq.  Wa,  la  £nekeda  waokwe  bakluma  ts!Ets!edzEkugixa 
tsledzEkwe   tEq!wa    wax,£mae    lexaEm    ts!esasE£we     dzedzidEmas. 

60  Wa,  la  tExtEqwaxa  tEqlwa  £nekiq.  Wa,  laEm  lexaEm  he 
gwegilasE£wa  tslEdaqasa  tEqlwa  yixs  kilEmae  hanxxEntsE£wa 
qaxs  laxae  hex 'MdaEiu  q!Qle  yixs  hemEnala£mae  qliilax  lag-aaLE- 
lasas  £wapalases  tsloxwaxa  hanxxaakwe  tstedaq  tEqlwa.  Wa, 
he£mis  lagilas  kes  ts!oxwasE£weda  tsledzEkwe  tEqlwa.     Wa,  heEm- 

65  xaawis  k' leselas  hanxxEntsE£we.      Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£la    tsledzEkwe 


boas]  BECIPES  473 

boiled.     After  they  have  eaten  the  roasted  |  arms,  they  throw  the  G6 
body  and  the  stomach  |  out  of  the  house.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Devil-Fish  with  Oil  (Chopped  Devil-Fish  with  Oil) . — This  j  is  another  1 
way  of  cooking  devil-fish.     When  the  |  devil-fish  hunter  comes  home 
with  the  devil-fish,  and  when  lie  has  many  |  devil-fish,  perhaps  as 
many  as  twenty  or  thirty,  ||  he  cooks  them  all  at  one  time  on  his  fire.  5 
He  |  does  it  in  the  same  way  as  I  described  the  cooking  of  devil-fish 
before,  and  he  |  takes  off  the  loose  skin  in  the  same  manner.     When 
all  the  loose  skin  is  off,  |  the  devil-fish  hunter  takes  his  knife  and  a 
large  dish  |  and  puts  them  down.     He  takes  a  small  piece  of  wood 
and   puts  it  ||  over  the  sides  of   the  dish    crosswise  in   the   middle.  10 
This   is   named  |  "the    cutting-board    for    devil-fish." 
He  takes  the  arms  of  the  devil-fish  and  |  puts  them  on 
the  short  board.     He  takes  his  chopping-  |  knife  and 
chops  the  arms  into  pieces.     Then  |  he  takes  another 
arm  and  cuts  it  up  too.     After  ||  they  have  all  been  15 

chopped  up,  he  takes  a  large  kettle  and  |  washes  it  out.  When  it 
is  clean,  he  takes  with  his  hand  the  chopped  |  arms  and  throws 
them  into  the  kettle  for  cooking  them.  |  When  the  kettle  is  almost 
full,  he  pours  a  little  |  water  into  it  and  puts  it  on  the  fire.  After  || 
boiling    quite   a  while,   it   is    taken   off.   |  Then    many    dishes    are  20 

dzedzElEmasexs  lae  aEm  tslEqEWEldzEma  bakawa£ye   LE£wa  gsiwa  6G 
lax  l  lasantVyases  gokwe.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Devil-Fish   with    Oil    (TEmxustaak"    tEqlwa    laxa    Lle£na). — Wa,  1 
g'aEm  cnEmx-£idala  ha£mexsdaenexa  tEqlwega.     Yixs  gil£mae  gax 
na£nakweda  nets lenoxwaxa  tEqlwa.     Wa,  g'il£mese  qlEyoLa  yixs  ne- 
ts !anEinaaxa maltsEing'usta  tEqlwa lox hayaqaax  jTudux"sEmgusta. 
Wa,  la  £naenEmp  !Eng-ila  hanx"LEndEq  laxes  lEgwde.      Wa,  la  aEm  5 
nEqEingiltEwex     tEqwelaena£yasEn    gale    waldEma    lo£    lawalae- 
na£yax   lEnplEna£yas.      Wa,  g'IPmese  £wl£lawe  lEnp'Ena£y,.sexs  lae 
&x£ededa  nets  lenoxwaxes  klawayowe,  wa,  he£mesa  loqlwa    £walasa 
qa£s  kagallles.     Wa,  laxae  axeedxa  ama£yelEqwa  qa£s  katledes  lax 
5gwaga£yasa  loq!we  gayfisEla  lax  nEgoya.£yas.     Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  10 
tEmgiidzoxa    tEqlwa.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa   dzedzElEmasa    tEqlwa    qa£s 
kadEdzodes    laxa    tEmgudzowe.      Wa,    la    &x£edxes    tEmgwayowe 
klawayo  qaJs  tEmtEmxusalax-£Idexa  dzedzElEine.     Wa,  la  £wl£laxs 
lae    etledxa    waokwe     cpaJs    tEmtEmxusalax£Ideq.      Wa,    giPmese 
£wl£la  la  tEmtEmx"s£aakuxs  lae  ^x£edxa  £walase  hanxLanowa.     Wa,  15 
la  tsloxugindF.q.     Wa,  gil£mese  egigaxs    lae  guxtslotsa  tEmtEm- 
xustaakwe     dzedzElEme     laxa     tEmx"staakwI£lats!e     hanxLanowa. 
Wa,    gil£mese  Elaq    qotlededa    hanxLanowaxs  lae  xaLlaqa  gfiqlE- 
qasa  £wape  laq.     Wa,  la  hanxLEiits   laxes  lEgwile.      Wa,  la  gex-- 
Lala     maEmdElqalaxs     lae     hanxsanowa    laxa     lEgwile.     Wa,    la  20 


474  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ann.  35 

22  taken  and  put  down  by  the  side  of  the  |  kettle  in  which  the  chopped 
devil-fish  has  been  cooked.  The  man  takes  a  ladle  and  |  dips  out 
the  chopped  devil-fish,  and  puts  it  into  the  |  dishes.     It  contains 

25  little  water.  When  the  ||  chopped  devil-fish  is  in  the  dishes,  he  takes 
oil  and  pours  it  over  it;  |  and  he  only  stops  pouring  oil  over  it  when  it 
is  covered.  |  After  doing  so,  he  takes  many  spoons  and  |  gives  them 
to  those  who  are  to  eat  the  chopped  arms  of  the  |  devd-fish.     After 

30  this  has  been  done,  he  places  the  ||  dishes  in  front  of  his  guests,  and 
they  begin  to  eat  the  chopped  devil-fish  |  with  oil.  When  it  is 
finished,  they  |  go  out  at  once,  for  this  food  makes  them  feel  like 
vomiting.  |  Then  they  all  hurry  out  to  go  back  of  the  houses,  where  | 

35  they  vomit.  After  vomiting,  they  drink  water.  ||  That  is  all  about 
this.  I 

Steamed  Devil-Fish. — When  |  a  woman  sees  a  devil-fish  in  the 
water  on  a  rock  while  she  is  gathering  clams,  she  |  spears  it  and  puts 
it  into  her  small  clam-digging  canoe.  |  When  she  has  many  clams,  she 

40  steams  them.  Then  she  l|  puts  the  devil-fish  with  them  when  she  is 
about  to  pour  water  on  her  steamed  clams,  j  After  the  water  has  been 
poured  on,  the  devil-fish  is  covered  over  |  with  the  clams,  and  it  is 
steamed  with  the  clams  that  are  I  steamed  to  be  made  into  dried 


21  ax£etsE£weda  qlenEme  loElqlwa  qa  niEx£alilEles  lax  maginwahlasa 
tEinxustaakwIiats!e  hanxxanowa.  Wil,  la  ax£edxa  tsexLa  qa£s 
tsex£Ide  laxa  tEmxustaakwe  dzedzElEma  qa£s  la  tsEyosElas  laxa 
loElqhve.      Wa,    laF.m    holElqElaxa   ewape.     Wa,  g  il£mese    £wi£losa 

25  hanxLaakwe  tEmx"staakuxs  lae  ax£edxa  L!e£na  qa£s  kiunqlsqes 
laq.  Wa,  al£mese  gwal  klunqasa  L!e£na  laqexs  lae  t!Ep!EgElesa. 
Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax-etlxa  qlenEme  ksik'EtslEnaqa  qa£s 
k'as£ides  laxa  tEtEinxustaaguLaxa  tEinxustaakwe  dzedzElsmsa 
tEcj!wa.     Wa,  g'ihmese  gwalExs  lae  kaxdzamolilasa  tetEmxustaaxu- 

30  ts!ala  loElqlwa  laxes  LeelanEme.  Wa,  laxda£xwe  £yos£Idxa  tEmx11- 
staakwe  tEqlwa  laxa  L!eJna.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  liex-ri- 
daEm  hoquwElsa  qaxs  alae  ts!Enk!ulEma  he  gwek"  ha£mexsila£ye. 
Wa,  laxdaExwe  he£nakulaEin  lax  iiLan.ryases  gigokwe  qa£s  la 
hox£wida.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  hoqwaxs  lae  nax£Idxa  £wape.      Wa, 

35  laEin  gwal  laxeq. 

Steamed  Devil-Fish  (£nEgEku  tEqlwa). — Wa,  he£maaxs  klunsa- 
eda  tsledaqaxa  tEqlwiixs  tslekaaxa  gaweq!anEme.  Wa,  la  sex£- 
IdEq  qa£s  k!wet!alExses  laxes  ts!egats!e  xwaxwaguma.  Wa, 
gil£mese    qleySLxa    g-aweq!anEmaxs    lae  £nEk'aq.     Wa,  he£mis  la 

40  lEgEnwayaatsa  tEqlwiixs  lae  Elaq  tsas£etsa  £wap  elaxes  £nEkasE£we. 
Wa,  gtl£mese  tsas£etsa  £wape  laqexs  lae  nanaskinaEinxa  tsq!wa. 
Wa,  la  £nEmax£idaEni  Llopa  LE£wa  enEgEkwe  gaweq!anEinaxs 
k- lots  !asE£wae  qaxs  k!dmats!eLe.     Wa,  gil£mese  LlopExs  lae  let!e- 


BOAS]  RECIPES  475 

clams.  After  it  is  done,  it  is  uncovered.  |  Then  the  steamed  devil- 
fish is  first  taken  out  and  ||  washed  in  fresh  water;  and  then  (the  45 
woman)  also  does  what  |  I  described  at  first,  when  I  described  the 
eating  of  devd-fish;  but  it  tastes  differently  |  when  it  is  steamed,  for 
the  taste  of  the  steamed  |  clams  affects  the  taste  of  the  steamed 
devil-fish.  | 

You  know  about  the  devil-fish  caught  in  deep  water  when  the  || 
tides  are  low  at  half-moon.  This  has  been  written  |  in  the  writing  50 
about  those  who  get  devd-fish  for  bait  for  halibut;  |  for  I  have 
described  it  entirely,  how  they  catch  devil-fish  with  long  |  spears  in 
deep  water,  and  everything  about  it.  Therefore  |  I  say  that  you 
know  it  already,  and  also  about  the  catching  of  devd-fish  on  the  dry 
beach  at  ||  spring-tide.     That  is  all  about  this.  |  55 

Boiled  Sea-Slugs    (Catching  sea-slugs). — When  |  a  man  wants  to  1 
take  sea-slugs,  he  first  goes  for  a  thin  shaft  which  is  used  by  the 
salmon-fishers.  |  He  takes  two  thin  cedar-sticks,  each  one  short  span  | 
long  and  a  little  thinner  than  the  ||  little  finger,  flat  on  one  side,  [  5 
and   he    takes    cedar-bark    and    splits       .      it    in    narrow   strips.   | 
The  two  cedar-sticks  are  to  be  hooks  at  the  end  of  the  sea- 

slug   spear.  |  He  puts   these  near  the  end    of    the    harpoon- 

shaft,  and  ties  them  on  v>dth  spht  |  long    xl     strips     of     cedar-bark. 
When  it  is  finished,  it  is  this    way:  ||       5^ 

tsE£wa.     Wa,  he£mis  gil   ax£etsE£wa   £nEgikwe  tEqlwa  qa£s  ts!f>x- 
£witsE£we  laxa  £wE£wap!Eme.     Wa,  aEm£xaawise  la  nEgEltEwex  gwe-  45 
gilasasEii  gaglleye  waldEmaxs  lae  tExtax£\v!dEq.     Wii,  laEm  6gux- 
p!aEmxs  £nEg-Ekwae   qaxs  lae  gwE£yose    gweplaasasa  k!6ts!aak\ve 
g-aweqlaiiEm  laxa  £nEgEkwe  tEqhva.     Wa,  laEmxae  gwala. 

HeEmLas  la  qlala  nanesamEiisaxa  tEqlwaxs  wiix-'mae  ama'ya  xa- 
ts!a£yexes  SmagawIxdEmxs  lae  nExsa£ya  £mEkula.  Wa,  la£mese  k-  !a-  50 
dEdzE£we  lax  k-!adEkwasa  tatelaxa  tEqlwa  loqwaLaxa  p!a£ye 
qaxgin  sEnolmek-  gwagwex-s£ala  laqexs  lae  nanedzayowaxa  giltla 
nanesamEndza£yaxa  tEqlwa  LF/wis  gwavidalase.  He£mesEn  lagila 
£nek5L  laEm  £wFla  q!a,LElaq  LE£wa  lEinxulesEla  nesaxa  tEqlwa  laxa 
£walase  xats!a£ya.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq.  55 

Boiled  Sea-Slugs  (AElyaxa  alase). — Wa  heEm  gil  ax£etso£sa  1 
aElyaenoxwaxa  alasa  saEnts!asa  yiilnEk Iwenoxwaxa  k!ok!utEla. 
"Wa,  la  ax£edxa  malts !aqe  wlswid  klwaxLawa,  £nal£nEmp!Enke 
awasgEmasas  laxEns  ts!Exuts!ana£yex.  Wii,  la  wawilalagawesEns 
sElt  laxts  !anaeyasEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  laxes  pepExklotlE-  5 
nena£ye.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  dEnase  qa£s  dzEdzExsEndeq  qa  ts!elts!E- 
q!es.  Wa  la  ax£edxa  malts  !aqe  gegalbiltsa  aElyayop  !eqLe.  Wii, 
lii  axbEnts  lax  maxba£yasa  saEnts!o  qa£s  yil£aLElodesa  dzEXEkwe 
giltla  dsnas   laq.      Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs   lae  g-a  gwiileg-a  (fig.). 


476  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KAVAKIUTL  [etii.  ann.  36 

10  Then  he  waits  for  it  to  bo  calm  at  low  tide.  When  |  it  is  calm, 
he  launches  Ids  sea-slug-gathering  canoe.  |  He  takes  his  sea-slug- 
gathering  paddle,  and  Ids  knife  lor  cutting  off  the  heads  j  of  sea- 
slugs,  and  also  the  stick  for  catching  sea-slugs.  Then  lie  paddles  | 
to  a  place  where  he  knows  there  are  many  sea-slugs.     He  looks  down 

15  into  the  water;  and  ||  when  he  sees  a  place  where  there  are  many 
of  them  together,  he  takes  his  stick  for  catching  sea-slugs  and  | 
pushes  it  down  into  the  water.  He  pushes  the  hook-end  under  the 
sea-slugs  |  and  pulls  them  off  the  bottom,  (putting  the  hooks  under) 
the  middle  of  the  sea-slug.  |  Then  it  comes  up  lying  crosswise  over 
the  two  hooks  at  the  end  of  the  pole.     He  pulls  up  |  the  pole,  and 

20  puts  it  down  crosswise  over  las  canoe.  ||  He  takes  the  sea-slug,  takes 
his  knife,  |  and  cuts  off  the  neck.  Then  he  squeezes  out  the  insides,  | 
and  lie  throws  it  down  hard  into  his  canoe,  saying  |  as  lie  is  throwing 
it  down, —  | 

"  Now  you  will  bo  as  stiff  as  the  wedge  of  your  grandfather."  || 

25  He  does  this  to  each  of  them,  and  says  so  as  he  throws  the  sea- 
slugs  into  Ids  |  canoe.  When  he  has  caught  many  of  them,  he  goes 
home.  | 

As  soon  as  he  arrives  on  the  beach  of  his  house,  his  wife  takes  |  a 
basket  and  goes  to  meet  him  and  to  carry  up  what  he  has.     She  puts  | 

30  her  basket  into  the  small  canoe:  and  the  woman  takes  II  one  of  the 


10  Wa,  la  esEla  qa  klEmaqElesexa  xatslaese.  Wa,  g'ileniese  k"!E- 
niaqidaxs  lae  wI£xustEndxes  aElyats!eLe  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  lii, 
ax£eilxes  aslyaxsayase  se£waya  LE£wes  t!ot!EsEmy5Le  kawayo 
laxa  alase.  Wii,  hec"mises  aElyayop  !eqe.  Wa,  la  sex£wlda  qa£s 
la  laxes  q!ale    qlayatsa    filase.     Wii,    lii    hanx-Ida.      Wa,    gil£mese 

15  dox'waLElaxa  qlaedzasasa  alasExs  lae  ax£edxes  aElyayop  !eqe  qa£s 
L!EiigEnse  laxa  dEmsx'e.  Wa,  laEm  bEnba£ye  gegalba£yases  aElya- 
yop !eqe.  Wii,  lii  gfiLElisa  lax  nEgoya£yasa  alasaxs  gaxae  galo- 
taweltEwe  laxa  male  gegalbesa  aElyayop  !eqe.  Wa,  la  nexostod- 
xes    aElyayop  !eq  qa  kat!e.des  la  £wax'sotiiga£yases  aElyaatsle  xwa- 

•_»()  xwaguma  qa  gayales.  Wii,  lii  daxcIdxa  alase  qa£s  ax£edexes  k-!a- 
wayo  qa£s  t lot !Ets lEXodaleq.  Wa,  lii  xix'IdEq  qa  lawayes  yax  - 
vigilas.  Wii,  lii  xusalEXsas  laxes  xwaxwagume.  Wa,  lii  neg-E- 
tEwexs  lae  xusalEXsas: — 

"LaEmshei  iJaxataeneLe  LEmgayas  gagasa." 

25  Wii,  lii  qlwalxoEm  £nekixs  lae  xils£alExsasa  alase  laxes  xwa- 
xwagume. Wa,  gil'mese  qlEyoLEXs  lae  nii£naku  laxes  gokwe. 
Wa,  giPmese  lag-alis  lax  idEma^isases  gokwaxs  lae  gEnEmas  ax£ed- 
xa  lExa£ye  qa£s  la  lalala ;  bikinis,  qa£s  lii  nanagwala.  Wii,  la  hang'aa- 
lExsases  lExa£ye  laxa  xwaxwagume.     Wa,  la  dax£ideda  tstedaqaxa 

30  £nEme  alasa  qa£s  xlx'ide  £wiisgEinasas  6gwidE£yas  laxes   dalaena- 


boas]  RECIPES  477 

sea-slugs,  squeezes  down  the  whole  length  of  its  body,  holding  it  by  31 
the  |  hind  part,  the  head  downward;    and  when  what  is  left  of  the 
insides  has  come  out,  |  she  throws  it  into  the  basket.     She  does  this 
to  all  |  of  them.     When  they  are  all  in,  she  carries  |  her  basket  of 
sea-slugs  up  the  beach  and  takes  it  ||  into  the  house.     She  puts  it  35 
down  in  the  corner  of  the  house.  |  Then  she  takes  a  large  low  steam- 
ing-box  and  pours  some  |  fresh  water  into  it.     When  it  is  half  full. 
she  takes  the  basket  of  sea-slugs  [  and  pours  them  into  the  water  in 
the  box.     She  leaves  them  there  ]  for  two  nights  with  the  water  over 
them.     Then  they  are  ready  ||  to  be  boiled.     The  man  takes   the  40 
kettle  for  boiling  sea-slugs  |  and  pom's  water  into  it  until  it  is  half 
full.  |  He  puts  it  over  the  fire;  and  when  the  kettle  for  boding  sea- 
slugs  |  is  on  the  fire  with  the  sea-slugs  in  it,  he  goes  into  the  woods 
and  breaks  off  hemlock-branches.  |  He  carries  these  back  and  puts 
them  down  where  the  sea-slugs  are  boding  ||  in  the  kettle.     Alter  he  45 
lias  done  so,  he  takes  the  low  steaming-box  in  which  the  sea-slugs 
are,  |  and    places   it  by  the  side  of   the  lire,  |  and  also    the   tongs. 
When  the  wTater  begins  to  bod,  his  wife  |  takes  one  of  the  sea-slugs 
and  squeezes  the  body  so  that  |  the  liquid  comes  out  from  the  inside. 
Then  she  puts  it  into  the  boiling  water.  ||  Her  husband  stirs  it  with  50 
the  tongs.     The  woman  |  squeezes  out  the  whole  number  of  sea- 
slugs;  and  when  they  are  all  |  in  the  kettle,  the  man  continues  to 

£yax  5xsdE£yas.     Wa,  la  bEnxtala.     Wit,  gil£mese  £wl£lawe  gega-  31 
yayawa£yas    yaxyig ilasexs  lae   bsxtslots    laxes    lExa£ye.     Wa,    lit 
£naxwa  he  gwex£Idxa  waokwe.  Wa,  giPmese  £wllts  !axs  lae  k"  !ox£wid- 
todxes    Elyats!e   lExa'ya  qa£s  lii    k'!ox£wtisdesElaq  qa£s   la  k!ogwe- 
LElaq  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  la  k'!ox£wal!las  lax  onegwllases  gokwe.  35 
Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  £walase  kutElll   q!o£lats!ii.     Wa,  lii  giixtslotsa  £we- 
£wap!Eme  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  ax£edxa  Elyatsle 
lExa£ya    qa£s  la   guxstsnts   lax    £wabEts!awas.     Wa,  la  bas.     Wa, 
het!a  la  mfdExse  ganuLas  qlogulileda  alasaxa  6wapaxs  lae  helala  lax 
hanxLEntsE£we.     Wa,  leda  bEgwanEme  ax£edxes  Elselats!eLe  hanx--  40 
Lanowa.     Wa,    lii   guxts!5tsa  £wape   laq    qa    nEgoyoxsdales.     Wa, 
la  hanxLEnts  laxes  lEgwde.     Wa,    g  ll£mese    la  hanxxale    Else£la- 
ts!eLasexa  alasaxs  lae  laxa  aLle  qa£s  LlEx£wIde  laxa  qlwaxe.     Wa, 
gaxe   gEmxElaq    cpi£s  lii    gEnixstEndEq    laxes    Else£lats!axa    alase 
hanx'Lanowa.     Wa,  gil£mese   gwalExs  lae  &x£edxa  qlogidile   Elya-  45 
ts!e  kiitElil  q!o£lats!a  qa£s  gaxe  ha£nolIsas  laxes  lEgwde;    WiL,  he- 
£mesa  ts!esLala.     Wa,  gd£mese  mEdElx£wideda  £wapaxs    lae  gEiiE- 
mas  ax£edxa  £nEme    alasa  qa£s  x-Ix£Idex    6k!wina£ya    qa    lawiiyes 
£wapaga£yasexs    lae   tslEmxstEnts   laxa  maEmdElqula  £wiipa.     Wa, 
laLa    la£wunEmas     xwetasa     ts!esLala     laq.       Wii,    lii     £naxwaEm  50 
x-Ix£ideda    tslEdaqax  £waxaasa    alase.      Wii,  giPmese  £wl£la£steda 
alasaxs    lae    heniEnalag"ild£Em    xweteda    bEgwanEmac^.     Wa,    gil- 


478  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

53  stir  them.  When  |  the  water  begins  to  boil,  the  man  picks  up 
handfuls  of  dirt  from  the  floor  of  the  |  house  and  throws  it  into  the 

55  boiling  water.  Then  ||  it  stops  boiling  over,  for  the  |  water  of  the 
sea-slugs  almost  always  boils  over,  and  only  |  dirt  from  the  floor  of 
the  house  stops  the  boiling-over.  The  man  |  tries  to  take  hold  of  one 
of  them  with  the  tongs;  and  when  he  succeeds  in  taking  one,  |  it  is 
done.     The  skin  gets  rough  when  it  is  done.     The    (sea-slugs)   are 

60  slippery,  when  ||  they  are  raw,  and  he  can  not  get  hold  of  them  with 
his  tongs.  |  When  they  are  done,  he  takes  off  the  fire  the  kettle  for 
cooking  sea-slugs.  |  He  takes  a  large  dish  and  puts  it  by  the  side  of 
the  |  kettle.     He  pours  some  water  into  it;    and  when  it  is  |  more 

65  than  half  full  of  water,  he  takes  the  tongs,  lifts  up  the  ||  sea-slugs,  and 
puts  them  into  the  dish  for  washing  the  boiled  |  slugs.  As  soon  as  they 
are  all  in,  the  man  sits  down  by  its  side  |  and  washes  them,  they  being 
stiff.  Afterhehas  |  washed  one  of  them,  he  gives  it  to  one  of  his  guests  | 
to  eat  first  a  sea-slug;  and  the  one  to  whom  the  first  sea-slug  is  given 

70  eats  it  at  once.  ||  The  man  washes  the  sea-slugs  quickly,  |  and  gives 
one  to  a  second  man;  and  he  continues  doing  this  with  his  other  | 
guests;  and  when  the  first  one  finishes  eating  a  sea-slug,  |  he  is  given 
another  one.     After  they  have  eaten  enough,  they  take  some  |  to 

75  their  wives,  for  sea-slugs  are  only  eaten  in  winter,  ||  when  they  are 


53  £mese  tEirx'£IdExs  laeda  bEgwanEme  klagilllxa  t!Ext!Eg!lases 
g-okwe,  qa£s  k-!a£stEndes    laxa    la  tEntEnkila.     Wa,  hex£ida£iuese 

55  xiitlededa  tEntEnkila  Elselas  qaxs  XEiiLElae  heniEnalaEm  tEirx£- 
Ide  £wapalasa  alasaxs  hanx%EntsE£wae.  Wa,  lex-a£mes  xut!eda- 
masa  t!Ex-t!Egilasa  gokwaq.  Wa,  la,  hemEnala£ma  bEgwanEme 
gunx-£Id  k!ak!ap!Enasa  ts!esLala  laq.  Wa,  g11£mese  k!ip!Endqexs 
lae  Llopa.     Wa,  laF.m  xulxunx£IdExs  lae  Llopa.     Wa,  la  tsaxEiixs 

60  k- librae.  Wa,  laEm  k!eas  g\vex£Idaats  k!ip!Entses  ts!esLala  laq. 
Wa,  gil£mese  LlopExs  lae  hanxsEndEq  laxes  lEgwiles  ElselaxdEma. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  loq!wa  qa£s  k'anoliles  laxa  Else£lats!e 
hanxxanowa.  Wa,  la  guxtslotsa  £wape  laq.  Wa,  gll£mese  ek!ol- 
dza£ya  £wape  laqexs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!esLala  qa£s  k!ak!ap!Enes  laxa 

65  alase  qu£s  la  klipstalas  laxa  ts  !ots  !ox£Qnats  !e  loq!waxa  hanxlaakwe 
alasa.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wI£1osexs  laeda  bEgwanEme  k'.wagagElllaq 
qa£s  ts!6ts!ox£unx£ide  laxes  laena£ye  L!ax£Ida.  Wa,  gihiaxwa£mese 
gwal  ts!ots!ox£unaxa  £nEme  alasEx  lae  yax£wits  laxes  Le£lanEme 
qa   galqlEses  Elsasxa  alase.     Wa,   la  hex-£idaEm   Elsas£Ideda  gale 

70  yax£w!tsE£wa,  yixs  lae  hanakwlla  ts!ots!ox£uneda  bEgwanEmax 
yaqlwemaLasa  makilaq.  Wa,  la  he  gwe£nakulaxa  waokwe  Le£la- 
nEms.  Wa,  gflnaxwa£mese  £wl£leda  gale  yax£w!tso£sa  alasExs  lae 
et!ed  yax£widEq.  Wa,  glPmese  pol£IdExs  lae  motElaxes  anex'sa£ye 
qaes  gEnEine,  ylxs    lex-a£mae    ElsasdEmxa   alaseda   tslawunxe   lax 


boas]  RECIPES  479 

good.     They  are  bad  in  summer.     That  is  all  about  |  one  way  of  76 
cooking  of  sea-slugs.  | 

Roasted  Sea-Slugs  (Sea-slugs  roasted  by  the  side  of  the  fire  of  the  |   1 
house). — When  water  has  been  on  the  sea-slugs  for  two  days,  |  the 
woman  takes  a  dish  and  carries  it  to  put  it  down  by  the  side  of  |  the 
low  steaming-box.     She  takes  the  sea-slugs  out  of  the  water  and  ||  puts  5 
them  into  the  dish.     As  soon  as  she  has  enough,  she  carries  a  dish  of 
sea-slugs  |  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire  of  her  house.     She 
puts  |  it  alongside  the  fire,  under  the  side-logs  of  the  fire,  and  she  | 
continually  turns  (the  sea-slugs)  over.     As  soon  as  they  are  really  | 
stiff,  they  are  done;  and  as  soon  as  they  are  done,  she  takes  them  off 
the  fire  with   the  ||  fire-tongs.     She  takes   another  dish    and    pours  10 
some  |  water  into  it,  and  she  puts  the  roasted  sea-slugs  into  it.  | 
Then  she  takes  a  cedar-stick  and  scrapes  off  the  ashes  that  |  stick  to 
the  roasted  sea-slugs.     When  they  are  all  in  the  dish,  she  squeezes 
them,  |  so  that  the  water  comes  out,  and  she  puts  them  into  another -|| 
dish.     Then  she  takes  another  sea-slug,  scrapes  off  [  the  ashes  that  15 
stick  to  the  outside  of  the  roasted  sea-slugs,  and  she  |  squeezes  it  so 
that  the  water  comes  out,  and  puts  it  into  the  |  dish.     She  does  this 
to  all  the  others;  and  when  |  they  are  all  done,  she  gives  them  to 

EyaxsdEmas.     Wa,  laxa  £ya£yax'sxa  heEiixe.     Wa,  laEm  gwai  laxa  75 
£iiEmx£idala  ha^mex'sllaene^xa  alase. 

Roasted    Sea-Slugs  (PEnedzEkwe    alasa   laxa    onalisasa  lEgwilasa  1 
gokwe). — Wa,    he£maaxs     lae     malp !Enxwafstalll    qlogullla    alase 
wa,  lada  tstedaqe  ax£edxa  loq!wa  qa£s   la  dalaq  qa£s  la  k'anolllas 
laxa  Elyatsle  kiitElil  q!qlats!a.     Wa,  la  ax£wustalaxa  alase  qafs  la 
axts!alas  laxa  loq!we.     Wa,  gil£mese  hel'alaxs  lae  kialaxa  Eltslala  5 
loq!wa   qa£s    lii  kanolisas  laxa    lEgwIlases  gokwe.     Wii,  la  kadE- 
nolIsElas  laxa  awaba£yas  k-ak'EdEnwaeyases    lEgwlle.     Wa,  a£mese 
hemEiialaEm    lexElaleda    tslEdaqaq.       Wa,    gihcmese     alax£Id    la 
L!axsedExs  lae  L!opa.     Wa,  gIPmese  LlopExs  lae  keltslalases  ts!es- 
Lala    laq.      Wa,    la    ax£edxa    ogudame    loq!wa    qa£s    guxts!odesa  10 
Jwape    laq.      Wa,    lii    axstEntsa    pEned/.Ekwe    alase    laq.     Wa,    la 
ax£edxa    k!wa£xxadzEse    qa£s     k-exalayoxa     guna£yaxs    lae    k!we- 
k!iit!Enexa  pEnedzEkwe  alasa.     Wa,  gil'mese  £wldaxs  lae  qhvedzE- 
lEndEq  qa  lawiij'es  £w;ipaga£yas.     Wa,  la  yaxtslots  laxa  ogu£lame 
loqhva.      Wa,    iaxae    et!ed    ax^edxa    snEme    alasa  qa£s    k'exalexa  15 
guna-yaxs    lae    k!wek!ut!Enexa    pEnedzEkwe    alasa.     Wii,  la  q!we- 
dzElEndEq    qa    lawayes    £wapagafyas.     Wii,  laxae    yaxtslots    laxa 
loqhve.     Wii,  lilnaxwaEm    he   gwex£Idxa  waokwe.     Wii,    gil£mese 
£wldaxs    lae    yax£wlts    laxa    ElsasLaxa     pEnedzEkwe    alasa.     Wa, 


480  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann  S5 

20  those  who  are  to  eat  the  roasted  sea-slugs.  ||  At  once  they  eat  them ; 
and  after  they  have  eaten  enough,  they  carry  home  |  for  their  wives 
what  is  left  over.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Baked  Sea-Slugs  (Sea-slugs  baked  in  hot  ashes  in  the  fire  of  the  | 
house). — The  woman  also  takes  the  sea-slugs  out  of  the  low  steaming  - 

25  box.  |  She  digs  a  hole  in  the  hot  ashes  and  puts  the  ||  sea-slugs  into 
the  hole  dug  in  the  ashes.  Then  she  covers  them  with  ashes.  |  It 
may  be  half  an  hour  according  to  the  watch  |  before  she  digs  them 
out.  She  takes  them  up  with  the  fire-tongs  and  |  places  them  on  the 
floor,  by  the  side  of  the  fire;  and  she  does  the  same  as  what  I  |  said 
before  when  I  spoke  about  the  sea-slugs  roasted  by  the  side  of  the 

30  fire.     That  is  ||  all.  | 
1       Roasted  Chiton. — Tins  is  called  by  the  l  !ai.  !asiqwala  h Uriel,  but  by 
the  Kwag-ul  it  is  called  |  me'srriEts.'a.  \ 

When  a  woman  gets  ready  to  |  go  to  get  chitons,  she  takes  her 
5  hasket  to  put  the  chitons  into,  and  also  flat-pointed  ||  hemlock- 
branches  three  spans  in  |  length.  They  are  flat-pointed.  She  car- 
ries with  her  what  is  called  [  "instrument  for  peeling  chitons  off  the 
rock."  As  soon  as  she  comes  to  a  place  where  there  are  many,  |  she 
pokes  the  stick  under  them,  lifts  them  off,  and  throws  them  into  her 
basket;  and  when  |  she  has  many,  she  carries  the  basket  with  the 

10  chitons  on  her  back,  and  goes  home  ||  carrying  the  basket  up  the 

20  hex£ida£mese  Elsas£IdEq.  Wa,  gil£mese  poHdExs  lae  motElaxes 
hamxsa£ye  qaes  gEgEnEme.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Baked  Sea-Slugs  (DzamedzEk"  alas  laxa  gflna£yasa  lEgwlhtsa 
g'okwe). — HeEmxaa  ax£ededa  tslEdaqaxa  iilasa  kiitElIle  q!o£lats!e. 
Wa,    la  £lap!alisa    laxa    tstelqwa    guna£ya.     Wa,    la    LEx£wallsasa 

25  alase  laxa  £labEkwe  guna£ya.  Wa,  la  dzEmk'Eyintsa  guna£ye  laq. 
Wa,  laxEntla  nExsEgiLF.lag  Ila  laxox  q!aq!alak!a£ye  laxEns  £nalaxs 
lae  £lap!Eqalisaq.  Wa,  lit  k'!ip!ltses  ts!esLala  laq  qa£s  la  k!ip!all- 
lElas  laxa  onalisases  lsgwile.  Wa,  heEm  gwayi£lale  gweg'ilasasEn 
waldEine  lax  makilasasEk'  laxa  pEnolldzEkwe  alasa.     Wa,  laEinxae 

30  gwala. 
1      Boasted  Chiton.— Klinel,  heEm  i.eqEla£yesa   LlaiJasiqwalaq;  wa, 
laLa  mesmEts  !axElaso£sa  Kwag'ule. 

Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  xwanalEleda  tslEdaqe  qa£s  la  k!ak!Enlaxa 
k!inele.  La,  ax£edxes  k!in£lats!eLe  lExa£ya  he£mesa  pExbaakwe 
5  LlEiiaksa  qlwaxe  yuduxup!Enk'  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,  yix 
£wasgEmasas.  Wa,  la  pExba.  Wa,  he£mis  daaxuseq  yixa  Legadas 
k-!ak-!Enlayaxa  klinele.  Wii,  g-il£mese  lagaa  lax  qlEyaasasexs 
lae  L!ok!ugi£lalaq  qa£s  ts!Exts!ales  laxes  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g'il£mese 
qlEyoLqexs   lae    6xxEx£Idxes  k!m£lats!e    lExa£ya  qa£s    la  na£nak" 

10  oxLosdesElaxa   k'!in£lats!e   lExa£ya.     Wii,  la  oxLEgalllas   lax   one- 


boas]  RECIPES  481 

beach.     She  puts  it  down  in  the  |  corner  of  her  house.     Then  she  11 
takes  a  large  dish  and  pours  some  [  fresh  water  into  it,  until  it  is  half 
full,  and  she  pours  the  chitons  into  it.  |  After  they  have  been  four 
days  in  the  water,  she  takes  her  |  fish-knife  and  goes  and  sits  down 
by  the  side  of  the  dish  of  chitons.     She  ||  takes  out  one  of  the  chitons  15 
and  scrapes  it  with  her  fish-knife  so  that  |  all  the  green  stuff  comes  off 
that  covers  it.     When  the  green  stuff  is  all  off,  |  (the  chitons)  are  white. 
When  they  are  done,  |  she  puts  them  into  another  dish  which  is  half 
full  of  |  fresh  water;   and  she  does  this  with  the  others.  ||  As  soon  as  20 
they  are  all  done,  she  leaves  them  in  the  water  in  the  dish  for  one 
night.  |  In   the    morning,  as  soon  as  day   comes,  the  woman  takes 
drift  wood,  |  which  she  gathers  on  the  beach  in  front  of  her  house, 
and  she  puts  down  one  crosspiece  |  at  the  upper  end;  and  she  puts 
down  two  |  side-pieces,  one  on  each  side.     She  puts  kindling-wood  in 
the  space  between  the  ||  side-pieces,  and  she   places  medium-sized  25 
driftwood  crosswise  |  on  top  of  it.     Then  she  takes  her  basket  and 
goes  to  pick  stones  on  the  |  beach.     When  her  stone-carrying  basket 
is  full  with  stones,  |  she  carries  it  on  her  back,  and  puts  it  down  out- 
side of  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  steam  the  chitons.     She  |  puts 
them  on  top  of  the  crosspieces  of  driftwood;  and  when  they  are  all 
on,  ||  she  lights  the  fire  under  (the  whole).     When  the  fire  blazes  up,  30 
she  goes  to  the  beach  |  and  gathers  kelp  that  grows  on  the  rocks;  | 

gwilases  gokwe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  loqlwa  qa£s  guxtslodesa 
£wE£wap!Eme  laq  qa  nEgoyoxsdalesexs  lae  giixstEntsa  klinele  laq. 
Wa,  hetlala  moxse  £nalas  q!og'ililExs  laeda  tstedaqe  ax£edxes 
xwaLayowe  qa£s  la  klwagagilllaxa  k-!ineltallle  loqlwa.  Wa,  das- 
tEndxa  £nEmsgEme  k-!inela  qa£s  klk'lxsEmeses  xwaxayowe  Laq  qa  15 
£wl£lawesa  lEnxa  lax  5sgEma£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£l:iwa  lEnxa 
lax  osgEma-yasexs  lae  £mElsgEma.  Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs 
lae  axtslots  laxa  6gu£lante  loqlwa  laxat!  UEgoyoxsdalaxa 
£wE£wap  tenie.  Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  he  gwex-£idxa  waokwe.  Wa, 
g'ihmese  £wl£laxs  lae  xa£mael  q!ogfdlLxa  £wape  laxa  loq!we.  20 
Wa,  g'lhmese  £nax£Idxa  gaaliixs  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxa  qlexale 
qa£s  q lap leg'aliseq  lax  LlEma'isases  gokwe.  Wa,  la£me  xwal£Itsa 
£iiEme  qa  gegiwalltse.  Wa,  lakak'EdEnotsa  malts  !aqe  lax  £waxsa- 
iio£yas.  Wa,  laxae  momagotsa  galastoyoLas  lax  awagawa£yasa 
k'ak'EdEnwa£yas.  Wa,  la  xwalEyindalasa  ha£yal£astowe  q!exal  lax  25 
okiiya£yas.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  lExa£ye  qa£s  la  xEqwax  tlesEma  laxa 
LlEma£ise.  Wa,  gihmese  qotle  xEgwatslas  lExaxa  tlesEmaxs  lae 
oxLosdEsaq  qa£s  la  oxLanolisas  laxes  £nEg-asLaxa  k'linele.  Wa,  la 
XEqiiyfnts  laxa  gEkiya£ye  q!exala.  Wa,  giPmese  £wIlk1yindExs  lae 
tsenabotsa  giilta  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  x-iqostaxs  lae  laxa  L!Eina£ise  3Q 
qa£s  k!ulx£Idexa  L'EsLlEkwe  q'.waxa  laxa  t!edzEk!wa.  Wa,  gil- 
75052—21 — 35  eth— pt  1 31 


482  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.36 

32  and  when  her  basket  is  full,  she  carries  it  on  her  back,  and  puts  it 
down  |  by  the  side  of  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  steam  the 
chitons.     Then  she  goes  into  the  woods  to  get  |  skunk- cabbage  and 

35  old  fern.  She  puts  these  into  a  ||  basket,  and  carries  the  basket  with 
fern  on  her  back;  and  she  carries  the  skunk-cabbage  under  her  arm.  | 
Then  she  goes  home,  and  puts  down  the  skunk-cabbage  |  by  the  side 
of  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  steam  the  chitons;  and  she  also  puts 
down  the  |  basket  with  old  ferns.     Her  husband  cuts  sticks  |  one 

40  span  long,  of  red  pine,  with  sharp  points  ||  and  round,  for  spits  for  the 
chitons.  As  soon  as  these  are  finished,  |  she  takes  one  of  the  chitons 
and  pushes  the  spit  of  |  red-pine  wood  through  the  middle  of  it. 
She  does  this  with  every  one  of  them,  |  one  spit  for  each  chiton,  in 
this  manner:  When    they  are  all  on   the   spits,  |  they  are 

ready,       and  she  puts  them  into  a  basket.     Then  the  man 

45  takes  the  ||  /CP  ^\  tongs  and  takes  away  the  driftwood  that  is  not 
burned;  |  and  \%t<¥  as  soon  as  all  the  fire  has  been  taken  away,  he 
takes     the  kelp  and  lays  it  |  on  the  red-hot  stones,  and  he 

puts  old  fern  |  over   the   kelp;    and   he    takes    the  skunk- 

cabbage   and    |   spreads  it  over   the   old  fern.     As  soon  as  this  is 

50  finished,  he  takes  the  ||  chitons  on  their  spits  and  pours  them  on  the 
skunk-cabbage.  When  this  is  |  done,  he  takes  a  cedar-stick  and 
pokes  holes  through  the  skunk-cabbage  for  |  the  water  to  pass  through 

32  £mese  qot!e  L!Egwats!es  lExaxs  lae  oxLosdesaq  qa£s  la  oxxanolisas 
laxa  £nEgasLaxa  k.  linele.  Wa,  la  aLe£sta  laxa  ai>!ek-as  la  axa 
klikaoklwa,    wa,    he£misa    LEqlEmse.     Wa,    laEm    axtslots    laxa 

35  lExa£ye.  Wa,  la  oxxalaxa  LEqlEmdzatsle  lExaxs  laaLal  gEmxElaxa 
k'liklaoklwaxs  lae  na£nakwa.  Wa,  la  gEmxEnolisasa  k'liklaoklwa 
la  maginwalisases  £nEgasLaxa  k' linele.  Wa,  laxae  oxLEgalisasa 
LEqlEmdzatsle  lExa  laxaaq.  Wa,  laLa  Ia£wunEmas  klaxwaxa 
£nal£nEmp  tenke  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex  wunagula  qa  eexbes; 

40  wa,  he£mis  qa  leElxines  qa  SdEinsa  k- linele.  Wa,  gtPmese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  axeedxa  EnEmsgEme  laxa  k- linele  qa£s  otledesa  odsme 
wunagul  lax  nExsEma£yas.  Wa,  lii  £naxwaEm  £nEmts  !axsEmaleda 
k-  linelaxa  odEme  ga  gwalegaxs  lae  odEkwa  (Jig.).  Wa,  la£me  £naxwa 
gwalalaxs  lae  gits!a  laxa  lExa£ye.     Wa,  la  ax£ededa  bEgwanEmaxa 

45k!ipLala  qa£s  k' !ips£alax£Idexa  k'lese  q!ulx£Itsa  qlexale.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  £wl£leda  gultaxs  lae  ax£edxa  LlEsLlEkwe  qa£s  ts!ax£alodes 
laxa  xixixsEmala  tlesEma.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  LEqlEmse  qa£s  ts!a- 
kiyindes  laxa  LlEsLlEkwe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  k!ik!aok!wa  qa£s 
LEpEyinde    laxa    LEqlEmse.     Wa,    gil£mese    gwalExs    lae    ax£edxa 

50  odEkwe  klinela  qa£s  g-edzodales  laxa  k-!ik-!aok!wa.  Wa,  giPmese 
gwalExs  lae  LlEiiqEmxsalasa  k!wa£xLawe  laxa  k-!ik-!aok!wa  qa 
lax-salatsa  £wape  lo£  qa  kixusalatsa  k'lalEla.     Wa,  g-il£mese  gwa- 


boas]  RECIPES  483 

and  the  steam  to  come  out.     When  this  is  done,  |  he  pours  water  on,  53 
and  he  takes  some  skunk-cabbage  |  leaves  and  spreads  them  over  the 
top;  and  when  it  is  all  covered,  he  ||  takes  mats  and  covers    (the  55 
whole).     When  this  is  done,  he  |  leaves  it.     After  about  four  hours  | 
(the  chitons)  are  done.     Then  he  takes  off  the  cover-mats  and  |  also 
takes  off  the  skunk-cabbage  cover.     When  the  |  cover  is  all  off,  he 
calls  the  people  who  are  walking  about  to  come  and  eat  the  chitons.  || 
When  they  sit  down,  he  gives  each  |  one  a  spit  with  a  chiton  on  it,  60 
and  immediately  they  |  begin  to  eat  chitons.     Nobody  gets  two  | 
spits  of  steamed  chitons,  for  they  taste  very  salt;  |  and  when  they  eat 
many  chitons,  these  cause    diarrhoea.   ||  After  they  have  finished,  65 
they  all  go  home.     They  do  not  invite  |  many  tribes  for  this,  and  it 
is    not   eaten   by   the   Kwakiutl.  |  Only   the   Seaward-Dwellers   eat 
chitons,  and  also  the  Koskimo  |  and  Gwats!enoxu   and  G'ap!enoxu 
and  the  L!asq!enoxu.  |  Only  those  eat  it.     That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Boiled  Chiton. —  (Wien  chitons  have  been  gathered  [see  p.  293],  1 
they  are  eaten  in  the  following  manner:)     At  once  (the  woman)  sends 
her  husband  to  go  and  |  invite  his  numaym.    Immediately  the  woman 
takes  |  her  kettle  and  pours  water  into  it;  and  when  it  is  half  full,  | 
she  puts  it  on  the  fire.     When  it  begins  to  boil,  ||  the  woman  takes  the  5 
basket  of  chitons  by  the  handle  and  pours  |  them  into  the  kettle. 


Iexs  hie    tsas£ftsa   £wape    laq.     Wa,  la    ax£edxa    waokwe  k'lik'lao- 53 
kwa    qa£s    LEpEyindales     laq.      Wa,    g  il£mese     hamElqEyaxs    lae 
ax£edxa  leEl£wa£ye  qa£s  nasEyindes  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  55 
bas.      Wa,    laxEntla    motsIagELElaglla    laxEns    q !aq !alak' !ayoxEns 
£nalaqexs    lae    iJopa.     Wa,   la£mes    letledEx    nayimas    l§El£wa£ya. 
Wa,  laxae  lawiyodxa  nayime   k"!a5k!wa.      Wa,  gil£mese    £wl£lawe 
nayimasexs     lae     Le£lalaxa     q!iiname£sta     qa     liis     k"  linlk"  !al£Idxa 
klinele.      Wa,    giPmese    k!iis£alisExs    lae    tslEwanagEmeda    £nal-  60 
£nEmts!aqe  6dEku  £nEgiku    k' !inel   laq.     Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  hex£i- 
daEm  k' linlk- !al£Idxa  kMtnele.     Wa,   laEm   k' leas  malts  !axk!Etsexa 
odEkwe  £nEg"Eku  klinela,  qaxs  Lomae  dEmp!a.     Wa,  he£misexs  alae 
wulElIsElamasEx   q!ek'!Edzayaeda  klinelaxs  ha£ma£yae.      Wa,  gil- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  £wl£la  na£nakwa.     Wa,  laEin  k'!es  Le£lalayo  laxa  65 
qlenEme  lelqwalaLa£va.     Wa,  laxaa    k"!es    ha£masa    Kwagule,    la 
lex-a£ma    LlaLlasiqwala    k!inlk!alxa    klinele    LE£wa  Gosgimoxwe 
LE£wa    Gwatslenoxwe   LE£wa    Gaplenox'we,    wa    he£misa    L!asq!e- 
noxwe.     HeEm  £waxeda  ha£mapaq.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Boiled  Chiton. — Wa,  he'x,£ida£mese  £yalaqaxes  la£wuiiEme  qa  las  1 
Le'£l5laxes  £nE£me'mote.     Wa,  la  he'x'£ida£meseda  tslEda'qe  ax£e'd- 
xes    hanxLa'nowe    qa£s    giixtslo'desa    £wa'pe    laq    qa    £nEgoya'le- 
sexs  la'e  ha'nxxEnts  la'xes  lEgwi'le.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  mEdEbc£wI'- 
dExs   la'eda  tslEda'qe   k-!o'qiilllxes   q!E'nyats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  gux-  5 
stE'ndes   la'xa    ha'nxLanowe.      Wa,    la    ax£e'dxes    kMipLa'la   qa?s 


484  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  85 

7  Then  she  takes  her  fire-tongs  and  |  pokes  the  chitons  in  the  water; 
and  as  soon  as  the  skin  comes  off,  |  they  are  done.  Then  she  takes 
the  kettle  off  of  the  fire.    |   She  takes  a  large  dish  and  dips  up  with 

10  a  spoon  ||  the  chitons  in  the  water,  and  she  puts  them  into  the  dish. 
She  does  not  |  put  the  liquid  into  the  dish  also.  As  soon  as  the  dish 
is  full,  |  the  woman  pours  fresh  water  on  the  chitons  in  the  dish,  | 
and  she  puts  it  down  before  the  guests  of  her  husband.  |  They  eat  at 

15  once  with  their  hands.  ||  They  peel  off  the  shells  on  the  back,  and  they 

throw  them  into  the  |  dish,  with  the  guts.     As  soon  as  they  finish 

eating  the  chitons,  they  |  wash  their  hands  in  the  water  of  their  food; 

and  |  after  they  have  eaten,  those  who  have  eaten  chitons  go  out.  | 

Large  Chiton  (Getting  large  chiton). — When  a  man  wants  to  eat  || 

20  chitons,  he  launches  his  |  small  canoe  at  low  water,  and  he  goes  to  a 
place  where  he  knows  there  are  many  chitons.  |  When  he  arrives 
there,  he  puts  the  stern  of  his  chiton-catching  |  canoe  ashore  and 
gets  off.     He  picks  up  chitons  which   |  he  on  the  stony  beach,  and 

25  he  throws  them  into  his  small  chiton-catching  canoe.  ||  When  he  has 
many,  he  launches  |  his  chiton-catching  canoe,  goes  aboard,  and  he  | 
paddles  back.  He  picks  up  driftwood  where  there  is  much  of  it, 
and  |  he  puts  it  into  his  chiton-catching  canoe.     As  soon  as  it  is  | 

dzEk'Elga'yes    la'xes    qlE'nsela.     Wa,    g'i'J£mese   qtis£e'des   LletsE- 

7  ma£ye,  wa,  laE'm  L!opa  laxe'q.     Wa,  he'x-£ida£mese  ha/nxs£EndEq. 

Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa   £wa'lase    lo'qlwa  qa£s    XElo'ltsodesa    katslEna'qe 

la'xes  qte'nsela  qa£s  le  xsltsla'las  la'xa  lo'qlwe.     Wa,  laE'm  k!es 

10  6'gwaqa  le  £wa'palas  la'xa  lo'qlwa.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  qo't!eda  16'- 
q!waxs  la'eda  tslEda'qe  gu'qlEqasa  a'lta  ewa'pe  la'xa  la  lExuts  la/la 
qlana'sa.  Wa,  le  k'axdzamo'lilas  lax  Le'£lanEmases  la'£wGnEme. 
Wa,  ke'x'£ida£niese  xa'maxts!a'naxs  la'e  da'x-£Idxes  ha£ma'£ye. 
Wa,  laE'm   sexa/lax    xE'ldzeg'a£yas.     Wa,    la    ts  texts  !a/las    la'xa 

15  lo'q!we  LE£wes  tslEyi'me.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwal  q!E'nsq!asExs  la'e 
he'Em  ts!E'nts!Enx£widede  £wapa'lases  ha£ma'£ye.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese 
gwa'lExs  la'e  ho'quwElseda  q!E'nsq!ase. 

large     Chiton     (K!ak!Enot!axa    k'.Enote). — He£maaxs     ha£ma- 
exsdaeda  bEgwanEmaxa  k'  lEiiote.     Wa,  a£mise  wi£xustEndxes  xwa- 

20  xwagumaxa  la,  x-ats!aesa  qa£s  la  laxes  q!file  q!eq!adxa  k'lEnote. 
Wa,  gil£mese  lag'aa  laqexs  lae  aLaxxax£Idxes  k-!ak'!Ent!aats!e 
xwaxwagiima  qa£s  loltawf.  Wa,  la  mEnx£Idxa  k'lEnotaxs  qEp- 
qEp!ae  laxa  t!edzEk!wa  qa£s  tslEgExsEles  laxes  k'!ak'!Ent!aats!e 
xwaxwagiima.     Wa,  g'iPmese  qlEyoLExs  lae  hex-£idaEm  la  wl£xus- 

25  tEndxes  k!ak'!Ent!aats!e  xwaxwagiima  qa£slaxseq.  Wa,  g-axe  sex- 
£wida  qa£s  la  anexbalax  q!exala  laxa  q!Eyaasasa  q!exale.  Wa,  la 
moxsElas  laxes  k!ak!Ent!aats!e  xwaxwagiima.  Wa,  g'il£mese  qo- 
t!axs  lae  laxsa  qa£s  sex£wide;  laEm  lfd  nivnak"  laxes  g-okwe.  Wa, 


boas]  RECIPES  485 

full,  he  goes  aboard  and  paddles  home  to  his  house.  ||  When  he  arrives  30 
at  his  beach,  he  throws  the  |  driftwood  ashore.     He  goes  up  and  goes 
to  get  a  basket  from  his  |  house,  and  he  comes  carrying  it  down  to 
the  place  where  his  chiton-catching  |  canoe  is.     He  also  carries  his 
knife,  and  he  |  puts  the  basket  into  the  small  canoe.  ||  Then  he  takes  35 
one  of  the  chitons,  puts  it  down  on  its  back,  |  and  cuts  along  its 
belly.     Then  he  pulls  out  the  entrails,  |  and  he  throws  them  into  the 
water;  and  he  scrapes  it,  so  that  the  red  color  |  on  the  body  of  the 
chiton  comes  off.     When  it  is  all  off,  he  |  washes  it  in  salt  water. 
After  he  has  done  so,  he  throws  it  ||  into  the  chiton-basket.     He  does  40 
this  with  all  the  others.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  all  ready,  he  carries  the 
basket  of  chitons;  |  and  when  he  is  in  his  house,  he  puts  it  down  in 
the  |  corner  of  the  house;  and  he  goes  down  to  the  beach  to  bring 
up  |  the  driftwood,  and  he  carries  it  into  the  house,  and  he  puts  it 
down  ||  by  the  side  of  the  fire,  and  he  puts  it  on  the  fire.  |  If  he  wishes  45 
to  eat  the  chiton  raw,  he  takes  his  knife  |  and  cuts  the  belly  of  the 
chiton,  which  looks  like  the  tongue  |  of  a  quadruped.     He  puts  them 
into  a  small  dish  with  |  water  in  it.     He  also  cuts  close  along  the  shell 
on  its  back  ||  the  whole  length  of  the  body  of  the  chiton;  and  |  when  50 
it  is  off,  he  cuts  it  into  pieces  half  a  |  finger-width  thick.    Then  he  puts 
these  pieces  into  a  small  dish  with  water  in  it ;  |  and  when  he  has 

g'iPmese    lag'alis   laxes    L!Ema£isaxs   lae    hex'£idaEm    sEp£iiltodxes  30 
qlexanEme   qlexala.     Wa,  la  lasdesa  qa£s  la  ax£edEX  lExa£ya  laxes 
gokwe  qa£s  g'axe  dEnts!esElaq  lax  ha£nedzasases  k'!ak'!Ent!aats!e 
xwaxwaguma.      Wa,   he£mis    daaxuses    tslewulegayo    k'lawayowa. 
Wa,  la   hang'aaiExsasa    iExa£ye  laxa  k-!ak!Ent!aats!e    xwaxwagil- 
maxs  lae  dax£Idxa  £nEmsgEme   k'tenota  qa£s   t!ex,£alExseq.      Wa,  35 
la     qwagEnodzEndEX    tEk!asexs    lae     gElx'wEqodEX    yaxyigllas 
qa£s  tslExstEndeq.     Wa,  la  k'odzEltsEmdEq    qa  lawayesa    gugum- 
yEmstowe  axsEmexa  k-!Enote.     Wa,  g"il£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  ts!6x£wl- 
dEq  laxa  dEmsxe    £wapa.     Wa,    g-il£mese    gwalExs  lae    ts  texts  lots 
laxes   k'!Endats!e  lExa£ya.     Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  he  gwex-£Idxa  wao-  40 
kwe.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  k-!ox£wEltodxes    k-!Endats!e  lExa- 
£ya.     Wa,  gil£mese  laeLas  laxes  gokwaxs  lae  hangalllas  laxa  one- 
gwilases  g'okwe.     Wa,  la  lEnts!es    laxa  L!Ema£ise  qa£s  la  wixwiis- 
desa  laxa  q!exale  qa£s   la  wlg'iLElas   laxes  g"6kwe  qa£s  la  wix£all- 
las  laxa  maginwalilases  lEgwile.     Wa,  la  lEqwelax-£Ida.     Wa,  g  il-  45 
£mese    £nex'    qa£s     k'  !ilxk'  !ax-exa     k-  lEnotaxs    lae    &x£edxes  k-  !a- 
wayowe    qa£s    tlosodex    tEk!asa     k!Enotexa    he    gwex'sa    k-!ilE- 
maxsa    gilg'aomase,  wa,  qa£s    axts lodes  laxa  lalogume  £wabEts!a- 
laxa  £wape.      Wa,    laxae    t'.osodxa    makildzodalaxa    xEldzega£ya 
hebEndala  lax  £wasgEmasas  ogwida£yasa  klEnote.      Wa,    g:il£mese  50 
lawaxs   lae  heloxusEnd    t!ot!Ets!EndEq  qa    k'!odEnes    wlwogwasas 
laxEns  q!waq!waxts!ana£yex,  lae  axstalas   laxa  £wabEts!awasa   la- 


486  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

enough,  he  takes  the  tongs  and  |  holds  the  pieces  of  chiton  and  throws 

55  them  into  the  ||  fire,  and  then  he  picks  them  out  again  with  the 
tongs  and  puts  |  them  back  into  the  dish,  and  he  washes  them,  and 
then  he  eats  them.  |  He  only  stops  when  he  has  eaten  enough.  Then 
he  rinses  his  mouth  |  with  water;  and  after  he  has  rinsed  his  mouth, 
so  that  the  salt  taste  |  is  removed,  he  drinks  a  little  water.     That  is 

60  all  about  ||  one  way  of  cooking  them.  | 
1  Baked  Large  Chiton. — There  is  another  way  of  cooking  |  chitons. 
They  only  cut  out  the  entrails;  and  as  soon  as  all  |  the  entrails  are 
out,  the  woman  takes  her  tongs  and  digs  a  hole  |  in  the  hot  ashes. 
5  Then  she  takes  the  chiton  whose  guts  have  been  removed  and  ||  puts 
it  into  the  hole  that  she  has  dug,  and  she  covers  it  over  with  hot 
ashes.  |  As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  a  dish  and  pours  water 
into  it  I  until  it  is  half  full.  When  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  a  spoon  | 
and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire,  and  also  the  dish,  |  and  she 
takes  the  tongs  and  uncovers  the  chiton  which  has  been  buried  in  the 

10  ashes.  ||  With  her  tongs  she  lifts  the  buried  chiton  and  |  puts  it  into 
the  dish,  and  she  takes  the  spoon  and  with  it  she  scrapes  off  |  the 
ashes  that  stick  on  it  from  the  outside.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  all  off,  she 
pulls  off  the  shell  from  the  back,  for  it  is  very  soft,  because  |  it  is 

15  thoroughly  cooked.     As  soon  as  all  the  dirt  is  off,  she  ||  changes  the 


53  logume.  Wa,  gu£mese  hela  axa£yasexs  lae  ax£edxes  tslesLala  qa£s 
daleqexs  hie    dax£idxa   tlEwekwe    klEnota    qa£s    tslEXLaleq    laxes 

55  lEgwIle.  Wa,  xwelaqa£mese  k'lipletsa  tslesLala  laq  qa£s  la  k'lip- 
stalas  laxa  loqlwe.  Wa,  la  ts!ox£widEq  qa£s  k'llntklatledeq.  Wa, 
laEm  al£Em  gwalExs  lae  pol£Ida.  Wa,  la  hex-£idaEm  tslEweLlExo- 
tsa  £wape.  Wa,  g11£mese  gwal  tsEweiJExodExs  lae  £wl£lawa  dEm- 
p  !aeL  lExawayasexs   lae  nax£ldxa   holale  £wapa.      Wa,  laEm    gwala 

60  £nF.mx-idala  hamexsilaeneq. 
1  Baked  Large  Chiton. — Wa,  ga£mes£  nEmx£Idala  ha£mexsllaenexa 
k'!Enoteg-a,  yixs  a£mae  ts  lewElegEkwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£lawe 
yax-yig-Ilasexs  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxes  ts!esLala  qa£s  labese  laxa 
tslElqwa  guna£ya.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  ts lewElagEkwe  klEnota  qa£s 
5  mExuts lodes  laxes  £lapa£ye.  Wa,  la  dzEmsgEmtsa  tslElqwa  guna£ye 
laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  loq  !we  qa£s  guxts  !odesa  £wape 
laq  qa  nEgoyoxsdales.  Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  kats!Enaqe 
qa£s  gaxe  g'gg'alllaq  lax  maginwalllases  lEgwIle  LE£wa  loqlwe.  Wa, 
la  ax£edxa   tslesLala    qa£s    let!edes    laxes    dzamesasE£we    klEnota. 

10  Wa,  la  k!ip!etsa  tslesLala  laxa  dzamedzEkwe  klEnota  qa£s  la 
klipstEnts  laxa  loqlwe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  k'atslEnaqe  qa£s  kodzEl- 
tsEmdes  lax  5sgEma£yas  qa  lawalesa  guna£ye  la  klutsEmeq.  Wa, 
g'll£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  gElqalax  xEldzeg-a£yas  qaxs  lae  xas£Ida  qaxs 
lae  alak'lala  la  Llopa.     Wa,  g'il£mese  £wi£lawa  £yax"sEma£yasexs  lae 

15  LlayodEx  £wapasexs   lae  neqwa.     Wa,  laEm  gtiqodEq  lax  Llasana- 


boas]  RECIPES  487 

water,  for  it  is  dirty.  Then  she  pours  it  out  outside  |  of  the  house,  16 
and  she  pours  some  fresh  water  on  it,  and  she  |  washes  it  again;  and 
when  all  that  looks  like  red  paint  comes  off,  it  is  done.  |  Then  they 
begin  to  eat  the  baked  chiton;  |  and  when  they  have  finished,  (the 
woman)  draws  some  water  and  rinses  her  mouth  to  |[  remove  the  20 
salt  taste;  and  when  it  is  all  gone,  she  drinks  |  water.  That  is  all 
about  this.  | 

Boiled  Large  Chiton. — First  |  the  woman  takes  a  kettle,  and  she 
pours  some  water  into  it  until  it  is  |  more  than  half  full,  and  she  puts 
it  on  the  fire;  and  she  takes  ||  a  chiton,  and  takes  the  knife  for  cutting  25 
out  the  insides,  and  cuts  |  along  one  side  of  its  belly.     Then  she  pulls 
out  the  entrails  and  throws  them  down  by  the  side  |  of  the  fire.     As 
soon  as  they  are  all  out,  she  scrapes  off  with  the  |  back  of  her  knife 
what  looks  like  red  paint  on  its  body;  |  and  when  it  is  all  off,  she 
washes  it  in  a  dish  ||  with  water  in  it;  and  by  the  time  it  is  all  washed,  30 
the  kettle  on  the  fire  begins  to  boil.  |  Then  she  puts  the  chitons  into 
it;  and  when  |  they  are  all  in,  she  calls  her  friends  to  come  and  eat 
the  |  boiled  chitons.     When  they  have  all  come  in,  the  |  woman  takes 
her  spoons  and  dishes  and  ||  puts  them  down  where  she  is  sitting,  and  35 
she  takes  her  tongs  and  stirs  |  the  chitons  that  she  is  cooking  while 
they  are  still  on  the  fire.  |  After  they  have  been  boding  for  maybe 


lyases  gokwe,  qa£s  laxat!  guxts!otsa  £wE£wap!Eirte  laq;  laxae  et!ed  16 
ts !ox£widEq.     Wa,  g  il£mese  £wl£lawa  he  gwexs  gugumyixs  lae  gwala. 
Wa,   hex£ida£niese  k' lEntk' !at !edxa   dzamedzEkwe    k' lEnota.     Wa, 
gllnnese  gwalExs   lae    tsex,£Idxa   £wape    qa£s  ts  !EweL  texode  qa  la- 
wayeses    dEmp!aeL*Exawa£ye.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laxs   lae  nax£Idxa  20 
£wape.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Boiled  Large  Chiton  (Hfinxxaak"  k-!Enot). — Wa,  heEm  g-tl 
ax£etso£sa  tslEdaqes  hanxxanowe  qa£s  guxtslodesa  £wape  laq  qa 
ek!oldza£yes.  Wa,  la  hanxxEnts  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
k-  lEiiote  qa£s  ax£edexes  ts  lewElagayo  k"  lawayowa  qa£s  qwagEno-  25 
dzEndex  tEklasexs  lae  gElxuqodEx  yaxgig-Ilas  qa£s  ts lEgEnolises 
laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  k'osalas  aweg-a£yases 
ts!ewElagayu  k'lawayowe  laxa  he  gwex's  gugumyime  lax  SsgE- 
ma£yas.  Wa,  g-il£rnese  £wl£laxs  lae  tsox£w!dEq  laxa  loqfwa 
£wabEts!alila.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£la  ts!okuxs  lae  mEdElx£wideda  30 
hanxLanowe.  Wa,  la  axstalasa  k'lEnote  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese 
£\\i£la£staxs  lae  L§£lalaxes  £ne£nEmokwe  qa  g-axes  k-  !Ek-  !Enotg"ixa 
hanxLaakwe  k'lEnota.  Wa,  g-ll£mese  gax  £wI£la§LExs  laeda 
ts!Edaqe  ax£edxes  kakEtslEiiaqe  LE£wa  loElqlwe  qa£s  g"axe  ka- 
galfias  laxes  k'.waelase.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  tslesLala  qa£s  xwet!edes  35 
laxes  k'lEntela  klEnotExs  he£mae  ales  hanxxala  laxa  lEgwile.  Wa, 
laxEntia  hayaqax  £nEmts!agELElagila   laxEns  q!aq!alak!a£yaxsEns 


488  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.36 

38  more  than  an  hour  according  to  the  watch,  |  she  takes  them  from  the 
fire.  |  Then  they  are  boiled  to  pieces  and  they  are  cooked  thoroughly. 

40  Then  she  takes  her  ||  long-handled  ladle,  and  with  it  she  takes  out 
the  boiled  chitons  and  |  pours  them  into  the  dishes.  As  soon  as  they 
are  all  in  the  dishes,  j  she  puts  them  down  in  front  of  her  guests. 
She  takes  the  spoons  and  distributes  |  them;  and  when  she  has  given 
one  to  each,  |  they  begin  to  eat  the  boiled  chiton  and  the  liquid.  || 

45  They  try  to  eat  with  spoons  all  the  boiled  chiton.     After  |  they  have 

eaten  it  all,  they  drink  very  little  water.     Now,  that  is  all  about  this.  | 

Chitons  are  the  food  eaten  by  the  poor  people  who  can  not  |  get 

the  real  good  food.     It  is  not  often  eaten  by  chiefs  |  and  young  men 

50  and  young  women.  The  only  time  it  is  eaten  ||  by  chiefs  and  young 
men  and  young  women  is  when  they  are  |  caught  in  bad  weather  and 
by  strong  winds,  and  when  they  have  to  stay  out  for  a  long  time,  or 
when  their  canoes  |  capsize.  Then  they  get  chitons  and  large  chitons  | 
and  winkles,  and  also  small  mussels  and  large  mussels.  This  and  | 
various  kinds  of  shell-fish  are  the  food  of  those  who  are  caught,  and 

55  often  this  ||  saves  their  lives.     That  is 'all  about  this.  | 
1       Raw  and  Roasted  Sea-Eggs. — As 1  soon  as  (the  spear)  is  finished,  (the 
man)  waits  |  until  it  gets  calm  at  low  tide;  and  when  it  is  calm,  at  low 
tide  in  the  |  morning,  he  launches  his  sea-egg  spearing-canoe,  |  and  he 


38  £nalaqe  £wa£wasLalasas  maEmdElqulaxslae  hanxsEndEq  laxes  lEgwi- 
le.    Wa,  laEm  xas£ida.    Wa,  laEm  alaklala  la  L!opa.    Wa,  la  ax£edxa 

40  g'iltlEXLala  tsexLa  qa£s  xalo£stEndexa  hanxxaakwe  k'lEnota  qa£s 
la  tsetslalas  laxa  loElqlwe.  Wa,  g'll£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  kax'dzamo- 
lllas  laxes  Le£lanEnie.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  kak"Ets!Enaqe  qa£s  tstewa- 
naeses  laq.  Wa,  giPmese  £wl£la  la  axnogwatsa  k-akEtstenaqaxs 
lax-da£xwae  £yos£Idxa  hanxxaakwe   k'lEnot  LE£wis  £wapala.      Wa, 

45  la£me  £wa£wl£laa    £yosaxa    hanxxaakwe    k'lEnota.     Wa,    gil£mese 

£wPlaxs  lae  nax£Idxa  holalbidawe  £wapa.     Wa,  lawesLa  gwal  laxeq. 

HeEm    hemawalasa    wI£woselageda     k'Enote,     yixa    wayapolala 

laLidaxa  ala£me  hemawala.      Wa,  la  k'!es  qltinala  ha£masa  glgiga- 

ma£ye  p£wa  ha£yalea  LE£wa  ealostagase  tsledaqa.    Lex'aEm  hamx-£i- 

50  daatsa  g-Ig  igama£yaq  LE£wa  ha£yala£q  LE£wa  ealostagasaqexs  lala- 
wol£idae  laxa  £y ax  same  £nalax  yanEmaaxs  g'ayagillsElae  loxs 
qEpae.  Wa,  he£mis  la  ax£edaatsexa  qlanase  LE£wa  k-!Enote 
le£wu  gllayowe,  L6£ma  laese  LE£wa  xole.  Wa,  heEm  hemawalasa 
lalawol£ede    LE£wa    ts!ets!Ek!wemase.      Wa,    heEm    qlunala   q!ula- 

55  masEq.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

1      Raw   and    Roasted    Sea-Eggs. — Wa,1   gll£mese   gwalExs  lae    esEla 

qa     kMimakilisexa     xats!aese.     Wa,   g-ll£mese    k!imaqElaxa    xa- 

tslaesaxa   gaalaxs  lae   wr"xustEndxes  mamaseq  Iwaats  !eL§  xwaxwa- 

guma.     Wa,  he£mesa  mamaseq!waxsEyase  se£wayo  ax£etsos  LE£wis 

1  Continued  from  p.  154,  line  18. 


boas]  RECIPES  489 

also  takes  his  paddle  and  bailer  ||  and  spear.     He  paddles,  and  goes  5 
to  a  place  where  there  are  many  sea-eggs.  |  Then  he  takes  his  spear 
and  puts  it  into  the  |  sea;  and  he  spears  the  sea-eggs,  and  puts  them 
into  his  |  sea-egg  spearing-canoe.     When  he  has  many  of  them,  |  he 
goes  home.  || 

As  soon  as  he  arrives  on  the  beach  of  his  house,  he  calls  his  |  tribe  10 
to  come  and  break  the  sea-eggs  and  to  eat  them.  |  Immediately  all 
the  men  and  women  and  |  children  go  down  to  the  beach  where  the 
sea -egg  spearing-canoe  is,  |  and  all  the  men  go  into  the  sea  ||  and  15 
stand  by  the  side  of  the  canoe  containing  the  sea-eggs.  |  They  take 
out  the  sea-eggs,  and  they  go  and  give  two  each  |  to  their  wives,  and 
they  also  take  two  each  for  themselves;  and  |  all  the  others  do  the 
same.     As  soon  as  |  they  have  them,  they  sit  down  by  the  side  of  the 
water.     Each  takes  a  ||  stone,  and  with  it  breaks  one  side  of  the  sea-  20 
egg  at  the  side  where  the  |  mouth  is,  and  they  pull  out  the  edible 
insides    and  |  wash    them   in   sea-water;    and    after   washing   them, 
they  |  squeeze  out  the  sea-water  and  they  eat  them, — lEx£wid  as  the 
Seaward  people  call  the  eating  |  of  sea-eggs,  while  the   Kwag'ul  call 
the  eating  of  sea-eggs  ||  m.Emsexug ' Exa  mEseqwe;  and  they  all  do  the  25 
same  as  |  they  eat  the  sea-eggs;  namely,  the  good  sea-eggs,  which  are 
the  female  |  sea-eggs.     The  male  sea-eggs  are  bad.     That  is  what  the 


tsiilayowe  l5£  mamaseq !wayas.     Wii,  la  sex£wlda  qa£s  la  lax  qteyaa-  5 
sasa  mEseqwe.     Wii,  la  dag  ilExsaxes    mamaseq  !wayowe   qa£s    me- 
dEnses  laxa  dEmsx'e.     Wa,  la  sEX,£Idxa  mEseqwe  qa£s  k!wet!alEx- 
sEles  laxes  mamaseq  Iwaats  !e  xwaxwagtima.    Wa,  gil£niese  q  lEyoLExs 
lae  nii£naku  laxes  gokwe. 

Wa,  gtl£mese   lag'alis   lax   LlEma£isases  gokwaxs  lae  £laqiilaxes  10 
gokulote    qa    g'Sxes   tsaka  qa£s    mEmsexuguxa    mEseqwe.      Wa„ 
hex£ida£mesa  £naxwa   bebEgwanEm  LE£wis    tsledaqe  LEfwa  gingi- 
nanEm   la   hoqiints!es    lax    hanstalldzasasa    mEseguxsala   xwaxwa- 
gtima.    Wa,  la  £naxwa£maeda  bebEgwanEme  la  la£sta  laxa  dEmsxe 
£wapa   qa£s   la   Lax£wag-ilisxa     mEseguxsala     xwaxwagiima.      Wa  15 
laxda£xwe    dag'IlExsaxa    mEseqwe     qa£s     la    tsasa    maemaltsEme 
mEseq"    laxes    gEgEnEme.     Wii,    laxae    maltsEme    SxanEmas    qaxs 
hae.     Wa,    la    £naxwasm    he  gwex£ide    waokwas.     Wa,    g11£mese 
£wilxtoxs  lae  k!udzExtalisEla   laxa    dEinsx-e    qa£s    £naxwe    ax£edxa 
t!esEme  qa£s  tsox£widexa   epsana£yasa  mEseqwe  laxa  gwena£ye  lax  20 
sEmsas.     Wa,    laxda£xwe    gElx£ults!odEx    hamts!awas    qaes    ts!ox 
£wideq  laxa  dEmsxe.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwal    ts!oxwaqexs   lae  q!we- 
sodxa  dEmsx-e.     Wa,  la  lEX£w!dEq   £nek-a  LlaLlasiqwalaxa  lia-'ma- 
paaxa  mEseqwe;  wa,  ItiLeda  Kwagule  £nekaxs  ha£mapaaxa  mEse- 
qwe mEmsexuguxa  mEseqwe.     Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  he  gwegilaxs   lae  25 
mEmsexugixa    mEseqwe   laxa    eyaxse    mEseqwa    yixa    tsledaqasa 
mEseqwe.     Wa,  la  £ya£yax-sa  bEgwanEme    yix    gwE£yasa  baklume 


490  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.sb 

28  Indians  call  |  "milky  sea-eggs."  The  milky  sea-eggs  are  not  eaten 
raw  by  the  Indians.  |  They  keep  them;  that  is  one  of  the  number  of 

30  those  who  are  ||  eating  sea-eggs.  The  woman  gathers  the  |  milky 
sea-eggs  that  have  been  thrown  away  by  the  eaters.  After  the 
people  have  eaten  the  |  good  sea-eggs,  she  takes  the  milky  sea-eggs 
and  washes  out  the  |  large  empty  sea-egg  shells.  Then  she  takes  the 
milky  sea-eggs  and  |  pulls  out  the  edible  insides.     She  washes  them 

35  in  salt  water;  ||  and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  squeezes  them  so  that 
the  water  comes  out,  |  and  she  puts  them  back  into  the  empty  sea- 
egg  shells.  She  continues  doing  this  |  with  the  others;  and  as  soon 
as  they  are  all  done,  there  may  be  five  j  empty  sea-egg  shells  filled 
with   milky  sea-eggs.     She  |  carries   them   up    the  beach   into   the 

40  house.  ||  Then  she  puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  Then  she 
roasts  them.  Some  |  Indians  call  this  ts.'esa.  They  are  almost  | 
under  the  side-logs  of  the  fire.  Sometimes  it  takes  almost  |  half  a 
day  to  cook  them.  They  are  not  taken  off  the  fire  |  until  they  are 
burnt  black.     Then  they  are  done.     The  one  who  is  roasting  them  || 

45  invites  her  numaym  to  come  and  eat  the  |  roasted  sea-eggs;  and  as 
soon  as  the  guests  come  and  sit  down,  |  the  one  who  invited  his  numaym 
takes  the  roasted  sea-eggs  and  \  puts  them  down  in  front  of  the  guests. 
There  are  two  men  to  each  |  sea-egg  shell  containing  roasted  sea-eggs. 


28  dzedaq  mEseqwa.  Wa,  heEin  k!es  k-!ilx'k-!axs6£sa  bakhlma 
dzedaqe  mEseqwa.     Wa,  la  axelaq  yixa  £nEmokwe  lax  £waxaasasa 

30  mEmsexugixa  mEseqwe.  Wa,  la  q!ap!e£nakula  tsteqElayasa 
mEmsexug!xa  mEseqwe,  yixa  dzedaqe.  Wa,  la  gwal  mEmsexugixa 
eyaxse  mEseqiixs  lae  ax£edxa  dzedaqe  mEseqwa  qa£s  ts !oxug-indexa 
£walase  la£xumot  mEseqwa.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  dzedaqe  mEseq"  qa£s 
gElxuqodex  hamts!awas.     Wa,  lii  ts!6x£widEq  laxa  dEinsxe.     Wii, 

35  giPmese  gwalEXs  lae  q!wes£edEq  qa  lawayes  £wapaga£yas.  Wa, 
lExtslots  laxa  lopts!a  la£xumot  mEseqwa.  Wa,  la  banal  he  gwe- 
gilaxa  waokwe.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  £nal£nEmp !Ena  ssk'Iex- 
Leda  la£xumote  mEseq"  qoqiit!axa  dzedaqe  mEseq".  Wa,  la 
kalaq  qa£s  la   kosdesElaq   qa£s    la    k-aeLElas   laxes   gokwe.     Wa, 

40  k'anSlisElas  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  laEm  Llopaq.  Wa,  la  £nekeda 
wa5kwe  baklumqexs  tslesaaq.  Wii,  lasm  halsElaEm  k'les  nEga- 
ballts  kak'EdEnwa£yases  lEgwile.  Wa,  la  £nal£nEmp !Ena  halsE- 
hiEm  k!es  nEqalagila  k!es  Llopa.  Wa,  al£mese  axsanoxs  lae 
k!umk1yax£Ida.     Wa,  laEm    L!opa    laxeq.     Wa,  gil£mese  l!ojjexs 

45  lae  Le£laleda  tslesaq  laxes  £nE£memote  qa  gaxes  ts!Ets!edzEg-ixa 
ts!edzEkwe  mEseqwa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  g-ax  k!us£alila  Le£lanEinaxs 
laeda  Le£lalaxes  £nEmemote,  ax£edxa  tsedzEkwe  mEseq"  qa£s  la 
k'ag'imlilElas  laxes  Le£lanEme.  Wa,  la  maemalElaxa  £nal£nEmexLa 
ts!edzEgwats!e    mEseqwa.      Wa,    lax-da£xwe    xamaxts lanalaxs  lae 


boas  J  RECIPES  491 

They  eat  with  then-  hands  as  ||  they  begin  to  eat  it.     The  people  of  50 
ancient  times  called  this  |  "eating  roasted  sea-eggs."     As  soon  as 
they  finish,  |  they  go  out  of  the  house.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Boiled  Sea-Eggs. — When  the  one  who  goes  to  get  sea-eggs  |  comes  1 
home,  he  immediately  takes  the  |  anchor-line  of  his  sea-egg-catching 
canoe  and  ties  it  to  a  |  stone  on  the  beach.     He  goes  up  and  takes  a 
large  ||  dish  out  of  the  house,  and  carries  it  down  to  where  the  sea-  5 
egg  |  catching-canoe  is.     He  puts   it  down  on  top  of  the  sea-eggs, 
and  |  he  takes  an  elongated  stone  to  break  the  shells  of  the  sea-eggs.  | 
He  sits  in  the  bow  of  his  canoe,  and  his  wife  sits  in  the  stern.  |  His 
wife  often  carries  a  yew-wood  wedge  to  break  the  sea-eggs.  |[  Then  10 
they  begin  to  break  the  mouth-side  of  the  sea-eggs,  and  they  |  pull 
out  the  edible  insides  and  wash  them  on  one  side  of  the  |  canoe. 
After  washing  them,  they  throw  them  into  the  |  large  dish,  and  they 
do  this  with  the  whole  number;  |  and  when  it  has  been  clone  with  all 
of  them,  they  carry  the  clean  sea-eggs  and  go  to  put  them  down  ||  in  15 
the  house.      (The  man)    takes   a  medium-sized  kettle  and  pours  | 
fresh  water  into  it;  and  when  it  is  half  full,  he  puts  it  over  the  |  fire; 
and  when  it  begins  to  bod,  he  takes  the  dish  with  clean  |  sea-eggs 
and  drains  off  the  liquid.     When  the  liquid  is  all  |  drained  off,  lie 
pours  the  clean  sea-eggs  into  the  ||  boiling  water  in  the  kettle  on  the  20 

hamx£IdEq.      Wii,    la    £nekeda  gale  bEgwanEma  ts!ets!edzEg  ixa  50 
ts!edzEk\ve    niEseqwa.      Wa,    gil£mese     gwatexs     lae     hex£idaEm 
hoquwElsa.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Boiled    Ser.-Eggs     (HanxLaak"     mEseq"). — Wa,  he£maaxs  gaxae  1 
na£nakweda  mamasEq !waxa   mEseqwe,  wa,  la  hex£idaEm    ax'edEx 
mogwana£yases  mamaseq  Iwaats  !e  xwaxwaguma  qa£s  mox£wallses  laxa 
makMibalise  laxa  L!Ema£ise.     Wa,  la  lasdesa  qa£s  la  ax£edEx  £walasa 
loq  !wa  laxes  g-okwe,  qa£s  la  kmts  !esElaq  lax  ha£nedzasases  mEsegux-  5 
salalise  xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  la  hankiyints  laxa  niEseqwe.     Wa,  la 
ax£edxa  saxusEme  tlesEma  qa£s  tsogwaj^ax;1.  mEseqwe.     Wa,  laklwa- 
g'iyodxes  xwaxwagume.     Wii,  la  gEnEmas  k!wagiwa£ya.     Wa,  la 
qliinala  dale  gEUEmasexa  Ltemqle  LEing-ayo  qaEs  tsdkulaxa  mEseqwe. 
Wa,  laxdaexwe  tsoxewidEX  sEmdzp:nwa£yasa  mEseqwe.     Wa,  lax'da-  10 
Exwe  gElx£ults!odEX  liamts!awas  qa£s  ts!ox£wideq  lax  apsaxdza£yases 
xwaxwagume.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwal    ts!oxwaqexs  lae  lExts!ots  laxa 
£walase  loq  !wa.     Wix,  la  £naxwaEm  he  gwex£IdEq  laxes  £waxaase,  wii, 
gil£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  koltodxa  Elgigwats!e  mEseqwa  qa£s  liik'aeLElas 
laxes  g"6kwe.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  hel£a  hanx'Lanowa  qa£s  gttxts!odesa  15 
£wEwap!Eme    laq    qa    ek' !oldza£yes.      Wa,    la     hanx'LEnts     laxes 
lEgwIle.    Wa,  g-il£mese  mEdElx£widExs  lae  ax£edxa  Elk!Exuts!aliixa 
mEseqwe    loqlwa  qa£s    xats!EX'£idex   £wapaga£yas.     Wa,  la  £wi£la- 
weda    £wapaga£yasexs     lae      guxstEntsa      ElgEkwe     mEsequ     laxa 
maEmdElqtila  £wabEts!asa  hanx'Lala  laxa  lEgwIlases  gokwe.     Wa,  20 


492  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.85 

21  fire  of  his  house.  |  They  keep  boiling  over  the  fire  a  long  time,  but  in 
the  evening  |  they  are  done.  Then  he  invites  his  numaym  to  come  and 
eat  |  boiled  sea-eggs.  As  soon  as  they  have  all  come  in,  the  man 
takes  |  a  long-handled  ladle  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  || 

25  kettle.  He  also  takes  many  dishes  and  puts  them  down  by  the  side  | 
of  the  kettle  in  which  the  sea-eggs  are  boiling;  and  he  takes  a  |  large 
dish  and  puts  it  down  on  one  side  of  the  |  kettle.  They  take  hold  of 
it  on  each  side,  and  drain  off  the  liquid  from  the  |  sea-eggs  into  the 

30  large  dish;  and  when  the  liquid  of  the  sea-eggs  is  in  the  dish,  ||  they 
pour  it  out  outside  of  the  house.  (The  man)  takes  a  |  long-handled 
ladle  and  dips  it  into  the  boded  sea-eggs,  and  |  dips  them  out  and 
puts  them  into  the  dish.  When  it  is  half  full,  he  stops.  |  He  takes  a 
cedar-stick  and  splits  it  in  pieces;  and  these  are  thin.  |  They  are  each 

35  one  span  in  length,  ||  and  they  are  all  of  the  same  length.  He  gives  | 
one  to  each  of  his  guests.  Then  he  lifts  the  dish  and  |  puts  one  down 
in  front  of  each  four  men.  |  When  the  dishes  have  been  placed  in 
front  of  the  guests,  |  they  take  their  sticks  and  with  them  begin  to 

40  put  ||  the  boiled  sea-eggs  into  their  mouths.  After  they  finish,  | 
they  go  out.  They  never  drink  water,  |  because  they  are  afraid  to 
drink  water  after  eating  |  the  sea-eggs;  for,  if  they  drink  soon  after 
eating   boiled   sea-eggs,    they  get   heart-burn.  |  Therefore    they  are 

21  la  gexxala  maEmdElqula  laxa  lEgwlle.  Wa,  het!a  la  dzaqwaxs 
lae  Llopa.  Wa,  la  Le£lalaxes  £nE£memote  qa  g'axes  mEmsexuguxa 
hanxxaakwe  mEseqwe.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gax  ewI£laeLExs  lae  ax£ededa 
bEgwanEmaxa  gilttexxala  tsexLa  qa£s  g'fixe  hanolllas  laxa  hanx- 

25  Lanowe.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  q!exxa  loElq!wa  qa£s  la  kanolnxlas 
lax  maginwalllasa  mEseqwe£lats!e  Mnxxana.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
£walase  ioqlwa  qa£s  kanohles  lax  apsanalilasa  •mEseqwe£lats!e 
hanxxanowa.  Wa,  la  dadanodsq  qas  x-ats!oses  ewapalasa  mEse- 
qwe laxa  £walase   loq !wa.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£losa  £wapalasa  mEse- 

30  qwaxs  lae  giiqoyo  lax  L!5sana£yasa  g'Okwe.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
giltlEXLala  tsexLa  qa£s  tsexp£Ides  laxa  hanxxaakwe  mEseqwa  qa£s 
la,  tsetslalas  laxa  loslqlwe.  Wa,  g-il£mese  naEngoyalaxs  lae  gwala. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  k!wa£xLawe  qa£s  x5xExusEndeq  qa  wlswuletowes. 
Wa,    la    £nal£nEmp!Enke    awasgEmasas    laxEns    q!waq!wax-ts!ana- 

35  £yaxs  lae  L!ELlExusalaq  qa  £nEmes  awasgEmasas.  Wa,  la  yax£wltsa 
£nal£nEmts !aqe  laxes  Le£laiiEme.  Wa,  la  kagilllxa  loqlwe  qa£s  la 
k'aglmlllElas  laxa  mokwe  bebEgwanEm  laxa  £nal£nEinexLa  loq!wa. 
Wa,  gil£mese  la  £wi£la  la  k'ax'dzamalileda  loElqlwaxa  klwelaxs  laeda 
k!wele  hex£idaEm  ax£edxes  klwedayowe  k!wa£xLawa  qa£s  k!wetq!E- 

40  sElesa  h&nxxaakwe  mEsequ  laxes  sEmse.  Wa,  g"il£mese  £wl£laxs 
lae  hex-£idaEm  hoqiiwElsa.  Wa,  laEm  hewaxa  nax£IdEX  £wapa. 
qaxs  k'llElae  nagekilaxa  £wape  qaxs  gil£mae  nExwage  nageklleda 
mEmsexuguxa  hanxxaakwe  mEseqiixs  lae  hex,£IdaEm   nEweq!iip!eda 


boas]  RECIPES  493 

afraid  to  drink  water  after  eating  this  kind  of  food.  ||  That  is  all  about  45 
this.  | 

Raw   Sea-Eggs    (Raw  sea-eggs  soaked  in  cold  water). —  |  When  1 
good  sea-eggs  are  being  broken,  they  take  a  |  new  dish  and  put  it 
down  on  the  beach  close  to  the  salt  water.  |  They  pull  out  the  edible 
insides  of  the  sea-egg  and  ||  wash  them  in  salt  water.     Then  (the  man)  5 
throws  them  into  the  new  dish,  |  and  they  all  do  the  same  with  the 
others.     As  soon  as  they  are  all  |  washed,  they  are  carried  up  the 
beach;  and  they  carry  them  up  the  river,  and  |  pour  some  water  into 
the  (dish).     With  his  right  hand  (the  man)  stirs  them  so  as  to  wash 
them,  |  and  he  pours  off  the  dirty  water;  and  he  puts  the  dish  ||  into  10 
the  water,  and  puts  stones  on  each  end  to  keep  it  down.     Then  he 
leaves  |  it  there.     For  one  night  it  remains  in  the  river;  but  at  noon 
on  the  |  following  day  (the  man)  walks  up  the  river  and  takes  out 
the  dish  with  the  clean  |  sea-eggs,  and  drains  off  the  liquid;  and  he 
goes  back  carrying  it  down,  |  and  takes  it  into  his  house.     Then  he 
calls  his  ||  numaymto  come  to  his  house;  and  when  they  have  all  come  15 
in,  he  takes  |  many  dishes,  and  puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the 
dish  with  |  clean  sea-eggs;  and  he  takes  a  large  ladle  and  |  dips  up 
the  clean  sea-eggs  and  puts  them  into  the  dishes.  |  The  depth  of  the 
clean  sea-eggs  is  only  one  layer  in  the  dish.  ||  As  soon  as  there  are  some  20 


Wa,    he£mis  lag'ilas    kilEla    nagek'ileda    ha£mapax    gwexsdEmas.  45 
Wa,  laEin  gwal  laxeq. 

Raw  Sea-Eggs  (Ivlilx-  niEsequ  tsleltalil  laxa  £wiida£sta  £wapa). —  1 
Wa,  lie£maaxs  lae  ts!okwasE£wa  eyaxs  niEseqwa,  wa,  la  ax£etsE£wa 
alolaq    loqlwa    qa£s    le    hangalklzEm    lax    awaxslalisasa    dEmsx'e. 
Wa,   la   g  ilx£wults!oyiwa    hamtslawasa    mEseqwe.     Wa,  la   tslox- 
£wklEq  laxa  dEmsx'e.     Wa,  la  lExts!ots  laxa  alolaqe  loqlwa.     Wa,  5 
la    maxwaEm    he    gwex,£idxa    waokwe.      Wa,    gil£mese    £wl£la  la 
ts!okiixs    lae    k'asdesElaq    qa£s    la    k'astalaq    laxa    £wa.     Wa,    la 
guqlEqasa  £wape  !aq  qa£s  molexulgindeses  helk-!ots!ana£ye  a£yaso 
laq.     Wa,  la   guqodxa    neqwa    £wapa.     Wa,    la    hanEnsasa   loqlwe 
laxa    £wape    qa£s    t  !et  !iixbEndeq    qa    wiinsalayos.     Wa,    laEm    bas  10 
laxeq.     Wa,    la    xamastalis  laxa   wa.      Wa,  het!a    la   nsqalaxa    la 
Ieiisexs   lae  qas£Id  laq  qa£s    la  kastEndxa  Elgixuts!alaxa  Elgikwe 
mEseqwa.    Wa,  la  xats!Ex-£idEX  £wapaga£yas.    Wa,  gaxe  kalt!alaq 
qa£s  la  k'aeLElaq  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  hex£ida£mese  Le£lalaxes  £nE£me- 
mota  qa  gaxes  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  g  il£mese  £wI£lae.LExs  lae  ax£edxa  15 
q!exLa  loElqlwa  qa£s  gaxe  k'anolllElas   lax  maginwalilasa  Elgix"- 
tslala    £walas   loq!wa.     Wa,    la    ax£edxa   £wiilase    k-ats!Enaqa   qa£s 
tsEyosElesa   Elgikwe    mEseq"    laxa    loElq!wa.     Wa,  la    £nEmx-IdE- 
tslaEm  lax  awagwldasasa  Elgikwe    niEsequ  laxa  6ts!awasa  loqlwa. 
Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£la  g'exLaleda    loElq!waxs,  wa,  la  ax£edxa  q!exLa  20 


494  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.sb 

21  in  all  the  dishes,  he  takes  many  |  spoons  and  distributes  them  among 
his  guests.  |  They  take  up  the  spoons,  and  the  host  |  takes  up  the 
dishes,  and  places  one  in  front  of  each  four  |  guests.     As  soon  as  they 

25  have  all  been  put  down,  they  eat  with  spoons  ||the  clean  sea-eggs; 
and  when  they  finish,  they  go  out.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

I  have  forgotten  this.     It  is  just  the  same  as  boiled  sea-eggs  |  when 
they  are  put  into  cold  water  for  one  night  so  that  they  may  |  get 

30  stiff.  Some  Indians  call  it  "  to  get  hard."  ||  They  are  also  afraid  to 
drink  water  after  eating  sea-eggs  |  that  have  been  in  the  river;  for 
they  really  get  heart-burn  when  they  eat  |  this  kind  of  food,  and  they 
drink  water  after  it.  Therefore  they  are  afraid  of  |  water.  That  is 
all  about  this.  | 
1  Flat  Sea-Eggs. — The  means  of  obtaining  |  flat  sea-eggs  is  also  the 
same  as  that  for  obtaining  large  sea-eggs;  but  they  do  not  |  often 
spear  flat  sea-eggs,  because  it  breaks  them.  Therefore  |  they  use  the 
5  scraping-net.1  .  .  .  As  soon  as  it  gets  calm  at  low  tide,  ||  (the  man) 
immediately  goes  and  launches  his  small  sea-egg  scraping-  |  canoe. 
He  carries  into  the  canoe  the  sea-egg-scraping  paddle  |  and  the  bailer 
and  his  scraping-net.  Then  he  goes  aboard  his  |  canoe,  and  he 
paddles  to  where  he  knows  that  there  are  |  many  flat  sea-eggs.     The 

10  flat  sea-eggs  are  where  there  is  sandy  and  level  bottom  and  no  ||  eel- 


21  kak'EtslEnaqa  qa£s  la  tstewanaesas  laxes  Le£lanEme.  Wa,  laxda- 
£xwe  £wl£la  ax£ededa  klwetaxes  k"5k-Ets!Enaqe.  Wa,  lada  Le£la- 
nEme  ax£edxa  loElqlwe  qa£s  la  kaxdzamolilas  laxa  maemokwe 
laxa  klweie.     Wa,  glPmese    £wllgalllExs  lae  hex£idaEm  £yos£Ideda 

25  klwelaxa  Elgtkwe  mEseqwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  hoqiiwElsa. 
Wa,  laEm  gwill  laxeq. 

HexoLEn  iJElewesoxs  £n£maxis£mae  LE£wa  hanxuiakwe  mEseqwa, 
ylxa  mEseqwaxs  lae  xama£stalae  laxa  £wuda£sta  £wapa,  yixs  lae 
L!ax-£Ida.     Wax 'Id a  waokwe  bakliima,  wa,  la  £nexqexs  L!ax£edae. 

30  Wa,  laEmxae  kitEla  nax£edxa  £wapaxs  lae  gwal  mEmsexugiixa 
£wasgEmala  mEseqwa  qaxs  alak'Ialae  nEweq lupElamasxa  ha£mapax 
gwex-sdEmasexs  laenageki]axa£wape.  Wa,  he£mis  lagila  k'ilEmasa 
£wape.  Wii,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Flat  Sea-Eggs  (Xslosaxa  amdEma). — Wa,  heEmxat!  aEmtla- 
yosexa  amdEmes  mamaseqlwayowaxa  mEseqwe.  Wa,  la  k!es 
qlunala  sskas  laxa  amdEma  qaxs  qlwelamasaaq.  Lagilas  he 
axElaseda  XElodzayowe.1  .  .  .  Wa,  gil£mese  k'limax^dxax'atslae- 
5  saxs  lae  hex£idaEm  la  wi£xustEndxes  xElodzats!eLaxa  amdEma 
xwaxwaguma.  WTa,  laEm  daxsElaxes  xElotsa£yase  se£wayowa 
LE£wis  tsalayuwe.  Wa,  he£misLa  xElodzayas.  Wa,  la  laxs  laxa 
xElodzats!as  xwaxwaguma.  Wa,  la  sex£wida  qa£s  la  laxes  q!ale 
q!eq!adxa  amdEma.     Wa,  he£misa  ex-stE£wese  £nEmaesaxa   k' lease 

i  Continued  on  p.  163,  line  1,  to  p.  166,  line  75. 


boas]  RECIPES  495 

grass.     That  is  good  for  scraping  |  sea-eggs.     When  he  arrives  there,  11 
he  |  takes  up   his  scraping-net  and   puts  it  into  the  water.     He  | 
pushes  it  down  to  the  bottom  with  the  mouth  of  the  |  scraping-net 
towards  the  bow  of  his  canoe,  and  the  canoe  goes  stern  first,  as  ||  the  15 
man  turns  his  face  towards  the  stern  of  his  canoe;  |  and  he  pushes 
down  the  scraping-net  forcibly,  and  pulls  it  so  that  |  the  sea-eggs 
jump  into  the  scraping-net.     As  soon  as  it  is  full,  he  |  hauls  it  up  and 
empties  it  out  towards  the  bow  of  the  canoe.     He  continues  doing  | 
so,  and  only  stops  when  his  canoe  is  almost  full  ||  of  sea-eggs.     Then  20 
he  goes  home  to  his  house.  |  As  soon  as  he  arrives  at  the  beach  of  his 
house,  he  calls  his  tribe  |  to  come  and  cut  the  flat  sea-eggs.     Immedi- 
ately all  the  men,  |  their  wives,  and  the  children  go  to  the  beach 
where  |  the  canoe  with  sea-eggs  is,  and  they  take  along  ||  horse-clam  25 
shells.     If  there   are  no  horse-clam  shells,   then   they  |  take  small 
clam-shells.    If  there  are  none  of  these,  they  |  take  large  mussel-shells 
to  break  the  sea-eggs.     They  |  walk  out  to  where  the  canoe  with  the 
sea-eggs  is,  and  they  take  the  sea-eggs  in  the  folds  of  their  |  blankets 
and  carry  them  ashore.     They  put  them  down  on  the  beach  ||  near  the  30 
edge  of  the  water,  and  all  the  others  |  do  the  same.     Then  they  sit 
iown  on  the  beach,  and  each  takes  |  one  sea-egg  and  cuts  all  round  it 

ts!ats!ayim  qlwaxales  lax  axasasa  amdEma.     Wa,  heEm  ex-  xeIo-  10 
sexa    amdEmeda    he    gwexse.     Wa,    gil£mese    lag'aa    laqexs    lae 
hex£idaEm     dag'ilExsaxes     XElodzayowe     qa£s     medEnse.     Wa,  la 
l lEnxalisasexs    lae    gwayaxstaleda    xElodzayuwe    laxa    agiwa£yasa 
XElodzatsle   xwaxwagum  qa£s  le    liExudzEgEmala   ylxs   lae   gweg-i- 
maleda  xElots !enoxwe    laxa    oxLa£yases    XElodzatsle  xwaxwaguma.  15 
Wa,  la  L!Eiik'Elases  XElodzayowe.     Wa,  la   gElqElaq  qa   dExuts!a- 
lesa  amdEma  laxa  XElodzayowe.     Wa,  glPmese  qotlaxs  lae  nexo- 
stodEq  qa£s  qEp!alExseq  laxes  nalelExse.     Wa,  laEm    hex-sa   gwe- 
gila.     Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs    lae    Elaq  qot!es  XElodzatsle  xwaxwa- 
gumxa  amdEma.     Wa,  la  hex£idaEm  na£naku  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  20 
giPmese  lagalis  lax  L!Ema£isases  gokwaxs  lae  Le£lalaxes  gokulote 
qa  las  tsakaxa  amdEma.     Wa,  hex,£ida£mesa  £naxwa  bebEgwanEm 
LE£wis  gEgEiiEme   LE£wis    g'inginanEme    la  hoqflntsles  lax   ha£ne- 
dzasasa  amdExsala   xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  la    £naxwaEm  dadEg'ilisE- 
laxa  xalaesasa  mEt!ana£ye;    wax'ek'leas  xalaetsa  niEt  !ana£yaxs  lae  25 
ax£edxa  xoxulk' limotasa    awawe    g-aweq!anEma  waxe   k-!easa   lae 
ax£edxa  xalaesasa  xole  qa£s  tsag'ayoxa  amdEma.     Wa,  lax-da£xwe 
taxt!a  lax  hewalasasa  amdExsala  xwaxwaguma   qa£s  la  hanx£etses 
£nEX£una£ye  laq  qa£s    gaxe    hanqElaxa    amdEma   qa£s    hanx£aliseq 
laxa    magixstallsasa  dEmsxe  £wapa.     Wa,  la   £naxwa£ma  waokwe  30 
he  g\vex-£id  Qgwaqe.     Wa,  laxda£xwe  kludzExtallsExs  lae  dax£Idxa 
£nal£nEmsgEme  amdEma.     Wa,  la  tsaxse£stalasa  xalaesasa  mEtlana- 


496  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.36 

with  the  clam-shell.  |  They  cut  along  the  edge,  for  the  sea-eggs  are 

35  flat.  |  After  they  have  cut  around  it,  they  take  off  ||  one  half,  and 
throw  away  the  side  of  the  sea-egg  with  the  mouth,  |  for  the  edible 
part  is  on  its  back;  and  as  soon  as  the  one  half  comes  off,  |  they  throw 
it  away.  The  other  one  they  turn  upside  down  in  the  salt  water,  |  so 
that  the  entrails  come  out,  and  they  eat  the  edible  part;  |  and  they 

40  do  the  same  to  all  the  others.  When  ||  one  of  them  gets  a  milky  sea- 
egg,  he  gives  it  to  one  who  |  gathers  them.  After  they  have  eaten, 
they  go  up  the  beach  and  |  go  into  their  houses.  There  they  take 
water  and  |  rinse  their  mouths;  and  after  doing  so,  they  drink  a  little 

45  water.  |  That  is  all  about  this.     But  the  woman  does  the  same  ||  with 
the  milky  flat  sea-eggs  as  she  did  with  the  |  milky  large  sea-eggs  when 
she  roasted  them  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
Picking  Flat  Sea-Eggs  off  the  Rock  at  low  Water. — When  |  there 

50  is  spring-tide  at  full  moon,  (the  man)  launches  his  ||  sea-egg-picking 
canoe,  takes  two  |  large  baskets  and  las  paddle,  and  he  |  paddles  to  a 
place  where  the  swell  made  by  the  southeast  wind  in  winter  does  not 
reach.  |  That  is  the  time  for  getting  flat  sea-eggs.     That  is  the  |  place 

55  to  gather  them.  When  he  reaches  there,  he  takes  his  basket  and  ||  gets 
out  of  his  sea-egg-picking  canoe;  and  when  he  finds  |  many  (sea-eggs), 

33  £yax  8we£stasa  amdEma.  Wa,  laEin  tsak'as5£seda  awunxa£yas  pExsE- 
mena£yasa  amdEma.     Wa,  g-il£mese  !a£ste  tsa,k"a£yasexs  lae  axodxa 

35  apsodile  qa£s  ts!EX£edeq,  ylx  axalaasas  sEmsasa  amdEma,  qaxs  hae 
klutalaatsa  hamtslawa  aweg-a£yas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  lawayeda  apsodl- 
laxs  lae  ts!EX£IdEq.  Wa,  a£mese  qEpIaxayodEq  laxa  dEmsxe  £wapa. 
Wa,  he£mis  la  £wil£awats  yaxyiglla.  Wa,  la  hamx£IdEX  hamts la- 
was.     Wa,  a£mese  la  £naxwaEm  he  gweg'ile  wa5kwa.     Wa,  g'il£mese 

40  laxa  £nEinokwaxa  dzedaqe  amdEmaxs  lae  tslas  laxa  £nEmok\ve 
q!ap!e£nakiilaq.  Wa,  la  gwal  tsak'axs  lae  hox£wEsdesa  qa£s  la 
hogweLEle  laxes  g"ig'6kwe.  Wa,  he£mis  la  ax£edaatsexa  £wape  qa£s 
tslEweLlExode.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  nax£ldxa  holale  £wapa. 
Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq.     Wa,  laLa  km  naqEmg-ilta£ye  gweg'ilasasa 

45  tslEdaqaxes  gwegilasaxa  dzedaqe  amdEma  laxes  gwegilasaxa 
dzedaqe  mEseqwaxs  lae  tslesaq  lax  onalisases  lEgwile.  Wa,  laEm 
gwal  laxeq. 

Picking  Flat  Sea-Eggs  off  the  Rock  at  Low  Water. — Wa,  he£maaxs 
lae  £walasa  x-ats!a£jTaxa   nExsEinalaeda   £niEkula,  la  wI£xustEndxes 

50  k'!ak!Elaats!e  xwaxwagumaxa  amdEma.  Wa  la  daxsElaxa  mal- 
tsEme  awa,  laElxa£ya  le£w!s  k-!ak'!Elax'sa£yase  se£wayowa.  Wii, 
la  sex£wlda  qa£s  la  laxa  k'lese  lag'aaatsa  qulasa  mElase  qaxs 
tslawunxae  k!ag  ilax-dEmaxa  amdEma.  Wa,  la  heEm  q!ap!E- 
yatsle.     Wa,  gtl£mese    lag  aa    laqexs    lae  ax£edxes  lExa£ye  qa£s    la 

55  lalta    laxes    k"!5k!Elaats!e     xwaxwagiima.     Wii,     g'iPmese     qlaxa 


boas]  RECIPES  497 

he  picks  out  the  large  ones  and  j  puts  them  into  his  basket;  and  when  57 
the  basket  is  full,  |  he  takes  it  up  and  goes  and  pours  (the  contents) 
into  his  canoe.  |  He  continues  doing  this,  and  he  only  stops  when  he 
has  enough.  ||  Then  he  goes  aboard  his  little  canoe  and  goes  home,  60 
When  |  he  arrives  at  the  beach  of  his  house,  he  puts  the  anchor  |  of 
his  sea-egg  canoe  into  the  water.     After  doing  so,  he  goes  up  the 
beach  |  and  goes  into  his  house;  and  his  wife  takes  her  back-  |  mat 
and  goes  down  to  the  beach,  and  she  carries  the  basket  with  ||  sea-  05 
eggs  up  the  beach  into  her  |  house  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the 
fire.  I  After  doing  so,  she  sends  out  some  of  her  children  to  call  |  all 
the  men  to  go  and  carry  up  the  sea-eggs.  |  Then  they  all  take  baskets 
and  go  down  to  the  ||  beach,  and  they  go  alongside  the  sea-egg  canoe  70 
and  I  put  the  sea-eggs  into  their  baskets;  and  as  soon  as  they  have 
enough  in  their  |  baskets,  they  go  up  the  beach  and  go  into  their 
houses,  carrying  |  the  sea-eggs  in  the  baskets  on  their  backs.     Then 
they  take  their  dishes  |  and  pour  fresh  water  into  them,  and  take 
their  knives  ||  to  cut  the  sea-eggs.     They  take  the  sea-eggs  out  of  the  |  75 
basket,  which  they  place  by  the  side  of  the  dish;  and  they  chop  them 
with  the  knife.  |  As  soon  as  they  have  cut  a  sea-egg  all  around,  they 
throw  one  half  |  towards  the  fire,  and  put  the  other  half  with  the 

qteyaasasexs    lae     miiniEnoqEwaxa     awawe     amdEma     qa£s   iiieji-  56 
ts!ales     laxes     k-!iik-!Elaats!e      lExa£ya.        Wa,      gih'mese      qot!a 
lEXElasexs  lae  kloqfdodEq  qa£s  lii  giix£alExsas  laxes  xwaxwagiime. 
Wa,  la  hanal  he  gweg'ile.     Wa,  almese   gwalExs  lae  heloLa.     Wa, 
la    laxs    laxes    xwaxwagiime    qa£s    la    na£nakwa.      Wa,    gil£mese  60 
lagalls  lax   l  !Eina£Isases    gokwe,   wa,  a£mese    qtelstEntsa   qlEltsE- 
mases  amdExsala  xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  g'lPmese  gwalExs  lae  lasdesa 
qa£s   lii  laeL    laxes   g'okwe.     Wii,  la  gEiiEinas  &x£edxes  LEbega£ye 
le£waeya    qa£s    lii     lEntsles    laxa  LlEma£ise.      Wa,    la    oxi.Ex'Idxa 
amttslala  lExa£ya    qaes    la    oxLosdesElaq    qaes    lii  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  65 
g"5kwe.     Wa,    lii    oxLEg'alllas    lax    mag'inwalisases    lEgwIle.     Wa, 
gihmese  gwalExs  lae  eyalaqasa  g'ayole  laxes  sasEme  qa  liis  axk-!a- 
laxa  £naxwa  bebEgwaiiEm  qa    liis    nanagwala  laxa  amdEma.     Wii, 
hex£ida£mese    £nax\va    axeedxa    laElxa£ve  qa£s  lii  hoquntsles   laxa 
LlEma£ise,  qaes    lit    heg'iigEndrdaxa    amdExsala    xwaxwaguma    qa£s  70 
k-!ats!alesa  amdEma  laxes  laElxa£ve.     Wa,  g-il£mese  hayal£ats !awe 
lai:lxa;vasexs  lae  hoxeusdesa  qa£s  lii    hogwll  laxes  g'ig'okwe  eoxLa- 
laxes    amdatsle    laElxa£ya.     Wii,    hex£ida£mese     &x£edxa    loElqlwe 
qa£s  gtixtslodesa    ewEewap!Eme    laq.     Wa,   lii    ax£edxa   kliiwayowe 
qa£s     tsiigayaxa      amdEma.       Wii,    la    dolts !odxa    amdEma     laxa  75 
lExa£ye  qa£s  £mEkwiigEndes  laxa  loqlwaxs  lae  tsax£Itsa  klawayowe 
laq.     Wii,  gil£mese  la£sta  tsak-a£yasexs  lae  ts  lEgEnolisasa  apsodilas 
hlxes    lEgwile.     Wa,    lii    kipstEiits    axts !E£wasasa    hamtslawe    lax 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 32 


498  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

edible  part  bottom  up  into  |  the  water  in  the  dish  and  wash  it,  so  that 
80  the  entrails  come  out.  ||  As  soon  as  they  are  all  out,  then  they  cat  the 
edible  part,  |  and  all  the  people  do  the  same.  After  they  have 
finished,  |  they  rinse  their  mouths;  and  when  they  have  done  so,  their  | 
wivesgather  up  the  empty  shells  and  put  them  into  a  basket.  As  soon 
as  |  they  are  all  in,  the  woman  takes  a  large  firebrand  and  puts  it  on 
85  top  of  the  ||  empty  shells.  Then  she  picks  up  (the  basket)  and  empties 
it  outside  of  the  |  house.1  ...  As  soon  as  it  is  day,  (the  people)  eat 
the  flat  and  the  |  large  sea-eggs.  .    .    .  This  is  all  about  the  flatsea- 

eggs-  I 

1  Blue  Sea-Eggs. — I  have  forgotten  the  blue  sea-eggs.  They  are  | 
the  same  as  flat  sea-eggs,  for  they  are  eaten  in  the  same  way  |  as  the 
ilat  sea-eggs  when  they  are  broken.  Only  that  is  different,  |  when 
they  go  to  get  them,  that  the  only  time  to  get  them  is  when  it  is 

5  really  low  ||  water  at  spring-tide,  when  the  moon  is  new  or  when  it  is 
full.  |  When  the  tide  is  nearly  at  its  lowest,  the  woman  takes  her  | 
basket  for  carrying  them,  and  she  carries  it  on  her  back,  going  down 
the  rocky  beach  to  the  |  point  of  land;  for  that  is  the  only  place  where 
there  are  many  blue  sea-eggs,  where  the  largest  waves  are,  |  what 
some  people  call  breakers,  for  that  is  where  the  blue  sea-eggs  stay, 
10  where  there  are  ||  many  cracks  in  the  flat  rocks,  and  that  is  where  | 
the  women  go  to  look  for  blue  sea-eggs,  carrying  their  clam-digging 


£wabEts!awasa   loqlwe    qaes    ts!ox£w!deq   qa  lawayesa   yaxyigilas. 

80  Wa,  gil'mese  £wldaxs  lae  hamx£Idxa  hamts!awas.  Wa,  la  £na- 
xwaEm  he  gweguleda  g-okulotas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExslae  £naxwa 
tslEweLlExoda.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwatexs  lae  q!ap!egillle  gEnEma- 
sexa  tsiix'mote  qa£s  k'lats  lodes  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa,  g-fl£mese 
£wi!ts!axs    lae    ax£edxa  gulta  £walastokwas    qa£s  anklyindes    laxa 

85  tsax-mote.  Wa.  la  k'loqulilaq  qass  lii  k'ladEs  lax  L!asana£yases 
gokwe.1  .  .  .  Wa,  giPmese  £nala  tsax'dEmaxa  amdEma  le£wh 
niF.seqwe.  Wa,  lawesLa  gwal  laxa  amdEma. 
1  Blue  Sea-Eggs  (LEwa). — HedEn  L!ElewesE£wa  lEwa,  yixa  hemaxat! 
gwexsa  amdEma,  yixs  hemaaxat!  gweg'ilasoxs  lae  tsakasEwe  gwe- 
gilasaxa  amdEmaxs  lae  tsak-asE£wa.  Wa,  lex'aemes  oguqalayosexs 
lae  axsE£wa  yixs  lexaEmae  klagilax'dEmqexs  alak'Ialae  £walasa 
5  x-ats!a£yaxa  xasawayaeda  £niEkula  loxs  la,  iiExsEmala.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  Elaq  walEmwaxsdElesa  xats!a£yaxs  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxes 
k!ag  ilaatsIeLe  b:xa£ya  qa£s  la  oxLalaqexs  lae  lEnts£Eyala  laxa 
awllba£ye  qaxs  lexa£mae  qlayatsa  lEweda  eEwIladaxa  quia  yix 
gwE£yasa     waokwe     t  !oxwa  qaxs     he£mae    dzEnaatsa    IewS    loxs 

10  qjenEmaeda  xuxxuk!a  laxa  paspElxEla.  Wa,  he£mis  la  al£yatsa 
tslEdaqaxa    lEwa    laxes    dalaena£yaxa    k'lilakwe.      Wa,    g'il£mese 

i  H  this  is  not  done,  the  ^host  will  come  and  eat  the  sea  eggs.    See  p.  614,  line  17. 


boas]  RECIPES  499 

sticks.  When  |  she  finds  them,  she  immediately  pushes  them  off  with  12 
her  digging-stick,  and  she  |  throws  them  into  her  carrying-basket. 
As  soon  as  it  is  full,  |  she  carries  the  basket  of  sea-eggs  on  her  back. 
She  carries  it  up  the  rocky  beach,  and  ||  carries  it  into  her  house,  and  15 
puts  it  down  in  the  corner  of  her  house.  |  They  are  not  eaten  at  once, 
for  they  do  not  eat  them  until  |  after  they  have  been  four  days  in  the 
house.  .  .  .  When  |  they  eat  blue  sea-eggs,  they  do  the  same  as  they 
do  when  they  eat  the  |  flat  sea-eggs.     That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Barnacles    (Getting  barnacles). — When   the   woman  is    getting  |  1 
ready  to  go  and  get  barnacles,  she  takes  |  many  old  mats  and  also 
many  baskets  and  one  large  bucket,  |  and  she  goes  and  puts  them 
aboard  her  barnacle-catching  ||  canoe.     As  soon  as  the  tide  begins  5 
to  fall,  she  |  carries  her  paddle  in  one  hand,  and  she  goes  down  to 
where  the  |  barnacle-catching  canoe  is.     She  launches  it  and  |  goes 
ahoard.     Then  she  paddles  and  goes  to  a  place  where  she  knows  there 
are  many  |  barnacles  on  stones.     As  soon  as  she  arrives  there,  she  [| 
goes  ashore.     Then  she  puts  the  old  barnacle-catching  canoe  stern  10 
first  ashore;  |  for  they  never  use  a  new  canoe  to  go  getting  bar- 
nacles, because   |   often   the  canoe  is  cracked    when    they   use  it.    | 
Therefore  they  use  old  canoes  for  getting  barnacles.     As  soon  as  | 


qlaqexs  lae  hex-£idaEm  LtenqElotses  klilakwe  laq  qa£s  tstex-  12 
tslodes  laxes  k" lag'flaats !e  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g"ll£mese  qotlaxs  lae 
5xLEX'£Idxes  lEwaats!e  JExa£ya  qa£s  gaxe  oxLosdEyalaq  qa£s  lii 
SxLaeLElaq  laxes  g'okwe  qa£s  oxLEg"allles  laxa  onegwflases  g"6kwe.  15 
Wa,  laxae  k-!ets!enoxu  hex'id  tsax-£IdEq  yixs  almae  tsax£Idqexs 
lae  mop !Enxwaese  £nalas  axel  laxa  g'okwe.  .  .  .  Wa,  laxa 
naqEingiltawi-'lalaEmx  gweg'ilasasexs  lae  tsak'aso  lax  tsak'alae- 
naeyaxa  anulEma  lo£  tsak- !ena£yaxa  lEwa.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  liixeq. 

Barnacles    (K!\vet;i\a    k!wet!aeye). — Wii,   he^maaxs  lae  xwanalE-  1 
leda  tstedaqe  qaes  lii  klwetaxa  k!wet!a£ye,  wa,  he;mis  ax£etsoseda 
qleiiEme    k' !ak* lobana,    wa,    heemisa     q!exLa    laElxa£ya.     Wii,    he- 
£misa  £nEmsgEme  ewalas  nagatsla  qa£s  lii  axealExsas  laxes  k!weda- 
ts!eLe   xwaxwagitma.     Wa,  g'lleinese  x'ats'.Eg  atowa  Jyixwuliixs  lae  5 
dak" lotElaxes  klwetsayase  se£wayowaxs  lae  lEntsIes   lax   hanaxsta- 
lidzasases  klwedatsleLe   xwaxwagiima.      Wa,  lii  wi-xl,stEiidEq    qa-s 
laxse  laq.     Wa,  la£me  sex£wida  qa£s  lit    lax  qlalas  qleqladEX  t!es- 
tlala.      Wii,    g-fl£mese     lag-aa     laqexs    lae    hang'alisa.     Wa,  laEm 
ai.axi.ax  'Ida  qa£s  k' !axc"allses  oxLa£yases  k!wedats!eye  ts!ats!agima  10 
qaxs  kMesae  k'.wedatslexa  k!wet!a£ya  ek'e  xwaxwaguma  qaxs  q  !ii- 
nalae  hox£wideda  ek'e  xwaxwagumxs    lae    ya£yats!a.     Wa,    he'niis 
lagilas  he   k!wedats!exa   k!wet!a£ya   ts!ats!agima.     Wii,    gil-mese 
k-!ax-£alise    5xLa£}'asexs     lae    hex£id?Ein   laltawa    qa-s    niEnxsEla- 


500  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.36 

15  she  puts  the  stern  ashore,  she  goes  ashore  and  picks  up  ||  some  drift- 
wood and  puts  it  aboard  her  old  canoe;  and  |  when  she  has  enough, 
she  pushes  the  canoe,  off  the  beach  and  goes  aboard.  |  She  goes  sea- 
ward, and  looks  downward  into  the  water;  and  |  when  she  sees  many 
barnacles  on  stones,  she  takes  her  anchor  |  and  puts  it  overboard 

20  where  she  thinks  it  will  run  dry  at  half  ||  tide.  She  cuts  shavings  of 
dry  cedar-wood;  and  |  when  her  old  barnacle-catching  canoe  is  left 
dry  on  the  beach,  she  takes  a  large  |  bucket  and  fills  it  with  salt 
water.  When  it  is  full,  |  she  just  lifts  it;  and  when  it  stands  upright, 
she  lets  it  go.  |  When  her  canoe  is  left  dry  on  the.  beach,  she  unloads 

25  the  small  pieces  of  driftwood,  and  ||  lavs  down  the  cross-ends  for  a 
fire  on  the  beach,  and  she  takes  two  other  pieces  and  lays  them  |  down 
as  side-pieces.  Between  them  she  puts  j  the  shavings  for  kindling. 
Then  she  places  cross-pieces  |  of  medium  size  on  top  of  the  side- 
pieces.  |  Then  she  picks  up  stones  close  alongside,  and  puts  them  on 

30  top;  !|  and  when  she  thinks  she  lias  enough,  she  lights  the  fire  under- 
neath; and  when  |  the  fire  is  burnt  up,  she  takes  her  basket  and  picks 
up  the  barnacle-stones  and  puts  them  |  into  the  basket;  but  she  only 
puts  into  the  basket  those  that  have  many  |  barnacles  on  them. 
When  she  thinks  that  the  basket  is  heavy,  she  carries  it  |  and  pours  out 

35  (the  contents)  close  to  the  fire  for  heating  stones;  ]|  and  she  continues 
picking  up  the  barnacle-stones.  She  only  stops  when  she  has  | 
gathered  many;  and  as  soon  as  she  iinishes,  she  takes  two  pieces  of 

15  x"£Idexa  q!aq!exEme  laxes  k!wedats!eye  ts!ats!ag'ima.  Wii,  g-il- 
£mese  heloLEXs  lae  wiqullsases  k!wedats!eye  ts!ats!ag  inia  qa£s  lax- 
seq.  Wa,  la  Llasta  qa£s  hanxEnsElexa  dEmsx'e  £wapa.  Wii, 
gll£mese  dox'wai.iJaxa  qlaedzasa  t!est!ala  lae  ax£edxes  qlEltsEme 
qa£s  q!ElstEndes  laxes  kodLe    q!axswidElxa  lai.a  naEnxsEg'ilallslxa 

20  xats!axEla.  Wa,  la  klak1  !F.xlJmotTlaxa  lEmxwa  k!wa£xLiiwa.  Wii, 
g  ilmiese  Elaq  licmxwalise  k'.wedatsles  ts  !ats  !ag"imxs  lae  iix-edxa  -'wa- 
ins nagatsUi  qaEs  tse£stEndes  laxa  dEmsxe.  Wit,  gil£mese  qotlaxs 
lae  aEm  dalaq.  Wii,  g ilnnese  bangallsExs  lae  dawaq.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  lEmxwalise  yfi-yats  lasexs  lae  moltodxa  q  !aq  !exEme.     Wii,  lii  gc- 

25  g'alTsasa  g'ibaLasa  lEgwIsLe.     Wa,  la  axeedxa  malts  !aqe  qa£s  kak-F. 
dEnodes.     Wii,  laF.m  krik'E(li;nwa£va.     Wa,  la   momag-otsa  amEma- 
£yastowe  lax  ek-!allsasa  g'alastoyiwe  k-!ak*!Ex"niota.     Wa,  la,  geki- 
vintsa  ha£yalastowe  q  !exal  lax  okfiyaeyasa  kak-EdEnwa£yas.     Wii,  lii 
mEiix£T(lxa  tlesEme  !ax  magimva£vas  qaes  xEquylndales  laq.     Wii, 

30  gibniese  k'otaq  laF.m  hel£axs  lae  menabodEq.  Wii,  gil£mese  x-iqo- 
staxs  lae  ax£edxes  lExaeye  qaes  mEng'illsexa  t'.estlala  qaes  niEnts!ales 
laxes  lExa:'ye,  yixs  lexamae  axeetsoseda  q  lesgEmalaeda  tlesEmaxa 
k!wet!a£ye.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwanala  loxuses  lExa£yaxs  lae  k'loqtilisaq 
qa£s  lii   gugEnolisas    laxa    mag'inwallsases   t!eqwapa£ye.      Wii,    lii 

35  hanal  he  gwegila  mEnaxa  I  'est  !ala.  Wa,  atones  gwatexs  lae  q!e- 
nEme  q!ap!aEyas.     Wa,    g-il£mese    gwalF.xs    lae    ax£edxa   maltslaqe 


boas]  RECIPES  501 

driftwood,  |  each  one  fathom  in  length  and  generally  |  one  short 
span  |  thick,  and  puts  them  down  close  to  the  ||  fire  for  heating  -ft) 
stones;  and  she  takes  two  other  pieces  of  the  same  thickness,  |  but 
only  half  a  fathom  long.  When  she  |  has  finished  this,  the  fire  for 
heating  stones  is  burnt  out.  |  Then  she  takes  a  long  thin  piece  of 
driftwood,  and  uses  it  to  take  out  the  firebrands  |  from  the  red-hot 
stones;  and  as  soon  as  all  the  firebrands  have  been  taken  out,  ||  she  45 
takes  one  of  the  one-fathom  pieces  of  round  driftwood  and  |  places 
it  by  the  side  of  the  red-hot  stones;  and  she  does  the  same  with  the  | 
piece  half  a  fathom  in  length.  She  places  it  across  the  end,  and  also  | 
with  the  other  one  of  the  same  length  at  the  other  end;  and  she 
takes  |  the  one-fathom  piece  and  puts  it  down  ||  on  the  ends  of  the  50 
two  short  ones;  and  after  she  has  done  so,  |  she  takes  a  long  thin 
piece  of  driftwood  and  levels  down  the  top  of  the  red-hot  [  stones,  so 
that  they  are  level,  and  so  that  they  fill  the  corners  of  the  |  drift- 
wood enclosure  all  around  the  place  for  steaming  the  barnacle-stones. 
As  soon  |  as  she  finishes,  she  puts  the  barnacle-stones  on 


°o° °  o' 

bo°°°° 


55 


the  red-hot  ||  stones;  and  she  heaps  up  the  barnacle- 
stones  on  top,  so  that  they  are  quite  |  thick.  Then 
she  takes  the  old  mats  and  spreads  them  alongside 
of  the  place;  |  and   when    they  are   all   ready,  she  takes  the  large 


£nal£nEmp  lEnk"    laxEiis    baLiiqe    awasgEinasas.       Wa,     la,    qltinala  37 
'niihuEmp !Enk'  laxEns    ts IexHs !ana£yaxsEiis   q !waq Iwax'ts !ana£\  ex 
yix  awagwidasasa  qlexale  qa£s  katlalises  lax    mag'inwalisases  t!e- 
qwapac"ye.     Wa,  laxae  et led  ax'edxa  malts  laqaxat !  hehm  awagwita  40 
g  ale  axanEins.     Wa,  liiLa  aEm  nsqlEbode  awasgEmas  s.     Wii,  g-il- 
£mese.  gwfilExs   lae    qlulx-'Ide    lExklwedzEmas   t!eqwapa£yas,     Wii, 
la    ax£edxa    wile    g-iltla    qlexala    qa£s    k!wak!wet!EqEwexa    giilta 
laxa  x'lx-ixsEmala    tlesEina.     Wii,  gil''mese  £wI£loqawa  gultiixs  lae 
ax£edxa   EnEmts!aqe    laxa    enal£nEmp!Enke    leElx'ln    qlexala    qa^s  45 
kadEnolise  laxa  xix'ixsEinala  tlesEma.     Wii,  lii  etletsa  eiiEmts!aqe 
laxa    nEqlEbodas  awasgEmase  ((a£s  gebEndes    laq.     Wii,  lii  etletsa 
he'maxat!  £wasgEm  laxa  Tqisba£yasa  giltagawa£ye.    Wii,  laxae  ax-ed- 
xa  £nEmts!aqe    £nEmplEiiks   ewasgEmse    laxEiis  baLax  qaes  k  at  !e- 
des   lax  epsbaEyasa   ts!EltslEkwagawarye.       Wii,    g'il£mese    gwalExs  50 
lae  ax£edxa  gilt  la  wilto  qlexala    qa£s  golx-ldes  laxa  x'ixixsEmfda 
tlesEina  qa  £nEmiikiyas.     Wii,  he£mis  qa  lElg-aes  laxa  ewaneqwasa 
eEmxEnwa£ye  qlexal  lax  awl£stiisa  c"nEg-asLaxa  tlestliil .\.     Wii,  gil- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  tliiqEyundalasa  tlestlala  laxa  x'ix'ixsEmala    tle- 
sEma  (Jig.).     Wii,  g-il£mese  lii  boteyaleda  t lest !ala  liiq  qaes  laen  £ye  55 
waklwa;  wii,  lii  ax£edxa   k'lak'lobane    qa£s    LEbEnolises  laq.     Wa, 
g'il£mese  la  £naxwa  gwiilalaxs  lae  ax£edxa   £walase    nagatsle  qotla- 


502  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [BTH.ANN.S6 

5S  bucket  filled  j  with  salt  water  and  pours  it  over  it,  and  she  | 
quickly  takes  up  the  old  mats  and  spreads  them  over  what  is  being 

g0  steamed.  ||  When  it  is  covered  over  on  top  and  on  the  sides,  |.  she 
takes  a  rest.  It  may  be  half  an  hour  according  to  the  watch  |  when 
they  are  done.  Then  she  takes  off  the  mat  covering;  and  |  when  it 
is  all  off,  she  waits  for  them  to  get  dry  and  also  to  |  cool  off.     Then  she 

65  takes  her  large  baskets  and  washes  them  ||  in  salt  water,  until  the 
sand  comes  off.  When  it  is  |  all  off,  she  carries  them  up  and  puts 
them  down  by  the  side  of  the  place  where  the  |  barnacle-stones  have 
been  steamed.  She  sits  between  the  two  large  baskets.  |  She  takes 
the  barnacle-stones  and  she  pulls  off  the  barnacles,  and  she  |  throws 

70  away  the  stones  when  the  barnacles  are  all  off;  and  she  ||  puts  the 
barnacles  into  the  baskets  carefully,  so  as  not  to  break  them  |  when 
she  puts  them  in.  She  continues  doing  this  with  the  whole  number;  | 
but,  even  if  she  takes  the  barnacles  quickly  off  the  stone,  |  generally 
the  tide  rises  to  the  place  where  she  is  steaming  the  barnacle-stones, 
for  steaming  in  this  way  is  slow.  |  When  they  are  all  off,  she  carries 

75  the  basket  of  barnacles  ||  and  puts  them  on  board  the  old  barnacle- 
canoe.  |  As  soon  as  they  are  all  in,  she  puts  aboard  her  old  mats  and 
the  large  |  bucket;  and  when  they  are  all  aboard,  she  goes  home  to 
her  house.  |  When  she  arrives  at  the  beach  of  her  house,  she  |  gets 
out  of  the  old  canoe,  which  she  lands  stern  first.     Then  she  takes  the 

58  lalesxa  dEmsx'e  ewapa  qa£s  la  tsadzELEyints  laq.  Wii,  lii  ha£na- 
kwlla    ax£edxa  lclak'lobana    qa£s  LEpEyindales    laxes   £iiEk-asE£we. 

60  Wii,  g'iPmese  £\\i-la  nadzEkwe  osgEma£3'a  le£w<?s  ewana£yaxs  lae 
xos£Ida.  Wa,  hayaqxEiitlex  nExseg  ii.F.la  laxEns  q !aq !alak" !aya- 
xeiis  £nfdaxs  lae  Llopa.  Wa,  la£me  nasodxa  nayimas.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  £wFlaxs  lae  esEla  qa  lEmlEmxustoxewides.  Wii,  he-mis  qa 
kox-widesexs    lae    ax'edxes    awawe    laElxa£ya    qa£s  lii  ts!ox£w!dEq 

65  laxa  dEinsx-e  £wapa  qa  lawayesa  eg'itsEma£yas.  Wii,  glPmese 
'"wrlaxs  lae  dalaq  qa£s  lii  niEXEiiolIsas  lax  apsanaeyases  £nEk"asE£we 
t!est!iila.  Wa,  la  klwaklwagawexa  maltsEme  awa  laElxaeya. 
Wa,  la  dax£idxa  t!est!iila  qa  gElqalexa  k!wet!a£ye  laxa  tlesEme 
qa£s    tslEqElexa    tlesEmaxs  lae   £wrlawa    k!wet!a£ye  laq.     Wa,    la 

70  aekilaxs  lae  axtslotsa  k!wet!a£ye  laxa  lExa£ye  qa  k-!eses  tEtEpsa- 
laxs  lae  getsla.  Wii,  lii  hex'siiEm  gwegilaq  laxes  £waxaase.  Wa, 
lai.a  mamaxulqlaxs  lae  axalaxa  k!wet!a£ye  laxa  t  lesEme  qaxs 
qliinalae  £yaxanEma  £nEkiixa  t  !est  !iilaxs  awabalaeda  EnEk-ax  gwex's- 
dEmas.     Wii,  gil£mese  £wl="laxs  lae  k'loqulisxa    k!wedats!e    lExa£ya 

75  qa£s  lii  kloguxsElas  laxes  nanak'!aats!iixa  k!wet!a£ye  ts!ats!ag'ima. 
Wii,  g'il£mese  £wllxsaxs  lae  m5xsaxes  k-!ak!obana  LE£wa  £w;~dase 
uagatsla.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wI1xsexs  gaxae  niiEnakwa  laxes  g-okwe, 
wa,  g?l£mese  lag-aa  liix  L!Ema="isases  gokwaxs  lae  hex£idaEm 
loltiilaxes  ts !ats !ag"lme  laxes  ai.axLalaena'ye.       Wii,  la£mese    dabex 


boas]  RECIPES  503 

end  ||  of  the  anchor-line  of  the  old  canoe,  goes  up  the  beach,  and  ties  |  80 
the  end  to  a  stone  on  the  beach.     She  goes  into  her  house,  |  and  imme- 
diately she  eats;  and  her  husband  clears  up  the  house  |  and  spreads 
mats  around  the  floor.     When  he  has  done  so,  he  invites  his  |  tribe 
to  come  and  eat  the  barnacles.     When  they  come  in,  ||  the  host  takes  85 
long  narrow  mats  to  eat  from,  |  and  he  spreads  them  down  in  front 
of  the  barnacle-eaters;  |  and  he  takes  cedar-sticks,  which  he  splits 
into  thin  pieces,  |  and  he  breaks  them  into  pieces  four  finger-widths 
in  length.  |  He   distributes   these,   one  stick  ||  to  each  one   of  the  90 
barnacle-eaters,  to  pull  out  the  |  edible  part  of  the  barnacles.     As 
soon  as  each  has  one,  he  goes  down  to  the  |  place  where  the  old  canoe 
of  his  wife  is,  and  he  carries  on  his  back  the  basket  with   bar- 
nacles. |  He  carries  them  into  the  house  and  puts  them  down  by 
the  side  of  the  |  door  of  the  house.     Then  he  goes  down  again,  and 
carries  on  his  back  the  ||  other  large  basket  of  barnacles;  and  he  goes  95 
and  carries  them  into  his  house;  |  and  he  walks  right  back  to  the  rear 
of  the  house,  and  pours  them  on  the  |  mats  from  which  the  barnacles 
are  to  be  eaten.     Then  he  pours  them  out  all  along  in  front  of  those 
who  |  are  to  eat  the  barnacles;  and  he  takes  the  other  basket  of 
barnacles  |  and    goes    and    pours    them    out.     Then  the    barnacle- 
eaters  ||  take  up  the  barnacles  with  the  left  hand,  and  with  the  |   100 
right  hand  they  hold  the  cedar-stick  and  push  at  the  "eye"  |  of  the 

q lEldzamVyases    ts!ats!ag  imaxs    lae"    lasdesEla    qa£s    mox"sEmleses  80 
5baeyas    laxa    niEgwise    tlesEnia.      Wa,    la     laeL     laxes     g-okwe. 
Wa,  hex£ida£mese  lIexwb.     Wa, laLa  lfrwmiKmas  ex£wldxes  gokwe 
qa£s  LEpse^stallMesa  teEl£wa£ye.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwabexs  lae  Le£lalaxes 
g'okulote  qa  g-Jixes  t  h:saxa  k!wet!a£ye.     Wa,  g-il£mese  g'iix  £wl£lae- 
Laxs  laeda  k  IwetelaLaxa  k  !wet  !a£yexa  bEgwanEine  ax£edxa  g-flsg-IldE-  85 
dzowe  leEl£wa£ya  qa£s  la  LEpdzamolilas  laxa  t  lEsaLaxa  k!wet!a£ye. 
Wa,  la  et!ed  ax£edxa  k!wa£XLawe  qa£s  xoxoxusEndeq  qa  wiswElto- 
wes.    Wa,  la  k-6k-Ex"suEiidEq.     Wii,  laEm  maemodEne  awasgEmasas 
laxEns  q !waq Iwaxts !ana£yex.     Wa,  la  ts lEwanaesasa  £nal£nEmts !aqe 
laxa  £nal£nEmokwe   laxa  tlEsaxaxa    k!wet!a£ye  c[a  l  lEnxsalayosexa  90 
hahamasta£yasa  k  !wet  !a-ya.     Wa,  g-il£mese  ewilxt6xs  lae  Isnts  !es  laxa 
ha£nedzasas  tslagolases  gEiiF.me  qa£s  oxLoltodexa  k!wedats!e  lExa£ya 
qa£s  la  oxxaeLElas  laxes  g-oknTe  qa£s  la  hangalllas  laxa  fiwlLElas  t!E- 
xilases  g-okwe.     Wa,  lii  etEntsles  qa£s  etlede  oxLEx-£Idxa  £nEmsgE- 
me  £walas    k!wedats!e    lExa£ya    qa£s  lit    oxLaeLElaq   laxes   gokwe.  95 
Wa,  la  heglyolIlElas  laxa  ogwlwallle  qa£s  lii  gugEdzodalas  laxa  t!E- 
dzEdzowe  le£wa£ya.     Wii,  laEm  gugE£nakulas  lax  LlasEx-dzannxlilasa 
tlEsaLaxa  k!wet!a£ye.      Wii,  lii    ax£edxa  £nEmsgEme  k!wedats!e  1e- 
xa£ya  qa£s  la  gugugeqas  laq.     Wa,  hex-£ida£meseda  ttesaLaxa  k!we- 
t!a£ye  dagllllxa  k  !wet  !a£ye  yises  gEmxoltslana've.      Wa,  lii  dalases  100 
helk- lots !ana£ye  laxa  idEngayowe  k!wa£xLawa  qa£s  LlELlEnxstowes 


504  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKHT].  [eth.  ann.  35 

2  barnacles,  so  that  the  edible  part  comes  out;  and  after  they  have 
pushed  out  |  the  edible  part,  they  pinch  the  shell  teeth  of  the  barna- 
cles, and  bite  off  the  |  lower  end  and  eat  it;  and  they  all  do  the  same  || 
5  while  they  are  eating  the  barnacles.  They  eat  them  very  quickly;  | 
and  after  they  have  eaten  them,  the  host  who  is  giving  the  barnacle- 
feast  draws  some  water  and  |  gives  it  to  the  feasters.  They  rinse 
their  mouths  so  as  to  |  remove  the  salt  taste  from  the  inside  of  the 
mouth;  and  when  the  salt  taste  is  out  of  the  mouth,  |  they  drink  a 

10  little  water.  Then  ||  they  go  out  of  the  house;  and  the  host  gathers  | 
the  empty  shells,  puts  them  into  a  mat,  and  throws  them  |  out  of  his 
house.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Another  Way  of  preparing  Barnacles. — Burning  barnacles  on  |  level 
sandstone.  When  the  j  woman  gets  ready  to  go  and  start  a  fire  over 
the  barnacles,  she  |  first  takes  her  large  basket;  and  she  takes  a 
5  short,  broad  board  and  ||  splits  it  in  pieces  the  thickness  of  a  finger.  | 
She  ties  them  up  with  cedar-bark,  and  she  also  takes  her  yew-wood  | 
clam-digging  stick  and  matches,  and  she  carries  her  |  large  basket. 
She  carries  the  split  cedar-sticks  on  her  shoulder,  |  and  in  one  hand 
she  carries  the  yew-wood  clam-digging  stick,  and  she  walks  down  the 

10  rocky  ||  beach  in  front  of  her  house  at  Fort  Rupert.  Then  she  looks 
for  I  a  sheet  of  barnacles;  and  as  soon  as  she  finds  a  large  patch  of 


2  laxa  k!wet!a£ye  qa  lax'sales  hamtslawas.  Wa,  g'iPmese  iJEnxsdd- 
xa  hamts  lawasexs.  lae  ep ledEX  q lEg'lmasa  k!wet!a£yaxs  lae  qteko- 
dEx  oxsdE£yas  qa£s  hamx-£Ideq.  Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  he  gweg'ilaxs 
5  klwetklwataaxa  khvet  !a£ye.  Wii,  la  halabalaEmxs  ha£mapaaq.  Wa, 
gll-niese  £wi£laxs  lae  ax£ededa  klwetelaxa  k!weta£yexa  £wape  qa£s  lii 
tsex'£its  laxes  klwetelagile.  Wa,  lax-da£xwe  ts !ew§l lExoda  qa 
lawayes  dEmp  !aeL  !Exawa£yas.  Wa,  g'il-inese  £wl£lawe  dEmpIaeLlE- 
xawa£yasexs   lae  xaL!Ex-£ld    nax-'ldxa    £wape.       \\';\,    hex-£ida£mese 

10  £naxwa  hOquwElsa.  Wa,  laxaeda  k!wetelax-de  hex-£idaEm  q!ap!e- 
gilllxa  t!asmote  qa£s  k'!ats!odes  laxa  lExa£ye  qa£s  la  k*!odEs  lax 
L!asana£yases  g"5kwe.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Another  Way  of  preparing  Barnacles. — Anaxa  k!wet!a£ya  laxa 
k!wedEk!wa  tlesEma  laxa  £nEmaa  dE£naxEk!wa.  Wa,  he£maaxs 
lae  xwanalEleda  tslEdaqaxs  lai.e  anaxa  k!wet!a£ye,  wii,  he£mis 
gil  ax£etso£ses  £walase  lExa£ya.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  ts!ats!axusEine 
5  qa£s  xoxox"sEnde  qa  yiwes  awagwitEns  q !waq Iwaxts !ana£yex. 
Wa,  la  yiL5yotsa  dEiiase  laq.  Wa,  he£misa  L!Einq!Ek!ine 
k'lilakwa;  wa,  he£misa  kedzayowa.  Wa,  la  oxLalaxes  fwa- 
lase  lExa£ya.  Wa,  lii  wikllaxa  mEndzaakwe  klwa'xi.awa.  Wa, 
lii    dak" lotElaxes    L!Emq!Ek"!lne     k'Klakwaxs     la,e    lEtslEyala    lax 

10  LtEma£isases  gokwe  laxg'a  TsaxesEk-.     Wa,  la  alex-ldicx  EnEmxsa- 
aasa  k!wet!a£ya.     Wa,  g-ll£mese    q!axa    lexEya    tasala    k!wet!a£ya, 


boas]  RECIPES  505 

barnacles  |   (that  is  what  the  old  Indians  call  a  sheet  of  barnacles),  |   12 
then  she  puts  her  cedar-sticks  down  on  the  rock,  and  also  her  clam- 
digging  stick,  |  and  she  carries  her  basket  on  her  back  as  she  is  going 
up  the  beach  where  she  goes  to  get  ||  eel-grass  at  high-water  mark.  15 
She  puts  it  into  her  basket.  |  When  it  is  full,  she  goes  down  again  to 
the  rocky  beach  where  she  left  |  her  split  cedar-sticks,  and  she  puts 
down  the  |  basket  of  eel-grass.     She  takes  out   the  eel-grass,  and  | 
scatters  it  over  the  barnacles.     She  does  not  put  it  on  thick  when  she 
scatters  the  ||  eel-grass.     After  she  has  done  so,  she  splits  up  |  into  20 
small  pieces  one  of  the  cedar-sticks  to  start  her  fire.  |  After  she  has 
done  so,  she  takes  her  matches  and  lights  them.  |  With  them  she 
burns  the  end  of  the  cedar-stick  for  starting  the  lire.     She  puts  it  |  on 
the  middle  of  the  scattered  eel-grass,  places  the  ||  split  cedar-sticks  on  25 
it,  and  scatters  them  all  over.     As  soon  as  it  is  burnt  up,  |  she  sits 
down  on  the  rocks  and  waits  for  the  |  split  cedar-sticks  to  burn  up. 
When   they  are   burnt,  |  the  woman    takes  her  clam-digging  stick, 
sweeps  away  the  eel-grass  and  |  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  wood,  and, 
when  they  have  all  been  remoA  ed,  she  pries  off  the  barnacles  with  her 
digging-stick.  ||  The  cooked  barnacles  come  oil'  in  large  cakes,  as  they  30 
are  in  |  cakes.     Then  the  woman  breaks  them  into  smaller  pieces  | 
and  puts  them  into  her  basket ;  and  when  all  that  has  been  cooked  is 
off,  |  she  carries  the  barnacle-basket  on  her  back  and  goes  to  her 

heEin  gwEsyosa  g'ale  baklum  £nEmxsaaatsa  k!wet!a£yeda  he  gwale,  12 
wa,  la  axalodxa  mEndzaakwe  klwaxLawa,   wa,  he£meses   k'lilakwe. 
Wa,  la    oxLosdesElaxes    lExa£yaxs    lae  lasdesEla  qa£s  la  ax£ed  laxa 
fcs  !ats  layime    laxa  £ya£xumute  qa£s    textslodes  laxes  lExa£ye.     Wa,  15 
g-il£mese   qotlaxs    lae    xwelaqEnts les  laxa  LlEmayaa    lax    g'lyaasa- 
ses    mEndzaakwe    k!wa£xi.awa.     Wa,    la    oxLEgaalotses  tslayatsle 
lExa£ya.       Wii,    lii    axewults lodxa     tslats  layime    laxa    lExaJye,  qa 
belEytndales   laxa  k!wet!a£ye.     Wii,    k- lest  la  waklwaxae  LEXEyaya 
tslatslayime    laq.     Wa,    g'il£mese   gwalExs  lae    heloxusEnd   xoxoxu-  20 
sEndxa   enEmts!aqe    laxa    mEndzaakwe  klwaxLawa  qa£s  g'alastoya. 
Wa,  glb'mese    gwalExs    lae    ax'edxes    k'edzayowe    qaEs    k'eseedeq. 
Wii,  la    mex'bEndxa    g'alastoyowe    k!waeXLawa.     Wa,  la  axEyints 
lax    naq!Eq!a£yasa    la    lEX£a    tslats layima.     Wa,  la   k'atEymdalasa 
mEndzaakwe  k!wa£xLa  laq  qa  gweles.     Wa,  gih'mese  x'lqostaxs  1;  e  25 
k!wag-aala    laxa    tledzEklwa.      Wii,    laEm    esEla    qa    q!ulx-£Idesa 
mEndzaakwe  k!wa£xxawa.     Wa,  g"ilemese  q !tilx-£IdExs  lae  ax£ededa 
tslEdaqaxes    k"!ilakwe    qa£s     xox-wldes    laxa    tslats  layime    LE£wa 
qluqlwalEmote.     Wa,  gil-mese  £wi£laxs  lae  k IwetElalases  k"!ilakwe 
laxa  k!wet!a£ye.     Wa,  a£mise  la  qwak lug'ilaleda  la  Llop  k!wet!a£ya  30 
laxes  awadzEwena£ye.     ^^"a,  a£mesa  tstedaqe  la  heloxus£alala  wewex'- 
salaq  qa£s  axtslales  laxes  lExa£ye.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£lawa  la  LlopExs 
lae  oxLEX-£idxa  k!wedats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  ua£nakwa  laxes  g'okwe. 


506  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  . 

35  bouse.  |  Then  she  calls  her  husband  and  ber  children,  or,  if  |]  she  has 
no  children,  she  calls  herfriends,  to  come  and  eat  |  barnacles.  When 
they  come  and  sit  down,  she  spreads  |  mats  in  front  of  those  who  are 
to  eat  the  barnacles.  Then  the  woman  goes  down  to  the  |  beach  of 
the  house  and  picks  up  stones  and  carries  them  up.  |  She  carries  them 

in  into  the  house  and  puts  them  down  ||  where  she  sits  down,  and  she 
gives  to  those  who  are  to  eat  the  barnacles,  each  two  stones.  |  Then 
she  pours  out  the  barnacles  in  front  of  those  |  whom  she  invited. 
Then  those  who  are  to  eat  the  barnacles  put  |  one  of  the  stones  down 
on  the  floor.     That  is  the  one  on  which  they  will  break  the  barnacles;  | 

45  and  (hey  take  a  barnacle  in  the  left  hand  and  put  it  on  ||  the  stone 
on  which  it  is  to  be  broken;  and  they  take  the  hammer-  |  stone  in  the 
right  hand  and  strike  the  barnacle  and  break  its  |  shell.  Then  they 
cat  the  edible  part.  They  keep  on  |  doing  so  as  they  are  eating  the 
barnacles;  and  |  when  they  have  finished,  they  do  just  as  I  have  told 

50  before,  ||  when  I  talked  about  the  way  they  do  when  the  guests  finish 
eating  barnacles  at  a  barnacle-feast.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Cryptochiton. — As  soon  as  the  tide  is  low,  (the  woman)  takes  her| 
small  basket  and  Iter  digging-stick  for  cryptochiton  and  she  goes 
down  to  the  |  rocky  beach.  Then  she  looks  under  stones  on  the  rocky 
beach;   j  and  when  she  sees  a  cryptochiton,  she   pushes  the  crypto- 

\V;i,  hex-£ida£mese   i.eMalaxes  hVwuiiEme   LE£wis    sasKiue.      Wit,    g'il- 

35  £mese  k"  leas  sasEmxs  lae  Le£lalaxes  £ne£nEinf>kwe  qa  g"axes  ttesaxa 
klwet  !a£ve.  Wa,  gih'mese  ga\  klfis-'alilExs  lae  LEpdzamolllEiua 
le£wa£ye  laxa  t!Esax,axa  klwet  !a£ye.  Wa,  leda  tslEdaqe  lEiitsles  laxa 
LlEma£isases  g'okwe  qa£s  xExU£widexa  t  lesEme  qa£s  la  xEx-usdesE- 
laq.     Wa,  la  XEgwiLElaq    laxes    g-6kwe    qa£s   la  XEXu£walilas  laxes 

40  klwaelase.  Wa,  la  tslasa  maemaltsEme  tlesEm  laxes  k!wetelag-ilaxa 
klwet !a£ye.  Wa,  lii  gugEdzotsa  klwet !a£ye  lax  L!asEx-dzama£yases 
i.e'danEme.  Wa,  hex-£ida£mesa  k!wetk!watLaxa  k!wet!a£ye  nncxwa- 
lllasa  £nEmsgEme  tlesEina  cpixs  he£mae  tlEsdEmalxa  klwet !a£ye. 
Wa,  lii  dax,£Itses  gEmxolts !ana£ye  laxa  klwet !a£ye  qa£s  axsEmdes  laxa 

4")  tlEsdEma  tlesEma.  Wa,  la  dax£Itses  helk" lots !ana£ye  laxa  tlayowe 
tlesEmxs  lae  t!Es£Its  laxa  klwet !a£ye.  Wii,  he£mis  la  tEp ledamasxa 
xalaesasa  klwet !a£ye.  Wa,  lii  liamx'£IdF,x  hamtslawas.  Wa,  ax'sa- 
£mese  he  gwegilaxs  k Iwetk Iwataaxa  k!wet!a£ye.  Wa,  g"il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  aEm   la  nEgEltEwexEn  gale  waldEmxgin  la,  gwagwex'- 

50  s£ala  laqexs  lae  gwal  klwetklwata  Le£lanEmasa  klweteliixa  k!we- 
t  !a£ye.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Cryptochiton. — Wa,1  g'iPmese  xatslaesexs  laeda  gEnEmas  ax£edxes 
lalaxame  LE£wis  qtenyayaxa  qlanase.  Wa,  lii  lEntslEyala  laxa 
LlEmayaa.  Wa,  lii  hex£idaEm  dodEgiipaxa  £niEX'£niEk!wa  tlesEma. 
Wa,  gil'niese  dox£waLElaxa  qlanase   lae  LlEnqElotses   qh<:nyayowe 

'  Continued  from  p.  151,  line  21. 


boas  J  RECIPES  507 

chiton  digging-stick  ||  under  it;  and  when  it  is  turned  on  its  hack.  5 
she  takes  it  and  throws  |  it  into  her  cryptochiton  basket.    She  con- 
tinues doing  this  |  as  long  as  she  finds  cryptochitons;  and  when  her 
little  basket  is  full,  |  she  goes  up  the  beach  into  her  house.  | 

Then  she  takes  her  small  kettle  and  washes  it  out  with  water.  | 
When  this  is  done,  she  pours  freshwater  into  it,  until  it  is  |  half  full,  10 
and  she  puts  it  over  the  lire.     When  it  |  begins  to  boil,  she  takes  her 
cryptochiton  basket  and  pours  the  |  chitons  into  the  boiling  water. 
When  they  are  all  in,  |  she  takes  her  tongs  and  stirs  them  with  them, 
so  that  they  stop  boiling,  for  the  ||  chitons  are  cold.     Therefore  the  15 
water  stops  boiling  at  once.  |  She  keeps  on  stirring  it  while  the  crypto- 
chitons are  in  the  kettle;  and  |  as  soon  as  the  water  boils  up  again, 
she  takes  the  |  kettle  off  the  fire.     She  takes  a  dish  and  quickly  ; 
pours  fresh  water  into  it.     Then  she  takes  a  large  ladle,  ||  and  with  20 
it  she  takes  out  the  cryptochitons  she  is  cooking  and  puts  them  into 
the  |  dish  with  water  in  it.     When  they  are  all  in,  she  calls  |  her 
husband  to  come  and  eat  the  boiled  cryptochitons.  |  Then  he  goes  and 
sits  down  by  the  side  of  the  dish  with  cryptochitons;  |  ami  he  takes 
out  one,  peels  the  shell  off  its  back,  and  ||  throws  it  into  the  kettle.  2-5 
He  pulls  out  the  |  entrails  and  throws  them  into  the  kettle;  ami  when 
they  have  |  "berries"  on  the  back,     these  are  of  red  color  and  soft, 

lax  awaba-yas.     Wa,  gibmese  nELElaxs  lae   dax-eidEq    qa-s   tshsx-  5 
ts lodes    laxes    qhnnyatsle    lalaxama.      Wa,  axsii£mese    he    gweg'i- 
laxes    qlasEwe    qlanasa.     Wa,  gil-mese    qotle    qhsnyatslas    lalaxa- 
maxs  lae  lasdesa  qa£s  la  laeL  laxes  g'okwe. 

Wa,  hex£ida£mese   ax£edxes  ha£nEme   qa£s  tsloxug'indesa    Ewape 
laq.     Wa,  g-il-mese    gwalExs    lae  giixtslotsa    £wE£waplEme    laq    qa  10 
nEgoyoxsdrdes.     Wa,  la    hanxxEnts    laxes    lEgwlle.     Wa,  gib'mese 
mEdElxcw!dExs  lae  ax£e<lxes  q  !r.nyats!e  lalaxama  qa£s  guxstEndesa 
qlanase    laxa    maEmdElqula   Ewapa.     Wa.  g-il-mese  £wl£la£staxs    lae 
ax£edxes  ts!esLala  qa£s  xwet!edes  laqexs  lae  gwal  mEdElqula  qaeda 
qlanasaxs  ewudae    lag-ilas    hex-eidaEm    gwal    mEdElqiile.      Wa,    Hi  15 
xwetax  saEmqexs   lae   g'estaleda    qlanase    laxa    hanx'Lanowe.     Wa, 
g-ib'mese    et  led  mEdElxewidEXS  lae  hex,£idaEm  lianx-sEiidxa  hanx- 
Lanowe    laxa     lEgwlle.       Wa,    lit     ax£edxa     loqlwe    c[a£s    halabale 
guxtslotsa  £wE£wap!Eme  laq.     Wa,  lii  axsedxa  nvalase  k"ats!Enaqa 
qa£s  xalost Elides  laxa  qlanselaseda   qlanase   qa£s  la   xEltslots  laxa  20 
£wabEts!alele  loqlwa.     Wa,  g'iPmese  £wI£1osexs   lae    hex,£ida   Le£la- 
laxes    la£wmiEme    qa    gaxes    cjlEnsqlasxa    hanxLaakwe    qlanasa. 
Wa,  hex-£ida£mese   la    klwagiigElllxa    qlEnsqlayatsle  loqlwa.     Wa. 
la  dax'£Idxa  £nEmsgEme  qlanasa    qaes  sexalex    xF.ldzeg'a£yas  qacs 
tslExtslales    laxa  qlEnselatsle  hanx'Lanowa.     Wa,  lii  gElx£uqodEx  25 
yix-yig-Ila   qa£s  ts !Exts lodexaas^laxa    hanx'Lanowe.     Wii,  gil£mese 


508  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ktii.  ann.  35 

he  puts  them  into  his  mouth  |  and  cats  them;  and  he  washes  the 

.'50  clean  cryptochitons  in  |  the  dish;  and  after  washing  them,  lie  ||  eats 
them.  Some  Indians  call  this  "cryptochiton-eating;"  |  and  when 
one  has  been  eaten,  they  take  another  one  |  and  clean  it,  as  they  did 
the  first  one,  before;  |  and  after  it  has  been  cleaned  and  washed, 
they  |  eat  it;  and  the  one  who  eats  the  chitons  does  this  with  every 

35  one  of  them;  ||  and  as  soon  as  he  has  finished,  water  is  given  to  him 
He  rinses  |  his  mouth;  and  after  rinsing  his  mouth,  he  drinks  a  | 
very  little  water;  and  after  doing  so,  he  sits  still.  |  That  is  all  about 
this,  j 
1  Baked  Cryptochiton. — The  woman  also  takes  |  a  small  basket  of 
cryptochitons.  She  takes  a  handful  and  throws  them  under  her  | 
tire,  at  the  side-logs,  scraping  out  some  of  the  hot  ashes.  |  When  she 
.")  throws  the  chitons  into  the  ashes,  she  takes  her  jj  tonus  and  stirs  the 
ashes  about,  so  that  they  will  be  scattered,  and  she  continues  stirring 
them.  |  She  does  not  leave  them  there  a  long  time;  and  when  they 

.  are  burnt  black,  she  |  pulls  them  out  with  her  tongs  and  puts  them 
down  by  the  side  of  t lie  j  tire.  She  takes  her  small  dish  and  pours 
some  water  into  it  |  until  it  is  half  full.     Then  she  picks  up  the 

10  roasted  cryptochitons  and  ||  puts  them  into  the  dish  with  water  in  it, 
and  she  stirs  them  round  with  her  |  hand ;  and  when  all  the  ashes  are 

•_>7  qlEmdzEgwekilaxa  L!ax"stowe  tF.lkiixs  lae  ts!oq!iisa  laxes  sEinse 
i|,i's  hamx£Ideq.  Wii,  la  ts!ox£wid'xa  senkwe  qlanasa  laxa 
q  tensq  layats  !e     toqlwa.       Wii,    glbmese      gwfd     tsloxwaqexs    lae 

:j!I  liamx-'IdEq.  Wii,  lii  £nekeda  waokwe  bakliima  qhmsqlasedxa 
qlanase.  Wii,  gibmese  £wl£laqexs  lae  et  led  dax£Idxa  £nEinsgEme 
qlanasa  qa£s  etlede  scxEIdEq  laxes  gale  gwegilasxes  g'ale  sex-a- 
sE£wa.  Wii,  gibmese  senkiixs  lae  ts!ox£wJdEq.  Wii,  laxae 
q tensq !as£edEq.      Wii,    lii    £naxwaEm    he    gwegilaxs    qlEnsqlasae. 

35  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalEXs  lae  tsex-£Itso£sa  £wape.  Wii,  lii  tslEweLlE- 
xoda.  Wii,  glbmese  gwal  tslEweiJExodExs  lae  xaL!Ex£Id  nax£ed- 
xa  holalbida£we  £wape.  Wii,  g'ibmese  gwalExs  lae  aEm  k!us£;ilila. 
Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
i  Baked  Cryptochiton.—  -TsledzKk"  qlanas,  yixs  he£mae  ax-ededa  tsli:- 
daqaxa  q  lanases  lalaxame.  Wii,  lii  k"  !olts!odEq  qa£sk'  laabolises  laxes 
lEgwIte  laxak"ak"EdEnwa£yas  yixs  lae  golx-aakweda  tsMqwa  guna£ya. 
Wa, gll£mese la k" !ag-iMsa  qlanase  laxa  giina£yaxs  lae  ax£edxes  tsles- 
5  Lala  qa£s  goli£laleq  qa  gwel£ides.  Wii.  la  lieniEiil£i:m  golg'Elgeq.  Wa, 
k"!est!a  alaEm  gaesExs  lae  k!wek!umElsgEmx£ida.  Wii,  sVmese 
golxsEntses  ts!esL:ila  laq  qa  gaxes  k'lanales  lax  mag'hiwallsases 
lEgwile.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxcs  lalogume  qa£s  guxtslodesa  £wape  liiq. 
Wii,  la    nEgoyoxsdalaxs    lae    klagilllxa    ts!edzEkwe  qlanasa  qa£s 

10  lii  k'liistEnts  laxa  £wabEts lawasa  loqlwa.  Wii,  lii  xwetElgEntses 
a£yasowe    laq.      Wii,    gil£mese   Ewll£awe    gwegunesgEma£yasexs    lae 


boas]  RECIPES  509 

off,  |  she  pours  away  the  dirty  water;  and  she  pours  more  water  into  12 
it  so  as  to  |  change  it,  and  she  again  stirs  it  with  her  hand,  and  again  | 
she  pours  off  the  dirty  water.  Now  they  are  clean.  ||  She  pours  15 
more  water  on  them,  and  she  peels  off  the  shell  from  the  back,  as  she 
did  in  the  case  |  I  first  talked  about  when  I  talked  about  |  boiling 
cryptochitons,  and  she  does  the  same  as  she  does  when  |  eating 
them.     That  is  all  about  tins.  | 

Winkles. — The  woman  just  takes  her  small  basket  and  |  goes  down  20 
to  the  rocky  beach  of  her  house  at  low  tide,  about  |  the  time  when 
the  Indians  are  going  to  Knight  Inlet;  for  that  is  the  time  when  | 
winkles  gather  to  spawn,  and  that  is  what  the  woman  searches  for.   | 
As  soon  as  she  finds  them,  the  woman  just  puts  her  small  basket  under 
the  place  where   there   are    many    winkles,  [  and  she  scrapes    the 
winkles  into  her  small  basket;  and  as  soon  as  ||  the  small  basket  is  25 
full,  she  comes  up  from  the  rocky  beach  carrying  the  winkle-  |  basket 
in  her  hands,  and  she  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.     Then  she 
takes  her  small  |  kettle  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  winkle- 
basket.     She  takes  it  |  and  pours  the  winkles  into  the  small  kettle. 
When  they  are  all  in,  she  |  takes  the  water  and  pours  a  little  into  it. 
She  takes  an  ||  old  piece  of  matting  and  tucks  it  in.     Then  she  puts  30 
the  kettle  on  the  fire,  |  and  it  stays  on  the  fire  a  long  time  boiling. 
It  takes  about  |  four  hours  according  to  the  watch  before  they  are 

guqodxa  neqwa  ewapa.  Wii,  la  et!ed  guqteqasa  ewape  laq  qa-s  l!S-  12 
yodeq.  Wii,  laEmxae  xwetElg'intses  aeyasowe  laq.  Wii,  liixae  et  !ed 
guqodxa  neqwa  Ewapa.  Wii,  laeme  ex'sEmx-eida.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed 
guqlEqasa  £wape  laq.  Wa,  la  sex'alax  XEldzeg-a£ya  laxes  gwegi-  1~> 
lasaxEn  g'ale  waldEmx'gln  liik'  gwagwex-s£alalak-exs  lae  q!Ensq!as- 
xa  hanxxaakwe  qlanasa.  Wa,  laF.m  aEin  iiEqEing  iltEweqexs  lae 
hiVmapEq.     Wa,  laEmxae  gwal  laxeq. 

Winkles  (G"elayo). — AicmLeda  tslEdaqe  ax-cedxes  lalaxame  qaes  lii 
lEnts!esEla  laxa  rJ.Emayaases  g'okwaxa   x'atslaese    laxs  lae  mEin-  20 
w:u'l!eiix  lax    Dzawade    qaxs    heemae   la  q!ap!ex£IdExdEmsa  ge- 
layowe  laxes    waselasLe.     Wa,    hemns  la  iilaso-csa    tslEdaqe.      Wa, 
giPmese  qlaqexs  lae  aEm  hanabotses  lalaxame  lax  qlayasasa  ge- 
layowe  qaes  goltslodesa    g'elayowe   liixes  lalaxama.     Wa,  g-il£mese 
qot!e  lalaxamasexs  gTixae   lalsdEyala    k' !oxk' lotElaxes  g*elayoats!e  25 
lalaxama  qafs  lii  haEnolilas    laxes  lEgwIle.     Wa,  la  ax=edxes  hamE- 
me  qa£s  hamollles  laxes  g'elayoats  !e  lalaxama.     Wii,  lii  dadanodsq 
qaffs  guqosesa   g'elayowe  liixa  ha£iiEme.     WTa,  giPmese  £wielaxs  lae 
axeedxa  £wape  qa£s  xaLlaqe    guq!Eqas  laq.      Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  k!;i- 
k!obana  qa£s   dzopEyindes    laq.    Wii,  lii  hanx'LEnts  liixes  lEgwIle.  30 
Wii,  la  gexxala    laxa    lEgwIle    yala    maEmdElqula.     Wa,    laxEnte 
mots !agELElag-ila  laxEns  q!aq!alak"!ayaxEns  £nalaxs  lae  Llopa.    Wa, 


510  ETHNOLOGY    OP   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.sg 

33  done.  |  Then  she  takes  them  off  and  pours  off  the  water;  and  when 
all  the  |  liquid  is  off,  she  takes  out  the  old  mat  that  she  tucked  in, 

35  and  ||  she  takes  two  stones  to  break  the  winkles.  She  uses  |  the  mat 
to  break  them  on,  and  spreads  it  out  outside  of  her  seat.  |  Then  she 
takes  the  winkle-kettle  and  pours  the  |  winkles  on  the  mat  on  which 
they  are  to  be  broken.     She  takes  up  one  of  the  stones  |  and  puts  it 

40  on  the  mat  to  break  them  on  it.  In  her  ||  right  hand  she  takes  the 
other  hammer-stone,  and  she  takes  up  |  one  of  the  winkles,  puts  it  on 
the  one  stone,  and  |  strikes  it  with  the  hammer-stone.  Then  the  | 
shell  of  the  winkle  breaks  to  pieces.     She  takes  out  the  |  edible  part 

45  and  eats  it,  and  she  does  the  same  with  the  others.  ||  After  she  has 
eaten  all,  she  rinses  her  mouth,  so  that  the  salt  taste  comes  out,  |  and 
she  drinks  a  little  water;  and  she  gathers  the  |  broken  shells,  puts 
them  into  her  mat  on  which  they  were  broken,  and  she  |  goes  out  and 
throws  them  away  outside  the  house,  for  these  are  not  given  at  a 

50  feast  to  |  many  tribes, — winkles,  cryptochitons,  and  chitons.  ||  Only 
chiefs  and  their  children  eat  winkles.  |  I  do  not  know  why  they  are 
the  only  ones  to  eat  them.  That  is  all  |  about  this,  for  there  is  only 
one  way  of  cooking  them.  [ 
1  Eel-Grass  (Twisting  off  eel-grass). — In  springtime,  |  when  the 
winter  is  past ,  then  all  the  women  get  ready  to  |  twist  eel-grass.  .  .  . 

33  lit  hanxsEiulEq  qa£s  x'ats!Ex£Ide  £wapaliis.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl£lawe 
£wapalasexs    lae     lawEyodi:x    dzopEya£yas    k!ak'!obane.     Wit,    lii 

35  ax£edxa  maltsEme  tlesEina  qa£s  tlayoxa  g'elayowe.  Wii,  lii  ax£ed- 
xa  tledza  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEplaliles  laxes  Llasalllases  klwaelase. 
Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  gelayotslala  hanxLanowa  qa£s  gugEdzodesa  gela- 
yowe  laxa  tledza  le£wa£ya.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £nEmsgEme  tlesEma 
qa£s  £mEgudzodes   laxa    tledza   le£wa£ya.     Wa,  lii  dalasess  helk"  !o- 

40  ts !ana£ye  laxa  £nEmsgEme  t.'ayo  tlesEma.  Wii,  lii  dax*£Idxa  £nEms- 
gEme  g'elayo  qa£s  £mE£xusEmdes  laxa  tlEsdEma  tlesEma.  Wii, 
lii  t!Es£edEq  yises  dasgEmesE£we  t!ayo  tlesEma.  Wii,  he£mis  la 
tEtEpsaatsa  XEltsEma£yasa  g'elayowe.  Wa,  lii  ax£edEX  hamts  la- 
was    qa£s  hamx£ldeq.      Wa,  ii£mise  he    gweg'ilaxa    waokwe.     Wii, 

45  gtl£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  tslEwlLlExoda  qa  iawiiyes  dEmplaeLlExawa- 
eyas.  Wii.  lii  xaL!EX';Id  niix£Idxa  £wape.  Wii,  lii  q!ap!eg'illlxes 
t!asesawa£ye  qa's  lii  £wi£ladzots  laxes  tledza  le£wa£ya  qa£s  lii 
k'lats  lax  L!asana£yases  gokwe,  yixs  k'lesae  klweladzEm  laxa  q!e- 
nEme    lelqwalaLa£yaxa    g'elayowe    LE£wa    qlanase    LE£wa  k-!Enote. 

50  Wii,  laxa  lexama  g-Igigama£ye  LE£wis  sasEme  ha£miipxa  g'elayowe. 

Wa,  lsn  k!es    qlaLElax    hegagilmas   h&£mapEq.     Wa,  laEm  gwal 

laxeq  qaxs  £nEmx-£Idalamae  ha£mex'silnena£yaq. 

1       Eel-Grass  (Klilpiixa  ts !ats layime) . — Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  qlwaxF.nxa 

laas  hayaqaxa    tslawiinxe  lae    xwanal£ideda   £naxwa    tsledaqa  qa£s 


boas]  RECIPES  511 

The  man's  wife  |  who  is  going  to  twist  eel-grass  first  takes  her  eel- 
grass  twisting  ||  paddle  and  her  anchor-line  of  cedar-bark  rope,  and  5 
also  her  |  eel-grass  twisting  hat,  for  generally  they  wear  a  hat  when 
they  twist  |  eel-grass,  because  generally  sea-water  splashes  into  their 
faces  |  when  the  women  pull  up  the  twisting-stick  with  the  eel-grass 
twisted  around  |  its  end.  Then  it  splashes  into  their  faces  ||  when  10 
they  wash  the  eel-grass;  and  therefore  (the  woman)  wears  an  eel- 
grass  twisting  hat.  |  She  carries  down  every  thing  as  she  goes  down 
to  the  beach  |  to  her  little  old  canoe  for  twisting  eel-grass,  and  she 
also  |  carries  her  bailer  and  her  eel-grass  twisting-stick.  She 
launches  |  her  small  old  canoe,  and  puts  into  it  what  I  have  named.  || 
When  it  is  all  aboard,  she  sits  in  the  stern  of  the  small  eel-grass  15 
twisting  |  canoe.  She  takes  up  her  eel-grass  twisting  paddle  and 
paddles,  |  and  she  goes  to  a  place  where  she  knows  that  there  is  thick 
eel-grass  and  that  the  eel-grass  is  growing  in  soft  sand.  |  When  she 
arrives  at  the  place  where  the  eel-grass  is,  |  she  takes  the  cedar-bark 
rope  and  ties  the  ||  stone  to  its  end  and  throws  it  into  the  water;  and  20 
when  it  touches  the  bottom  so  that  it  is  vertical,  |  she  ties  it  to  the 
stern-seat.  After  doing  so,  she  ]  takes  her  twisting-stick  and  puts 
the  tip  into  the  water.  |  She  pushes  it  down  into  the  sea-water  and 
strikes  the  sandy  bottom  where  |  there  is  much  eel-grass.     Then  she 

klilpelxa  tslatslaylme.1     .     .      .     Wii,  laEin  liiLe  gEHEmasa  bEgwa-  3 
liEme  ktflpalxa  ts!ats!ayime.     Wii,  he£mis  gil  ax£etso£ses  k- !ipsa- 
yase  se£wayowa   LE£wes    q!Eldzana£ye    dEnsEn    dEiiEma.     Wa,  he-  5 
£mises  kHlpEmle  LEtEmla  qaxs  keniEnala£mae  LEtEmaleda  kltlpaxa 
ts!ats!ayime    qaxs    hemEnala£mae    kiisx'EgEinalaxa    dEmsxe    £wa- 
pExs  lae  nexostodeda    tstedaqaxes    k!ilba£yaxs    lae    x11k!utba£va 
ts!ats!aylme  lax  oba£yas.     Wa,    he£mis    la    kusx-EgEma!atsexs    lae 
ts!ots!Exodxa  ts!atsayime.     Wa,  heEm  lagilasa  kMilpEmle  LEtEm-  10 
la.     Wii,  la   £wl£la   dEnts !esElaqexs  lae   lEiitslesEla  laxa    L.'Ema£ise 
lax    ha£nedzasases    k'!ilbats!eLe    tslagol    xwaxwaguma.      Wii    he- 
£mises  tsiilayowe  i,E£wis  k'lElbayowaxa  ts  !ats  !ayime.     Wii,  la  wlxu- 
stEndxes  ts  !agpole  xwaxwaguma.     Wii,  la.  ax£alExsElaxEn  la  LeLEqEla- 
sE£wa.     Wii,  gil£mese  £wi1xsexs  lae  klwaxLEndxes  k' lllbats  !eLe  xwa-  15 
xwagiima.     Wii.   lii    dax"£idxes    k!ilpsayase  se£waya  qa£s  sex£wlde 
qa£s  lii  liixes  q!ale  waxus  ts!ats!ayime.     Wii,  he£misa  tElgwesas  eo"iSe 
q!waxasasa    ts!ats!ayime.     Wii,    g-il£mese    lagaa    laxa   k* lilbadaxa 
ts!ats!ayimaxs  lae    ax£edxa  dEnsEne    dEnEina    qa£s    m6xllbEndes;'. 
tlesEmelaq  qa£s  q!ElstEndes.     Wii,  a£mese  a£WEiiEnsElaxs  lae  mox-  20 
£walExsas    laxa    LEXExstEwelExse.      Wii,     g-il£mese     gwalalExsExs 
lae    dag-ilExsxes    kMilbayowe   qa£s   metsEncles    wllba£y'as    qa£s    me- 
dEnses  laxa  dEmsxe  £wapa  qa£s  LlEnxalises  laxa  eg-edzEgwise  lax 
qlayasasa   ts!ats!aylmaxs  lae  k!ilp!ida.     Wii,  la£meda  ts!ats!ayhne 

1  Continued  on  p.  155,  line  19,  to  p.  15G,  line  45. 


512  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Horn.  ANN.  35 

25  begins  to  twist  it.  Then  the  eel-grass  ||  is  t\\  isted  around  the  twisting- 
stick.  When  she  cannot  turn  the  |  twisting-stick  any  more,  she 
pulls  it  up.  The  twisting  woman  pulls  up  the  twisting-stick.  |  As 
soon  as  i  be  eel-grass  comes  in  sight,  she  untwists  |  it  to  get  it  off  from 
her  twisting-stick,  and  then  the  eel-grass  comes  off;  |  and  she  squeezes 

30  one  span  around  it,  ||  beginning  at  the  head-end.  That  is  what  we 
refer  to  as  the  roots.  |  She  washes  it  in  saltwater,  so  that  the  sand 
comes  off.  |  When  it  is  all  off,  she  measures  two  spans  |  from  the 
upper  end  of  the  roots,  and  she  breaks  oil'  the  lower  end.  |  When  it  is 

35  all  off,  she  puts  it  in  front  of  herself,  ||  and  she  puts  the  twisting-stick 
back  into  the  water,  and  she  does  I  lie  same  |  as  she  did  before.  When 
she  has  much  of  it,  the  tide  rises,  |  for  they  only  twist  at  spring 
tide  As  soon  as  tbc  tide  |  comes  up,  she  hauls  up  the  anchor  and 
goes  home;  |  and  when  she  arrives  at  the  beach  of  her  house,  she  gets 

40  out  of  her  ||  old  canoe  for  twisting  eel-grass.  She  takes  ou<  her 
anchor  and  carries  it  up;  |  and  when  the  anchor-line  gets  taut,  she 
puts  it  down.  ]  Then  she  sends  her  husband  to  go  and  invite  bis 
tribe  j  to  come  and  peel  eel-grass.     The  man  immediately  obeys  \ 

45  his  wife.  He  invites  bis  tribe.  ||  When  he  comes  back,  he  clears  out 
bis  house,  I  and  spreads  the  mats  around  for  those  who  are  going  to 
peel  the  eel-grass  t<>  sit  down  on.  |  As  soon  as  he  has  done  so,  be  takes 

25  la  kMilp'.Enexa  k'ltlbayowe.  Wa,  giPmese  gwal  sE£xuts!a  klilpE- 
leda  klilbavaxs  lae  aexostodeda  klilplenoxwe  tstedaqxes  kMilba- 
yowe.  Wti,  g'iPmese  g-ax  nel£ededa  ts  !ats  layimaxs  lac  aodzaaqa 
qwelk- lEwesedxes  kMllbayowe.  Wa,  he£mis  la  lawiyatsa  ts!ats!a- 
yinic.  Wa,  la  q!wes£idxa  MiFmplF.nk'e  laxF.ns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana- 
:;o  £yex  gag'iLEla  laxa  oguma.£yas  yixEns  gwE£yowe  LloplF.ks.  Wa, 
la  ts !ox£wEltalaq  laxa  dEmsx-e  £wapa  qa  lawayesa  egise.  Wa, 
gll£mese  c~\\i-laxs  hie  baHdxa  malplEnke  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!a- 
na£yex  g'aglLEla  lax  aw  ana£yi  sa  LloplEkasexs  hie  ploqalax  ewaxsda- 
Eyas.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wrwulx-sExs  lae  gig-aalExs' s  laxes  nalelExse. 
35  Wa.  la  xwelaqa  medEnsases  k'ttlbayowe.  Wa,  iVmese  nEqEmg  il- 
tEwexes  gale  gwegilasa.  Wa,  gih'mese  cjIevolexs  lae  £ylxwa 
(|axs  lexa£mae  kMilpdnnia  £walase  xats!a£va.  Wa,  g-ll£mese  k!wf„- 
yosdesa  £ylxwaxs  lae  dEnx£idxes  qlEltsEme  qa£s  la  na-iiak\\a. 
Wa,  glPmese  Lag'alis  lax  L!Ema£isases  gokwaxs  lae^oltalaxes  k•!ll- 
4(l  1>;  ts!e  tslag'ola  qa-'s  dagilExsexes  qlEltsEme  qa£s  la  dasdesElaq. 
Wa,  gll£mese  lEk!ut!ede  qlEldzaanayasexs  lae  £mEX£walisaq.  Wa, 
hex£ida£mese  £yali  qaxes  hVwfinEine  qa  las  i.edalaxes  g'okulote  qa 
g-axes  scx'axa  ts !ats laylme.  Wa,  hex£ida£raese  nanagega£ya  bE- 
gwanEmax  waldEmases  gEiiEme.  Wa,  lii  Le£lalaxes  gokidote. 
45  Wii,  g  ilmese  g  ax  aedi  aqaxs  lae  hex£ida£Em  ex£widxes  gokwe 
qa£s  EEpse'stalllElesa  l§El£wa£ye  laq  ((a  k'wadzosa  sexaLaxa  ts.!a- 
tslayime.      Wa,    ^-ih'mese    gwalalrlExs    lae    ax-'edxes    ts  lets  tebats  !e 


boas]  RECIPES  513 

his  oil-dishes  |  and  oil    and  brings  them,  so  that  they  are  ready.  4S 
Then  those  who  are  to  peel  the  |  eel-grass  come  in;  and  when  they 
are  all  inside,  the  man  asks  the  ||  young  men  of  his  numaym  to  go  and  50 
carry  up  the  eel-grass.  |  Immediately  the  young  men  go  and  carry  it 
up.     They  |  carry  it  into  the  house  and  put  it  down  in  front  of  those 
who  are  to  peel  it.  |  The  man  takes  the  oil  and  pours  it  into  the  | 
oil-dishes;  and  when  the  oil  is  in  every  one,  (the  young  men)  place 
theminfront  ||  of  those  who  are  to  peel  the  eel-grass,  at  the  outer  side.  55 
There  are  four  ]  men  to  each  oil-dish.     Then  the  eel-grass  is  scattered 
in  front  of  |  those  who  are  to  peel  it.     When  this  is  done,  the  |  men 
take  up  four  pieces  of  eel-grass  and  pluck  off  |  the  small  roots.     When 
they  are  all  off,  they  peel  off  the  ||. leaves  of  the  tail-end.     They  begin  60 
at  the  upper  end  of  the  thick  |  root;  and  when  they  have  peeled  it  as 
far  as  the  soft  part  in  the  middle  of  the  |  eel-grass,  they  do  the  same 
with  the  other  three  pieces.     When  |  this  has  been  done  with  all  of 
them,  they  put  the  roots  together  so  that  they  are  j  three  finger- 
widths   in   length,    and    then    they ______     break  ||  them  off;  65 

and  they  break  them  off  again  so  _____~~^_ _  that  they  are  all 
the  same  length,  |  in  this  manner:  Then   there  are 

eight  pieces  in  all.  They  -,  A  „  „  ft  tie  |  them  together  with 
the  leaves,  in  this  manner,  /  \ I  \f  \j  \  -  and  they  hold  them  at  |  1. 
Then  they  dip  (the  bundle)  j  [K      into    the  oil    and  eat  it, 

and  I  all  the  others  do  the  '   "\       same.     After   they    have 

LE£wa  L!e£na  qa  g'fixes  gwallla.     Wii,  g-axe  hogwlLEleda  sexaLaxa  45 
tslats  layime.     Wii,  gil-mese  nvidaeLEXs  laeda    bEgwanEine    helaxa 
haeyal£ases   £nE£memote   qa  las  gEmx£usdesaxa    ts  lilts  layime.     Wa,  50 
hex£ida£mese  lax-da£xweda    ha£yal£a    qa£s  lii  gEmxnisdesaq  qa£s  la 
gEmxeLElaq  qa£s  la    gEinxEmlilElas    lax    6xudzamalilasa   sex'aLaq. 
Wa,  lii  ax£ededa  bEgwanEinaxa  _!e£na  qa£s  k lunxts Sales  laxa  tsle- 
tslEbatsle.     Wii,    gil£mese    q Iwalxots lEwakiixs  lae    kaxdzamolllas 
laxa  sex'ai.axa  fcslats layime  lax  idasalilas.     Wii,  lii  maemaleda  be-  55 
bEgwanEinaxa.  Enal£nEmexLa  ts!ets!Ebats!a.    Wit,  la,La  gwelEmalileda 
ts!ats!ayime  liixa  sexaLaq.     Wa,  gilmiese    gwfd-alilExs  lae  hex-ri- 
daema  bebEgwanEine  dax-rdxa  maemotslaqe  fcs!ats!aylma  qa  k!ul- 
wiilexa  am£ama-ye  L!op!Eks.     Wa,  gib'mese  £wldaxs  lae    sex  alaxa 
wlwakiiya£ya  ogwida-'yas  6xsda£yaa  g-ag"iXElalax  awana-yasa  LEkvve  60 
L!5p!Ek's.     Wa,    g-il£mese    lag-aa    sex-a£yas    lax    tEltElq!uq!a£yasa 
ts  !ats  !a£yimaxs  lae   et!ed   he   gwex'Hdxa    yudux"ts!aqe.     Wii,    gil- 
£mese  £wiela  la  he  gwekiixs  lae  q!ap!ex£TdEx  LloplEk'asexs  lae  yae 
duxudEn  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  yix  awasgEmasasexs  lae  ko- 
k'ExsEndEq.      Wii,  lii   et!ed  k-ok-ExsEndEq  qa  £nEmes  awasgEinasa  65 
ga  gwiileg-a  (Jig.).     Wii,  lii  hamalgunalts!aqalaxs  lae  yiltsEmts  qwe- 
qiiL!Exsda£yas   laq  g-a    gwalega    (fig.).     Wa,  he£mis  la  dalasoseda 
(1)  axs  lae  tslEplets    laxa   L!e£na   cpx£s    ts  lasts  !Es£edeq.     Wa,  £na- 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 33 


514  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Utii.asn.ji 

70  finished  eating,  ||  they  pick  up  what  they  did  not  eat  and  go  out  of 
the  house;  and  they  go  into  |  their  houses  and  put  down  in  front  of 
their  |  wives  the  eel-grass  that  they  have  taken  along.  They  never 
drink  water  before  they  go  out  |  and  when  they  go  into  their  houses. 
That  is  the  eel-grass  peeling  feast  given  to  |  many  tribes,  for  it  is  the 

75  food  of  the  first  people  ||  in  the  time  of  the  first  Indians  of  the  myth- 
ical period.  Therefore  |  an  eel-grass  feast  is  a  valuable  feast  given 
by  a  man.  |  That  is  all  that  is  to  be  said  about  eel-grass,  for  there  is 
only  one  way  |  of  eating  it  and  of  getting  it.  | 
1  Seaweed. — When  the  visitors  have  finished  |  eating  dried  salmon, 
the  woman  takes  her  seaweed  |  and  tears  it  into  strips;  then  she 
gives  it  to  each  of  the  young  men.  |  And  some  take  an  adz  and  put 
5  the  seaweed  ||  on  a  block  of  hemlock-wood  made  on  purpose:  it  is  a 
span  |  and  a  half  long  and  three  |  spans  around,  and  it  stands  on  the 
floor  of  the  |  house.  Then  they  lay  the  seaweed  flat  on  it,  and  the 
young  men  cut  it  with  the  adz;  |  and  some  of  the  young  men  chew 

10  it  and  put  it  ||  into  a  large  dish.  As  soon  as  enough  of  the  seaweed  has 
been  chewed,  |  they  stop  chewing,  and  the  others  stop  chopping  it 
with  the  adz.  |  Then  a  kettle  is  taken,  and  water  is  poured  into  it  | 
until  it  is  half  full.     Then  the  chewed  |  seaweed  is  put  into  it.     Then 

xwaEm  he  gwegile  waokwas.  Wa,  glPmese  gwal  ts lasts !esexs  lae 
70  aEm  gEinxElIixes  k!ets!a£yawaye  qa£s  lii  hoqtiwElsa.  Wii,  la  hogwiL 
laxes  gigokwe  qa£s  gegEinxEinlilEleses  mamute  ts!ats!ayim  laxes 
gEgEnEme.  Wa,  laEm  hewaxa  nax£idEX  £wapaxs  lae  hoquwElsa 
l5xs  lae  hogwiL  laxes  gigokwe.  Wii,  heEin  sex'ilagilaxa  ts!ats!a- 
yima  qlenEine  leElqwalaLa£ya  qaxs  hemawalaasa  gale  bEgwanEina 
75  galaolex  bEkumgalisa  £naxwa  nux"nemisa.  Wa,  he£mis  lag-ilas 
awilaxselakwa  ts!ats!ayimxs  tslaselaeda  bEgwanEme.  Wii,  laEm 
gwala  ts!ats!ats!aliixa  tslatslayime  qaxs  EnEmx*eidalaemae  ts!ats!E- 
ts!ena£yaq    LE£wa   laLElaena£yaq. 

1  Seaweed  (LEqaxa  lEq!EstE'ne). — Wii,  he'£maaxs  la'e  gwal  ha- 
£ma'pa  k!we'laxa  xa-'ma'se,  wa,  la  ax£e'dedats!Eda'qaxes  lEqlEstE'ne 
qa£s  k!ulk!ulpsa'leq.  Wii,  la  tslawanaqas  la'xa  ha£ya'l£a.  Wii, 
leda  wao'kwe  ax£e'dxa  k'limLayowe  qa£s  pa'xbEndesa  lEqlEstE'ne 

5  la'xa  hekwila£ye  tE'mk!Ewe  qlwaxasa.  Wii,  laE'm  e'sEg-Eyo  la'- 
XEns  q!wa'q!waxts!ana£yex.  Wa,  lii  yu'duxup!Enxse£sta  la'xEns 
q!wa'q!wax-ts!ana£yex  yix  wa'gidasas.  Wii,  la  Lael  la'xa  g'5'- 
kwaxs  la'e  pagEtali'leda  lEqlEstE'ne  la'qexs  la'e  tsEtsEx-sa'leda 
ha£ya'l£iiq.  Wa,  leda  wao'kwe  ha£ya'l£a  ma'lekwaq  qa£s  axtsla'les 
10  la'xa  £wa'lase  lo'qlwa.  Wa,  g'i'Pmese  hel£e'da  maleg'Ekwe  leq!Es- 
tE'nxs  la'e  gwal  male'kwa  LE£wa  wao'kwaxs  tsEkaa'sa  k'li'm- 
Layo.  Wii,  laE'm  ax£e'tsE£weda  hanx-Lanowe  qa£s  giixts!o'tsE- 
£wesa  £wa'pe  qa  £nEgoya'les.  Wii,  la  k"  lEsta'noweda  male'g'Ekwe 
lEqlEstE'ne  laq.     Wa,    la  xwe'tasa   gEltlEXLa'la  kats!Ena'qe  laq. 


boas]  RECIPES  515 

they  stir  it  with  a  long-handled  ladle,  ||  and  they  watch  it  so  that  it  15 
does  not  become  too  thick  when  it  is  |  on  the  fire.     They  keep  on 
stirring  it  while  it  is  on  the  fire;  |  and  after  it  has  been  boiling  for  a 
long  time,  oil  |  is  poured  on  the  seaweed.     It  is  stirred  again  a  long 
time,  |  so  that  it  becomes  well  mixed.     When  it  is  really  mixed,  || 
the   kettle   is   taken  off    the  fire.     Then  it  is  done,  |  when  the  oil  20 
disappears  from  the  top  of  the  seaweed.     Immediately  |  a  food-mat  is 
taken  and  is  spread  before  |  those  who  are  to  eat  the  seaweed.     Then 
spoons  are  given  to  the  |  guests.     Then  the  small  kettles  are  lifted 
by  the  handle,  and  ||  are  put  down  at  the  outer  edge  of  the  food-mat,  25 
and  they  begin  to  eat  with  spoons  |  the  seaweed.     They  do  not  drink 
water  before  they  eat  it,  |  because  they  drank  water  before  they  ate 
dried    salmon.  |  After    they  have  finished  eating  with   spoons  the 
seaweed,  they  cool  themselves  |  by  drinking  fresh  water;  and  after  they 
have  finished  they  go  out.  ||  They  eat  seaweed  at  all  times,  in  the  morn-  30 
ing  and  at  |  noon  and  in  the  evening;  but  only  in  the  morning  they 
eat  |  dried  salmon  first;  and  when  there  is  no  dried  salmon,  then  they 
eat  |  dried  halibut  in  its  place:     They  do  not  eat  dried  salmon  first, 
at  |  noon  ami  in  the  evening.  || 

Powdered  Seaweed. —  (The  powdered  seaweed)  is  only  taken  when  1 
the  owner  wants  to  eat  some  of  it;  |  and  they  do  it  in  the  same  way 
when  it  is  cooked  |  as  they  do  with  the  chopped  and  chewed  seaweed. 

Wa,  la  do'qwafaq  qa  hela'les    gEiikalaf'na'yasexs  la'e  ha'nx-LEnts  15 
la'xa   lEgwfle.      Wa,    la    he'iiiEnalagilil-Ein    xwete'da    ha'nxxala. 
Wa,  he'tla  la  ge'gilll  maE'nulElqulaxs  la'e  ax£e'tsE;wa  i.!e'=naqa£s 
k!uq!EgEme  la'xa    lEqlEstE'ne.      Wa,  la'xaa    e'tled    ge'gilll    xwe'- 
tasE£wa    qa    lElgowes.     Wa,    gi'Pmese  la    a'lakMala    bs'lgoxs    la'e 
ha'nxsan5    la'xa    lEgwI'leda    ha'nxLanowe.     Wa,  laE'm    l!o'pexs  20 
la'e   x  is£I'deda   L!e'£na  lax  6'kuya£3~asa  lEqlEstE'ne.     Wa,  he'xid- 
£rnese   ax£e'tsE£wa    ha£madzowe    le'£waeya    qa£s    le    LEpdzamolIlas 
la'xa    lExla'qLe.     Wii,    la  tslawanae'dzEma  kak-Ets!Ena'qe    la'xa 
k!we'le.     Wa,  la  k!o'kulllasE£wa  heha'nEme  qa£s  le  hanEmga'lilEm 
lax  L!a'sEnxa£yasa  ha£ma<lzowe   le'£wa\ya.    Wa,  laxda£xwe   £yo's-  25 
£idxes    lExla'qsE£we.       Wii,    laE'm    k-!es    nanaqalg-iwalax    ewa'p'a 
qaxs    la£me'xde    mx'qaxa    £wa'paxs    le'x-de  ha£ma'pxa    xa£ma'se. 
Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwal  £yo'saxes  lE'xlExsE£waxs  la'e  k'5'xwaxod   na'- 
x£idxa    a'lta    £wa'pa.      Wa,    gi'l£mese    gwa'lExs    la'e    ho'qiiwElsa. 
Wii,  k!eii's  k'!es  ha£ma'pdEmxa    lEqlEstE'ne   LE£wa   gaa'la   LE£wa  30 
£nEqa'la  Lo£ma   ga'nuLe.     Wa,  le'xa£ma   gaa'la   ha'ha£malgiwala- 
tsexa  xa£mase.      Wii,    g'i'Imiese    k!ea,'s    xa£masExs    la'e    he'deda 
k'.a'wase    ha'£mii£s.     Wa,    la    k-!es    haha£malg-iwalaxa  xa£masaxa 
£nEqii'la  LE£wa  dza'qwa. 

Powdered   Seaweed. — Wa,  a'£mese  la  ax£e'daasExs  lExlaqlexs.laf'da  1 
axnogwadiis.       Wii,  la    he'Emxat!    gwe'gilasSxs    la'e    ha£mexslla- 
sE£we  gwe'gilasaxa  tsEg-Ekwe  LE£wa  male'g-Ekwe.     Wii,  <r  i'l£mese 


516  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE    KWAKIUTL  Listh.  ann.  35 

As  soon  as  |  the  seaweed  gets  cold  quickly,  the  guests  who  eat  it  || 

5  take   tongs,   and   red-hot  stones   are    taken  |  and  put  into  a  small 

kettle.     Then  it  |  keeps  warm  for  a  long  time  while  they  are  eating 

it.     Seaweed  is  never  |  boiled  in  a  large  kettle,  but  they  use  a  |  small 

10  kettle,  for  they  eat  it  out  of  it;  and  ||  not  once  is  it  put  into  a  dish,  | 
for  it  is  not  good  when  it  gets  cold,  and  it  is  only  good  |  when  it  is 
hot.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Salmon-Spawn  with  Seaweed.     I  have  |  forgotten  this.     When  two 

15  spoonfuls  of  scattered  ||  dog-salmon  spawn  are  boiled,  when  they  are 
nearly  done,  |  the  kettle  is  taken  off  from  the  fire,  andthen  cold  water 
is  poured  |  into  it  until  the  kettle  is  more  than  half  full.  |  Then 
chopped  seaweed  is  put  in  and  is  stirred.  |  When  it  is  just  the  right 

20  thickness,  the  kettle  is  put  back  ||  on  the  fire.  Then  it  is  left  to  boil 
for  a  long  time;  and  |  it  is  taken  oil'  again,  and  oil  is  poured  into  it.  | 
This  is  eaten  with  spoons  when  it  is  done.  | 

Clams  with  Seaweed. — And    also    four   large    (small)  |  clams   are 

25  taken  and  are  opened.  Then  ||  the  sand  is  picked  off;  and  when  it 
is  all  off,  they  are  put  into  the  |  kettle.  When  this  is  done  with 
four  I  large  clams,  water  is  poured  on,  but  not  very  |  much  water.  | 

ha'labala  £wudEx-£I'deda  iEq  testE'naxs  la'e  lExla'qa  klwe'laxs  la'e 
5  ax£e'tsE£wa  k!ipLa'la  qa£s  k!ip!eda'yuwe  la/xa  xI'xsEinala  t!e'- 
sEma  qa£s  le  k'lipsta'no  la'xa  ha'nEme.  Wa,  he'x,£ida£mese  la 
ga'la  ts!E']qwaxs  la'e  £yo'seda  lExla'qe.  Wa,  he'£mesexs  kMe'sae 
he  ha£mex-silats!eda  £wa'lase  hanx'Lano  la'xa  lEqlEstE'ne  he'e 
ba'nxLEndaa'ts!eda  Ein£Ema'£ye  ha'nx'Lanaq  qaxs  he'£mae  ha'£ma- 

10  ats!eq  qaxs  kle'sae  £nE'mp!Eiia  lo'xtsloyo  la'xa  lo'qlweda  IsqlEs- 
tE'ne,  qaxs  k-!e'sae  e'k-Exs  £w0da'e  yixs  le'xa£mae  e'g'asExs 
tslE'lxstae.     Wa,  laE'mxaa  gwal  la'xeq. 

Salmon-Spawn  with   Seaweed  (LE'qlEqElaxa  ge'£ne). — He'dEii  l!e- 
le'wesE'wa  ge'£niixs  ha'nx'LEntsE£waeda  ma'lEXLa  gwe'ledze  ge'£nesa 

15  gwa£xnise  la'xa  ka'tslEnaqe.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  Ela'q  Llo'pExs  la'e 
ha'nxsanoweda  ha'nxLanowe  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wii,  guqlEqasosa 
£wflda'£sta  £wa'pa  qa  e'k" !oldza£yes  la'xa  ha'nxLanowe.  Wii,  le 
k' ia'stanoweda  tsEg'E'kwe  lEqlEstE'n  laq.  Wa,  la  xwe'tasE£wa. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  he'lale  gE'nkalaena£yasexs  la'e  xwe'laqa  ha'nx'LEn- 

20  dayo  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la£me'se  ge'gilll  qa£s  maE'mdElqulaxs 
la'e  ha'nxsano  la'xa  lEgwI'le.  Wii,  la  k!u'nq!Eqasosa  L!e'£na. 
Wa,  a'£mese  la  £yo's£Itsoxs  la'e  L!o'pa. 

Clams  with  Seaweed. — Wii,    he'£mesa  mo'sgEme  awa'    g-a'weq!a- 
nEma    yixs    ax£e'tsEwae.     Wa,    la    k' !6'x£wItsE£wa.     Wii,  la  mEn- 

25  wa'lasE£weda  e'g-ise.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  £wl'£laxs  la'e  axts!o'yo  la'xa 
ha'nxLanowe.  Wii,  gi'l£mese  £wi'£la  la  he  gwe'kweda  mo'sgEme 
awa'  g-a'weq!anEma  la'e  guqlEqasosa  £wa'pe.  Wii,  la  k-!es  a'laEm 
qle'nEina  £wa'pe. 


boas]  RECIPES  517 

The  woman  takes  with  her  hands  the  meat  ||  of  the  cleaned  clams  and  30 
squeezes  it,  and  she  only  stops  squeezing  it  |  when  the  water  is  quite 
milky-     Then  |  she  puts  the  kettle  over  the  fire,  and  she  lets  it  boil  a 
long  time.  [  Then  she  pours  oil  into  it.     When  it  is  |  done,  she  takes 
it  off  the  fire.     Then  she  pours  ||  cold  water  into  it,  until  the  kettle  35 
is  more  than  half  full.  |  Then  she  takes  chopped  seaweed  and  puts 
it  in,  and  |  she  stirs  it  until  it  is  the  right  thickness;  and  she  puts  the 
kettle  back  |  on  the  fire,  and  she  lets  it  bod  for  a  long  time,  and  she 
puts  more  |  oil  into  it.     Then  she  takes   the   kettle   off   the  ||  fire,  40 
and  it  is  done;  and  it  is  only  eaten  with  spoons.  |  That  is  all  about 
this.  | 

Fern-Root  (1). — After  she  has  (dug  the  fern-roots)  the  woman  takes  l 
the  basket  on  her  back  |and  goes  home.  On  the  following  day,  as 
soon  as  day  comes,  when  the  weather  is  good,  |  she  takes  a  large  mat 
and  spreads  it  out  on  the  ground  in  front  of  the  |  house.  Then  she 
goes  back  into  her  house  and  takes  the  ||  basket  of  fern-roots.  Then  5 
she  goes  out  with  it  and  pours  the  fern-roots  on  the  |  spread  mat,  and 
she  scatters  the  fern-roots  over  it.  Now  she  |  dries  them,  so  that 
they  may  become  dry,  and  she  turns  them  over  again;  |  and  when 
they  all  become  dry,  the  woman  |  takes  a  piece  of  cedar-stick  and 
measures  it  so  that  it  is  the  size  of  one  ||  span,  and  half  the  thickness  10 

Wa,    le'da    tslEdaqe    da'x-£Itses    e£eyasowe  la'xa  E'lg-Ekwe    ga- 
weq!anEma    qa£s    q!we'q!iilts!iileq.     Wa,    a'Pmese  gwal   q!we'q!iil- 30 
tsUilaqexs   la'e    a'em  la  dzE'mx"stoweda  £wa'pas.     Wa,  le   ha'nx- 
LEiitsa    ha'nxxanowe    la'xa    lEgwI'le.       Wa,     le     g-e'g-illl-i:m    la 
maE'indElqiilaxs     la'e     k!ii'nq!Eqasa    L!e'£na    laq.      Wa,    g'ihmese 
gwa'lExs  la'e  ha'nx'sEndEq  la'xa  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  la'xae  guqlEqasa 
£wiida'£sta  £wap  laq,  qa  ek!o'ldza£yes  la'xa  ha'nxxanowe.     Wii,  le  35 
ax£e'dxes    tsEgEkwe'    lEqlEstE'na    qa£s     k' !a'£stEndes    laq.      Wa, 
le  xwe'taq  qa  he'lales  gEnk'alae'na-'yas.     Wii,  le  ka'nxLEnts  la'xes 
lEgwI'le.     Wa,  le  ge'g'ilil£Ein  maE'indElqiilaxs  la'e  e'tled  k!u'nq!E- 
qasa    L!e'£iia   laq.     Wa,  la'xae    ha'nxsEndxa    ha'nx-Lanowe    la'xa 
lEgwI'le.     Wa,   laE'm   Llo'pa.     Wa,  a'£mes   la    ="yo's£itsE£wa.     Wa,  40 
laE'm  gwal  hi'xeq. 

Fern-Eoot  (1). — Wa,1  la  gwalE.xs  lae  oxLEx-£Idxes  tsag'atsle  lExa£ya  1 
qa£s  la.  na£nakwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  £nax£Idxa  la  lEnsa  ylxs  ekaeda 
£nala,  la  ax£edxa  £walase  le£wa£ya  qa£s  lii  LEplElsas  lax  l  !asana£yases 
gokwe.  Wa,  la  xwelaqa  laeL  laxes  g-6kwe  qa£s  ax£edexes  tsag'a- 
tsle lExa£ya.  Wa,  la  lawElsas  qa£s  lii  gugEilzolsasa  tsakuse  liixa  5 
LEp!Ese  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  lii  gweldzolsasa  tsakuse  laq.  Wa,  laEm 
xihiq  qa  lEmlEmxusEmx£Ides.  Wii,  la  xwelaqElaEin  lex£IdEq. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  £naxwaEm  hi  lEmlEmxllsEmx£IdExs  laeda  tslEdaqe 
ax£edxa  k!wa£XLawe  qa£s  mEns£Ideci  qa  enEmp!Enkes  £wasgEmasas 
laxEns    q!waq!wax-ts!ana-"yex.     Wii,  la    k'lodEne    wagwasas  laxEns  10 

i  Continued  from  p.  196,  line  12. 


518  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

11  of  a  finger,  |  and  it  is  one  finger-width  wide;  |  and  she  whittles  down 
the  end  of  it  until  it  is  thin.  As  |  soon  as  she  has  finished  this,  she 
takes  the  root  and  holds  it  bottom  up  in  her  |  left  hand ;  and  the  woman 

15  holds  the  cleaner,  the  cedar-stick,  in  the  middle  ||  and  scrapes  off 
the  dirt  that  is  on  the  fern-root,  and  the  |  small  roots  that  are  on  its 
surface.  As  soon  as  |  the  dirt  and  the  roots  that  were  on  the  out- 
side of  the  fern-root  are  all  off,  she  |  puts  them  on  the  mat  again; 
and  she  only  stops  doing  so  wThen  |  all  the  fern-roots   have  been 

20  cleaned.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  she  takes  ||  her  basket  and  puts  the 
cleaned  fern-roots  into  it;  |  and  when  they  are  all  in,  she  takes  up  the 
basket  of  fern-roots  and  hangs  |  it  up  in  the  rear  of  the  house,  behind 
the  fire.  They  are  kept  twelve  |  days  drying  in  the  rear  of  the  house. 
When  this  is  done,  the  woman  |  gets  some  fire-wood,  and  makes  every- 

25  tiling  ready.  When  she  ||  has  the  fire-wTood,  the  woman  takes  a  rest 
and  when  the  fern-roots  have  been  drying  for  eleven  |  days,  the 
woman  takes  her  large  basket  |  and  looks  for  good  hemlock-branches 
and  also  wet  leaves;  that  is  to  say,  the  |  leaves  of  the  salmon-berry 
bush  and  of  the  thimble-berry  bush.  These  are  referred  to  by  the 
Indians  as  "wet  leaves."  |  As  soon  as  she  finds  them,  she  puts  the 

30  wet  leaves  into  her  basket;  ||  and  when  it  is  full,  she  breaks  off  hem- 
lock-branches and  carries  them  under  her  arms;  |  and  she  carries  the 


11  q!waq!wax"ts!anasyex.  Wii,  la  £nEindEne  £wadzEwasas  laxEns 
q!waq  !wax  is!ana£yex.  Wii,  la  k'oxbEndEq  qa  pExbiis.  Wa,  gll- 
-'mese  gwalExs  lae  8x£edxa  tsak'use  qa£s  daleses  gEmxolts!ana  la- 
qexs  lae  ek'Iaxsdala.     Wii,  lii  qlwedzoyayeda  tslEdaqaxes  kimda- 

15  yaxa  k!wa£xLawaxs  lac  kimtalax  dzExllsEma£yasa  tsakuse  LF/wa 
L  !op  lEk'mEnexwe  lax  osgEina-yas.  Wii,  g  il'mese  £wrclaweda  dzExu- 
sEma£yas  LE£wa  Lldptek'axs  lae  exsEma  tsakuse.  Wii,  la  xwe- 
Laqa  axdzSts  liixa  le£wa£ye.  Wa,  la  al£Em  gwal  lie  gwreg'ilaxs  lae 
nvria  la  k'ek'imdEkwa    tsak'use.     Wii,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  axeed- 

20  xes  li:xa;ye  qa£s  XExuts!odesa  la  k  ik'imdEk"  tsak'os  laq.  Wii, 
g'iPmese  ewlclaxs  lae  k!5qulsxes  tsagatsle  lExa£ya  ((a£sl  atex'Ewa- 
lllaq  laxa  ogwiwewalllases  lEgwil.  Wii,  laEin  malsxsag  iyogwllalxa 
£nala  x  ilElai.E)  1  laxa  5gwiwalile.  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwala  lae  ane- 
x£ededa  tslEdaqaxa  lEqwa  qa  ^'iixes  gwallla.     Wii,  g  il^mese  g'iixeda 

25  lEqwiixs  lae  xos£ideda  tslEdaqe.  Wa.  g"llemese  £nemxsag'iyowre 
£niiliisa  tsak'use  la  xilalaxs  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxes  £wiilase  lExa£ya 
qa£s  lii  alax  eka  qlwaxa.  Wii,  he£mesa  LEqlicmse  yix  mlma- 
mamotasa  qlwiilniEse  i.E'wa  tsEgElniEse,  gwE£yasa  bfiklume  LEq!- 
Einsa.    Wa,  gil£mese  qlaqexs  lae  m5ts!alasa  LEqlEmse  laxes  lExafye. 

30  Wii,  giPmese  qotlaxs  lae  L!EXcwidxa  qlwaxe  qa£s  ^EinxEleq.    Wii, 


boas]  RECIPES  519 

basket  with  wet  leaves  on  her  back  and  goes  home.  |  Then  she  puts  32 
the  basket  down  from  her  back  in  the  house.1  .  .  . 

In  the  morning,  as  soon  as  day  comes,  she  lights  the  fire  under  the 
stones;  |  and  as  soon  as  it  blazes  up,  she  takes  her  large  basket  ||  and  35 
goes  and  plucks  off  seaweed  and  puts  it  into  her  basket.  When  |  her 
basket  is  full,  she  carries  it  on  her  back,  and  she  puts  it  down  |  close 
to  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  bake  the  fern-root;  and  she  also 
takes  two  |  large  buckets,  and  she  goes  and  draws  fresh  water.  As 
soon  as  |  she  comes,  she  puts  them  down  near  the  place  where  she 
is  going  to  bake;  ||  and  she  also  takes  tongs  made  on  purpose  to  use  40 
with  the  red-hot  stones.  |  She  puts  them  down  where  she  put  down 
the  two  buckets,  |  and  she  also  takes  an  old  mat  and  puts  it  down. 
Then  she  takes  |  her  digging-stick  of  yew-wood  and  puts  it  down. 
Now  everything  is  |  ready. 2  .  .  .   || 

And  when  all  the  fire  is  out  of  the  hole,  she  takes  with  the  tongs  45 
the  red-hot  stones  and  puts  them  into  the  fire  in  the  middle. 
Eight  |  stones  she  puts  into  the  fire  in  the  middle,  for  she  puts  into 
a  heap  on  the  floor  of  the  house  the  |  fire  that  she  has  taken  out  with 
her  tongs  from  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  bake.  Then  she  levels 
down  the  |  stones  in  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  bake.  || 


gaxe  oxxalaxa   lecj lEmdzadze    lExa£yaxs    gaxae    na£nakwa.     Wa,  31 
lii  oxEEgalllaxes  lExa£ye. '  .  .  . 

Wa,  gll£mese  £nax'Idxa  gaalaxs  lae  tsenabotsa  giilta  laxes  t!e- 
<|\vapa£ye.  Wii,  giPmese  xlqostaxs  lae  ax£edxes  £walase  lExa£ya 
qaes  la  k!ulgilaxa  LtesLlEkwe  qa£s  axts!ales  laxes  lExa£ye.  Wa,  g  il-  35 
£mese  qot!e  lExa£yasexs  lae  5xLEx£IdEq  qa£s  la  oxLEgalllaq  laxa 
iiExwata  laxes  kunyasLaxa  tsak'use.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  maltsEme 
awa  naEngatslii  qa£s  la  tsexnts  laxa  filta  £wapa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
gaxExs  lae  hfingalllElas  liixa  nExwala  laxes  kiinyasLe.  Wii,  la- 
xae ax-edxa  kipLala  hekwele  qa  k-!ipElexa  xixixsEinala  tlesEma.  40 
Wa,  lii  ax£alJlas  lax  la  henelatsa  maltsEme  naEngats!a.  Wa,  la- 
xae ax£edxa  gemase  le£wa£ya  qa  gTixes  g-aela.  Wa,  laxaa  ax£ed- 
xes  L!Emq!Ek!ine  k- !ilakwa  qa  gaxes  gaela.  Wa,  laEm  ewi£la 
la  gwallla.2  .  .   . 

Wa,  g11£mese  ewI-clolts!aweda  gultaxs  lae  k!ip!edxa  xix'ExsEinala  45 
t!esEma  qa£s  la   kMipLEnts   laxa   la    laqawallla.     Wa,  malgunaltsE- 
meda  tlesEmela  XEXuLalalll  laxa  liiqawallleqaxs  lae  q  lap  !esgEmlileda 
giilta  yix  k!ipwults!alayas  laxes  kunyasLe.     Wa,  la  '"nEinak  iyindxa 
t!esEine  lax  otslawases  kunyasLe. 

'  Then  follows  the  description  of  the  oven  (see  Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition, 
Vol.  \  .p.  408). 
-  Then  follows  remarks  on  the  taking  out  of  stones  from  the  fire  (see  ibid.,  p.  408). 


520  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  axn.  35 

50  As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  a  large  clam-shell  |  and 
scrapes  up  the  soil  with  it,  and  she  puts  it  over  the  red-hot  |  stones; 
and  she  only  stops  doing  so  when  (the  soil)  is  four  fingers  |  thick  on 
top  of  the  red-hot  |  stones.     Then  she  takes  the  seaweed  and  throws 

55  it  on  top  of  the  soil,  ||  and  it  is  of  the  same  thickness  as  the  soil;  and 
she  takes  |  hemlock-branches  and  puts  them  on  the  seaweed,  and  she 
puts  them  carefully  |  on  top  of  the  seaweed  so  that  none  of  it  shows.  | 
Then  she  takes  the  wet  leaves  and  puts  them  on  top  of  the  hemlock- 

60  branches,  |  and  these  are  also  four  finger-widths  thick.  ||  Then  she  takes 
the  fern-root  and  puts  it  among  the  wet  leaves.  She  |  places  (the 
fern-roots)  bottom  upward,  and  they  are  close  together.  |  First  they 
are  put  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  hole,  turning  the  face  to  the  | 
rear  of  the  house.     And  when  they  are  all  in,  the  woman  |  takes  wet 

65  leaves  and  throws  them  over  the  fern-roots;  and  ||  these  are  also  the 
same  thickness  as  the  thickness  of  those  underneath  the  fern-roots, 
namely,  four  |  finger-widths.  As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,  she  levels 
down  the  top.  |  Then  she  takes  hemlock-branches  and  places  them 
over  them,  the  |  same  amount  as  was  first  put  into  the  hole. 
Then  she   takes  seaweed  |  and   throws  it  on   top  of   the  hemlock- 

70  branches,  and  this  is  also  four  ||  finger-widths  in  thickness.  Then  she 
takes  an  old  mat  |  and  spreads  it  over  the  seaweed.     Then  she  takes  her 


50  Wii,  g  tlemese  gwiilExs  lae  axeedxa  ewalase  xalaetsa  mEt!anaeye 
qafs  xElx'EIdes  laxa  dzEqwa.  Wii.  la  k'!ak  iyindalas  laxa  xlx  ix- 
sEmala  t  lesEina.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalsxs  lae  modEn  lax  Ens  q  !waq!wax- 
ts!ana£yex  yix  wagwasasa  dzEqwa  lax  okuyaeyasa  xix-txsEmala 
tlesEina.     Wa,  lii  axEedxa  LlESLlEkwe  qaEs  lEXEyiuts  laxa  dzsqwa. 

55  Wa,  heEmxaawise  wakwe  wagwasasa  dzEqwa.  Wa,  laxae  ax'ed- 
xa  qlwaxe  qaEs  LEXwiiyindes  laxa  LlEsLtekwe.  Wa,  laEin  aek!a 
LEXwas  lax  6kiiyaEyasa  LlESLlEkwe  qa  k' leases  la  nelalas.  Wa, 
laxae  axEedxa  LEqlEmse  qaEs  lEX£edes  lax  6kuyaJvasa  qlwaxe. 
Wa,  laEmxae  mOdEn  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!anaeyex    yix  wagwasas. 

60  Wa,  la  ax-T'dxa  tsakuse  qa£s  k!uts!E(jEles  laxa  LEqlEmse.  Wii,  laEm 
ek" kxsdalaxs  lae  axtslalaya.  Wa,  laxaa  tasala.  Wa,  la  heEmxat! 
gil  k!wats!odaatsa  tsak'usa  helk" !odEnexuts !a  gwegimala  laxa 
ogwiwahlases  g'okwe.  Wa,  gil'mese  Ewllts!axs  laeda  tslEdaqe 
ax£edxa     LEqlEmse    qa£s    lEXEyodales    laxa    tsakuse.     Wa,    laxae 

g5  heEin  wakwe  wagwasasa  bEna\yasa  tsak'usaxs  modEnae  laxEns 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yex.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  EnEmak"iylndEq. 
Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  qlwaxe  qa's  LExfiyindes  laq.  Wii,  laxae  heEin 
waxe  waxaasasa  g-ilx-de  latsloyos.  AVii.  lii  ax£edxa  LlESLlEkwe 
qa£s  lEXEyindes   laxa  qlwaxe.     Wit.  g-il£Emxaawise   modEn  laxEns 

■jq  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yaqe  wagwasascxs  lae  axedxa  gemase  le£wa;ya 
qaEs  LEpEyindes  laxa  LlESLlEkwe.     Wa,   la  axEedxes  L!Emq!Ek!ine 


boas]  EECIPES  521 

yew-wood  |  digging-stick  and  pokes  it  down  in  the  middle  of  what  is  72 
being  baked  by  her.  |  She  pokes  it  through  the  middle  of  the  mat; 
and  after  she  has  done  so,  |  she  takes  a  large  clam-shell,  scrapes  up 
some  soil  with  it,  ||  and  throws  it  on  top  of  the  mat.     When  this  is  75 
level  with  the  |  floor  of  the  house,  she  calls  a  woman  who  has  had  just 
one  husband,  |  and  whose  husband  is  still  alive,  and  who  lias  never 
been  |  a  widow,  and  whose  monthly  period  terminated  at  least  eight 
days  before.  [  This  woman  is  called  to  come  and  stamp  down  the 
soil  ||  on  top  of  what  is  to  be  baked.     The  woman  continues  for  a  long  80 
time  to  tread  down  the  sod,  |  and  she  only  stops  when  the  soil  on  top 
of  the  baking-place  is  very  hard.  |  Then  the  owner  of  the  fern-roots 
takes  her  tongs  |  and  takes  the  red-hot  stones  which  she  had  put  into 
the  |  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  and  puts  four  of  them  into  || 
each  of  her  buckets.     As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  the  [  water  in  the  85 
buckets  gets  hot.     When  this  has  been  done,  |  the  woman  again 
throws  soil  upon  the  baking-place  which  has  been  stamped  down; 
and  she  |  only  finishes  throwing  soil  on  it  when  it 
is  piled  up  over  the  baking- place,  in  this  manner:  | 
Now  the  root-digger  stands  out  from  it.     After  this 

is  done,  ||  she  takes  up  the  buckets  by  the  handles,   ' ^     90 

and  she  puts  the  two  buckets  |  containing  the  hot  water  near  to 
the  baking-place.     Then  she  pulls  out  the  |  root-digger  and  puts 


klilakwa  qa£s  LlEnxbEtEndes  lax    nEqEya£yases    kunsasowe.     Wii,  72 
laEm   LlEnxsodEx    nEgEdzayasa  teewaeye.     Wa,  g-il£mese    gwalExs 
lae  fix£edxa  £walase  xalaetsa  mEt!anaeye  qa£s  XElx-£ides  laxa  dzEqwa 
qa£s  k"  lakiylndales  laxa  leewafye.     Wa,  gil£mese  EnEmaklya  LEewa  75 
awinagwllasa   gokwaxs  lae  Le£lalaxa  heEin  ales    enEmokwe    la£wii- 
nEmasa  tslEdaq  yixs  heemae    ales  q!ule    la-wuiiF.nias.  yixs    k"!esae 
aEmyola.     Wa,    he£mesexs    lae  malgdnalEXse    enalas  gwal    exEnta. 
Wa,  heEm  Le£lalas5£seda    tslEdaqe  qa  g'axes    tlepaxa    dzEqwa  lax 
okuyasyas  kunsasE£was.     Wa,  leda    tslEdaqe  gegilil    tlepaxa    dzE-  80 
qwa.     Wa,  Sl-'mese  gwalExs  lae  p!eseededa  dzEqwa   lax  okuya£yasa 
kunyase.      Wa,    lateda    Sxnogwadasa    tsakuse    axeedxes    klipLala 
qa£s  lit  k'!lp!edxa    x'lxixsEmala  tlesEm,    ytx    axLalayoxudas    laxa 
laqawalllasa  g'okwe,  qa£s  la    klipstfdasa    maemosgEme  laxa    enal- 
£nEmsgEme  nagatsla.     Wii,  g'IPmese  gwatexs  lae  tsets !Elxusteda  £\\J-  85 
£wat>Ets!awasa  naEngatsIe.     Wa,   g'il£mese    gwalsxs    lae    etlededa 
tslEdaqe    k'lakiyintsa    dzEqwa    laxa  la    t!ebEku    kunyasa.       Wa, 
al£mese  gwal  k- !asa  dzEqwaxs  lae  tEnkiyaleda  kunyase    g-a  gwii- 
leg'a  (Jig.)-    Wa,  laEm  Lak'Evalllxak'lilakwi".    Wa,  g"ll£mese gwatexs 
lae  k-!oktililxa  nagatsle  qa£s  la  hfinolilElasa    maltsEine  ts!ets!Elxu-  90 
satslala     naEiigatslexa    £wape   laxes   kiinyase.     Wii,    lii    lex£wldxes 
k'lilakwe    qa£s  k'atlallles.     Wii.  la    ax£edxa    EnEmsgEme    nagatsla 


522  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

93  it  down  on  the  floor  of  the  house;  and  she  takes  one  bucket  |  and 
pours  the  water  into  the  hole  on  the  top  of  the  baking-place,  where 
the  |  root-digger  had  been  standing;  and  as  soon  as  it  is  emptied, 

95  she  takes  the  ||  other  bucket  and  empties  it  also  into  the  hole  on  top;  | 
and  when  it  is  emptied,  she  covers  up  the  hole  on  top  with  soil.  |  It  is 
evening  when  she  finishes;  and  as  soon  as  it  gets  dark,  |  she  takes  her 
tongs  and  lifts  the  lire  from  the  middle  of  the  house  with  her  tongs,  | 
100  and  puts  the  firebrands  on  top  of  the  baking  fern-roots;  ||  and  when 
it  blazes  up,  she  puts  some  wet  fire-wood  on  top,  |  so  that  it  may  last 
until  the  morning.  | 

When  she  has  finished,  she  asks  the  people  who  live  in  the  same 
house  to  abstain  |  from  sexual  intercourse  during  the  night.  In  the 
morning,  when  day  comes,  |  the  woman  gets  up,  and  she  goes  to  look 
5  at  what  is  being  baked  by  her.  ||  As  soon  as  the  fire  on  top  is  all 
burned  out,  she  digs  |  it  up;  and  when  it  is  not  burned  out,  she 
extinguishes  |  the  fire  on  top  of  it,  and  she  waits  for  the  soil  to  get 
cool  before  |  she  digs  into  it.  As  soon  as  she  reaches,  in  digging, 
the  |  mat  that  has  been  spread  on  top,  she  takes  it  by  the  corners 

10  and  she  lifts  it  up  with  everything  on  it,  and  ||  takes  it  out.  Then 
she  takes  her  tongs  and  takes  out  |  the  seaweed  and  the  hemlock  and 
the  wet  leaves.  As  soon  as  |  the  fern-roots  show,  she  takes  her  large 
basket  and  |  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  baking-place.     Then  she 

93  qa£s  qEptsIodesa  £wtipe  laxa  kwaxiiya£yasa  kunyase  ylx  Lala- 
asdasa    kliliikwe.     Wa,  gil£mese    £\\ilgilts!axs    lae  etled    ax£edxa 

95  fnEmsgEine  nagatsle  qa£s  laxa  qEpts!ots  laxaaxa  kwaxiiya£ye.  Wa, 
gil£mese  £wllg  iltslaxs  lae  dzEinstotsa  dzEqwa  laxa  kwaxuya£ye. 
Wii,  laEin  dzaqwaxs  lae  gwfda.  Wa,  gil£mese  plEtlEgt-nakulaxs 
lae  ax'edxes  klipuda  qaes  k!ip!ldes  laxa  laqawallle  qa£s  la  k' !i- 
pEyEndalasa  gulta  lax  6sgEma£yases  kunsasE£weda  tsakuse.  Wa. 
100  giHmese  x  ikustaxs  lae  axLalasa  kkmqe  lEqwa.laq  qa  £nagilisLEs 
x  IqElal. 

Wa,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae  hawaxElaxes  ^iiEinaelwute  qa  k' lea- 
ses nExwalas  le£wcs  gEgEiiEinaxa  ganoLe.  Wa,  g  iPmese  ?nax£Idxa 
gaaliixs  lae  Lax£wideila  tslEdaqe  qa£s  lii  dox£widxes  kiinsasE£we. 
5  Wii,  gil£mese  £wl-la  q!idx£Ideda  lEquya£yase.xs  lae  hex£Ida£Em  £la- 
plEqodEq.  Wii,  gil£mese  k'les  q!ulx,£IdExs  lae  hex£idaEin  k!il- 
x£idxa  lEquya£yas.  Wii,  la  esElaEmq  qa  k,5x£wldesa  dzEqwiixs 
lae  £lap!EqodEq.  Wii,  gil£mese  lilgae  £iapa£yas  laxa  LEpEya£ye  le- 
£wa£ya  lae  aEin  dadEnxEiidEq  qa£s  £nEmagilts!ode  wexp£idEqexs  lae 

10  ax£wults!odEq.  Wii,  a£mese  la  ax£edxesk!ipLala  qa£s  k' !i])wfdts  !ales 
laxa  l  !esl  lEkwe  LE£wa  q  Iwaxe  LE£wa  LEq  lEmse.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wl£la 
la  neEltsEmx£Ideda  tsak'usaxs  lae  ax£edxes  £walase  lExa£ya  qa£s 
lii  hanolllas  laxes  kunyase.     Wa,  la  dadEsgEmases  e£eyasowe  laxa 


boas]  RECIPES  523 

takes  out  the  fern-roots  with  her  hands  |  and  puts  them  into  the 
basket;  and  when  they  are  all  out,  ||  then  she  iills  up  with  earth  again  15 
the  hole  in  which  she  had  been  baking.  She  |  just  throws  the  soil  on 
top  of  the  stones;  but  she  throws  out  of  the  house  the  seaweed  |  and 
the  hemlock-branches  and  the  wet  leaves  which  were  on  top  of  the 
fern-roots.  |  Now  the  fern-roots  are  done.     That  is  the  |  end  of  this.  || 

Eating  Fern-Roots. — Four  days  after  [  the  fern-roots  have  been  in  20 
the  house  and  have  been  cooked,  |  the  people  are  invited.     Often  the 
chiefs  of  the  tribes  eat   the  fern-roots,  |  for  it  is  really  a  valuable 
food.  |  When  the  guests  have  taken  their  seats,  the  woman  ||  takes  25 
a  food-mat  and  spreads  it  in  front  |  of  those  who  are  going  to  eat  the 
fern-root.     Then  she  pours  oil  into  oil-dishes;  |  and  when  all  the  oil 
has  been  poured  into  oil-dishes,  |  she  takes  dry  spawn  of  the  silver- 
salmon  and  she  puts  it  |  on  the  food-mat.     Then  she  puts  the  oil- 
dishes  ||  before  her  guests;  and  she  takes  fern-roots  and  |  puts  them  30 
down,  two  for  each  man.  |  The  guests  at  once  take  up  one,  and  | 
begin  to  clean  off  what  can  be  plucked  from  the  lower  end  of  the  root;  ■ 
and  |  when  they  get  off  all  the  black  bark,  they  dip  it  into  the  oil 
and  ||  eat  it;  and  if  others  prefer  to  eat  it  with  dried  |  spawn,  they  35 
mix  it,  and  they  do  not  dip  it  into  oil.  |  When  they  eat  all  the  pieces 

tsakusaxs  lae  axtslalas  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wi£lolts !axs  lae 
xwelaqa  dzEmtsIotsa  dzEqwa  laxes  kunyasde.  Wa,  laEni  km  15 
dzEmeg-tntsa  dzEqwa  laxa  tlesEme.  Wii,  l&La  k'iatsa  LlEsiJEkwe 
LE£wa  q!wilxe  LE£\va  LEqlEmse  yix  ek- lelts  !ax*dasa  tsak'use  laxa 
tlfisamVyases  gokwe.  Wa,  laEm  l  lopeda  tsakuse  laxeq.  Wii,  laEin 
gwala  laxeq. 

Eating     Fern  -  Roots. — Wa,      g'l'l£Em     mo'p  !Enxwa£se     £na'liisa  20 
tsa'kuse    la    axe'l    la'xa    go'kwaxs     la'e     ido'pa.      Wa,    le    Le'- 
£lalayoEm  la'xa    g'o'kulote.       Wii,    la    he  qlunala    niEk'a'xa    tsii'- 
k'useda  g'l'g  igama'vasa  le'lqwalaLaeye  qaxs  a'lae  la'wene  l.e'mao- 
masa.     Wii,  he'smaaxs  la'e  k!iisEa'lila    Le'£laiiEme    lii'da    tslEda'qe 
axee'dxa  ha'emadzowe  le'£wa£ya  qa£s  le    LEpdza'molIlas  la'xa    niE-  25 
ka'Laxa    tsa'kuse.      Wii,    la    k lu'nxts Ipdalaxes     ts le'ts lEbats !asa 
L!e'£na.     Wii,   g-i'l£mese    ewl'ela    k!u'nxts!Ewakwa  ts  le'ts  !Ebats!axs 
la'e  ax£e'dxa  lallEmwets  laakwe  ge'enesa  dzafwii'ne  qa£s  le  axdzo'ts 
lii'xa  ha'£madzowe  te'£wa£ya.     Wa,  le  kaxdzamolI'lElasa  tsle'tslE- 
batsle   la'xes    Le'£lanEme.      Wii,  la  &x£e'd   lii'xa   tsa'kuse    qa£s  le  30 
XEX£wali'lF.lasa  mae'maltsEme   qae'da  £na'lsiiEmokwe   be'bEgwanE- 
ma.     Wii,  he'x"£ida£meseda  klwe'le  da'x^dxa  £na'l£nEmsgEme  qa£s 
se'x-£Idexes  la  klulpoyo  lax  o'xsda£yasa   tsa'kuse.     Wii,  giTmese 
la'wiiyeda    tslo'la  xEx£wiine'sexs    la'e  tslEp le'ts  la'xa  L!e'£na  qa£s 
hamx'£I'deq.      Wii,  g  i'Pmesa   wao'kwe    he    &x£e'tsE£wa    lEmo'kwe  35 
ge'£na,  wii,  la  he  ma'yimse.     Wii,  la  k!es  tslEpa'xa  L!e'£na.     Wa, 


524  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  so 

38  of  fern-root,  then  the  inner  part  is  just  |  held  by  the  chief,  who  often 
does  not  eat  it.     He  just  gives  it  |  to  the  one  to  whom  he  wishes  to 

40  give  it;  for  the  Indians  say,  that,  if  ||  a  chief  eats  the  inner  part  of  a 
fern-root,  he  will  always  |  waver  in  his  mind  about  giving  away 
blankets,  for  one  side  of  his  mind  will  |  forbid  him  to  give  away 
blankets.  Therefore  the  inner  part  of  fern-root  is  not  eaten  by  the  | 
head  chiefs.     When  the  guests  |  have  all  eaten  two  fern-roots  each, 

45  thej7  drink  water,  and  ||  the  woman  gives  each  man  two  fern-roots  to  | 
take  home  to  his  wife.  Then  the  guests  go  out  of  the  house.  |  That  is 
all  about  this.  | 
1  Fern-Root  (2). — As1  soon  as  she  enters  the  house,  she  puts  the  bundle 
of  fern-roots  down  by  the  side  ]  of  the  fire.  She  builds  up  a  large 
fire;  |  and  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  burn  low,  she  unties  the  root  j  with 
which  the  bundle  of  fern-root  has  been  tied,  and  she  spreads  them  out 
5  so  that  they  are  straight.  ||  Then  she  puts  them  on  the  fire,  and  |  turns 
them  over  so  that  the  whole  outer  side  of  the  fern-root  is  charred.  | 
When  the  whole  fern-root  is  chaired,  she  takes  it  off  |  from  the  fire; 
and  when  they  are  all  off,  she  takes  a  |  short  wedge  and  a  piece  of 

10  fire-wood  and  her  fish-knife,  and  ||  she  puts  them  down  at  the  place 
where  she  charred  the  fern-roots.  Now  |  the  fire  in  which  she  charred 
the  fern-roots  has  gone  out,  and  she  takes  the  long  |  charred  roots 

37  la  £wl'£lawe  q!wa'sgEma£yasa  tsa'k'use  la'e  a/Em  la  mEg'e'se  da- 
akwasa  gi'gamaeye  la  q  luna'la  k-  !es  ha-mx-i'dKq.  Wii,  a,'£mise  ts!as 
la'xes  gwE\yo'  qas  tshcwats  qaxs  £ne'k'aeda  bii'khlmaqexs  g  i'Pniae 

40  ha£ma'sa  gi'gamaeda  niEge'sasa  tsa'k'use,  wii,  la'£lae  lie'niEnalaEm 
ma'glsidale  na'qa^as qaes  p!i:s-TdeLoxsbEla'e  apsa'negwise  na'qe£s 
qa£s  k'le'se  p!Es£I'da.  Wii,  he'£mes  la'gila  k'!es  ha£miisa  xa'magE- 
ma£ye  g i'gama£eda  niEg'e'sasa  tsa'k'use.  Wii,  g  i'l£mese  £wi'£leda 
klwe'laxa   mae'maltsEme  tsa'kusExs  la'e    na'x£idxa  £wa'pe.      Wii, 

45  lii'da  tsteda'qe  e't!ed  tslEwanaesasa  mae'maltsEme  tsii'k'usa  qa 
mo'dolts  qaes  gEgEiiE'me.  Wii,  he'x'£ida£mese  ho'qiiwElseda 
k!we'lde  lii'xeq.  Wii,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq. 
1  Fern-Root  (2). — Wii,'  gil£mese  laeL  laxes  g'okwaxs  lag  g'enolisas 
lax  lngw  liases  g'okwe.  Wii,  lii  tEqwelax"£id  qa  l !agawasLal!ses 
lEgwlle.  Wii,  g'il£mese  q !wala£nakulaxs  Iae  qwelodxa  L!op!Ek'e 
qEnoyowes  sagwanEmas  saguniaxs  lae  dal£klEq  qa  naEiiqEles. 
5  Wa,  lii  k'atLEndalas  laxa  q!uq!walEm6tas  lEgwilas.  Wa,  lii 
lex'i£liilaq  qa  EnEmaenakules  k!iimElx£ide  ogwida£yasa  sagume. 
Wii,  g'tPmese  Enaxwa  k!uniElx£Ide  6gwida£yasexs  lae  axsEndEq 
laxa  q!uq!walEmotases  lEgwlle.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  ax£edxa 
ts!Ek!wa  LEmg'a£ya  he£misa  lEqwa;  wii,    he£mises  xwaxayowe  qa£s 

10  lii  g'iyimgalllas  laxa  maginwallsas  L!Enasasexa  sagume,  yixs  la- 
£maaLal  k!ilx£ede  LlEx'damases  lEgwlle.  Wii,  la  dax,£Idxa  g'ilt!a 
LlEnk"  saguma    qa£s   gwanax£edeq.     Wii,  lii    k'atlEnts   laxa  lEqwa 

1  Coutiuuetl  Iroui  p.  (31*5,  line  fi3. 


boas]  RECIPES  525 

doubled  in  two,  and  puts  them  on  the  fire-wood,  [  holding  them  with  13 
her  left  hand.     Then  she  takes  the  sharp  point  of  the  |  wedge  and 
strikes  the  charred  fern-root  with  the  top  of  the  wedge.  ||  She  does  15 
not  strike  it  very  hard,  going  along  the  whole  length  |  while,  she  is 
striking  it.     As  soon  as  the  fern-root  has  been  pounded  flat,  she  | 
takes  her  fish-knife  and  puts  the  handle  between  the  big  toe  |  and  the 
other  toes,  turning  the  edge  of  the  knife  upward.  |  Then  she  takes  the 
pounded  charred  fern-root  and  measures  a  piece  three  ||  finger-widths  20 
long.     Then  she  |  presses  it  against  the  sharp  edge  of  the  knife  which 
is  turned  upward,  |  and  cuts  it  off.     She  continues  cutting  that  way; 
and  as  soon  as  all  the  roots  have  been  cut  in  pieces,  |  she  takes  her 
oil-dish,  puts  some  oil  in  it,  |  and  begins  to  eat  the  pounded  charred 
fern-root,  ||  dipping  it  into  oil  every  time  she  takes  a  piece,  and  put-  25 
ting  it  into  her  mouth.     For  a  long  time  |  she  chews  it  and  sucks  at 
it;  and  when  all  that  is  good  has  been  sucked  out,  |  she  spits  out  the 
fibrous  part  inside  of  the  fern-root;  and  |  she  takes  another  piece  of 
pounded  charred  fern-root,  cuts  it  in  pieces,  and  dips  it  |  into  oil. 
She  puts  it  into  her  mouth,  ||  chews  it  for  a  long  time,  and  sucks  at  it,  30 
and  spits  out  what  is  left  after  sucking.  |  She  continues  doing  this 
while  she  is  eating  the  cut  pieces  of  charred  fern-root.  |  As  soon  as  she 
has  eaten  enough,  she  puts  away  what  is  left  over,  and  she  drinks  | 
water.     That  is  all  about  the  fern-roots,  for  there  is  only  one  way  of  | 

dalases     gEmxolts!ana£ye      laq.       Wii,     la     dax-£IdEx     exba£yasa  13 
LEingayaxs   lae    t'.ElxwIts    6xta£yas    laxa    L'.Enkwe    saguma  laxes 
k- lets  !ena£ye  ealtselaxs  ttelxwaaq,  la  labEndalax  ewasgEmasas  ttelo-  15 
£nakiilaq.     Wa,  gllmiese  la  pEx£Eiia  ttelokwe  LlEnku  sagumxs  lae 
ax^edxes  xwaLayowe  qa£s   g'apodes  6xLa£yas  laxes  qomaxsnlza£ye 
LErwesq!waq!wax'sIdza£ye  lax  ek'!Ex'iilaena£yasa  xwaLayowe.    Wa, 
la  ax£edxa  ttelokwe  LlEnk"   saguma    qa£s  mEns£Idesa  yuduxudEne 
laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!anaEyex  laxa  tlslokwe   LlEnku    sagumaxs  lae  20 
LaxxwalabEnts  laxa  ek'lEX'iila  xwaLayowa.    Wa,  la£me  tlotslEndEq. 
Wa,  aemis  la  he  gwegilaxa  waokwe.    Wii,  gll£mese  £wPla  la  tlEwe- 
kuxs  lae  ax£edxes  ts!Ebats!e   qa£s  k-!Enxts!odesa  L!e£na  laq.     Wa, 
la  sax'sEx^widxa  t!Elokwe  L!Enku   saguma.     Wa,  laEm  qlwaLxoEm 
tslEplets  laxa  L!e£na    qa£s  tsloq'.iises  laxes  sEmse.     Wa,  la  geg'illl  25 
malekwaq    qa^s   k!umteq.     Wa,  g'ih'mese  £wi£la  k!iimtalax  eg'imas 
lae  kwesodxes  k!wax-mote  ylx  dodEq!uga£yasa  sagume.     Wii,  laxae 
et!ed   dax,£idxa  t'.Ewekwe  t!Eloku   L'.Eiik"  saguma   qa£s   ts!Ep!edes 
laxa  L!e£na.     Wa,  laxae  ts!oq!iisas  laxes  SEmse.     Wa,  laxae  geg'ilil 
malekwaq  qa£s  klumteq.     Wii,  laxae  kwesodxes  k!wax-mote.     Wii,  30 
ax'sii£mese  he  gwegilaxs  sax'sEkwaaxa  tlEwekwe  LlEnku  saguma. 
Wii,  gil£niese  pol-idExs  lae  g'exaxes  anexsa£ye.     Wii,  la  nax£idxa 
£wiipe.     Wa,   laEin   gwal  ltixa  sagume  qaxs  £nEmx-£idafa£mae  ha- 


526  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

cooking  it,   and  it  is  not    good  when    eaten  raw.     They  are  not  || 

35  given  at  feasts,  for  only  old  people  eat  them.  | 
1  Fern-Root  (3).1 — She2  takes  the  fire-tongs  and  piles  the  fire-brands  | 
together  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  She  takes  the  |  fern-roots  out  of  her 
basket  and  throws  them  on  the  |  fire,  where  she  turns  them  over  with 
5  the  fire-tongs,  so  that  they  are  ||  scorched  all  over.  When  they  are 
brittle,  they  are  done.  |  She  takes  them  out  with  her  tongs,  and  does 
the  same  with  |  the  others.  When  all  the  roots  are  done,  |  she  takes 
her  small  dish,  washes  it  out,  and  when  it  is  clean,  |  she  breaks  the 
roasted  roots  into  short  pieces  into  the  small  dish.     She  breaks  the 

10  roots  into  pieces  ||  one  finger-width  long.  When  she  |  has  broken  up 
enough,  she  takes  oil  and  pours  it  over  them,  |  and  she  does  not  stop 
pouring  oil  over  them  until  they  are  all  covered.  Then  she  takes  |  a 
spoon  and  begins  to  eat  the  scorched  roots  with  oil.  |  She  eats  the 

1")  oil  and  the  roasted  roots  with  a  spoon.  j|  After  she  has  finished,  she 
puts  away  what  is  left  over,  and  |  she  drinks  a  little,  water,  for  she 
does  not  want  to  vomit.  Because  |  she  has  taken  much  oil,  she  does 
not  take  much  water.  |  There  is  only  one  way  of  cooking   the  fern- 

20  roots.  |  They  are  not  eaten  raw  by  the  tribes.  When  a  ||  hunter  goes 
hunting,  he  holds  a  fern-root  in  his  mouth  in  order  |  not  to  get 


£mexsilaena£yaq,  yixs  k'lesae  ek-  lax  k!ilx'k!ax-sEwe  k"!es  k!we- 

35  ladzEma  qaxs  lexa£niae  sax'sEkwa  q!ulsq!iilyakwe. 
1  Fern-Root  (3).1 — Wa,2  lii  ax£edxests!esLalaqa£skelts!alexagultaqa 
g-axese  q!ap!esgEmles  laxa  onalisases  lEgwIlejwa,  la  LEx£ults!odxa 
lEk!wa£ye  laxes  lEgwats  !e£ye  lExa£ya  qa£s  LlEx-LEndes  laxes 
LlEiiase  lEgwIla.  Wa,  lii  k"eii£lalases  tslesLala  laq  qa  ekes  k!um- 
5  la£nakiilaena£yas.  Wii,  g-tl£mese  lIeI^kIexs  lae  Llopa.  Wa,  la 
k-eits!EndEq  laxes  Lkx'dEma  lEgwIla.  Wa,  la  hanal  he  gweg'i- 
laxa  waokwe.  Wa,  g'tl£mese  £wl£lala  LlEukwa  lEk!wa£yaxs  lae 
ax£edxes  lalogume  qa£s  tsoxiigfndeq.  Wa,  gil£mese  eg'Ig'axs 
lae  ax£edxa    LlEnkwe    lEk!wa£ya    qa£s    p!oxts!ales    laxa    lalogume. 

10  £iud-nEmdEne  awasgEmasas  p!oqwa£yaseda  lEk!wa£ye.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  hel£e  p  !oqwa£yasexs  lae  ax£edxa  L!e£na  qa£s  k'!unq!Eqes  laq. 
Wa,  al£mese  gwtd  k!iinq!Eqexs  lae  t!Ep!EgElisa.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa 
k"ats!Enaqe  qa£s  lExla£x£widexa  t!Ep!EgElIse  LlEnk"  lEk!wa£ya. 
Wa,  laEm  £yosasa  k'atslEnaqe    laxa  L!e£na  LE£wa  LlEnkwe  lEk!wa- 

15  £ya.  Wa,  g'lPmese  gwala  lae  gexaxes  anex-sa,£ye.  Wii,  la 
xaL,!EX'£id  £nax£klxa  £wfipe  qaxs  gwaqlElae  ts!Enk!Ql£Ida  qaxs 
q!ek!Esaaxa  L!e£na  lag-ilas  k-!es  q!ek"!Esxa  £wapaxs  lae  nax£ida. 
Wa,  laEmxae  £nEmx£Idala£me  h^mex'silaena-'yaxa  lEk!wa£ye.  Wa, 
laxae  k'les  klweladzEma  laxa  lelqwalaLa£ye.     Wii,  g"tl£mese  hana- 

20  Lleda    hanEiiLlenoxwe    lae    hamsgEmexa     k-!ilx-e    lEk!wa£ya    qa£s 

i  Dryopteris  spinulosa.  -  Continued  from  p.  197,  line  31. 


boas]  RECIPES  527 

hungry  and  thirsty,  and  also  |  those  who  vomit  blood  keep  it  in  the 
mouth.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Cooking   Clover. — Now1  I  will  talk  about  the  cooking  of  |  clover.  1 
First  of  all,  the  husband  of  the  woman  |  goes  to  get  fire-wood  to  cook 
the  clover.     When  j  he  has  filled  his  small  canoe,  he  goes  home  and  || 
throws  down  the  fire-wood  that  he  has  obtained.     After  he  has  thrown  5 
it  out    |  of  the  canoe,  he  carries  it  on  his  shoulders  and  throws  it 
down  |  in  his  house.     After  the  fire-wood  has  all  been  taken  up,  he  | 
takes  his  wife's  basket  and  goes  down  to  the  beach  and  |  puts  stones 
into  it.     When  this  has  been  done,  he  ||  carries  them  on  his  back  up  10 
the  beach  and  into  his  house,  and  he  puts  them  down  |  by  the  side 
of  the  fireplace  in  the  middle  of  the  house.     He  only  stops  |  when  he 
thinks  that  he  has  enough.     Then  he  takes  the  fire-wood  and  |  puts 
one  log  down  at  the  rear  end  of  the  fireplace  in  the  middle  of  the 
house;  and  he  |  takes  one  of  medium  size  and  puts  one  end  on  the 
first  one,  the  ||  other  one  resting  on  the  floor  of  the  house;  and  he  15 
does  the  |  same  on  the  opposite  side.     Then  he  splits  dry  fire-wood 
and  |  places  it  between  the  two  side-pieces;  and  when  it  is  even  with 
the    top  |  of   the    side-pieces,  he    takes  some  medium-sized    |   fire- 
wood  and  places  it  crossways  over  the    side-pieces,  putting    them 
close  together.  ||  After  this  has  been  done,  he  picks  up  the  stones  and  20 

k-!ese    posqla    lo£    qa£s    k'lese     naq!exsdxa     £wape.      Wa,    laxae  21 
hamsgEmes6£sa  Elkwala.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 

Cooking  Clover. — Wa,1  la£mesEn  gwiigwexs£alal  laqexs  lae  LEke-  1 
laxes  LExsEme.     Wa,  heEm  gll  ax£etso£sa  laEwunEmasa  tslEdaqaxs 
lae  aneqax  lEqwa  qafs  LEkelax"dEmaxa  LExsEme.      Wa,  giPmese 
qot!e     xwaxwagumasexs     g'axae     na£nakwa.       Wa,    hex£ida£mese 
sEp'wultodxes  aneganEme  lEqwa.    Wa,gil£mese  £wi£loltaweda  lEqwa  5 
lax  xwaxwagumasexs    lae    hex-£idaEm   yllx£usdesElaq  qa£s   la  yilx- 
-'walllElas  laxes    gokwe.      Wa,    g-ll£mese    £wi£losdesa  lEqwaxs    lae 
ax'"edxa  lExa£yases  gEnEme  qa£s  lii  lEnts!es  laxa  L!Ema£ise  qa£s  la 
xExuts!alasa    tlEsEme    lacp      Wii,    gil'mese    gwanala    lokusexs  lae 
QxLosdesEci  qa£s  la  oxLaeLElas  laxes  gokwaxs  lae  oxLEg'alllas  lax  10 
mag'inwalisasa    laqwawalxlase.     Wii,  al'"mese     gwal     oxLosdesElaxa 
tlesEmaxs    lae    k-otaq    laEm    helala.     Wa,  lii    axeedxa    lEciwa  qa£s 
kat!alilesa  £nEints!aqe  lax    ogwiwalilasa  laqwawalilas.     Wa,  laxae 
axeedxa  helagite  qaes    katbEiides    apsba£yas   laq.     Wa,  la  xa£ma- 
stallle    apsba£}ras    laxa    awlnagwllasa    gokwe.     Wii,    laxae    heEm  15 
gwex£idxa    apsana£yas.     Wa,    niEndzix£Idxa    lEmxwa   lEqwa   qa£s 
k'ak'Etodales  laxa  kak'EdEnwa£ye.     Wii,    gil£mese    £nEmaki'"yeda 
mEiidzaakwe    LE£wa    k'ek'ak'EdEiiwexs    lae     ax£edxa   ha£yaastowe 
lEqwa  qaes  gek'iyindales  liixa  kekaksdEiiwas  laxes  q  !asalaena£ye. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  xEx£w!dxa  tlesEme  qa£s  lii  xEqiiyindiilas  20 

1  Continued  (rom  p.  188,  line  60. 


528  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.36 

21  places  them  on  top.  |  When  all  the  stones  are  on,  lie  lights  the  fire 
underneath;  I  and  when  it  blazes  up,  he  sends  some  men  of  his  | 
numaym  to  go  and  call  thepeople.  The  messenger  goes  immediately  | 
to  call  them;  and  as  soon  as  lie  arrives  at  the  door  of  the  house  of 

25  those  whom  he  is  to  call,  ||  he  says,  "I  call  you  to  come  and  eat  the 
clover-root,"  |  naming  the  man  who  sends  the  invitation.  He  con- 
tinues |  saying  these  words,  going  to  the  end  of  the  village;  and 
the  one  who  gives  the  |  clover-feast  takes  out  the  clover-baskets  and 
puts  them  down  |  at  the  left-hand  side  of  the  door  of  the  house;  and 

30  he  ||  takes  a  large  steaming-box  and  places  it  in  front  of  the  |  fire  in 
the  middle  of  the  house,  together  with  two  long  fire-tongs.  |  He  also 
takes  two  large  buckets,  |  a  large  cedar-withe  basket,  and  old  mats, 
and  he  sends  |  a  second  time  the  man  who  went  first  to  invite.     As 

35  soon  as  he  goes,  ||  he  sends  another  man  of  his  numaym  to  |  get  fresh 
water  in  the  two  large  buckets,  which  is  to  be  poured  over  the  | 
clover  when  it  is  put  on  the  red-hot  stones.  |  As  soon  as  the  man  who 
went  to  draw  water  conies  back,  he  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  | 
steaming-box.     Now  the  guests  who  are  going  to  eat  the  clover  come 

40  in.  |i  They  go  to  the  rear  of  the  house  and  sit  down.  When  |  they  are 
all  in,  they  eat  first  scorched  dried  salmon.  |  When  they  eat  the  dried 
salmon,  two  men  of  the  |  numaym  of  the  host  take  the  tongs  and  |  stand 

21  laq.  Wa,  gih'mese  £wIlk'Eyintsa  tlesEmaxs  lae  menabodEq  ylsa 
gulta.  Wa,  gil£mese  x'lqostaxs  lae  £yalaqas  g'ayole  laxes  £nE£me- 
mote  qa  las  Le£lalax  g'okulotas.  Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  lada  eyala- 
gEme    qa   Le£lala.     Wa,  gil-mese    lag'aa    lax   tlExilases  Le£lalasE- 

25  £waxs  lae  £nek-a:  "  Le£lalEnLoX  qa£s  laos  LExxak'xa  LEX'sEine 
lax  .  .  "  (£nex-  Lex£edEX  LegEmases  Ledalele).  Wa,  la  hex-saEm 
waldEmsexs  labElsElaaxa  goxudEmse.  Wii,  laLeda  LEkelaLaxa 
LExsEme  axwiiltlalilElaxa  LeLEgatsIe  idaidEbata  qa£s  g'axe  axsto- 
hlfilaq    lax    gEmxotstalllas    tlExilases    gokwe.     Wa,    laxae    et!ed 

30  ax£edxa  -£walase  q!o£lats!a  qa£s  hangaliles  laxa  obexxalalllases 
laqawalilases  g-6kwe.  Wa,  he£misa  malts  !aqe  gllsg'lltla  k-!ipL&- 
laa.  Wii,  heEmxaawis  ax£etso£seda  maltsEme  awa.  naEngatsIa, 
he£misa  £walase  lExa£ya  le£wu  k!ak'!Ek'!obana.  Wa,  la  £yalaqa 
etled  qa  las  etse£steda  lax'de  g'il  Le£lalElg-isa.     Wa,  gil£mese  laxs 

35  lae  £yalaqasa  ogu£lamaxat!  g'ayol  hlxes  EiiE£memote  bEgwanEm  qa 
las  tsex£itsa  maltsEme  awa  nagatsle  lax  £wE£wap!Eina  qa  tsayimltsa 
LEk'elas  LEx-sEina  qo  lal  lagaalal  laxa  xixixsEmala  tlesEma. 
Wa,  gil£mese  gaxa  tsaxdaxa  £wE£wiip!Emaxs  lae  ha£nolilas  liixa 
q!o£lats!e.      Wii,    g-ax£me     hogwiLEleda    LEXLaxLaxa     LEx-sEme. 

40  Wii,  la  he£nakulaEin  laxa  ogwlwalilasa  g'5kwe  qa£s  k!fis£allle.  Wii, 
g'il£mese  £wi£la§LExs  lae  hesm  gil  hamx£ItsE£wa  tstenkwe  xa£masa. 
Wa,  gil£mese  xEinsxas£IdExs  hie  ax£ededa  ma£lokwe  g'a£yol  liix 
£nEmemotasa     LEkeliixa     LEXsEma     ax£edxa     klipLalaa    qa£s    la 


boas]  RECIPES  529 

in  readiness  on  each  side  of  the  steaming-box,  and  ||  both  pick  up  the  45 
red-hot  stones  and  dip  them  quickly  [  into  the  water  that  has  been 
brought  in  in  the  two  large  buckets.     They  take  the  stones  out 
again  |  and   put   them  into    the    steaming-box.     They  do   this  |  in 
order  to  wash  off  the  ashes  that  stick  on  the  stones;  and  they  con- 
tinue I  to  do  so  with  all  the  red-hot  stones.     When  ||  this  has  been  50 
done,  the  woman  takes  the  large  basket  and  pours  |  some  water  over 
it,  so  that  it  is  wet.     Then  she  takes  a  |  square  box,  pours  some  fresh 
water  into  it,  not  very  much.  |  Then  she  throws  the  clover  into  it  and 
washes  off  the  sand  that  sticks  to  it.  |  When  all  the  sand  is  off,  she 
throws  the  roots  into  ||  the  basket  for  steaming  clover.     When  all  55 
the  I  clover  has  been  taken  out  of  the  square  box  and  lias  been 
washed,  the  two  |  men  take  hold  of  it,  one  on  each  side,  and  they  put 
it  on  the  red-hot  |  stones  which  they  have  put  into  the  steaming-box. 
Then  they  press  the  clover-roots  down  in  the  |  large  basket  so  that 
they  are  close  to  the  red-hot  stones.  ||  When  they  have  been  pressed  60 
down,  the  woman  takes  some  old  mats  |  and  spreads  them  on  each 
side  of  the  place  where  the  clover  is  being  steamed.  |  Then  one  of  the 
men  lifts  a  large  bucket,  j  draws  fresh  water,  and,  when  he  comes  in, 
he  I  immediately  pours  the  fresh  water  over  the  clover  which  is  || 
piled  up  at  the  place  where  it  is  being  steamed.     When  the  fresh  55 
water  lias  all  been  poured  out  of  the  |  bucket,  they  take  old  mats 

r.axumg'alll    laxa    £wax-sana£yasa    q!o£lats!e.       Wa,  la     £iiEmax£Id 
k!ip!edxa    xixExsEinala    t!esEma    qa£s    la    hanax£wld    klipstEnts  45 
lfix  £wabEts!awasa  maltsEme    awl   naEngats!a.     Wa,  lit  xwelaxtis- 
tEiula-'meseq  qa£s   la  k!ipts!ots   laxa  q!o£lats!e.     Wa,  het!  hegilts 
gweg'ilaq  qa£s  ts!oxalexa  giina£ye  klwekhltsEmeq.    Wa,  lii  hex-saEin 
gwegilaq    liixes    waxaasa    x-ix"ExsEmala    t!esEina.      Wa,    gil-'mese 
£wl£laxs  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxa   £walase   lExa£ya    qa£s    giigF.ltsEm-  50 
desa    £wape    laq     qa     klunqese     hamExsEma.      Wa,    lii     ax£edxa 
k'limyaxLa  qa£s  guxts'odesa  £WE£wap!Eme  laq,  xa  k-  !ese  qleiiEma. 
\X:A,  lii  lEXstalasa  LEXsEme  laq  qa£s  tsloxalexa  eg'ise  k!wek!ut!E- 
neq.     Wa,    g-il£mese   £wPlawa   eg'lsEna£yasexs    lae    lExts!alas    laxa 
lielosgEma£ye  lExitsa  £nEkaxa  LEX'SEme.    Wa,  gihmese  £wilts!oweda  55 
LEX'sEme  laxa  k'limyaxLa  lae  ts!okwa.     Wa,  lada  ma£lokwe  bebi-:- 
gwanEm    dadanodEq  qa£s   hankiymdes    laxa    xix'ExsEinala  t!esE- 
maxa  la  XEXuts!a  laxa    q!o£lats!e.     Wa,  lii   Laqwaxalts !odxa  lex'- 
tslala    £walas    lExa£ya    qa    q!Es£ales    laxa    x'lxixsEmala   tlesEma. 
Wa,  gihmese  q!Es£alaxs    laeda  tstedaqe    &x£edxa    k"  !ak- !Ek"  lobane  60 
qa£s    la    LEpialllElas     lax    £wax-sana£yasa    £nEg'ats!axa    LExsEme, 
laaLasa  £nEmokwe   bEgwanEm  ax£edxa  £nEmsgEme  £walas  nagatsla 
qa£s  lit   tsex£IdEx    alta    ewEewap !Ema.     Wa,  gihmese   g'axExs  lae 
h,ex-£idaEm     tsadzELEyintsa     £wE£wap!Eme    laxa    LExsEmaxs    lae 
L!iikimlts!a  laxa  £nEg'ats!aq.      Wa,  glhmese  £wllg  iltslaweda  naga-  55 
tslaxa    EwE£wap i.Emaxs    lae    ax£edxa    k* !ak- !Ek- lobane    qa£s    nasE- 
75052—21—35  eth—  pt  1 34 


530  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.ss 

67  and  cover  it  over,  j  They  do  not  let  the  steam  blow  out.  [  They  do 
not  leave  it  there  a  long  time,  before  the  woman  takes  the  short 

70  tongs  |  and  lifts  up  one  side  of  the  covering  of  old  mats.  [|  She  picks 
up  some  clover-roots  and  puts  them  into  a  small  dish,  and  j  she 
pinches  them  with  her  fingers;  and  if  they  break  in  two,  J  they  are 
done.  Then  the  man  takes  off  the  |  old-mat  covering  and  spreads 
the  mats  on  each  side  of  the  steaming-box.  j  When  this  has  been  done, 

75  two  men  take  up  ||  each  one  clam  digging-stick  and  push  it  through  | 
each  side  of  the  clover-basket  in  which  the  clover  has  been  steamed,  | 
and  they  lift  it  up  out  of  the  |  steaming-box.  Then  they  put  it 
down  on  the  old  mats  which  are  spread  |  on  the  floor,  and  they  pour 

SO  it  all  out.  When  the  clover  is  all  out,  ||  they  put  the  basket  down  at 
the  left-hand  side  of  the  house.  |  Then  the  woman  spreads  the  hot 
clover  over  the  |  old  mats,  so  that  the  steam  comes  out  and  so  that 
they  get  cool.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  the  woman  takes  the  dishes 
and  |  puts    them   down.     Then   the   two   men   take   the  steamed  || 

85  clover-roots  and  put  them  into  the  dishes;  and  when  all  |  the  dishes 
are  full,  they  begin  at  one  end  of  the  dishes  and  go  to  the  other, 
breaking  up  |  the  roots  with  their  hands.  When  all  the  clover-roots 
are  in  pieces  in  the  |  dishes,  the  woman  takes  oil  and  pours  it  over 
them;  j  and  when  they  are  covered  over  with  oil,  they  mix  (the  roots 

67  yindes  laq.  Wa,  la£me  k'!es  helqlalaq  kEx"saleda  k'lalEla.  Wa,, 
k!est!a  alaEm  gEyaxs  laeda  tslEdaqe  &x£edxa  tslesLala  tsteklwa 
qa£s   klwetostodex    apsanii£yasa    nayime  k!ak!Ek!obana.     Wa,  la 

70  k!ip!ed  laxa  LEX'sEme  qa£s  &xts!odes  laxa  lalogume.  Wa,  la 
epletses  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£ye  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  hex£idaEin  k!Exu- 
sexs  lag  Llopa.  Wa,  hex£ida£mesa  bEgwanEme  nas£6dEX  nayimas 
k!ak!Ek!obana  qa£s  LEpIalllEleq  lax  £waxsanalilasa  £nEg"ats!e. 
Wa.  g  il£mese  gwalExs  laeda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEm    axeedxa  £nal- 

75  £nEints!aqe  kMilakwa  yix  dzeg-aj-axa  gaweqlanEme  qa£s  LlEnxsodes 
lax  £waxsana£yasa  helosgEma£yasa  la  LlQp  £nEgEku  LExsEma. 
Wa,  laxda£xwe  k!wak!wedaanodEq  qa£s  k!wet£wults!odeq  laxa 
£nEg-ats!axa  LEX'SEme  qa£s  lii  k!wedEdzots  laxa  la  LEbel  k'!ak"!E- 
k!obana.     Wa,  la    qEbEdz5ts  laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£lolts !axs   lag 

SO  hanstoliltsa  lExaeye  lax  gEmxotstalilasa  LExxag'atsIe  g'okwa. 
Wa,  lai.eda  tslEdaqe  lEndzodalasa  tstelqwa  LEXsEm  laxa  LEblle 
k  !ak!Ek!obana  qa  lawalesa  k"!alEla.  Wii,  he£mis  qa  koxcwides. 
Wa,  gil£mgse  gwalExs  laeda  tslEdaqg  S,x£gdxa  loElqlwe  qa£s  giixe 
mEx£alilElaq.     Wa,  la  ax£gdeda  ma£lokwe bebEgwanEmxa  £nKgEkwe 

85  LEXSEm  qa£s  lii  texts !alas  laxa  loElq!wg.  Wii,  giPmese  £wPwe1- 
ts!Ewakiixs  lae  giibEndxa  loElq!wg  qa£s  p !op loxsalexa  lex'se- 
mases  eeeyasowe.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wi£la  la  plogEkwaxa  LExtslalasa 
loElq!waxs  lagda  tslEdaqg  &x£edxa  L!g£na  qa£s  k!unq!Eqes  laq. 
Wa,  g-il£mgse    la    t!Ep!EgEl!sxa   L!g£niixs  lag  xwgtElg'intsgs  eeeya- 


/ 

boas  J  EECIPES  531 

and  the  oil)  with  their  hands;  ||  and  when  (everything)  is  mixed,  it  90 
is  like  mush.  When  |  this  is  done,  they  carry  the  clover  to  those 
who  are  to  eat  it.  Four  men  |  eat  out  of  one  dish  of  clover.  Those 
who  |  eat  the  clover  take  it  with  their  hands.  After  |  they  have 
eaten,  two  men  take  soft  ||  cedar-bark  and  give  to  each  of  those  who  95 
have  eaten  the  clover  a  piece  (with  which)  to  |  wipe  off  the  oil  from 
their  hands.  |  After  they  have  done  this,  they  drink  fresh  water. 
Then  J  they  go  out.  The  steamed  clover  is  given  at  a  great  feast  to 
many  tribes,  |  and  those  who  eat  steamed  dover  always  try  to  eat  it 
all.  |[  This  is  all  about  one  way  of  cooking  it.  |  100 

Another  Way  of  cooking  Clover. — This  is  another  way  of  |  cooking  1 
clover.     The  woman  takes  a  small  kettle  and  |  puts  it  down  by  the 
place  where  she  is  sitting.     She  takes  a  cedar-stick  and  |  splits  it  into 
thin  pieces.     She  measures  the  size  of  the  bottom  ||  of  her  small  5 
kettle  with    the  split  cedar-sticks,  and   |  breaks  the  cedar-sticks  in 
pieces  and  puts  them  in  the  bottom  of  the  kettle.     As  soon  |  as  they 
are  all  in  the  bottom  of  the  kettle,  she  places  others  across  them, 
in  tins    I   way:        -prr,.      After   this  has  been  done,  she  takes  her 
clover-basket  |    (t--~- - -\    and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she 
is  sitting;    and   ft  I""/    she  takes  a  small  dish  ||  and  places  it  by  10 
the  side  of  the      4JJJy     clover-basket,  and  also  a  bucket  of  water.  I 


sowe  laq.  Wit,  g'iPmese  lElgoxs  lae  gEiika.  Wa,  g  il£mese  90 
gwalExs  lae  k'aesas  laxa  LEx-Lax-Laxa  LExsEme.  Wa,  maemaleda 
LEX'Lakaxa  £nal£nEmexLa  loqlwa.  Wa,  laEm  xamaxts!analeda 
LEX'Lakaxs  lae  LEXLax'£Idxa  LExsEme.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwal 
LEXLak-axs  laeda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwaiiEin  ax£edxa  qloyaakwe 
kadzEkwa  qa£s  la  tslswanaesas  laxa  LEXXax'daxa  LExsEme  qa  95 
dedEiix="wedesexes  e£eyasowaxs  q telq lElts lanalae.  Wa,  gil-mese 
gwalExs  lae  nagek  ilaxa  alta  Ewapa.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
hoquwElsa.  Wa,  heEm  klweladzEm  laxa  q!eiiEme  lelqwalaLa-'va 
£nEgikwe  LEX'SEma.  Wa,  lii,  ewaewilaas6xs  LEx-Lax'SEfwaeda 
£nEgikwe  LExsEma.     AYa,  laEm  gwala -iiEmxJidala  ha£mexsilaeneq.  100 

Another  Way  of  cooking  Clover. — Wa,  ga£mes  £nEmx£idala  ha'ine-  1 
xsilaenexa  LExsEmega  yixs  ax'edaeda  tslEdaqaxa  ha£nEme  qa£s 
hangaliles  laxes  klwaelase.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  k!wa£XLawe  q;£s 
xoxoxusEndeq  qa  wlswultowese.  Wa,  la  niEns£IdEx  5wadzEq  texsda- 
asasa  ha£iiEme,  visa  xokwe  k!wa£xLawa.  Wa,  he£mis  la  kokoxs£a-  5 
latsexa  k!wa£xxawe  qa£s  k'atlEXLEndales  laxa  ha£nEme.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  la  hamElqlExsdeq  lae  galotEytndalasa  waokwe  laq  g-a  gwa- 
lega  {fig.).  Wa,  g11£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  LEg'atsle  Llab  ta 
qa£s  g-axe  hang-alllas  laxes  klwaelase.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  lalogume 
qa£s  g-axe  ha£n6lllas  laxa  LEg-ats!eL!abata.    Wa,  he£mesa  EwabEts!ala  10 


532  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  tETH.AMN.83 

11  Then  she  unties  the  string  of  the  clover-basket,  so  that  it 
comes  off  |  and  that  she  can  take  out  the  roots.  She  takes  out  the 
clover  and  puts  it  |  into  the  small  dish;  and  when  she  thinks  it  is 
enough  to  go  into  the  kettle,  |  she  pours  some  water  into  it  and  she 

15  washes  off  the  sand.  ||  When  all  the  sand  is  off,  she  places  (the  clover- 
roots)  on  top  of  the  |  cedar-sticks  in  the  bottom  of  the  small  kettle. 
She  does  not  press  them  down,  |  for  she  wishes  (them)  to  he  loosely 
inside  of  the  kettle,  so  that  |  the  steam  can  pass  through  easily. 
When   (the  kettle)  is  full,  she  takes  soft   cedar-bark,  |  dips  it  into 

20  water,  and  covers  the  roots  with  it.  ||  After  she  has  tucked  it  in  all 
round  the  small  kettle,  she  pours  a  little  |  water  all  round  the  cover- 
ing, perhaps  half  a  teacupful,  |  which  forms  the  liquid  of  the  clover. 
Then  she  puts  (the  kettle)  on  the  fire.  |  She  does  not  let  it  boil  long, 
before  she  takes  it  off  of  the  fire  of  her  house,  ]  and  leaves  it  on  the 
floor  while  it  is  getting  done, — while  it  is  staying  there  and  the  steam 

25  is  passing  through  it.  ||  As  soon  as  it  stops  steaming,  the  woman  takes 
off  |  the  top  covering.  She  takes  her  small  dish  and  puts  it  down  by 
the  side  |  of  the  clover-kettle.  She  takes  her  tongs,  and  with  them 
she  takes  out  the  |  boiled  clover  and  puts  it  into  the  small  dish.  | 

30  When  it  is  all  in  the  dish,  she  takes  her  oil-dish  and  puts  some  ||  oil 
into  it.  Then  she  calls  her  husband  and  her  children  to  |  come  and  sit 
down;  and  when  they  sit  down,  she  puts  before  them  the  |  whole 


11  n;igats!a.  Wa,  la  qwebeyindxa  LEgatsle  L!abata  qa  lawayes  t!E- 
makiya£yas.  Wa  la  lEX£wults!odxa  LExsEme  qa£s  la  lEXts!ots 
hlxa  lalogtime.  Wa,  gihmese  k-5taq  laEm  keT'atsla  laxa  hacnE- 
maxs  lae  guqteqasa   £wape    laq    qa£s    tsloxalexa    egise    laq.     Wit, 

15  glPmese  £wl£laweda  eg'is£Ena£yasexs  lae  lEXEylndalas  laxa  helotslawe 
k!wa£xLa  lax  oxsdaeyasa  ha£nEme.     Wa,  lit  k!es  Laqwaxa  LExsEme 

■  qaxs  £nek-ae  qa  hasdexwales  lax  otslawasa  ha£nEme  qa  lalaqesa 
k' lalEla.  Wa,  gil£mese  qotlaxs  lae  axeedxa  q  loyaakwe  kadzEkwa 
qa£s   t  lak'Eylndesexs    lae   hapstaaku    laxa    Ewape.      Wa,    g  il-'mese 

20  gwal  dzopFlalax  aweestasa  hamEmaxs  lae  xaL!Ex£Id  guxse£stfdasa 
£wape  laxa  awe£stiisa  t!ak'Eya£ye  walaanawise  lo£  nEgoyala  deda- 
g-aats!e  £wapalasa  LExsEmaxs  lae  hanx'Lano  laxa  lEgwda.  ^^'a, 
la  k!es  gegilll  mEdElqiilaxs  lae  hanxsano  laxa  lsgwllases  gokwe. 
Wa,  a£mese  la  ha£nela  qa  he£mis  la  L!obE£nakulayosexs  lae  kunya- 

25  tasa  k!alEla.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  k!rdElaxs  laeda  ts!Edaqe  axodxa 
t!ak"Eya£yas.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  Ifdogiime  qa£s  ha£noliles  laxes  LEke- 
latsle  ha£nEma.  Wa,  lii  fix£edxes  tslesLfda  qa£s  k!ip!edes  laxa 
hanxxaakwe  LEX'SEma  qa£s  la  k!ipts!alas  laxa  lalogtime.  Wii, 
g-il£mese    £wI£1osexs  lae    ax£edxes     ts!Ebats!e     qa£s    k!unxts!odesa 

30  L!e£na  laq.  Wa,  lawesLe  Le£l5laxes  la£wmiEme  LE£wis  sasEme  qa 
g'axes  k!us£alila.  Wa,  gil£mese  k!us£alllExs  lae  k'agEmllltsa  sEn- 
yEnk-!Enalats!alaxa     hanxxaakwe    lex'seiu   lalogiim    lax-dasxwaq 


boas]  RECIPES  533 

clover-roots  in  the  small  dish,  |  and  the  oil  in  the  oil-dish.  Then 
they  |  take  some  clover-roots  and  dip  them  into  the  oil  and  ||  put  35 
them  into  the  mouth;  and  they  continue  to  do  so,  eating  it.  |  After 
they  have  eaten,  they  drink  water,  after  eating  |  the  boiled  clover. 
The  married  couple  and  |  their  children  alone  eat  boiled  clover.  It 
is  not  given  |  at  feasts  to  many  tribes.  That  is  all  about  ||  boiled  40 
clover.  | 

Baked  Clover-Root. — Xow  I  will  talk  about  clover  baked  in  |  hot  1 
ashes.     When  the  woman  and  her  husband  have  nothing  to  eat  |  and 
they  have  no  kettle,  when  they  are  camping  out  j  in  bad  weather  and 
their  food  is  all  gone,  ||  then,  since  there  is  no  place  where  clover  does  5 
not  grow,  the  woman  goes  to  find  |  the  leaves  of  the  clover.     When 
she  finds  them,  she  |  digs  out  (the  roots) ;  and  when  she  has  many,  she 
goes  to  a  place  where  there  is  water,  |  carrying  the  clover.     She 
washes  (the  roots)  so  that  the  sand  comes  off.  |  When  all  the  sand  is 
off,  she  goes  back  ||  to  her  camp,  carrying  the  clover,  and  she  sits  10 
down  by  the  side  of  |  the  fire.     Then  she  sends  her  husband  inland 
to  get  |  skunk- cabbage,  and,  if  there  is  no  skunk-cabbage,  to  get  dry 
fern-fronds.  [  When  he  gets  the  skunk-cabbage,  he  brings  back  two 
leaves  and  gives  them  |  to  his  wife.     The  woman  takes  them  and 
puts  the  ||  clover-roots   into    the   skunk-cabbage   leaves,  which  she  15 

LE£wa    ts!Ebats!ala     L'.e'na    lax   Llasalllas.      Wa,    hex£idax'da£xu-  33 
£mese  dax£Id  laxa  LExsEme   qa£s  ts!Ep!ldes  laxa  L!e£na  qa£s  ts!o- 
qliises  laxes  sEmse.     Wa,  axsa£mese  he  gwegilaxs  lae    LEXLaka.  35 
Wa,  g'iPmese    £wi£laxs  lae  nag'ik'Elaxa    £wapaxs  lae   gwal  LEXLa- 
kaxa  hanx'Laakwe  LExsEma,  ylxs  lexa£maeda  hayasEkala  LE£wis 
sasEme    LEXLakxa  hanxxaakwe   lex  sicma.     Wa,  la  k'!es  klwela- 
dzEm  laxa  qlenF.me  lelqwalaLVya.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxa  hanxxa-  40 
akwe  LExsEma. 

Baked  Clover-Root. — Wa,  la£mesEn  edzaqwaltsa  dzamedzEkwe  laxa  1 
tslElqwa   giina£yaxa   LExsEme.     Wa,   he£maaxs    kleasae   ha£maeya 
ts!Edaqe  LE£wis  la£wunEine  loxs  k!easae  hanagexs  gayag'llIsElae, 
yixs  £yax'sa£maeda  £nala,  wa,  he£mis  la  golElosE£watsexes  g'iwul- 
kwe,  wa  la  kleas   k!es    qlwaxatsa   LEX'SEme.     Wa,  la  alex£Ideda  5 
ts!Edaqaxa    LEgiluowasa    LExsEme.      Wa,    gil£mese    qlaqexs    lae 
hex'£idaEm    ts!os£edEq.     Wa,  g"il£mese  qlEyolqexs  lae   laxa  £wape 
hanqElaxes    LExsEme     qa£s    la    ts!ox£wultalac[    qa   law  ayes    eg"e- 
sEna£yas.      Wa,    g-il£mese    Ewl£lawe    egesEna£yasexs    lae     nii£naku 
laxes   gig'o'klwale    hanqElaxes   LExsEme.     Wa,    la    k'wanolisaxes  10 
lEgwllaxs    lae    £yalaqases    la£wunEme    qa    liis  laxa    aL!e    ax£edEx 
k'.aok'.wa.     Wa,  gil£mese  k'!eas  k-!aok!waxs  lae  he  axsE£weda  gEms. 
Wa,  gil£mese  lolxa  k!aok!waxs  gaxae  dalaxa  malEXsa  qa£s  ts!awes 
laxes  gEnEine.     Wa,  lada  ts!Edaqe    ax£edEq  qa£s  lExdzodesa  lex-- 
sEme  laxa   k'!aok!we.-    Wa,    la    q!EnepsEmts   lfiq.      Wa,    gil£mese  15 


534  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.88 

1(3  folds  around  them.  As  soon  as  she  |  has  done  so,  she  takes  split 
cedar-sticks  and  digs  a  hole  in  the  hot  |  ashes  just  under  the  fire. 
When  the  hole  is  deep  enough,  she  |  takes  the  clover  wrapped  up  in 
skunk-cabbage  and  puts  it  into  it.  |  She  takes  the  split  cedar-sticks 

20  and  she  scrapes  the  hot  ashes  ||  over  the  clover  that  she  is  going  to 
bake.  When  |  it  is  covered  thick  with  hot  ashes,  she  piles  fire  over 
it.  |  When  this  is  done,  she  waits  for  it  to  be  baked.  After  a  short 
while  |  she  thinks  that  it  is  done.  Then  she  takes  up  the  split  cedar- 
sticks,  scrapes  |  away  the  fire  and  the  ashes,  and  digs  out  the  clover 

25  wrapped  up  in  ||  skunk-cabbage  leaves.  She  opens  the  leaves  and 
spreads  them  on  the  floor,  |  and  the  baked  clover-roots  are  piled  up 
in  the  middle  |  of  the  leaf.  They  use  the  leaf  as  a  dish,  and  eat  it 
without  oil  |  when  they  eat  the  baked  clover.     The  woman  only  eats 

30  it  |  with  her  husband;  and  they  drink  a  little  water  after  ||  eating  it, 
as  the  white  men  do  when  they  drink  tea.  After  they  have  |  eaten 
enough,  they  drink  much  water.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Raw  Clover-Root. — Now  I  will  talk  about  |  those  who  eat  raw 
clover.     Not  all  Indians  eat  it  |  raw.     Generally  it  is  eaten  raw  by 

35  the  woman  who  is  ||  digging  it,  when  she  sets  hungry,  and  she  does 
not  wish  to  lose  time  by  going  to  |  eat  in  her  house.  Then  she  just 
eats  raw  |  clover.  That  is  the  only  time  when  it  is  eaten  raw.  | 
These  are  all  the  ways  of  eating  clover.  | 

16  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  xokwe  k!wa£xLawa  qa£s  £lap!edexa  tslslqwa 
guna£ya  lax  awabalisases  lEgwIle.  Wa,  gil£mese  hel£abEtalisExs  lae 
ax£edxa  qlEtiepsEmalaxa  k'!aok!\ve  LExsEma  qa£s  £mExuts!odes  laq. 
Wa,  la  &x£edxa  xokwe  k!wa£xEawa  qa£s  goles  laxa  tstelqwa  guna£ya 

20  cja£s  golsgEmdales  laxes  dzamesasE£we  LExsEma.  Wa,  gil£mese 
wax"sEm5laxa  ts!Elqwa  giinexs  lae  mosgEmdalasa  giilta  laq.  Wii, 
gIPmese  gwala  lae  esEla  qa  l lopes.  Wa,  k!est!a  alaEin  galaxs 
lae  kotaq  laEm  iJopaxs  lae  ax£edxa  xokwe  k!wa£xLfiwa  qa£s  golaxE- 
lexa  gQlta  LE£wa  gflna£ye.     Wii,  la  k!wet!Eqalisaxa  q!EnepsEmaliixa 

25  k!aok!wa  LHxsEma.  Wa,  la  dzaxusEmdEq  qa£s  LEp!5lileq.  Wa, 
a£mise  la  modzaya  dzamedzskwe  laxa  ts!Elqwa  gune  lax  nEgEdza- 
£yasa  k!aok!wa.  Wa,  laEm  hamadzonoxusexs  lae  wElwal£IdExs  lae 
LEXLax£Idxa  dzamedzEkwe  LEX'sEma.  Wa,  la£me  a,Ein  LEXLax-£I- 
dEq  LE£wis  la£wiinEme.     Wa,  laxda'xwe  asm    naxnaqaxa  £wapaxs 

30  LEXLakae  he  gwegileda  dedagaxa  deyexa  mamah'a.  Wa,gil£mese 
pol£IdExs  lae  alax£Id  nax£idxa  £wape.     Wa,  laEm  xae  gwala. 

Raw  Clover-Root. — Wa,  la£mesEn  edzaqwal  gwagwexs£filal  hlxa 
k!ilx-k-!ax-axa  LEX'sEme  yixs  k'lesae  £naxwema  bakliime  k'ltlx-- 
k'!ak-Eq.     Wii,  het!a  q!unala  k!ilx-k!axqeda  tstedaqaxs  lae  ts!o- 

35  saq  yixs  lae  posq!Ex£Ida  qaxs  k!esae  helqlala  Lakimx£ida  qa£s 
la  hamx£Id  laxes  gokwe.  Wii,  he£mis  aEin  la  k!ilxk!ax£Ida- 
atsexa  LExsEme;  lexaEm  ha£mapdEmxa  k-!Elx-e  LExsEmeq.  Wii, 
laEm  £wl£la  gwala  gwayi£lalasaxa  LEX'sEme. 


boas  J  RECIPES  J>35 

Cinquefoil  (1). — Now  I  shall  talk  about  the  man  who  |  cooks  cinque-  1 
foil-roots  for  his  tribe.     First  he  takes  a  j  large  square  box,  which  is  put 
down  at  the  right-hand  side  inside  of  |  the  house-door;  and  he  takes 
cedar-wood  that  splits  well,  ||  and  spUts  it  into  pieces  of  the  size  of  the  5 
little  finger;  |  and  when  he  thinks  he  has  enough,  he  takes  the  cedar- 
bark  and  |  splits  it  in  narrow  strips  and  long.     When  he  |  thinks  he 
has  enough,  he  takes  cedar-sticks  and  |  measures  them  off  so  that  they 
are  of  the  length  of  the  inside  of  the  square  box.  ||  Then  he  takes  his  10 
knife  and  he  cuts  them;   and   he    takes   another  |  cedar-stick  and 
measures  off  the  width  of  the  inside  of  the  square  box,  |  and  he  cuts 
that  also.     Then  he  takes  the  other  |  cedar-sticks  and  measures  them 
off  according  to  the  length  of  the  square  box.     He  measures  j  them 
with  the  cedar-stick,  takes  his  knife,  and  cuts  them  off  ||  so  that  they  15 
are  all  of  the  same  length.     When  he  thinks  he  has  enough,  |  he  takes 
the   measure   of   the  width  of  the  box  and  measures  off  another  | 
cedar-stick,  and  cuts  it  accordingly.     There  are  only  |  two  sticks  for 
the  width  of  the  box.     Then  he  |  takes  one  of  the  cedar-sticks  which 
he    has    measured    according    to    the    length    of     the  ||  box,    and  20 
one  of   those   which    he   has    measured  |  according    to    the    width 
of  the  box,   and  he  puts  the   two  ends    crosswise,  in    this  |  way:1 
He  takes   the   split   cedar-bark     and   ties   them   together.    |   When 
they    have    been    tied,    he     takes    another    one  that   has   been 

Cinquefoil   (1). — Wa,  la£niesEn  gwagwex's£alal  laxa  bEgwanEmaxs  1 
lae  tlEqwelaxa  t!Exusose  qaes  g-okulote.     Wa,  heEm  gil  fix£etsoseda 
£walase  klimyaxLfi  qa  g-axes  kamela  lax  helklotstalllasa  aweLElas 
tlExilas   g'okwas.      Wa,  lit    ax£edxa    eg'aqwa  lax  xasE£we  k!\vasx- 
Lawa  qa£s  xoxoxllsEndeq  qa  yuwes  awagwitEns  sElt !axts !ana£yex.  5 
Wa,  g11£rnese  k-otaq  laEm  hel£axs   lae  ax'edxa    dEnase    qa£s    dzE- 
dzExs£aleq  qa  ts !elts !ecj lastowe  lo£  gilsgildEdzowa.     Wa,  gil£Em- 
xaawise    k'otaq    laEm    hel£axs  lae    ax£edxa  k!wa£xxawe  qa£s    niEii- 
s£Ides  lax   £wasgEmasas  otslawas   g"ildolasasa  k!iniyaxxa.     Wa,  lii 
ax£edxes  k!awayowe  qa£s  k"!Lmts!Endeq.     Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  6gQ-  10 
elaeme  xoku  k!wa\\r.Fiwa  qa's  mEiis-'Idex  tslEgolas  ots lawasa  k- !im- 
yaxxa.      Wa,    laxae     k"!imts!EndEq.      Wa,     la    ax^edxa     waokwe 
k!wa£xxawa  LEJwis  mEnyayox  g'ildolasasa  k!im3'axLa  qafs  mEiises 
laxa  k!waeXLawe.     Wa.  lii  axeedxes  k-!awayowe  qaEs  k- !imk' !imts Sa- 
les laq  qa  eneejiEmasgEmes.     Wii,  g  il£mese  kotaq  laEm  helaxs  lae  15 
ax^edxes     mEnyayowaxa    ts!Eg-ola.      Wa,    la    mEnseIts   laxa    ogu- 
£la£me  k!wa£xLawa  laxae  k"  Hmts  lEntses  klawayowe  laq.     Wii,  laEm 
malts !aq£meda    tslEgola    k!wa£XLawa    qaeda  k!imyaxLa.      Wa,   lii 
ax£edxa    £nEmts!aqe  laxa    mEiiekwe    k!wa£xiawa  qaeda   gildoliisa 
kllmyaxLa.     Wii,  he£misa   £nEmts!aqe  liixa  mEiiekwe    k!wax£L§,wa  20 
qaeda  ts!Eg'oliisa  k- limyaxLa  qa£s  k'ak'Etodex  oba£yasg-a  gwaleg'a.1 
Wii,  lii   ax£edxa   dzEXEkwe    dEnasa   qa£s   yaLodes   laq.     Wa,    g  il£- 
mese    Elg'aaLEla    yilayasexs  lae   etled   ax£edxa   £nEmts!aqc  g"a£vol 

'  So  that  the  ends  form  a  right  angle. 


536  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.ass.85 

measured  according  to  the  length  of   the  box,  and  places  it  at  the 

25  end  of  the  one  ||  that  he  tied  on  first;  and  he  continues  |  doing 
so  until  lie  comes  to  the  end  of  the  crosspiece;  and  when  he  has 
filled  it  to  the  end,  he  takes  the  |  other  cedar-stick  that  had  been 
measured  for  the  other  end  (the  width  of  the  box),  and  he  ties 
it  on  with  |  cedar-bark;  and  when  he  has  finished  with  his  frame  for 
red-hot  stones  on  which  cinquefoils  are  cooked,  |  it  is  in  this  way: 

30      He  places  it  inside  the  bottom  of  the  square  box.  ||  Then 

he  takes  up  a  medium-sized  basket  and  goes  into  the 
woods  to  look  for  |  dry  fern-fronds.  When  he  finds  them, 
he  pulls  them  out  and  puts  them  into  his  |  basket.  When 
it  is  full,  he  carries  the  |  dry  fern-fronds  on  his  back  into    his  | 

35  house,  and  puts  them  down  next  to  the  square  box.  ||  After  he  has 
done  so,  he  takes  a  stout  and  long  cedar-bark  rope,  |  coils  it  up, 
and  dips  it  into  the  water  on  the  beach.  ]  When  the  kinks  are  all  out, 
he  takes  it  back  |  into  the  house  and  ties  it  around  the  square  box. 

40  the  whole  height  of  it,  and  as  tightly  as  possible,  ||  so  that  the  box 
may  not  burst  when  they  begin  to  put  red-hot  |  stones  into  it,  for 
very  often  the  square  boxes  burst  |  when  the  host  who  gives  a  cinque- 
foil-root  feast  fails  to  put  a  rope  around  it .  |  After  this  has  been  done, 
they  do  the  same  as  they  do  when  they  [  build  a  fire  in  the  middle 

45  of  the  house  |  for  clover  and  put  stones  on  it.  ||  When  (the  stones) 

laxa  niEnekwe    qaeda  gildolaxs    lae    k'adEnodzEnts    laxa    g'ilxde 

25  yihfiLElodayosexs  laaxat!  yil£5LElots.  Wit,  a£mese  la  he  gwe£na- 
kulas  liibEndalaxa  geba£ye.  Wa,  gihmese  qlulbaxs  lae  ax£edxa 
inEnekwe  k!wa£xxawa  qaeda  apsba£ye.  Wa.  laxae  yil£aLElots  yisa 
dEnase  laq.  Wa,  gihmese  gwala  t!ak'!aLe  £nEgidzoxa  t!Exusosaxs 
lae  g-a  gwaleg-a  {fig.).     Wa,  la  paqlEXLEnts  laxa  k-  !EiuyaxLa.     Wa, 

30  he£mis  la  et!ed  ax£etso£seda  hel£a  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  laxa  ai.!e  aliix 
gEmsa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  q!aqexs  lae  k!ulx-£IdEq  qa£s  dzoptslales  laxes 
gagEmyaatsIe  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g-il£mese  k"6t!axs  lae  oxLEx£Idxes 
gEmdzats!e  LExaeya  qa£s  la  oxLoltlalaq  qa£s  la  oxxaeLElaq  laxes 
g-6k\ve  qa£s  la   SxLEgalllaq  lax   mag  inwalllasa    k-  limyaxLa.     Wa, 

35  g'il£mese  gwatexs  lae  ax£e£dxa  LEkwe  dEnsEm  dEnEmaxa  gilt!a. 
Wa,  lii  qtelxwalaq  qa£s  lit  hapstEndEq  laxa  £wapasa  L!Ema£ise. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  ewlelawe  q!Ek"!Elsiis  lae  xwelaqaEm  la  q!Elxw5laq 
qa£s  lii  laeL  laxes  gokwe.  Wii,  hex£ida£mese  qEX'SEmts  laxa  k'lim- 
yaxLa  qa  hamElxsEmayeseq    laxes    alaena£ye   lEk!utaleda  dEnEine 

40  qa  k'leses  yimxseda  k  limyaxLa  qo  lal  k- !ipts!alayoLa  xIxexse- 
mala  t!esEm  laq  qaxs  qlunalae  yimxseda  k'  limj^axxaxs  qlEmqkm- 
dzaakwelae  qExsEmdeda  tteqwelaxa  t!Exusose.  Wa,  gil£mese 
gwala  bEgwanEmaxs  lae  aEm  nEqEmgiltEwex  gwegilasasa  la  laqo- 
llla  qaeda  LEX'sEme,  LE£wa  tlesEmaxs  lae  ts!ats!Elq!wasE£wa.     AVa, 

45  gil-'mesela  £naxwa  £me£mEnltsEmx£Idedat!esEmaxs  laeax£etsE£weda 


boas]  RECIPES  537 

are  all  red-hot,    t  wo  men  take  two  long  pairs  of  tongs,  which  they  ]  use  as  46 
walking-sticks,  and  go  out  of  the  house  in  which  the  cinqucf oil-roots  are 
being  cooked.  J   They  are  going  to  invite  the  tribe  to  come  and  eat 
cinquefoil-roots.   They  go  into  |  each  house  and  stand  inside  the  door.  || 
As  soon  as  they  have  gone  all  through  the  village,  they  go  back  and  call  50 
again.  |  When  they  come  back  to  the  house  in  which  the  roots  are  being 
cooked,  [  they  spread  mats  for  the  guests  to  sit  down  on.    After  |  they 
have  done  so,  the  guests  come  in;  and  when  they  are  in,  |  the  two  men 
take  the  square  box  and  put  it  ||  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire  in  the  55 
middle  of  the  house.     Another  man  takes  |  two  large  buckets  and 
goes  to  draw  |  freshwater;  and  when  the  one  who  went  to  draw  water 
comes  back,  |  another  man  takes  the  frame  out  of  |  the  bottom  of  the 
box  and  puts  it  up  against  the  side  of  the  box,  ||  behind  it,  away  from  60 
the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house.     When  |  this  has  been  done,  each 
takes  a  bucket,  and,  |  standing  at  each  end  of  the  square  box,  carry- 
ing in  the  hand  |  the  fire-tongs  and  the  bucket,  they  put  it  down  at 
the  j  left-hand  side.     Then  they  take  off  ||  the  burning  fire  and  put  65 
it  down  at  each  end  of  the  fireplace.     When  it  has  all  been  taken  off,  | 
they  put  the  ends  of  the  tongs  into  the  |  buckets  which  contain  the 
water.  \  and  keep  them  in  this  way  until  the  ends  are  wet.  |  That  is 

malts  !aqe    gilsg-ilt!a    k!ek-!EpLalaa    yisa   ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEin  46 
qa£s  sekMaganowaxs  lae  hoquwElsa  laxa  t!Eqwelats!e  gokwa.     Wa, 
iaEin  lal  Ledalalxes    g-6kul5te    qa    g-axes    tlExtlaqwa  laxes  qhvfd- 
xoene£nie    la     Lauixstoltslax    t!et!Exilas    gig-okwases     g'okiilote. 
Wa,  giPmese  labElsaxa   g'ox'VlEmsaxs  giixae  aedaaqa  etse£sta£na-  50 
kula.     Wii,  g'il-'mese  laeL  laxa  tteqwelatsle  gokwa  lae  ha£nakwela 
LEp lalilElaxa     klwiixasa    t  text  !aquLaxa    t!Exusose.      Wa,    gih'mese 
gwfdExs  lae  hogwlLEleda  Le=lanEme.     Wa,  gihmese  £wi-'laeLExs  lae 
hex'£ida£ma  madokwe  bebEgwaiiEm  ax£edxa  k'!imyaxi,a  qa£s  ha'"no- 
lises    laxa   laqwawalilasa    tlEqwelats'.e    g'okwa.     Wa,   lii    ax£ededa  55 
=nEmokwe  bEgwaiiEiuxa  maltsEme  awa    naEngatsle  qa£s  la  tsex'I- 
dEX    alta    £wapa.     Wa,   gihmese    g'axa    tsax'daxa    £wapaxs    laeda 
JnEmokwe      bEgwiinEin     axwiiltslodxa      k"  !itk-  lEdese     paqlEXLexa 
kMimyaxLa    qa£s     tsagEnoliles     laxa     kMImyaxLa    lax    axanalilasa 
k'limyaxLa  laxa   laqwawalilasa  t!Eqwelats!e  g'okwa.     Wa,  gil'mese  60 
gwalEXs  lae  ax£edxa  £nrd'"nEmsgEme  naEngatsle  laxes  madok!\vena£ya 
bebEgwaiiEme  la  Lax-LE\vIl  lax  £waxsanalllasa  k' limyaxLa  dedalaxa 
£nal£nEmts!aqe    klipLalaa.     Wii,    he£mise    h&ng'aMasa    naEngatsIes 
gegEmxagawalile.     Wa,  la  heEm  gil  ax£etso£sexs  lag  £waxse="stEndxa 
gulta  qa  las  axel  lax  £waxsballlasa  lEgwde.     Wa,  g  il£mese  £wfix-  65 
snxs    lae    enEmax-£id£ma    k!ek-!ipElg-ise    bebEgwanEin  LlEiixstEnts 
5ba£3'ases     k-!ek'!!pLa!aa    laxa    naEngatsle    laxes    £wI£wabEts!alae- 
na£yaxa  £wape.     Wa,  axsii£mese    he    gwaele    qa  LEx£edes  oba£yas. 
Wa,  he£mis  la  ax£edaatsa  bEgwanEmaxa  helagite  dEnsEn  dEnEma 


538  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.m 

70  the  time  when  the  man  takes  a  fairly  stout  cedar-bark  rope  ||  and  winds 
it  around  the,  square  box  so  that  it  may  not  burst  open  when  |  they 
put  the  red-hot  stones  into  it.  Generally  |  the  rope  is  put  around  the 
square  box  before  the  guests  come  in.  |  When  this  has  been  done,  the 
two  men  who  are  to  pick  up  the  red-hot  stones  |  take  the  tongs  out 

75  of  the  water  and  pick  up  the  red-hot  ||  stones  and  put  them  into  the 
square  box;  |  and  when  the  end  of  the  tongs  begins  to  burn,  they  |  push 
them  at  once  into  the  water;  and  when  the  ends  are  wet  again,  |  they 
pick  up  more  red-hot  stones.  During  this  time  |  the  wife  of  the  host 
who  is  to  give  a  feast  of  cinquefod-roots  takes  a  new,  smooth  mat 

SO  and  ||  spreads  it  out  behind  the  box  in  which  the  cinquefod-roots  are 
to  be  cooked.  She  takes  |  one  of  the  cinquefod-baskets,  unties  the 
top,  j  and  takes  out  the  roots,  which  she  throws  on  the  mat.  |  She 
pulls  them  apart  so  that  they  lie  loosely  on  the  mat.     She  does  this 

85  with  |  four  cinquefod-baskets.  When  the  roots  are  all  ||  pded  up 
loosely,  she  takes  one  of  the  baskets  of  long  roots  |  and  a  new  mat, 
which  she  spreads  out.  |  She  unties  the  top  and  takes  them  out  very 
carefully,  |  puts  them  on  the  mat,  |  and  puds  them  apart  carefully, 

90  because  she  does  not  want  them  to  break,  for  they  are  all  long.  ||  As 
soon  as  they  have  been  pulled  apart,  she  takes  the  dry  fern-leaves 
and  |  puts  them  down  on  the  floor  of  the  house  near  by.  She  takes 
old  mats  |  and  puts  them  down  next  to  the  square  box.  |  After  this 

70  qa£s  qEX'se£stEndes  laxa  k'  llmyaxLa  qa  k-  lesei.Es  yimxsal  £wl£lal 
k'!ipts!oyoLa  x-Ix-ExsEmala  tlesEm  laq.  Wa,  la  qlunala  gEyol 
qExsEmtsE£wa  k'!imyaxLiixs  k!es£mae  hogwlLa  Le£lanEme.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  gwabsxs  laeda  madokwe  k'  !ek-  lEpElg'is  bebEgwanEm 
axwiistEndEx  6ba£yases  k!ek!ipLalaa  qa£s  k'liplldes  laxa  x'Ixex- 

75  sEmala  tlesEma  qa£s  la  k-!ipts!alas  laxa  t!Eqwe£lats!e  k!imyaxLa. 
Wa,  g  ilnaxwa£mese  x"fx£ede  6ba£yas  k' lipLalaasexs  lae  hex-£idaEm 
LlEnxstEnts  6ba£ya  laxa  £wape.  Wii,  gih'mese  k!iinx£ede  oba£ya- 
sexs  lae  etled  k"!ip!ets  laxa  x-Ix"ExsEmala  t!esEina  laaLasa  gEnE- 
masa    tlEqwelaxa  t!Exusose  Sx£edxa  eg-ldzowe  eMzo  le£wa£ya  qa£s 

80  LEp!aliles  lax  aLanalllasa  tlsqwelatsle  k!imyaxLa.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
£nEmsgEme  t!Egwats!e  Llabata  qa£s  qwelEyindex  t!Emakiya£yas. 
Wa,  lii  bEhx£idts!odEq  qa£s  lii  bElxEdzots  laxa  LEbele  le£wa£ya. 
Wa,  la  bel£edEq  qa  hasdexwales.  Wa,  £naxwaEin  he  gwex-£Idqexs 
mosgEinaeda    t!et!Egwats!e    L!aL!Ebata.      Wa,  g'ihmese    £wi£la    la 

85  belkwaxs  lae  &x£edaxaaxa  £nEmsgEme  Laxabatsle  Llabata.  Wa, 
he£misa  Eldzo£maxat!  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  la  LEpIalilasa  le£wa£ye.  Wa, 
laxae  qwelEyindEx  t!Einakiya£vas.  Wa,  laxae  aek'ilaxs  lae  bEl- 
x£ults!odEq  qa£s  lii  bElxEdzots  laxa  le£wa£ye.  Wii,  laxae  aek'ilaxs 
lae  bel£edEq  qaxs  gwaqtelaaq  aEltsIala    qa  sEnfdes    laxes   awasgE- 

90  mase.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£la  la  belkwaxs  hie  ax£edxa  gEmse  qa£s 
gaxe  lEx£al!las  laxa  nE.xwala  laq.  Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  k!ak-!Ek-!o- 
bane  qa  g-axes  axel  lax  maginwalilasa  t  teqwelats  !e  k'  KmyaxLa.    Wii, 


soas]  RECIPES  539 

has  been  done,  the  two  men  who  have  picked  up  the  red-hot  stones 
throw  the  |  dry  fern-leaves  on  the  red-hot  stones;  and  ||  after  they  95 
have  done  so,  they  take  the  frame  and  place  it  on  top  of  the  fern- 
leaves.  |  They  take  the  short  cinquefoil-roots  and  place  them  in  the 
square  box,  |  then  they  put  the  frame  into  the  box;  and  when  [  all 
the  short  cinquefoil-roots  are  in,  the  woman  gives  four  pieces  of  split 
cedar-bark  to  the  man,  and  he  places  them  over  the  ||  short  cinquefoil-  100 
roots.     Then  he  takes  up  the  long  cinquefoil-roots  and  throws  them 
on  top  of  the  |  short  roots,  and  the  four  pieces  of  split  bark  are  a 
mark  between  the  short  |  and  the  long  roots.     As  soon  as  the  long 
roots  have  all  been  put  in,  |  the  woman  takes  old  mats  and  spread> 
them  |  next  to  the  square  box.     When  they  are  all  ||  ready,  the  two  5 
men  take  each  one  of  the  |  buckets,  each  standing  on  one  side  of  the 
square  box,  |  and  they  pour  the  water  over  the  long  cinquefod-roots.  | 
When  the  water  has  all  been  poured  out  of  the  buckets,  they  take 
hold  of  |  the  old  mats  at  each  corner  and  throw  them  over  the  box  in 
which  the  roots  are  steaming;  j|  and  they  only  stop  when  many  |  old  10 
mats  have  been  put  on  as  a  cover,  so  that  the  steam  can  not  come 
through.  |  After  they  have  covered  it,  the  woman  goes  into  a  room  | 
in  tie  corner  of  her  house  where  the  dishes  are  generally  kept,  j  and 

g-il£mese  gwala  laeda  ma£lokwe  k- !ek!ipElgis  bebEgwiinEm  ax£edxa  93 
gEmse  qa£s  lEXEyimdales  laxa   x-Ix-ExsEmFda    t!esEma.     Wa,    gil- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  k'  !itk"  !idese  qa£s  paqEyindes  laxa  gEmse.  95 
Wa,  la   bElx£Idxa  t!Exusose  qa£s  laxat!  bElxts!alas   laxa  kMimyax- 
La.     Wa,   laEm    bElxEdzodalas   laxa    k-!itk'!Edese.     Wa,   g-il£mese 
c"wllts!aweda  t!Exusosaxs   laeda  tslEdaqe  tslasa  mots!aqe    dzEXEk" 
dEnas    laxa    bEgwanEme.      Wii,    katEymdfdas    lax    6kwa£ya£yasa 
t!EX"sose.     Wa,  la  bElxElllaxa  Laxabalise  qa£s  la  bElxEyindes  laxa  100 
t  !exus5s§.     Wii,  laEm  &wulgawa£ya     mots!aqe     dEnatsa    t!Exusose 
LEnva  Laxabalise.     Wii,  g-il-'mese  ewiela  la  bElxa£ya£ya  Laxabalisaxs 
laeda  tslEdaqe    ax£edxa    k"!ak!ak-!obana    qaes  la  LEplalilElas  laxa 
mag'inwalllasa    t  !Eqwelats!e.    k'limyaxLa.     Wa,    g-il£mese  £wl£la    la 
gwiilllaxs  laeda  ma£l5kwe  bebEgwanEm  k.  loqulllaxa  £nal£nEmsgEine  5 
nenagats!a  qa£s  la  Lax£walll  lax  £wax-sanalilasa  t!Eqwelats!e  k!im- 
yaxLaxs    lae    tsadzELEyintsa    £wape    laxa    okuya£yasa    Laxabalise. 
Wa,  gil£mese  £wilg-ilts  !aweda  £wape  laxa  nenagats  !iixs  lae  dadEnxEnd- 
xa    k' !ak' !Ek- lobane    qa£s    nasEyindes   lax    okwaya£vasa  la,  k-!fdE- 
yala  Laxabalisa.     Wa,  i\l£mese  gwal  nasaqexs  lae  £wi£leda  qlenEme  jq 
k!fd\!Ek'!obane   nas^dayoq    qa    k"!eses    k'E£xusaleda    k!alEla  liiq. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  gwal  nasaqexs  laeda  ts!Edaqe    latslalll  laxa  otslalile 
lax  onegwilases    g-okwe    qaxs    he£mae    q!uniila  k"ax-k-aelatsa  IoeI- 
q!we     qa£s    la    k-oltslalTlElaq.      Wii,    lada    £uEmokwe    bEgwanEm 


540  ETHNOLOGV   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

15  she  passes  them  out.  One  of  the  men  j|  takes  the  dishes  from  her, 
and  puts  them  down  at  the  |  left-hand  side  of  the  door  of  the  house. 
Then  the  |  other  man  counts  how  many  dishes  there  will  be,  for  there 
will  I  be  one  dish  for  each  group  of  six  guests.  |  As  soon  as  he  has 

20  counted  them,  he  names  the  number  of  dishes  required;  ||  that  is, 
the  number  of  dishes  that  the  woman  passes  out  of  the  room.  |  As 
soon  as  all  the  dishes  are  out  of  the  room,  the  woman  j  takes  one 
kelp  bottle  of  oil  for  every  two  dishes;  and  when  |  the  oil-bottles 
and  dishes  have  all  been  taken  out,  one  of  the  |  men  takes  the  fire- 

25  tongs  and  with  them  strikes  the  mat  covering  of  the  ||  long  cinquefoil- 
roots.  If  the  cover  sinks  down,  the  roots  are  done.  If  it  does  |  not 
stay  down  but  jumps  back,  they  are  not  done  yet.  (If  they  are 
done,)  he  takes  off  |  the  mat  covering,  and  a  new  mat  is  spread  out.  | 
The  two  men  take  hold  on  each  end  of  the  strips  |  of  cedar-bark  that 
mark  the  level  between  the  short  and  the  long  roots.    They  take  them 

30  all  up  and  put  them  down  ||  on  the  new  mat  that  had  been  spread  out. 
After  (the  men)  have  done  this,  they  |  take  their  fire-tongs  ami  push 
them  in.  When  the  legs  of  the  tongs  spread  open,  |  they  press  them 
together,  and  they  lift  out  the  short  roots,  and  |  they  put  them  on 
another  new  mat  that  has  been  spread  out;  |  and  they  only  stop 

35  taking  out  the  roots  when  they  are  all  out  of  the  ||  box.  Then  the 
two  men  put  down  their  |  fire-tongs  and  sit  down  on  each  side  of  the 

15  k-ak'alaxa  loElqlwe  laxa  tstedaqe  qa£s  lii  k-agalllElaq  laxa 
gEmxotstalllasH  tlEx'ilasa  t!Eqweelats!e  g-5kwa.  Wa,  laLeda  £nE- 
mokwe  bEgwanEm  gElpax  '"wiixexLaasas  loElqlweda  klwele  lax 
q!eq!aL!alasE£wa  £nal£nEmexLa  loslqlwasa  bebEgwanEme.  Wa, 
g-il£mese    gwala    gElpaxs    lae  Lex£edEx    £wax£exLaasLasa  loElqlwe. 

20  Wa,  he£mis  £wax£exLeda  loElq  !wa  k'olt  lalelEmsa  tstedaqe.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  £wl£l5lt!allleda  loElqlwaxs  lae  axeedaxaeda  ts  lEdaqaxa  Enal- 
"uEine  ewaEwade  L!e£na  qaeda  maemalEXLa  loElqlwa.  Wa,  g'il£mese 
£wFlolt  lallleda  £ watts !ala  L!e£na  LE£wa  loElqlwaxs  laeda  uiEmokwe 
bEgwanEm   ax£edxa  k'.'ipLalaa    qa£s    kwexsEmdes    laxa    nayEmasa 

25  Laxabalise.  Wa,  glPmese  xutayax£IdExs  lae  Llopa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
k'les  xiita£yax£IdExs  lae  k'!ilx-a.  Wa,  lii  hex'£idaEin  let!etsE£we 
nasEya£yas.  Wa,  laxae  LEpIalilEma  Eldzowe  le£wa£ya.  Wa, 
a£misa  ma£lokwe  bebEgwaiiEm  dadEbEnclEx  £waxsba£yasa  awulga- 
wa£ye    dEnasa   LE£wa    t!Exusose  qa£s   wegiLElodeq  qa£s  lii   IjeIxe- 

30  dzots  laxa  LEbele  Eldzo  le£wa£ya.  Wa,  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
ftx£edxes  k- !ek- !ipLalaa  qa£s  l Ieucj !EC[esexs  lae  aqale  £waxsanodzEx- 
sta£yasa  k'UpLalaaxs  lae  k-  lip  lets  hlxa  tslElqwa  t!Exusosa  qa£s  lii 
k- lEbEdzots  laxa  oguela£maxat !  LEbel  Eldzo  le£wa£ya.  Wa, 
fd£mese    gwal  klipwultslalaqexs  lae  EwiElorts laweda  tlExusose   laxa 

35  k'limyaxLa.  Wa,  lax-da£xwa  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEm  gigalllaxes 
k' lek' lipLalaa    qa£s    kliidzEnolllex     £waxsana£yasa  t  !Exusosaxs    lae 


boas]  RECIPES  541 

short  roots  which  are  j  on  the  new  mat.     Then  they  shake  the  steam  37 
out  of  them,  j  taking  up  with  both  hands  the  short  roots,  and  shaking 
them  while  they  are  |  holding  them  up.     Then  the  short  roots  fall 
down  one  by  one,  falling  back  ||  on  the  others;  and  before  the  two  40 
men  have  done  so  a  long  time  |  the  steam  has  all  gone  out.     The 
woman  does  the  same  with  the  long  roots;  |  and  when  she  has  done 
so,  she  takes  the  dishes  and  |  puts  the  long  cinquefoil-roots  into  them, 
and  the  two  men  |  put  the  short  einquefoil-roots  into   the  dishes. 
When  they  have  done  so,  they  ||  take  the  oil-bottles  and  pour  the  oil  45 
into  the  dishes  containing  the  long  roots  |  and  the  short  roots;  and 
they  measure  so  that  the  |  oil  of  one  bottle  is  put  into  two  dishes. 
After  thej"  have  done  so,  they  place  |  the  dishes  of  long  roots  before 
the  chiefs,  one  dish  for  j  each  six  of  them;  and  when  the  chiefs  have 
received  theirs,  ||  they  put  one  dish  before  six  of  the  common  people,  j  50 
When  they  have  been  put  down,  the  |  chiefs  tuck  up  the  sleeves  of 
their  shirts,  |  and  after  doing  so  they  begin  to  eat.     They  take  the  j 
long  roots  with  the  right  hand,  fold  them  up  with  the  thumb,  ||  and,  55 
when  they  have  been  made  into  a  ball,  they  put  them  into  the 
mouth.     They  all  do  it  in  this  way;  and  the  common  people  |  eat 
the  short  roots  in  the  same  way  as  the  long  roots  are  eaten,  j  After 
they  have  had  enough,  those  who  have  eaten  the  long  roots  and 
those  who  have  eaten  the  short  roots  take  in  their  hands  what  is  left 

bElxEdzalilxa    Eldzowe    le-wa-ya.     Wa,  dox£me  k'lalodEX  k"!alElas.  37 
Wa,  laEm  dax-£itses  £wax-solts  !ana£ye  laxa  t!Exusose  qa£s  k'  lAbeles  lae 
dzoxwalas.    Wa,  he£mis  la  ts  !alts  !aiiEmk"ilatsa  t!Exusosaxs  lae  teqlE- 
laxeswaokwe.     Wa,  k'!ets!Emese  gegillla  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEmxs  4u 
lae  gwal  klalEla.     Wa,  laxa  he£ma  tslEdaqe  he  gweg'ilaxa  Laxaba- 
lise.    Wa,  gil'mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£ededa  tslEdaqaxa  loElqNve  qa£s 
belts lalesa   Laxabalise  laq.      Wit,  leda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEm  bel- 
ts lalasa  t  !Ex"sose  laxa  l<!>Elq!we.     Wa,  g-ih'mese  Ewi£laxs  lae  ax'etsE- 
£weda  £watts!ala  L!e£na  qaes  klungELEyindalexa  Laxaptslala  loElq!wa-45 
LE£wa  t!Exuts!ala  loElqlwa.     Wa,   laEm  mEnekwa  £nEme  £wa£wade 
L!e£na  laxa  mafEXLa   loEkjlwa.     Wa,  gilmiese    gwalExs    lae  k'ax'- 
dzamolilasa  Laxaptslala  loElqlwa    laxa   g-Ig-igEma£ye  laxes  q!eq!a- 
Lalaena£yaxa  £nal£nEmexLa  loqlwa.     Wa,  gilmiese  ="w!lxtowa  g-fg-i- 
gama£yaxs   lae    k-ax-£itsE£wa    bEgulula£ye;    laEmxae    q !eq !at lalaxa  50 
c"nal£nEmexxa    loqlwa.       Wa,  g-il£mese    '"wllg'allleda    loElqlwaxs  lae 
hex-£ida£ma  gig-ig&ma£ye   LleplExndEX   obalts!ana£yases    q!eq!ESE- 
na£ye.     Wa,  g'ih'mese    gwalExs     lae    daxa,    wa,  la'"me    dasgEmdxa 
Laxabalise  vises    helk'!ots!ana£ye.     Wa,  la    klokloxsEmases  qoma 
lacj.      Wa,    g-ll£mese    loxsEma    Liixabalisaxs    lae    tsoqlusas    laxes  00 
sEmse.      Wa,   la    £naxwaEm    he   gweg'ila   LE£wa   bEgullda£yaxs   hie 
t  !EX"t!;ikuxa  t!Exusose  gweg'ilasasa   LElaxapg'iixa  Laxabalise.     Wa. 
g-tl£mese    poHdExs    lae  £wl£la£ma    LElaxapg'axa    Laxabalise    LE£wa 
t!Ext!akwaxa    t!Exusose    tExsEindxes   anexsa£ye    qa£s    la   motElaq 


542  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  Leth.  ann.ss 

60  over  and  take  it  home  ||  to  their  wives.  Then  they  drink  water  in 
their  houses.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  The  long  and  the  |  short 
cinquef oil-roots  are  given  at  great  feasts  to  many  tribes,  for  |  they 
are  counted  when  chiefs  count  their  feasts  in  rivalry.  | 

65  (2)  There  is  anotherwayof  cooking  short  and  ||  long  cinquef  oil-roots — 
when  they  are  boiled  for  a  married  couple  and  their  children,  |  and 
when  they  invite  their  brothers  or  sisters.  First,  |  the  woman  goes 
to  get  her  |  small  kettle  for  cooking  long  and  short  cinquefoil-roots, 
for  there  is  only  one  way  of  cooking  them.     She  |  washes  out  the  small 

70  kettle;  and  when  it  is  clean,  she  takes  split  ||  cedar-wood  and  meas- 
ures the  size  of  the  bottom  of  the  kettle  with  the  |  split  cedar-wood. 
She  breaks  the  sticks  and  places  them  in  the  bottom,  |  six  at  the 
bottom  of  the  small  kettle,  and  she  places  the  same  number  cross- 
wise over  |  those  six  which  she  first  put  in.  After  |  she  has  put 
them  in,  they  are  in  this  way     srfTTTfv.      m  the  bottom  of  the  small 

75  kettle.  ||  After  she  has  crossed  H : ; : : :  D  the  sticks  in  the  bottom  of 
the  small  kettle,  |  she  takes  'vUJ_LLLJ  her  basket  containing  the 
long  cinquefoil-roots,  unties  it,  |  takes  a  small  dish  and  pours 
some  water  into  it  until  it  is  half  full.  |  She  takes  the  long 
roots   out  of   the  basket   and  |  puts   them  into   the  water  in   the 

SO  small  dish,  and  she  ||  washes   them.     After  she  has  done  so,  she 


CO  qaes  gEgEnEme.  Wa,  al£mese  nax£Idxa  £wape  laxes  gigokwe. 
Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq.  Wa,  hiEm  klweladzEma  Laxabalise  LE£wa 
t!Exusose  laxa  £walase  klwelasxa  q!enEme  lelqwalaLaeya  yixs 
Layaasa  g'Ig-Egfima£yaxs  Laplaases  k!welats!Ets!aeye. 

(2)  Wa,  ga£mes    £nEmx,£idala  haemex"silaenexa   t!Exusose  LE£wa 

65  Laxabalise,  yixs  hanxLEntsE-'wae  qaeda  hayasEkala  LE£wis  sasEme 
loxs  Le£lalaya£e  laxa  £nal£nEmwEvote.  Wa,  heEm  gil  ax£etso£sa 
tslEdaqaxs  lae  ax£edxes  Laxape£lats !§lS  ha£nEma  loxs  t!Eqwe£la- 
ts!eLa  ha£nEme  qaxs  £nEmae  gwajaasas,  yixs  lae  aek"!a  ts!oxu- 
gindxa    ha£nEine.      Wa,    gil£mese     egigaxs     lae    ax£edxa    xokwe 

70  k!wa£XLawa.  Wa,  la  mEns£idEX  £wadzEq!Exsdaasasa  ha£nEme,  yisa 
xokwe  k!wa£xLawa.  Wii,  lii  k'okoxsEndEq  qa£s  xulxi/Endalesa 
q!EL!Ets!aqe  lax  5xLa£yasa  haenEme.  Wa,  laxae  gekiytndalasa, 
hemaxat!  £waxeda  gilxde  xulxLEndalayoseda  q!EL!Ets!aqa.  Wa, 
lag'a    gwalaxs  lae    gwala    k"  !aat !EXLaeyasa    t!Eqwe£lats!e   ha£nEma 

75  (Jig.).  Wa,  gil£mese  gwala  k!aat!EXLa£yasa  t!Eqwe£lats!e  ha£nEma 
lae  ax£edxes  Laxabatsle  Llabata  qa-'s  ciwelEyindex  t!Emak-iya£yas. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  lalogume  qa£s  guxtslodesa  £wape  laq  qa  nEgoyoxs- 
dales.  Wa,  la  bElx£ults!odxa  Laxabalise  laxa  laxabatsle  Llabata  qa£s 
bElxstEndes  laxa  £wabEts!awasa  lalogume.     Wa,  la  beheltalaqexs  lae 

SO  ts!6x£wklEq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  bElx£ustEndEq  qa£s  la  bel- 


i.'asJ  KECIPES  543 

takes  them  out  of  the  water  and  |  puts  them  on  the  frame  in  the  81 
bottom  of  the  kettle  for  cooking  the  long  roots.     She  only  |  stops 
putting  them  into  the  small  kettle  when  they  are  heaped  up  high. 
She  pours  on  very  little  |  water,  about  half  a  cupful.  [  She  takes  a 
piece  of  old  mat  and  covers  (the  kettle)  with  it.  ||  Then  she  tucks  it  in  85 
all  round  so  that  it  is  tight,  and  so  that  not  much  steam  |  can  come 
out  when  (the  water)  begins  to  boil.     After  she  has  done  so,  ]  she 
puts  it  on  the  fire;  and  when  it  begins  to  boil,  she  takes  her  |  fire- 
tongs  and  strikes  the  mat  covering.     When  it  |  stays  down  and  does 
not  jump  back,  she  takes  it  off  the  fire,  removes  [|  the  mat  covering,  90 
takes  the  small  dish  and  puts  it  alongside  of  the  |  kettle.     Then  she 
takes  the  fire-tongs  and  pushes  them  into  the  |  cinquefod-roots  which 
are  now  done,  picks  them  out  and  puts  them  into  the  small  dish.  | 
She  only  stops  when  they  are  all  out  of  the  kettle.     Then  she  |  takes 
up  the  steaming  long  roots,  holds  them  up,  and  shakes  them,  until  || 
the  steam  comes  out.     As  soon  as  they  stop  steaming,  she  takes  an  |  95 
oil-dish,  pours  oil  into  it,  and,  after  doing  so,  she  |  puts  the  dish  with 
the  long  roots  in  front  of  those  who  are  to  eat  it.  |  She  places  the  oil- 
dish  on  the  outer  side  of  the  small  dish.  |  Then  those  who  are  to  eat 
the  boded  roots  begin  to  eat.  ||  They  take  hold  of  them  with  the  right  200 
hand,  and  |  press  the  roots  with  the  thumb  so  as  to  make  a  ball. 

dzots  laxa   k-!aat!EXLa£yasa  Lfixape£lats!e    ha£nEma.     Wa,  al£niese  81 
gwal  bElxtslalaxa    ha£nEmaxs   lae  Llak'Emala.     Wa,  la  xaL!Ex£Id 
gfiqlEqasa    walaanawise   lo£    nEgoyalada  £wape   laxa    dedag'aatsle 
k!waesta.     Wa,  la    &x£edxa   k!ak-!obanedzEse    qa£s   nasEmdes  laq. 
Wa,  Iueiii  dzopax  ewana£yas  qa  arnxes  qa  k!eses  XEriLEla  klaltsa-  85 
leda  k'  latela   laq    qo    mEdElx£wIdELo.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs    lae 
hanxLEiits  laxa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  gil£mese  mEdElx£\v!dExs  lae  ax£edxes 
tslesLala  qa£s  kwexsEmdexa  nasEya£ye  k!ak!obana.     Wa,  g-il£mese 
xutEyax-'IdExs  lae  liex£idaEin  hanx'SEndEq  laxa  lEgwIle  qa£s  naso- 
dex  nasEya£yas.     Wa,  la  fix£edxa  lalogtime  qa£s  ha£nolIles  laxa  Laxa-  90 
pe£lats!e  ha'nEina.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tslesLala  qa£s  L!Enq!Eqes  laxa 
la,  L!opa   Laxabalisaxs  lae    k'!ip!edEq  qa£s  la  k!ipts!ots  liixa   lalo- 
giime.      Wa,    al£mese    gwalExs  lae    £wllg-ilts  !awa   ha£nEme,  wa,  la 
dax,£Idxa  k!alEla   Laxabalisa  qa£s  dzox-ostalisexs  lae    kMitelaq    qa 
lawalesa  k"!alBla  laq.     Wa,  g'il£mese   gwal    k-Iatelaxs  lae   ax£edxa  95 
ts!Ebats!e  qa£s  k!imxts!odesa  L!e£na  laq.      Wa,  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
kagEmlilasa  L:"ixapts!ala  lalogiim   laxa  LElaxapglLaxa   Laxabalise. 
Wa,  la  k'Sg-allltsa   ts!Ebats!e  L!e£na   lax  L!5saxdza£yasa  lalogume. 
Wa,    hex-£ida£mese    daxweda    Laxapelag'iLaxa  hanxLaakwe    Laxa- 
balisa.      Wa,  la    d5x£itses    helk- lots !ana£ye  laxa   Laxabalise    qa£s  200 
k!5xwises  qoma  laq.     Wa,  g-il£mese   loxsEmx-£IdExs  lae    tsteplets 


544  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.aks.3B 

2  Then  they  dip  (the  ball)  |  into  the  oil  and  put  it  into  the  mouth. 
They  keep  on  doing  this  |  until  they  have  had  enough.  Then  they 
drink  some  |  water  after  eating  the  boiled  long  roots.  || 

5  There  are  only  two  ways  of  cooking  the  long  and  sh  ort  cinquef oil- 
roots.  |  Only  this  teaches  the  common  people  their  low  station,  | 
when  it  is  given  in  a  feast,  for  the  long  roots  are  given  to  the  chiefs 
and  the  ]  short  ones  (to  the  others),  for  only  chiefs  eat  the  long 
10  roots  |  and  the  common  men  eat  the  short  roots.  ||  That  is  all  about 
this. 

1  Erythronium. — If  the  woman  has  many  Erythronium  plants,  she 
takes  a  large  dish  |  and  puts  it  down  at  the  place  where  she  |  always 
-it-.     With  one  hand  she  takes  up  the  |  flat-bottomed  basket  contain- 

5  ing  the  roots  and  pours  them  into  the  large  dish.  ||  Then  she  goes  to 
get  water  in  her  bucket,  and  pours  it  into  |  the  large  dish  contain- 
ing the  roots,  and  she  moves  them  with  her  hands  so  that  the 
earth  comes  off.  She  washes  them;  and  |  after  moving  them  with 
her  hands,  she  washes  out  the  flat-bottomed  basket.  |  When  it  is 
10  clean,  she  takes  the  roots  out  of  the  water  and  ||  puts  them  back  into 
the  small-meshed  flat-bottomed  basket.  When  |  the  roots  have  all 
been  taken  out  of  the  washing-dish,  she  takes  up  the  |  washing-dish 
at  each  end  and  pours  out  the  dirty  water  outside  of  |  the  house; 
and  she  brings  it  back  again  and  puts  it  down  '  where  it  was  before. 


2  laxa  L!e£na  qa£s  ts!oq!uses  laxes  sEmse.  Wa,  ax'samese  he  gwe- 
g'ile.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  poleida.  Wa,  laEm  nax£idxa  £wa- 
paxs  lae  LElaxapgExa  hanx'Laakwe  Laxabalisa. 
5  Wa,  maledala£me  ha£mexsilaena£yaxa  Laxabalise  LE£wa  t!Ex'Jsose. 
Wa,  laEm  lexaEm  q!al£aLElatsa  bEgullda£yaxes  awalox£unasaxs 
hamgElflae  LEewa  g-Ig  igania£ye  laxa  Laxapelaxa  Laxabalise  LE£wa 
tlEqweliixa  t!Exusose,  qaxs  lex"a£maeda  gig  igama£ye  LElaxapgixa 
Laxabalise.     Wa;  la  t!EXt!aqwa   bEgwuluhr'yaxa    t!EXusose.      Wa, 

10  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Erythronium. — Wa,1  la  ax£edxa  £walase  loq  Iwaxs  qlEyoLaeda  ts!E- 
daqaxa  xaasxEntle.  Wa,  g'axe  k'ag-alllas  laxes  heniEnala£me 
klwaelasa.  Wa,  la  k-!6quhlaxa  x-aasx-Ent!aats!e  t!olt!oxusEm  le- 
qlExsd  bexa£ya  qa£s  lii  qEposasa  x'aasx'Eiitle  laxa  £walase  loq!wa. 
5  Wa,  la  tsex£idxa  ewape  yises  nagats!e  qa£s  gaxe  guqlEqas  laxa 
x-aasxEnt!ts!aleda  £walase  ioqlwa.  Wa,  la  golgElgeq  qa  lawaye 
dzedzExsEma£yas.  Wa,  laEm  tsloxwaq  laxes  gwegilasaq.  Wa, 
gil£mese  gwal  golg-Elgeqexs  lae  ts!oxuSEmdxa  LEqlExsde  lExa£ya. 
Wa,    gil£mese    ex'tslaxs    lae    golostEndalaxa    xaasx-Ent!e   qa£s  lii 

10  k-!ats!alas  laxa  t  !olt  !oxusEme  LEqlExsd  lExa£ya.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
£wi£losteda  la  ts!oku  x'aasxEnt!  laxa  ts!ats!iiq  lae  dadEbEndxa 
ts!ats!e  £walas  Ioqlwa  qa£s  la  giiqodxa  neqwa  £wapa  lax  Llasana- 
£yases  gokwe.  Wa,  giixe  xwelaqa  kaeLElaq  qa£s  la  k-iigallhis 
lax  g-ilx-de    k'aelats.     Wa,    laxae    guxtslotsa    'wape    laxa  ts!ats!e 

'   Continued  from  p.  198,  line  22. 


boas]  RECIPES  545 

Then  she  pours  some  water  into  the  ||  large  washing-dish,  and  takes  15 
up  in  one  hand  the  basket  containing  the  roots  |  and  pours  them  into 
the  dish.  She  leaves  them  there  |  until  she  is  ready  to  cook  them. 
She  also  changes  the  |  water  in  which  they  have  been  washed  for 
clean  water,  and  leaves  the  roots  in  it.  Then  she  builds  up  |  the  fire 
and  goes  down  to  the  beach,  ||  carrying  in  her  hands  a  basket  for  20 
stones.  She  puts  |  stones  into  it;  and  when  it  is  full,  she  carries  it 
on  her  back  and  puts  the  stones  on  the  |  fire.  She  continues  doing 
this  if  she  has  many  roots.  |  When  she  has  enough  stones,  she  takes 
her  stcaming-box  [  and  places  it  ready  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  She 
draws  fresh  water  ||  in  her  bucket  and  pours  it  into  the  steaming-box.  25 
When  |  it  is  half  full,  she  stops  pouring  in  water.  Then  she  goes  | 
with  her  bucket  to  draw  more  water,  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side 
of  the  steaming-box;  |  and  after  doing  so,  she  takes  her  tongs  and 
puts  them  down.  |  Now  everything  is  ready.  When  the  stones  of  the 
fire  are  red-hot,  ||  she  takes  the  fire-tongs,  and  also  the  bucket  with  30 
water  |  that  stands  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  She  is  going  to  dip  the 
red-hot  |  stones  in  it,  and  she  takes  up  the  red-hot  stones  with  the 
tongs.  |  She  quickly  dips  them  into  the  water  in  the  bucket,  until  the  | 
ashes  that  stick  on  them  come  off.  She  puts  them  into  the  water  in 
the  steaming-box,  ||  and  she  continues  to  do  so.     As  soon  as  the  water  35 

ewalas  loqlwa.     Wa,  la   kloqulllxa  xaasxEnt!aats!e  LEqlExsd  1e-  15 
xa£ya  qa£s   guxstEiides  laxa    loqlwa.      Wa,    a£mes  la  he    gwestallla 
lae  xwanalElax  L!obasLas,  yixs   lamaaLal    LlayodEq   laxa  ex'stowe 
£wapa  yix   la   axstalilatsa   ts!6kwe   xaasxEiit!a.     Wa,  la  lEqwela- 
x,£ldxes  lEgwIle.     Wa,  la  lEnts  !es  laxa  L!EmaEisases  gokwe  dak-!o- 
tF.laxa  lExa£ye  qa's  t!agats!exa   tlesEme.     AV;i ,  la  t!axts!alasa  t!e-  20 
sEme  laq.     Wa,  lii    qotlaxs  lae  oxLosdesaq  qa£s  lii  XEXuLalas  laxes 
lEgwIle.      Wa,    la    hanalExs     q!enEmaes     qlolasoLe     xaasxEnt !a. 
Wa,  gil£mese  heT'e  xEgwanEmas  tlesEmaxs  h.e    ax-edxes  q!olats!e 
cja  g-axes  gwalil  hanolisxa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  latsex-£Idxa  £wE£wap!Eme  -. 
yises  nagatsle  cja£s  lii  guxts!alasa  Ewape   laxa  q!olats!e.     Wa,  g  il-  25 
£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  gwal    guxtslalaq.     Wa,  laLa   laEm  et!ed 
tsex-£itsa  nagatsle   laxa    £wape  qa    ha£neles    q  !ots!al!ltsE£wa.     Wa, 
g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  k'SpLalaa   qa  gaxes  kadela.     Wa, 
la£me  £naxwa  gwalila.     Wa,  gil£mese  memEnltsEiiix-'Ideda  XE£xuL:Ila 
tlesEinxs  lae  ax£edxa  k!ipL5laa.      Wa,  he£mesa  £wabEts!alile  naga-  30 
ts!a  qa  las  ha£nallsxa  lEgwIle.     Wa,  heEm  habasLEsexa  xIxexse- 
mala  tlesEma.     Wa,  la  k!ip!ldxa  xIXExsEmala  tlesema.     Wa,  lii 
hanaxnvld    hapstEiits    laxa    £wabEts!awasa    nagatsle    qa    lawalesa 
guna£ye  klutsEmeq.    Wa,  lii  k!ipstEtits  lax  ewabEts  lawasa  q!olats!e. 
Wa,  axsa£mese  he  gweg-ilaq.     Wa,  gil£mese  niEdElx£wideda  q!ola-  35 
75052 — 'Jl — '■'<'>  eth — pt  1 35 


546  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  I  i;tii.  ANN.  BB 

36  in  the  steaming-box  begins  to  boil,  |  the  woman  takes  the  flat- 
bottomed  basket,  takes  the  |  washed  roots  out  of  the  dish,  and  puts 
them  into  the  flat-bottomed  basket.  |  As  soon  as  all  the  roots  are  in 
the  flat-bottomed  basket,  she  |  puts  the  basket,  with  the  roots  into 

40  the  boiling  ||  water.  After  she  has  done  so,  she  again  takes  up  her 
tongs,  |  picks  up  red-hot  stones,  dips  them  into  the  |  water  in  the 
bucket,  and  puts  them  in  all  around  the  sides  of  the  |  basket  con- 
taining the  roots.     She  does  not  put  in  really  many  |  red-hot  stones. 

4.">  Then  the  water  begins  to  boil;  ||  and  it  does  not  boil  a  very  long  time, 
before  the  |  roots  are  boiled  to  pieces.  Then  the  woman  takes  hold 
on  each  side  of  the  |  basket  with  roots,  and  she  puts  the  basket  into  a 
large  |  dish.  She  pours  out  the  water  that  was  in  the  dish,  and  |  lets 
the  liquid  drain  off.     For  this  purpose  she  puts  (the  roots)  into  the 

50  large  dish.  ||  Then  she  takes  a  small  dish,  puts  it  down,  and  also  oil  | 
and  spoons;  and  when  everything  is  ready,  she  takes  up  with  one 
hand  |  the  basket  containing  the  roots  and  lifts  it  out  of  the  large  j 
dish.  Then  she  pours  the  boded  roots  into  a  |  small  dish,  from  which 
they  are  to  be  eaten.     When  the  dish  is  full,  she  stops  pouring  them 

55  in.  She  ||  takes  od,  and  pours  on  much  oil,  and  she  only  |  stops 
pouring  on  od  when  (what  is  in  the  dish)  is  a  thick  paste.  Then  she 
stirs  it  with  a  |  spoon,  and  gives  the  spoons  to  those  who  are  to  eat  | 

36  ts!axs  lae  &x£ededa  tslEdaqaxa  LEqlExsde  lExa£ya  qa£s  lii  klastalaxa 
tslokwe  x-aasx-Ent!a  qa£s  lii  kMatslalas  laxa  LEqlExsde  lExaeya. 
Wa,  g-iPmese  £wI£losa  x-aasx-Ent!e  laxa  LEqlExsde  lExa£ya  lae  han- 
stEntsa    x-aasx-Ent!Ets!ala    LEqlExsd    lExa£y.a    laxa    maEindElqiila 

40  £wapa.  Wa,  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  et!ed  ax£edxes  k'lfpLalaa  qa£s 
etlede  k'lip'.edxa  xixExsEmala  t!esEma  qa£s  hapstEndes  laxa 
£wabEts!awasa  nagatsle.  Wa,  k'lipstales  lfix  ewanaeyasa  xaasxKii- 
t!Ets!ala  LEqlExsd  lExa£ye.  Wa,  k!est!a  alaEm  qlenEineda  k!ip- 
stanas  x-Lx'ExsEinala  t'.esEmaxs  lae  alax-eId  maEmdElquleda  £wape. 

45  Wa,  k-!est!a  alaEm  geg'ilil  maEmdElaqulaxs  lae  xas£Ideda  qlolkwe 
x-aasx-Ent!a.  Wa,  a£mese  la  k-  !ak" logwaanodeda  tstedaqaxa  qlolkwe 
x-aasxEnt!Ets!ala  LEqlExsd  lExa£ya  qa£s  hants lodes  laxa  £walase 
loq!wa,  yixs  lae  giiqEwakwe  q!ots!ax-daq  £wapa.  Wii,  la£me 
x'atslax  £wapaga£yas  laxes  la  gwetslawas  laxa  £walase  loq!wa.     Wii, 

50  lii  ax£edxa  lalogume  qa£s  gaxe  k-ag-alilas.  Wa,  he£misa  L!e£na 
LE£wa  kakEts  '.Eiiaqe.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wl£la  gwalila  lae  k'  !ox£wults  !od- 
xa  x'aasxEnt!aats!e  LEqlExsd  lExa£ya  laxa  £walase  x-ats!aats!e 
loqlwa.  Wa,  lii  qEpasasa  qlolkwe  x-aasx-Ent!a  laxa  x'aasx-Entg'a- 
atsle  lalogmna.     Wii,  gil£mese    qot!axs,    lae    gwal    giiqa.     Wii,  lii 

55  ax£edxa  L!e£na  qa£s  k!unq!Eqesa  qleiiEme  L!e£na  laq.  Wii,  al£mese 
gwal  klunqasa  L.'e£na  liiqexs  lae  gEnkaxs  lae  xwetElgesa  kats!E- 
naqe  laq.    Wii,  la£me  ts  lawanaesasa  kats  lEnaqe  laxes  xaasx'Entg'ot- 


boas]  KECIPES  547 

the  boiled  roots.  Then  they  begin  to  eat  with  |  spoons,  and  they 
eat  much  oil  with  them,  because  the  roots  are  bitter.  ||  Therefore  they  60 
put  much  oil  on,  |  so  that  they  may  not  taste  bitter.  After  they  have 
eaten  enough,  |  they  drink  a  little  water.  This  is  the  manner  in 
which  |  in  former  times  the  Indians  boiled  the  Erythronium-roots. 
They  were  |  used  by  the  Indians  at  feasts  given  to  many  tribes. 
That  is  all  about  the  ||  one  way  of  cooking  them.  |  65 

Boiled  Erythronium. — Now  I  will  talk  again  |  about  the  way  they  1 
are  cooked   at  present,  for  at    present  the  Erythronium-roots   are 
boiled;  |  and  they  are  kept  by  the  woman  who  digs  them  and  put  | 
into  baskets,  and  they  are  dried  in  the  sun  by  those  who  gather  many 
of  them  where  they  grow  in  ||  great  quantity.     First  of  all,  the  woman  5 
takes  a  kettle  and  |  washes  it  out  with  water.     When  it  is  clean,  she 
takes  the  |  basket  with  Erythronium-roots,  unties  the  top,  and  takes 
off  |  the  dry  grass  covering.     She  takes  a  dish  and  |  puts  it  down 
where  she  is  sitting.     Then  she  puts  the  roots  into  it,  ||  and  she  pours  10 
on  some  water.     As  soon  as  the  top  of  the  roots  is  covered,  |  she  stirs 
them  with  her  hands  so  that  the  soil  may  come  off;  [  and  when  the 
water  in  which  they  are  beingwashed  is  dirty, she  takes  out  the  |  roots 
and  puts  them  into  another  dish  which  stands  on  the  floor.  |  When  they 
have  all  been  taken  out,  she  pours  out  the  dirty  water  in  the  corner 
of  the  ||  house  and  she  washes  the  dish.  |  When  it  is  clean,  she  puts  15 

Laxa  qlolkwe  x-aasxEht!a.  Wa,  laxda£xwe  £yos£Itsa  k-ak-EtslE-  58 
naqe  laq.  Wa,  laEm  heqlek'lEdzeseda  Lle£na  qaxs  malaeda 
x-aasx-Ent!axs  qlolkwae.  Wa,  he£mis  lagilas  qleqElaxa  Lle£na  60 
qa  k"!eses  plEgEla  malp  !aena£yas.  Wa,  g'iPmese  polc'IdExs  lae 
xaL!Ex£Id  nax£Idxa  kolale  £wapa.  Wa,  heEm  ha£mexsilaenesa 
gildzEse  bakliimxa  xaasx'Entle.  Wa,  la  klweladzEinxa  qleiiEme 
lelqwalaLa£ya  visa  gildzEse  bakluma.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxa  £nEin- 
x-£idala  ha£mexsilaeneq.  65 

Boiled    Erythronium. — Wii,    la£mesEn     edzaqwal     gwagwexs£alal  1 
laqexs  ha£mexsilasE£waasa  ale  £nala,  yixs  hanx'LEndaaxa  xaasxEii- 
t!e  qaxs    axelaso£maeda    ts!oyanEmasa   ts!Edacje   qa£s   la  axEmtslo 
laxa    L!aL!Ebate,  yixs   ex£mae   xilaso£sa    cjlEyaLaqexs  lae  tslosax 
qlayasas.     Wa,  he£mis  g'il    ax£etso£sa    tslEdaqes  hanxLanowe  qa£s  5 
ts!oxug  indesa    £wape    hxq.     Wii,   gil£mese    eg-ig-axs    lae   ax£edxes 
xaasxEnt'.aatsle    Llabata    cja£s    qwelEyindeq.      Wa,    la,    axodEx 
ts!ak-iya£yas    lelElxLo    kletlEma.       Wii,  la    ax£edxa    loq!we    qa£s 
k'agaliles    laxes    k!waelase.     Wa,  la    k-!ats!otsa   x"aasx'Ent!e    laq. 
Wii,  lii  guqlEqasa    £wape    liiq.     Wit,  gil£mese   tlEpEle    okuya£yasa  It) 
x-aasx-Ent!axs  lae  g-olg'Elgeses  e£eyasowe  laq  qa  lawayes  dzedzEX"- 
sEraa£yas.    Wa,  g-il£mese  nex£wideda  tslasas  £wapa  lae  golostEndxa 
x-aasx-Ent!e   qa£s  lii  goltslots  laxa  ogfl£la£me  loqlwa  k'aela.     Wii, 
g-il£mese   £\vi£losa  lae    cjEpEWElsaxa    neqwa    ewapa    lax    onalasases 
g'okwe.     Wii,  lii,   ts!oxugintsa   £wape    laxa    ts!ats!e   loqlwa.     Wii,  15 


548  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.AKN.80 

17  the  roots  back  into  it  |  and  pours  some  more  clean  water  on  them. 
Then  she  stirs  them  again  with  her  |  hands,  and  again  she  changes 
the  water  that  she  poured  on  last.  |  Now  the  roots  are  white  when  they 

20  have  been  washed.  ||  She  pours  some  water  into  the  kettle  until  it  is 
half  lull.  |  Then  she  puts  it  on  the  fire;  and  when  the  water  begins  to 
boil,  |  she  takes  up  the  dish  with  the  roots  and  |  pours  them  into  the 
boiling  water  in  the  kettle  in  which  the  roots  are  to  be  cooked.  | 

25  When  they  are  all  in,  she  lets  them  boil.  ||  She  takes  a  cedar-stick  and 
stirs  them;  and  when  |  they  have  boiled  to  pieces,  she  takes  the 
kettle  oil  of  the  fire,  for  they  are  done.  Then  she  |  takes  oil  and 
pours  much  of  it  on  the  roots.  She  takes  her  |  spoon  and  stirs  (the 
roots)  so  that  the  oil  |  and  the  water  and  the  boiled  roots  are  all 

30  mixed.  After  ||  stirring  them,  she  takes  spoons  and  distributes  them 
among  |  the  guests  who  arc  to  cut  the  boiled  roots.  She  puts  the  | 
kettle  in  which  they  were  boiled  in  front  of  the  guests,  and  |  they 
begin  to  eat  with  the  spoons  out  of  the  kettle.     After  |  eating,  they 

35  drink  a  little  water.     That  is  all  about  this.  ||  This  kind  of  cooking 
is  used  for  inviting  many  tribes.  ] 
1       Eaw  and  Baked  Erythronium  (1). — Some  |  women  and  men  eat  the 
roots  raw  when  it  is  a  hot  day,  for  j  the  Erythronium-roots  are  cool 

16  g'il£mese  la  egig'axs  lae  xwelaqa  goltslotsa  x-aasx"Ent!e  laq.  Wa, 
laxae  giiqlEqasa  ex-stowe  Ewap  laq.  Wa,  laxae  golg'Elgeses 
e£eyaso\ve  laq.  Wa,  laEme  rJayodEq  laxeq  ylsa  ale  guqlEgEins 
£wapa.     Wa,  la£me  la,  EmElEmElsgEnia  x-aasx-Ent!axs  lae  tslokwa. 

20  Wa,  la  guxtslotsa  Ewape  laxa  h&nxxanowe  qa  ttEgoyoxsdalisexa 
ewapaxa  lae  hanxxEnts  laxes  lEgwIle!  Wa,  g-tlEmese  iiik<1i:1x- 
£wi<1exs  lae  k-ag"llllxa  loqlwe  la  g'its  tewatsa  xaasx'Ent  !e  (|a£s  la 
gttxstEnts  laxa  la  maEmdElqfllaxa  x"aasx"Ent!Eg"ielats!e  h&nxxa- 
nowa.      Wa,  g-ilEmese     Ewi£lastaxs     lae    waxdzala    maEmdElqula. 

2.")  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  k!wa£xxawe  qa£s  xwetes  laq.  Wa,  g'flemese  xas£I- 
dExs  lae  hanxs£EndEq  laxes  lEgwile  qaxs  lE£mae  Llopa.  Wii,  la 
ax£edxa  L!eena  qa£s  k!uq!Eqesa  q!enEine  laq.  Wa,  la  axeedxes 
k-ats!Enaqe  qa£s  xwet.'edes  laq  qa  alak'lalise  lfilgowa  i.!e;ua 
LE£wa    Ewapalas    LoEma     xasa    xaasx'Entla.     Wii,    gil£mese    gwfd 

30  xwetaq  lae  axEedxa  k-ak"Ets lEnaqe  qaEs  tslEwanaeses  laxes  x-aas- 
x-Entg-otLaxa  hanxi.aakwe  xaasxEiit  !a.  Wa,  iV'mise  hanxdza- 
molllasa  x-aasx-EnteElats !e  hanxxanowa  laxa  i.e'lfuiEnie.  Wa, 
lax-da£xwe  EyosEwQlts lalaq  laxa  hanxxanowe.  Wa,  g-UEmese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  xaxlEx^d  nax£Idxa    Ewape.     ^Ya,  laEin  gwal  laxeq.     Wii, 

35  laEmxae  Le£lalayoxa  rj!enEme  le]qwalaLa£ya  he  gwekwe  ha£mex'si- 
laenaeyaq. 
I      Eaw  and  Baked  Erythronium  (1). — Wa,  IaemesLa  k'lElxk' !axso£sa 
waokwe  tsledaqa  LE£wa  bebEgwanEma,  yixs  tstelqwaeda  £nala  qaxs 


boas]  RECIPES  549 

Inside  when  they  are  eaten  raw. and  they  have  a  |  milky  taste.     That 
is  the  only  time  when  it  is  thus  eaten.     That  is  all  ||  about  this.  5 

(2).  There  is  another  way  of  preparing  them,  when  they  are  baked 
in  |  hot  ashes.  The  Erythronium-roots  which  are  baked  in  ashes  are 
not  washed.  |  The  woman  takes  her  tongs  and  |  digs  a  hole  under  the 
side-pieces  of  her  fire.  When  ||  the  hole  is  deep  enough,  she  takes  a  10 
handful  of  roots  and  puts  them  j  into  the  hole.  When  they  are 
nearly  level  with  the  top  of  the  j  hole,  she  takes  her  tongs  and  | 
covers  them  with  ashes.  She  does  not  leave  them  there  very  long, 
before  |  she  uncovers  them  with  her  tongs  and  takes  them  out. 
Then  she  puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  ||  Wien  all  those  15 
that  have  been  buried  in  the  ashes  have  been  taken  out,  she  takes  her 
oil-dish  |  and  pours  some  oil  into  it,  and  places  it  in  front  of  the  one 
who  is  goin^  to  eat  the  j  baked  roots.  She  puts  the  baked  |  roots 
on  a  mat.  from  which  they  are  to  lie  eaten;  and  shespreads  (the  mat)  | 
in  front  of  the  one  who  is  to  eat  (the  roots)  and  puts  them  on  it. 
Then  lie  takes  the  roots,  ||  rubs  oil  with  his  thumb  the  ashes  that  are  20 
sticking  to  them,  and,  |  after  doing  so,  he  dips  them  into  oil  and  puts 
them  into  his  mouth.  |  He  continues  doing  so  while  he  is  eating  the 
baked  |  roots.     After  that,  he  drinks  water;  and  |  after  drinking,  he 


£wiidaqaeda  x'aas.vEiit  !iixs    q  !EmkwasEewaaxs    k'telx'ae.       Wa,  la  3 
dzEmx"p!a.     Wa,  laeme  lexaEm  q  lEmkwaxdEmq.     Wa,  laEm  gwal 
laxeq.  "       5 

(2).  Wa,  g'a£mes£nEmx£idiila  gweg-ilasEq  yixs  dzamesasE-wae  laxa 
tstelqwa  gu£na£ya.  Wii,  la  k'lesLal  ts!oxwasE£weda  x-aasxEnt  !iixs 
dzamedzEkwae  laxa  gii£na£ye.  Wa,  heeEm  ;ix£etso£ses  tslesLala  qa£s 
£lap!alisexa  awaba'yasa  k-adEnwaeyases  lEgwIle.  Wa,  gil£mese 
wiinqEle  Elapaeyasexs  lac  k!ax£Id  laxa  x'aasx-Ent!e  qa£s  k-!ats  lodes  10 
Laxes  elapaeye.  Wii.  g-il£mese  Elaq  enEmak"Eya  LE£wa  ewaneqwases 
£lapa£ya  okuva£yasa  xaasx'Ent !axs  lae  ax£edxes  tslesLala  qacs 
dzEmkEyindesa  gu£na£ye  laq.  Wii,  k"!est!e  alaEin  gaesExs  lae 
lotledEq  visa  tslesLfda  qa£s  k-!agalllEleq  laxa  onalisasa  lEgwile. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  £wPloqalisa  lax  dzamedzasaq  lae  ax£edxes  ts!Ebats!e  15 
qa£s  k!iints!odesa  L!e£na  laq.  Wii,  la  k'ag^imlilas  liixes  x'aas- 
x-Entg'5tLnxa  dzamedzEkwe  x-aasx-Ent!a.  Wa,  la  k'ladzatsa  dza- 
medzEkwe  x-aasx"Ent!  laxa  ha£madzowe  le£wa£ya  qa£s  LEpdzamo- 
llles  la  k" ladzayaats.  Wii,  lii  dax-£Id  laxa  x'aasx'Entle  qa£s 
dewalexa  gu£na£ve  k!wek!fitsEmeq  yises  qoma.  Wa,  giPmese  20 
gwalExs  lae  ts!Ep!lts  laxa  L!e£na  qa£s  ts!oq!uses  laxes  sEmse. 
Wa,  axsa£mese  he  gweg-ihixs  lae  x-aasxEntgExa  dzamedzEkwe 
x'aasx'Entla.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  nax£idxa  £wape.  Wa, 
g'll£mese  gwal  naqaxs    lae    hamsgEnid    laxa  £w;ipe  qa£s  h&mx'ts.'a- 


550  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  S3 

25  takes  a  mouthful  of  water,  squirts  ||  it  into  his  hands,  and  washes 
them  off.  Now  it  is  done.  |  This  is  not  given  at  a  feast  to  many 
tribes.  | 
1  Boiled  Lupine-Roots. — The  woman  lakes  her  small  kettle,  washes 
!t  with  fresh  water,  j  and.  when  it  is  clean,  she  takes  her  small 
basket  and  |  goes  down  to  the  beach  of  her  house.  She  picks  up 
5  some  fresh  ||  medium-sized  stones,  puts  them  into  her  small  basket, 
and,  when  |  she  thinks  she  has  enough  to  put  into  the  bottom  of  her 
small  kettle,  she  carries  |  them  up  into  the  house,  and  she  puts  them 
down  next  to  the  |  kettle  in  which  the  lupine  is  to  be  cooked.  She 
takes  some  fresh  stones  |  and  puts  them  into  the  bottom  of  the  small 

10  kettle;  and  when  they  are  all  in,  ||  she  takes  the  lupine-root  basket, 
unties  the  top,  |  and  takes  out  the  roots  and  |  puts  them  on  the 
stones  in  the  bottom  of  tin-  small  kettle.  \  She  continues  doing  so, 
and  only  stops  when  it  is  heaping  full,  j  Then  she  takes  some  dead 

15  grass  and  covers  it  over,  ||  and  tucks  the  grass  in  all  around,  so  that 
the  steam  comes  through  it  ]  when  the  water  begins  to  boll.  She 
takes  a  shell  of  a  large  horse-clam,  j  dips  out  water  in  it,  and  pours  it 
over  the  dry  grass  cover.  |  She  puts  on  four  shells  of  water.  |  After 

I'll  doing  so,  she  puts  the  kettle  with  the  lupine-roots  on  the  ||  fire.  The 
reason  why  she  pours  the  water  on  is  because  she  |  wishes  the  roots 
to  be  wet,  so  that  they  may  not  get  burned.     Then  it  begins  to  boil,  | 

25  nEndes  laxes  e£eyasowe  qa£s  ts  tents !Enxewide.  Wii,  lawesLa  gwal 
laxeq.  Wa,  laEin  k' !es  k!weladzEin  laxa  lelqwalaLa£ye. 
1  Boiled  lupine-Roots  (Ilanxi.uak"  q!wa£ne). — Wa,  heEm  ax£etso£sa 
tslEdaqes  ha£nEme  qa£s  ts!oxug  indeq  visa  EWE£wap [Erne.  Wa 
gllmiese  egigaxs  lae  ax-'edxa  lalaxame  qa£s  hi  dalaqexs  lae 
lEntsles  lax  LlEimrisases  g-6kwe.  Wii,  la  XEx£wIdxa  FdExsEme 
5  ha£yal£a  tlesEina  qa£s  xExuts!ales  laxa  lalaxame.  Wii,  gil£mese 
kotaq  lfiEm  helala  lax  xEq  !uxLa£yases  h  riiEinaxs  1  e  k- !ox£\\  usde- 
SElaq  qa£s  lii  k-!ogweLElaq  laxes  gokwe,  cja£s  k'logunoldes  laxes 
q!iinse£lats!eLe  hamEina.  Wii,  lit  xEx£wults!odxa  alExsEme  t!esEma 
c[a£s    la    xEq luxJLEndalas    laxa    hamEine.     Wii.  g-llemese  £wdts!axs 

10  lae  ax-'edxes  q!unyats!e  Llabata  qa£s  qwelEyindex  tlEmaglmas. 
Wii,  lii  LEX£wfdts!;llaxa  q!waene  laxa  q!unyats!e  Llabata  qaes  lii 
LEx£uyindrdes  lax  XEq !QxLa£yexa  q !unseelats !eLe  hamEma.  W;i,  lii 
hanal  LEx£ts!rdas.  Wii,  iiPmese  gwal  LEx-Tiyiudalascxs  hie  Lliik'E- 
mala.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxa    IcIeIxlo    k!et!Ema  qa£s   ts!;ikEvindes  laq. 

15  Wii,  lii  dzopax  awe£stits  qa  kleses  alaEm  k-Exusaleda  kMalEla  laq 
qo  niEdElx'wIdLo.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  xalaesasa  £walase  niEt!ana£ya 
qa£s  tsex£ides  laxa  Ewape  qaes  giigELEyindes  laxa  ts!ak'Eina£yas. 
Wii,  lii  niEwexLeda  £wape  laxa  £walase  xalaetsox  niEt!ana£yex 
Wii,    g'iPmese    gwalEXs    lie    hanx'LEnts    laxes    cj!unse£lax-dEmaLe 

20  lEgwIla.  Wa,  heEm  lag"ilis  guqas  i  £\vape  laxa  ts!ak'Ema£yaxs 
£nek'ae    qa    klflnqes    qa    k!eses    xix£eda.      Wa,  la    mEdElx£wida. 


boas]  RECIPES  551 

and  she  lets  it  boil  until  the  liquid  is  almost  dried  up.  |  They  know  22 
thai  the  liquid  has  dried  up  when  |  the  steam  ceases  to  come  through. 
Then  she  takes  the  small  kettle  off  the  fire,  ||  and  they  are  done.  25 
She  does  not  take  off  the  cover  immediately,  |  because  she  wishes  the 
roots  to  be  steamed.     When  the  steam  stops  |  coming  through,  she 
takes  off  the  top  covering,  takes  her  small  dish  |  and  puts  it  down 
close  to  her  seat,  where  she  has  been  cooking  the  roots.  |  She  takes 
the  tongs,  picks  up  the  lupine-roots  which  are  in  the  ||  small  kettle,  30 
and  she  puts  them  into  the  small  dish.  |  As  soon  as  all  the  roots  are 
out  of  the  kettle,  [  she  takes  her  oil-dish  and  pours  some  od  into  it.  | 
After  doing  so,  she  puts  it  into  the  small  disli  containing  the  lupine- 
roots,  and  |  places  it  in  front  of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  boiled 
roots.  ||  Then  they  take  out  the  roots,  one  each,  for  |  they  are  long  35 
pieces;  and  they  do  not  bod  to  pieces,  although  the  roots  in  the 
kettle  have  been  boiling  a  long  time,  |  for  they  always  remain  whole.  | 
They  put  the  lupine-roots  lengthwise  into  the  dish,  and  |  they  dip 
one  end  into  the  oil  in  the  oil-dish,  and  they  bite  off  ||  the  ends  when  40 
they  are  eating  the  lupine-roots.     They  continue  doing  so  while  | 
they  are  eating;  and  after  they  have  finished,   they  drink  water. 
Now  |  they  do  not  get  drunk   and   they   do   not  get  sleepy  |  after 
eating  lupine-roots.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Wa,  he/mis  wawasElll  maEmdElqulaxs  k'!es'mae  lEmxEwkle  £wapa-  22 
las.     Wa,  he£mis  £ma£malt  !ek"  lesexs  lae  .lEmx£wide  £wapalasexs  hie 
gwala     k'laiEla.      Wa,    hex,£ida£mese     hanx-sEiidxa     q!unse£lats!e 
ha£nEma.      Wa,  laEm    Llopa  laxeq.     Wa,  lii  k!es  hex£ida  l&WEyo-  25 
dEX  t!ak'Ema-yas  qaxs  £nek'ae  qa  kiinyadlles.     Wa,  het!a  la  gwal 
k"!alElaxs  lae  lawEyodEx  t  !ak-Ema£yas.     Wa,  la  ax£edxes  lalogume 
qa£s  g-axe  k'ag-ahlas  laxes  klwaelasaxs  qlunselaxa  q!wa£ne.      Wa, 
la  ax£edxes  tslesLala  qa£s  k-!ip!ldes  laxa  q!wa£naxs  LExuts!ae  laxa 
q!iinselats!e    ha£nEma   qa-'s    la    k"!lpts!alas    laxa    Ifdogiime.    ■  Wa,  30 
g-il£mese  £wllg  iltslaweda  q!wa£ne  laxa  q !unse£lats !e  liaMiEinnxs  lae 
ax£edxes  ts'.Ebatsie   qa£s    k!unxts!5desa    ide£na  liiq.     Wa,  gil£mese 
gwfdExs  lae  kaneqwas  laxa    q Irinsq Iwayats !eLe  laloguma.     Wii,  la 
k"agEml!las  laxes  q !unsq IwaswQtLaxa  hanxxaakwe  q!wa£ne.     Wa, 
hex£ida£mese  dax-£IdEx-da£xuxa    Enal£nEmts !aqe    laxa  q!wa£ne  qaxs  35 
g'ilsg'ilt!ae  qaxs  hewaxae  xas£IdExs  wax,£mae  la  geglhl  maEmdEl- 
qiileda    q  !uns§£lats  !e    hanxxanowa,   yixs    ax-sa£mae    sEniiles    ogwi- 
da£ye.     Wa,  a£mese  doltsloyo  laxa  q!iinsq  Iwayats !e  hlloguma  qa£s 
idEnxstanowe    laxa    ts tebasts !ala    L!e£na.     Wa,  a£mese   q!Eg-ex-be- 
soxs     lae      q!unsq!was£eda.       \V;i,    ax'sa£mese     he    gwegilaxs   lae  40 
q!tinsq!wasa.     Wa,  g'il£mese  gwala  lae  nax;Idxa  £wape.     Wa,  laEm 
k  !eas  gweg'ilats  k!es  wunaHda.     Wa,  laxae    k!es  bEqluh'Ida  yixs 
lae  gwiil  q!unsq!wasa.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq. 


552  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

1  Steamed  Lupine-Roots. — They  [  build  a  fire  in  the  same  way,  and 
the  woman  goes  to  get  stones  in  the  same  way,  as  they  do  when  | 
they  build  a  lire  for  steaming  the  short  cinquef  oil- roots;  and  only 
this  is  different,  that  |  she  takes  green  grass  and  skunk-cabbage 
5  leaves  to  place  ||  on  the  red-hot  stones  when  they  are  placed  in  the 
steaming-box,  |  and  that  they  put  red-hot  stones  into  the  steaming- 
box.  I  When  there  are  enough,  the  woman  takes  the  green  |  grass 
and  puts  it  on  the  red-hot  stones;  and  when  |  there  is  a  thick  layer 
on  them,  she  takes  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  and  places  them  flat  on 

10  the  ||  fresh  grass;  and  when  there  are  many  Layers  of  this,  [  she  takes 
her  digging-stick  for  digging  clams  and  pokes  holes  |  through  the 
skunk-cabbage  leaves.  After  making  many  |  holes,  she  takes  her 
basket  with  lupine-roots,  unties  the  |  top,  and  takes  out  the  roots, 

15  which  she  places  ||  on  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves.  When  she  thinks 
there  are  enough,  |  she  takes  a  bucket  with  water  and  empties  it  over 
the  roots.  |  When  (the  water)  has  all  been  poured  out,  she  takes  old 
mats  and  |  covers  up  the  box,  so  that  the  steam  shall  not  come 
through.     She  leaves  it  that  way  for  a  long  time.  |  Sometimes  she 

20  leaves  it  there  until  mid-day.  if  she  began  ||  cooking  in  the  morning. 
Then  she  takes  off  the  cover,  takes  her  |  small  dish  and  puts  it  down. 
She  takes  her  tongs  and  takes  out  |  the  steamed  lupine-roots,  puts 
them  into  the  |  small  dish  from  which  the  roots  are  to  be  eaten;  and 

1  Steamed  Lupine -Roots  (£nEg'Eku  q!wa£ne). — Wii,  heEmxaa  gweg'i- 
laxs  hie  lEqwela  loxs  hie  xE£x"J.Entsa  tlesEmes  gwegilasaxs  lae 
lEqwila  qa  enEgasxa  t!Exusose.  Wa,  lexaEme  oguqalayosexs  lae 
ax-edxa  IeuIeiixexlo  k' let  !Ema  LE£\va  k!Ek"!aok!wa  qa  ts!ak'!es 
5  laxa  x'lxExsEniala  tlesEmxs  lae  k!ipts!o£yo  laxa  q!o£lats!e.  Wa, 
he£maaxs  lae  k"  !lpts  lalayowa  xIxKxsEinfda  t!esEm  laxa  q!o£lats!e. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  helatslaxs  lae  ax£ededa  tstedaqaxa  lEnlEnxEXLowe 
k-!et!Eina  qa£s  lEx£al6dfdes  laxes  xIxExsEmala  tlessma.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  waklwaxs  lae  ax'edxa  k!Ek- !aok!wa  qa£s  paquyfndales  laxa 

1 0  IsnlEnxEXLowe  klettema.  Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  q!ex-dzEkwalaxs 
hie  ax£edxes  k'lilakwexes  dzegavaxa  gaweq  IfuiEme  qa  ts!Ex£wum- 
x'soles  laxa  paxuts!a  k!Ek!aok!wa.  Wa,  gll£mese  qledzEqe 
ts!EXwa£yasexs  lae  ax£edxes  q!unyats!eye  Llabata  qa£s  qweteyindex 
t!Einak-Eya£yas.     Wii,  la  LEXewtilts lalaxa  q!wa£neqa£s  la  LExutslo- 

15  dalas  laxa  paxllts!;l  k!Ek-!aok!wa.  Wii,  g-il£mese  hela  lax  naqa- 
£yasexs  lae  ax£edxa  £wabEts lalfle  nagatsla  qa£s  tsadzELEyindes 
laq.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wllg-iits!axs  lae  &x£edxa  k"  !ak' !Ek- lobane  qa£s 
nasEyindes  laq  qa  kMeses  k'Exusale  klalEla  laq.  Wii,  la  gael  he 
gwaele.     Wa,  la  £nfd£nEinp  !Ena  nEqalag'ila  he  gvvaele,  ylxs  gag'aa- 

20  lodaaqexa  gaala.  Wii,  la  nas5dEx  nasEma£yas.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxes 
lalogiime  qa£s  kagaliles.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes  tslesLala  qa£s  k-  !ip  '.Ides 
laxa  £iiEgEkwe  q!wa£na  qa£s  lii  k-!Epts!ala  laxa  q!unsq!wayats!eLe 
laloguma.     Wa,  gil£mese   helatslaxs   lae    ax£edxes    ts!Ebats!e  qa£s 


boas]  RECIPES  553 

when  enough  are  in  it,  she  takes  an  oil-dish,  |  pours  some  oil  into  it, 
and,  after  doing  so,  she  puts  the  oil-dish  on  the  ||  steamed  roots  and  25 
puts  it  in  front  of  those  to  whom  she  is  going  to  give  to  eat.  |  Those 
who  are  eating  the  lupine-roots  take  them  |  and  dip  the  ends  into 
the  oil,  and  |  put  the  roots  that  have  oil  at  the  end  into  the  mouth 
and  bite  them  off  and  chew  them.  |  As  soon  as  (hey  swallow  the  roots, 
they  dip  the  cud  ||  again  into  oil  and  put  it  into  the  mouth.     They  |  30 
chew  it,  and  those  who  eat  the  lupine-roots  |  take  up  another  one, 
and  do  as  they  did  |  before  when  they  began  to  eat  the  |  roots. 
After  eating,  they  drink  much  water.  ||  That  is  all  about  the  lupine-  35 
roots.  [ 

Carrots(l). —  (After  the  woman  lias  gathered  carrots,)  she  takes  fire-  1 
wood  and  builds  up  the  fire.  |  After  building  the  fire,  she  takes  her 
small  basket  and  goes  |  to  get  stones  on  the  beach.     She  puts  the 
stones  |  into  her  small  basket,  just  enough  so  that  she  can  carry 
them.  ||  Then  she  stops  putting  in  stones  and  carries  the  basket  on  5 
her  back  |  up  the  beach  into  the  house,  and  she  |  puts  it  down  by 
the  side  |  of  the  fire.     Then  she  takes  out  the  stones  and  puts  them 
on  top  of  |  the  fire.     When  there  are  many  carrots,  there  are  also 
many  |  stones.     When  she  has  enough  stones,  she  takes  her  ||  large  10 
basket,  goes  down  to  the  beach,  and  at  high-water  mark  picks  up 

k!uhts!odesa  L!e£na  laq.  Wa,  la  gwalExs  lae  kak-Eyints  laxa 
mEgEkwe  q!wa£na.  Wa,  lii  k"ax-dzamolTlas  laxes  q !unselag"ilaxa  25 
q!waEne.  Wa,  lii  enEmax-£Id  dax-£ideda  q  !unsq  IwasLaxa  q!wa£ne 
laxa  q!wa£ne  qa£s  LtenxstEnde  oba'yas  laxa  L,!e£na.  Wa,  la 
LlEngeLas  laxes  sEinsexa  L!e£nabalaxs  lae  q!Ek"5dEq  qa£s  malex- 
£wideq.  Wa,  giPmese  nEx£wklqexs  lae  et!ed  LlEnxstEnts  oba£yas 
laxaaxa  L!e£na  qa£s  LtengeLes  laxes  sEinse.  Wii,  laxae  malex£wi-  30 
dEq.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£la  q!unsq!was£idxa  enEmts!aqaxs  hie  etied 
dax,£idxa  £nEmts!aqe  glltla  q!wa£na.  Wa,  aEmxaawise  naqEm- 
giltowi£lalaxes  g'ilx-de  gwa£yilalasa  yixs  la  gil  q  !unsq  !was£Idxa 
q!wa£ne.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwala  lae  nax£Idxa  qlenEme  £wapa.  Wii, 
lawisLa  gwal  laxa  q'wame.  35 

Carrots  (l).1 — Wit,  lii  ax£edxa  lEqwa  qa£s  lEqwelax,£Idexes  lEgwile.  1 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwal  lEqwelaxs  hie  ax£edxes  lalaxame  qa£s  lii 
xEqwas  t!esEina  laxa  L!Eina£ise.  Wa,  la  XEXuts!alasa  t!esEme 
laxes  xEgwatsle  lalaxama.  Wa,  a£mise  gwa£nala  qa£s  lokwesexs 
lae  gwal  xExuts!alasa  t!esEiue  laq.  Wa,  la  5xLEx-£idEq  qa£s  lii  5 
oxxosdesEhxq  qa£s  lii  QxLaeLElaq  laxes  gokwe  qa£s  la  oxLEnolisas 
laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  la  xEx£wults!alaq  qa£s  lii  XE£xuLalax,£Ide  laxes 
lEqwela£ye.  Wa,  g-il£mese  q!enEmeda  xEtxEtlaxs  lae  q!enEm£Em- 
xaeda  t!esEme.  Wa,  gil£mese  helala  t!esEmasexs  lae  ax£edxes 
ewalase    lExa£ya    qa£s    lii    laxa    L!Ema£ise  qa£s  la  lExaxa  tslats.'Es-  10 

'  This  follows  the  description  of  the  gathering  of  roots,  p.  201,  line  21. 


554  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  axn .35 

11  dead  eel -grass,  |  which  she  puts  into  her  large  eel-grass-carrying 
basket.  |  As  soon  as  the  large  basket  is  full  of  |  dry  eel-grass,  she 
carries  it  on  her  b  ack  up  the  beach  |  and  into  her  house,  and  she  puts 

15  it  down  ||  not  far  from  the  fire.  Then  she  takes  another  |  large 
basket  and  goes  into  the  woods,  looking  for  dry  fern.  |  When  she 
finds  it,  she  picks  it  off  and  puts  it  into  |  the  large  basket.  When  it  is 
full,  she  carries  it  on  her  back,  and  |  she  carries  it  out  of  the  woods 

20  home  into  her  house.  Then  she  ||  puts  it  down  close  to  the  dead-eel- 
grass  basket.  |  She  takes  her  tongs  and  the  small-meshed  large 
basket,  |  and  also  old  mats,  and  keeps  them  in  readiness.  |  Then  she 
takes  her  large  bucket  and  goes  to  draw  water.     When  |  she  comes 

25  back,  she  takes  a  large  dish,  in  which  she  intends  ||  to  steam  the 
carrots.  Then  she  goes  to  gel  her  basket  with  carrots,  |  and  pours 
them  out  into  the  large  [  dish.  She  takes  the  bucket  with  water  and 
pours  (the  water)  |  on  the  carrots  in  the  large  dish.     She  pats  them 

30  with  her  hands  1  until  the  soil  and  sand  come  off;  and  ||  after  she 
has  done  so.  she  takes  the  small-meshed  basket  and  puts  it  down  | 
close  to  the  dish  in  which  she  washes  the  carrots.  She  takes  out  the  | 
washed  carrots  and  puts  them  into  the  flat-bottomed,  small-meshed, 
huge  |  basket.      When  it  is  full,  the  woman  rises.  |  By  this  time  the 

11  mote  qa£s  la  lExtslalas  laxes  ts!ats!ayaats!e  £walas  lExa£ya  laxa 
«yax£motasa  £yExwa.  Wii,  g11£mese  qot!eda  ts latsayaats !as  £walas 
lExaxa  lEinxwa  ts  latsEsmotEXs  lae  5xLEX£idEq  qa£s  la  oxLosde- 
sElaq  qa£s  la  oxLaeLElaq  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  la   oxLEg'alilaq  laxa 

15  k!ese  qwesala  laxa  lEgwde.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  6gu£la£maxat ■! 
£walas  lExa£ya  qa£s  lii  laxa  axle.  Wa,  laEm  alax  gEmsa.  Wa 
g-il£mese  q!aqexs  lae  k!ulx,£idEq  qa£s  la  k!ults!alas  laxa  gEmdza_ 
ts!e  £walas  lExa£ya.  Wa,  gil-mese  qotlaxs  lae  oxLEg'ilsaq  qa£s 
la  oxLoltliilaq,  qa£s    la    oxLaeLElaq    laxes    g'okwe.     Wa,    lit    oxle- 

20  galilaq  lax  hamelasasa  ts !ats lEsmodats !e  ewalas  lExaeya.  Wa,  la 
ax£edxes  k'lipLalaa  LE£wa  t!olt!oxusEmaeyadzEwale  ewalas  lExa£ya. 
Wa,  he£misa  k- !ak- tek- lobane  leEl£waeya  qa  gaxes  gwallla.  Wa 
la  ax£edxes  £vvalase  nagatsla  qa£s  lii  tsiix  £\vapa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
g-ax  aedaaqaxs  lae    ax£edxa    ewalase    loqlwa  qa£s  g-axe  k-ag-alilas 

25  laxes  enEg-asLaxa  XEtxEtla.  Wa,  lii  ax-edxes  XEdatsie  Llabata 
qa£s  gux£wults!odexa  XEtxEtla.  Wa,  hu:ni  qEpasas  laxa  ewalase 
loqlwa.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  £wabEts!ala  nagatsla  qa£s  la  guqlEqes 
laxa  xEtxEtlatslala  £walas  loqlwa.  Wa,  lii  LEqElgeses  e£eyasowe 
laq  cui  lawayes  dzedzEx£una£3Tes  LE£wa  eg'is£Ena£yas.     Wit,  gil£mese 

30  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  t!olt!ox"sEme  £walas  lExa£ya  qa£s  hang'alfles 
lax  mak-axdza£yasa  ts!ats!axa  XEtxEtla.  Wii,  lii  lEx£iistalaxa 
tslokwe  XEtxEtla  qa£s  lii  texts !alas  laxa  t!olt!oxusEme  £walas 
LEqlExsd    lExa£ya.     Wii,  g'il£mese  qotlaxs  lae  Lax£ulileda  tslEdaqe 


boas]  RECIPES  555 

stones  on  the  fire  are  red-hot.  She  ||  takes  the  tongs  and  picks  off  35 
the  hnr  ning  wood  and  puts  it  down  |  in  front  of  the  fire.  As  soon  as 
shehasdone  so,  she  levels  down  the  top  of  the  ]  red-hot  stones,  so  that 
they  are  level;  and  when  this  has  heen  done,  |  she  takes  the  basket 
with  dry  eel-grass  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  |  of  the  place  where 
she  is  going  to  steam  the  roots.  She  takes  the  dry  eel-grass  ||  out  of  40 
the  large  basket  and  spreads  it  over  the  |  red-hot  stones.  As  soon 
as  it  is  all  on,  she  gets  the  |  large  basket  with  dry  fern-leaves  and 
puts  it  down  close  to  the  place  where  she  is  going  to  steam  the  | 
carrots.  Then  she  takes  out  the  dry  fern-fronds  and  puts  them  ]  on 
the  dry  eel-grass.  She  puts  on  one-half  of  the  dry  fern-fronds.  Then 
she  takes  the  ||  small-meshed,  flat-bottomed,  large  basket  with  the  45 
washed  carrots  |  and  puts  it  in  the  middle  of  the  place  where  she  is 
going  to  steam  the  carrots,  and  she  takes  |  the  remainder  of  the  dry 
fern  and  puts  it  around  the  small-meshed,  large,  flat-bottomed 
basket  in  which  |  she  is  going  to  steam  the  roots;  and  she  |  only 
stops  putting  it  around  the  basket  when  the  fern-fronds  are  level  wit  h 
the  top  of  the  ||  place  where  she  is  going  to  steam  (the  roots).  After  50 
doing  so,  she  takes  old  mats  |  which  she  has  brought,  and  spreads 
them  alongside  of  the  steaming-place.  When  everything  is  ready,  | 
she  takes  the  bucket  with  water  and  empties  it  all  over  |  and  around 
the  flat-bottomed,  large  steaming-baskets  in  which  the  roots  are.  | 

qaxs  lE£mae  memEnltsEmx£Ideda  la  g'ex'Lalales  tlesEma.  Wii,  la 
ax£edxes  k'lipLalaa  qa£s  kllpsales  laxa  gulta  qa£s  la  k!ip!alilElas  35 
laxa  o£stalilasa  rEgwile.  Wa,  g'il'mese  gwalExs  lae  £iiEmak  ivindxa- 
xIx'ExsEinala  tlesEma  qa  £nEmak-Eyes.  Wa,  gil£Emxaawise  gwas 
Iexs  lae  ax'edxa  ts  !ats  .'Esmodats  !e  £walas  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  ha£nolisas 
laxa  mEg'asLaxa  xEtxEtle.  Wii,  lii  lExewults !odxa  ts!ats!Esmote 
laxa  ts !ats lEsmodats !e  ewalas  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  lEx'alodalas  laxa  40 
xuxExsEinala  tlesEma.  Wii,  gilemese  £wilg-aalaxs  lae  ax£edxa 
gEmdzatsle  ewalas  lExaeya  qa-s  liixat!  ha'nolisas  laxa  EnEgasLaxa 
xEtxEt!e.  Wa,  laxae  lEx£uits!odxa  gEmse  qa£s  lii  lEXEyindfdas 
laxa  ts  !ats lEsmote.  Wa,  la  nExsRiidxa  gEmsaxs  lae  ax£edxa  la 
xElts!alaxa  tslokwe  XEtxEt  !a  t!olt  !ox"sEm  LEq  lExsd  £walas  lExa£ya  45 
qa£s  hanqes  lax  nEqEya£yasa  £uEgasLaxa  XEtxEtle.  AYii,  lii  ax£ed 
etledxa  anex'saEyasa  gEmsexa  lExts!a£waxa  £walase  lExa£ya  qa£s 
lExse=stales  laxa  £nEg-ats!e  t!olt!oxusEin  LEq.'Exsd  £walas  lExa£ya. 
Wii,  almiese  gwiil  lExse-stalaqexs  lae  £nEmag-axtowa  gEmse  LE-wa 
EnEgats!e.  Wa,  gih'mese  gwalExs  lae  ax-edxa  k" !ak' tek" lobane  50 
qa£s  g-axe  LEbEiiolllas  laq.  Wa,  gtl£mese  £naxwa  gwalllExs 
lae  axsedxa  ewabEts!ala  nagats.'e  qa£s  tsadzELEyindes  laq 
lo£  &we£stasa  eUEg-ats!iixa  XEtxEt !ats !ala  t!olt!oxusEm  lecjIexscI 
£walas     lExa£ya.       Wa,  giPmese     £wilg-ilts!aweda     nagatslaxs  lae 


556  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

55  As  soon  as  the  bucket  is  empty,  she  ||  takes  the  old  mats  and  covers 
them  over  the  basket;  and  she  |  only  stops  covering  it  when  she 
has  many  old  mats  over  it,  so  that  |  the  steam  can  not  come  through. 
She  leaves  what  is  being  steamed  in  that  way;  |  and  sometimes  she 
only  takes  off  the  cover  from  the  |  carrots  that  are  being  steamed  at 

60  mid-day,  if  they  are  put  on  in  the  morning.  When  ||  they  are  done, 
the  woman  takes  the  dishes  |  and  oil  and  puts  them  down;  and  when 
everything  is  ready,  she  takes  off  the  covering  of  |  old  mats  and 
spreads  them  out,  so  that  they  come  off  from  ;he  carrots;  |  and 
the  small-meshed,  flat-bottomed  steaming  basket  stands  in  the 
middle  of  the  fern-fronds,  j  where  it  is  kept  warm.     Then  the  woman 

65  sends  her  husband  to  ||  go  and  invite  whomever  he  wishes  to  eat  the 
carrots,  j  Sometimes  his  tribe  come  into  the  house  when  they  know 
that  I  carrots  have  been  steamed.  When  all  those  who  are  going  |  to 
eat  the  carrots  have  come  in,  two  men  of  the  numaym  of  the 
woman's  husband  |  come  and  help  her.     They  take  the  dishes  and  [| 

70  put  them  down  in  a  row.  They  take  out  the  |  flat-bottomed  carrot 
steaming-basket  from  among  the  fern  and  put.  it  down  at  one  end  of 
the  I  row  of  dishes.  One  of  them  takes  the  tongs  |  and  with  them 
takes  out  the  steamed  carrots.     The  other  one  |  takes  up  one  of  the 

75  dishes  and  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the  ||  small-meshed,  flat- 
bottomed  steaming-basket.     Then  the  |  other  one  puts  the  steamed 

55  ax£edxa  k  !ak  !Kk!obane  qa£s  nasEyindes  laq.  Wii,  fd-mese 
gwfd  nasaqexs  lae  qlenEma  k!ak!Ek!obana  niis£Idayoseq  qa 
k-!eses  k"EXusaleda  k!fdEla  laq.  Wa,  la£me  wax'dzala  he  gwaela 
£iiEkasE£was.  Wa,  la  EnalenEinp tena  al£Em  let!etsEewa  £nEk'asE- 
Ewaeda    xEtxEtliixa    la    nEqiilaxs    gag'aalayaxa   gaiila.     Wii,    gil- 

60  £mese  LlopExs  lae  hexsaEma  tshndaqe  ax£edxa  loElqlwe  qa  g'axes 
mExela  LEewa  L!e£na.  Wa,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae  nasodxa  nayime 
k- !ak!Ek!obana  qa£s  LEplalllEles  qa  lawalesa  xEtpla'la  laq.  Wa, 
a£mise  la  ha£naga£ya  £nEgats!e  t!olt!oxusEm  LEqlExsd  lExaxa  gEm- 
se    qa    ts!Elqwes.     Wa,  liida   tslEdaqe    £yalaqases    la£wunEme    qa 

65  las  Le£lalaxes  gwE£yowe  qa£s  XEtxatwEtxa  xEtxEt!a.  Wa,  la  £nal- 
£iiEmp!Ena  q!ulyaeLEle  gokiilotas  gax  hogweLElaxs  lae  qlalaqexs 
lE£mae  Llopa  XEtxEtlaxs  £nEk-asE£wae.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wi£laeLeda 
XEtxatLaxs  laeda  ma£lokwe  gayol  lax  £nE£memotas  la£wunEmasa 
tslEdaqe    gax    giwalaq.      Wa,    la    ax£edExda£xuxa    loElqlwe    qa£s 

70  mEx£alIlEleq  qa  £nEmag  iyoliles.  Wa,  lit  k1  !5xewEq5dxa  £nEgats!e 
LEqlExsd  lExa£ya  laxa  gEmse  qa£s  lit  hanballlas  lax  apsballlasa 
£nEmag  iyollle  loElq'.wa.  Wa,  ax£ededa  £nEinokwaxa  k'itpLalaa 
qaes  k' lip lidf's  laxa  enEg-Ekwe  XEtxEtla.  Wii,  liida  £nEmokwe 
kag'illlxa   £nEmexLa   loq!wa  qa£s    gaxe    kagiiges  laxa   £nEgats!e 

75  t!olt!oxusEm  LEqlExsd  lExa£ya.  Wa,he£mis  lanaxwa  k!ipts!odaatsa 
£nEmokwasa  £nEgEkwe  XEtxEtla  laq.     Wa,  ax"sii£mese  he   gwegila 


boas  J  RECIPES  557 

carrots  into  it,  and  he  continues  to  do  so  |  with  the  whole  number  of  77 
dishes.     There  are  many  of  those  who  will  eat  the  carrots.  |  When  all 
the  dishes  are  full,  they  |  take  oil  and  pour  it  in,  so  that  there  is 
much  oil;  ]|  and  after  doing  so,  they  put  them  down  in  front  of  those  80 
who  are  going  to  eat  the  carrots.     They  |  never  exceed  four  men  to 
each  |  dish.     As  soon  as  all  the  dishes  have  been  put  down,  those  | 
who  are  going  to  eat  the  carrots  take  them  up  with  the-right  hand  and 
put  them  into  the  mouth;  |  and  they  continue  doing  so  while  they 
are  eating  the  steamed  carrots.  ||  When  they  have  had  enough,  they  S5 
take   a  handful  of  what  is  left  over  and  take  it  to    their  |  wives. 
Finally  they  drink  water  after  washing  their  hands  |  in  their  houses. 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

(2).  What  I  just  talked  about  is  the  way  in  which  the  people  of 
olden  times  |  steamed  carrots;  but  the  present  people  do  not  steam  || 
carrots,  they  boil  them  in  kettles  on  the  fire  of  the  |  house.  They  90 
boil  the  carrots  in  the  same  way  as  they  do  when  they  |  boil  cinque- 
foil-roots,  and  there  is  no  difference.  |  Just  look  at  the  way  in  which 
they  boil  short  cinquef  oil-roots,  for  |  they  do  the  same  thingwben  they 
boil  carrots  in  a  kettle.  ||  They  do  not  eat  carrots  raw,  because  they  95 
have  a  strong  taste  and  they  cause  |  diarrhoea.     That  is  all  about  it.  | 

Sea-milkwort. — When  her  basket  is  full,  she  goes  |  home,  carrying  1 
the  basket  in  her  hands.     As  soon  as  she  enters  |  the  house,  she  takes  a 

laxtodalax  ;waxexLaasasa  loElci!we.     Wa,  yixs  qlenEinaeda  XEtxat- 77 
Laxa     xEtEme.     Wa,    gll'mese    Ewi£wElts  lEwakwa    loElqlwaxs    lae 
axeedxa  L!e£na  qa£s  k!iinq!Eqes  laq,  qa  q  !eq  !aqeseqxa  L!e£na.     Wa, 
gfl-mese  gwalExs  lae  k'ax'dzamolilas   laxa  xEtxatLaq.     Wa,  la£me  80 
k!ets!enoxu     hayaqax    maemaleda   bebEgwiinEmaxa   £nal£nEmexi,a 
loq'.wa.     Wii,    g11£mese    £wllg"alrleda    loElqlwaxs    lae     hex£ida£ma 
xEtxatLe    dax£Itses    helk!ots!ana£ye  laq    qa£s    ts!oq!Qses   sesEmse. 
Wii,  axsii£mese  he  gwegilaxs  XEtxataaxa  £nEg*Ekwe  xEtxEt  !a.    Wa, 
g'il£mese  poHdExs  lae  tExsEmdxes   anex*sa£ye  qae£s  motEleq  cpaes  85 
gEgEiiEme.     Wa,  al^mese  nax£Idxa  ewapaxs  lae  gwal  ts tents lEnkwa 
laxes  g-ig'okwe.     Wa,  lasm  gwal  laxeq. 

(2).  Wa,  heEm  gwegilatsa  g-ale  bEgwanEmEn  gale  waldEmxs 
£nE.k'aaxa  xEtxEt!a.  Wa,  laLox  k'!es  £nEk-6xda  alex  bEgwanEmxa 
xEtxEtla  ytxs  hanxLEndaaq  visa  hanxLanowe  lax  lEgwIlases  90 
gokwe.  Wa,  la  heEm  gwaleda  hanx'LEndaats !axa  XEtxEtle  gwii- 
laasasa  t!Eqwe£lats!e  hanxL'anowa  yixs  k-!easae  ogux£Ida£yos.  Wa, 
laEins  aEm  dox'widLEx  hanx-LEndaena£yaxa  t!Exusose,  yixs  he£mae 
gwayMale  gwayi£lalasasa  xEtxEt!ag-i£lats!e  hanx-Lanowa.  Wa,  la 
kp!es  k-!Elx'k!axsE£weda  XEtxEtla  qaxs  loxup!ae.  Wii,  he£misexs  95 
wulElesElamasae.     Wii,  lawesLa  gwiil  laxeq. 

Sea-milkwort.1 — Wa,2  gil£mese  qot!e  lEXEliisexs  lae  na£nakwa  laxes  1 
gokwe  k-  !oxk'  lotElaxes  hoc[!waleats!e  lalaxama.     Wii,  gil£mese  laeL 

'  Glaux  maritima,  v.  obtusifolia  (Fernald).  sContinueii  from  p.  195,  line  10. 


558  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

dish,  pours  some  |  water  into  it,  so  that  it  is  half  full,  and  she  takes  || 
5  the  small  basket  and  puts  it  down  close  to  the  dish  with  water.  |  She 
picks  up  some  of  the  roots,  puts  them  into  the  dish  with  water,  |  and 
shakes  them  so  that  the  sand  comes  off.  When  |  they  are  clean,  she 
takes  them  out  and  puts  them  on  a  small  mat  that  has  been  spread 
on  the  floor.  |  Then  she  takes  up  some  more  milkwort-roots  and  || 

10  puts  them  into  the  water  and  washes  them.  She  continues  doing 
this  with  the  others,  |  and  only  stops  when  they  have  all  been 
washed.  After  |  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  her  small  kettle, 
washes  it  out,  and,  after  doing  so,  |  she  takes  a  very  small  basket, 
goes  down  to  the  beach  and  |  picks  up  medium-sized  pebbles,  which 

15  she  puts  into  the  ||  small  basket.  There  may  be  eight  pebbles 
which  I  she  puts  in.  She  carries  them  up  in  one  hand  and  takes  them 
into  the  |  house,  where  she  puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the  kettle. 
She  takes  the  |  pebbles  out  of  the  basket  and  puts  them  into  the 
bottom  of  the  |  small  kettle.     She  scatters  them  so  that  they  cover 

20  the  bottom.  ||  After  doing  so,  she  picks  up  some  milkwort-roots  and 
puts  them  |  on  the  stones  in  the  bottom  of  the  kettle.  She  continues 
doing  so,  putting  the  |  other  milkwort-root  in,  and  she  only  stops 
when  I  the  kettle  is  piled  full.     Then  she  pours  in  a  very  little  | 

25  water.  She  takes  a  piece  of  an  old  mat,  with  which  ||  she  covers  the 
kettle,  and  tucks  it  down  all  around  so  that  the  steam  may  not  come  | 

3  Laxes  g'5k\vaxs  lae  hex-eidaEm  ax£edxa  loqlwe  qa£s  guxtslodesa 
£wape  laq,  qa  nEgoyoxsdales.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  hoqlwaleatsle  lala- 
5  xama  qa£s  la  hangallias  lax  mak'axdza£yasa  loqlwe  £wabEts!ala. 
Wa,  lit  lEx£ed  laxa  hoqlwale  qa£s  la  lExstents  lax  £wabEts!awasa 
loqlwe.  Wa,  la  k'lilEltalaq  qa  lawiiyes  eg'ls£Enasyas.  Wa,  gil£mese 
i'x'Enx'ldExs  lae  1e  wEstEndEq  qa£s  lii  lExEdzots  laxa  LEblle  Eldzo 
ame  le£wa£ya.     Wa,  laxae    et'.ed   lEx£ed    laxa    hoqlwale    qa£s   Iex- 

10  EstEndes  laxes  ts'.Ewasaq.  Wa,  la  hex'saEm  gweg'ilaxa  waokwe. 
Wa,  al£mese  gwalqexs  lae  £wl£la  tslokwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs 
lag  a,x£edxes  hamEnie  qa£s  tsloxiiglndeq.  Wii,  gil£mese.  gwalExs 
lae  ax-edxa  amaeye  lalaxama  qa£s  lit  laxa  LlEmaeise.  Wa,  la 
mEiix'£Idxa    ha£ya£lamEnexwe     t!at!edzEma    qaes  xEx"ts!ales    laxa 

15  lalaxame.  Wa,  laanawise  lo£  malgunaltsEnia  t!at!edzEme  xexu- 
tsloyosexs  gaxae  k!ox£wusdesElaq  cpx£s  lii  k- logwiLElaq  laxes 
g-okwe.  Wa,  lii  k' logunolllas  laxa  ha£nEme.  Wii,  lii  xEx£Qlts!alaxa 
t!at!edzEme  laxa  xEgwats!iis  lalaxama  cpa£s  lii  xEq!iixLEndiilas 
laxa  ha£nEme.     Wa,    la   gwelaq  qa  hamElq !EXLa£yesexa  ha£nEme. 

20  Wii,  gil'mese  gwalExs  lae  lEx£edxa  hoqlwale  qa£s  lii  lEXEyints 
liixa  t!ets!EXLa£yasa  ha'iiEme.  Wa,  la  hanal  he  gweg'ila  lExEyin- 
dalasa  waokwe  hoqlwale  laq.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  bolE- 
yala  Lada  hoq!walegi£lats!e  ha£nEma.  Wa,  la  xaLlaqa  giiqlE- 
qasa  ewape    laq.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxa   kolplayasox  klak'lobanex  qa£s 

25  nasEytndes  laq.     Wii,  lii    dzopax   ewana£yas  qa  kleses  k'laltsaleda 


boas]  RECIPES  559 

through.     Then  she  puts  it  on  the  fire.     She  boils  it  for  a  long  time,  | 
then  she   takes   it    off.     She    does    not   immediately  |  remove   the  27 
cover,  so  that  the  steam  is  kept  in.     When  the  |  steam  stops  coming 
out,  she  takes  off  the  covering,  takes  a  small  dish,  ||  and  puts  it  down  30 
by  the  side  of  the  small  kettle.     Then  she  takes  her  |  fire-tongs,  picks 
up  the  boiled  roots,  and  |  puts  them  into  the  dish  with  her  tongs; 
and  when  the  kettle  is  empty,  |  she  takes  her  oil  and  pours  some  of  it 
over  them.     Then  she  begins  |  to  eat  a  boiled  root  with  oil.     She  || 
does  not  press  it  into  a  ball  when  eating  it,  as  is  done  with  the  short  35 
cinquef  oil-roots,  |  but  she  just  takes  the  milkwort-root  and  puts  it  into 
her  mouth,  for  |  they  are  very  short.     After  eating,  she  |  puts  away 
what  is  left  over  and  washes  her  hands.  |  After  doing  so,  she.  gets 
sleepy.     Generally  (the  people)  go  to  ||  sleep  immediately  after  having  40 
eaten  milkwort-root,  for  it  makes  one  (very)  sleepy.  |  Therefore  the 
Indians  do  not  eat  it  until  evening.     This  is  not  |  used  for  inviting 
many  tribes.     Only  the  married  couple  |  and  their  children  eat  the 
milkwort-root.     There  is  only  one  way  of  |  cooking  it.     That  is  all 
about  this.  || 

If  they  eat  much  of  the  milkwort-root,  it  makes  them  feel  squeam-  45 
ish,  |  therefore  it  is  called  hoqlwale. 

kMalEla  laqexs  lae  hanx'LEnts  hixes  lEgwIle.     Wii,  lii  gegllll  maEm-  26 
dElqfilaxs    lae  hanx'sEndEq    laxa    lEgwile.     Wii,    k'!est!a    hex-'"id 
nasodEx  mxsEma£yas    qa     yales    kiinyadlla.     Wa,     gil-'mese    gwfil 
k-  IfdElaxs    lae    nasodEx    nasEma'yas.     Wii,    lii    ax^edxa    lalogume 
qa£s   hamollles  laxa  hoq!walegi£lats!e  hamEma.     Wii,   lii    ax'eilxes  30 
tslesLfila     qa-s     k!ip!ldes     laxa     hanxxaakwe    h5q!wale    qa£s    lii 
kliptslalas    laxa   lalogume.     Wii,  giTmese   £wllgilts!aweda   hamE- 
maxs   lae    axc"edxes   L'.ema  qa£s  klunqlEqes    laq.     Wa,  lii  hoxhax- 
£wedxa   k!uq!EgEkwasa   L!ema    hanx'Laak"    hoq!wala.     Wii,    laEin 
k-!es  k' !5k' !oxsEmaqexs  lae  hoxhax£weda  lax  gweg'ilasaxa  t!Exusose,  35 
yixs    a£mae  xEsEineLElasE-weda   hoqlwale     liixEns    sEmsex    qaexs 
ts!Elts!Exustoena'ya  hoqlwale.     Wii,  g-il'mese  gwal  hoxhaquxs   lae 
g-exaxes    anexsa£ye.     Wii,  lii  ts!Eiits!Enx-widxes   efeyasowe.     Wit, 
gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  bEq!uHkla.     Wii,  la  q!unala  aEm  hex'£idaEm 
mex-cededfi  hamaag-olaxa  hoqlwale  qaxs  bEq'.iilE^mae.     Wii,  heemis  40 
lagilas  al£Em    hoxhaqwa    bakliimaxa  la    dzaqwa.     Wii,  laem  kMes 
Le£lalayo  laxa  qleiiEme  lelqw;ilaLa£ya  ytxs  lex"a£maeda  hayasEkala 
LE£wis    sasEme    hoxhaqwaxa    hoqlwale.     Wii,  lii    £nEmx-eidala£me 
ha*"mex-silaenaJyaq.     Wii,  laEin  gwal  liixeq. 

G'Il£Em  Loina    q!ek'!Edza£ya    hoq!waliixs    lae  tslEnkluHdayowa.  45 
Wii,  hemis  lag'Sa  LegadEs  hoq!vvale. 


560  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.36 

1  Lily.1 — When  the  people  have  a  winter  dance,  the  owner  of  lily- 
bulbs  promises  a  [  lily-bulb-feast  to  the  Sparrow  Society.  |  In  the 
evening  he  takes  his  basket  |  down  to  the  beach  of  his  house  and  puts 
5  stones  ||  into  it.  He  puts  in  as  many  as  he  thinks  he  can  carry;  |  and 
he  carries  them  into  the  house,  and  he  puts  them  down  |  near  the 
fireplace  in  the  middle  of  the  house;  and  he  does  not  stop  mi  til  he 
thinks  |  he  has  enough  to  steam  the  bulbs.  In  the  morning,  when 
day  comes,  |  he  sends  the  Sparrow  Society  to  invite  the  various 

10  dance-owners  ||  and  the  head  Sparrows,  while  he  himself  is  build- 
ing up  the  fire  in  his  house.  |  After  he  has  put  on  the  crosspieces 
on  the  fire  of  his  house,  he  throws  the  stones  on  to  it;  |  and  when  he 
has  put  all  the  stones  on,  he  lights  the  fire  under  |  both  ends.  Then 
the  wood  begins  to  burn  under  the  stones  with  which  he  is  going  to 
cook  the  |  bulbs.     Then  he  takes  a  large  square  box  and  puts  it  down 

15  close  ||  to  the  fire  in  the  middle,  and  he  also  puts  down  dishes  |  and 
two  tongs,  and  oil  is  put  down.  |  Then  he  takes  two  large  buckets  and 
goes  himself  |  to  draw  fresh  water,  and  he  pours  the  water  into  the 
square  box.     When  |  it  is  almost  half  full,  he  stops.     Then  he  goes 

20  to  ||  draw  more  water,  so  that  the  large  buckets  will  be  full  of  fresh 
water,  j  His  wife  takes  a  large,  fiat-bottomed,  small-meshed  basket 
and  |  places  it  next  to  the  box;  and  the  woman  goes  and  gets  the  | 
lily-bulb-box.  | 

1  Lily.1  Wa,  g!l£mese  ts!ets!ex£Ide  g-okulotasa  x'ogwadasa  x-o- 
kiimexs  lae  hex'£idaEm  qasa  xokiimxa  qaeda  gwegudza.  Wii, 
g-il£mese  dzadzaqwalaxs  lae  &x£edxa  lnxane  qa£s  la  dalaqexs  lae 
lEntsles  laxa  L!Ema£isases  g'okwe  qa£s  la  xExuts!alasa  tlesEme 
5  laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa,  a£mise  gwanala  qa£s  lakwesexs  lae  oxLosdesaq 
qa£s  la  oxLaeLElaq  liixes  g'okwe.  Wa,  lii  oxLEg-alilas  lax  mag-in- 
wallsasa  laqwawalllase,  wa,  al-inese  gwatexs  lae  kotaq  laEm 
helala  lax  q'obslaLaxa  xokiime.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £nax-£Idxa  gaalaxs 
lae  £yalaqaxa  gwegudza  qa  las    LelElklusaxa  £naxwa  lelaenenokwa 

10  LE-wa  gwatslEme,  yixs  laaLas  laqolllaxes  g'okwe.  Wa,  giPmese 
gwal  hawanaqostalaxa  lEqwaxs  lae  XEquyindalasa  t!esEine  laq. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  Ewllk-Eylndeda  t'.esEmaxs  lae  menabStsa  giilta  lax 
ewaxsba£yas.  Wa,  la£me  xiqostaweda  t!eqwapa£ye  qa  q!o£lasLxa 
x'okumf'.     Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa    £walase   Lawatsa    qa£s  g-axe  ha£no- 

15  lisas  laxa  laqwawallle.  Wa,  he£misa  loElqlwe  gax  mEx£alelEms; 
wa,  he£misa  kMipLalaa  malts  !aqa;  wa,  hemiisa  L!e£na  g-iix  ax£ali- 
lEms.  Wii.  lii  ax£edxa  maltsEme  awa  naEngatsla  qa£s  la  xamax-£id 
tsa  laxa  £wE£wap!Eme  qa-cs  lii  guxtslalas  laxa  Lawatsa.  Wa,  g-il- 
£mese   la    Elaq    nEgovoxsdalaxs   lae    gwala.     Wii,  a£mese  la    et!ed 

20  tsexnda  qa  qoqiitliililesa  awS  naEngatslexa  £WE£wa.p!Eme.  Wii, 
la  gEiiEiiiiis  ax'edxa  -walase  LEqlEXsd  t!olt!oxusEinlExa£ya  qa  gaxes 
ha/iialdxa  Lawatsa.  Wa,  heEmxaawisa  tslEdaqe  la  ha£nolt!alllxa 
x"6gwats!e  XEtsEma. 

lFritiUaria  cam&cluitccnsis  Ker. 


boasJ  RECIPES  561 

As  soon  as  everything  is  in  readiness,  they  send  out  four  ||  member.-  25 
of  the  Sparrow  Society  belongirg  to  the  friends  of  the  host  to  call 
again,  |  and  they  all  go  and  call  again.    When  they  come  |  back,  they 
go  out  again  to  see  if  any  one  hrs  not  come,  for  the  |  head  Sparrows 
are  now  coming   in.     When   the  members  of  the  head  Sparrows  are 
all  in,  |  the  messengers  go  again  to  call  the  dancers;  and  they  come 
in,  the  four||  (messengers)  leadirg  the  dancers.     Then  they  announce  30 
that  they  are  coming,  |  and  they  come  in.     As  soon  as  they  are  all  in, 
they  sit  down.  |  Then  they  untie  the  top  of  the  box,  and  they  take 
out  the  lily-leaves  |  and  throw  them  on  the  fire.     Then  they  take  a 
small-meshed  |  flat-bottomed   basket  and  put  it  close  to  the  top  of 
the  lily-box.  ||  With  their  hands  they  take  the  plants  out  of  the  box  35 
and  put  them  into  |  the  small-meshed,  flat-bottomed  basket.     When 
it  is  full,  [  they  put  the  basket  into  a  large  dish  and  pour  some  water 
into  it.  |  Then  they  move  the  bulbs  with  their  hands,  so  that  the  soil 
comes  off.  |  When  they  are  all  washed,  two  men  take  each  one  pair  of 
long  ||  toi  gs,  and  with  them  they  pick  up  the  red-hot  stones.     They  I   40 
dip  these  into  the  water  in   the  large  buckets,  so  that   the  I  ashes 
sticking  to  them  come  off,  and  they  put  them  into  the  water  in  the  | 
square  box.     They  only  stop  putting  in  the  red-hot  stones  |  when 
the  water  begins  to  boil;  and  when  it  begins  to  boil,  they  ||  put  the  45 
basket  with  the  lily-bulbs  into  it;  |  and  when  it  is  in,  they  put  some 

Wa,  guh'mese  £naxwa  la  gwalllaxs  lae  eyalagEmeda  mokwe  gwe- 
gudza  g^ayol  lax  £neJnEinokwasa    klwelasLe  qa  la£s    etse£sta.     Wa,  25 
hex'£idaemese  laxda£xwa   etse-stElgise.  WTa,  gil'mese    g-ax  aedaa- 
qaxs   lae    xwelaqaEm    la     dadoquma    qaxs     g'iix-maeda     waokwe 
gwatshum  hogweLEla.     Wa,  gihmese    £wi£laeLeda  gwats!Emaxs  lae 
e'tse>"stasE£wa  lelaenenokwe.      Wa,  gax£mese  galagiwa£ya  mokwe 
eetseJstElgis;>,  vis;;  lelaenenok".     Wa,  lasme  nelasexs  lE£mae  l5x£wI-  30 
da.     Wa,    gax-e   h5gweLa.      Wa,    giPmese  £wl£la   k!us£al!lExs    lae 
x-ax£wItsE="\veda  XEtsEine.     Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda  x'ogwunu  ts!ak  iyes 
qafs  lEXLanowe  laxa    lEgwTle.      Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda  t!0lt!oxusEine 
LEq!Exsd  lExa£v."    (pi's    hfingagEinles    laxa    x'5gwats!e    xEtsEmas. 
Wii,  la  goxwax'dasxuses   es"ey:  sowe  laxa    xokume  qa=s  lit  guxts!a-  35 
las  laxa  t!6lt!oxusEine    LEqtexsde  lExa£ya.     Wii,  gihmese    qot!axs 
lae  hants!ots  laxa  ewalase    loqlwa.     Wa,  la  guqEyintsa    ewape  laq 
qa£s    golg'Elga^yeses     e-eyasowe     laq,    qa    lawales    dzEq!waq!asya. 
Wii,  la  ts!okwa,  laeda  ma£lokwe  dax'ndxa  £nalJnEme  laxa  gilsg'il- 
t!a   klipLalaa  qaes    k!tp!ides  laxa    xixExsEmfda  tlesEma  qa£s   lii  40 
hapstEnts    laxa    £wabEts!awasa    awawe    naEngatslii    qa    lawayesa 
guna£ye  k!wek!utsEmeq.      Wii,  lii   k!ipstEnts    laxa   £wabEts  !awasa 
Lawatsa.     Wa,  ah'mese  gwal  k!ipstalasa    xIxExsEmiila  tlesEm  la- 
qexs  lae  maEmdElquleda  £wiipe.     Wii,  gil'mese  mEdElxnvIdExs  lae 
k'loxstEntsa  x-okwe£lats!e    t  !olt  !oxuseiii    LEqlExsd  lEXii  laq.      Wii,  45 
75052—21 — 35  eth — pt  1 36 


562  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAK1UTL  [eth.  Ann.  85 

47  more  red-hot  |  stones  into  it,  not  very  many,  so  that  the  water  boils 
hard.  They  are  not  |  long  in  the  water  and  they  are  done.  Then 
they  take  out  the  basket  with  the  bulbs,  |  and  they  pour  the  boiled 

50  bulbs  into  the  large  dish.  ||  Then  they  put  the  flat-bottomed  basket 
again  close  to  the  lily-bulb-box,  |  and  they  pour  some  more  raw 
bulbs  into  it;  and  when  it  is  full,  |  they  put  it  into  the  large  dish 
to  wash  the  bulbs;  |  and  they  pour  some  water  on  them  and  move 
them  witli  their  hands;  and  when  all  the  soil  is  off,  |  they  put  the 

55  basket  with  the  bulbs  into  the  hot  water.  They  ||  pick  up  some 
more  red-hot  stones  and  put  them  into  it;  |  and  when  the  water 
boils  up,  they  stop  putting  |  red-hot  stones  into  it.  When  they  are 
done,  they  |  take  out  the  flat-bottomed  lily-basket  and  pour  the 
bulbs  into  |  another  large  dish.     They  keep  on  doing  this,  and  they  || 

60  only  stop  when  all  the  lily-bulbs  are  out  of  the  box.  | 

'linn  the  wife  of  the  host  takes  out  the  dishes  |  and  the  spoon- 
baskets,  and  oil;  and  |  two  men  go  and  take  up  each  one  large  ladle, 

65  and  |  each  one  empty  dish,  and  they  put  these  close  ||  to  the  dish  in 
which  the  cooked  lily-bulbs  are.  They  dip  the  large  |  ladle  into  the 
bulbs,  and  they  pour  them  into  the  empty  dish.  |  When  the  dish  is 
more  than  half  full,  they  go  and  put  them  down  on  the  |  left-hand 


46  g'iPmese  la  hanstalaxs  lae  et!ed  kMipstfilasa  holale  xix'ExsEmala 
tlesEm  laq  qa  alax,£ides  maEmdElquleda  £wape.  Wa,  k-!est!a 
alaEin  gestalllExs  lae  Llopa.  Wa,  lii  k!ox£wustEndxa  xokwe£lats!e 
qa£s  la  giixts!otsa  la  q!olku  xokum   laxa  £walase  loqlwa.     Wa,  la 

50  xwelaqa  hang-agEntsa  LEqlExsde  lExa  laxa  xogwatsle  xEtsEma 
qa£s  guxtslalesa  klilxe  x'okum  laq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  qotlaxs  lae 
ban ts  lots  laxa  ts!ats!e  £wiilas  loqlwa  qa£s  guqEyindesa  £wape  laq, 
qa£s  golg"ElgaEyeses  e£eyasowe  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£lawe  dzedzEx"- 
sEma£yas  lae   hanstEnts    laxa    ts!Elxusta  £wapa.     Wa,   laxae    k-!i- 

55  p!ltsE£weda  x'lx-ExsEinala  tlesEma  qa£s  la  klipstalas  laq.  Wa, 
g'il£Emxaawise  inaEnidElqiile  £wapasexs  lae  x-os£Id  klipstalasa 
x'ix'ExsEmala  tlesEin  laq.  Wa,  g'il£Emxaawise  l!6])Exs  lae  axwii- 
stEndxa  x-okwe£lats!e  LEqlExsd  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  guxts!ots  laxa 
ogu£la£maxat !  £walas    loq!wa.     Wa,    axusiimese   he   gweg-ila.     Wii, 

60  al£mese  gwSlExs  lae  £wIlgElts!oweda  x-ogwats!ex-de  XEtsEma. 

Wa,  la  gEnEmasa  klwelase  mEx£\vElt!al!lElaxa  loElq!we.  Wii, 
he£misa  k'ayats!e  LlExosgEma;  wa,  he£misa  L!e£na.  Wa,  la  ax£e- 
deda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEmxa  £nal£nEme  awa  k-iik'Ets!Enaqa;  wa, 
he£misa  £nal£nEinexLa  laxa  lopEints!a  loElqlwa  qa£s  la  h3,£nots!ElI- 

65  las  laxa  axtslEwasasa  Llope  x'okuma.  Wa,  la  tseqasa  £w3lase 
k'atslEnaq  laq  qa£s  la  tsetslalas  laxa  lopEmtsla  loqlwa.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  ek-!5lts!EndExs  lae  qas'"Tda  qafs  la  k-ag-alllas  laxa  gEm- 
xotsaliiasa     awlLEliisa     t!Exila.      Wii,     axusii£mese    he    gweg'ilaxa 


boas]  RECIPES  563 

side  inside  the  door;  and  they  continue  doing  so  with  |  many  empty  70 
dishes.     They  only  stop  when  cooked  ||  lily-bulbs  are  in  front  of  all 
of  them.     When  they  have  done  so,  they  take  |  oil  and  pour  on  much 
od.     When  |  this  has  been  done,  they  take  the  large  ladles  and  stir 
(the  bulbs);  |  and  after  stirring  them,  they  take  the  spoon-basket  |  75 
and  give  the  spoons  to  those  who  are  to  eat  the  bulbs;  ||  and  when 
every  one  has  a  spoon,  they  put  the  dishes  with  the  bulbs  |  in  front 
of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  lily-bulbs.     When  they  have  all  been  put 
down,  |  the  guests  take  the  spoons  and  begin  to  eat;  |  and  after  they 
have  done  so,  they  drink  a  little  water,  for  |  they  do  not  want  to  get 
squeamish,  because  there  is  much  oil  in  it,  for  ||  there  is  more  oil  80 
than  lily-bulbs.     It  tastes  bitter  when  there  is  only  a  little  |  od  with 
it:  therefore  they  put   much   oil  in,   to  remove  the  bitter  taste.  | 
After  drinking,  the  guests  go  out.  |  That  is  all  about  one  way  of 
cooking  it.  | 

Boiled  Lily-Bulbs. — There  is  another  way  of  cooking  them.  |  They  I 
wash  them  in  the  same  way  as  I  j  said  before;  and  the  only  difference 
is  that  they  are  boiled,  for  |  they  pour  them  into  a  small  kettle  after 
washing  them,  and  they  take  an  ||  old  mat  and  cover  them  over  with  5 
it.  After  that  they  tuck  it  in  all  round  |  inside  of  the  small  kettle, 
so  that  steam  can  not  come  through.  |  And  after  they  finish  this,  they 
dip  up  some  water  and  pour  it  over  the  |  old  mat  covering;  and  when 

q!enEme  lopEmts!a   toElqlwa.     Wa,  al'mese   gwalExs 'lae    qlwalxo- 
ts!Ewakusa  qlolkwe  xokiima.     Wa,   g"tl£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax-edxa  70 
L!e£na  qa£s    la    k!unq!Eqasa    qleiiEme     lde£na    laq.     Wa,   g-il£mese 
gwalExs   lae    ax£edxa    £walase    kiitslEnaqa    qa£s   lii  xwetElges  laq. 
Wa,  giPmese    £wi£la  la    xwedEkwa,  hie  ax£edxa    k"ayats!e  l!exos- 
gEma    qa£s  lii    fcstewanaesas    laxa    xox"xax"i.axa    xokume.     Wa, 
gil£mese  £wllxtoxa  k'ak-Ets!Enaqaxs  lae  k'aedzEina  x'oxux'agwats!e-  75 
Le    loElq'.wa    laxa    x-oxux-axuLaq.     Wa,   gihmese  £wIlg-alllExs  lae 
hex£ida£ma    klwele    daxaxes    k"ak#Ets!Enaqe     qa£s  £yos£Idecp     Wa, 
g'ih'mese    g-wiilEXs     lae     xa,L!ax'£Id    nax^idxa    ewEewap!Eme     qaxs 
gwaqlElae    ts!Enk!ulEla,    qaxs    xEiiLElae    q'eqxa    Le£na,    yixs    hae 
q!egawa£ya    L!e£nasa    x'okume,  qaxs   Lomae   malploxs    holElqaaxa  80 
L!e£na;  wii  he£mis  lagilas  qlec^xa  L!ecna  qa  lEmp!Ex£ides  malplas. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwal  naqaxa  Ewapaxs  lae  hoquwElseda  klwelde.     Wa, 
laEin  gwal  laxa  EnEmxeidala  ha£mex-silaeneq. 

Boiled  lily-Bulbs. — Wii,  g-a£mes  enEmx,eIdala  g-ada,  yixs  hanx-LEii-  i 
tsEewae.  Wii,  heEmxaa  gwegdlasoxs  lae  ts!5xwasE£wa  yixsn  g-llx'de 
waldEma.  Wii,  lit  lex-aEm  oguqalayosexs  hanxxaakwae,  yixs  a£mae 
guxts  !oyo  laxa  ha£nEmaxs  lae  gwhl  ts  !6xwasE£wa.  Wii ,  lii  8x£etsE£weda 
k-a  !k-  !obane  qa£s  nasEyindayowe  laq.  Wa,,  g'lPmese  gwal  dzopasE£we  5 
awe£stas  otslawasa  ha£nEme  qa  k- leases  alaEm  k-Exusalasa  k-lalEla. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  tsex-£idxa  £wape  qafs  giigELaya£yes  laxa 
nasEya£ye  k"  !ak-  lobana.     Wa,  a£mise  k-ak-ots!E£wa  qa  ek-  !oldza£yesa 


564  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  85 

9  (the  woman)  thinks  that  the  |  water  passes  a  little  more  than  half 
the  height  of  the  lily-bulbs  in  the  small  kettle,  she  puts  it  on  the  || 

10  fire.  She  does  not  leave  it  there  a  long  time  boiling,  before  |  she 
takes  it  off  of  the  fire.  She  takes  off  the  covering,  and  |  takes  her 
small  dish,  which  she  brings  and  puts  down,  and  also  her  oU  and  her  | 
spoon.     Then  she  takes  the  spoon  and  dips  it  into  the  |  boiled  lily- 

15  bulbs.  Then  she  drains  off  the  liquid;  ||  and  when  all  the  liquid  has 
run  out,  she  pours  (the  bulbs)  into  a  small  dish,  |  and  continues  doing 
this  with  the  others;  and  when  they  have  |  all  been  put  into  small 
dishes,  she  presses  them  with  the  back  of  the  spoon,  |  until  they  are 
mashed ;  and  when  they  are  mashed,  they  are  |  like  wet  flour,  she  takes 

20  oil  and  pours  it  jj  in.  There  is  much  oil  on  them.  After  doing  so, 
she  eats  with  the  |  spoon.  Now  she  does  in  the  same  way  as  |  I 
said  before.  Lily-bulbs  are  never  baked  in  ashes,  for  |  they  are  very 
soft  when  cooked.     That  is  all.  ] 

25  Elderberry  Cakes. — Now  I  will  talk  about  the  ||  eating  of  elder- 
berry-cakes. When  winter  comes,  and  when  |  the  tribe  of  the  owner 
of  elderberry-cakes  have  a  winter  dance,  (the  owner)  invites  his  | 
tribe  at  noon;  for  elderberry-cakes  must  not  be  eaten  in  the  |  morning, 
because  they  give  stomach-ache.  Therefore  they  just  invite  |  those 
who  are  to  eat  the  elderberries  when  they  think  that  the  people  have 

£wape  lax  ew.alalaasasa  x'Skiime  laxa  ha£nEmaxs  lae  hanx'LEnts  laxes 
10  lEgwIle.  Wa,  la  k'les  alaEm  helqlalaq  geg-ilil  maEmdElqulaxs  lae 
hanx'SEndEq  laxes  lEgwIle.  Wa,  la  nasodEX  nasEya£yas.  Wa,  la 
&x£edxa  lalogiime  qaes  g-iixe  kagalllas.  Wa,  he'misLes  L!e£na  LEewis 
katslEnaqe.  Wa,  la  dax-idxa  k-ats!Enaqe  qa£s  tsex-£Ides  laxa 
hanxLaakwe  xokuma.     Wa,  hi  xats!alaq  qa  £wi£lawes  £wapagafyas. 

15  Wa,  gil£mese  Ewi£lawe  'w;ipaga£yasexs  lae  tsetslots  laxa  lalogiime. 
Wa,  axusa£mese  he  gweg'ilaxa  waoku.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl£laxs  lae 
£wllts!ii  laxa  lalogiime.  Wii,  la  ijEmkulges  6xiii£yases  k-ats!Eiiaqe 
laq  qa  q!weq!fllts!es.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wi£la  la  qlwekwaxs  lae  yo 
gwexsa    gEnk-ax  quxa.    -Wii,    lii  ;ix£edxa    L!e£na    qa£s    k!iinq!Eqes 

20  laq.  Wii,  laEm  qleqxa  L!e£na.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  hie  £yos£itses 
k-ats!Enaqe  laq.  Wii,  a£mese  la  nfik-Eing-iltEwex  gweg'ilasasa 
g'llx-dEii  waldEina.  Wii,  lii  k'  !es  dzamesaso£  laxa  gflna£ye  qaxs 
alae  xas-IdExs  lae  L!opa.     Wii,  laEm  gwala. 

Elderberry   Cakes.       Wa,    la£mesEn   gwiigwexs£x-£idEl   laqexs   lae 

25  ts!ex-ts!ax-£ida.  Wii,  heemaaxs  lae  ts!awiinx£ida  yixs  lae  ts!e- 
tslecje  g-okulotasa  ts !endzon5kwasa  ts!endzowe.  Wii,  la  Le£liilaxes 
g'okulotaxa  la  nEqala  qaxs  k'lesae  ex-  lax  ts!ex-ts!ax-sE£waxa 
gaala  qaxs  ts!ExsEmdzEmae.  Wii,  he£mes  lag-ilas  al£Em  Le£la- 
leda  ts!endzonokwaxs   lae  k'otax  laEm  £wi£la  gaaxstales  g-okiilote. 


boas]  RECIPES  565 

eaten  their  breakfast.  ||  At  noon  they  invite  all  the  men  when  |  they  30 
have  a  whiter  dance.     As  soon  as  the  messengers  go  out  to  rail,  | 
the  wife  of  the  one  who  gives  the  elderberry-feast  gets  ready  and  | 
clears  her  house.     After  she  has  done  so,  she  brings  out  her  |  dishes, 
which  she  puts  down  at  the  right-hand  side  inside  the  ||  door  of  the  35 
house  where  the  elderberries  are  to  be  eaten.     There  she  also  puts  the 
large  water-buckets  |  and  the  elderberry-boxes  and  oil.    When  |  every- 
thing is  ready,  she  sends  some  member  of  (her  husband's)  numaym 
to  go  and  |  draw  water;  and  when  those  who  have  gone  to  get  water 
come  back,  she  fills  |  the  large  buckets  with  water;  and  the  woman 
also  takes  her  spoon-basket  ||  and  puts  it  down  ready  by  her  seat  at  40 
the  left-hand  side  |  inside  the  door  of  the  house  where  the  elderberries 
are  to  be  eaten.    Now  |  the  guests  come  in,  after  they  have  been  called 
again  by  the  messengers.     As  soon  as  |  they  come  in,  they  wash  the 
dishes;  and  when  this  is  done,  |  (the  woman)  unties  the  cover  of  the 
elderberry -box  and  takes  out  the  ||  elderberry-cakes.     She  unties  the  45 
cedar-bark  strings,  and  |  throws  two  cakes  of  elderberries  into  each 
of  the  dishes.   |  As  soon  as  every  one  is  in  a  dish,  fresh  water  is 
poured  on;  |  and  she  leaves  them  there  while  the  feasters  begin  to 
sing  |  their  feast-songs.      She  wants  the  elderberries   to  soak.  ||  As  50 
soon  as  those  who  are  to  eat  the  elderberries  finish  singing  |  the  four 


Wa,  g-iPmese  nEqalaxs  lae  Le£lalasE£weda  £naxwa  bebEgwanEmxs  30 
lae  ts!ets!eqa.     Wa,  gil£mese    la   g'iileda   Le£lalElg'isaxs  lae  hex£i- 
daema    gEnEmasa    ts!ex'ts!anasLaxa     ts!endzowe    xwanal£ida    qa£s 
ex£widexes  g-5kwe.     Wii,  g-il£mese   gwalExs    lae  niEx-fdt  lalllElaxes 
loElq!we  qa  g'axes  mExstalil    lax    helk'  lotsalilas  awlLElases  ts!ex-- 
ts!ax-ilats!eL5    gokwa;     wa,    he£mises    awawe    naEngats!a.      Wii,  35 
hemisLes  ts!enats!e  xaxadzEma;  wii,  he£misa  L!e£na.     Wii,  g'il-mese 
£wl£la  g'fix  gwalila  lae    £yalaqasa   g-ayole  lax  £nEJmemotas    qa  liis 
tsax  ewapa.     Wii,  g-il£mese  g-iixeda  tsiix'daxa  £wapaxs  lae  qoqutla- 
lalileda  awawe  naEngatsliixa  £wape.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxaaxes  k'ayatsle 
yixaaxa  ts!Eclaqe  cja  gaxcs  gwalila    laxes  klwaelasa  gEmxotsalltas  40 
aweLElas    tlExilasa    ts!ex-ts!ax-r'lats!e    g-okwa.  .  Wa,   g-ax£me   ho- 
gwlLEleda  Le£lanEme  qaxs  lE£mae  yala  etse£stasE£wa.     Wii,  g'il£mese 
£wI£laeLExs  laase  ts!ox£ug1ntsE£weda  loElqlwe.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  x-akiiyindxa  ts!enats!e  xaxadzEma.     Wii,  lii  ax£wults!a,laxa 
ts!ets!endzowe   qa£s   qwelalex    yaeltsEma£yas    k'iidzEkwa.     Wii,    lii  45 
pElx-alts!alasa  maemalExsa  tsendzowe  laxa  £nal£nEinexLa  loElq  !wa. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  q!walxots!Ewakwa  loElqlwiixs   lae  giiq!Eqaso£sa  £we- 
£wap!Eme.     Wa,  a£mese    la    he  gwaetexs  lae    k!we£lala  dEnxEleda 
ts!ex-ts!axxaxa    tslendzowe.      Wa,   laEm    £nex-    qa    pex£wldesa  la 
pexustalll     tslendzowa.      Wii,    g'il£mese     gwal     dsnxEleda     ts!ex--  50 
ts!x'Laxa    ts!ex-inasa    mosgEme    ts!aq!ala    (|  !Emq  lEmdEinaxs   lae 


566  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

52  winter-dance  songs,  |  all  the  young  men  of  the  host's  numaym  sit 
down  by  the  side  of  |  the  dishes  in  which  the  elderberries  arc  rubbed. 
Each  takes  hold  of  a  soaked  |  elderberry-cake;  and  they  rub  them  to 

55  pieces,  since  the  liquid  has  all  been  soaked  up  ||  into  the  elderberry- 
cakes.  When  they  are  all  j  in  pieces,  they  rub  them  with  the  open 
right  hand,  so  that  they  become  really  thick  |  and  well  mixed  with 
water.  After  doing  so,  they  take  |  oil  and  pour  it  into  the  whole 
number  of  dishes.  |  They  put  in  much  oil;  and  after  doing  so,  they 

60  give  [|  the  spoons  to  the  guests;  and  after  every  one  of  those  who  are 
to  eat  the  elderberries  have  one,  |  they  carry  the  elderberry-dishes, 
one  for  each  six  |  men,  and  immediately  the  guests  begin  to  eat  the 
elderberries.     They  |  just  suck  out  the  juice  and  blow  out  the  seeds,  | 

65  but  the  old  people  swallow  them  with  the  seeds.  ||  After  they  have 
eaten,  water  is  passed  around,  and  they  |  rinse  their  mouths,  because 
seeds  remain  |  inside  the  mouth.  After  doing  so,  they  drink  a  little  | 
water,  and  then  they  go  out  when  they  have  |  finished.  || 

70  I  will  talk  about  the  elderberries  that  are  not  tied  into  bundles  i 
when  I  talk  about  the  salal-berries  when  these  are  picked,  |  for  the 
elderberries  get  ripe  first  of  all  the  various  kinds  of  berries.  That  is  | 
why  they  go  first  to  pick  these.  | 

52  -'wrhrma  hiryfdas  EnE£memotasa  ts!ex-ts!anase  la  k  lusiigElilaxa 
ytlyatslaxa  tslendzowe  loElqlwa.  Wii,  lax'da£xwe  dax-£idxa  pegE- 
kwe  tslendzowa    qa£s    q!weq!ults!aleq    yixs    lae   la  lEmx£walts!awe 

55  £wapalas,  yixs  lae  £wiwElaqaxa  tslendzowe.  Wii,  g-il£mese  £w!£we1x'- 
sexs  lae  yilsElgeses  helk" lots !ana6ye  laq  qa  alak-!ales  gEnkaxs 
lae  lElga,  LEewa  ewapagaeyas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax-'e- 
tsE£weda  L!e£na  q:v's  khmqlEqes  lax  £waxexLaasasa  loElqlwe.  Wii, 
laEm  q!eqxa  L!eena.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  tslEwanaedzEineda 

50  kak'Ets  lEnaqe.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £w!lxtoweda  ts!ex-ts!ax-Laxs  lae  kax- 
dzamolilEina  ts!ets!Exts!ala  l5Elq!wa  laxa  q!eq!EL!okwe  bebE- 
gwanEina.  Wii,  hex-£idu£mese  ts!ex-ts!ax-£idEX-da£xwa.  Wii,  lacme 
ax'da£xu£Ein  klumtalax  £wa]>aga£yas  qa£a  pox'&lex  mEk!uga£y<s. 
Wa,   laaLas    £wi£la£Em  nEqweso£sa    qlulsq  lulyakwe    i.E£wes    mak!u- 

65  S&Ey^-  Wii,  g-il£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  tsayanaedzEmeda  £wiipe  qa  ts!E- 
weL!Exodes  qaxs  lae  gwelei.!Exawaeya  mEk!Qgaeyasa  ts!ex'ts!ax'- 
sE£was  lax  aweL !Exawaeyas.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  xfu. !e- 
x-£id  nax£id  laxa  £wiipe.  Wii,  hex-£ida£mese  la  hoqflwElsExs  lae 
gwala. 

y()  Wa,  alEmlwIsEn  gvvagwexs-'alal  laxa  k' !ese  yiltsEnuk"  tslendzowa 
qEnLS  hel  gwagwex  s£alasLa  nEk!iile  qo  lal  nEkwaso£Lo  qaxs  lex  a- 
£mae  g'il  L!opa  tslex'iniisa  £naxwax  £na£nElemasa.  Wii,  he£mis 
lagilas  lexaEin  g-il  ts!ex'asE£\\t". 


boas]  RECIPES  567 

Unripe  Elderberries. — Now  I  will  talk  again  about  ||  the  boiled  75 
elderberries;  that  is,  before  they  are  red.  |  Only  the  old  women 
like  very  much  to  eat  elderberries,  |  and  they  go  first  to  get  elder- 
berries when  they  are  still  green;  |  for,  as  soon  as  a  woman  sees  elder- 
berries that  are  still  green,  she  takes  |  a  small  small-meshed  basket 
and  goes  to  pick  the  elderberries.  When  she  arrives  ||  at  the  elder-  80 
berry-bushes,  she  plucks  off  the  elderberries,  which  are  in  bunches,  | 
and  throws  them  into  the  basket  for  carrying  elderberries.  When  it 
is  |  full,  she  goes  home  at  once  and  puts  |  down  the  basket  with  the 
elderberries.  She  takes  her  small  kettle  and  |  carries  it  down  to  the 
beach.  Then  she  puts  down  the  kettle,  ||  picks  up  gravel,  and  puts  85 
it  into  the  small  kettle.  |  She  takes  care  that  no  sand  that  sticks  to 
the  gravel  |  gets  into  the  kettle.  When  it  is  half  full  from  the  bottom 
with  |  gravel,  she  carries  the  little  kettle  with  the  gravel  in  it  into 
the  house,  and  |  puts  it  down  where  she  is  working  at  the  elder- 
berries. Then  she  takes  her  ||  small-meshed  basket  with  elderberries  90 
in  it,  and  she  pours  the  elderberries  |  into  the  small  kettle  for  cooking 
elderberries.  When  they  are  all  in,  she  dips  up  a  |  little  water  and 
pours  it  in.  She  takes  an  old  piece  of  matting  |  and  puts  it  on  as  a 
cover.  Then  she  puts  the  kettle  on  the  fire,  and  |  watches  it  until  it 
boils  up;  and  as  soon  as  it  boils  up,  ||  she  takes  it  off  and  takes  off  the  95 


Unripe  Elderberries. — Wa,  la£mesEn  edzaqwal  gwagwex-s£alal 
laxa  hanx'Laakwe  tslex'ina,  yixs  k' !es£mae  gultleda,  yixs  lex'a- 75 
cmaeda  laElk!wana£ye  xEHLEla  ts!ets!exbEsxa  ts!ex-ina.  Wa, 
he£mis  g  il  ts!ex£Idxa  tslex'inaxs  he£mae  ales  tenlEiixsEma 
yixs  g'lPmae  dox£waLElaxa  tslex'inaxs  lae  lEnlEiixsEma.  lae  ax£ed- 
xf'S  t!olt!oxusEme  lalaxama  qa£s  la  ts!ex-a.  Wa,  g'iPmese  lag-aa 
laxa  ts!ex-mEsaxs  lae  k!ulp!edxa  ts!ex-rna  laxes  £nal£nEmxLalae-  go 
na£ye  qa£s  k!ulpts!ales  laxes  ts!enats!e  lalaxama.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
qotlaxs  lae  hex-£idaEm  la  na'nakwa  laxes  g-okwe.  Wa,  la  h&ng'a- 
lllaxes  ts!enats!e  lalaxama  qa£s  ax£edexes  ha£nEme.  Wa,  la  k-!o- 
qulaqexs  lae  lEntsles  laxa  L!Eina£ise.  Wa,  hangalisasexs  lae 
mEnx-£Idxa  t!at!edzEme  qa£s  lii  k'!ats!Slas  laxes  ha£nEme.  Wa,  §5 
laEm  aeklla  qa  k-!eases  lasa  egise  klutala  laxa  t!at!edzEmaxs  lae 
k'latslalas  laxa  ha£nEme.  Wa,  g-il£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxa  t!at!e- 
dzEmaxs  g'axae  k'!oqulesaxa  t !at ledzEmts !ala  ha£nEma  qa£s  g'axe 
hang-alllas  laxes  ts !ats  !ex-silasaxa  ts!ex-Ina.  Wa,  la  ax£edxes 
ts!enats!e  t!5lt!oxusEm  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  giiqasasa  ts!ex-ina  laxa  go 
ts  !ex'i£lats  !eLe  ha£iiEma.  Wa,  g-iPmese  £wI£1osexs  lae  tsex-£Idxa 
holale  ewapa  qa£s  la  guqlEqas  laq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  k-!ak-!obane 
qa£s  nasEyindes  laq.  Wa,  la  hanxxEnts  laxes  lsgwlle.  Wa,  la 
q!aq!alalaq  qa  niEdElx£wIdes.  Wa,  gil£mese  mEdElx£w!dExs  lae 
hanx-sEndEq  qa£s  nasodex  nasEya£yas.     Wa,  lii  ax£edxes  lalogume  95 


568  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

96  covering.  She  takes  her  small  dish  |  and  spoon  and  puts  them  down 
hy  the  side  of  the  small  kettle  |  in  which  the  elderberries  have  been 
cooked.  .She  takes  her  spoon  and  pokes  under  the  |  boiled  elder- 
berries, and  lifts  them  up  and  puts  them  into  |  the  dish  from  which 
the  elderberries  are  eaten;  and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  turns  her 
100  spoon  over  and  ||  presses  it  into  the  boiled  elderberries,  which  are 
still  in  bunches  on  the  stems.  |  Now  she  breaks  them  to  pieces;  and 
when  they  get  thick  and  pasty,  she  |  takes  oil  and  pours  it  over  them. 
After  doing  so,  she  |  takes  her  spoon  and  again  presses  (the  elder- 
berries) with  the  back  of  the  spoon.  |  After  doing  so,  she  licks  off  the 
5  juice  from  the  spoon  and  ||  puts  it  down.  Then  she  takes  a  cedar- 
stick  and  splits  it  so  that  it  is  like  |  a  pair  of  tongs.  She  takes  a 
piece  of  split  cedar-bark  and  ties  it  on  one  end  to  |  keep  it  from 
splitting,  and  the  tongs  are  one  span  |  in  length.  When  the  tongs  are 
finished,  they  |  are  used  like  a  fork.     She  puts  them  into  the  boiled  || 

10  berries  which  are  mixed  with  the  stems.  Then  she  puts  (the  tongs) 
into  her  mouth  and  sucks  out  the  juice;  |  and  when  all  the  juice  has 
been  sucked  out,  she  blows  out  the  stems  and  the  |  seeds.  She  con- 
tinues doing  so  while  she  is  eating  the  boiled  |  elderberries.  After 
she  has  done  this,  she  puts  away  what  is  left,  |  so  that  she  can  eat  it 

15  after  a  while.  Then  she  takes  up  some  water  and  ||  rinses  her  mouth , 
so  that  the  seeds  that  are  in  her  mouth  may  come  out.  |  After  she 


96  i.E£wis  k'atstenaqe.  Wa,  la  kanulllases  talogiime  laxes  ts!ex-i- 
elats!eha£nEma.  Wa.  la  ax£edxes  k'atslEnaqe  qaes  tsEyabodes  laxa 
hanx'taakwe  tslexina  qa£s  la  tsetslots  laxa  tslex'ts'.anatsleLe 
taloguma.  Wa,  gilmiese  gwalExs  lae  nELalamasxes  k-ats!Ena<|  \- 
100  lae  qJotElges  laxa  hanxLaakwe  tslexina  yixs  axfda£maes  tslena- 
nowe.  Wa.  laEin  q !weq futts !alaq.  Wii,  g-iPmese  la  gEiik-axs  lae 
ax£edxa  L,!e£na  qa£s  klunq'.Eqes  laq.  Wa,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae 
ax£edxes  k'ats'.Enaqe  qa£s  etlede  qlotElges  aweg-a£yas  liiq.  Wii 
g-tl£mese  gwala  lae  k-ElgElEg-lndxes  k-atslEnaqe.  Wa,  la  g'lg'a- 
5  lilasexs  lae  axEedxa  klwa-xi.awe  qa£s  xox£wide  qa  yEwes  la  gwex-sa 
tslesLalax.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  dzEXEkwe  dEnasa  qaes  yiLlEXLEndes 
qa  kleses  hek"!ot!ed  xoxusa.  Wa,  la  £nEmp!Enk-e  £wasgEmasas 
laxEns  q !waq !wax#ts !anaeyex.  Wii,  g  il£mese  gwala  kMibayowe  ha- 
6mayoxs    lae    k'lip'.Its    laxa    hanxxaakwe    q  !weq  IwatEwak"  LE£we 

10  tslenanowe  ts!ex-ina  qaes  kMlpqlsdzEndes.  Wii,  lit  klflmtElgeq. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  ewielawe  saaqas  lae  pox-6dex  tslenanowas  LEewes 
mEk!uga£ye.  Wa,  axusaemese  h;;  gweg'ilaxs  ts!exts!ax-aaxa  hanx'- 
Laakwe  tslexina.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  g-exaxes  anex'sa£ye 
qa£s  et!e:!el  ts!ex-ts!ax-£IdLEq.     Wa,  lii  tsex-£idxa  Ewape  qa£s  tslE- 

15  weL'.Expde  qa  lawayesa  la  klweklutfila  maEinklugesa  tslexina  lax 
aweiJ-Exawa£yas.     Wa,   gil£mese    gwalExs    lae  xFil!ex£m  nax£Idxa 


boas]  rectpes  569 

has  done  this,  she  drinks  a  little  |  water;  and  after  doing  this,  she  117 
cats  roasted  salmon  |  with  oil.     She  does  this  with  the  roasted  sal- 
mon [  so  that  she  may  get  no  stomach-ache.     Now  that  is  all  about 
the  elderberries.  || 

Salal-Berry  Cakes. — Now  I  will  talk    about  the  long  salal-berry  1 
cakes  when  they  are  |  squeezed  (in  water).     First  of  all,  the  woman 
takes  her  |  dishes.     She  puts  them  down  (in  a  row).     She  goes  to  draw 
water,  and  |  pours  it  into  the  dishes.     When  the  water  is  in  each  dish,  || 
she  takes  shredded  cedar-bark  and  |  washes  them,  beginning  at  one  5 
end.     She  uses  the  shredded  |  cedar-bark  in  washing  them  so  that 
all  the  dirt  may  come  off.     When  |  they  are  clean,  she  takes  the  box 
with  long  salal-berry  cakes,  |  unties  the  string  holding  down  the 
cover,  ]]  takes  off  the  cover,  and  takes  off  the  skunk-cabbage  covering.  10 
She  puts  it  down,  and  takes  |  out  the  long  salal-berry  cakes  and 
breaks  them  into  |  five  pieces  lengthwise.     She  puts  each  one  of  the  | 
pieces  into  a  dish.     There  are  five  |  dishes  to  each  long  salal-berry 
cake ;  and  when  ||  there  is  a  piece  in  each  dish,  she  goes  to  draw  water  15 
and  pours  |  it  in;  and  when  there  is  water  in  the  dishes,  she  takes  | 
a  mat  and  covers  up  the  dishes  with  the  pieces  of  salal-berry  [  cake. 
She  leaves  them  in  this  way  until  the  morning,  when  daylight  comes.  | 
She  leaves  them  there  all  night.  ||  In  the  morning,  when  daylight  20 

£wape.      Wit,    gil£mese    gwalExs    lae    heleg-intsa  LlobEkwe.      Wit,  117 
hiEm  tslEpas  laxa  i.!e-na.     Wa,  hivEm  hlg-ilas  be  gwex-£Itsa  LlSbE- 
kwe  qa£s  k-!ese  ts !Ex-sEinsEla.     Wa,  laF.m  gwala  laxa  tslexina. 

Salal-Berry   Cakes.     Wit,    la£mesEn    gwagwex's£x,£idEl    laqexs    lae  1 
q  !wesasE£weda  heyadzo  tbxqa,  yixs  he£mae  g  il  ax£etso£sa  tstedaqes 
loElqlwe,  qa£s    gaxe    mEx£filIlElas.     Wa,  lii   tsex-£Idxa    -wape    qa£s 
gugEg'lndales    laxa    loElqlwe.      Wit,    gil£mese    q  Iwalxots  !Ewaxusa 
£wapaxs    lae    ax£edxa    qloyaakwe    kadzEkwa.     Wa,  la    g-abalela-  5 
qexs    lae    ts!oxug-lndalaq.     Wa,    laEm     dzEg-ElEg-esa     qloyaakwe 
k-felzF.k"    Laq     qa    lawayesa    dzedzEgiig-a£yas.      Wa,    g-ll£mese    la 
eeg'Eg-axs  lae  ax-'e  Ixes    heyadzoats !e    nEgiidzowe   tteqa  qa£s  qwe- 
lEvindex    t!Emak"Eyaeyas.     Wa,    lit    axodEx    yiktiya£yas.     Wit,    la 
axalaxa  paqEyaeye  k'!Ek-!aok!wa  qa£s   axalllEles.     Wa,  lit   ax£wfil-  10 
tslodxa    heyadzowe    nEgiidzowe    tteqa.      Wit,  lii    k!5k!upsalaq    qa 
sesEk"!axse  laxes  awasgEmase.     Wa,  lii    pElx"ts lalasa  £nal£nEinxsa 
k-!op!awe    laxa    Enal£nEnaexLa    loqlwa.     Wa,  hiEm    sEkMexLa   IoeI- 
q!wa    laxa    ''iieiuxs  ■.    heyadzowe    nEgudzo    tlEqa.     Wa,    g'IPmese 
q Iwalxots lEwakweda    loElqlwaxs  1  e  tsa  laxa  £wape  q:;"s  lii  qaplE-  15 
qElas  laq.     Wa,  g-fl£mese  la  £wl£la  la  qlogulTlxa  £wapaxs  lae  ax£ed- 
xa  le:w  ;ve  qa£s  nakuyindes  laxa  t!Exts!alaxa  heyadzowe  nEgftdzo 
tlEqa.     Wa,    1-iEin    hex'siil    gwaeh.e    lalaal    laxa    laLa    £nax-£I  IeIxh. 
gaala.     Wa,  laEm   xamastalilLe   tleltalllxa  ganone.     Wa,  g  il£mese 
£nax£idxa    gaalaxs    laeda    ha£yah'a    Le-ialaxes    g'okulote  qa  g-axes  20 


570  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [etii.ann.S5 

21  comes,  the  young  men  go  to  call  the  people  to  |  eat  the  long  salal- 
berry  cakes.  They  all  come  in  after  the  young  men  have  called 
them  |  four  times.  Then  the  woman  takes  off  the  mat  |  covering  of 
the  dishes,  and  the  young  men  go  and  stand  each  |  next  to  a  dish, 

25  and  they  sit  down  and  put  [|  both  hands  into  the  soaked  berry-cake. 
They  |  take  a  handful  of  the  berry-cake,  squeeze  it  into  a  ball,  and, 
when  they  take  it  out,  |  they  squeeze  it  again,  so  that  the  ball  of 
berries  gets  smaller;  |  and  they  stop  squeezing  only  when  it  is  all 
dissolved  and  the  liquid  is  thick.  ]  Then  they  stop  squeezing  the 

30  berry-cake.     The  woman  goes  ||  to  get  oil,  and  pours  it  on.     They 

.  put  much  oil  on ;  |  and  after  doing  so,  the  woman  takes  the  |  basket 
containing  her  horn  spoons.  (For  horn  spoons  |  are  made  for  eating 
salal-berry  cakes,  because  they  are  all  black,  |  and  the  spoons  do  not 

35  turn  black  after  being  nsed  by  those  ||  who  eat  long  salal-berry  cakes, 
as  the  wooden  spoons  do,  when  |  they  begin  to  use  them  for  eating 
salal-berry  cakes.  Even  |  if  they  are  new,  [the  wooden  spoons]  at 
once  turn  black  all  over.  I  Therefore  they  use  only  horn  spoons  to 
eat  |  long  salal-berry  cakes  when  they  are  given  at  a  feast,  because 
[the  berries!  ''"  no*  *>i('k  to  them.)  || 

40  I  only  wished  to  turn  for  a  while  to  this.  |  They  give  a  spoon  to 
every  guest  who  |  eats  long  salal-berry  cake.     After  this  has  been 


21  t!Ext!aqa  laxa  heyadzowe  t!Eqa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  g-ax  £wI£laeLExs 
lae  mop!ene£steda  ha/yab'a  etse£sta  laasa  tslEdaqe  axodxa  le£wa£ye 
naxumaliltsa  loElqlwe.  Wa,  la  q!walxogwaga£ya  £nal£nEinokwe 
hel£a  lax  £waxexLaasasa    loElqlwe    qa£s    k!us£alilExs  lae   axstEnda- 

i'.",  lascs  £\vn\  suits !ana£ye  laxa  hapstallle,  t!Eqa.  Wa,  lax-da£xwe 
gdlx-fidxa  tlEqa  qa£s  loxsEmgileq;  wa,  g"il£mese  £wi£lostaxs  lae 
qlwes^dEq.  Wa,  hermis  la  ts!Eina£nakulatsa  loxsEine  t!Eqa.  Wii, 
al£mese  gwal  qlwesaqexs  lae  £wl£la.  Wii,  laEm  gEnx£Ideda 
ewapalas.     Wa,  laEm  gwala  qlwesaxa    t!Eqa;   wii,  hiLeda  ts!Edaqe 

30  axEedxa  L!eena  qa£s  k!unq!Eqes  laq.  Wii,  laEm  qleqxa  L!e£naxs 
lae  k!imq!EgEinq.  Wii,  g'u£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£ededa  tslEda- 
qaxes  ts!ololag-ats!e  LlExosgEin  qaxs  he,£mae  k-ats!Enaqeltsa  ts!o- 
lolaqa  heyadzowe  nEgudzo  tlEqa  qaxs  ts!ots!ElEgaeda  ts!6lolaqe 
k*ats!Eiiaqa.     Wii,  lii  k'es   awElx'Es  ts!ol£IdExs  lae  gwal  £yosElaxa 

35  heyadzowe  nEgudzo  tlEqa,  he  gwexsa  k!wek!wagEg'a  katslEna- 
(|axs  g"il£mae  eyoseidayo  laxa  heyadzowe  nEgudzo  tteqaxs  he£mae 
files  alolaqe  lae  hex-eidaEm  la  ts!5ts!Elg-ax£Ida.  Wii,  hi1£mis 
lag'ilas  lex-aEm  £yo£yats!eda  ts!ets!ololaqe  kakEtslEnaqxa  heya- 
dzowe nEgudzo  tlEqaxa  k!weladzEmae  ([axs  k"!esae  klutala  laq. 

40  Wii,  iVniEn  £nEx-  cjEn  yfiwas£Ide  giiyoyox£wid  gwagrtrex-s£x"Id  laq. 
Wa,  lii  tslEwanaedzEma  ts  lets  !olohiqe  kiikEtslEnaq  laxa  klwelaxa 
heyadzowe  nEgudzowe    t!EC{a;  wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  k'agEmll- 


boas]  RECITES  571 

done,  they  |  put  before  them  the  dishes  containing  salal-berries  mixed  43 
with  water.     Now   there   are  |  six  men   to   each   dish.     When   the 
dishes  have  all  been  put  down,  ||  they  immediately  begin  to  eat  the  |  45 
squeezed  long  salal-berry  cakes  in  the  dishes  with  their  horn  spoons. 
After  eating,  |  the  salal-berry  dishes  are  taken  away  |  and  put  down 
at  the  left-hand  side  of  the  door  of  the  |  feasting-house.     Then  the 
guests  go  out  at  once.  ||  They  do  not  drink  any  water  after  the  feast.  50 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Raw  Salal-Berries   (Eating  raw,  ripe  salal-berries). —  |  When   the  l 
woman  comes  home  after  picking  |  ripe   salal-berries,  her  husband 
goes  and  calls  whomever  he  likes  |  to  come  to  eat  ripe  salal-berries. 
When  ||  the  guests  are  all  in,  the  woman  takes  a  long  |  narrow  mat  5 
and  spreads  it  in  front  of  those  who  are  to  |  cat  the  ripe  salal-berries. 
Her  husband  takes  the  |  basket  containing  the  salal-berries  and  pours 
them  all  along  the  mat  in  |  front  of  his  guests.     He  pours  out  ||  all,  10 
so  that  it  reaches  to  the  end  of  the  guests..     His  wife  pours  oil  into  | 
oil-dishes:  and   as  soon  as  she  has  poured  in  the  oil,  her  |  husband 
takes  the  oil-dishes  and  puts  them  on  the  salal-berries.  |  He  puts  them 
far  enough  apart  for  the  men  to  reach  them,  |  and  there  are  four  men 
to  each.  ||  After  all  the  oil-dishes  have  been  put  down,  the  guests  15 
take  I  the  salal-berries,  each  one  bunch.     They  dip  them  into  the  oil;  | 

lElayEweda  t!et!Exts!ala  l5Elq!wa  laxa  k!wele.  Wii,  la£me  q!eq!E-  43 
Llalaxa  £nal£nEmexLa  loElqbva.  Wii,  giPmese  £wllgallleda  IoeI- 
qlwiixs  lae  hex-£idaEm  £naxwa  £yos£Itses  tsets!olohiqe  k-ak-Ets.'Enaq  45 
laxa  loxts  !ala  q  !wedzEku  heyadzowe  t  !Eqa.  Wii, g-il-'mese  £wl£hixs  hie 
hex'£IdEma  kiigilllEma  t!et!Ext!agats!ex-daxa  q!wedzEkwe  heya- 
dzowe tteqa  qa£s  la  klk'ag'alllEm  lax  gEmxotsallhsa  tlEx-ilasa 
t!Eqe£lats!e  g-okwa.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese  la  hoqiiwElseda  k.'welde. 
Wii,  laEm  hewiixa  nagek'Elax  ewape.     Wa,  laEm  gwal  laxeq.  50 

Raw    Salal-Berries  (K'Elxklax  axa    nEklulaxs    he    qlayoqwa).—  1 
Wit,  he£maaxs  g-alae  g-ax  nii£nakweda  tslEdaqaxs  liix'de  nekwaxa 
qlayoqwa  nEk!ula;  wit,  la.   lil£wunEmas   Le£lalaxes  gwE£yo  qafs  Le- 
£lahisE£wa,  qa£s    q!Eq!EX'notxa    qlayoqwa    nEk!fda.     Wit,  gil£meso 
g'iix  £wiElaeLa  Le£lanEinasexs  lae  hex-£ida£ma  tstedaqe  ax£edxa  gil-  5 
dEdzowe  ts!eq!ats!o   le£wa£ya  qa£s   lit    LEpdzamolilas    liixes  nEkwe- 
lag'iLaxa  q!fiyoqwa  nEklula.     Wii,  lii  la£wunEmas  ax£edxa  iiEk!ul- 
tslala  lExa£ya  rja£s  lii  qapanaesElasa  q!ayoqwa  UEklfd  lax  iJiisEx-- 
dzama£yases  Le£liinEme.      Wii,   a£mise    gwanaht    qa,    laballlesexs  lae 
£wIlgflts!amasEq,  ylxs    laiiLes    gEnEme    k!iinxts!alasa    L!e£na    laxa  10 
tsletsteb^tsle.     Wii,  g-il£mese  £wl£la  k!iinxts!Ewakuxs  lae  ax-'ede  la- 
£wiinEin-:,seq  qt/s  la  hanaqElas  laxa  nEk!ule.     Wii,  Lieiii  iiEm  gwa- 
nala  qa    helts!apElesa    bebEgwaiiEine    lax  awalagolilasasa    ts!ets!E- 
batsle.      Wii,  laEm  maemalasE£weda  £nfd£nEmexLa.     Wii,  g'il£mese 
£wllgallleda  ts!ets!Ebats!axs  lae  hex,£ida£ma  klwele  dax£idxa  £nal-  15 
•'iiEmxLa    nEklula    c[a£s  katsEndes    laxa  L!e£niixs    ts!Ebats!ets!alae. 


572  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  I  kth  *nn.  m 

17  and  after  they  have  done  this,  all  the  salal-berries  are  covered  with  oil.  | 
They  shake  off  the  oil,  take  the  bunch  out,  and  |  eat  them  off  one  at  a 

'20  time;  and  when  all  have  been  taken  off,  they  throw  the  stem  ||  into 
the  fire.  Then  they  take  another  bunch  and  |  do  in  the  same  way, 
and  all  the  guests  do  the  same.  |  After  they  have  eaten,  they  all  go 
out  of  the  house.  |  They  drink  no  water  after  eating  it,  for  they  |  do 

25  not  want  to  remove  the  sweetness  from  the  mouth.  ||  For  this  reason 
they  do  not  drink  any  water.  The  reason  why|  the  branch  is  thrown 
into  the  fire  by  the  one  who  has  eaten  the  berries  is,  that  they  do  not 
want  any  one  to  take  it  |  for  witchcraft;  for  the  man's  breath  is  on  it, 
because  he  has  bitten  off  the  |  salal-berries  and  it  remains  on  it. 
Therefore  they  are  afraid.  Now  that  is  all  |  about  salal-berries.  [| 
1  Cakes  of  Currants '  (Eating  currant-cakes) . — First  |  the  woman  takes 
the  dishes  and  she  brings  them  down  and  she  puts  them  down  on  the 
left-hand  side  of  the  |  door  of  the  house  where  the  currant-cakrs 
are  to  be  eaten;  and  she  places  there  also  oil  |  and  the  horn-spoon 
5  basket  and  also  large  water-buckets,  ||  are  put  down  on  the  floor, 
and  also  long  mats.2  |  .  .    . 

As  soon  as  he  stops  speaking,  the  wife  of  the  |  host  takes  the  box 
containing  the  currant-cakes  and  unties  the  cover.  |  She  takes  out 

17  Wa,  g'iFmese  la  £wlcla  la  t!Et!EpsEina  nEk!ulaxa  idemaxs  lae  k!E- 
lodxa  iJemiixs  lae  axwustEndEq  qa£s  enalmEmsgEniEmqeqexs  lae 
qlEk'alaq  laxes  ytsx'Ene.     Wa,  g11Emese  fwilg-ElEnxs  lae  tslEXLEn- 

20  dEq  laxa  lEgwIle  qa£s  etlede  dax£Idxa  enEmxLala.  Wa,  laxae 
heEmxat!  gwex£IdEq.  Wa,  la  £naxwaEin  he  gwegwiibglldeda  wao- 
kwe  klwehx.  Wa,  gihmese  ewi£laxs  lae  hex'-IdaEm  enaxwa  hoqil- 
wElsa.  Wa,  laEmxae  hewaxaEm  nageqElax  £wapa  qaxs  gwaqlE- 
faaq    lawayes    ex-p!aeL!Exawafye    yls    ex'p!EsgEma£yasa    nEk!iile. 

25  Wa,  he£mis  k'leselas  naxeidxa  ewape.  Wa,  heemis  lagilas  ts!EXLa- 
laxa  yisx-Eiirses  q!EgElEn.ikwaxs  gwaqlslaaq  lalax  yayanEinasosa 
eqlenoxwe  qaxs  lae  liasa£yasa  bEgwanEmaxs  lae  q!Ekalaxa  nE- 
k!ule  k!ut!Eneq.  Wa,  heemis  kllEmse.  Wa,  laEm  alak'Iala  gwal 
laxa  nF.k!fde. 
1  Cakes  of  Currants1  (T!Ext'!aqxa  q!edzEdzowe). — Wii,  heEm  gll  ax£e- 
tso£sa  ts!Edaqes  loElcjIwe  qa  g-axes  mExstalil  lax  gEmxotstalllas 
tlExilasa  t!Ext!agats!iixa  qledzEdzowe  gokwa;  wa,  he5misa  L!e£na, 
LEJwis  ts  lololagats  !as  LlExosgEma;  wa,  he£misLes  awawe  naEnga- 
5  ts!a,  qa  g- fixes  haxdianela;  wa,  he£mises  gilsgildEdzowe  leEl£wa£ya.2 
.  .  .  Wa,  gil£mese  q!weleededa  yaq !Ent lalaxs  lae  ax£ede  gEnEmasa 
klwelasaxa  q!edzats!e  xaxadzEma  qafs  qwelEyindex  t!Emak-iya£yas. 
Wa,  la  ax£wiilts!alaxa  qledzEdzowe  fc.'Eqa,  qaJs  qwequltsEmex  yael- 

1  Ribes  bracteosus  Dougl.  and  Ribcs  pctiolare  Dougl. 
'Continued  on  page  751,  line  IS,  to  page  75J,  line  82. 


boas]  RECIPES  573 

the  currant-cakes,  and  unties  the  |  string  with  which  the  bundles  are 
tied;  and  she  gives  them  to  the  two  messengers,  and  ||  they  put  two  10 
cakes  into  each  dish.  |  When  they  are  in  each  dish,  (the  messengers) 
pour  a  little  more  |  water  on;  and  after  doing  so,  the  woman  |  asks 
some  of  her  husband's  guests  to  squeeze  and  rub  the  [  currant-cakes. 
Immediately  some  of  the  young  men  come  |]  from  their  seats  and  sit  15 
down  alongside  of  the  currant-dishes.  |  They  take  out  of  the  water  a 
soaked    currant-cake,  |  roll  it  up  and  break  it  into  pieces.     When  it 
is  all  in  pieces,  |  they  break  it  into  smaller  pieces,  so  that  they  are 
very  small.     Then  they  |  gather  up  what  has  been  broken  into  small 
pieces,  and  they  make  a  ball,  ||  and  squeeze  it  with  both  hands  so  20 
that  it  becomes  round;  |  and  they  squeeze  it  for  a  short  time,  and  put 
the  ball  |  into    the  currant-dish   and  into    the  juice,  which  is  now 
becoming  thick.  |  They  press  the  ball  with  their  right  hands  and  make 
it  Hat;  |  and  when  it  is  flattened  out,  they  rub  it  with  the  right  hand;  || 
and  before  they  have  rubbed  it  very  long,  it  gets  pasty,  because  |  the  25 
ball  dissolves  in  the  water  in  which  it  is  rubbed.     As  soon  as  it  [  is 
very  thick,  they  stop  rubbing.     Then  they  wash  |  their  hands,  and, 
after  doing  so,  they  walk  back  and  |  sit  down  at  their  seats.     Then 
the  wife  of  the  ||  host  takes  a  box  of  oil-bottles,  and  it  is  put  down  30 
next  to  her  seat.  |  She  unties  the  top;  and  when  she  takes  off  the  | 

tsEmayas  kadzEkwa.  Wii,  la  ts  !as  laxa  ina£lokwe  e£etse£stElg'isa.  Wii, 
lax-da£xwe  pepElx-ts!alasa  niaemalExsa  laxa  £niil£nEmex£La  loq  !wa.  10 
Wit,  glhmese  la    q!walxots!E\vakwa    loElqlwaxs   lae   gEnwax  £wi- 
ewabEts  lawasa    loElq'we.     Wa,  glhmese    gwalExs    laeda    tstedaqe 
helg  ilge  lax  khvelekwases  la£wimEme,  qa  gaxes  q!wesa  yllsElgexa 
q!edzEdzowe    t!Eqa.      Wa,  hex,£ida£mesa   £waxokwa    ha£yal£a   gax 
qhvaqalll,  qa£s  g-axe    k!iisagEllhixa  q !esq ladzats !§Le    loqlwa.     Wii,  15 
hex-£ida£mese  £naxwa  dastEiidxa  £niil£nEmxsa  pegEk"  q  !edzEtlzo  t  teqa, 
qa£s  k- loxsEmdeqexs  lae  p!op!oxsalaq.      Wit.  g'ihmese  '"wPwuIxsexs 
lae  heloxusEiid  q!\veq!ults!alaq,  qa  iimEmayastoxs  lae  yawas£Id  q!a- 
p!ex-£Idxa    la    q!weq!idts!aak"    q!edzEdzo  t!Eqa,    qa£s    tExsEmdeq 
qa£s    qlwetsEmdeq    yises    £waxsolts!ana£ye    e£eyasa,  qa  loxsEmes.  20 
Wa,  la   q!wes£edEq.     Wii,  la    k!est!a    ^egilllExs   lae    £mE£xusEiits 
lax  £wapalitsxa  la  gEnk'a  q!ots!axa  q  !esq  !adzats!eLaxa  qledzEdzowe 
loq!wa.     Wii,  la.  La£xusEmtses    kelk'!ots!iina£ye  laq  qa  pExsEmx  £I- 
des.     Wii,  g-il£mese  la  pExsEinxs  lae  yElsElgintses  helk!olts!ana£ye 
laq.     Wa,  k'!est!a    geg-flilExs  lae    alakMala  la  gEnx-eida,  qaxs    lae  25 
x'idzElteda    loxsEmx'de,    yix    yilsasoxudiis.     Wii,    gihmese   la  tila- 
kMala  la  gEnk-axs,  lae  gv\rala  yeyilsElg'Esaq.     Wii,  lii   tslEntstenx- 
£wldxes    e£eyasowe.     Wa,   gihmese    gwalExs    lae    qiis£ida,   qa£s    lii 
xwelaqa  k!us£a!lla,  qa£s  lii  klwelEmlila.     Wii,  laLa  gEnEmasa  k!vve- 
lase  ax£edxes  qlElwase  xEtsEma,  qa  gaxes  ha£nel    lax  klwaelasas.  30 
Wii,  lii  qwelEyindEx  t!Emak-Eya£yas.     Wii,  gfhmese  paqodEx  yE- 


574  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ann.  se 

33  cover,  she  puts  it  down.  She  takes  out  a  ]  large  oil-bottle  of 
kelp  and  gives  it  to  the  two  messengers.  |  One  of  them  bites  off  the 
string  with  which  the  mouth  of  the  kelp  bottle  is  tied;  and,  after  tak- 

35  ing  off ||  the  string,  he  holds  it  with  his  right  hand,  and  |  squeezes  the 
oil  out  on  the  rubbed  currant-cakes,  while  |  the  other  one  holds  the 
head  of  the  kelp  bottle  with  his  left  |  hand,  and  he  squeezes  it 
with  lus  right  hand,  so  that  the  oil  comes  out  |  at  the  mouth.  If  the 
oil  does  not  come  out  easily,  because  it  is  thick  ||  in  cold  weather, 

40  then  the  two  messengers  take  hold,  one  of  each  end,  |  of  the  oil- 
bottle.  They  stand  one  each  side  of  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the 
house,  |  and  they  pull  the  kelp  bottle  containing  the  od  backward 
and  forward  over  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house.  |  When  the  oil 
is  melted,  then  they  begin  to  pour  it  over  the  |  currant-cakes  in  the 

45  dish.  They  put  on  much  oil,  and  ||  continue  doing  so  witli  the  others. 
After  oil  has  been  poured  on  all  of  them,  |  they  take  the  horn-spoon 
basket  and  |  distribute  the  spoons  among  the  feasters.  After  this 
is  done,  they  put  |  the  currant-dishes  in  front  of  them,  |  one  dish  for 
each  six  men.     As  soon  as  ||  all   (of  the  berry-dishes)  have  been  put 

50  down,  the  guests  begin  to  eat  the  berries.  |  They  are  told  to  eat 
everything  that  is  in  the  dish;  and  this  they  do,  for  |  these  berries 
are  never  taken  home  when  they  are  eaten  in  the  house  of  the  owner,  | 


32  kiiya£yas  lae  pax£alllaq.  Wa,  la  q  !Elx£ults  !odxa  L!e£nats!ala  £walas 
£wa£wadaxs  lae  ts!as  laxa  ma£lokwe  efetse£stElg  isa.  Wii,  lada 
-uEinokwe  qlEk'odEX  m5guxsta£yasa  £wa£wade.     Wii,  g-il£mese  lawa- 

35  ya  moxuba£yas  awaxsta£yasexs  lae  dalases  helk-!ots!ana£ye  laqexs 
hie  tslEtx-aqElasa  L!e£na  laxa  yilekwe  qledzEdzo  tlEqa,  yixs  laaLe- 
da  £iiEmokwas  dalaxa  oxLa£yasa  £wa£wade,  yises  gEinxolts  !ana£ye 
a£yasowa.  Wa,  la  xlkases  helk!ots!ana£ye  qa  loltslalesa  L!e£na 
lax    awaxsta£yas.     Wa,   g"il£mese    q'Einsa  lawaleda    ide£naxs    gEn- 

40  k-aaxs  £wuda'lae;  wa,  laxda£xwa  e£etse£stElg-lse  dadEbexa  L!e- 
£nats!ala  £wa£wade,  qa£s  la  Lax£walll  lax  £waxsanahlasa  laqwawall- 
laxs  lae  ts!ats!EngiiLalasa  L!e£nats!ala  £wa£wade  hlxa  laqwawallle. 
Wa,  gil£mese  yax£ideda  L!e£nats!awasexs  lae  ts!Etx-aqas  laxa  lox- 
ts!ala  ytlek"  qledzEdzo  tlEqa.  Wii,  laEin  qleqxa  L!e£na.  Wa,  la  axu- 

45  sa£mese  he  gwegilaxa  waokwe.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wi£la  la  k!unq!EgE- 
kuxs  lae  ax£edEX'da£xuxa  ts!ololagats!e  LlExosgEma,  qa£s  lii  ts!E- 
wanaesElas  laxa  k!wele.  Wa,  gll£mese  gwalExs  lae  k-ax-dzam6ll- 
lElasa  q!eq!esq!adzats!eLe  loElqlwa  laxa  q!esq!asLaq.  Wii,  la£me 
q!eq!aLaleda  bebEgwaiiEmaxa  £nal£nEmexLa  loq!wa.     Wii,  g-il£mese 

50  £w!lgalilExs  lae  liex'idaEm  £niixwa  q!esq!as£ideda  klwelaq.  Wa, 
la£me  &xso£,  qa£s  £wa£wi£laexes  leloqula.  Wa,  he£mis  gwiile  qaxs 
k"!ets!enoxwae     modola     q!edzEdzEwaxs    q!eselaeda    iixnogwadas, 


iioas]  RECIPES  575 

because  it  brings  bad  luck  to  take  them  home,  as  the  people  of  olden  53 
times  say.  |  Therefore  they  try  to  eat  all;  and  after  emptying  their 
dishes,  ||  they  go  out  of  the  feasHiouse.     That  is  all  about  the  berry-  55 
cakes.  | 

Raw  Currants. — Currants  are  also  eaten  raw.  When  |  the  woman 
comes  home  from  picking  currants,  she  |  asks  her  husband  to  get  a 
dish,  and  put  it  |  next  to  her  seat.  Then  she  unties  the  top  of  ||  the 
currant-basket,  and  she  sits  down  (with  her  husband),  |  one  on  each  60 
side  of  the  |  currant-basket;  and  the  large  dish  is  put  down  on  the 
outer  side  of  the  currant-basket.  Then  they  both  take  the  currants  | 
out  of  the  basket  ami  strip  them  and  put  them  into  the  dish.  As  soon 
as  |  they  have  been  stripped  off  the  stems,  the  stems  are  thrown  || 
into  the  fire.  The  woman  |  and  her  husband  continue  doing  this,  65 
trying  to  see  who  will  strip  them  most  quickly.  When  |  the  currants 
have  all  been  stripped  off,  the  man  goes  and  calls  whomever  lie  likes  | 
fromamonghisrelatives,orhemayevencallhisnumaym;  |  and  assoon 
as  the  husband  goes  to  call  all  those  who  are  to  eat  the  raw  ||  currants, 
she  takes  oil,  and  the  spoon-basket  with  horn  spoons,  |  which  she  70 
keeps  in  readiness  at  the  place  where  she  sits  down,  and  she  also 
takes  medium-sized  dishes  |  and  holds  them  ready.  Then  her  hus- 
band comes  in,  followed  by  his  guests;  |  for  they  do  not  sit  down  as 
they  do  at  a  great  feast.     The  guests  sit  down  |  any  way  they  like. 

qaxs    aEmsaaEl   laxox  modolexs   £nek-a£laeda  g  ilx'da  bEgwanEma.  53 
Wa,  he£mis  lag'ilas  £wa£wl£laaq.     Wii,  gil£mese  £wl£laxes  leloqulaxs 
lae  hocpuwElsa.     Wa,  la£me  gwal  laxa  qledzEdzowe  tteqa.  55 

Raw  Currants. — Wa,  la  k!Elxk-!axsQ£Emxat!eda  q!esena.  Wa, 
he'maaxs  gaxae  na'nakweda  tslEdaqaxs  qlesexdiixa  qleseiia,  wa,  lii 
axk-!alaxes  la£wiinEme  qa  ax£edesexa  loq!we,  qa  gaxes  kael 
lax  k!udzelasas.  Wa,  hex-ida£mesa  tstedaqe  qweiEyindEx  t!Ema- 
k-Eya£yases  qledzadze  lExa\ya.  Wii,  la  £wax-sanalltxa  qledzadzaxs  60 
lae  k!udzEnolllaq.  Wa,  lii  k'ael  cwalase  loq!\va  lax  Llasanalllasa 
qledzadze  lExa£ya.  Wii,  he£mis  la  dalts!alasda£xusexa  qlesena 
laxa  lExa£ye,  qa£s  lii  kimts!alas  laxa  loq!we.  Wii,  gilnaxwa- 
£mese  ewilg-ElEne  yisx'Enasexs  lae  ts!EXLEntsa  kEmtkatmote  yis- 
x-En  liixes  lEgwIle.  Wii,  lii  axusa£mese  he  gweg'ileda  tstedaqe  65 
LE£wis  liVwunEme  hahanakwap !exs  klmtae.  Wii,  g-il£mese  £wFla 
la  k'lmdEkwa  q!eseniixs  lae  Le£laleda  bEgwanEmaxes  gwE£yowe 
qa£s  Le£liilasE£wa  laxes  LeLELtda  lo£xs  hiie  Le£lalasE£wes  £nE£me- 
mote.  Wa,  g-ll£mese  la  Le£lale  la£wimEmasexa  q  !esc[  lasLaxa  k'!il- 
x'e  qlesena,  lae  ax£edxa  L!e£na  LE£wa  ts!ololagats!e  LlExosgEma,  70 
qa  giixes  gwalll  ax£fixel  liix  k!waelasas.  Wa,  he£misa  ha£yal£a  IoeI- 
q!wa,  qa  gaxes  ogwaqa.  Wii,  la£me  liikEle  hVwuiiEmasexes  Le£la- 
nEine,  qaxs  k'lesae  alaele  k!we£lena£ya.  Wii,  la£me  ttEm  k!uk!wax-- 
siila  laxes  gwE£yowe,  qa£s  k!us£alilasa  Le£lanEme.   Wa,  g-il£mese  £wi- 


576  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  85 

75  As  soon  as  all  arc  in,  ||  the  woman  wipes  out  with  shredded  cedar- 
bark  |  a  medium-sized  dish.  As  soon  as  she  has  done  so,  she  takes 
the  |  large  dish  with  the  stripped  currants  and  puts  it  down  where 
she  is  sitting.  |  Then  she  takes  a  large  wooden  ladle,  dips  it  into  the  | 

80  stripped  currants,  and  dips  them  into  the  ||  medium-sized  dish. 
When  it  is  half  full,  she  puts  it  aside  and  |  takes  another  medium- 
sized  dish,  and  she  puts  it  down  where  the  other  one  |  stands  con- 
taining the  stripped  currants.  She  puts  |  stripped  currants  into  it; 
and  when  it  is  half  full,  she  |  puts  it  away.     She  continues  doing  this 

85  with  the  others;  and  when  ||  all  the  medium-sized  dishes  contain 
currants,  she  takes  her  oil  |  and  pours  it  on,  so  that  they  are  floating 
in  it.  When  |  she  has  done  so,  the  horn  spoons  are  given  to  all  those 
who  are  to  eat  |  the  raw  currants;  and  when  every  one  who  is  going 
to  eat  currants  lias  a  spoon,  |  then  the  dishes  with  the  currants  are 

90  placed  in  front  ||  of  them.  Now  there  are  three  men  to  |  each  dish. 
As  soon  as  all  (the  dishes)  have  been  put  down,  |  those  who  are  to  eat 
the  currants  take  up  the  horn  spoons,  and  |  all  begin  to  eat  the  cur- 
rants floating  in  the  oil.  There  |  is  more  oil  in  (each  dish)  than  there 
are  currants,  because  the  currants  without  oU  cause  constipation.  || 

95  They  do  not  stop  eating  until  all  |  the  oU  and  the  currants  are  at  an 
end.     Then  those  who  have  been  eating  the  raw  currants  go  out.  I 


75  aeLExs  lae  hex'£ida£ma  tsEdaqe  dedEgEg'asa  q loyaakwe  k'adzEk" 
.laxa  hiVyfd-'a  loElqlwa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwfdExs  lae  ax£edxa  kimdE- 
gwatsle  £walas  loqlwaxa  qlesena  qaes  hang'allles  laxes  klwaelase. 
Wa,  lii  ax£eilxa  £vviilase  khvagEga  lrittslEnaqa,  qa£s  tseqes  laxa 
k'EmdEkwe  qlesena.     Wa,  la  tsEy5sElasa  k'EmdEkwe  qlesena  Laxa 

80  ha£yal£a  loqlwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  wlqttlllaq  qa£s 
ax£edexa  ogiHliixat!  hel£a  loqlwa  qa£s  la  h&nstolilas  lax  ha£nelas- 
dasa  la  qlets'.alaxa  klmdEkwe  qlesena.  Wa,  laxae  tsetslotsa 
klmdEkvve  qlesena  laq.  Wii,  g'ih'Emxaawise  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  hie 
wlqillllaq.     Wii,   ax"sa'mese  he  gwegilaxa  waokwe.    Wa,  g-tlemese 

85  £wi'"wults  lEwakwa ha£yalc"a  q  !eq  lets  lala  IdElq  Ivvaxs  lae  ax£edxes  l  !eena, 
qa£s  klunqlEqeq.  Wii,  la£me  tlEplEgElisxa  Lle£na.  Wii,  giPmese 
gwalExs  lae  ts lEwanaedzEma  tslololaqe  k-ak'EtslEnaq  laxa  q!esq!as- 
Laxa  kTilx-e  qlesena.  Wa,gil£mese  £wIlxtoweda  qlesq  lasLaxak'lil- 
xe  qlesenaxs  lae  IcaedzEmeda  c[  !eq  lets  lala  loElq  Ivva   laxa  qlesqlas- 

90  Laxa  klilxe  qlesena.  Wii,  la£me  yaeyuduxuleda  bebEgwanEinaxa 
enal£nEmexLa  loqlwa.  Wii,  g-il£mese  £w!lg"alilExs  lae  hexeida£ma 
qlesqlasLaxa  qlesena  iix£edxes  tsletslololaqe  k-akEtslEiU'ci,  qa£s 
£niixwe  q!esq!as£ida  laxa  tlEplEgElesaxa  Lle£na  qlesena.  Wa,  la£me 
he'    q!iigawa£ya    Llemasa    qlesena,    qaxs    aatlalagilaeda    qlesenaxs 

95  k-leasae  Lle£na  kliingEins.  Wa,  iil-'mese  gwal  qlesqlasExs  lae  £wi- 
!laxa  qlesena   LE£wa  Lle£na.     Wii,  g11£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  hoquwiilseda 


boas]  RECIPES  577 

These  are  not  given  at  a  feast  to  many  |  tribes.     That  is  all  about  97 
the  currants.  | 

Mashed  Currants  and  [  Salal- Berries. — When   the  salal-berries  are  1 
thoroughly  ripe,  |  the  woman  goes  to  pick  salal-berries.  and  at  the 
same  time  she  picks  currants  |  which  are  also  ripe.  ||  She  has  one  5 
basket  for  salal-berries,  and  another  |  basket  for  currants.     When  the 
baskets  are  full,  j  she  puts  on  the  top  covering  of  hemlock-branches; 
and  after  doing  so,  |  she  ties  down  the  top  and  carries  them  on  her 
back  to  her  |  house.     There  she  puts  them  down  next  to  her  seat.  || 
She  puts  down  a  large  dish  on  the  floor,  outside  of  her  seat,  |  and  she  10 
takes  the  salal-berry  basket  and  puts  it  down  at  the  |  right-hand  side 
of  the  large  dish.     She  unties  the  string  on  top  of  her  |  salal-berry 
basket,  and,  after  doing  so,  she  pulls  out  the  |  hemlock-branches 
which  cover  it,  and  throws  them  into  the  fire.     Then  she  takes  jj 
one  of  the  salal-berry  branches  and  strips  off  the  berries  |  into  the  15 
large  dish.     She  continues  doing  this,  and  only  |  stops  when  it  is  all 
done.     She  throws  the  stripped  |  stems  into  the  fire.     Then  she  puts 
aside  the  empty  basket,  and  |  takes  the  basket  containing  the  cur- 
rants and  puts  it  in  the  place  of  the  ||  empty  basket.     She  unties  the  20 
top  string;  and  |  as  soon  as  it  is  off,  she  pulls  off  the  hemlock-branches 

qlesqlasdiixa   k-!ilxe   qlesena.     Wa,  laEm  k'les  Le-lalayo  laxa  qle-  97 
nEme  lelqwalaLa£ya.     Wii,  laEm  gwal  laxa  qlesena. 

Mashed    Currants    and    Salal-Berries     (QlwedzEk"     qlesena    LE£wa  ] 
nEklule). — Wa,  he£maaxs    lae    alaklala    la    qlayoqweda   nEklule, 
yixs  liix'de   nEkweda    tslEdaqaxa    nEk!iile.     Wii,  lii    qlaqlesbalaxa 
qleseniixs  lae  nEqlekwa. 

Wa,  laEm  ogu£la£me  liEgwatsliisexa  nEklule,  wa,  laxae  5gu£la-'me  5 
q  ledzats  liisexa  qlesena.     Wii,  gib'mese  qoqtitleda  laElxa£yasexs  lae 
ts lets lak'Eyindalasa  qlwaxe  laq.     Wit,  g-ihmese  gwiitexs  lae  tletlE- 
mak-Eyindalaq.     Wii,  g-axe  oxLoltlalaqexs  g'axae    naenakwa  luxes 
g-okwe.     Wii,  lii  oxLEg'alilas  laxes  hemEne£lase  k!waeJlasa.     Wii,  la 
ax£etlxa  £walase  loq!wa,  qa  gaxes  haenel  lax  Llasalilases  k!wae'lase.  10 
Wa,  lii  ax£edxa    nEgwats!e  lExa£ya,  qafs  hang'agEliles  lax  helk-!o- 
tiiga£yasa  ^walase  loq!wa.      Wii,  lii   qwelEyindEx  t!Emak-Eya£yases 
nEgwatsle    lExa-ya.       Wii,    g-il£mese    gwalExs    lae    nexEmwEyodxa 
qlwaxe  ts!ak-Eyes  qa£s  tslExudes  laxes  lEgwile.     Wii,  lii  dax£idxa 
£iiEinxLala  laxa  yisx'Enasa  nEk!ide  xig-ElEndeq,  qa="s  lii  x*Ix-ts!alas  15 
laxa    £walase  loqlwa.     Wii,  lii    hex-saEm   gweg-ilaq.      Wii,  al£mese 
gwatexs  lae   £wi£la.     Wii,   la£me    aEm   la  ts!EXLalasa   xlxaxmote 
yisx'En    laxes   lEgwile.      Wii,  lii    Lequlilxa  la  loptsla   lExa£ya,  qa£s 
lii   iix£eclxa    cjledzatsle  lExa£ya,  qaEs  la  hanstolilas  lax  ha£nelasdiisa 
la  loptsla  lExa£ya.     Wii.  laxae  qwelEyindEx  t!Emak-Eya£yas.     Wa,  20 
g-il£mese  lawiixs  lae  nExEmwEy5dxa  qlwaxe  qa£s  tslEXLEndes  laxes 
T.j0o2— 21— 35  eth— pt  1 37 


57S  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE   K.WAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.so 

22  and  throws  them  into  the  ]  fire.  When  this  is  done,  she  takes  out 
a  hunch  of  currants  |  and  strips  them  off,  and  puts  them  on  top  of 
the  salal-berries  |  which  have  been  stripped  oil'  and  which  are  in  the 

25  dishes.  She  strips  the  currant-stems  ||  and  puts  the  currants  on  the 
salal-berries  that  has  been  stripped  off,  and  |  she  throws  the  currant- 
stems  into  the  fire.  She  continues  doing  this  with  the  |  others;  and 
as  soon  as  the  basket  is  empty,  |  she  puts  it  away.  She  takes  her 
husband's  stone  hammer  |  by  the  small  end  with   the  right  hand, 

30  and  ||  with  the  big  end  she  pounds  the  mixed  salal-berries  and 
currants.  |  She  pounds  them  with  the  stone  hammer  for  a  long  time 
ami  only  stops  when  |  all  the  salal-berries  and  currants  have  all  burst 
and  are  |  all  mixed.     When  this  is  done,  she  tells  her  husband  |  to 

35  go  and  invite  whomever  he  likes  from  among  the  chiefs,  ||  for  only 
chiefs  eat  this  kind  of  food,  consisting  of  salal-berries  |  mixed  with 
currants;  and  the  owner  of  this  kind  of  food,  |  salal-berries  and  cur- 
rants, eats  it, — the  woman,  her  husband,  |  and  their  children.  Then 
the  woman's  husband  goes  out  to  |  invite  the  chiefs  and  their  wives; 

40  and  as  soon  as  the  woman's  ||  husband  goes  out  of  the  house,  she  takes 
her  small  dishes  and  her  |  horn-spoon  basket,  and  puts  them  dow;i 
next  to  her  seat,  |  and  also  her  oil,  and  she  spreads  out  a  new  mat  on 
which  |  her  husband's  guests  are  to  sit.     As  soon  as  she  has  done  so, 

45  the  chiefs  come  in  with  their  wives,  and  husband  and  wife  ||  sit  down 

22  lEgwIle.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  daltslodxa  £nEmxLala  qlesena, 
qa's  la  k'imtEylndalasa  qlesena  lax  okiiya£yasa  x'ig'Ekwe  iiEklii- 
laxa  la  k"!ats!axa   kimdEgwatsle  loqlwa,  qa£s  kimdEltsEndex  q!e- 

25  dzanas,  qa£s  la  k*  lak'Eyints  laxa  klmdekwe  nEkluia.  Wa,  laxae 
tslEXLEnts  qledzanas  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  axusa£mese  he  gweg-ilaxa 
waokwe.  Wa.  gll£mese  ewllg"Elts !awa  q!edzats!a  lExiixs  lae 
g-exaxes  laElxa£ye.  Wa,  la  8x£edEX  pElpElqases  hVwiinEme.  Wa, 
hetla  dfdasose  wllba-yasa  pslpElqases  helk-!ots!ana£yaxs  lae  Llra- 

30  kulg-es  LEExubaeyas  laxa  malagEkwe  nEk!fd  LE£wa  qlesena.  Wa, 
Iti  geg-illl  LlEmkulgesa  pElpElqe  laq.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae 
£naxwaEm  la  kuxi£ideda  nEklule  LE£wa  qlesena.  Wa,  la£me  ala- 
k!ala  la  lElga.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  axk- lalaxes  lii-'wunEme 
qa  las    LE£lalaxes    gwE=yowe,  qa£s  Le£lalasE£wa  laxa  g-Ig-igama£ye. 

35  qaxs  lex'a£maeda  gug'ig'amae  ha£mapxa  he  gwek"  malaqEla  iiEk!ul 
LE£wa  qlesena.  Wa,  laxae  lexa£ma  axnogwadasa  he  gwek"  mala- 
qEla nEkliil  LE£wa  qlesena  ha£mapEqxa  tslEdaqe  LE£wis  la£wflnEme 
LE£wis  sasEme.  Wa,  lit  qas'Ideda  la-wunEinasa  tslEdaqe,  qa£s  la 
Le£lalaxa   gig-igama£je    LE£wis   gEgEnEme.     Wa,  gil£mese  ltiwElse 

40  la-wunEmasa  tslEdaqaxs  lae  hex£IdaEm  &x£edxes  laElogiime  LE£wis 
ts lololagats !e  LlExosgEina,  qa£s  gaxes  gex-g-ael  lax  k!wae£lasas 
LE£wis  L!e£na.  Wa,  laxae  LEplalllasa  eEldzowe  leEl£wa£ya  lax 
k!udze£lasLas  LeJlanEmases  hVwunEme.  Wa,  gih'mese  gwalExs 
g-axae   hogwilEleda  hehayasEk'ala  g-Tg-igama£ya.     Wii,  la  hehaya- 


boas]  RECIPES  579 

next  to  each  other  on  the  mat  that  lias  been  spread  out  for  them,  j   45 
When  they  are  all  in,  the  wife  of  the  host  prepares  |  her  small  dishes. 
She  counts  how  many  |  married  couples  there  are,  and  she  puts  down 
the  same  number  of  small  dishes  for  [two  of]  them.  [  Each  man  and 
wife  will  have  one  dish.     She  takes  soft  shredded  cedar-bark,  ||  wipes  50 
out  the  small  dishes,  and,  after  doing  so,  |  she  takes  a  large  horn 
spoon,  takes  the  |  large  dish  of  salal-berries  mixed  with  currants,  and 
puts  it  down  next  |  to  her  seat.     Then  she  dips  the  large  horn  ladle 
in  |  and  stirs  the  berries.     After  doing  so,  she  dips  them  out  and  puts 
thein  ||  into  the  small  dishes.     She  only  stops  when  they  are  nearly  55 
filled.  |  She  continues  doing  this  with  the  others.     When  she  has 
finished,  |  she  takes  oil  and  pours  it  on,  and  she  only  stops  pouring  it 
on  |  when  the  oil  covers  the  top  of  the  mixture  of  salal-berries  and  | 
currants.     As  soon  as  she  has  finished,  she  gives  the  spoon-basket  || 
to  her  husband,   who   distributes   the  spoons    among  his  |  guests.  60 
After  he  has  distributed  them,  he  puts  down  the  |  dishes  containing 
the  salal-berries  and  currants,  giving  one  to  eacli  couple.  |  Each  dish 
is  given  to  two,  a  husband  and  Ins  wife.  |  When  they  have  been  put 
down,  they  eat  with  their  spoons.     They  ||  try  to  eat  it  all,  eating  with  65 
their  spoons;  and  after  they  have  eaten,  |  they  go  out.     They  never 


sEkollhEmxs    lae    kludzEdzolIlaxes   k!wek!wadzo    leElwa£ya.     Wit,  45 
gil£mese  £wi£laex,a,  lae   hex-£ida£me   gEnEinasa    LeElala    xwanaMda, 
qa£s    ax£edexa    laElogtime.       Wit,  heEin    hos£itso£se    £waxogwasasa 
hehayasEk-ala.     Wa,   la  heEin  £waxexxeda  iaElogume  lax  maemalE- 
leda  bEgwanEine  LE£wis  gEiiEine;  wa,  la  5x£edxa  qloyaakwe  k-adzE- 
kwa,  qa£s  dedEg'iglndes  laxa  laElogtime.     Wa,  gllmiese  gwala,  lae  50 
ax£edxa  ewalase  mogug'a  kats  lEnaqa.    Wa,  la  ax£edxa  malaqElaat  !se 
£walas    loq'.waxa    iiEkliile    i.Efwa    qlesena,    qa£s    g-axe    hang-alllas 
laxes  k!wae£lase.     Wa,  la  tseqasa  £walase  mogug'a  k'ats !Enaq  l;lq, 
qa£s    xwetElga£yes  laq.       Wa,    g'ihmese    gwalExs  lae    tsetslodalas 
laxa    IaElogume.      Wa,    almaese    gwatexs    lae    Elaq    qot!a.      Wa,  55 
axusa£mese    he    gweg-ilaxa    waokwe.     Wa,    g'iPmese    gwatexs    lae 
ax£edxes    L!e£na,    qa£s    k!iiq!Eqes    laq.      Wii,  Sl'mese  gwalExs    hie 
haniElqEya£ya  L!e£na  lax    okuya£yasa    malaxstaakwe  nEk!iil  LE£wa 
qlesena.     Wa,  gilmiese    gwalExs    lae    ts!asa   tsololagatsle    l!exos- 
gEm    laxes     la£wunEine.      Wa,     he£mis     la     ts!E\vanaesElas    laxes  60 
Le£lanEme.     Wii,  gilJmese  £wilxtoxs  lae  k'aesasa  miilaxstaak"  tslala 
laElogumaxa  nEkhll  LE£wa  q!esena  laxa  hehayasEk'olile.     Wii,  laEm 
maemalEleda  bEgwanEine  LE£\vis  gEHEmaxa  £nal-cnEinexLa  laloguma. 
Wii,  gihmese  £wilg'alilExs  lae    hex-£idaEm   fyos£IdEX'da£xwa.     Wii; 
hix(la£xwe  £wa£wi£laaqexs  lae  £yos£idEq.     Wii,  gihmese  £wi£laxs  lae  65 
hoqiiwElsa.     Wii,  laEm  hewiixa  nagekilax  £wiipa,  qaxs  gwaqtelaaq 


580  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL 


67  drink  any  water  alter  eating  it,  for  they  do  not  want  |  to  lose  the  good 
taste  of  the  salal-berries  from  their  mouths.  !  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Huckleberries. — As1  soon  as  (the  woman)  enters  her  house,  she  puts 
down  |  the  two  baskets,  takes  a  |  short  wide  board  and  puts  it  down 
flat  near  the  place  |  where  she  always  sits:  and  she  takes  a  log  and  || 
5  rolls  it  towards  the  board,  so  li  al  one  end  of  the  short  wide  hoard 
rests  on  it.  |  When  this  is  done,  it  is  like  this: 
She  also  takes  a  piece  of  wood  which  is  not 
really  thick  (2)  and  |  puts  it  down,  and  she 
takes  anew  mat  (4)  and  |  spreads  it  out.     She 

10  lifts  up  the  edge  so  that  it  lies  on  the  piece  of  lire-wood  at  (2),  ||  and 
she  lifts  up  the  lower  end  of  the  board  (3)  for  cleaning  the  |  huckle- 
berries, and  spreads  under  it  one  edge  of  the  mat  (4)  on  to  which 
the  |  cleaned  huckleberries  roll.  As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,  she 
pushes  small  pieces  of  wood  under  the  |  sides  of  the  cleaning-board,  so 
that  it  lies  firmly  on  the  support  (1)  |   for  the  cleaning-board.     Alter 

15  all  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  a  Ij  bucket  with  water  and  puts  it 
down;  and  she  takes  her  |  huckleberry-baskets,  unties  the  top,  and 
takes  off  the  |  skunk-cabbage  covering.  As  soon  as  all  this  is  off,  she 
takes  the  |  bucket  and  pours  water  over  the  board  (3).  |  The  water 

20  runs  over  it,  as  it  runs  down  the  board  (3)  .  ||  As  soon  as  it  is  wet,  she  | 

67  lawiiyes  ex'p!aeL!Exawa£ye  qaeda  ex'p!EsgEma-yasa  nEk!iile.  Wa, 
hiEiiixae,  gwala. 
1  Huckleberries. — Wa,1  g-il£mese  laeL  laxes  g'okwaxs  lae  oxLEg'all- 
laxes  gwegwadatsle  laElxa£ya.  Wa,  la  hex-£idaEm  ax£edxa  ts!a- 
ts!axusEm§  £wadzo  saoku,  qa£s  paxeallles  laxa  mak-alame  lax 
hemEne£lase  k!wae£lats.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  LEkwe  lEqwa,  qa£s 
5  g'axe  len£nakulas  qa£s  g-axe  gelballtas  laxa  ts!ats!axusEme  £wadzo 
saokwa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalahlExs  lae  g-a  gwaleg-a  (jig.)-  Wa, 
laxae  ax'edxa  k!ese  alaEm  LEku  lex-En  lEqwa,  yix  (2),  qa£s  lii 
k-at!rdlhis.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxa  £walase  Eldzo  le:wa-ya  (4)  qa£s  hi 
LEp  lahlas.     Wa,  la    ek-  lEnxalaxs    lae    LEp  !Ena£ye   apsEnxa£yas  lax 

10  xwatEnxa£y§  (2).  Wa,  la  wlbEndEx  bEiiba£yas  k'imdEdzowaxa 
gwadEme  (3),  qa£s  LEbabodes  apsEnxa£yas  (4)  xa  q  lumEndzowasa 
kimdEkwe  gwadEma,  Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  g-api£lalax  ewun- 
xa£yas  k-imdEdzowa  qa  ek'es  paxEnayaena£yas  laxa  qenolilasa 
k'imdEzowaxa  gwadEme  (1).     Wa,  g-il£mese   gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes 

15  £wabEts!ala  nagatsla  qa  g-axes  ha£nela.  Wa,  laxae  ax'edxes  gwe- 
gwadatsle laElxa£ya,  qa£s  qwelEyindaleq,  qa£s  lawalex  LeLEpEya- 
£yas  k'!ik'!aok!wa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wl£la  la  lawEyakwa  lae  ax£edxa 
nagats!e,  qa£s  gugEdzodesa  £wape  lax  ek-!Eba£yasa  k'imdEdzowa  (3). 
Wa,  lii  wag-ildzayeda  £wapaxs    lae  waxEla  laxa  k'imdEdzowa    (3). 

20  Wa,  g-il£mese,    hamElgidzod    la    k'.ungEdzowa    kimdEdzowaxs   lae 


i  Continued  from  p.  21 1.  line  40. 


boas]  RECIPES  581 

puts  down  her  bucket,  takes  up  the  basket  with  huckleberries,  and,  |  21 
beginning  at  the  upper  end  of  the  cleaning-board,  she  pours  on  the 
huckleberries  |  while  it  is  still  wet.     The  huckleberries  roll  down  [  to 
the  end  of  the  cleaning-board,  ||  on  to  the  mat  (4)  which  has  been  25 
spread  out;  and  the  |  leaves  stick  to  the  cleaning-board  (3),  so  that 
there  are  |  no  leaves  on  the  mat  on  to  which  the  cleaned  huckle- 
berries roll.  |  As  soon  as  the  huckleberries  are  cleaned,  |  the  woman 
who  works  at  them  calls  her  husband  to  ||  take  hold  of  one  end  of  the  30 
board;  and  they  carry  it  |  out  of  the  house  in  which  the  huckle- 
berries are  being  worked,  and  they  put  it  down  flat  to  be  |  dried,  for, 
as  soon  as  it  is  dry,  the  |  leaves  fall  off,  and  the  wind  |  blows  them 
away.  || 

Mashed  Huckleberries. — Now,  you  know  how  huckleberries  are  35 
cleaned,  |  and  I  shall  not  talk  about  it  again.  |  When  the  woman  has 
picked  many  huckleberries,  she  |  asks  her  husband  to  go  and  invite 
many  people  of  different  tribes,  |  and  he  sends  out  two  young  men  to 
call  for  the  first  time.  ||  They  name  the  name  of  the  child  of  the  host  40 
who  is  about  to  give  a  feast  of  mashed  |  huckleberries.  The  woman 
and  her  husband  take  out  |  oil  and  dishes  and  spoons,  so  that  they 
stand  ready  at  the  |  left-hand  side  of  the  house  in  which  mashed 
huckleberries  are  to  be  eaten.  |  The  house  has  already  been  cleaned, 


hang'ahlases    nagats!e    qa£s    k'  loqiililexes    gwadats!e    lF.xa£ya,  qa£s  21 
ek'  !EbEiidexa  k  imdEclzoxs  lae  g-igEdzotsa  gwadEme  laqex,  he£mae 
ales    k!ungE(lzalasa    £wape.       Wii,    la    loxumg-ildzayeda    gwadEme 
k'initaso£s    qa£s    la    hebEiidala  loxwaxEla  laxa  k'imdEdzowaxs  lae 
hedz5dalaxa  qhimEndzowe   LEbel   le£wa£ya    (4).     Wa,  liiLa   k!iidE-  25 
dzodale    mamamasa  gwadEmse  laxa  kimdEdzowe   (3).     Wa,  laEm 
k-!eas  ladzodaleda  mania  ma  laxa  q  luniEndzowasa  la  kimdEk"  gwa- 
dEina.      Wii,    gil£mese   la    £wl£la    la   k'imdEkwa    gwadEmaxs    lae 
hex-£ida£ma    gwiigwatsela    tstediiq     Le£l5laxes    la£wiinEme    qa    las 
dadEbEndxa    k"lmdEdzowaxa    gwadEme,  qa£s    la     tlaxalaqexs    lae  30 
lawElsas  laxes  gwagwatsr'lats  !e  g-okwa,  qa£s  la  pax£Elsas  qa  Ieuio- 
dzox£wides,  qaxs   g'ih'mae    lEmodzox£w!deda    k  imdEdzowaxa  gwa- 
dEmaxs lae  hex"£idaEm  c|  !up8.1e    mamamasa    gwadEmaxs  lae  yox£- 
w!tso£sa  yala.1 

Mashed  Huckleberries. — LaEmLas  q!ol£aLElax  k'imt  !enaEyaxa  gwa-  35 
dEme.  Wa,  he£mesEn  lag'ila  k'les  naneltsEmala  gwagwexs£ala  laq. 
Wa,  he£maaxs  qlEyoLaeda  tstedaqaxa  gwadEmaxs  k-Klae,  wii,  lii 
axk"  liilaxes  la£wunEine  qa  Le£lalesexa  q  leiiEme  lelqwalaLa£ya.  Wa, 
lii  eyalaqasa  ma£lokwe  hii£yal£a,  qa  liis  g'allLlEs  Le£lala  qae.  Wii, 
laEm  LeqElax  LegEmas  xtinokwasa  gwatgiidasLaxa  qlwedzEkwe  40 
gwadEma.  Wii,  l&Leda  ts!Edaqe  LE£wis  la£wuiiEme  ax£wult lalitelaxa 
L!e£na  LE£wa  loElqlwe  LE£wa  k-ak-Ets!Enaqe  qa  g'iixes  gwalila  lax 
gEmxotstolIlasa  q!wedzExugaats!iixa  gwadEme  g'okwa,  ylxs  lamaa- 

1  Continued  on  p.  754,  line  1. 


582  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Leth.ann.35 

r>  and  mats  have  been  spread  out  around  it.  ||  After  the  young  men  have 
called  four  times,  the  people  come  into  the  house  where  the  |  mashed 
huckleberries  are  to  be  eaten.  Immediately  they  |  begin  to  sing  the 
feast  songs;  and  now  the  |  numaym  of  the  host  comes  to  help  him 
put  |  the  huckleberries  into  the  dishes.  || 

50  The  dishes  are  half  filled  with  huckleberries;  and  when  |  there  are 
some  in  each,  they  begin  to  mash  them  with  both  hands,  |  so  that 
they  burst;  and  after  they  have  |  burst,  they  pour  oil  over  them,  so 
that  there  is  one  half  |  mashed  huckleberries  and  one  half  oil.     When 

55  they  have  finished,  |j  they  distribute  the  spoons  among  the  guests; 
and  when  each  has  one,  they  I  put  the  dishes  with  the  mashed  huckle- 
berries one  in  front  of  eacli  six  |  men;  and  when  they  have  been  put 
down,  |  they    begin   to    eat,    and    all  |  eat   with    their   spoons    the 

60  mashed  huckleberries;  and  they  only  ||  stop  when  they  have  eaten 
everything.  Then  they  go  out  of  the  house.  That  is  all  |  about  it.  | 
They  never  drink  water  afterwards.  This  is  all  about  j  oneway,  what 
I  say  about  the  huckleberries. 
1  Cleaning  Huckleberries  (Blowing  huckleberries)  .—When  |  awoman 
cuiiics  home  who  has  tried  to  pick  many  huckleberries,  but  who  has 
found  only  a  few;  |  and  when  her  basket  is  only  half  full  of  huckle- 
berries,  which  she  tried  to  shake  off;  |  and  when  the  men  are  sitting 
5  on  their  summer  seats  ||  outside  the  house  of  the  owner  of  the  huckle- 

Lal  ektilelkwa  gokwe.     Wii,  laxae  LEpse£stalIlxusa  leEl£wa£ye.     Wa, 

45  g-il£mes  m5p!ene£sta  etse£steda  ha£yal£axs  g'axae  £wi£laeLeda  q!u- 
(|  !udzExllglLaxa  qlwedzEkwe  gwadEina.  Wa,  la  hex£idaEm  k!we- 
dala  dEnx£itsa  k!welayala  q lEimlEma.  Wii.  laxa  £wi£laEm  gaxeda 
MiHincinotasa  gwatelaxa  qlwedzEkwe  gwadEm  gi£wiilaxa  la  k'!a- 
tslalasa  gwadEme  laxa  loElqlwe. 

,"ii  Wa,  laEmxae  naEngoyaleda  loElqlwaxa  gwadEme;  wa,  gil£mese 
la  q!walxots!Ewakuxs  laxila'xwae  q  IwesElgEntses  £wi£waxsolts!a- 
ua£ye  laxa  gwadEme  qa  £naxwes  kux£ida.  Wii,  gilemese  £naxwa 
la  kux-£Iila  lae  k!unq!Eqasa  L!e£na  laq.  Wit.  laEmxae  naxsaap!ed;t 
qlwedzEkwe  gwadEm    LE£wa    i,!e'na.     Wii,    gil£mese    gwalExs    lae 

55  ts lEwanaedzEma  k-ak'Ets!Enaqe.  Wii,  g-il£mese  £w!lxtoxs  lae  k-ae- 
dzEma  q!weq!wredzEx"ts!ala  loElqlwaxa  gwadEme  laxa  q!eq!ELaku 
bebEgwanEm  laxa  £niil-nEmexr.a  loqlwa.  Wii,  gil£mese  £wllgall- 
Iexs  laxda-xwae  £naxwa  £yos£itses  k'ak'Ets!Enaqe.  Wii,  la£me  £na- 
xwa  <|  !uc|  !wedzaagux:t  qlwedzEkwe    gwadEina.     Wa,  5l£Emxaawise 

60  gwatexs  lae  £wl£laq.  Wa  hex-£ida£mlse  hoquwElsa.  Wa,  laEmxae 
gwala.  Wa,  laEm  hewaxa  nagekllax  £wapa.  Wa,  laem  gwiil  laxa 
£nEmx-£Idala  gwagwex-s£ala  laxa  gwadEme. 
1  Cleaning  Huckleberries  (Poxwaxa  gwadEme). — Wa,  he£maaxs 
g-axae  na£nakweda  k'lak'IalEme  tslEdiiqxa  gwadEme,  yixs  holalo- 
Laaq,  yixs  a£mae  nEgoyales  k'ak-!alEmats!e  lExaxa  gwadEme. 
Wa,  gil£mese  awaq'.tiseda  bebEgwanEine  laxa  awaqwa£ye  lax  Llasa- 
5  na£yas   g'okwasa   gwadadasa    gwadEme;    lae    hegElsElaEmses    k-  !a- 


boas]  BECIPES  583 

berries, — then   (the  woman)  goes   with  the  |  huckleberries  she    has  6 
shaken  off  to  the  men  on  the  summer  seat,  and  |  puts  clown  her  basket. 
The  woman  says,  "Blow  at  the  huckleberries  that  |  I  tried  to  shake 
off!"  and  immediately  |  the  men  all  put  the  right  hand  into  the  || 
huckleberry-basket  that  she  tried  to  fill,  and  take  a  handful  each,  10 
pour  |  it  to  and  fro  from  hand  to  hand,  and  blow  at  them  so  as  to  blow 
off  the  leaves;  |  and  when  all  the  leaves  have  been  blown  off,  they 
put  the  huckleberries  |  into  the  mouth  and  cat  them;  and  they  only 
stop  eating  the  |  blown  huckleberries  when  they  finish  t!  em.     They 
do  this  when  it  is  ||  very  hot,  for  the  blown  huckleberries  arc  cooling  15 
when  they  |  are  eaten  on  a  warm  day.     Thai  is  all  about  t]  is. 

Viburnum-Berries  with  Water  and  Oil. —  |  Now  I  will  talk  about  the 
eating  of  viburnum-berries  |  mixed  with  water  and  oil.  They  do  not 
invite  many  people  ||  to  eat  these,  for  this  is  only  the  food  for  husband  20 
and  wife  |  and  their  children,  when  there  are  no  more  ripe  viburnum- 
berries,  and  when  the  man  wishes  to  |  invite  his  near  relatives.  When 
whiter  comes,  |  and  the  oil  they  put  on  the  viburnum-berries  gets 
thick,  the  |  woman  takes  a  wedge  and  wedges  off  the  cover  ||  of  the  25 
box  containing  the  berries  mixed  with  water  and  oil.  When  the 
cover  |  is  off,  she  takes  a  small  dish  and  a  spoon,  and  she  puts  the  | 
small  dish  on  the  corner  of  her  box,  and  she  dips  the  spoon  into  the  | 

klalEmaiiEme  gwadEm  laxa  awaq!iise   bebEgwanEina,  qa£s  la  han-  6 
gElsas  laq.     Wa,  la  £nekeda  tslEdaqe:     "Wax-da£xu  lag'a  pox£w!d- 
xEn  k-!ak-!alEinanEma  qEn    gwadEma."     Wa,  hex£ida£mesa   £nii- 
xwa  bebEgwanEm  sats!ases  hehelk-!ots!ana£ye  e^eyasowa  laxa  k-!a- 
k1  lalEmats  !e  gwats!ala    lExa£ya  qa£s  gox£wide  laq.      Wa,  la   goxo-  10 
si:lalas  laxes  epsotts  !ana£yaxs  lae  poxwaq  qa£s  p5x'alex  inamamas. 
Wa,  gib'mese  £wl£la  la  poxEwakwe  mamamasexs  lae   g0xk!usEiaq 
laxes  sEmse  qa£s  gwatgutledeq.     Wii,  al£mese  gwal  gwatgiitxa  p5- 
kwe  gwadEmxs    lae  ewi£laq.      Wa,    heEm     hex"dEms    gweg'ilaqexs 
Lomae  tslElqweda    enala,  qaxs   k- lEnodzEmaeda  pokwe    gwiidEmxs  15 
gwatgiitsE-waaxa  ts!Ek[wa  enala.     Wii,  laEmxae  gwala. 

Viburnum-Berries  with  Water  and  Oil  (L!EL!iigF.xugExa  L'akwe 
tlElsa). — ^Wii,  la^mesEn  edzaqwal  gwa^\vex-s;rilal  laxa  L!EL!iigExu- 
g-axa  Llakwe  tlElsa,  yixs  kMesae  Le'lalayo  laxa  q!eiiEme  lelc^wa- 
laLa£ya,  yixs  lex-a£mae  t!Elst!asEx  gwexsdEinaseda  hayasEk-ala  '-0 
LE£wis  sasEmaxa  la  k- !ek- layoEnxxa  tlElse,  loxs  £nek'ae,  qa£s 
Le'lalexes  maxmigile  LeLELala.  Wii,  he£maaxs  lae  tslawfmxa, 
yixs  lae  alakMala  gEnk-e  L!eLlEnaga£yasa  tMse.  Wii,  he£mis  la 
5x£edaatsa  tslEdaqaxa  LEmgayowe,  qafs  lit  LEmg-ELElodEx  yiku- 
va£yases  L'agwatsle  tlEls  Eawatsa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  lawag'iLEle  yikii-  25 
yasexs  lae  ax£edxa  hllogume  LE£wa  k-ats!Enaqe,  qa£s  la  hfing'agEntsa 


584  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAK1UTL  [eth.  ann.  sc 

mixture  of  water  and  oil,  for  only  this  shows  on  top,  for  it  |  is  thick. 

30  She  dips  into  it  until  she  comes  to  the  viburnum-berries.  ||  Then  she 
puts  these  into  a  small  dish.  When  there  are  enough  in  it,  she  puts  | 
the  dish  containing  the  water  and  oil  and  the  berries  next  to  the  | 
box.  She  takes  the  cover  and  puts  it  on  bottom-side  up,  so  that  | 
the  pegs  stand  upward.     After  doing  so,  she  picks  up  |  the  dish  and 

35  puts  it  down  in  front  of  her  husband  ||  and  her  children.  After  doing 
so,  she  takes  her  small  |  spoon-basket,  and  she  gives  each  a  spoon,  | 
and  they  begin  to  eat  with  the  spoons.  Then  they  eat  |  the  viburnum- 
berries  mixed  with  oil  and  water.  They  are  in  clumps,  for  they  stick 
together  |  on  account  of  the  thick  oil.     They  do  not  blow  out  any- 

40  tiling  ||  when  they  eat  them,  for  the  women  clean  them  well  when  they 
are  |  working  at  the  viburnum-berries.  After  they  have  eaten,  the 
woman  |  takes  her  small  dish  and  puts  it  away.  She  takes  a  dry 
salmon  ajid  |  roasts  half  of  it  over  the  fire;  and  as  soon  as  one  side 
of  it  begins  to  be  blistered  |  a  little,  it  is  done.     Then  she  breaks  it 

45  into  small  pieces  ||  and  puts  (the  pieces)  into  a  small  dish.  She 
places  this  in  front  |  of  her  husband  and  children,  and  they  eat  it  to 
take  the  |  oil  taste  out  of  their  mouths.  Therefore  they  eat  the 
blistered  |  salmon  without  oil.  They  eat  dried  salmon  without  oil, 
because  I  the  oil  and  the  viburnum-berries  burn  the  throats  of  those 


27  talogiime  laxes  Llagwatsle  Lawatsa.  Wa,  lii  tseqases  k-atstenaqe 
lax  qElokwe  L!e£na,  qaxa  lexa£mae  la  nelala  axa£yexa  tlElse,  yixs 
lae  gEnka.     Wa,  he£mes  la  tseqE£yesos    lagaa   laxa  tlElse,  qa£s  la 

.30  tsetslalas  laxa  lalogume.  Wa,  gu£mese  helatslaxs  lae  ha/nolllasa 
L!axuts!ala  lalogumaxa  Llakwe  t!Elsa  lax  onalllasa  L!iigwats!§ 
Lawatsa.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  yikitya-yas,  qa£s  nELEylndes  laq,  qa 
ek"  tebalisa  L!eL'!abEdza-yas.  Wa,  la  g-ll£mese  gwalExs  lae  k-ag  ill- 
laxa  L!axuts!ala  laloguma,  qa£s  la  kaxdzamolilas  laxes  lu£wunEme 

35  LE£wis  sasEme.  Wa,  g-llemese  gwatExs  lae  ax£edxes  am£amayaa- 
tslaxa  k'atslEnaqe  kayatslii,  qa-s  la  tslEwanaesaa  laxda£xuq. 
\V;i,  laxda£xwe  £yos£Itses  k:1k-Ets!Enaqe  laq.  Wa,  la£me  LlELla- 
gExug"Exa  Llakwe  tlElsa,  yix  am£amsgEmalae  qaes  laena£ye  k!wa- 
tala    qaeda    gEnk-a    Lle'na.      \V;i,  lainn    k'!eas    poxalayox-daExus 

40  laqexs  lae  haemapEq,  qaxs  alak'lalaeda  tslEdaqe  aek'Iaxs  lae 
t!at!Eltsllaxes  t!Else.  Wa,  g'il£mese  swiElaqexs  laeda  tslEdaqe 
k-agilllaxes  lalogume,  i|a;>  g-exaq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  xa£mase,  qa£s 
dzadzax'Lales  laxes  lEgwilexa  apsodile.  Wa,  gil£mese  pEnpEndzE- 
dzox£WldExs    lae    Llopa.      Wa,    lit  k  !ok!upsEndEq,  qa    am£amayas- 

45  towesexs  lae  fixts!ots  laxa  lalogume,  qa£s  lii  k'axdzamolflaa 
laxes  la£wiinEme  LE£wis  sasEme.  Wa,  laEm  LaqodElts  lfixes 
Laxp!aeL'.Exawa£ye.  Wit,  he-mis  lag-ilas  wiohvalxa  tslEitkwe 
xa£masa.  Wii,  laEm  WElwalqexs  lae  xEmsxasxa  xa£mase,  (ptxs 
alak'!alae      Laq!Exoyo\va       L!eL!Enaga£yasa      t!Elsaxs      lae     gwala 


boas]  RECIPES  585 

who  eat  them.     After  ||  they  have  eaten  the  salmon  without  oil,  |  50 
they  drink  a  little  water.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Ripe  Sucked  Viburnum-Berries. — When  the  viburnum-berries  |  are  1 
quite  ripe,  they  are  sucked.  |  The  woman  takes  her  front-basket  and 
hangs  it  in  front  of  her  body.  |  Then  she  goes  to  the  viburnum  patch ; 
and  when  she  gets  there,  she  picks  off  (the.  berries)  and  puts  them  into 
her  ||  basket.     When  (her  basket)  is  full,  she  goes  |  home.     At  once  5 
she  calls  any  one  who  likes  to  come,  |  and  gives  them  ripe  viburnum- 
berries    to   suck.     When  |  the   guests   come,    they   sit   down.     The 
woman  takes  a  new  mat  |  and  spreads  it  hi  front  of  her  guests;  and 
when  it  is  down  on  the  floor,  ||  she  takes  the  basket  with  the  berries  10 
and  pours  them  |  on  the  mat  that  has  been  spread  out.     Then  she 
puts  down  her  |  basket,  as  it  is  now  empty.     She  scatters  the  sucked 
berries  |  over  the  whole  length  of  the  mat.     As  soon  as  this  has  been 
done,  |  she  takes  an  oil-dish  and  pours  some  oil  into  it.  ||  After    this  15 
she  puts  it  down  next  to  the  sucked  berries.  |  Then  the  men  take  hold 
of  one  bunch  of  |  berries  each,  dip  them  into  the  oil,  and  put  them 
into  the  mouth,  |  and  then  they  suck  them.     They  just  put  them  on 
the  tongue  |  and  press  them  against  the  palate;  and  then  the  berry 
bursts,  ||  and  they  suck  out  the  edible  part.  |  The  stems  are  thrown  20 
into  the  fire.     They  continue  doing  this  |  while  they  are  eating  and 


ttelstlasaq.     Wa,  g-il£mese  £wi£laxes  WElwattsEwe  ts!Enku  xa£masaxs  50 
lae  xiiLlEx£Id  nagek-ilaxa  £wape.     Wa,  laEm  gwata. 

Ripe  Sucked  Viburnum-Berries   (K!iimdEku  t!Elsa). — Wii,  he£maaxs  1 
lae    alak'Iala    la    nEq  !ex£wldeda    ttelsaxs    lae    k!umdEkwa.     Wa, 
laasa  tslEdaqe  axEedxes  nanaagEme  lExa£ya,  qa£s  tEk!upEleqexs  lae 
laxa    tlEiyade.      Wa,    g-il£mese     lag-aa     laqexs    lae    k!ults!alaxes 
nanaagEme    lExa£ya.     Wa,  gilmiese    qot!e   nanaagEmasexs  g-axae  5 
na£naxu   laxes    gokwe.     Wii,    hex,£ida£mese    Le£lalaxes  gwE£yo  qaes. 
k!\vak!umdEg-amatso£ses    k'.umdEkwe    t!Elsa.     Wii,    gil-mese    gax 
k !us£rililr-(ia    iA-lanEmaxs  laeda  tslEdaqe  ax£edxa  Eldzowe  le£wa£ya 
qa£s  lit  LEpdzamolilas  laxes  Le£laiiEme.     Wii,  gil£mese  gwal£al!lExs 
lae  ax£edxes    k!umdEgwats!axa    tlElse    lExa£ya,  qa£s    la    gugEclzots  10 
laxa     LEpdzamalile     le£wa£ya.       Wii,   lii     geg-alllases     nanaagEme 
lExiixs  lae  loptslawa,  c[a£s  lii   lEndzotsa  tlElse  k!umdEku  labEnda- 
lax  £wasgEmasasa  k!iimdEx"g-adzowe  le£wa£ya.     Wa,  g-il£mese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  ax£edxes   ts!Ebats!e   qa£s    k!unxts!odesa    L!e£na  laq.     Wa, 
gil£mese    gwfdExs    lae    k"inxElllas    laxa    klumdEkwe    t!Elsa.     Wii,  15 
hex-£ida£mesa   £naxwa   bebEgwanEm    dax-£Idxa  £nEmxLa  k!umdEku 
t!Elsa,  qa£s    tslEplides    laxa    L!e£na,    qa£s    ts!oq!uses    laxes   sEmse. 
Wii,  he£mis  la  k!fimdatsex.     Wii,  laEm  aEm  ax£edzots  laxes  k-  lilEme, 
cja£s  tEk'ostodes  lax  ek'!odelases  SEmse.     Wit,  he£mis  lakukuxsaatsa 
tlElse.  Wa,  he£mis  la  k!timdatsex  hamts!avvasa  tlElse.  Wii,  he£mis  la  20 
tsiExLrdatses  t!et  !Elt!Elts!E.\La£yas.     Wii,   ax"sii£mese  he  gweg-ilaxs 


586  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  I ETH.  ANN.  31 

22  sucking  the  viburnum-berries,  and  they  only  stop  when  everything 
has  been  eaten.  |  Some  of  them  stop  sooner,  because  they  can  not 
stand  to  have  their  tongues  |  rubbed  through.     These  are  the  ones 
25  who  have  never  eaten  sucked  viburnum-berries  before.  ||  As  soon  as 
they  have  done  so,  they  go  out.     That  is  all  about  the  viburnum- 
he  rry.  j 
1       Steamed  Viburnum-Berries. — There  is  one  tiling  that  I  forgot  when 
I  |  described  the  steaming  of  viburnum-berries,  |  for  you  know   the 
way  in  which  viburnum-berries  are  picked  when  they  are  green.  |  In 
5  this  way  they  are  eaten  in  Knight  Inlet.  ||  As  soon  as  the  woman 
comes  home,  she  picks  off  the  stems  and  puts  |  the  cleaned  berries 
into    the   large  basket.     When  |   they   have    been    picked    off,    she 
puts    the  large   |  basket  with  the  picked  berries   in  a  cool  corner 
of  the  house.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  she  goes  into  the  woods,  car- 
lo rying  her  basket  on  her  back.     She  is  going  to  ||  look  for  fern-fronds 
and  skunk-cabbage  leaves,  and  she  tries  to  fmd  very  broad  ones.  | 
As  soon  as  she  finds  broad  leaves  of  skunk-cabbages,  |  she  breaks  off 
the  leaves;  and  when  she  has  enough,  she  leaves  them  there  J  and 
goes  on,  carrying  her  basket  on  her  hack  and  looking  for  fern-fronds. 
When  |  she  has  found  these,  she  puts  the  basket  down,  picks  off  the 
15  fern-fronds  and  ||  puts  them  into  the  basket.     When  it  is  full,     she 
ties  down  the  top  and  carries  the  basket  with  fern-fronds  |  back  the 
way  she  came.     She  picks  up  the  skunk-cabbage  on  her  way  |  home. 

22  k!uk!umdEx"g-aaxa  tlElse.  Wii,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae  £wi£leda  wao- 
kwe.  Wa,  la  gEyol  gwala  wayats  lalaqxa  gEyole  basamasxes  k!ili:- 
mexa    yagilwate   lax  k!uk'umdExugaxa    khlmdEkwe  tlElsa.     Wa, 

25  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  koquwElsa.  Wa,  laEm  gwal  liixa  tlElse. 
1  Steamed  Viburnum-Berries. — enEmx-eidalag"ln  idElelawek-  lax  gwe- 
g'ilasaxa  t!Elsaxs  kttnsasE£waeda  kiinekwe  tlElsa,  yfxs  lEEmaaxLa- 
qos  qlaLElax  gwegilasasa  tlElsaxa  tlElsaxs  he£mae  ales  IeiiIeiix- 
sF.me.  Wa,  liii£mis  gwex-saxs  lae  t!ElsasEewa  lax  Dzawade.  Wa, 
5  g'ih'mese  g'ilx  namakuxs  lae  klttlpalaq  laxes  yisx'ine,  qa£s  k'  !ats!a- 
lesa  la  k!ulbEku  t!Els  laxa  nag'e  ewalas  lExa£ya.  Wii,  g-ilemese 
£wl£la  la  klulbElovaxs  lae  liang'alllases  k!iilbExuts!ala  t!Eldzats!e 
£walas  nag-e  lExa£ya  laxa  £wiidanegwiciases  g-okwe.  Wii,  g'il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  a,Le£sta   laxa  aL!e  oxLalaxes    lExaeye.      Wa,  laEm    lal 

10  alax  gEmsa  LE£wa  k!Ek'!aok!waxa  alii  la  awadzoxLa.  k-!Ek-!aok!wa 
alasoes.  Wa,  gil£mese  q!iixa  awadzoxLEwe  k'!Ek!aokwaxs  lae 
hex-£idaEm  p!ox£w!dEq.  Wii,  gil£mese  heloLExs  lae  gEinxEsala- 
qexs  lae  oxLalaxes  lExa£ye,  qa£s  lii  aliix  gEmsa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
q!;iqexs  lae  oxLEgaElsaxes  lExa£ye,   qa£s    k!ulx-£Idexa  gEmse,  qa£s 

15  lii  k!iilts!alas  laxes  gEmdzats!eye  lExa£ya.  Wii,  giPmese  qotlaxs 
lae  tlEmak'iyin  Iecj.  Wii.  la  5xLEX-£idxes  gEmdzats!eye  lExa£va. 
qa£s  gaxe  gagEmxbalaxes    k- !ak" !aok IwanEmaxs    g-axae  na£nakwa 


EQAS]  RECIPES  587 

Then  she  puts  down  the  skunk-cabbage  at  the  place  where  she  |  put 
the  large  basket,  and  she  puts  down  the  ||  basket  with  the  fern-  21) 
fronds.  After  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  |  her  clam-digging  stick 
and  a  large  horse-clam  shell,  and  she  sits  down  [  in  an  empty  corner 
of  the  house.  Then  she  pushes  the  digging-stick  into  the  ground  so 
that  it  |  stands  and  measures  off  (a  distance)  two  spans  away  from 
it.  |  Then  she  uses  a  small  ||  cedar-stick  for  a  mark.  She  takes  her  25 
clam-digging  stick  and  marks  |  a  line  on  the  floor,  beginning  at  the 
place  where  it  was  standing  to  the  place  where  the  cedar-stick  is  stand- 
ing. |  Then  she  measures  another  two  spans  |  fromtheendofhermark.  { 
She  puts  up  a  cedar-stick  at  the  end  of  the  line  that  she.  measured,  [j 
and  marks  it,  starting  from  the  end  of  her  mark  towards  the  cedar-  30 
stick  that  is  standing  up.  |  After  she  has  done  so,  it  is  this  way:| 
After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  the  cedar-stick  and  meas- 
ures with  it,  beginning  at  (1)  and  gohig  |  towards  (2), 
and  she  also  measures  the  line  (3)  to  (4) .  |  After  she  has 
4  done  this,  she    takes  the  cedar-stick  and   puts  it  up  || 

at  the  end  of  the  last  line  she  measured,  and  she  |  measures  again  35 
with  her  cedar-stick   the  distance  from  (1)  to  (3);  |  she  marks  the 
end  of  the  cedar-stick  measure;  |  after  this  she  puts  it  down,  begin- 

laxes  g-okwe.     Wii,  laxae  gEmxalllasa  lr!Ek-!aok!wa  lax  la  luVne-  IS 
latses  t lEldzats  !eye  nag'e  Ewalas  lExa£ye.     Wa,  heEmxaawise  oxle- 
galilases  gEmdzatsieye  lExa£ya.     Wa,  g-iPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£ed-  20 
xa  klilakwe  LE£wa  £walase  xalaetsa  mEt  !ana£ye.     Wa,  lii  k!wag-allt 
laxa  lobEnegwilases  gokwe  ts!ExubEtalile  6ba£yases    kMElakwe,  qa 
Laeles.       Wii,     he£mis    lag'iigilllatsexs     lae     balcIdxa     ma£lp!Enke 
laxEns    q!waq!waxts!ana'vex,    ytx    £wasgEinasasexs  lae   Lagalilasa 
k!wa£xLodzEse    laq.     Wa,    la    axeedxes  k'lElakwe,    qa£s   xultledes  25 
obaeyas  g'agilll  lax  Laelasdas  lalaa  laxa  Laele  k!wa£xLodzEsa.     Wa, 
gil£mese  gwfdExs  lae  et!ed  bal'hlxa  hamodEngala  lax  ma-'lplEnke 
laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!anaeyex  g-ag-iLEla  lax  obaeyas  xulta£yas.     Wii. 
laxae  ax£edxa  k!waeXLodzEse,  qa£s  Lag'allles  lax   wElgilasas.     Wa, 
la£me  et!ed  xiiltledEq  g-iigilll  lax  oba£yases  xultaeye  lalaa  laxa  Laele  30 
klwaxi.odzEsa.     Wa,  g-lPmese  gwalExs  lae  g-a  gwalega  (fig.).     Wa, 
lit  et!ed  ax£edxa  k!wa£xL§.we  qa£s  mEns£Ides  g-iig'iLEla  lax  (1)  labia 
lax   (2).      Wa,  he£mis    la    mEns£idayoses  (3)    lalaa  lax    (4).     Wa, 
gilmiese  gwalExs    laaxat!    ax£edxa  k!wa£xLodzEse,    qa£s    Lagaliles 
lax  £walaasas  6ba£yasa  mEnyayowe  k!wa£XLa.wa.     Wa,  laxae    et!ed  35 
mEnsntses  k!wa£xrawe  mEnyayo  g-iigllll  lax  (1)   lalaa  lax  (3),  yix 
awalagalaasas.      Wa,    la    xultlaLElodEq  laxes  k!wa£XLawe    niEnya- 
vowa.     Wii.  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  k-at!alilas  g'ag'Ilil  lax  (2)  lalaa 


588  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [dth.ann.85 

ning  at  (2),  |  towards  (4),  and  she  marks  it.     Then  it  is  in  this  way: 

40  i  After  ||  she  has  marked  it,  she  begins  to  dig  along  the 

marks  which  she  has  put  down.  She  digs  with  her  | 
digging-stick  and  the  large  shell.  When  the  hole  is 
one  span  |  and  four  finger  widths  deep,  she  |  stops  digging. 
4  She  takes  dry  |  driftwood   and    puts   it  into  the  hole; 

45  and  as  soon  as  it  shows  level  with  the  ground,  ||  she  puts  small 
pieces  of  driftwood  over  it  crosswise.  Then  she  puts  |  stones 
on;  and  after  this  has  been  done,  she  lights  a  fire  underneath  for 
steaming  |  the  mashed  viburnum-berries.  When  the  fire  blazes  up, 
she  takes  a  large  |  dish,  washes  it  out  well  with  water,  and,  when  it  is 
clean,  |  she  takes  the  basket  with  viburnum-berries  and  puts  it  down 

50  next  ||  to  the  washed  large  dish.  She  takes  her  husband's  stone 
hammer  |  and  sits  down  next  to  the  large  dish.  Then  |  she  takes  a 
handful  of  green  picked  berries  and  puts  them  into  the  |  large  dish. 
Then  she  pounds  them  with  the  stone  hammer  until  |  they  are 
crushed.     When  they  are  all  crushed,  she  gathers  them  up  at  one 

55  end  ||  of  the  large  dish,  and  she  takes  another  handful  of  berries  | 
with  her  left  hand,  puts  them  into  the  steaming-box  for  green  | 
virburnum-berries,  and  she  pounds  them  with  her  [  stone  hammer 
with  which  she  crushes  them.  When  they  are  all  crushed,  |  she 
gathers  them  up  at  the  end,  like  the  first  ones  that  she  crushed;  || 

60  and  she  continues  doing  this  with  the  whole  number  of  green  berries. 

lax  (4).    Wa,  la£me  xult!edEq,  qa  g'iis  gwaleg-a  (Jig.).    Wa,  g-il£mese 

40  gwal  xiiltse£stalaqexs  lae  nEgElEnexes  xulta£yaxs  lae  slap£wults  lalases 
k- lElakwe  LE£wis  xalaese  laq.  Wa,  g11£mese  la  modEiibala  esEgl- 
wa£yas  lax  mEmplEnke  laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  yix  £wala- 
bEtalilasas  £lapa£yasexs  lae  gwal  £lapaq.  Wa,  la  &x£edxa  kmxwa 
q!aq!exEma,  qa£s  LExuts!ales  laq.     Wa,  g-il£mese  nelk-Eyax£IdExslae 

45  gayi£lalax  okuya£yas  yisa  q!aq!exEme.  Wa,  he£mis  la  XEquyintsosa 
t!esEme.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  menabotsa  giilta  laxes  kunyas- 
Laxa  q'.welkwe  t'.Elsa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  x'lqostaxs  lae  &xeedxa  £walase 
loq!wa,  qa£s  aek-!e  ts!6xug-intsa  £wape  laq.  Wa,  gil£mese  la  eg'l- 
g-axs  lae  ax£edxes    t!Elts!ala  nag-e   lExa£ya,  qa£s    la    hang'agElilas 

50  laxa  ts!oxugaakwe  £walas  loqlwa.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edEx  pElpElqa- 
ses  hVwunEme.  Wa,  lii  klwag-iigElilaxa  £walase  loq!wa,  qa£s  gox- 
£wide  laxa  lEntenxsEme  k!ulbEku  t!Elsa,  qa£s  la  g-6xts!ots  laxa 
£walase  loqlwa.  Wa,  he£mis  la  lEsElgayaatsesa  pElpElqe  laq,  qa 
q!weq!ults!es.     Wa,  g-ll£mese  £w!£we1x'sexs  laegolbEnts  lax  apsbel- 

55  ts!awasa  £walase  loqlwa.  Wa,  laxae  et!ed  gox£wid  laxa  tlElsa- 
ses  gEinx6lts!ana£ye,  qaes  la  goxts'.ots  laxa  q!o£lats!axa  lEnlEnx- 
sEme  t!Elts!ala  £walas  loqlwa.  Wa,  laxae  etled  lEsElgEntses  IeseI- 
gayayowe  pElpElq  laq.  Wa,  g-il£Emxaawise  £wi£we1xs  q!weq!ul- 
tslExs  lae   golbEiits  laxaax  laasases    gilxde  q!wcla£ya.     Wa,  axu- 

60  sa£mese  he  gwegilax  £waxaasa  lEnlEnxsEme  tlElsa.     Wii,  g  il£mese 


BOAS]  RECIPES  589 

When   !  all  have   been  crushed,  she  takes  her   basket   to  the  back  61 
of  the  J  house,  and  breaks  off  tips  of  |  alder-tree  branches  and  puts 
them  into  the  basket.     When  she  has  enough  of  these,  |  she  picks 
up  old  alder-leaves   and  lays    them    on    top;  ||  and    when  she  has  65 
enough  of   these,   she  carries  them  back   j   to  the  house,  and  she 
puts  them  down  where  she  is  going  to  steam  the  pounded  |  green 
viburnum-berries.     When  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  her  tongs  |  and 
puts  them  down,  and  she  also  goes  to  draw  water  in  her  bucket,  so 
that  it  is  |  ready,  and  she  also  has  a  mat  to  cover  them.     When  fl 
everything  is  in  readiness,  she  waits  until  the  |  fire-wood  is  burnt  up,  70 
although  the  stones  are  already  red-hot  on  the  fire  |  in  the  place  where 
she  is  going  to  steam  the  berries.     A  long  time  after  she  has  seen  that 
the  fire  |  has  burned  out,  she  takes  her  tongs  and  picks  |  out  the 
charcoal  that  is  left.     When  |[  it  has  all  been  taken  out,  she  levels  75 
down  the  red-hot  stones  |  until  they  are  level.     After  doing  so,  she 
waits  again  j  for  a  short  time,  for  she  wants  the  charcoal  to  be  all 
burned.  |  As  soon  as  she  sees  that  it  is  all  |  burnt  up,  she  takes  her 
bucket  with  water  and  sprinkles  ||  a  little  water  over  the  red-hot  SO 
stones,  until  |  the  ashes  that  stick  to  the  stones  fly  off.     When  this 
has  been  done,  she  takes  the  |  tips  of  the  alder-branches  and  puts 
them  .on  the  |  stones;  and  after  they  are  on,  she  puts  the  dead  leaves 


Ewi£la  la  lElExsaakiixs  lae  ax£edxes  lExa£ye,  qa£s  la  lax  aLega£yases 
gokwe,     qa£s     la     iJEqwaxEla     lax      6balts!ana£yasa      LlEnak'asa  61 
L'.asmEse.     La,  LExuts!alas  laxes   lExa£ye.     Wa,  g'ih'mese  heldLExs 
lae    laxEls'id    laxa  LEq!Emese,    qa£s     la    lEXEyindfdas    laq.      Wa, 
g-il'Emxaawis    heloLEXs    g-axae    oxLalaq,    qa£s    g-axe    QxLaeLElaq 
laxes    gokwe,    qa£s    lii    oxLEg-alilas    laxes    kunyasLaxa    q!welkwe  65 
lEiilEnxsEm  tlElsa.     Wa,  g-ihmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxes  kllpLalaa, 
qa  g-axes  kadela.     Wa,  laxae   tsaxa    £wapases   nagatsle,  qa  gaxes 
gwalfl  luVnela.     Wa,  he£misa  le£wa£ye,  qa  nayimLEs.     Wa,  g-il£mese 
-wl£la  g-ax  gwaxgulllaxs  lae  edzela,  qa  alax-£Ides  rwi£la  q!iilx-£Ideda 
lEqwa,  yixs  wax-cmae  la  memEnltsEmx-EIdeda  t!esEine  xExuLalales  70 
lax  ots!awas  kiinyasLas.     Wa  la'mese  galak'asExs  lae  doqulaqexs 
lE;mae  ewi£la  q  !ulx-eida.     Wa,  la  fix£edxes  k-  lipLiilaa,  qa£s  k-  !ak-  !a- 
puqEwexa    xaiJa  g'lgayawesa    q!waq!walEmote  tslolna.     Wa,  gil- 
£mese    wilg-ilciaxs  lae    mEinak-Eyindxa    x-ix-ExsEmfila    tlesEma  qa 
'"nEinakiyes.      Wa,  glPmese    gwalExs    laaxat!   et!ed  sElt!eda   qa-'s  75 
yawasnde    xos£Ida.      Wa,   la£me    '"nex-    cja    alak- !ales    q IwalaEma 
ts  !ots  !Elxna£ye.      Wa,    g-il£mese    doqulaqexs    lE-mae     alak-!:Ila    la 
q!iilxeIdExs   lae    &x£edxes    nagats!e   £wabEts!alila,  qaes   xarJEx-'Ide 
xodzELEyintsa    £wape    lax    oku£yasa    x-Ix-ExsEmala     t!esEma,     qa 
q!Ex=ults!awesa    gunaeye    laq.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  SO 
obalts!ana£yasa  LlEiiiik'asa    LlasmEse,    qa£s  lii    LExug'indfdas    laxa 
tlesEme.     Wa,  g-il£mese  £wllts!axs  lae  bEXEylndalasa  LEqlEmse  laq, 


590  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKITJTL  [itu.  axn.ss 

on.  |  She  scatters  these  until  they  are  level.     When  this  is  done,  she  || 

So  takes  the  fern-leaves  and  spreads  them  carefully  so   that  they  are 

thick.  |  After  this  she  takes  the  skunk-cabbage  leaves  and  |  spreads 

them  over  them.     She  bends  the  edges  upwards  inside  the  |  steaming- 

hole,  and  she  lays  them  so  that  they  will  not  leak,  one  on  top  of  I  tie 

other.  |  'When  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  the  large  dish  which 

90  In 'Ids  the  pounded  ||  viburnum- berries,  and  she  pours  them  into  the 

steaming   hole.     When  |  this   has    been    done,   she    puts   down    the 

empty  large  dish.     She  takes  |  broad  leaves  of   the  skunk-cabbage 

and  spreads  them  well  over  what  she  is  |  steaming,  and  so  that  it 

does  not  leak.     Then  |  she  takes  her  bucket  and  pours  the  water  in 

95  between  [[  the  leaves  enveloping  the  viburnum-berries  |  which  she  is 

steaming,  and  the  side  of   the  steaming-hole.     As  soon  as  she  has 

poured  water  all  round  it,  |  she  takes  more  skunk-cabbage  leaves, 

spreads  them  over,  and  |  takes  a  mat,  and  she  adds  still  more  cover 

to  keep  the  steam  down.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  a  large 

Km i  shell  and    scrapes   the   soil   up,  ||  and   with  it  she  covers  the  mats. 

That  is  all  about  the  steaming  of  viburnum-berries.  | 

When  morning  comes  after  the  day  when  she  steamed  the  viburnum- 
berries,  and  |  when  it  is  almost  evening,  the  woman  who  steams  the 
viburnum-berries  takes  the  large  dish  |  and  pours  some  water  into  it. 

qa£s    golg'ilgayeq,    qa    £nEmak*Eyes.     Wa.    g-il£mese   gwatexs    lae 

85  ax£edxa  gEmse,  qa£s  la  aek'Ia  lEXEyindalas  laq,  qa  wakwes.     Wa, 

g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax'edxa  k!F.k-!aok!wa,   qa£s    la  aek'Ia  LEpE- 

yindalas  laq.     Wa,  la£me  eklsbale    5ba£yas   lax    ewanexuts!awasa 

kunyase.     Wa,  laxae  aEmxaakwa  laxes  papEqEwak!wena£ye.     Wii, 

gil£mese    gwalExs  lae  fix£edxa  £walase  loqlwa,  yixa  q!ttlxuts!alaxa 

90  qlwelkwe  ttelsa,  qa£s    la    qEptslots   laxa    kunyase.      Wa,  gil£mese 

gwalExs  lae  hangalilasa  £walase  loq!wa  la  loptsla.     Wa,  la  &x£edxa 

awadzoxLo    k!Ek-!aok!wa,    qa£s    aek-!exs    lae    LEpEyindalas    laxes 

kunsasEEwe.     Wa,  lasmxae    aEmxaq.     Wii,  giHmese    gwalExs    lae 

&x£edxes   £wabEts!ala   nagatsla,  qa£s    gwraqodes    lax   awaga\va£yasa 

95  sasgEma£yases    kunsasE£we    tlElsa    k-!Ek-!a5k!wa    lo£  ewaneqwasa 

kiln}Tats!asexa    tlElse.      Wii,  g-fl£mese   £wi£la  giix£idEX    awe£stiisexs 

lae  ax£edxa    waoku  k!Ek- !aok!wa,  qa£s   LEpEylndales   laq.     Wii,   lii 

ax£edxa  le£wa£ye,  qa£s  helokuyinde  la  nasEyonts  laq.     Wa,  giHrnest 

gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  £walase    xalaesa  qa£s  xElx£ides  laxa  dzEqwa, 

bin  qa£s  dzEindzEmEnxEndex    awe£stiisa  na£yime  le£wa£ya.     Wii,  la£me 

gwala  kunsiixa  tlElse  laxeq. 

Wa,  he£mexs  gaalaaxs  lae  gwala  kiinsaxa  t!Else.  Wii,  gil£mese 
Elaq  dzaqwaxs  laeda  kflnts lenoxwe  tslEdaq  ax£edxa  £walase  loc|!wa, 
qa£s    guxtslodesa    £wiipe    laqexs    lae    tsIoxugindEq,    qa    lawayesa 


boas]  RECIPES  591 

She  washes  it  out,  so  that  all  the  ||  crushed  viburnum-berries  come  off,  5 
for  the  dish  in  which  she  steams  the  berries  is  the  same  dish  in  which 
she  |  crushed  them.     When  it  is  clean,  she  |  puts  it  down  next  to 
the  steaming-hole.     She  takes  a  large  |  ladle,  which  is  made  for  this 
kind  of  work,  to  scoop  |  out  things  that  are  still  hot.     She  takes  it 
and  ||  puts  it  into  the  large  dish.     When  this  is  done,  she  takes  a  |   10 
large  clam-shell  and  scrapes  away  the  soil  with  which  she  covered  | 
the  steaming-hole.     When  it  is  all  off,  she  takes  |  hold  of  two  corners 
of  the  mat,  turns  it  back,  and  puts  it  down  on  the  floor.  |  Now  the 
cooked  skunk-cabbage  wrapping  begins  to  show.  ||  She  peals  it  off;  15 
and     when    it    is    off,  the    steamed    |    viburnum-berries   look    like 
thick  dirty  water.  |  They  are  reddish  in  color.     When  all  the  skunk- 
cabbage  leaves  have  been  taken  off,  she  |  takes  the  large  dish  in 
which  the  large  ladle  is  kept  and  |  puts  it  down  by  the  side  of  the 
hole.     Then  she  takes  out  the  long-handled  ladle,  ||  dips  it  into  the  20 
steaming-hole,  and  pours  the  viburnum-berries  into  the  large  |  dish. 
She  does  not  stop  until  they  are  all  in  the  large  dish.  |  Then  they  have 
all  been  taken  out  of  the  steaming-hole.     As  soon  as  this  is  finished,  | 
she  takes  up  the  dish  hi  which  the  steamed  berries  are,  and  |  puts  it 
in  a  cool  place.     She  lets  it  cool  off  quickly.     Then  she  takes  a  ||  mat  25 
and  puts  it  over  it,  for  she  does  not  want  the.  soot  to  drop  |  into  it. 

q!weq!walesawa£ye  ttels    kliidEgeq,  qaxs  he£mae    q!welts!alax-dxa  5 
qlwelkwe    ttelsa,  yix  la    kunsaso£s.     Wa,    gil£mese  la  egig'axs  lae 
k-anolllas  laxes  ktinyase.   . Wa,  laxae   ax£edxa  £walask-ase  k'atslE- 
naqaxa  hek!iimgilihne  k'asele  g-tltlEXLala  k-ats!Enaqa  qa  xEloltsla- 
layaxa    heEm    ale  tslElqwa.      Wa,    heEm    ax£etsose,    qa£s    la  g-i- 
ts!ots    laxa    £walase   loqlwa.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs   lae    ftx£edxa  10 
Ewalase    xalaesa,     qa£s    la    golaxElas     laxa    dzEqwaxa     dzEmsgE- 
mexxlases  kunsasE£we  tlElsa.     Wa,  gil-mese  £wFlaxaxs  lae  dadEn- 
xEndxa  le£wa£}Te,  qa  nELE£nakulamaseqexs  lae  ax£alilaq.     Wa,  la- 
£mes  xamasgEing-alileda  sasgEma£ye  la    L!ELlEbEdzo  k" tek" laokwa. 
Wa,  la£me  qusalaq.     Wa,  g'iPmese    Ewl£laxs  lae   aEm  la  q!ots!awa  15 
kunekwe    tlElsa    la   yaxa    he"    gwex-sa    gEnk-asox    neqwax    £wapa. 
Wa,  la  LlaiJaxostala.     Wa,  g-il£mese  £\vl£iaweda  k-!Ek!aok!waxs  lae 
fix£edxa    £walase    ioqlwaxs   glts!amaeda    £walase    k'ats!Eiiaq    laxes 
lae    ha£nolilas  laq.     Wii,    la    dolts !odxa    gilt!EXLala    k*ats!Enaqa, 
qa£s  tseqes    laxa    kunekwe    t!Elsa,  qa£s    la    tsets!alas    laxa  £walase  20 
loqlwa.      Wa,  al£mese    gwalExs    lae    £wllts!a    laxa  £walase  loqlwa. 
yixs   lae    £wilg'ilts!aweda    kunyats!aq.      Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
k-ag-alilaxa  kunexutsalaxa    kunekwe    tlEls    £walaa    loqlwa,    qa£s   la 
k-ag-alilas  laxa  £wiidaele,  qa  halabales  £wudEx-£Ida.     Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
le£wa£ye,  qa£s  paqEymdes  laq,  qaxs  gwaqtelaaq  qlupstaleda  qlwalo-  25 
bEse    laq.     Wa,  g-il£mese    gwalExs    lae    ax£edxa  ha£yal£a   loElq  !wa 


592  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.ss 

27  After  doing  this,  she  takes  medium-sized  dishes  [  and  washes  them 
out  with  water.  When  this  has  been  done,  |  she  piles  them  up. 
Then  she  takes  her  spoon  basket,  in  order  to  |  have  it  ready,  and  puts 

30  it  down  next  to  her  seat.  When  she  thinks  that  the  ||  steamed 
viburnum-berries  are  cold  enough,  she  sends  her  husband  to  invite 
whomever  he  |  bkes  among  his  friends,  or,  if  he  wishes  |  to  invite 
(them),  the  members  of  his  numaym.  He  invites  them  to  |  come  and 
eat  steamed  crushed  berries.     When  they  |  come  in,  the  woman  gets 

35  ready.  She  takes  a  ||  medium-sized  dish  from  the  pile,  and  she  puts 
it  down  at  the  |  place  where  she  always  sits;  and  she  takes  oil  and  | 
puts  it  down  where  she  sits;  and  finally  she  takes  the  dish  containing  | 
the  steamed  crushed  viburnum-berries  and  puts  it  down  |  just  out- 

40  side  of  her  seat.  Then  she  takes  a  medium-sized  ||  dish  and  puts  it 
across  the  corner  of  the  large  dish  in  which  the  steamed  |  crushed 
viburnum-berries  are.  She  takes  a  long-handled  ladle,  |  dips  it  into 
the  berries,  and  puts  it  into  a  medium-sized  |  dish.  When  it  is  half 
full,  she  puts  it  down;  and  |  she  does  this  with  all  the  medium-sized 

45  dishes.  When  ||  the  crushed  steamed  viburnum-berries  are  in  all  of 
them,  she  takes  [  oil  and  pours  it  in.  She  does  not  put  in  very  much 
oil.  |  When  she  has  done  so,  she  distributes  the  spoons  among  the  | 
guests  of  her  husband;  and  when  every  one  has  one,  the  woman  her- 

50  self  |  places  the  medium-sized  dishes  before  them.     There  is  ||  one 

27  qa£s  aek-!e  tsloxwtigidalaq  yisa  £wape.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwabsxs 
lae  maxogwalllaq.  Wa,  laxae  ax£edxes  k-ayats!e,  qa  g-axes  gvva- 
llla    lax   klwaelasas.      Wa,    g'iPmese    kotaqe    laEm    £wfidEx-£Ides 

30  kunekwe  ttelsaxs  lae  £yalaqases  hVwunEme,  qa  las  Le£lalaxes 
gwE£yowe,  qa£s  Le£lalasE£we  laxes  £ne£nEmokwe  loxs  £nekae,  qa£s 
he  Le£lalasE£wes  £nE£memote.  Wa,  la£mese  Le£lalax-da£xuq,  qa 
g-axes  t!Elst!asxa  qlwelkwe  kunekwe  t!Elsa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  g;"ix 
-'widaeLExs  lae    hex£ida     xwanal-'Ideda     tstedaqe,     qa£s    ax£edexa 

35  ha£yal£a  loqlwa  laxes  maxOlllase,  qa£s  g'axe  mEx£iililas  laxes 
hemEnelase  k'.waelasa.  Wa,  laxae  axeedxa  L!e£na,  qa-'s  gaxes 
haenel  lax  k!waelasas.  Wa,  la  alElxsdalaxs  lae  fix£edxa  kunexuts!a- 
laxa  qlwelkwe  kunekwe  t!Els  £vvalas  loqlwa,  qa£s  g-axe  hang-alllas 
lax  L!asalllases  k!waelase.     Wa,  la  axeedxa  £nEmexLa  laxa  haeyalea 

40  loqlwa,  qa£s  hangagEndes  laxa  £walase  loqlwa  kunexuts lalaxa 
qlwelkwe  kiineku  tteisa.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  glltlExLala  kTitslEnaqa, 
qa£s  tsex-£Ides  laxa  kunekwe  tlElsa,  qa£s  la  tseyosElas  laxa  hela 
loqlwa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  k'agalilas.  Wa,  la 
''naxwaEin  he  ^vex-£Idxa  waokwe  ha£yal£a  loElq!wa.     Wii,  giPmese 

45  £wl£la  la  t!et!Elts!alaxa  qlwellove  kunekwe  tlElsExs  lae  ax£edxa 
LleMia.  qaes  klttnqlEqes  laq.  Wa,  la  k'!es  alaEin  q!eqxa  L!e£na. 
Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ts !Ewanaesasa  k-ak'Ets!Enaqe  lax  Le£la- 
nEinases  la£wiinEme.  Wa,  g-ll£mese  £w!lxtoxs  lae  k'aeseda  tslE- 
daqasa  ha£yal£a    loElqlwa.     Wa,  la£me  yaeyudokwa  bebEgwanEine 


boas]  BECIPES  593 

dish  for  each  three  men.     When  she  has  put  them  down,  |  the  guests  51 
at  once  take  their  spoons  and  begin  to  cat  the  |  steamed  viburnum- 
berries;  and  after  they  have  eaten,  they  drink  a  very  little  |  water 
to  rinse  their  mouths.     After  doing  this,  |  they  go  out;  and  now  at 
last  this  is  all   about   the   eating  ot  ||  crushed  steamed  viburnum-  55 
berries.  | 

Brittle  Crabapples. — The  time  to  pick  crabapples  |  is  when  they  1 
get  large,  when  they  are.  still  green.     When  |  the  woman  sees  that 
the  apples  are  getting  large,  she  takes  her  |  small  basket  and  goes 
where  good  crabapples  are,  and  picks  them  off.  ||  She  puts  them  into  5 
her  small  basket ;  and  when  it  is  full,  |  she  goes  home.     Then  she 
calls  her  husband  and  her  1  children  to  come  and  sit  down;  and  when 
they  sit  down,  she  |  spreads  a  food-mat  in  front  of  them.  |  She  takes 
the  basket  with  crabapples  and  pours  the  apples  on  the  ||  mat.     Then  10 
they  take  hold  of  |  the  bunches  of  crabapples,  one  of  each,  and  bite  off 
the  |  crabapples  from  the  stems  and  eat  them.   They  |  continue  doing 
so,  and  only  stop  when  they  have  |  all  been  eaten.    They  do  not  eat  oil 
with  them,  because  there  is  juice  inside.  ||  Brittle  crabapples  are  not  15 
given  at  a  feast  to  many  tribes,  |  for  only  the  married  couple  and 
their  children  eat  I  them.     That  is  all  about  this.  I 


laxa  enal£nEmexLa  hela  l5q!wa.  Wii,  g-ilmiese  £wIlg-alIlExs  lae  50 
hex""ida'"ma  Le£lanEine  daxsIdxes  k-ak'Ets!Enaqe,  qa-s  £y5s£idexa 
kiinekwe  qlweltaak"  ttelsa.  Wii,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  xaiJEx-£rd 
nagek-ilaxa  £wape,  qa£s  tslEWeiJExodayowe.  Wii.  gih'mese  gwa- 
Iexs  lae  hoquwElsa.  Wii,  lawesLe  gwal  laxa  t!Elst!asaxa  kunekwe 
q!welku  ttelsa.     Wa,  laEm  gwala.  55 

Brittle  Crabapples.  -  XEmok"  tsElx11,  yixs  he-mae  tsElx£wIdExdEinxa  1 
tsElxwaxs  lac  awawa,  yixs  heemae  ales  lEnlEnxsEma.     Wii,  he£maaxs 
laeda  tslEdaqe  doqwalaxa  tsElxwaxs  lE£mae  awawa.     Wii,  la  ax£edxes 
lalaxame,  qa£s   la    laxa   egadiixa    tsElxwe.     Wii,  laEmes  ep!Exi>aq, 
qa£s    la    eptslalas    laxes    lalaxame.     Wii,  g-il-mese    qotlaxs    gaxae  5 
nivnakwa    laxes  g-okwe.     Wii,  la£me   Le£lalaxes    la/wunEine  LE£wis 
sasEme,  qa  g'axes  k!tis'"allla.     Wii,  guk"mese  k!iis£alIlExs  lae  fix£ed- 
xa  ha£madzowe  le£wa£ya,  qa£s  la    LEpdzamoUlas    lax'da£xuq.     Wa, 
la  ax£edxes  tsElwats!e  lalaxama,  qa£s    lii  gugEdzotsa  tsElxwe  laxa 
LEbile  tsElx'tsaxudzo  le£waeya.     Wii,  hex£ida£mese  £naxwa  dax-£Td-  10 
xa    £nal£nEmxLa    laxa    lEnlEnxsEme    tsElxwa,    qa    q!Ekalax£Idexa 
tsElxwe    laxes    tsetsElwanowaxs    lae    xEinx£wedEq.     Wa,    la£mese 
hex'siiEm   gwegilaqexs    tsElxutsaxwae.     Wa,    al£mese    gwalExs   lae 
£wi£laq.     Wii,  la£me  hewaxa  ts!Epas  laxa  L!e£na,  qaxs   £wabEts!ae. 
Wii,  laeme  k!es  klweladzEm  laxa  qlenEme  lelqwalai.arya  xEmokwe  15 
tsElxwa,  yixs  lex-a£maeda  ha£yasEqala  LE'wis  sasEme  tsElxl'tsaxuxa 
xEmSkwe  tsElxwa.     Wii,  laEmxae  gwal  hlxeq. 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 38 


594  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Intii.jsx   33 

Crabapples  and  Oil. — This  is  the  same  as  |  viburnum-berries  and  oil, 

2U  about  which  I  talked  before,  for  you  will  ||  only  have  the  same  (de- 
scription). | 

Mashed  Steamed  Crabapples. — The  |  woman  takes  her  small  dish 
and  her  spoon,  and  she  dips  |  some  of  the  crabapples  and  water  out  of 
the  box.     Then  she  puts  them  into  her  small  dish;  and  when  it  is  | 

25  half  full,  she  takes  it  and  puts  it  down  next  to  her  ||  place.  She  takes 
her  husband's  stone  hammer,  and  she  pounds  |  the  crabapples  in  the 
small  dish;  and  when  they  are  all  broken  up,  she  |  puts  away  the 
stone  hammer  that  she  was  using,  and  she  |  mashes  them  with  both 
hands.     When  they  arc  all  |  mashed,  she  takes  oil  and  pours  it  on, 

30  much  of  it;  ||  and  when  this  is  done,  she  calls  her  husband  and  her 
children  |  to  come  and  sit  down;  and  as  soon  as  the  whole  family  has 
assembled,  the  |  woman  takes  her  spoons  and  gives  one  to  each.  | 
Then  they  all  eat  with  their  spoons;  and  |  they  eat  the  mashed  crab- 

35  apples.  They  only  stop  ||  when  they  have  been  eaten.  They  never 
drink  water  after  eating  them.  |  That  is  all  about  it.  | 

Salal-berries  and  Crabapples  (Salal-berry  cakes  mixed  with  mashed  ] 

crabapples). — The  woman  takes  two  dishes  and  |  puts  them  down 

next  to  the  place  where  she  always  sits.     Then  she  takes  |  four  cakes 

5  of  salal-berries  and  puts  them  into  one  of  the  dishes.  ||  As  soon  as 

she  has  finished  doing  so,  she  takes  some  water  and  pours  it  in.  | 

18  Crabapples  and  Oil. — iJiikwe  tsElxwa;  yixs  he£maaxat!  gwekwa 
idiikwe    tlElsaxEn    hlx-£idaxat!  gwagwex-s£alasa,    ylxs    he£meLaqos 

20  aEml  HEgEltEwesoLe. 

Mashed  Steamed  Crabapples.—  Q!wedzEku  q  !olku  tsElxwa,  ylxs  a£mae- 
da  tstedaqe  &x£edxes  lalogiime  LE£wes  k-ats!Enaqc,  qa£s  la  tsex-£Id 
laxes  tsElxustaats!e,  qa£s  la  tsets!alas  laxa  hxlogume.  Wa,  g-il£rnese 
nEgoyoxsdalaxs   lae    k'alaq,    qa£s    lii    klwagalil    laxes    hemEnelase 

25  k'.waelasa.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  pElpElqases  la£wunEme,  qa£s  lEsElgEii- 
dexa  la  tsElxuts!alasa  lalogiime.  Wit,  g-tl£mese  £wI£weLvsexs  lae 
g-exaxes  lEsElgayayowe  pElpElqa.  Wa,  la  helox£wid  la  qlwesEl- 
gEntses  £wax-solts!ana£ye  e£eyas5  laq.  Wa,  g'ibmese  la  alaklala 
la  cwFwe1xsexs  lae  ax£edxa  L!e£na,  qa£s  k!iinq!Eqesa  q!enEme  laq. 

30  Wii,  g-ibmese  gwalExs  lae  Le£lalaxes  laewunEme  LE£wis  sasEine, 
qa  g-axes  k!usJalila.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gax  sEnyanogwalllExs  lae 
ax£ededa  tslEdacjaxes  k'ak'EtslEnaqe,  qa£s  tslEwanaeses  liix-da£xuq. 
Wii,  hex£ida£mese  £naxwa  £yos£itses  kak-EtslEnaqe  laq.  Wa,  la£me 
tsELxutsax£wIdxa  qlwedzEkwe  tsElxwa.     Wii,  al£mese    gwalExs    lae 

35  £wl£laq.  Wa,  la£me  hewiixa  nagek'Elax  £wiipaxs  lae  gwala.  Wa, 
laEinxae  gwal  laxeq. 
1  Salal-berries  and  Crabapples  (T!Eqa  miilaqEla  LE£wa  qlwedzEkwe 
tsElxwa). — Wa,  heEm  ax£etsosa  tslEdaqa  ma£lEXLa  loslqlwa,  qa£s 
g-axe  mEx£alilas  laxes  he£mEnelase  klwaelasa.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa 
moxsa  tlEqa,  qa£s  la  pax£alts!odalas  laxa  mEmexLa  loqlwa.  Wa', 
5  gibmese   gwalExs  lae    tsex£Id    laxa   £wape,  qa£s  lii  guqlEqas  laq. 


boas]  EECIPES  595 

Then  she  watches  until  they  are  just  covered  with  water.     Then  she  6 
stops  and  |  takes  the  spoon  and  the  other  dish,  and  takes  it  |  to 
where  she  keeps  the  crabapples.     She  dips  her  spoon  into  the  |  crab- 
apples  and  puts  them  into  the  dish.     When  it  is  half  full,  ||  there  is  10 
enough  in  it.     Then  she  puts  it  down  next  to  her  seat.  |  Then  she 
takes  her  husband's  stone  hammer  and  pounds  |  the  crabapples;  and 
when  they  are  all  pounded  up,  she  puts  away  the  stone  hammer.  |  Then 
she  takes  the  dish  with  salal-berries   and   mashes  them  with  both  | 
hands,  the  salal-berries  which  have  been  soaked.  ||    When  they  are  1.5 
all  in  pieces,  she  takes  the  dish  with  the  pounded  crabapples  and 
pours  them  into  the  dish  with  the  mashed  salal-berries.     When  they  | 
are  all  in,  she  takes  the  oil  and  pours  it  on.     After  |  doing  so,  she 
mashes  them  again  with  both  hands,  |  so  that  they  are  thoroughly  mixed. 
When  they  are  mixed,  she  stops,  and  ||  calls  whomever  she  likes  to  come  20 
to  eat  the  mashed  |  crabapples  mixed  with  dried  salal-berries.     When 
the  guests  |  come  and  sit  down,  she  gives  them  a  food-mat  and  spreads 
it  |  in  front  of  them.     She  takes  the  spoons  and  distributes  |  them 
among  them.     Finally  she  puts  down  in  front  of  them  the  dish  || 
with  the  salal-berries  and  crabapples  mixed  which  she  |  puts  down  25 
in  front  of  her  guests.     Then  they  take  the  |  goat-horn  spoons,  for 
this  kind  of  food  is  eaten  with  |  goat-horn  spoons,  and  they  all  eat 

Wa,  a£mese  doqwala,  qa  t  let  lEbidzowesexa  ewapaxs  hie  gwala.     Wa,  0 
la  ax£edxa  katslEnaqe  LEewa  £nEmexLa  loqlwa,  qaes  la  dalaqexs  lae 
lax  ha£nelasases  tsElx"staats!e.     Wa,  la  tsex-£Itses  k'atslEiiaqe  laxa 
tsElx"sta,  qa£s  la  ts.etslalas  laxa  loqlwa.     Wa,  g'ihniese  nEgoyoxsda- 
laxs  lae  helats'.a.     Wii,  gaxe   kag-aldas   liixes   heniEnelase  klwae-  10 
lasa.     Wa,  la    axeedBX    pElpElqases    la£wiin.Eme,    qaes    lEsElgEndes 
laxa  tsElxusta.     Wii,  g-il£mese  ewPwe1x-sexs  lae    g-exaxa  pElpElqe. 
Wa,  la  nex£edxa  tlEqatslala  loqlwa,  qa's  q!\\  esElgEndeses  nvaxsol- 
ts!ana£ye     e£eyasowe     laxa    t!sqa    la    peqlugEllla.     Wii,    g-il£mese 
ewrwElx'SExs    lae   a,xeedxa    lEdzEkwe    tsElx"ts!ala    loqlwa,  qaes  la  15 
guqasas    laxa    q IwedzEgwats !axa    tlEqa     loqlwa.      Wa,    g  il£mese 
£widosExs  lae  ax£edxa  Lle'na,  qa£s  lii  guqlEqas  laq.     Wii,  g-il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  etled    qlwesElgEntses  £wax-solts!ana£ye    e£eyasowe  laq 
qa  alaklales  lElga.     Wa,  giPmese  lElgoxs  lae  gwala.     Wii,  hex£i- 
da£mese  Le£lalaxes  gWEeya  qa  g-axe  mEinalaqg-Exa  malaqEla  (jlwe- 20 
dzEkwe    tsElxusta    LE£wa     tlEqa.       Wa,    g-iPmese    g-ax    k!useallle 
Le£lanEmasexs  lae    ax£edxa    ha£madzowe    leewaeya,  qa£s  lii  LEpdza- 
molita  laq.     Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  kiikEtslEnaqe,  qa£s  lii  tslEwanae- 
sas  lax"da£xiiq.     Wii,  lii  alElxsdalaxs   lae  k  ag  illlaxa  malaxts lalaxa 
malaqEla  qlwedzEk"  tsElxusta    LE£wa    tlEqa   loqlwa,  qa£s  lii   kax-  25 
dzamolilas  laxes  Le£laiiEme.     Wii,  hex£ida;mese  Enaxwa  dax£Idxes 
tslololaqe    kakEtslEnaqa,  qaxs    he£mae  £yosEhix    gwexsdEinaseda 
tslololaqe     k'atslEnaqa.       Wii,    liix'da£x£me     £nEin;ix£id    £yos£Itses 


596  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  L bth.  ANN.  85 

30  with  their  |  spoons.  They  suck  out  the  juice;  ||  and  when  the  juice 
is  out,  they  blow  out  the  skins.  |  They  continue  doing  so  while  they 
are  eating  it.  When  they  have  eaten  it  all,  |  they  go  out.  They 
never  drink  water  after  eating,  |  and  only  rinse  out  the  mouth  with 
water,  for  the  food  sticks  |  to  the  inside  of  the  mouth.     They  do  not 

35  like  to  ||  drink  water  after  eating  this  food,  because  the  water  causes 
heart-burn.  |  Therefore  they  are  afraid  to  drink  it.  This  is  not  | 
used  when  they  invite  many  tribes,  for  it  is  only  used  by  the  husband 
and  wife.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 
1  Bunch-Berries.1 — When  (the  basket)  is  full,2  (the  man)  sends  his 
young  men  |  to  call  his  tribe,  for  he  is  going  to  give  a  feast  with  the 
bunch-berries.  Then  |  his  wife  takes  her  dishes  and  puts  them  down 
next  to  her  seat,  |  also  the  spoons  and  the  oil.  As  soon  as  she  has 
5  finished,  ||  she  spreads  down  the  mats  for  the  guests  to  sit  on  when 
they  come  |  in.  When  they  are  all  in  the  house,  the  woman  |  tells 
the  young  men  to  go  and  put  the  berries  into  the  dishes;  |  and  when 
all  the  dishes  are  full  of  berries,  she  takes  |  oil  and  pours  it  in.     After 

10  this  lias  been  done,  (the  young  men)  distribute  ||  the  spoons  among  the 
guests;  and  when  this  is  done,  |  they  put  the  dishes  with  the  berries 
one  in  front  of  each  four  men.  |  Alter  they  have,  been  put  down,  the 


kfik'EtslEnaqe    laq.      Wii,    la£me    klumtalax    £wapagu£yas.      Wa, 

30  g  il£mese  £wl£lawe   £wfipaga£yasexs    lae    pox'odEx    siiq  !iisgEina£yas. 

Wa,  hex'sa£mese    gweg-ilaqexs    ha£mapaaq.     Wii,   g'il£mese   £wi£la- 

qexs  lae  hoqiiwElsa.     Wa,  la£me    hewaxa    niigekilax  £wapa.     Wii, 

lai.e  km    tslEweiJExotsa   £wape,  qaxs  alak'lalae   k.'uta  hemaoma- 

ts!ena£yas  laxEns    awlL!Exawa£yex.     Wii,  he£mis   k'leselas  helqlala 

35  nax£ideda    ha£mapax   gwex'sdEmasexs    nEweq  !up  !edae    nagekiliixa 

£wape.     Wit,   he£mis   lagilas   k'ilEme.      Wii,   laEmxae    kMes    Le£lii- 

£layo   laxa   qlenEme   lelqwalaLa£ya,  yixs    lex-a£maeda  hayassk  ala 

ilXEq.     Wa,  lasm  gwal  laxeq. 

i       Bunch-Berries.1 — Wii,2  gil£mese   qotlaxs   lae  £yalaciases    ha£yal£a, 

qa  las  Le£liilax   g'okidotas.     Wii,  la£me  qEk'Ilalxa  qEk'!aa,le.     Wii, 

la  gEnEmas  ax£edxes  loElqlwe,  qa  g'iixes  kax'hanel  lax  klwaelasas 

LE£we  kiikEtslEnaqe;    wii,  he£misLes  L!e£na.     Wii,  gil£mese  gwaluxs 

5  lae  LEp lalilElaxa  leEl£wa£ye,  qak!wadzEwesoltsa  Le£lanEme,  qo  gaxL 

hogwiLO.     Wii,  g11£mese  g'ax  £wi£laeLExs  lae  hex-£ida£ma  tshidaqe 

ilxk'!alaxa    ha£yal£a,    qa   las   k!ats!alasa   qEk!afde   laxa  loElq!we. 

Wii,    g"il£mese   £wi£la  qeqEx-ts!aleda    loElqlwaxs    lae    ax£etsE£wetla 

L!e£na,  qa£s  la  k!iinq!EgEm  laq.     Wii,  glPmese  gwala  lae  ts!Ewa- 

10  naedzEma  kakEts!Eiiaqe  liixa  Le£lanEme.      Wii,  gil£mese  gwfdExs 

lae  k'axdzamolelEma  qeqEX'ts!ala  loElqlwe  liixa  maemokwe  bebE- 

gwanEina.      Wii,    gil£mese     £wIlg'alllExs    lae    hex-£idaEm    £niixwa 

1  Chamaeperklineum  unalaschkense  (Ledb.)  Rydb. 
'  Continued  from  p.  221,  line  27. 


boas  J  RECIPES  597 

guests  |  take  their  spoons  and  eat  the  berries;  |  and  after  having 
done  so,  they  go  out.     There  is  only  one  ||  way  of  eating  the  bunch-  15 
berries;  and  they  do  not  sing  when  |  they  are  invited  to  this  feast. 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Gooseberries. —  (The  woman1  puts  [her  basket  with  gooseberries] 
down  on  the  floor;)  and  when  a  strong  wind  is  blowing,  she  |  spreads 
out  her  mat  where  the  wind  blows  strongest.  |  She  takes  four  pieces 
of  firewood  and  puts  them  down  crosswise  under  the  edges  ||  of  the  20 
mat,  so  that  it  is  like  a  nest  inside.  When  this  has  been  done,  |  she 
takes  her  basket  with  the  gooseberries,  puts  it  down  |  at  the  end 
whence  the  wind  is  blowing,  at  the  end  of  the  long  side  of  the  | 
billets  around  the  mat.  in  this  way;2  and  when  the  wind  begins  to 
blow  hard,  |  she  takes  hold  of  each  side  of  the  large  basket,  ||  and  25 
poms  out,  not  violently,  the  gooseberries  so  that  |  they  come 
slowly  out  of  the  gooseberry  basket  when  they  are  |  falling  into  the 
nest  which  was  made  for  cleaning  them.  The  woman  lifts  |  the 
basket  up  high;  and  the  leaves  are  blown  away  by  the  wind,  |  and 
do  not  fall  onto  the  mat  on  which  they  are  ||  cleaned.  Only  the  30 
gooseberries  fall  down  on  it.  |  Now  they  are  cleaned.  As  soon  as 
this  has  been  done,  she  goes  and  puts  them  back  |  into  the  large 

dax£idxes  kfik'EtslEnaqe,  qa£s    qEx-qakax-£Idexa  qEk'laale.      Wii,  13 
g-il£mese  £wl£laxes  qExqakaxs  lae  hoqiiwElsa.     Wii,  £nEmx-£idala£me 
gweg-ilasaxa     qEklaiile.       Wa,     he£misexs     k"!esae     di:n\Klag  IIex  15 
qEx-qakaeda  Le£lanEme  qaeda  qEklaiile.     Wii,  la£me  gwal  laxeq. 

Gooseberries. — Wii,  giPmese  laklwemasa  yalaxs  lae  ax'edxes  le- 
£wa£ye,  qa£s  la  LEplElsaq  laxa  yoxudEmala£yasa  yala.  Wii,  lii 
ax£edxa  motslaq  lEqwa  qa£s  xwaltse£stales  lax  awaba£yas  ewEnxa- 
la£yasa  le£wa£ye,  qa  qElxasales  otslawas.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  20 
lae  ax£edxes  tlEinwatsle  niige  £walas  lExa£ya,  qa£s  lii  hanbElsas 
laxa  gweba£ye  lax  g'aya£iiakiilasasa  yala  lax  gfldagaena£yasa 
x\valtse£staakwe  le£wa£ya,  g-a  gwiilega.2  Wii,  g"il£mese  lEk!utE- 
leda  yaliixs  lae  dadanodxes  t!Emwats!e  niige  £walas  lExa£yaxs, 
lae  k-  !es  eoPnakiilaxs  lae  gugE£nakulaxes  t  lEinwats  !e  lExa£ya  qa  25 
ex'£mes  lalts!aleda  tlEmxwale  laxa  t!Einwats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  lii 
ladzodala  laxa  c[Elxase£lakwe  kimdEdzo  le£wa£ya  lax  dzoxwalaena- 
£yasa  ts!Eclac[axes  t!Emwats!e  lExa£ya,  qa  yame£stalayowes  k'lamo- 
mas.  Wa,  laEm  k-  leas  ladzodalasa  klamomo  laxa  qElxase£lakwe 
k-imdEdzo  le£wa£ya.  Wii,  la£me  lexama  tlEnixwale  la  ladzodiilaq.  30 
Wii,  la£me  ek'lEgEkwa.  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwiilExs  lae  xwelaqa  laax- 
tslots   laxes   tlEmwatsle  niige  £walas  lExa£ya,  qa£s  la  oxLaeLElaq 

i  Continued  from  p.  222,  line  24. 

a  That  is,  she  places  four  small  logs  in  a  rectangle  and  presses  the  mat  into  the  space  so  formed,  the  edges 
leaning  against  the  logs. 


598  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  I  inn.  ann  35 

33  basket.  Then  she  carries  it  on  her  back  |  into  the  house.  She  goes 
and  pours  them  into  the  large  dish.     As  soon  as  ]  she  has  finished, 

35  she  picks  more  gooseberries,  and  ||  uses  the  same  mat,  and  the  canoe 
pole  to  strike  them  with.  When  |  her  basket  is  full,  she  carries  | 
them  home  to  her  house.  Again  she  puts  down  her  mat  |  where  the 
wind  blows  strongest,  and  she  does  the  same  as  |  before.     When  she 

40  has  many  gooseberries,  she  takes  a  ||  low-sided  box  which  is  made  for 
this  purpose.     It  is  |  two  spans  and  two  short  |  spans  long,  and  two 

45  spans  wide,  |  and  one  span  |  high.  The  woman  takes  this  ||  low  box  and 
pours  the  |  gooseberries  into  it.  When  it  is  nearly  full,  she  stops  pour- 
ing them  in;  |  and  when  she  has  done  so,  she  builds  up  a  fire  and  puts  | 
stones  into  it.     When  she  thinks  there  are  enough  for  her  purpose,  | 

50  she  takes  her  tongs  and  puts  them  down  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  ||  She 
takes  a  bucket  and  goes  to  draw  water.  When  she  |  comes  back,  she 
pours  the  water  into  the  small  dish,  and  she  |  puts  the  small  dish 
next  to  the  fire.     When  all  this  |  has  been  done,  the  stones  on  the 

55  fire  are  hot.  |  She  takes  her  tongs,  picks  up  the  red-hot  ||  stones,  dips 
them  into  the  small  dish  with  water  in  it,  |  and,  when  the  ashes  that 


33  laxes  g-okwe.  Wit,  la  guxtslots  laxa  £walase  loq!wa.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  gwfdExs   hie  xwelaqa  tlEmxwaxa  tbsmxwale.     Wii,   heEmxa 

35  &XElases  le£wa£ye  LE£wa  dzomegalaxs  kwexaas.  Wii,  gil£Emxaa- 
wise  qot!e  t!Emwats!as  niige  £wiilas  IexSxs  g'axae  oxLiilaq,  qa£s 
g-axe  nii£nakwa  laxes  g-okwe.  Wii,  laxae  ax£Elsaxes  le£wa£ye  lax 
yoxudEinala£yasa  yala.  Wii,  laEmxae  a  1:111  he  gweg-ilaqes  gilx-de 
gweg-ilasa.     Wii,  g-il£mese  la  qleiiEme  tlEinxwaliisexs  lae  ax£edxa 

40  kCitsEine  nEqlEingilllEin  wule  qaeda  dzeg-ikwe  tdF.mxwala,  ylxs 
ma£lp!Enk'ae  liixEns  q!wiiq!\vax'ts!ana£yex  he£mis  bilbELawis£Ida 
ts!Exuts!ana£ye  £wasgEmg"Eg"aasas.  Wa,lama£lp!Eiik"  ISxeiis  q!wa- 
q!waxts!ana:yex,  yix  £\vadzEgEg-aasas.  Wa,  lii  £nEmp!Enk'ustawe 
£widasgEmasas  laxEns  q !waq Iwax'ts !anasyex.     Wii,  heEin  ax£etsosa 

45  tslEdaqexes  kiitsEm  dzeg-atslexes  tlEurxwale.  Wii,  lii  giixtslotsa 
t!Emxwale  lacp  Wii,  g'il£mese  Elaq  qotlaxs  lae  gwfd  gu(|as. 
Wii,  g-!l£mese  gwalExs  lae  lEkjox'wIdxes  lEgwIle,  qa£s  xExuLEndesa 
tlesEme  laq.  Wii,  gil£mese  kotaq  laEm  helala  liixes  senataq, 
lae    ax="ed.\es    klipLalaa    qa    giixes    kadEnwalisEX    lEgwIlas.     Wa, 

50  laxae  &x£edxes  niigatsle,  qa£s  lii  tsex,£idEx  £wiipa.  Wii,  g-il£mese 
g-ax  aedaaqaxs  lae  giixtslotsa  £wiipe  laxa  lalogume,  qa£s  la 
kanolisasa  £wabEts!ala  liilogum  laxes  lEgwile.  Wa,  g'il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  memEnltsEinx-£ideda  tlesEme  xExuLalales  laxa 
lEgwile.     Wa,  lii  dax-£Tdxes  k'lipLalaa  qa£s  k!ip!edes  laxa  x'Ix'ex- 

55  sEmiila  t!esEma,  qa£s  lii  hapstEnts  lax  £wabEts!iiwasa  liilogiime. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  la  £wl£lawe    k  !wek  lutsEmayaq  guna£yaxs  lae  k'  !lp  !e- 


boas  I  RECIPES  599 

stick  on  the  stones  come  off,  she  |  puts  them  into  the  gooseberries.  57 
She    continues    doing    this    with    the   other   red-hot  |  stones.     The 
stones  are  put  in  close  together.     When  |  this  is  finished,  she  takes  a 
mat  and  spreads  it  over  it,  and  ||  she  leaves  it  this  way  some  time.  60 
When  the  woman  thinks  that  the  stones  are  getting  cool,  |  she  takes 
oil  the  mat  covering  and  puts  it  down.  |  Then  she  takes  her  tongs  ami 
picks  out  the  stones  that  have  cooled  off,  |  and  she  puts  them  down 
next  to  the  fire.     When  they  are  all  out,  |  she  stirs  the  berry  jam 
with  a  cedar  stick.  ||  If  they  are  not  boiled  to  pieces,  she  takes  her  65 
tongs,  |  takes  out  more  hot  stones,  dips  |  them  into  the  small  dish 
with  water,  and  puts  them  in.     She  does  not  |  take  very  many  red- 
hot  stones.     When  it  begins  to  boil  up,  |  she  spreads  a  mat  over  it; 
and  she  does  not  leave  it  there  long,  ||  before  she  takes  off  the  covering  70 
mat  and  puts  it  down.     Then  she  |  takes  her  tongs,  picks  out  the 
stones  from  the  |  gooseberry  jam,  and  puts  them  down  next  to  the 
fire,  |  When  the  stones  are  all  out,  she  takes  a  large  dish  and  |  puts  it 
down  next  to  the  low-sided  box.     She  takes  a  ||  long-handled  ladle  ■" 
and  dips  out  the  gooseberry  jam  and  puts  it  into  the  |  large  dish. 
When  it  is  full,  she  takes  up  the  large  dish  of  |  gooseberry  jam  and 
puts  it  down  at  a  cool  place  |  to  cool  off  quickly.     When  it  is  cold, 


qas  laxa  tlEmxwale.     Wa,  la  hanal  he  gwegilaxa  waokwe  xIx'ex-  57 
sEmala  tlesEma.     Wii,  la£me  niEmk'Ewakweda  tlesEme.     Wa,  gil- 
emese  gwalExs  lae  &x£edxa  le£wa£ye,  qa£s  naxuyindes  liiq.     Wa,  la 
gael  he  gwaele.     Wa,  g'il£mese    kotcda    tstedaqaq    laEm   k'ox^wl-  60 
deda   tlesEinaxs   lae    axodxa   le£wa£ye    niixumiis   qa£s   glg'alilesexs 
lae  ax£edxes  k"!ipLalaa,  qa£s    k'!ip!ldes  laxa    tlesEin   la  kox£wida, 
qa's    lii    k'  libEiiolisElas    laxes    lEgwile.     Wa,    gil'mese    £wi£lostaxs 
lae    xwetletsa    k!wa£xLawe    laxes    dzek-asE£we    tlEmxwala.      Wii, 
g'ih'mese    k'les    xas£idExs    lae    et!e<l     dax-£Idxes    klipLalaa,    qaes  65 
et!eile    k"!ip!lts    laxa     xixExsEmala     tlesEma,    qa£s    liixat!    hfi,p- 
stEnts  lax  £wabEts!awasa  lalogiime.     Wii,  laxae  k!ip!Ekilasa  k'lese 
q!esgEm  xix'ExsEmala  t!esEm  laq.     Wii,  gil'mese  mEdElx£wIdExs 
lae  ax£edxa    le£waeye,  qafs   lii  naxumts    laq.     Wii,    k'!est!a    gex-£I- 
dExs  lae  xwelaq  axodxa  naxuya£ye  le£wa£ya,  qa£s  gig-alllesexs  lae  70 
dax-£Idxes  klipLalaa,  qa£s   k!ip!ides  laxa  t!esEme  la  g-egexa    dze- 
g-ikwe   tlEinxwalii   qa£s  liixat!  klibEnolisElas  laxes  lEgwile.      Wii, 
giPmese  £wI£losteda  t!esEmaxs  lae  ax£edxa  £walase  loq!vva,  qa£s  la 
k'anolllas  laxa  kiitsEme  dzegats!exa    tlEmxwale.     Wii,  lii  ax£edxa 
gltlEXLiila  tsexLa,    qa£s    lii    tsEydsasa  dzegikwe    tlEmxwale    laxa  75 
£walase  loq!wa.     Wa,  g'ih'mese  qotlaxs  lae  k-ag  ililaxa  d/.egix"ts!a- 
laxa  tlEmxwale   £walas  loqlwa,    qa£s   la  k'agalllas    laxa  £wudaele, 
qa  ha£nakweles  £wuda£stax,£ida.    Wii,  gil£mese  £wuda£stax,£IdExs  lae 


600  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUIL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

80  she  |  sends  out  her  husband  to  invite  his  friends.  He  ||  might  call  his 
numaym,  if  the  man  wishes  to  give  them  the  |  gooseberry  jam.  As 
soon  as  they  |  all  come  in,  the  woman  takes  her  small  dishes,  her  | 
spoons,  and  her  oil,  and  puts  them  down  next  to  her  seat.  |  Then 

85  she  sends  her  husband  to  get  the  ||  gooseberry-jam  dish  and  to  put  it 
next  to  her  seat.  |  When  her  husband  comes,  she  takes  a  wooden 
spoon,  |  dips  it  into  the  jam,  and  puts  it  into  the  |  small  dishes. 
When  these  are  halt  full,  there  is  enough  in  them;  and  |  when  she  has 

90  put  some  gooseberry  jam  into  ||  the  small  dishes,  she  takes  the  oil  and 
pours  it  on.  She  puts  |  much  oil  on.  After  this  has  been  done,  she 
gives  a  |  spoon  to  each  guest;  and  after  this,  one  |  dish  with  goose- 
berry jam  is  put  down  in  front  of  |  each  three  men.     As  soon  as  they 

95  have  been  put  down,  ||  (the  guests)  begin  to  eat  the  gooseberry  j am.  | 
When  they  have  eaten  all,  they  go  out.  They  never  drink  |  water 
after  it.  | 

Gooseberries  are  also  eaten  raw  (and  unripe)  by  the  Indians.  |  They 
100  pick  them  off  the  gooseberry  bushes,  or  they  eat  them  ||  in  the  house. 
They  never  call  their  friends  for  this.  |  That  is  all  about  the  goose- 
berries. I 


£yfdaqases    ta£wunEme,    qa   las    Le-lalaxes    £ne£nEmokwe    loxs    he- 

80  £maes  EnE£memote  la  Le£laIasos,  yix  Enek*aeda  bEgwanEme,  qa£s  ha 
t lEmxwilag'Ilxa  dzeg'tkwe  tlEmxwala.  Wii,  gil-mese  g'iix  £wl£lae- 
i.f.xs  lae  hex'£ida£ma  tslEdaqe  axeedxes  laElogume  LE£wis  kak'E- 
tslEnaqe  LE£wa  Lle£na,  qa£s  g'iixe  glg'alila  laxes  heiuKnclase  klwae- 
lasa.     Wa,  lii    £viilaqaxes   la£wiinEme,  qa  las  ax£edxa    dzeg-ixuts!a- 

S5  laxa  tlEmxwale  £walas  loq!wa,  qa£s  g'itxe  kagalflas  lax  klwaela- 
sas.  Wa,  gil£mese  g'axe  la£wunEmasexs  lae  &x£edxa  kikayEme 
qa£s  teqes  laxa  dzEg'ikwe  tlEmxwala,  ga£s  lii  tsEyosElas  laxa  laE- 
logume. Wa,  gih'mese  nEgoyoxsdalaxs  lae  helatsla.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  la  £wi£la  la  t  let  !Emxuts  laleda  t!Emxut!awats!§Laxa  dzeg'ikwe 

90  laElogumxs  lae.  ax£edxa  Llema,  qa£s  klunqlEqes  laq.  Wa,  la£me 
q'.eqxa  L!e£na.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  tslEwanaesasa  kak'E- 
tslEnaqe.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  kaxd/.aiuollhisa  £nal£nE- 
mexLa  t!Emx"t!awats!eLaxa  dzeg'ikwe  t  lEmxwale  hiElogiim  laxa 
yaeyudukwe    bebEgwanEina.      Wii,    gil£mese    £wIlg-alIlExs   lae    he- 

95  x,£idaEm  £naxwa  dze(lzegigux£I(lxa  dzegikwe  t!Emxw7alii.  Wii, 
g'il£mese  £wi£laxs  lae  hoquwElsa.  Wit,  la£me  hewaxa  nagekilax 
£wapa. 

Yixs  k'!Elx"k!ax'aaxaeda    baklumaxa    tlEmxwale,   yixs    lae    h&- 
£maaxs5q  laxa    t!Emx"mE(lzEXEkula    Loxs    g'ax£mae    t!Emxut!axuq 
100  laxes    gokwe.     Wa,    lii    k"!es    Le£lalas    laxes    £ne£nEmokwe.     Wa, 
laEm  gwegwalEin  laxa  t!EmxwTale. 


boas]  BECIPES  601 

Currants. — Currants  are  also  only  eaten  |  from  the  currant  bushes.  1 
They  do  not  give  these  at  a  feast  to  many  |  people  or  to  their  relatives, 
for  there  are  not  very  many  of  |  these.     That  is  all  about  this.  || 

Solomon's  Seal. — This  is  the  same  thing.     They  only  eat  these  off  5 
the  plant  when  |  they  see  them  growing  on   a  berry  patch,  for  | 
sometimes  the  plants  have  many  edible  berries.  |  The  tribes  are  also 
not  invited  for  these,  for  there  are  not  |  many  berries  of  this  kind. 
They  arc  not  put  on  the  fire  and  ||  boiled.     That  is  all  about  this.  |       10 

Currants  (Ilabaxsole). — HeEmxaeda  habaxsole  aEm  ha£maaxsoso£  1 
laxa  habaxsoleniEse.     Wa,  laEmxae   k'!es  Leslalayo  laxa  qlenEme 
bebEgwanEma    i.o'ma     LeLELala,    rjaxs     k'lesae     alaEm    qleiiEme 
gwex'sdEmas.     Wa,    laEmxae   gwal    laq. 

TiEmts!.1 — Wa,  heEmxae  gwegilasErwe,  yixs  a£mae  ha£maaxso- 5 
sosa  doxfwaLEl;iqexs  qlwaxae  laxa  t!Emts!EXEkula,  qaxs  a-mae 
helanokwa  t!Emts!aniEse  lax  hamxLalaxes  hamxLawa£ve.  Wii, 
laEmxae  k'!es  Le£lalaj'o  laxa  lelqwalaLaeye,  cjaxs  k'!esaaxat! 
q!enEme  gwexsdEmas.  Wii,  laEmxae  k'!es  hanxLEntsE-'wa  qa 
Llobats.      Wii,    laEm   gwal   laxeq.  Ill 

1  Unifnlium  dilatatum  (Wood)  HoweU. 


V.  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS 
Signs  (a'qEn) 

Body  Feelings  as  Signs. —  Twitching  of  the   Crown   of  iht   Head. —  1 
When  the  crown  of  the  head  of  a  man  twitches,  |  he  knows  that  he  will 
cut  off  his  hair  for  his  relative  who  |  is  to  die;  for  that  is  the  way  the 
Indians  do.     As  soon  as  a  near  |  relative  dies,  and  when  he  has  been 
dead  four  days,  ||  the  hair  is  cut.  |  5 

Twitching  of  the  Nose. — When  the  nose  of  a  man  |  twitches,  he 
knows  that  he  will  blow  his  nose  when  he  cries  for  a  |  relative  who  is 
going  to  die.  | 

Twitching  of  the  Upper  Lip. — When  the  upper  ||  lip  [of  our  mouth]  10 
twitches  (a  man)  knows  that  tears  will  run  down  |  wThen  he  cries  for 
a  relative  who  is  going  to  die.  | 

Twitching  and  Itching  of  the  Cheek. — When  the  cheek  |  of  a  woman 
twitches  or  itches,  she  knows  that  she  will  scratch  her  face  when  she  | 
cries  for  a  relative  who  is  going  to  die.  || 

Heaving  of  the  Stomach. — When  the  stomach  of  a  man  twitches,  |   15 
the  Indians  call  it  "heaving"  of  the  stomach,  for  the  stomach  will 
heave  |  when  he  is  wailing  for  one  who  is  going  to  die.  | 

Wiping  of  the  Eyes. — When  the  lower  part  of  the  thumb  |  of  the 
hand  of  a  man  twitches,  he  knows  that  he  will  wipe  his  eyes  ||  with  the  20 
lower  part  of  his  thumb  when  he  wails  for  a  relative  who  is  going  to  die.  | 

MeUexlo,'. — Wa,  he'£maaxs   niEta'e  q!E'nxLii£yasa  bEgwa'nEme;  1 
wa,    laE'm     q!a'laqexs     t!o'sasE£weLes    sE£ya'    qae's     LeLELa'laxs 
lErle'Le,    qa    gwe'gi£lasasa    ba'klumaxs    g-i'Pmae   1e£16's    ma'g"ile 
LeLELa'laxs,  wa,  gi'l£mese  mo'p lEnxwa's  la  lE-la'gules  LeLELa'la, 
wii,  la  t!o's£ItsE£we  sE£ya's.  5 

Msde'lba. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  x'i'ndzasasa  bEgwa'nEme; 
wa,  laE'm  qla'laxs  lE'ntelxes  x-I'ndzase  qo  qlwa'sal  qae's  LeLE- 
La'laxs le'Le  1e-1l. 

MEdExsta'    e'h'.'odEXStes    ssms. — Wii,   he'emaaxs    niEta'e    e'k'!o- 
dExsta£yasEns  sE'msex;   wa,  laE'm  q!a'lax  wa£na'kuleLes  gwa'^sdo  10 
qo  qlwa'sal  qaes  LeLELa'la  qo  1e'£1l5. 

MeV.o's  lo  ld'xsos. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  loxs  la'xae  awo'- 
dzaeyasa  ts!Eda'qe;  wa,  la  qla'laxs  E'lwateLaxes  go'guma£ye  qo 
qlwa'sal  cpxes  LeLELa'laxs  lE£le'L§. 

QE'mqEmlJc.'im. — Wa,  he'fmaaxs  mEta'e    tEk!a'sa  bEgwa'nEine;  15 
wa,    he'Em    gwE^yasa    ba'klume     qE'mqEinlk"  !im,    yixs    qELEla'e 
tEk'!ii'sa  qlwa'sa  qae'da  lE£'lLe. 

De'dastodJc'Hm.  —  Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  o'xxa£yasa  qo£mas 
a£yasa'sa  bEgwa'nEme;  wii,  la  qla'laxs  de£sto'deLaxes  gwa'£sde, 
yis  o'xLa£yasases  qo'ma  qaxs  q  Iwa/saex.  qaes  LeLELa'liixs  lE£le'Le.  20 

603 


604  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Ikth.  ann.  35 

21  Tremor  inter  femina. — Cum  raulieris  alterutra  pars  vulvae  salit  | 
scit  inf antem  suum  moriturura  esse;  [  hide  enim  exit;  atque. vaginae 
foramen  cum  salit,  eadem  de  causa  salit.  | 

25  Tremor  penis. — Cum  viri  penis  salit,  ||  propter  hoc  scit  suam  uxorem 
morituram  esse.  | 

Twitching  and  Itching  of  the  Feet. — When  |  the  feet  of  a  woman 
twitch  and  itch,  she  knows  that  she  will  be  in  a  widow's  house  |  on 
account  of  her  husband  when  he  dies,  for  she  will  sit  still  a  long  time 
in  the  |  widow's  house.     Tins  is  the  same  with  a  man.  || 

30  Tremor  genus. — Cum  viri  genu  salit,  |  scit  amicam  suam  esse 
morituram;  nam  simul  ac  |  noctu  adest  vir  cum  arnica,  postquam  | 
cum  arnica  concubuit,  vir  ad  vulvam  amicae  genu  applicat.  |  Salit 
igitur  genu  viri  cum  arnica  est  moritura.  || 

35  Twitching  of  the  Upper  Arm. — When  the  shoulder  joint  of  a  woman 
twitches,  I  she  knows  that  one  of  her  children  is  going  to  die,  because  | 
her  shoulder  joint  twitches,  and  that  is  the  place  where  the  child  lies 
when  it  I  sleeps  with  its  mother,  j] 

40  Twitching  of  tin  Sides.  When  a  woman's  sides  |  twitch,  she  knows 
that  she  will  lie  sick  in  bed.  | 

Twitching  of  the    Whole  Body. — When  the  whole  body  of  a  man 

21       MEdd'q.1 — Wii,he'£maaxs  mEta'e  £wa'x-sanodzExstaeyas  na£xwa'sa 

tslEda'qe;  wa,    laE'm    qla'laqexs    lE-le'i.es  xfino'kwe  qaxs  he'£mae 

g-a'yowe,  Lo£me'  a/waxsta£yasa  na'xwe':  he'Emxaa  gwe'lHalaglle. 

Mt;tsEgd'. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  me'mesasa  bEgwamEme;   wa, 

25  laE'm  qla'laxs  lE£le'Les  gEiiE'me  la'xeq. 

MaE'md.Edzd'x'ses  lo  Id'lEXEdzo'x'ses. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e 
i.oxs  la'xae  g-ogogu£yasa  tslEda'qe;  wa,  laE'm  qla'laxs  aa'msIliLe 
qae's  la'£wunEmaxs  lE£ma'e  1e£1l,  qaxs  galei.e  klwa'lal  la'xa 
&a'msllats!e.     He'Emxaa  gwe'g'ileda  bEgwa'nEme. 

30  Maemtk'ex'. — Wa,  he/£maaxs  mEta'e  o'kwiix'a£yasa  bEgwa'- 
nEme; wa,  laK'm  qla'laqexs  Ie-Ic'lC's  La'la,  qaxs  g-i'l£mae  la 
he'lona  bEgwa'nEme  la'xes  i.a'laxa  ga'nuLe;  wii,  g-i'l£mes  gwal 
iiExwa'la  LE£wes  La'laxs  la'e  L!a'gwagi£lela  bEgwa'nEinaxes  La'la. 
Wa,    he'£mes    la£gilasox    mEtE'ns    o'kwaxa£yaxs    leie'Le    La'lasa 

35  bEgwa'nEme. 

MaEintscfya'pla. — Wii,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  gwa'£nasa  tslEda'qe; 
wii,  laE'm  qla'laqexs  lE£la'e  g'ii'yole  lax  sa'sEinas  qaxs  mEta'e 
gwa'£nas  a£yasa's,  qaxs  he'£mae  kula'laatsa  g-ina'nEme,  yixs 
me'xae  le£w!s  abE'mpe. 

40  MaE'mdEncfs. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  e'£wanu'dza£yasa  ts!E- 
daqe;  wii,  la  qla'laxs  qE'lgwillLa  tslEx-qla'l  la'xes  g-ae'lase. 

Mii/vak\'E'n   niEt.'E'n. — Wa,  he'£maaxs    mEta'e    £nii'xwe  6'klwi- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  605 

I  witches,  I  he  knows  that  one  of  his  children  will  die,  [  if  he  has  many 
children.  First,  his  arms  twitch,  ||  because  he  carries  his  child  45 
[there];  and  afterwards  his  chest  twitches,  j  for  that  is  the  place  that 
his  child  lies  when  he  carries  it  about;  |  afterwards  the  upper  lip  [of 
his  mouth]  twitches,  for  |  tears  run  down  when  he  cries;  and  then 
his  |  stomach  twitches,  for  it  heaves  when  he  cries.  Then  he  knows  || 
by  this  that  his  child  is  going  to  die.  |  50 

Twitching  of  the  Eyelids. — When  the  eyelids1  of  a  man  |  twitch,  he 
knows  that  it  is  going  to  rain  that  day,  for  his  eye  is  twitching,  | 
and  that  is  the  place  where  the  rain-water  [when  it  rains]  runs  down.  | 

Twitching  offhi  Small  ofth  Back.     When  the  small  ||  of  the  back  55 
(the  part  with  which  the  hunter  sits  in  the  canoe)  twitches,  he  knows 
there  will  be  fine  weather  that  |  day.     There  will  be  no  wind,  and  he 
will  sit  for  a  long  time  in  his  |  little  hunter's  canoe  paddling  about.  | 

Twitching  of  the  Under-lip. — When  the  under-lip2  of  a  |  sea  hunter 
twitches,  he  knows  that  he  will  eat  all  kinds  of  meat,  for  ||  the  place  60 
where  the  fat  of  the  meat  goes  down  is  twitching,  j 

Twitching  of  Feet. — When  the  toes  of  the  feet  |  of  a  man  twitch, 
then  a  visitor  will  come,  |  for  he  will  soon  go  to  meet  a  visitor.  | 

Twitching  of  the  Neck. — When  the  neck  of  a  man  twitches,  ||  he  65 
knows  that  his  head  will  be  cut  off  in  war.  I 


na£yasa  bEgwa'nEme;  wa,  la  qla'laxs  lE/£lnokweLes  sa'sEme.  4:-! 
ylxs  qle'nEmae  sa'sEmas.  Wit,  he'Em  g-il  niEtle'de  6'xusi£ya'- 
p!a£yas  qaxs  qtelEla'axes  xiino'kwe.  Wa,  la  nEXwa'g-!  niEtle'de  45 
o£ba'£yas,  qaxs  he'£mae  kula'laats  xuno'kwasexs  qlElEla'aq.  Wa,  la 
nExwa'glxs  la'e  e't!ed  niEtle'de  e'k!odExsta£yas  sE'msas,  qaxs 
he'-mae  wa'xaatsa  gwa'-sdiixs  la'e  qlwa'sa.  Wa,  la  e'tled  niE- 
tle'de tEkla's,  qaxs  qE'mLElaaxs  qlwa'sae.  Wa,  laE'm  qla'LE- 
laqexs  lE£le'Les  xuno'kwe  lii'xeq.  50 

MEele'g'altd. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  e'£wig-alta£yasa  bEgwa'- 
nEme, la  q  !a'laqexs  yo'gwlLEns  £na'lax,  qaxs  mEta'e  e'£wig-alta£ye, 
qaxs  he'£mae  waa'tsa  yo'giimesaxs  la'e  yo'gwa. 

MEtlE'xsd  los  k!we'k!waxsk'!im. — Wit,  he'£maaxs    mEta'e    k!we'- 
k!waxsk'!imii'sa    ale'winoxwe;     wa,    laE'm     cjla'laqexs     ae'g'IseLa  55 
-'na'la.     K- lea'seLe   ya'laL.     Wa,  lill  gexs    k!wa'xsalal   la'xes    ale'- 
watsle  xwa'xwaguma  la'xes  se'£wina£ye. 

MeV. exlo.1 sxd. — Wa,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  bEnk!o'dExstii'sa  Sle'- 
winoxwe;  wii,  laE'm  qla'laxs  q!Ese'Laxa  q!e'q!ats!o'mase,  qaxs 
mEta'e  wa'xa£lasas  tsE'nxwa£yasa  c[!e'q  !ats!o'mase.  60 

MEtE'mx'ses. — Wii,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  o'gumx-sidza£yas  g'6'g'o- 
gii£yasa  bEgwa'nEme;  wa,  laE'm  qlaxElaqexs  ba'gunseLe  gii'x£a- 
HsLa,  qaxs  a'ltsEmesE£waeda  ba'gunse. 

MeV.xo!. — Wii,  he'£maaxs  mEta'e  oxii'wa£yasa  bEgwa'nEme;  wii, 
laE'm  q!a'laxs  q  !ii'x'£itsE£weLasa  wi'naLa.  65 

1  According  to  others,  the  upper  eyelids.  2  According  to  others,  the  middle  line  of  the  chin. 


606  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL 


1  Cries  of  the  Raven.  — When  it  is  desired  that  the  owner  of  an  after- 
birth should  understand  |  the  cries  of  the  raven,  the  after-birth  is 
put  down  |  on  the  beach  where  the  ravens  peck  at  it.  And  when  it 
5  is  |  pecked  at  by  the  ravens,  ||  the  man,  when  he  is  full  grown,  will 
understand  the  cries  of  the  raven,  for  |  the  people  of  olden  times 
considered  it  important  that  the  raven  came  |  to  report  about  the  ar- 
rival of  warriors  who  came  to  make  war  upon  the  tribes.  |  Then  they 
would  come  at  once  and  ask  one  who  understands  the  raven,  tum- 
bling about  |  and  crying.  It  is  bad  news  when  they  are  tumbling 
10  about  ||  and  feathers  fall  out.  (Below)  are  the  various  cries  |  of  the 
raven,  which  I  learned  from  an  old  man  of  the  Kwakiutl,  |  when 
they  discussed  about  it  in  a  feast,  when  I  was  a  child  |  for  when  the 
ravens  are  crying,  a  man  |  whose  after-birth  has  been  eaten  by  ravens 
is  sent  out.1  II 


1  Cries  of  the  Raven. — Wa,  gil£mese  £nex-so  qa£s  ayosElaeda  ma- 
enokwasa  maenaxa  gwek-  lalasasa  gwa£winaxs  lae  km  axaledzEma 
maene  laxa  L!Eina£ise,  qa  LEiil£ItsE£wesesa  gwa£wina.  Wa,  g  iHrnese 
£wi£la  LEnl£Its5£sa  gwa£winiixs  lae  ayosEleda  maenokwasexs  lae 
5  nEXLaax'£Id  la  bEgwanEina  lax  ogiiqi£lalasas  gwek'  lalasasa  gwa- 
ewina,  yixs  awilagilaeda  g'ale  bEgwaiiEmq,  qaxs  heemaeda  gwa£wina 
g-ax  ts!Ek-!alElasa  wlniixs  g'axae  gwasx'iilaxs  wlneLaxa  lelqwa- 
laLa£ye.  Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  waxap!sE£wa  ayosEliixa  gwa£winiixs 
lelax'alae  lalawiilaqula.  Wa,  la£me  £yax"sa£me  tslEklfdEmasexs  le- 
10  laxalae  pleplElgilxullaxes  ts!Elts!Elke.  Wii,  g'a£mes  oguqElala 
gwek"!iilatsa  gwaewine  g'a  laxEn  hoLelaena£yax  q!ulsq!ulyax"d;isa 
Kwag'uleg'a,  yixs  qataplaaxs  klwelae,  yixg'in  hemaolEk'  allle 
ginanEme,  yixs  gwagiixalaeda  gwafwina.  Wa,  he£mis  la  £yala- 
gasxa  ha£maakwas  maenasa  gwa£wina-. 

15      ga  ga  ga  gad Warriors  are  coming  to  make  an  attack. 

gax  gax  gax  ..      ..Ravens  will  eat  the  bodies  of  people  drowned 
by  the  capsizing  of  canoes. 

qlEdzo  qlEdzo Hunters  will  bring   much    meat   to  feed    the 

people. 

gaga  ha  hiigae A  chief  (or  someone  else)  died. 

xagaq  xagaq . . A  woman  is  going  to  die. 

20      k'  lEmax  k'  temaq     It  will  be  calm  weather. 

sox  sox  sox r .It  will  be  calm  and  sunshine. 

gfls  gflx  gus  ...    .  There  will  be  heavy  rains. 

wax   wax  wax A  stranger  will  arrive  on  a  visit. 

xwo  xwo  xwo There  will  be  a  poor  salmon  run. 

25      x'ok"  x'ok"  .    .When  ravens  ciy  thus  while  lighting  in  the  air, 

there  will  be  bad  news. 

'  For  the  cries  and  their  meanings  see  Indian  text  below. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  607 

The  one  whose  after-birth  has  been  eaten  by  the  raven  understands  |  27 
this  what  I  am  talking  about.     There  are  only  a  few  whose  after- 
births have  been  eaten  |  by  the  raven.  | 
Eating 

(He  folds  up  the  morsel,  chews  the  end,  and  dips  it  into  oil,  and  1 
keeps  on  doing  so  while  he  is  eating.)     When  he  has  nearly  eaten  all, 
he  stops,  for  it  is  a  bad  sign  |  for  a  man  to  eat  all  that  is  given  to  him.  | 

Picking    Huckleberries 

As1  soon  as  (the  woman)  has  finished  (picking  the  berries),  she  gets 
ready  to  |  go  and  pick  huckleberries  when  day  comes,  in  the  morn- 
ing; for  ||  the  ancient  Indian  said  that  it  brings  bad  luck  not  to  pick  5 
huckleberries  at  once  into  |  a  new  basket  when  it  has  been  finished.  | 
Therefore  the  women  immediately  get  ready  to  go  |  as  soon  as  they 
finish  the  basket.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  Sealing 

When  the  flippers  (of  the  seal)  have  been  singed,  (the  man)  strikes 
off  with  his  ||  tongs  the  singed  hair,  so  that  it  comes  off  in  pieces,  for  10 
the  hunters  do  not  |  allow  any  one  to  scrape  off  the  singed  hair.     It 

yilxwa  gwa£wina.-When  a  raven  holds  with  its  beak  the  end  of  a  26 
branch  and  hangs  down,  it  means  that  a  man's 
head  will  be.  cut  off  in  war. 
Wa,   hastaEm   ayodzEltsa    maenokwas    hamx,£ItsEewasa    gwa£wi-  27 
nexg"in  lak'  gwagwex's£alasa.     Wa,  lak'  holala  haemaakwas  maene 
yisa  gwa£wina. 

Eating 

Wa,  g'il£mese    Elaq   £wi£laxs    lae   gwala  qaxs  aEinsaeda  £wl£laxa  1 
hag'Ila£yaxs  £wI£lasE£wae  yisa  ha£mape. 

Picking  Huckleberries 

Wa,1  gil£mese  gwalamasqexs  lae  hex£idaEm  xwanal£Ida  qa£s  la- 
lag'll  k!ilal  laxa  kliladaxa  gwadEnie,  qo  £nax-£ldElxa  gaala,  qaxs 
£nekaeda  g'ale  bak!umqexs  aEmsaax  kMesae  hex-£idaEm  la  k-!il-  5 
ts!otsEswa  alomase  k"!ilats!e  lExiixs  galaegwalamats6£sa  k"!llex"daxa 
gwiidEme.  Wii,  he£niis  lag'ilasa  tstedaqe  hex-'idaEin  xwanaHdExs 
g'iilae  gwales  k!ilats!eg"ila£ye  lExa£ya.2 

Customs  Relating  to  Sealing 

Wa,3    gil£mese   £wl£la   ts!Enkwe    gElq!ayaxs  lae    kwexEltsEmesa 
ts!esLala    laxa    la    tstenkwa    qa  lawalesa  ts!ax'mote    qaxs    k'lesae  10 
helq!aleda  es£Elewinoxwe  k'exalaxa  tslaxmote,  aLa£lae  bome£stala- 

■  Continued  from  p.  140,  line  16.      ^Continued  on  p.  209,  line  3.      "Continued  from  p.  152,  line  24. 


608  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.ANN.86 

12  is  said  that  otherwise  the  seal  would  escape  |  from  the  hunter  when- 
ever he  goes  out  hunting.  |  Therefore  they  only  knock  it  off  with  the 
tongs,  so  that  the  singed  hair  |  comes  off.1  || 

15  (The2  hunter)  always  pushes  his(  paddle)  right  over  his  fire,  hecause 
he  wishes |  it  to  become  very  black;  and  also  that  no  |  young  woman 
may  step  over  it,  and  no  young  man,  for  they  never  do  right;  ]  and 
also  that  a  menstruating  woman  may  not  give  bad  luck  to  the  hunter.  | 
His  canoe-box  also  hangs  in  the  corner  of  the  house.     He  also  puts  || 

20  just  over  the  fire  the  two  mats  on  which  (hunter  and  steersman)  sit; 
but  he  leaves  |  his  harpoon-shaft  in  the  hunting-canoe;  and  [  also 
the  bladder-float  is  hung  up  at  the  same  place  where  the  canoe-box 
is.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  Porpoise-Hunting 

Blue-hellebore  root  and  |  peucedanum-seeds  are  kept  in  the  canoe- 
box  of  the  porpoise-hunter,  and  also  back-sinew  of  the  porpoise,  which 

25  is  dried  ||  for  tying  up  the  spear  if  it  should  break.  |  Blue-hellebore 
root  is  put  into  the  canoe-box,  and  the  peucedanum-seeds,  |  in  case 
that  a  sea-monster  should  come  up  in  the  night  when  they  are 
spearing  |  porpoises.  It  is  said  that  often  the  sea-monsters  show 
themselves.     Then  |  the  hellebore-root  is  taken  out  and  chewed,  and 

30  spit  ||  overboard  on  each  side  of  the  hunting-canoe,  and  |  the  same  is 

12  laxa  megwate  LE£wa  k'!olot!asa  alewinoxwaxs  helayaaq.  Wii,  he- 
£mis  lag'ilas  km  kwexEltsEmesa  tslesLala  laq  qa  lawalatsa  tslax-- 
mote.1 

15  HeniEnala2  Les-aLElod  lax  nEqostawases  lEgwIle  qaxs  £nekae 
qa£s  hemEnala£mese  q  !wagwa£nakiila.  Wa,  he£mis  qa  k'leses  gaxa- 
sosa  eaiostagase  tsledaqa  LE£wa  ha£yal£a  qaxs  k' !esae  nenagolkwlla. 
Wa,  he£mis  q5  exEntalaxo  qaxs  aEinsae  laxa  es£Elew!noxwe.  Wa, 
laxae   tegwlla   odzaxs   laxa   onegwilasa  g5kwe.     Wa,    laxae   g-ala- 

20  LEleda  k!wek!wa£ye  mal  le,ElJwe  laxa  ekMa£yasa  lEgvvfie.  Wa,  laLa 
mastowas  hex'siiEm  gexsa  alewasELEla  xwaxwagiima.  Wii,  heEm- 
xaeda  poxunse  tegwit  lax  axasasa  odzaxse. 

(  istoms  Relating  to  Porpoise  Hunting 

Wa,  )ie£mis  g-ets!a  lax  odzaxse  g  ildatsa  alewinoxwa  axsole  LE£wa 
qlExmene.     Wa,  he£misa    atlEmasa   awlg"a£yasa    k'!olot!iixs   lEmo- 

25  kwae  qa£s  yil£edayolaxes  LEg'ikwe  q5  Eh'edElaxo.  Wii,  he£misa 
axsole  yixs  he£mae  lagults  getsla,  lax  odzaxsas  LE£wa  qlExmene 
qo  q!axwas5laxsa  £yag"imaxa  gan5Laxs  nEguLayalae  alexwaxa 
k'!olot!e.  Wa,  la£lae  qlunala  qlaxwasosa  £yag'ime.  Wa,  he£mis 
la  ax£wiilts  lodaatsexa  axsole  qa£s  malex£wideq  qa£s  kwestales  lax 

30  £wax-sodg"iwa£yases    alewats!e    xwaxwagiima.     Wa,     laxae    heEm 

i  Continued  on  p.  452,  line  25.  » Remark  inserted  on  p.  175,  line  9. 


BOAS  J  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  609 

done  with  the  peucedanum-se.eds.     Then  the  sea-monster  sinks  at  31 
once,  j  when  it  smells  the  hellebore-root.     Therefore  it  is  kept  in 
the  box.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  Salmon-Fishing  - 

Dog-Salmon. — (When  the  first  dog-salmon  (if  the  season  has  been  1 
caught,  the  wife  of  the  fisherman  goes  to  meet  her  husband  when  he 
comes  home  from  fishing.) 

As1  soon  as  he  arrives  at  the  beach,  his  wife  goes  to  meet  him;  |  and 
when  she  sees  what  has  been  caught  by  her  husband,  |  she  begins  to 
pray  to  it.  The  woman  says,  as  she  is  praying:  |  "O  Supernatural- 
Ones!  O,  Swimmers!  I  thank  you  that  ||  you  are  willing  to  come  5 
to  us.  Don't  let  your  coming  be  bad,  |  for  you  come  to  be  food  for 
us.  Therefore,  |  I  beg  you  to  protect  me  and  the  one  who  takes 
mercy  on  me,  |  that  we  may  not  die  without  cause,  Swimmers!" 
Then1  the  woman  herself  |  replies,  "Yes,"  and  goes  up  from  the  bank 
of  the  river.  || 

As2  soon  as  they  finish  cutting  up  the  speared  salmon,  |  the  woman  10 
at  once  gathers  the  slime  and  everything  |  that  comes  from  the 
salmon,  and  puts  it  into  a  basket,  and  pours  |  it  into  the  water  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river;  for  it  is  said  that  |  the  various  kinds  of 
salmon  at  once  come  to  life  when  the  intestines  are  put  into  the 
water  at  the  ||  mouths  of  the  rivers,  and  therefore  they  do  this;  and  |  15 
they  break  off  the  intestines  at  the  anal  fin  of  the  speared  salmon 


gwex"£ldxa     q!Exmene     qa£s    hex"ida£maEl    wiins£ldeda    £yag'imaxs  31 
lae  mesaLElaxa    axsole.     Wa,  he£mis   lag'ilas  g'etsia  lax  odzaxsas. 

Customs  Relating  to  Salmon  Fishing 

Dog-Salmon.  — Wa,1  gfl£mese  la'g-allsExs  la'e  gEiiE'mas  la'lalaq.  1 
Wa,  gi'Pmese  do'x£waLElax  t!a't!aq!wan.Emases  la'£wunEmaxs  la'e 
ts!E'lwax£IdEq.  Wa,  laE'm  £ne'k-eda  tsteda'qaxs  la'e  ts!E'lwaqa: 
''A'kasoL  £na£nawalaku.  A'kasoL  me'niEyoxwan,  ge'lakasdaxs 
sEX"ts!aaqas  g'ax  g'a'xEnu£xu.  Gwa'laxl  £y;l'kayes  gaxena£yos  5 
qaxs  he£maaqos  ga'xelaxs  go'lilaaqas  g"a'xEnu£x".  Wa,  he'£mis 
qa£s  da'damaylLos  ga'xEn  LEewu'n  hawaxa'lotexwa  wa'x£ede  cpx£s 
k!e'saos  wii'lalesEma  mEyo'xwan."  Wa1,  la  q!iilex's£Em  waxeda 
tstedaqaxs  lae  lasdesa. 

Wa,2  he£me'sexs  g-i'l£mae  gwal  xwa'LasE-'wa  sEgune'taxs  la'e  10 
he'x£ida£ma  ts!Eda'qe  q!ap!e'x-'ldxa  kMe'le  LE£wa  £na'xwa 
g-ay6'l  la'xa  k-!o'tEla  qa£s  lExts!o'des  la'xa  lExa'£ye  qa£s  le  qEp- 
stE'nts  la'xa  o'xusiwa£yasa  wa,  qaxs  £ne'x-sowae  he'x-£idaEm  la 
q!ula'x-£ldeda  k!o'k!utElaxs  la'e  axsta'nowes  ya'xyigile  la'xa 
o'xusiwa£yasa  wl'wa.     Wa,  he'£mis  hi'g-ilas  he  gwe'g-ile.     Wa,  he'-  15 

i  Continued  from  p.  303,  line  13.  2  Continued  from  p.  304. 

75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 39 


610  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [etii.  ann.ss 

17  but  |  they  cut  off  the  intestines  at  the  anal  fin  of  salmon  caught  with 
a  hook,  for,  if  the  intestines  were  broken  off  |  from  those  caught 
with  a  hook,  then  the  |  fish-line  of  him  who  does  so  would  always 

20  break.  Therefore  the  woman  takes  care  ||  in  breaking  it  off.  That 
is  the  end.  ] 

Silver-Salmon. — Eyes    and    salmon-heads  roasted  |   together  with 
backbone  and  tail,  in  this  manner:  |         ^ 

When  they  go  trolling  for  silver-        JS       salmon,  and  when  they 
first  go  out  to  |  sea,  as  soon  as  a      MW       man  has   caught  four 

25  silver-salmon,  ||  his  wife  goes  down  /j|  to  meet  him  when  he 
arrives  at  the  beach  of  his  |  house.  J|  When  she  first  sees 
what  was  caught  by  her  husband,  |  1 she  prays  to  the  silver- 
salmon;  and  after  she  has  prayed,  )  she  picks  up  with  her 
fingers  the  four  silver-salmon  and  goes  up  with  them  and  puts  them 
down  |  on  the  beach  in  front  of  the  house.     Then  she  takes  her  fish- 

30  knife  and  ||  cuts  the  four  silver-salmon;  the  head  |  and  the  tail  are 
left  on  the  backbone.  Then  she  takes  the  |  roasting-tongs  and  puts 
them  up  on  the  beach,  where  she  is  sitting.  Then  she  takes  |  what 
she  is  going  to  roast  and  puts  the  salmon-tail  and  the  backbone  in  | 

35  between  the  roasting-tongs.  Then  she  pushes  it  down,  so  that  ||  the 
ends  of  the  tongs  reach  to  the  eyes  |  of  the  salmon-head.     After  she 

16  £mesexs  aLa'lasE£wae  ts !e'waga£yasa  sEgine'te.  Wit,  laLa  t!6'sa- 
layEwe  ts  !e'waga£yasa  do'gwinete  qaxs  g'i'l£maaEl  aLo'yEwe  ts!e'- 
waga£yasa  dS'gwinetaxs  la'e  heniEnalaEm  el§'  do'gwayasa  ya'nE- 
maxa  he  gwe'x£ItsE£wa.     Wa,  he'£mis  la'gilaseda  tsteda'qe  ae'k-ila 

20  ELa'laq.     Wa,  laE'm  g-wa'la. 

Silver-Salmon.-' XexF.xstowa'kuxa    L!o'bEkwe    he'x'tle    sna'enEm- 

p!Eng"ila    LE£wa    xa'kladzo    LE£wa    ts!a'sna£yeg-a  gwa'leg'a  (Jig.). 

Wa,  he'£maaxsla'e  do'kwasE£wa  dza£wu'naxs  gi'lg-aaLa£yalae  la'xa 

ao'wak'e.     Wii,  gl'l£mese    £ya'iiEmeda   bEgwanEmaxa   mo'we  dza- 

25  £wuna,  lae  gEnEmas  la'lalaqexs  g'alae  g-a'x£alisa  laxa  L!Ema£isases 
go'kwe.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  do'x£waLElax  £ya'nEmases  la'£wunEmaxs 
la'e  ts!E'lwaqaxa  dza£wu'ne.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwal  tslE'lwaqaxs  la'e 
gasx"ix,£Idxa  mowe  dza£wuna  qa£s  le  lo'sdesElas  qa£s  le  k"!ix£a'li- 
sElaq  lax  L !Eina£isases  go'kwe.     Wa,  la  ax£e'dxes  xwa'Layowe  qa£s 

30  le  xwa'1-idxa  mo'we  dza£wii'na.  Wit,  laE'm  axa'leda  he'x-t!a£ye 
LE£wa  ts!a'sna£ye  laxa  xa'lcladzowe.  Wa,  la£mese  ax£e'dxa  Llo'p- 
sayowe  qa£s  La'g'aliseq  la'xes  klwae'dzase.  Wa,  la£me'se  ax£e'd- 
xes  L!o'pasoLe  qa£s  axo'des  ts!a'sna£yas  LE£wa  xa'k'!adzowe  lax 
awa'gawa£yasa  Llo'psayowe.     Wa,  la  we'qwaxots  qa  les  LleLlE'n- 

35  cjale  o'ba£yas  £wa'x-sanots!Exsta£yasa  Llo'psayowe  la  gegE£jTa'gE- 
sasa  he'x-t!a£yasa  dza£wu'ne.     Wa,  g"i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  q!ap!e'- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  611 

lias  done  so,  she  gathers  |  the  slime  and  throws  it  into  the  sea.     As  37 
soon  as  |  she  comes  up  from  the  beach,  she  picks  up  the  roasting- 
tongs  with  the  eyes  in  them,  that  had  been  put  over  the  fire,  |  for 
there  are  four  of  them,  and  she  places  them  by  the  side  of  the  lire  of 
her  house.  ||  Then  she  watches  them  until  the  skin  of  the  head  is  40 
blackened;  |  and  when  it  turns  black,  she  takes  it  away  and  puts  it  | 
over  the  fire.     Then  her  husband  at  once  |  invites  his  numaym  to  come 
and  eat  it,  for  he  must  take  care  |  not  to  keep  it  over  night  in  the 
house;  for  the  first  people  said,  that,  if  ||  the  roasted  eyes  were  kept  45 
over  night  in  the  house  when  |  they  are  first  caught,  then  the  sdver- 
salmon  would  disappear  from  the  sea.  |  Therefore  the}'  do  in  this  way. 
As  soon  as  the  guests  j  come  in,  they  sit  down  in  the  rear  of  the  tire,  j 
on  the  mat  that  has  been  spread  out  for  them.     When  all  ||  the  guests  50 
are  in,  the  woman  takes  a  new  food-  |  mat  and  spreads  it  in  front  of 
those  to  whom  she  is  going  to  give  to  eat.     Then  she  |  takes  down  the 
four  roasting-tongs  with  the  eyes  in  them  that  had  been  over  the  fire 
and  places  them  |  before  her  guests.    Then  she  takes  the  salmon  out  of 
the  |  roasting-tongs.     After  she  has  done  so,  she  gives  water  ||  to  55 
them  to  drink;  and  after  they  finish  drinking,  then  the  one  highest 
in   rank  |  prays    to   what   they   are   going    to   eat.     He   says:  "O, 
friends!  |  thank  you  that  we  meet  alive.     We  have  lived  until  |  this 
time  when  you  came  this  year.     Now  we  pray  |  you,  Supernatural- 

x-£ldxa   k-!e'le   qaes   le    ts!E.xstE'ndEq    la'xa    dE'msxe.     Wa,  g"i'l-  37 
£inese  g'a'x£wusdesExs  la'e  da'gilxLalaxa   ido'ptslala   xexExstowa- 
kwa,  ylxs  mo'tslaqae  qaEs   le  La'nolisaq  lax    lEgwI'lases  go'kwe. 
Wa,   la£me'se    da'doqwllaq    qa  k!umE'lx-£ldes    Lle'sasa  he'x't!a£ye.  40 
Wa,  gl'Pmese    k!umE'lx-£idExs    la'e    ax£e'dEq    qa£s    LeVaLE'lodes     ' 
lii'xa   e'k' !a£yases   lEgwi'le.     Wa,   la'xa    he'x£ida£me   la'£wunEnias 
la  Le'£lalaxes  £nE£me'mote  qa   ga'xes    haema'pEq    qaxs    ae'kilaaq 
xa£mae'l    la'xa    g'o'kwe,    ylxs    £ne'k'aeda    g'a'le    bEgwa'nEiuqexs 
g-i'l£mela'xe   xa£mae'la    Llo'bEkwe   xexExstowak"    la'xa   g'o'kwaxs  45 
ga'loLanEmae     la'laxe     x-is£I'dlaxa     dza£wii'ne     la'xa     ao'wake. 
Wa,     he'£mis     la'g'ilas     he      gwe'x'£ide.        Wa,     gl'Pmese     g-ax 
ho'gwiLeda     Le'dauEmaxs     la'e     k!us£a'lll    lax     o'gwlwalllasa     lE- 
gwi'le, la'xa  la   LEbe£latsa    le'£wa£ye  qae.     Wa,  gi'l£mese  £wi'£lae- 
Leda  Le'£lanEmaxs   la'eda   tslEda'qe   iix£e'dxa   E'ldzowe   ha£madzo  50 
le'£wa£ya  qa£s  le  LEpdzamo'lllas  la'xes  ha£mg-i'lasoLe.     Wa,  la  axa'- 
xodxa  mo'tslaqe  L!eL!opts!fda  xexE.xstowa'kwa  qa£s  le   axdzamo'- 
lllas  la'xes  Le'£lanEine.     Wa,  he'£mis  xik- !ax£I'dEq    qa   lo'ltslawes 
la'xes  Llo'psaj'owe.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  tsa'x-£itsa  £wa'pe 
laq  qa  na'x£itsos.     Wa,    g-i'l£mese  gwal    na'qaxs   la'e    naxsa'laga-  55 
£yas  tslE'lwaqaxes  ha£ma'Le.      Wa,  la  £ne'ka:"     A'k'asoL  £ne£nE- 
mo'ku,  ge'lakas£laxgins  q!iila'gowe.     Wa,  g-a'x£Emxa£nu£xu  ga'x£a- 
LEla  la'xos  g-a'xdEmaqaso'xda  £na'lax.     Wa,  la£me'sEiiu£xu  hftwa'- 


612  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  Listh.ann.85 

60  Ones,  to  protect  us  from  danger,  ||  that  nothing  evil  may  happen  to 
us  when  we  eat  you,  |  Supernatural-Ones!  for  that  is  the  reason  why 
you  come  here,  that  we  may  catch  you  |  for  food.  We  know  that 
only  your  |  bodies  are  dead  here,  but  your  souls  come  to  watch  |  over 

65  us  when  we  are  going  to  eat  what  you  have  given  us  ||  to  eat  now." 
Tims  he  says;  and  when  he  stops,  he  says,  "Indeed  !" 

As  soon  as  he  stops  speaking,  they  begin  to  eat,  and  |  his  friends 
also  eat.  Then  the  man  takes  up  |  a  bucket  and  goes  to  draw  fresh 
water  |  to  drink  after  they  have  eaten;  and  when  he  comes  back,  || 

70  he  puts  down  the  water  that  he  has  drawn,  and  waits  for  them  to 
finish  eating.  |  After  they  have  eaten,  the  water  is  put  in  front  of 
them,  |  and  they  drink.  Then  his  wife  [  picks  up  the  pieces  of  bone 
and  skin  and  puts  them  on  the  |  food-mat;  and  when  she  has  them 

75  all,  she  folds  ||  up  (the  mat  J  and  goes  to  throw  the  contents  into  the 
sea;  and  |  the  guests* only  rub  their  hands  together  to  dry  off  the  fat 
from  their  hands,  |  for  they  are  careful  not  to  wash  their  bands,  and 
not  to  |  wipe  their  hands  with  cedar-bark.  After  they  have  done  so, 
they  go  out.  | 
Sockeye- Salmon. — The "  name  of    the   sun-dried    salmon    is    also 

80  "sandy,"  ||  and  "place  of  cohabitation."  for  it  is  caught  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  river;  |  therefore  it  is  called  "from  the  sandy  ground," 

xElox'da£xoL   £na£na'walak"    qa-s    a'£meLos    da'damwil   g'a'xEnu£xu 

60  qanu'x"  k'lea'sel  £ya'g'asLExg'anu£x"  la'i.Ek'  hS,£maag'5lL0L,  £na£na- 
walak",  qaxs  he'£maaq6s  ga'xelda'.xwe  qEnu£xu  ya'l'nakulaoL 
qEnu£x"  ha£ma'£ya.  Wa,  lanu£xu  qla'laEmxs  a'£maex  le'x-aEm  1e- 
£los  6'gwlda£yex.  Wa,  la'i.ak"  g-a'x£Emg'as  bebExu'neg-6s  xi'tsla- 
xilaxgamrxu    la'LEk"  hamx,£I'dExg'as    g'a'xyogwllos    <|Enu'x"  la,'- 

65  k"!EsEla,"   'ne'k'Exs  la'e  q!iile'x's£Em  wa'xa. 

Wa,  gi'k'mese  q!we'l£idExs  la'e  hamx£I'da.  Wa,  la'x-da£xwe 
5'gwaqa  hamx'*I'de  Ene"nEmo'kwas.  Wa,  he'x'£ida£mese  la  k-!o'- 
qwallle'da  bEgwa'nEinaxa  na'gatsle  qa£s  le  tsax  a'lta  "wa'pa  qa 
na'geg-eLES  qo  gwfd   ha£ma'pLo.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  g-ax    ae'daaqaxs 

70  la'e  k'!o'x£\valilases  tsli'iiEine  qa£s  e'sfileq  qa  gwii'les  ha£ma'pa. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwfd  ha'ma'pExs  la'e  lia'nxdzamolllasa  Ewa'pe  laq. 
Wa,  he'x-£ida£mese  na'x£IdEX'da£xwa.  Wii,  la'La  gEiiE'mas  ma'- 
mEnsgEmaxa  xa'qe  LE£wa  Llei.Ia 'smote  qa£s  axdzo'dalls  la'xa  ha- 
£madzowe'  le'£wa£ye.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  £wI'£ladzodamasEq,  la'e  k-!5'x- 

75  £wiilllaq  qa£s    le    ka'stEndEq    la'xa    dE'msx'e.      Wa,     a'£mese    la 

ts!a'k"5deda  khve'ldaxes  e£e£yasowe  qa  lE'mxwaLEles   ts!E'nts!Enxu- 

ts!ana£yas   qaxs   ae'k'ilae  ts!E'nts!Enkwa,  loxs  k'le'sae  he'lq!olEin 

de'dEnkwasa  k'a'dzEkwe.     Wa,  g'i'l£mese  gwa'lExs  la'e  ho'qiiwElsa. 

Sockeye-Salmon. — Wii,1  le'xaa  Le'gadeda  ta'yalts lalas  tslEgwa'te 

80  loxs  qlo'bas  xEla'sE£wae  qaxs  ha'e  g'a'yanEma  £nE'ldzasa  wa; 
la'g'ilas   Le'gadEs   tslEgwa'te,   yixs    tslEkwa'e    awi'nak'iisas    nE'l- 

1  Continued  from  p.  353,  line  52. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  613 

for  the  place  at  the  upper  part  of  the  river  is  sandy;  |  and  it  is  said  S2 
that  a  woman  was  cutting  old  sockeye  salmon  when  her  |  lover  came 
and  cohabited  with  her  while  she  was  cutting  the  salmon.  |  Then 
she  was  seen  by  her  husband,  and  therefore  he  [|  said  that  the  sun-  85 
dried  salmon  should  be  called  "place  of  cohabitation,"  and  at  once  ]  all 
the  men  named  it  that  way.  lie  was  trying  to  make  his  |  wife 
ashamed  by  it.  Now  the  sun-dried  salmon  always  has  the  name  of 
"place  of  cohabitation."  |  That  is  the  end. 

Customs  Relating  to  Fish-Traps 
As  soon  as  the  ends  of  the  ribs  (of  the  fish-trap)  have  been  tied  at  l 
the  place  where  the  kelp-fish  is  to  go  in,  |  (the  woman)  tests  it,  (to 
see)  whether  it  will  be  lucky  or  unlucky.  |  She  puts  it  down  by  the 
side  of  the  fire,  |  takes  her  fire-tongs,  and  takes  up  a  not  really  big 
piece  of  ||  coal.     She  puts   it  into   the  fish-trap,   puts   down   the  |  5 
fire-tongs,  and  takes  hold  with  her  hands  of  each  side  of  the  |  fish- 
trap.     Then  she  shakes  it  up  and  down,  so  that  the  coal  jumps  up 
and  down  j  in  the  trap.     If  it  only  crumbles  and  the  glowing  coal  | 
goes  out,  the  owner  knows  that  the  fish-trap  will  be  lucky  ||  and  that  10 
the  fish  will  not  come  out  again  the  same  way  |  as  they  went  in;  but 
if  the  coal  jumps  out  again  |  through  the  way  by  which  the  kelp- 
fish  go  in,  then  the  owner  knows  |  that  the  trap  will  be  unlucky.  |  In 

dzasa  wa.  Wa,  lo'Hae  xwa'Leda  tslEdii'qaxa  mElo'le;  wii,  g'a'x£lae  82 
La'las  q!o'p!edqexs  he'£mae  a'les  xwa'Laxes  xwii'LasE-we.  Wa, 
laEnvua'wise  do'x£waLEltses  la'£wfmEme.  Wa,  he'£mis  la£g-ilas 
£nex-  qa  Le'gadeses  qlo'basa  ta'yalts !ala.  Wa,  he'x"£idaemesa  85 
£nii'xwa  bEgwa'nEm  Le'x£edEs.  Wa,  laE'm  hama'x'tslalaxes 
gEiiE'me  la'xeq.  Wa,  he'mEniila'mesox  la  Le'gadoxda  ta'yalts  !a- 
liixs    qlo'base.     Wii,    laE'mxaa    la'ba. 

Customs  Relating  to  Fish  Traps 

Wa,    g-i'l£mese    gwal    malagExstE'iidsx    g-a'poLasasa    pEx-I'taxs  1 
la£me  gwa'naLEx  gwe'x'sdEinLasa  LEgE'me  lo£  helaqe  lo£  wa'naqe. 
Wa,  la£me'se  ha'ng'alilas  la'xa    ma'ginwallsases  lEgwI'le.     Wa,  la 
ax£e'dxes  ts!e'sLala  qa£s  k'lipsE'mdes  la'xa  kMe'se  a'laEm  £wa'lasto 
gu'lta.     Wii,    lii    k-!ipts!o'ts    la'xa    LEgE'me.     Wii,  lii    k'atlri'lilasa  5 
ts!e£sLaliixs  la'e  te'tEgEnotses  e£e£yasowe  £nEin  lax  £wa'x-sanaevasa 
LEgE'me.     Wa,  la    ya't!eda  qa    da'daqunequlesa  gu'lta  lax  ots!a'- 
wasa  LEgE'me.     Wa,  g'i'Pmese   a'Ein  ts'.Emx"£i'deda   gu'ltiixs  loxs 
k!ilx£I'dae,    wa,    laE'm     q!a'LEleda     axii'nokwaseqexs    he'laqeLes 
LEgE'me.      Wii,    laE'm    k!e'sLeda    pExi'te    xwe'laqal    malts!a'lal  10 
la'xes    g-ii'ts!alase    laq.     Wii,  gi'l£mesa    gu'lta  xwe'laqa  £nEx£wul- 
ts!a' dEX£wults!a'  la'xa   g'a'poLasasa    pExu'te,    wii,   la£me    q  !a'LE- 
leda     axii'nokwaseqexs     kle'seLe     he'lac[Leda     LEgE'me.       Wii,    lii 


614  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIHTL  [eth.ann.bb 

most  cases  the  women  throw  it  away;  but  if  the  charcoal  does  not  jump 
15  out,  ||  they  go  back  into  the  woods  and  |  look  for  maple-*.1  |  .  .  . 

Customs  Relating  to  Sea-Eggs 

As2  soon  as  the  (shells  of  the  sea-eggs)  are  all  in,  the  woman  takes  a 
large  firebrand  and  |  puts  it  on  top  of  the  empty  shells.  Then  she 
goes  and  pours  them  out  |  outside  of  the  house.     The  reason  why 

20  they  put  the  firebrand  there  is  that  ||  the  spirits  may  not  eat  the 
refuse  of  the  sea-eggs.  |  If  they  do  not  put  a  firebrand  on  top  of  it, 
it  is  said  that  the  spirits  |  immediately  go  and  eat  it;  and  it  is  said 
that  |  he  who  ate  what  was  in  the  empty  shells  eaten  by  the  spirits 
would  be  immediately  sick.  |  Therefore  fire  is  put  on  top  of  them  when 

25  they  are  poured  out  at  night.  When  ||  they  eat  flat  or  large  sea- 
eggs  in  the  daytime,  they  do  not  put  fire  on  top  of  them,  |  for  it  is 
done  in  the  same  way  with  large  sea-eggs,  for  the  |  spirits  like  flat  sea- 
eggs  and  large  sea-eggs.  |  That  is  all  about  the  flat  sea-eggs. 

Beliefs  Relating  to  the  Devil-Fish 

The  "bear  of  the  rocks  "  is  the  largest  kind  of  devil-fish.   This  |  is  not 
30  eaten  by  Indians.     Sometimes  they  are  nearly  ||  three  fathoms  long 

q !una'la£m§da    tsteda'qe  ts!Ex£I'dEq.     Wa'x-e   k'les  dEx£wults!a/- 
15  weda  gu'lta  laq,  wa   he'x-£ida£mese  la  a'Le£sta  la'xa  a'Lle  qa£s  la 
a'lax  sa'q!waEmsa.'  .  . 

Customs  Relating  to  Sea  Eggs 

Wii,2  g'il£mese  £w!lts!axs  lae  ax£edxa  gulta  £walastokwas  qa£s 
ank'iylndes  laxa  tsax'mote.  Wa,  la  k'!oqiilllaq  qa£s  la  k'!:ulEs 
lax   L!asana£yases  gokwe.     Wa,    heEm    lElg'Tltsa  gulta   qa  k'leses 

20  lada  hayaillagase  hamg'llqaxa  tsax'motasa  tsak'axa  amdEma. 
Wax'e  k'les  lada  gulta  la  ankiylndayoq  laEm£lawisa  hayaillagase 
hex-£idaEm  la  hamgllqaq.  Wa,  lalax£lae  hex-£idaEmlax  tslEX'qlE- 
x'£lde  tsax'modadas  hamgilqasE£wasa  hayaillagase.  Wit,  hemies 
lagila  ank'iyindaypwa  gulta  laqexs  lae   k' ladayoxa  ganuLe.    Wii, 

25  gil£mese  Enala  tsuxdEinaxa  amdEma,  wa,  lalcles  ank'iylntsosa  gulta 
qaxs  hemaaxat!  gweg-ilag-ila  mEseqwe  qaxs  LomaaEl  ax£exsdeda 
haEyalilagasaxa  amdEma  LE-wa  mEseqwe. 

Beliefs  Relating  to  the  Devil-Fish 

Xa     LlaxLEyotsla,     heEm    £walegesa    £naxwax     tEq!wa;    heEm 

k!es   ha£masa    baklume.    Enal£nEmp lEnae   halsElaEm   k'les  nExnE- 

30  qEla  yuduxup!Enk'  laxEns  baLacje  £wasgEmasas  g'agiLEla  lax  £vvax's- 

i  Continued  in  Publications  of  the  Je™p  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  387. 
'After  small  sea  eggs  l:ove  been  eaten  the  shells  are  carried  out  ot  the  house.    (Continued  from  p.  498, 
line  83.) 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  615 

across  |  the  amis,  and  they  are  (very)  thick.     I  have  seen  one  |  sucker  31 
one  short  span  |  across,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  sucker  is  a  piece  just 
like  a  |  round  bone.     The  points  of  the  middle  of  the  suckers  are 
sharp.  ||  There  are  eight  bones  around  the  stomach,  |  and  the  arms  35 
also  have  a  bone  each.  |  Sometimes  they  make  a  mistake  and  cook 
a  |  small  "bear  of  the  rocks."     When  it  is  cooked,  and  they  take  off 
the  loose  skin,  |  when  it  is  squeezed  by  those  who  are  washing  it,  it 
gets  ||  thin,  because  the  water  in  it  comes  out,  for  there  is  nothing  but  40 
water  in  the  |  "bear  of  the  rocks."     Then  they  throw  it  away,  for  | 
they  are  afraid  to  eat  it,  because  it  kills  people  and  it  is  a  sea- 
monster.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  Canoe-Building 

In '  the  morning,  as  soon  as  it  is  day,  (the  canoe-builder)  rises  for  || 
he  is  alone  in  the  house,  because  canoe-builders  are  not  allowed  to  lie  45 
down  |  with  their  wives  when  building  canoes.  It  is  a  saying  of  the 
first  |  people,  that  if  a  canoe-builder  should  lie  down  |  with  his  wife, 
the  tree  from  which  he  makes  the  canoe  would  be  hollow.  |  Therefore 
he  is  not  allowed  to  lie  down  with  his  wife.  || 

As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,2  he  takes  a  piece  of  charcoal  and  50 
paints  |  the  face  of  a  man  on  each  side,  in  the  middle  of  the  |  canoe, 


ba£yas      dzedzElEmas,     wii     lii     LESLEkwa.      Wa,     Ieh      doqiilaxa  31 
k!umt!Ena£yas  enEmp!Enk-awlI    laxEiis    ts!Ex"ts!ana£yaxsEns   q!wa- 
q!wax'tsiina£yex.      Wa,  lii  hclostale    k!umt!Ena£yasexa    he    gwexs 
kilkllx'sEm     xaqa.       Wa,    heEm     eexbe    6ba£yasa     nExts!;\wasa 
k!umt!Eiia£yas.     Wii,   lii    malgunalts !aqe    daplEnkas    gawiis.     Wa,  35 
laxae  enaxwaEm  exaleda  dapbmk'e    lax  ewaxLa£yas   dzedzElEinasa 
L!axLEyots!a.     Wii,  la   £nal£nEmp  tena   LexLeqtilll  ha£mex*sllasE£wa 
ama£ye  L!ax-LEyots!a.     Wii,  giPmese  Llopsxs  lae  lawoyowes  lEp!E- 
na£ye.     Wii,  gil-'mese  q  !wes£etso£sa  tsloxwaqexs   lae  ts!Emx'Ida  la 
wlheda,  yixs    lae  lawayes  cwapagaeye   qaxs   aEmae  £wabEx'sa£yeda  40 
L!iix'LEyots!a.     Wii,  aemese    la    ts JEqEWElsdEm   laxa  g'Skwe    qaxs 
kilEEmae  ha£mayaxs  bExbakwae.     Wii,  he£misex  £yagimae.     Wii, 
laEm  gwiil  laxeq. 

Customs  Relating  to  Canoe-Building 

Wii,  gi'l-'mese1  la  £na/x,£idxa  gaa'laxs1  la'e  La'x£wida,  yixs 
£nEmo'gwll£mae  qnxs  k'  !e£saeda  Le'Elq  lenoxwe  helqla'la  ku£lll  45 
LE£wis  gEnE'maxs  Le'qaaxa  xwa'kliina;  yix  wii'ldEmasa  g'a'le 
bEgwa'nEma,  yixs  g-i'l£melaxe  ku'lx'kfdk'a  hVxa  Le'q  lenoxwe 
LEEwis  gEnE'me,  wii,  la/laxe  kwa'kuxubalaxe  Le'qa£yas  xwa'kluna. 
Wii,  he'£mis  la'g-ilas  k-!es    he'lqlala  ku'lx'kuhVa  LE£wis  gEnE'me. 

Wii,  gi'l£mese   gwalExs2  la'e  ax£e'dxa  tslo'lna    qa£s  k'!at!a'lEX- 50 
sesa  goguma£yasa  bEgwanEme  liixa  £wax-saneguxsasa  nEgoya£yasa 


'  Continued  from  Publications  of  the  Je^up  North  Pacific  Expedition,  Vol.  V,  p.  3">6,  line  2. 
'The  pegging  for  adzing  the  sides  of  the  canoe.    (Continued  fromibtd.,  p.  364,  line  25.) 


616  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ieth.anS.8B 

53  for  the  purpose  of  frightening  the  spirits,  —  ]  the  Indians  mean  the 
souls  of  dead  canoe-builders — for  it  is  said  that  if  they  did  not  ]  paint 

55  the  face  of  a  man  inside  the  canoe,  ||  then  the  spirit  would  come  to 
examine  it  as  soon  as  the  adzing  of  the  canoe  has  been  completed;  | 
and  lie  would  tell  the  canoe  to  split  as  soon  as  the  |  canoe-builder 
would  spread  it.  When,  however,  it  is  painted  inside  with  the  face  | 
of  a  man,  the  spirits  will  run  away  when  they  see  the  painting  in  it.    || 

Customs  Relating  to  Fern  Eoots 

60  Only  old  women  are  allowed  to  dig  fern  roots.  Young  women  | 
are  not  allowed  to  dig  them,  for  the  people  of  olden  times  |  said 
that  it  would  make  them  sick,  if  the  young  women  should  go  to  dig 
fern  roots.  |  Therefore  only  old  women  are  allowed  to  dig  them.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  Currants 

Now  they  are  told  to  eat  the  contents  of  the  dishes.     They  do 
65  so.  ||  because  currants  are  never  carried  home  when  they  are  given 
by  the  owner,  |  for  it  brings  bad  luck  when  they  are  carried  home, 
thus  said  the  people  of  olden  times.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  Cedar-Bark 

Even  '  when  the  young  cedar-tree  is  quite  smooth,  |  they  do  not  take 
all  the  cedar-bark,  for  the  |  people  of  olden  times  said  that  if  they  should 


52  xwa'kluna  qa  kilEinesesa  hayalilagase,  yixa  bEx£iina£yasa  la  Ie-1 
Leq  !enoxwayadzEwal  gwE£yosa  baklume  qaxs  g'!l£maaEl  k'les 
k' !at  lalExdzEma    gogfima£yasa   bEgwanEine    laxa    xwfik!uniixs    lae 

55  gwal  ;iek  !a  k-  !iniLasE£wa.  Wii,  g*ax£laeda  hayalilagase  xitslax'i- 
laq.  Wa,  la£Iae  axkMalaxa  xwakliina  qa  hox£wides  qo  la]  lEpii'- 
solts  Leqleno'kwas.  Wii,  gi'leEm£lawise  k'!adExdzEkusa  goguma- 
Eyasa  bEgwFmEmaxs  lae  km  heltsoxs  lae  dox£waLElaxa  k"  ladExse  laq. 

Customs  Relating  to  Fern  Roots 

Lex"ame  sakweda  laElk!wana£yaxa   sagiime,  yixs  k'lesae    helqlo- 
60  lEma  alostagase  ts!rdaq  la  sakwaxa  sagiime  qaxs  mek'aeda  gildzEse 
bEgwaiiEmqexs  £yafyax-dalag"ilae  lax  sakwasosa  alostagase  tslEdaqa. 
Wa,   lie;niis  lagilas    lex'aina    laElk!wana£ye  sakwaxa  sagiime. 

Customs  Relating  to  Currants 

Wii,1  la£me  axso£,  qa£s  £wii£wllaexes  leloqfila.     Wa,  he£mis  g'wiile 

qaxs  k"!ets!enoxwae  modola  qledzEdzEwaxs  qleselaeda  axnSgwadas 

65  qaxs   aEinsaaEl  laxox  modolexs  £nek-aalaeda  gilxdii  bEgwanEma. 

Customs  Relating  to  Cedar  Bark 

Wa, 2    wax-£mese    £naxwa    ek'e     ogwida£yasa     dzEs£Eqwaxs     lae 
k!ets!enox   £wllg'iLEloyowes   tslaqEmse    qaxs   £nek-aeda    g-ale   bE- 

'See  p.  575,  line  51.  sContinue'l  from  p.  122.  line  47. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  617 

peel  off  all  the  cedar-bark  of  a  ||  young  cedar-tree,  the  young  cedar  70 
would  die,  and  then  another  |  cedar-tree   near  by  would  curse  the 
bark-peeler,   so    that    he   would    also    die.     Therefore   |    the    bark- 
peelers  never  take  all  the  bark  off  of  a  young  tree.  | 

Customs  Relating  to  the  Felling  of  Trees 
Now  I  will  talk  about  him  who  will  work  at  |  porpoise-hunting  1 
The  canoe-builder  is  first  asked  by  the  porpoise-hunter  (of  a  |  small  ca- 
noe) to  build  a  hunting-canoe.    |    The  canoe-builder  goes  at  once  back 
into  the  woods  to  a  place  where||  the  cedar  for  canoe-building  is  stand-  5 
ing,  for  each  canoe-builder  always  has  a  straight  cedar  in  the  woods 
picked  out  for  canoe-building.     He  just  walks  right  there,  |  carrying 
his  axe,  going  to  the  place  where  the  cedar-tree  is  standing.  |  He  looks 
for  the  place  where  the  cedar  will  lie  when  it  falls.  |  When  he  sees  all 
the  branches  on  the  outer  side  of  the  cedar-tree,  he  ||  chops  through  10 
the  foot  of  the  tree  on  the  back  of  the  cedar-tree;  and  as  soon  as  he 
has  chopped  deep  into  it,  |  he  takes  four  chips  and  throws  |  them 
behind  the  foot  of  the  cedar-tree;  and  as  he  throws  them,  he  says:  | 
"O,  supernatural  one!  now  follow  your  supernatural  power!" 

Then  he  takes  another  Chip,  throws  it,  ||  and  says  as  he  is  throwing  15 
it:  "O,  friend!  now  you  see  |  your  leader,  who  says  that  you  shall 
turn  your  head  and  fall  there  also."  | 


gwiiiiEniqexs  g'il£mae  £wTlgiLEloyoweda  tsklqEinse  lax  ogwida£yasa  68 
dzEs£EC[\vaxs   lae   lE'leda    dzEs£Eqwe.     Wa,  laeda   makililse  6gu£la 
dzEs£Eq"  hanx^wldxa    sEuq!enoxwe    qa  ogwaqes  lE£la.     Wa,  he£mis  70 
lagilas  k' !es  £wilg'iLEloyowe  ts!aqEinsas  yisa  SEnq  !enoxwe. 

Customs  Relating  to  the  Felling  of  Trees 

Wa,    la-"niEn    gwii'gwex-s£iilal    la'xa    e'axalaxes    ale'xwaeneLaxa  l 
k!o'lot!e.     Wii,  he'Ein    g'll    axk" !ii'laso£sa    ale'wenoxwa    Le'qleno- 
xwaxa     xwa'xwagiim,    qa     Le'x£edesex    ale'watsla    xwa'xwaguma. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£mesa  Le'q!enoxwe  la  ii'Le£sta  hi'xa  a'Lie  lax  Lii'dza- 
sases  £we'lsa   we'lkwa  qaxs   £na'xwa£mae   we'ldzadeda   Le'Elq!eno-  5 
xwaxa  e'k'ete  welku  la'xa  a.'L!e.     Wit,  a'£mese  he'x'dzenala  la  qa'- 
s£ida  dii'laxes    so'bayowe  qafs   lii    lax   La'dzasases  we'lse  we'lkwa. 
Wa,    la    do'qwalax  gwe'xtox£widaas   La'sa  we'lkwe   qo  t!a'x£IdLo. 
Wa,  gi'l£mese  do'qulaqexs  ewlelae  L!a'sot!Ena£yeda  we'ltslanas.     Wa, 
lii  sEp!Exo'd  a'Lot !Exa'wa£yasa  we'lkwe.     Wii,  g"i'l;mese   k!wiibEte  10 
so'pa£yasexs  la'e  da'x-£Idxa  mo'sgEmstowe  so'yapmuta  qa£s  nEp!e'- 
desa  £nE'me  lax  a'Lot  !Exawa£yasa  we'lkwe.  Wii,  lii  £negEtE£we'xs  la'e 
nEpa':   "Wa  £nawalakwii',  laE'ms  liil  lii'sgEmllxes  £na'walagumos." 

Wa,    la    e't!ed    dii'x-£idxa    £nE'me    so'yapmuta    qa£s    nEp!e'des. 
Wii,  la'xae  £neg'EtEwe'xs  la'e  nEpa':     "Wii,  qastii',  laE'ms  do'qfi-  15 
laxes  gwa'yi£lalasos  £ne'k'exs  he'Laqos  gwe'xtoxewldLe  laa'sas." 


618  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Leth.  ANN.  85 

17  Then  he  takes  another  one  and  throws  it;  and  as  |  he  throws  the 
third  one  in  the  same  way,  he  says  while  throwing  it:  |  "  O,  life-giver ! 

20  now  you  have  seen  which  way  your  supernatural  power  went.  ||  Now 
go  the  same  way."  As  he  says  so,  he  takes  the  |  last  one  and  throws 
it  back  of  the  foot  of  the  tree  that  he  is  chopping,  |  and  he  says  as 
he  is  throwing  it:  "O,  friend!  now  you  will  go  I  where  your  heart- 
wood  goes.     You  will  lie  on  your  face  at  the  same  place."  |  After  he 

25  has  said  so,  he  answers  himself  and  says:  "Yes,  ||  I  shall  fall  with  my 
top  there."  After  he  has  said  so,  he  takes  his  ax  and  |  chops  again; 
and  as  soon  as  his  chopping  passes  half  |  through  the  trunk  of  the 
tree,  he  goes  to  the  opposite  side  and  chops ;  and  he  does  not  chop  | 
deep  into  it  when  the  tree,  begins  to  crack;  and  it  does  not  take  long 
until  |  the  cedar-tree  falls  backward.  || 

Prayer  of  Cinquefoil-Digger  ' 

1  After2  they  have  finished  (loading  their  canoe),  they  go  aboard  the 
travelling-canoe.  |  The  man  stands  up  in  the  stern  of  the  canoe, 
because  he  steers  it,  and,  |  looking  at  his  digging-house,  ho  prays  to 
it  and  says,  |  praying  and  holding  in  his  hand  his  steering-paddle 

5  while  he  is  standing  up,  he  says:   ||  "Look  upon  my  wife  and  me,  and 


17  Wa,  la  e'tled  da'x"£Tdxa  mEma'xs  la'e  nEp!ldEs.  La'xaaxs 
nEba'sasesa  la'Le  yu'dux£wedFt'ia.  Wa,  la'e  meg'EtEwe'xs  la'e  iie- 
pa':  "  Wa,  g-ilgildokwlla  lar/ms  do'qulax  laa'sas  dalalaxes  ma'wala- 

20  k!wena£ya;  laE'm  las  lal  lax  laa'sas,"  £nek'Exs  la'e  da'x-£idxa 
K'lxLa'ye  qa£s  nEp!e'des  la'xaax  a'Lot!Exa£waeyases  sop.'cxotsEwe. 
Wa,  la  meg'EtF.we'xs  la'e  nEpa':  "Wa,  qasta',  laE'ms  las  lal 
lax  laa'sases  do'maxdos;  laE'm  las  IiexmVIslol  lax  laa'sas,"  enex' 
lae'xs    la'e     qlule'x'sEin    na'naxma£ya.     Wa,    lii    me'ka:"      "Wa, 

25  he'EmLEu  gwexto'x'widi.e,"  6nek"Exs  la'e  dax'£Idxes  sobayowe  qa£s 
sop!e'de  e't!eda.  Wii.  gi'l£mese  la'kModele  so'pa£yasexs  la'e 
la'k'  !ot!Exoda  qa£s  sEp  IsdzE'iideq.  Wa,  k-  !es£mese  k  Iwii'bEte  so'pa- 
£yasexs  la'e  hetniElq!uga£leda  we'lkwe.  K'le'st.'a  ge'x,£IdExs  la'e 
aLEtox£\vid  t!a'xrI(leda  we'lkwe. 

Prayer  of  Cinquefoil-Digger1 

1  Wa,  g'fl£mese  gwalExs2  lae  hoguxs  laxes  ya£yats!e  xwakluna.  Wa, 
lada  bEgwanEme  LaxLexa  xwaklfina  qaxs  he£mae  LEnxLa£ya.  Wii, 
doqwalaxes  ts!Ewedzats!ex-e  g-okwa  qa£s  ts!El£waqeq.  Wa,  la  fne- 
k'Exs     lae     tslElwaqaq     sEk!iigExtses    LEnxxayayowe  se£wayowa. 

5  "Weg-a  dSqwahll    gaxEiiu'x"    Logun    gEiiEmk'    qa£s   dadamayeLos 

i  Sec  also  Addenda,  p.  1318. 

"-  This  is  done  when  husband  and  wife  return  from  digging  cinquefoil  roots  in  their  garden.    Continued 
from  p.  193,  line  96. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  619 

protect  |  us,  so  that  nothing  may  happen  to  us,  friend!  and  |  wish  G 
that  we  may  come  back  to  live  in  you  happily,   |  O  house!  when  we 
come  next  year  to  dig  cinquefoil.     Good-bye!"  |  Thus  he  says,  sits 
down  in  the  stern  of  his  travelling-canoe,  and  paddles;  ||  and  he  must  10 
not  turn  his  face  to  look  at  his  house  again.  |  He  only  turns  his  face 
back  after  |  passing  the  point  (that  hides  the  house). 

Prayer  to  Young  Cedar 

(The  woman1  who  has  found  a  young  cedar)  takes  her  adz  and 
stands  under  the  |  young  cedar-tree,  and,  looking  upward  to  it,  she 
prays,  saying:  ||  "Look  at  me,  friend!  I  come  to  ask  for  your  dress,  |  15 
for  you  have  come  to  take  pity  on  us;  for  there  is  nothing  for  which 
you  [  can  not  be  used,  because  it  is  your  way  that  there  is  nothing  for 
which  we  |  can  not  use  you,  for  you  are  really  willing  to  give  us  your 
dress.  I  |  come  to  beg  you  for  this,  long-life  maker,  for  I  am  going 
to  make  a  basket  for  lily  roots  out  of  you.  ||  I  pray  you,  friend,  not  to  20 
feel  angry  with  me  on  account  of  what  I  |  am  going  to  do  to  you; 
and  I  beg  you,  friend,  to  tell  our  |  friends  about  what  I  ask  of  you.  ] 
Take  care,  friend!  Keep  sickness  away  from  me,  so  that  I  may  not 
be  killed  by  |  sickness  or  in  war,  O  friend!"  | 

This  is  the  prayer  that  is  used  by  those  who  peel  cedar-bark  of  25 
young  cedar-trees  and   I  old  cedar-trees.  ' 

g'axEnu£x"  qEnu£x"  k' !ease  £yag'asa,  qasta.  Wa,  he£mis  qa£s  Lale-  6 
laqEliiLos  g-axEnu£xu  qEnu£xu  g'Sxel  et!allL  g-okumts !ag"aliL  Iol 
g'okwii,  lax  et!edLa  ts!ots!EyEnxi.i:x  qwesEyEnxLa.  Wa,  halak'as- 
leIu  ;"  £nek-Exs  lae  klwaxLEndxes  ya/yatsle  xwak!una  qa£s  sex£wlde. 
Wa,  la£me  k*!es  helqlala  mEls^ida  qa£s  dox£wide  et!edxes  g-okwe.  10 
Wa,  aldzala£mese  mElmElsi£lalaxs  lae  t!Et!ag'6  LE£wis  g'okwaxs  lae 
ha/yaqa  laxa  awllba£ye. 

Prayer  to  Young  Cedar 

Wa,  la1  ax£ededa  tstedaqaxes  k'!iniLayowe  qa£s  la  LaxLElsaxa 
dzE£sEqwaxs  lae  ek' !EgEniElsExs  lae  tslElwaqaq.  Wa,  la  Enek-a: 
''Weg'a,  doqwala  g-axEn  qastaxgin  gaxe  gets!a  laxs  k'omaqos  15 
qaxs  he£maaqos  g'axele  qa£s  waxaos  g'axEnurx",  ylxs  k'!easaaqos 
k"!es  eg'asaxes  g"axelaos  bEX£walesa,  yixgamrx"  k'easek1  k-!es 
helEmx;idaasos  qaos  alaqos  aex'stots layowos  k"omaqos.  HedEn 
g'axel  getsia,  Iol  g'ilgildokwllaxgin  x'ogwats!eg'Ililg'5L.  Wa,  la- 
fmesEn  aesayoLol  qasta  qa-s  k-!eseLos  5dzEmg"aaLElatsgin  gwala-  20 
gildzasLEX'  1;\l.  Wa,  la£mesEn  hawaxEloL  cjasta  qa-'s  nelaosaxEns 
£iie£nEmokwaxg1n  hanal£meLEX'  getslol  laqo.  Wa,  qasta,  wega 
3TaL!aLEx;  aEniLEs  dadamEwIl  giixEn  qEnk'!ease  gagoLEmalasa  laxa 
ts!ets!axq!olEme  LE£wa  dzedzax'lla.     Wa,  qasta!" 

Wa,  heEm  ts telwagayosa  sEnqaxa  dEnase  laxa  dzE£sEqwe  L6£ma  25 
we  Ik  we. 


1  Continued  from  p.  131,  line  4. 


620  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKITJTL  [kth.AKN.8B 

Weather  Charms 

1  I  was  walking  along  in  Fort  Rupert.  I  begged  Haemisk"ienis  |  to 
tell  mo  about  what  he  would  when  he  wished  the  northwest  wind  to 
come.  |  He  spoke  at  once,  and  said,  "Listen,  |  that  I  may  teach 
5  you!"  Tims  he  said.  "One  time,  when  I  |  was  going  south  to 
Victoria,  we  arrived  at  0's£F.q",  and  |  the  southeast  wind  began  to 
blow  strong.  The  wind  lasted  all  day  and  all  |  night.  Then  I  arose 
in  the  morning,  and  1  saw  that  the  |  southeast  wind  was  stdl  blowing. 
I  started  our  campfire;  |  and  as  soon  as  the  fire  blazed  up,  I  went 

10  down  to  the  [|  beach,  for  the  tide  of  the  sea  was  half  out.  |  Then  I 
searched  for  small  crabs  underneath  the  stones,  and  |  I  found  four 
crabs.  I  carried  the  four  and  |  went  up  the  beach.  Then  I  took 
cedar-bark  and  split  it  into  strips.     I  |  took  four  strips  and  tied  them 

15  to  the  right  claws  of  the  ||  crabs.  As  soon  as  I  had  tied  the  cedar- 
bark  to  the  four  crabs,  |  I  took  poles  and  drove  them  into  the  ground. 
Not  |  really  upright  were  the  poles,  which  were  two  fathoms  (long) ; 
hut  it  was  thus,"  |  said  Ha£misk"ienis  (imitating  on  the  ground  with 
cedar-sticks    what   he   said,  |  while   he    placed    them   down    on    the 

20  ground):  The  poles  leaned  over,  and  |]  to  the  ends  he  hung  the  four 
crabs.  "Then  I  watched  them,  |  and  as  soon  as  I  saw  that  the  shells 
began  to  be  red,  I  |  took  them  down,  and  I  untied  the  cedar-bark 

Weather  Charms 

1  Qa'enakulek"  lax  Tsa'xise.  Wa,  lEn  hawa/xElax  Ha'£misk'i£nese 
qa  gwii'gwex"s£ales  lax  gwe'gi£lasasexs  £ne'k-ae  qa  dza'q  !ux-£i'des. 
Wa,  he'x£ida£mes  ya'q!eg-a£la.  Wii,  la  £ne'ka:  "We'ga,  ho'Lelax 
qF.n  q!a'q  loiJa'mase  Iol,"  £nex\  "Wii,  he'£maaxgin  la'olEk- 
5  :'ni:'lkila  la  'xa  Tsla'mase.  Wa,  lanu:\"  la'g'aa  lftx<  )'s£Eqwe,  la'e  yu'x- 
£wideda  la/k'.wemase  £nu:la'sa.  Wa,  la  SE'nbe  ya'laxa  £na'la  LEEwa 
ga'nuLe.  Wa,  lsn  i.a'x-'wldxa  gaa'la.  Wa,  Ieii  do'qfilaqexs  ya'- 
lax'sa£maeda  £mEla'se.  Wa,  Ieii  xa'xiq  !Ex£idaxF.iiu£xu  lEqluse'. 
Wa,    giTmis    x-I'qostaweda    lEqlusa'xgln     lek1    lE'nts!esa,    la'xa 

[o  LlEma£ise  qaxs  lE£ma'6  naE'nxs£ag'Ilaliseda  x'S'tsIaxEleda  di:'ms\e. 
Wa,  lEn  a'liixa  a'm£ama£ye  q  !o'smatsa  e'£waa'baeyasa  t!e'sEme.  Wa, 
Ieii  q la'xa  mo'sgEme  qlo'masa.  Wa,  Ieu  da'laxa  mo'sgEme  cjeo  le 
la'sdesa.  Wa,  Ieii  ax£e'dxa  dEna'se  qEn  dzEdzExs£a'leq.  Wii,  Ieii 
ax£e'dxa  mo'ts!aqe  qEn  mo'x£wides  lax  helk'!olts!ana  q!e'q!Egimsa 

ie  qlo'mase.  Wii,  giT'mesEn  £wl£la  m6'xul)Entsa  mo'sgEme  qlo'miis 
la'xa  dEna'se,,  lek'  ax£e'dxa  dzo'xume  qEn  de'x£wulseq.  Wa,  lak'les 
a'laEm  nEgEta'leda  ma£lp  !E'nke  la'xEns  ba'LE.x  dzo'xuma.  "  He't  !a 
gwaleda,"  £nek"e  Ha,£misk"i£nese  mEns£Elsaxa  l;!wa£xLa£we,  £ne'k-Exs 
la'e  mo'gwaE'lsaq.     Wa,  la  gwe'xtaleda  dzo'xume  laq.     Wii,  he'£mis 

on  la  te'xuba£yaa'tseda  mo'sgEme  q!5'masa.  "Wa,  lEn  q!a'q!a£lii'laq. 
Wa,  o"i'l£mesEn  do'qulaq  la  l !§'l !a'x£wideda  e5'sgEma£yas,  le'g'En 
axa'xodEq.     Wii,  Ieii    qwe'lalaxa  dEna'se  lax  q  !e'q lEgimas.     Wa, 


boas  J  BELIEFS    AND    CUSTOMS  621 

from  the  claws.  |  I  put  them  down,  and  I  searched  for  four  large 
clam-shells.  |  As  soon  as  I  found  them,  I  took  one  of  the  ||  crabs  and  25 
put  it  into  (a  clam-shell).     Then  I  took  the  cedar-bark  with  which 
they  had  been  hung  up,  \  and  tied  it  around,  so  that  the  shell  should 
not  open.  |  Then  I  did  so  also  to  the  next  one,  and  I  did  so  to  the 
four  |  shells.     As  soon  as  I  had  finished  tying  the  four  clam-shells,  |  I 
went  and  carried  them  into  the  woods.  ||  I  searched  for  a  hole  in  the  30 
bottom  of  a   tree;  and  when  I  found  a  hole  |  in   the  bottom  of  a 
hemlock-tree,  I  put  three  shells  |  into  it.     Then  I  spoke  to  the  last 
one,  |  and  said,  'Warn  your  friends  to  call  |  strongly  the  northwest 
wind  and  the  east  wind,  ||  else  you  will  not  go  back  to  the  beach,  if  35 
you   do  not  get  |  what  has  been  planned  for  you   and   your  friends.' 
Thus  I  said  when  |  I  put  it  down  in  the  hole  on  the  ground.     Then  I 
left  them,  went  back,   and  bathed  in   the  sea.  |  As  soon  as  I  had 
finished,  I  sat  down  on  the  beach,  that  |  the  wind  might  dry  me." 
Thus  he  said.     "As  soon  as  I  ||  began  to  be  dry,  I  dressed,  and  I  40 
warmed  myself  by  the  |  camp-fire.     Now  I  waited  for  the  northwest 
wind  to  blow  |  at  noon."  Thus  he  said.  | 

I  questioned  Ha£misk"i£nis  again;  and  I  said  to  him,  [  "Who, 
indeed,  was  the  first  to  wish  that  this  should  be  done  to  the  crabs  for  || 
calling  the  northwest  wind  V     Thus  I  said  to  him.  |  45 

lEn  &x£E'lsaq.     Wa,  Ieh  a'lex-£idEX  mo'sgEma  awo'  xa'laetsa  g'a'-  23 
weqlanEm.    Wa,  g"i'l£mesEn    q!aq,  wa,    Ieii    ax£e'dxa   £nE'msgEme 
q'o'mas,  qEn  axts!o'de£s  laq.     Wa,   Ieii  ax£e'dxa  te'kwala£3uixudas  25 
dEna'sa  qEn  yiltsE'mde£s  laq,  qa  lc!e'ses  axsto'x£wideda  xa'laese. 
Wa,  Ieii  e'tledxa  ma'k'ilaq.     Wa,  lEn£wI/£lahe  gwe'x'£Idxamd'sgEme 
xa'laesa.     Wii,  g'i'l£mesEn  gwala  yae'ltsEmaxa  m5'sgEme  xa'laetsa 
g'5'weqIanEinaxs  le'gin  £wl'£la  da'laq  qEn  le  a'Le£sta  la'xa  a'L!e. 
Wa,  la£mEn  a/lax  xuba/ga£yasa  LaxuLo'£se.     Wii,  lEn  qlaxa  xuba'-  30 
ga£yasa  la'xmEse.     Wa,  Ieii  £wl'£la  gibe'Lasa  yu'duxusEme  xe'xa'- 
laes  laq.     Wa,  lEn  ya'q!Eg"a£l  la'xa  £nE'msgEme  la  E'lxia£ya.     Wa, 
Ieii  £ne'k"a:  "We'gil  la  haya'L!o£laLExos  £ne/nEmo'kwaqos,  qa  wa'- 
£lEink-a£meltso  Le£la'laLEx  Dza'q Iwalanu'kwa,  l5£  Xa£yo'lesanagii' ; 
a' Las    kMeslax    la/lax    ae'daaqa'lax    la'xa     LlEma£ise    qaso   wio'L  35 
la'xa   se'nat!E'lsayoL,  le£wos   £ne£iiEino'kwaq!os;"    £ne'k'EnLaxg-in 
lek'  axbEtE'lsaq.     Wii,  g'a'xEii    biis  qEn  le   la£sta'  la'xa  dE'msx'e. 
Wii,  gi'l£mesEn  gwa'la,  wii,  Ieii  k!wa'g'a£lisa   la'xa  L!Ema£ise  qEn 
lE'mx£unx-£ida'masesa     ya'la    gii'xEn,"    £ne'k'e.     Wii,    g1'l£mesEn 
lE'mx£unx£ida,    le'g'in    q!o'xts!oda,  qEn    le     tE'lts!ix'!i'da     la'xEn  40 
lEqlu'se.     Wa,  la'mEii    o'la£stala  qn  yu'x£widesa  dza'q  Iwiixa  la'La 
nEcui'laL,"  £ne'k-c. 

Wii,  Ieii  wuLa'  e'tledEx  Ha'£misk'i£nese.  Wii,  Ieii  £ne'k'Eq; 
"A'ngwadzedii  g'ti'lola  £nex-  qa  he£s  gwe'gilasE£wa  qlo'mase  qa 
dzEdza'q!wa£la'yuwe,"  £ne'k'EnLaq.  45 


622  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.ann.3s 

46  He  replied  at  once,  and  said:  |  ''You  know  about  all  the  Myth 
people, — all  the  different  |  quadrupeds,  and  all  the  different  birds, 
and  also  all  the  |  different  crabs:  they  were  all  like  men,  and  also  the  || 

50  trees  and  all  the  plants.  Then  war  was  made  against  the  |  south- 
east wind  by  the  Myth  people.1  That  was  the  place  where  |  Great- 
Inventor  questioned  his  younger  brothers,  and  said:  'O  younger 
brothers!  |  who,  indeed,  controls  the  weather  among  you?"     Thus 

55  he  said.  "Immediately  |  a  short  man  spoke,  and  said,  ||  'O  Myth 
people!  when  you  wish  for  the  northwest  wind  in  our  |  world', — thus 
said  the  Crab,  for  that  was  the  name  of  the  short  |  man, — '  then  take 
four  of  the  crabs  that  look  just  |  like  me,  and  take  four  long  |  pieces 

60  of  cedar-bark,  and  tie  the  ends  of  the  cedar-bark  to  the  right  ||  claws, 
and  hang  them  right  over  your  fire;  |  and  as  soon  as  their  backs  begin 
to  be  red,  take  them  down,  untie  |  the  cedar-bark  from  the  claws, 
and  search  for  four  |  large  clam-shells ;  and  put  the  crabs  |  into  them, 

65  and  tie  them  with  the  cedar-bark  that  was  tied  to  the  claws  ||  of  the 
crabs.  Then  when  each  crab  is  in  |  one  shell,  and  after  you  have  tied 
them,  |  go  into  the  woods  behind  your  houses,  and  search  for  a  |  hole 
in  the  bottom  of  a  tree;  and  as  soon  as  you  find  a  hole  in  a  |  tree,  put 


46  Wa,  ke'x-£ida£mese  na'nax£ma£ya.  Wa,  la  £ne'k-a:  "£ya,  q!a'- 
LEla£maaqosaxa  £na/xwax  nfi'x£ne£misaxa  £naxwa  oguqala  gi'lg'a- 
omasa  LEEwa  £na/xwa  6'guqala  tse'ltslEklwa  Lo£mo'xda  £na'xwax 
6'guqala  q  !eq  lo'masaxs  £na'xwa£mayole'  be'bEgwanEma  Lo£mo'xda 

50  LaxuLo£se£x  Lo£mox  £na'xwax  q!wa'sq!uxE'la.  Wa,  la  wI'nasE£we 
MEla'lanukwe  yi'sa  nu'xuneemise.  Wa,  he'£mis  la  wuLa'ts  K!we- 
k!waxa'wa£yaxes  ts!a'ts!a£ya.  Wa,  la  £ne'k"a:  '£ya,  ts!a'ts!a£ya, 
a'ngwadzes  £ne£na'lanukwaq!os;'  £ne'x-£lae.  Wa,  he'x'£idaEm£la'- 
wiseda  ts!E'k!uxsde  bEgwii'nEm  ya'q!Eg-a£la.     Wa,  la'£lae  £ne'k-a: 

55'£ya,  nu'xune£mis.  He/£maaqaso  £ne'xdax  qa  dza'q  !ux£IdesEns 
£na'lax,'  £ne'x£lae  q!omase,  qaxs  he'£mae  Le'gEmsa  ts!E'k!Qxsde 
bEgwa'nEma.  'Wa,  las  ax£e'dxa  mo'sgEme  la'xEn  £nEma'x'ise 
LE£WE'nLaxg-in  q!o'masek\  Wii,  las  ax£e'dxa  mo'ts!aqe  gi'lsgilt!a 
dEna'sa    qa£s  mo'x£waLElodaosas    oba'£yasa   dEna'se    lax    helk'  !ol- 

60  ts!ana£ye  cjlEgi'ms.  Wa,  las  te'x£wldEs  lax  nEqo'stases  lEgwIlos. 
Wa,  g'i'l£mes  L!a'x£wlde  awl'g-a£yas,  la'aqos  axaxo'dEq  qa£s  qwe'- 
Pldayosaxa  dEna'se  lax  q!eq!Eg'i'mas.  Wa,  las  a'lex,£Idxa  mo's- 
gEme awa'  xa'laetsa  g'a'weqlaiiEme.  Wa,  las  axtslo'tsa  qloma'se 
laq  qa£s  yiltsE'mdayosasa  dEna'se,  yi'xa  yae'Lalax'de  lax  q!Egi'- 

65  masa  q!oma'se.  Wa,  laE'm  £na'l£nEmsgEmeda  q  !oma'se  g'itsla' 
la'xa  £na'l£nEinsgEme  xa'laesa.  Wa,  g"i'l£mets  gwal  yae'ltsEinaq,  wa, 
la'LEs  qa's£IdEl  lax  a'Lana£yases  g'6'kwos  qa£s  la'yos  a'lax  kwa'- 
waga£yasa     La'xuLo£se'.       Wa,     g-i'l£mets     q  la'xa    kwa'waga£yasa 

See  Boas  and  Hunt,  Kwakiutl  Texts  C Publications  of  the  Jesup  North  Pacific  Expedition  [I.eyden], 
Vol.  Ill,  p.  350,  Vol.  X,  p.  98;  Boas,  Kwakiutl  Tales  (Columbia  University  Contributions  to  Anthro- 
pology, Vol.  II,  pp.  227,  494. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  623 

three  shells  into  it;  and  then  ||  again  take  one  shell  and  pray  to  it,  70 
and  |  say:  "Now  warn  your  friends  to  call  |  strongly  the  northwest 
wind  and  the  east  wind,  |  else  you  will  not  go  back  to  the  beach,  if 
you  do  not  get  |  what  has  been  planned  for  yon  and  your  friends." 
Thus  you  shall  say  to  us.  '  and  you  shall  put  the  one  into  the  hole.  75 
Then  |  leave  them,  and  the  northwest  wind  will  come  at  once." 
Thus  he  said.  |  Therefore  it  is  known  by  the  later  (generations  of) 
people.  1 

I  left  Ha'£miskr£nis,  and  went  into  the  house  of   |   Kwa'gwaeno;  1 
I  questioned  him  and  said.    "This  is  the  reason  why  I  walk  about,  | 
that  I  beg  you  to  teach  me  the  |  strongest  way  of  calling  the  north- 
west wind."     Thus  I  said  to  him.     He  ||  replied  at  once,  and  said,  |   5 
' '  Listen  to  me  !  for  it  is  good  to  know  how  t(  >  call  the  northwest  wind ,  | 
even  if  the  southeast  wind  is  strongest.     Whenever  you  are  desirous 
to  |  go  to  Alert  Bay.  then  go  back  to  the  woods  and  search  for  |  a  fern: 
and  as  soon  as  you  find  it,  dig  out  four  ||  roots  of  fern-plants,  and  take  10 
care  that  you  do  not  break  off  |  one  of  them  from  the  leafy  stem.     As 
soon  as  you  have  the  |  four  roots,  carry  them  home:  and  when  you  | 
enter  your  house,  put  the  fern  down.     Then  take  |  twenty  dentalia 

La'xuLo£se'  la'aqos  axbEtE'ndxa  yu'duxusEme  xa'laesa.  Wa,  las 
e'tled  ax£e'dxa  £UE'msgEme  xa'laesa  qa£s  ts!E'lwaqaosaq.  Wii,  las  7(1 
-ne'k-a:  "Wa'g"tl  la  haya'L!o£laLEx6s,  £ne£nEmo'kwaqos,  qa  wa'- 
-lEmka£meltso  Le'£lalaLEx  Dza'q  Iwalanu'kwa  lo£  Xa£yo'lisanaga, 
ii'Las  k'  !eslax  la/lax  ae'daaqalax  la'xa  L!Ema£ise  qaso  wio'L  la'xa 
se'natlElsiiyoL,  le£wos  £ne£iiEm5'kwaq  !os,"  £ne'x-LEs  g"a'xEnu£xu.' 
Wa,  las  axbEtE'ndxa  £nE'msgEme.  Wa,  las  bas.  Wa,  he'x-£i-  75 
daEmlwise  dza'q  !wax£IdEL,"  £ne'x£lae. 

Wa,  he'Em  lii'glltsox  q!al  yiso'xda  a'lex  bEgwa'iiEma. 


Wa,  lEn   bas   Ha'£miski£nese    qEn   le  lae'L   lax  go'kwas  Kwa'-  1 
gwa£no.     Wa,  Ieii  wuLa'q,  wii,  Ieh  £ne'k-Eq:  "  He'dEn  qa'ts!ena£ye 
qa£s    waxa'os    q!a'q!oL!amas    ga'xEtiLasa     dzEdza'q!wa£laxa    a'le 
La'k!wemasa    lax    Le'£lalax    dza'qlwa    ya'la,"    £ne'kEiiLax.      Wa, 
he'x-£ida£mes     na'nax£me     g-a'xEn.      Wa,      la     £ne'ka:     "Wre'g'a5 
lio'Lela  ga'xEii  qaxs  e'k'aeda  qla'LElaxa  Le'£lalaxa  dza'qlwalanu- 
kwe  wa'x,£mae  La'klwemaseda  niEla'se  ya'la,  yixs  £ne'kaa'qos  qa£s 
la'os  lax  £yEli'se.     Wa,  las   a'Le£sta  la'xa  a'L!e.     Wa,  las  a'lex£Id- 
xa  sa'laedana.     Wii,  g'i'l£mets  q!aq,  wa,  las  £la'p!Eqodxa  mo'tslu- 
qlEXLa  la'xa  sa'laedana.     Wa,  las    ae'kila  qa  klea'ses  ko'x£wide  10 
£nE'mts!aqa    lax  ma'ma£map!eqas.     Wa,    gi'l£mets   -rwI'£loqamasxa 
mo£xxa',  wa,  las  da'laq  qas  la'os  na'£nakwa.     WTa,  g'i'Fmets  lae'L 
la'xos  go'kwax,    wa,  las    ax£a'lilxa    sa'laedana.     Wa,  las  ax£e'dxa 


624  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  an.n.  35 

15  and  some  red  ochre,  and  take  ||  also  four  split  pine-sticks  three  |  of 
our  fathoms  in  length;  then  sharpen  the  ends,  and  take  the  fern  |  and 
put  it  upside  down;  then  push  the  ends  of  the  sharpened  |  pine- 
sticks  among  the  leafy  stems;  |  then,  while  it  is  still  upside  down, 

2(1  take  five  dentalia,  and  ||  put  two  dentalia  on  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  fern-root,  |  and  take  two  more  dentalia  and  put  them  |  on  the  left 
side  of  the  fern-root,  and  then  take  |  one  dentalium  shell  and  put  it 
on  its  nose;  |  and  tie  them  all  on;  and  as  soon  as  you  finish,  take  || 

25  red  paint  and  cover  the  root  of  the  fern,  |  and  place  it  by  the  side 
of  the  fire  of  your  house  or  on  the  |  south  side  of  your  fire.  Then 
speak,  and  |  say: 

'Don't  put  me  too  near  the  fire,  else  there  will  be  too  much  in 
your  world!  |  Northwest  Wind,  East  Wind!' 

30  "Thus  you  shall  say."  Thus  said  ||  old  Kwa'gwa£no.  "As  soon 
as  the  fern  gets  warm,  |  the  northwest  wind  will  at  once  begin."  | 

Then  I  questioned  him,  and  said  to  him,  "Let  me  ask  you  |  who 
invented  it?"  I  said  to  him.  | 

35  Immediately  he  began  to  laugh,  and  said:  "It  is  not  that  ||  this  has 
been  recently  invented,  what  I  told  you.  Listen !  and  I  will  |  tell 
you  the  story  about  the  one  who  first  invented  what  I  told  you.  | 

ma£ltsEmg-usta  aLE'la  LEEwa  gwEgu'myime.     Wii,  las  e't!ed  ax£e'd- 

15  xa  mo'ts!aqe  xoku  xEXumEsa',  yfi'duxup!Enk'e  £wii'sgEmasas 
la'xEns  ba'Lax.  Wa,  las  k"!a'k'!oxubE'ndEqwe,  las  ax£e'dxa  sa'lae- 
dana. Wii,  la  e'k"  !axsda'laxs  la'aqos  k-  !a'q  !iiqaseda  6'ba£yasa  k-  !axu- 
baa'kwe  xExumEs  lax  a'waga£yas  mii'ma£map!eqas.  Wit,  laE'm 
ek'!axsda,La.     Wit,  IsI'les  ax£e'dxa  ssk* !a'ts !aqe  iiLE'la,  qa£s  ax£ii'- 

20  LElodayosasa  ma£lts!a'qe  aLE'la  lax  he'lk"  !otEma£yasa  sa'laedana. 
Wii,  las  e't!ed  ax£e'dxa  ma£lts!a'qe  aLE'la  qa£s  ax£a'LElodaosa 
lax  gEm£xa'nulEma'yasa  sa'laedana.  Wii,  las  e't!ed  iix£e'dxa 
£nE'mts!aqe  aLE'la  qa£s  ax£a'LElodaosas  lax  x"i'ndzasas.  Wa, 
£nfixwa£ma   yil£a'LElodEs.      Wii,  g'i'Pmets   gwala,  wa,   las  &x£e'dxa 

25  gwEgii'myime  qa£s  qopsE'mdes  £na'xwa  lax  L!o'p!Ekasa  sa'lae- 
dana. Wii,  las  Lii'nolisas  lax  lEgwI'lases  g'o'kwos;  £wl'"la  la'xa 
£na'laqEiiwa£Usases  lEgwi'l5s.  Wii,  las  ya'q!eg'a£la.  Wa,  las 
£ne'ka:  'Gwii'lax'in  La'tsalae',  sVlox  xE'nlt!Eqa  la'xos  £na'liiqose', 
Dza'q!walanukwai',  Xa£yolisiixtayai' ; '    £ne'x"LEs,"  £ne'k"eda   q!u'l- 

30  £yakwe  Kwii'gwa£no.  "Wii,  g"i'l£Emlwise  ts!E'lx£wIdeda  sa'laedana, 
le'Las  he'x,£idaEm  dzit'q!ux,£IdELa  ya'la." 

Wa,  Ieii  wuLa'q,  wa,  Ieii  £nek'Eq:    "Wii'Entsosen  wulo'l.     Wa, 
a'ngwasox  k!we'xa£ya?"  £ne'k'EULaq. 

Wii,   hex£ida£mes  da'l£eda.     Wii,  la  £ne'k'a:   "KMe'saiixs  al£E'm 

35  k!we'xa£ya  yixEn  lax  wa'ldEin  Iol.  Wa,  we'g-il  la  ho'Lela  qEn 
no's£Idag-i  qa£s,  yls  g'ii'lola  k!we£nuxusEn  wa/ldEmaqoL. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  625 

"When  the  Myth  people  went  to   make  war  against  Southeast-  37 
Wind,  |  then  Great-Inventor  questioned  his  younger  brothers,  and  | 
said:  'Who  among  you  controls  the  weather?'     Thus  he  said.  ||  Im-  40 
mediately  a  short  man  spoke,  |  and  said,  'O  Myth  people!  whenever 
you  wish  |  for  a  northwest  wind  in  our  world,' — thus  said  the  short  | 
man,  the  Crab — 'then  take  four  of  my  |  fellow-crabs  and  hang  them 
up  over  the  fire  of  ||  your  house;  and  as  soon  as  our  backs  begin  to  be  45 
red,  |  take  us  down  and  put  us  into  four  |  large  clam-shells,  and  hide 
us  in  |  holes  of  trees,'   thus  he  said — 'and  if  I  do  not    make  the  | 
northwest  wind  in  our  world,  then  take  one  ||  of  the  crabs  again  out  50 
of  the  hole  of  the  tree  and  pray  to  it;   |  and  as  soon  as  you  finish 
praying  to  it,  put  it  into  the  |  place  where  you  took  it  from.'     Thus 
said  the  Crab.  | 

"As  soon  as  the  Crab  had  finished  speaking,  one  (person)  who  had  | 
hair  over  his  face  and  red  ochre  on  his  face  also  spoke.  He  had  two  || 
dentalia  on  each  side  in  his  ears,  and  he  had  one  dentalium  shell  in  55 
his  nose.  |  He  said:  'O  chief,  Great-Inventor!  |  I  am  the  fern,  and  I 
control  the  weather.  If  |  we  go  to  make  war  on  Southeast- Wind, 
take  me  |  just  as  I  am  dressed  now,  and  three  of  my  ||  tribe  here;  60 


Wii,   he'£maalaxs  la'e  wl'neda  nu'xune£mise  lax   MEla'lanukwe.  37 
Wit,  la'£lae  K!wek!waxii'wa£ye   wuLa'xes  ts!a'ts!a£ya.     Wa,  la/£lae 
£ne'k*a:  ,£ya,  ts!a'ts!a£ye,  a/ngwadzes  £ne£na'lanukwaq  !os  ? '  £ne'x-£lae. 
Wa,    l,e'x-£idaEm£la'wise     ts!E'k!iixsde'    bEgwa'iiEm    ya'q!Eg-a£la.  40 
Wa,   la'£lae  £ne'k'a:     '£ya,   nu'xune£mis,   he'£maaxs   £ne'kela'xaqos 
qa    dza'q!wax-£idelaxsEns    £na'lax,'    £ne'x-£laeda    ts!E'k!iixsde'    bE- 
gwa'nEma,  yix  q!o'miise.     'Wii,  la'laxs  ax£e'dlax  mo'sgEina  la'xEn 
qio'swutex,  wii,  la'laxs  te'x"stodlax    gaxEnu'x"  la'xa  lEgwi'laxsos 
g'5'kwaq!os;   wa,  g'i'l£mesEk-    L!a'x;"wldganu£xu   awl'g'ik-,   wii,  las  45 
iixa'xod  g'a'xEnu£xu  qas  axts!o'daos   g-a'xEnu£xu    la'xa  mo'sgEme 
awo'  xa'laetsa  ga'weq!anEme.      Wii,  las  q!u£la'l£Id  g'axEnu£xu  la'xa 
kwa'waga£yasa  LaxuL5'se,'  £ne'x£lae.     Wii,  g  il£mesEn  we'£stamas  qa 
dza'q!uxu£idesEns  £nii'lax,  wa,  las  e't!ed  la  ax£e'dxa  £nE'msgEme  q  !o'- 
mas  la'xa    kwa'waga£yasa   LaxllL6'£se.     Wa,   las    ts!E'lwaqa.     Wa,  50 
gi'l£mets    gw;"d    tslE'lwaqaq,    wii,    las  e't!ed    axbEtE'ndEq    la'xes 
g"a'yanE£masosaq,"  £ne'x"£lae  q!omii'se. 

Wa,  la'£lae  gwal  q!ayo'le  q  !omii'se,  la'e  o'gwaqa  ya'q!Eg'a£leda 
sE£ya'ts!a  mEgwogE'mxa  gwogu'myime.  Wii,  la'£lae  mae'maleda 
aLE'la  lax  ewa'xsodata'£ye  jjlEsplEyo's;  wii,  la'£lae  ki'dzelba'liixa  55 
£nE'mts!aqe  aLE'la.  Wii,  l;i'£lae  £ne'k'a:  £ya,  g'i'game£,  K!wek!waxii'- 
we,  no'gwaEm  sa'laedana.  Wa,  Ieu  £ne£na'lanu'kwa.  Wii,  he'£maa 
qE'nso  lal  winaLex  MEla'lanukwe.  Wii,  ITi'les  a'Em  ax£e'dEL g'ii'xEii 
la'xg'in  lak"  gwa'laii'sa.  Wii,  he'£mise  yu'dukwa  ga'yuL  la'xEn 
go'kulotex.  Wa,  las  q  !wa'nolisEn  lax  £nii'laqEnwa£lisases  lEgwi'los.  qq 
750;i2— 21— 35  eth— pt  1 40 


626  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ank.m 

61  and  place  me  on  the  south  side  of  the  fire  in  your  house,  |  and  say, 
"Don't  put  me  too  near  the  fire,  else  there  will  be  too  much  in    | 
your  world !  Northwest  Wmd !  East  Wind  !"     Thus  you  shall  say. ' " 
"Thus  said  the  |  Fern  to  Great-Inventor.  | 

65  "As  soon  as  he  stopped  speaking,  some  slow  ||  young  man  also 
spoke,  and  said:  'O  |  Myth  people!  listen  to  me!  I  am  Snail.  | 
When  you  are  going  to  make  war  on  Southeast- Wind,  and  when  |  the 
southeast  wind  is  blowing  strong,  and  when  it  is  raining,  then  I  am 
the  only  one  who  has  a  way  of  |  calming  the  southeast  wind,  and  I 

70  also  have  a  way  of  ||  stopping  the  rain.'  Thus  said  the  Snail  to 
Great-Inventor.  |  'Whenever  the  rain  falls  with  the  southeast  wind, 
you  shall  take  me  |  and  three  of  my  tribe  and  put  us  by  |  the  south 
side  of  the  fire  in  your  house;  and  as  soon  as  we  |  put  out  our  tongues, 

75  you  shall  sing;  and  this  is  what  you  shall  say:  || "Listen  to  me,  Clear- 
Sky!     Look  at  |  me!     I  put  out  my  tongue;  I  sweep  off  with  my 
tongue  from  you  the  |  clouds,  Northwest-Wind,  East-Wind,  Clear- 
Sky!"  |  Thus  you  shall  say.' 
"Thus  he  said. 

80  "This  is  imitated  by  later  (generations  of)  man.  Then  ||  Great- 
Inventor  felt  glad  on  account  of  the  words  of  the  Snail.  | 

"Then  Land-Otter  spoke  also,  and  said,  |  'O  Myth  people!  turn 
your  face,  that  I  may  also  |  tell  you  what  I  am  to  you.     When  you 

61  Wii,  las  me'ka:  "Gwa'lax'in  La'tsalai',  a'Lox  xEnlt!Eqa  la'xos  £na'- 
laqose',  Dza'qiwalanukwai',  Xa£yolisaxtayai';"  me'x'LEs,'  £ne'x'- 
£lae  sa'laedana  lax  K!wek!waxa/wa£ye. 

Wa,  gi'l£Ein£la'wise  q!we'l£Ida,  la'e  6'gwaqa  ya'q!Eg'a£iedaawi'na- 

65  gEmala  e'x'sSx"  heTa  bEgwa'nEina.  Wa,  la'£lae  me'ka:  i£ya, 
nuxune£misai',  we'g'il  ho'Lelal  g-a'xEn.  No'gwaEm  q!wEa'ts!Eqa. 
Wa,  he'£maa  qaso  lal  wi'naLEx  MEla'lanukwe,  wa,  la'Le  La'k!we- 
masLeda  mEla'se  LE£wa  yu'gwa,  wa,  lEn  lex'aEm  gwe'x'£idaasnuxu 
q!5'x£wida'masxa  mEla'se.     Wii,  la'xaEn  gwe'x-£idaasnuxu£Em  ts!e- 

70  x£idamasxa  yu'gwa,'  £ne'x-£lae  q!wEa'ts!Eqax  K!wek!waxa'wa£ye. 
Wa,  he'£maa  qo  yu'gwaqElaLa  mEla'se,  wa,  IS/les  ax£e'dEL  g'a'xEn 
lo£  yu'dukwa  g'a'yol  la'xEn  g'o'killotex.  Wa,  las  axEno'lisa 
g-a'xEnu£xu  la'xa  £na'lana'£yases  lEgwT'los.  Wa,  gi'l£Emlw!sEnu£xu 
Elx£E'lgwis£I'dEL,  wa,  la'LEs  dE'nx'£idL6L.     Wa,  he'Ems  waldEmLa: 

75  'We'g'il  la  ho'LelaL  g'a'xEn,  Q!o'xulIsaxtayai'.  We'ga  d5'qwala 
g'a'xEn.  La£mEn  E'lx£Elgwi'sa,  xe'kwasgin  k"!ElE'mk-  Iol,  a'n£an- 
wega';  Dza'qiwalanukwai',  Xa£yolisaxtayai',  Q!5xulisaxtayai',' 
ne'x'LEs,"  £ne'x-£lae. 

Wa,  ytl'£niis  la  ha'yig-isosoxda    a'lex  bEgwa'nEma.     Wa,  la'£lae 

80  e'x'£ide  na'qa£yas  K!wek!waxa'wa£ye  qa  wa'ldEmas   q!wEa'ts!Eqe. 

Wa,  la'£lae  e't!ed    ya'q!Eg-a£le  Xu'mta£la.     Wii,  la'£lae   ene'k-a: 

"£ya,  nu'xunemisai',  we'g'il  la'g-a  gwa'sgEinx'£IdEx  qEn  e'talisgin 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  G27 

go  to   make   war  on   |  Southeast-Wind    because   it  never   becomes 
calm,  as  soon  as  you  start,  ||  four  men  shall  come  into  my  house.  |  85 
Then  they  shall  pick  up  the  soil  from  the  floor  of  my  house,  and  they 
shall  |  cany  it,  and  shall  throw  the  soil  from  the  floor  of  my  house 
into  the  |  sea;  and  the  last  one  shall  say, 

"O  Northwest-Wind!  |  come  and  blow  against  Southeast- Wind ! " 
'And  ||  immediately   the    northwest  wind  will    come,  and   it  will  90 
blow  one  |  day;  then  it  will  become  calm,  and  it  will  be  calm  for  |  four 
days;  and  that  will  be  the  time  when  you  shall  start;  |  and  when  you 
wish  the  northwest  wind  to  continue  to  blow,  then  |  all  the  four  men 
shall  call  to  Northwest- Wind;  ||  and  their  leader  shall  say,  before  he  95 
throws  the  |  soil  from  the  floor  of  myhouse  into  the  water:  "I  call  you, 
Northwest-Wind,  that  |  you  may  come  and  help  me,  and  blow  me  to  the 
place  where  I  am  going.     Forfour  days  |  you  shall  do  so."     Thus  you 
shall  say.     Then  Northwest-Wind  will  blow  for  four  days.  |  That  is 
it.'     Thus  said  Land-Otter  to  Great  Inventor,  ||  and  the  later  (gene-  100 
rations  of)  men  do  so  for  that  reason.  |  As  soon  as  the  southeast  wind 
is  strong,  when  I  am  going  southward  and  |  I  find  an  otter-slide,  I 
pick  up  the  |  soil  from  the  ground  with  both  hands.     I  turn  round  | 
to  the  right  and  throw  it  into  the  water,  praying  with  the  ||  words  of  5 


gwe'x'sdEmk'    la'xda£xoL.     Wa,  he'smaa    qaso   1&l  wI'naLEx    Me-  83 
la'lanukwe  qaxs  k'lesae  q!o'x£wklae'noxwa.     Wa,  g'iT'EnilwIts  ale'- 
xwaLoL,  wa,  g'a'xLe  mo'xuLa  be'bEgwanEin  lae'L  la'xEn  g'6'kwe.  85 
Wa,  la'Le  k'!a/x"£IdEL  hlx  dzExdzEgwi'lasEn  go'kwex.      Wa,  la'Le 
gS'xsEmeLEqe.     Wa,  la'Le    gd'xstEiidElxa  dzExdzEgwI'ldase    la'xa 
dE'msx'e.     Wa,  la    me'k'eda    £nEmo'kwe    E'lxLa£ya:     'Wa,    Dza'- 
q!walanukwai',    ge'las    ya'yalaxg'a    MEla'lanukuk' !'     Wa,   he'x,£i- 
daEmlwise     g'iixLe     Dzaq  Iwalanukwe.       We,     laLe     mEmxsaEml  90 
Ena'laLe    ya'laxdEiiiLa£se.        Wa,    la'Le    q!o'x£w!dEL.       Wa,    la'Le 
m5'p  !EnxwaesLe  q  !sq  lo'giisL.    Wii,  he'£mits  lal  ale'x£widaasda£xui.os. 
Wa,    he'£maa    qaso   £iiex-l   qa   dzEdza'q'QsIltsoxda  £na'lax.     Wa, 
la'Le  fna'xwaEml  Le'elalaLa  mo'kwe  be'bEgwanEm   lax  Dza'q  Iwa- 
lanukwe.    Wa,  laLe  £nexxa  g-alaba£ye,  yixs  k'!es£mae   go'xstEndxa  95 
dzExdzagwi'lasEn   g'o'kwe:    '  Le'£lalEnLoL,  Dza'qbvalanukwai',  qa£s 
g'a'xaos  wa'x£ed  g-a'xEn  yo'x£w!dEn  la'xEn  lalai'.     Mae'm5p!ena)a- 
ga'Emlts;'  mexxe.     'Wa,  la,Le  mop!Enxwa£sL  £nalas  dzEdza'q!usL. 
Wa,  he£meq,'  £ne'x,£lae  Xu'mta£la,  lax  K!wek!waxa'wa£ye. 

Wa,he'£mis  la'gilasox  la  he  gwe'g-iloxda  a'lex  bEgwa'nEm.  100 
G'il£mae  La'k!wemas  mEla'sa,  yl'xgln  la'laek'  la'xa  mE'ldze,  wa, 
gi'l£mesEn  he'laxa  xu'mdase,  wa,  he'x£ida£mesEn  go'x£w!dxa 
dzExdzEq!u'sas,  yi'sEn  £wa'x'solts!ana.  Wa,  Ieh  xi'lpled  he'lk'!o- 
we£sta  xllpleda  qEn  k!a£stE'ndes.  Wa,  la£niEn  tslE'lwaqas  wa'l- 
dEmas    Xu'mta£la.     Wa,   lEn    he'Em   k- !a£stE'ndxEn   go'xEk",    lax  5 


628  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  Ikth.  ann.  85 

5  Land-Otter.  Then  I  throw  into  the  water  what  I  am  carrying  | 
northward  from  the  otter-slide;  and  while  I  am  carrying  the  soil  | 
from  the  otter-slide,  my  crew  beat  time  on  the  side  of  our  canoe,  | 
and  they  say,  'Don't  treat  roughly  our  charm,  else  our  world  will  be 

10  too  rough.'  |  Then  I  turn  round  and  throw  it  into  the  water;  ||  and  as 
soon  as  I  throw  it  into  the  water,  I  say,  T  call  you, "Northwest- 
Wind,  |  that  you  may  come  and  help  me,  and  blow  me  to  the  place 
where  I  am  going.  |  For  four  days  you  shall  do  so.'| 

"And  as  soon  as  I  have  done  so  four  times,]  go  aboard  my  |  canoe, 

1 5  and  we  take  our  paddles,  and  I  tell  ||  my  crew  to  go  on  and  be  ready, 
and  I  tell  them  to  go  ahead  and  |  paddle  together,  and  four  times  we 
pull  our  paddles  through  the  water;  |  and  we  all  begin  to  paddle; 
and  I  say,  |  'Let  us  paddle  away  from  the  northwest,  for  it  is  already 
coming  behind  us.'  |  This  I  say  when  I  paddle  with  my  crew.  ]| 

20  That  is  theend  of  the  fourwaysof  calling  the  Northwest- Wind.  |  The 
first  one  is  the  crab,  when  it  is  hung  over  |  the  fire  and  hidden  in  the 
holes  of  trees;  |  and,  again,  the  fern,  when  four-  of  them  are  taken 

25  and  |  painted  with  red  ochre,  and  dentalia  are  taken  for  its  ||  ears 
and  its  nose,  and  they  push  into  the  lower  end  a  |  sharp  split  pine- 
stick  and  place  it  by  the  side  of  the  fire;  |  and,  again,  a  snail,  when 

6  gwa'daiisa  xu'mdase.  Wii,  he'£maaxg'in  lek"  go'xiilaxa  dzExdzE- 
gwa'sasa  xu'mdase;  lii'En  le'Elote  t!E'msagEndxEnu£xu  ya£yats!e. 
Wa,  la  £ne'k"a:  'Gwa'laa'lElesaxwa  £na'walakwex  a'Lox  a'lElesEns 
£na'lax.'     Wa,  he'£misEn    la   xilplldaase    qEn  k'!a£stE'ndeq.     Wa, 

10  gi'l£mesEn  k' !a£stE'ndEq  le'gin  £ne'k-a:  'Le'£lalEiiLoL  Dza'qlwala- 
nukwai',  qas  g'a'xaos  wa'x£ed  g'a'xEn  yo'x£wIdEn  la'xEn  lalai'. 
Mae'mop  lEnalaga'Emlts.' 

Wa,   gl'FmesEn    mo'ptena    he    gwe'x-£Ide  le'gin   la'xsa    la'xEn 
ya'£yats!e.     Wii,  lanu£xu  da'x-£idxEnu£xu  se'sE£wayowe  qEn  wa'xe- 

15  xEn  le'Elote  qa  gwa'lales.  Wa,  lEn  wa'xaq  qa  £nEma'x£Ides  se'x- 
£wlda.  Wa,  lanu£xu  k'IdzELa'£yalasEnu£xu  se'sE£wayo,  mo'plEna 
he  gwe'x,£ideda.  Wa,  lanu£xu  se'x£wlda.  Wa,  Ieu  £ne'k"a:  "We'g'a 
se'xasux  Dza'q  !waianukwex  qaxs  g'a'x£maex  la'xEns  E'lxLa£yex," 
£ne'kEiiLaxgin  lek-  se'x£wlda  LE£wun  le'Elote. 

20  Wa,  laEm  gwa'l  la'xexda  mo'x£widala  dzEdza'q  Iwalaya.  Wii, 
he'£meda  g'a'laba£yaseda  q!oma'se,  yixs  la'e  texust5£yo  la'xa 
lEgwI'le,  qa£s  le  q  !u£la'l£idaya  lax  kwa'waga£yasa  LaxuL5'£se. 
Wa,  la  edeLE'le  sa'laedanaxs  la'e  ax£e'tsE£weda  mo'we  qa£s 
gu'ms£ItsE£wesa    gugu'myime.      Wa,   la   ax£e'dayuweda  aLE'la  lax 

25  p!ep!aspa£ya's  LE£wis  x'ix'E'ndzase.  Wa,  la  L!eL!E'nq!Exsdiilaxa 
ee'x'baa'kwe  xoku  xExumEsa'  qa£s  La'nolidzEme  la'xa  lEgwi'le. 
Wii,  la  e'dELEleda    qlwEa'dzEqe    yixs    ax£e'tsE£waeda   mo'we    qa£s 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  629 

four  are  taken  and  |  placed  by  the  side  of  the  fire  to  stop  the  south-  28 
east  wind  and  rain;  |  and  the  soil  of  the  otter-slide  when  it  is  thrown 
into  the  water  ||  on  the  north  side  of  the  otter-slide.     These  are  the  30 
four  ways.  | 

This  is  another  means  of  calling  Northwest-Wind — a  piece  of  1 
kelp,  |  which  is  taken  fresh  from  the  sea.  Now,  when  we  |  are  again 
paddling  along,  when  it  is  calm  and  it  is  a  hot  day  in  summer,  |  as 
soon  as  we  see  kelp  floating  on  the  water,  we  \\  go  towards  it  and  pick  5 
out  a  large  piece  of  kelp,  and  the  one  who  is  to  use  it  measures  it  off.  | 
It  is  more  than  half  a  fathom  long.  Then  he  |  rises  in  our  canoe  and 
turns  his  face  northward.  |  He  puts  one  end  of  the  piece  of  kelp  to  his 
mouth;  and  he  shouts  loud  |  through  the  inside  of  the  tubular  kelp:  || 

"I  call  you,  North  west- Wind,  wo!  |  10 

"Come,  Northwest- Wind,  wo!  | 

"Come  quickly,  Northwest- Wind !  | 

"I  come  to  call  you  again,  wo!"  | 

Every  time  he  says  "wo"  he  turns  round  to  the  right  and  he  ||  puts  1 5 
the  end  of  the  tube  of  kelp  into  the  sea;  ami  bubbles  come  up,  | 
because  he  says  with  a  long  breath,  "WTo!"  as  he  turns  round.     As 
soon  as  his  |  breath  nearly  gives  out,  he  turns  his  face  again,  and 


axE'nolidzEina'e  la'xa  lEgwi'le  qa  gwa'les    mEla'sa  LE£wa  yu'gwa  28 
Wii,    he'£mesa    dzExdzEq!wa'sa     xii'mdase,    yixs    la'e   k!a£sta/na 
la'xa  gwa£laa'sa  xii'mdase.     Wa,  laE'm  mo'x£widala.  30 


Wa,  he'£mis  £nEm  LE,£lala£yuxa  dza'q Iwalanukweda  £wa'£wade,  i 
yixa'  a'lomase  ga'yol  la'xa  dE'msx'e.  Wa,  he'Einxaaxganu-xu 
seyu£na'kulek"  la'xa  qlo'qula,  yixs  tsls'lqwaeda  ma'laxa  he'Enxe. 
Wa,  g-il£mesEnu£x"  do'qulaxa  £mE'lxala  ewa'ewade.  Wa,  lanirx" 
gwii/'sta  laq  qEnu'x"  ax£e'dexa  £wa'lase£wa'£wade.  Wa,  la  £mE'ns-  5 
£ideda  aa'xsilaLaq.  Wa,  la  haya'xk" !ot tebo'da.  Wa,  la  La'x'wa- 
lExsa  laxEnu£xu  ya'eyats!e  qas  gwe'gEmaLe  la'xa  gwa'£nakwe. 
Wii,  la  ax£a'LElotsa  £wa'£wade  la'xes  sE'mse.  Wa,  laha'sElalaxusa'la 
lax  k\va,'ko£ga£yasa  £wa'£wade: 

"Le'£lalEiiLoL  Dza'q Iwalanukwa,  wo!  10 

"  E'tse-'stEimoL  Dza'q  Iwalanukwa,  wo! 

"Ge'lag'a  Dza'q  iwalanukwa,  wo! 

"A'lEle'lla  Dza'q !walanuk",  ga'x£mEn  e'tse£stoLa,  wo!" 

G-i'lnaxwaEm  £ne'k-a    "wo",    la'e    xi'lpleda    helk!owe£sta    qa£s 
axE'nses  6'ba£yasa  £wa'£wade  la'xa  dE'msx'e.     Wa,  la  mEdE'lqiila  15 
qaxs  g-i'ldesae  £ne'k-Exs  la'e  xi'lp!eda  "wo."     Wa,  gi'h'mes  wu'lbe 
ha'sa£yasexs  la'e   e't!ed   gwe'gEmx£id  qas  gwe'bax,£idesa  £wa'£wade 


630  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [mth.  ANN.  8b 

18  turns  the  end  of  the  tube  of  kelp  |  towards  the  north,  and  he  shouts 
again  loud;  and  as  soon  as  |  he  arrives  at  the  "wo,"  he  turns  as  long 

20  as  his  breath  lasts,  and  ||  he  puts  the  end  into  the  sea.  When  his 
breath  is  at  an  end  |  he  rises  again  and  turns  to  the  north.  |  After  he 
has  cried  "wo"  four  times,  he  lets  the  piece  of  kelp  sink  into  the 
water.  |  Then  he  takes  his  paddle  and  paddles.  |  He  says:  "Go  on, 

25  paddle!  for  the  one  who  has  been  invited  is  coming."  ||  Then  they 
paddle.     This  belongs  to  the  Kwag'ul. 


1  This  is  also  a  means  of  calling  Northwest-Wind  of  the  Koskimo — 
four  |  star-fishes.  When  the  southeast  wind  is  blowing,  and  |  they 
wish  it  to  turn  into  a  northwest  wind,  a  man  |  goes  down  to  the  beach 
5  at  low  tide  |  and  searches  for  four  star-fishes ;  and  ||  as  soon  as  he  finds 
these  star-fishes,  he  takes  them  from  the  beach  |  and  puts  them  down 
by  the  side  of  the  fire  at  the  house.  Then  he  takes  red  ochre  |  and 
daubs  the  four  star-fishes  all  over  with  it.  |  As  soon  as  this  has  been 
done,  he  takes  cedar-bark  and  splits  it;  |  then  he  takes  four  strips; 
10  then  he  takes  one  of  the  ||  star-fishes  and  ties  a  cedar-bark  strip  to  the 
end  of  one  of  its  arms.     Now  it  is  |  hanging  right  over  the  fire. 

And  he  does  the  same  to  the  |  others.     As  soon  as  he  finishes  hang- 
ing them  over  |  the  fire,  so  that  they  may  be  smoked  by  the  smoke, 

18  la'xa  gwa£nakwe.  Wa,  la  e'tled  £la'q!ug'a£la  ha'sEla.  Wa,  g'f'l- 
£mes  la'g-aa  lax  "wo,"  la'e  x  i'lp!edEx  £wa'sgE£masases  ha/sa£ye  qa£_ 

20  metstE'ndes  6'ba£yas  la'xa  dE'msxe.  Wa,  g'iTmes  la'be  ha'sa- 
£yas  la'e  e'ted  La'x£wld  qa£s  e'tlede  gwe'gEmx-£Id  la'xa  gwa'£na- 
kwe.  Wii,  g'i'Pmes  mo'plEna  la'e  £ne'k-a  "wo"  qa£s  we'gunsesa 
£wa'£wade.  Wa,  la  da'x-£Idxes  se£'wayowe  qa£s  se'x£wlde.  Wa,  la 
£ne'k'a:     "We'g'a  se'x£wIdEx  qaxs   g-a'x£maEn  Le'£lanEmex,"   £ne' 

25  k'Exs  la'e  £wl'£la  se'x£wlda.     QEsE'mxaexa  Kwa'g'ule. 


1  G'a'Em  o'gwaqa  dzEdza'qlwala'yusa  Go'sgumuxwe,  g'a'da  mo's- 
gEmk-  ga'dzEqa.  Wa,  he'£maexs  mEla'sae,  wa,  la  wa'laqela  qa 
dza'q!ux-£Ides.  Wa,  g'il£mes  x'a'ts!aesa  la'e  lE'ndzeseda  bEgwa,'- 
nEme  la'xa  i.!Ema£ise  qa£s  a'lex-£idexa    mo'sgEme  ga'dzEqa.     Wii, 

5  g-iTmes  q!axa  ga'dzEqe  la'e  da'laq  qa£s  le  la'sdesa  la'xa  L!Ema£ise 
qa£s  le  ax£a'lllas  lax  6'na£lisases  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la  &x£e'dxa  gugu'm- 
yime  qa£s  qupsE'mdalis  ha'mElxsE'mdEs  la'xa  mo'sgEme  ga'dzE- 
qa. Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'la  la'e  ax£e'dxa  dEna'se  qa£s  dzEx£e'deq. 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  mo'tslaqe  laq.  Wa,  la  ax£S'dxa  £nE'msgEme  la'xa 
10  ga'dzEqe  qa£s  yil£e'desa  dEna'se,  lii'x  o'balts!ana£yas.  Wa,  laE'mk- 
te'kwala  lax  nEqo'stasa  lEgwI'le.  Wa,  la  e'tled  he  gwe'x,£ldxa 
waS'kwe.  Wa,  gi'l£mese  gwa'texs  la'e  te'x£waLElots  la'xa  nEqo'- 
sta£wases  lEgwI'le  qa    kwa'x-asE£wesesa   kwaxl'la.     Wa,  g-i'l£mese 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  631 

and  when  |  they  are  dry,  the  man  says,  "0  friends!  ||  take  care!  I  15 
pray  you,  Owner-of-the-Weather,  |  to  make  your  weather  right, 
Owner-of-the-Weather !  O  |  Supernatural-One !  make  your  weather 
right  and  call  |  Northwest-Wind  and  East-Wind  and  Clear-Weather- 
Above." — "Yes,"  |  says  the  man  who  himself  gives  answer.  ||  He  20 
pretends  that  the  star-fish  says  this.  Then  the  man  says,  |  "Don't 
let  me  be  too  near  the  fire!  Don't  let  me  be  too  near  the  fire,  else 
your  |  weather  will  be  too  good.  Don't  let  me  be  too  near  the  fire, 
else  your  weather  will  be  good  forever."  |  Thus  he  says.  | 

As  soon  as  he  stops  speaking,  he  breaks  off  the  cedar-strings  || 
which  hold  the  four  star-fish,  and  he  carries  them  into  the  woods  25 
and  |  hides  them  under  the  stump  of  a  tree.     Then  he  leaves  them.  | 

Some  people  say  that  he  takes  them  back  to  the  beach,  |  to  the 
place  where  he  took  them  from.  | 


This  is  also  one  way  of  calling  the  wind,  and  it  is  |  a  way  of  making  l 
it  calm,  for  all  the  winds,  wherever  they  come  from —  |  the  north- 
west wind,  and  the  northeast  wind,  and  the  south  wind,  and  the 
southeast  wind —  |  even  when  they  are  strong.  || 

Whenever  we  go  far  away  and  a  mother  of  twins  sits  in  the  canoe,  |  5 
or  even  if  it  is  a  man  (a  father  of  twins) ,  |  as  soon  as  there  is  no  wind — 


lE'mlEmx"sEmx£idExs  la'eda  bEgwa'nEme  £ne'k-a:  "Wa,  £ne£nE- 
mokwa'!  We'ga  ya'iJaLEx;  la£mEii  hawa'xElaLOL  £ne£na'lanukwa'  15 
qa  we'g'aos  wax  he'li£lalaxs  £na'laqos,  mema'lanukwa' ;  yuL,  na£na- 
walakwa'.  We'g'il  la  he'li-lalaLExs  ma'liiqos  qa£s  Le'£lalaosax  Dza'- 
q!walanukwaa',  Xa'yolisaxtayaa',  QJoxulIsaxtayaii'." — "Wa,"  £ne'- 
k'Exs  la'e  q!ule'x"s£Em  na'nax£ma£eda  bEgwa'nEme.  Wa,  laE'm 
he'bolaya'q!Ent!aledaga'dzEqe.  Wa,  la'xae  £ne'k'eda  bEgwa'nEme:  20 
"Gwa'laxin  La'tsalai'.  Gwa'laxin  La'tsalai',  a'Lox  ha'k"Enos  £na'- 
laqos.  Gwa'lax'in  La'tsalai',  E'lox  xE'nlt !EqElesos  £na'laqos," 
£ne'x--lae. 

Wa,  g"i'lsmese    q  !we'l£IdExs    la'e    aLE'maxodxa  dEna'se,  yix  te- 
gwe'lEmasa   mo'we   ga'dzEqa   qa£s    le  a'Le£stas  la'xa  a'L!e  qa£s  le  25 
qiula'Labolsas   lax  awa'ga£yasa    ts!Ekume'Le.     Wa,    gi'x£Em   bas. 

Wa,  la    £ne'keda  wao'kwaqexs  lE£ma'e  ae'daaqas  la'xa  L!Ema£- 
ise  la'xes  ga'yanEmasaq. 

Wa,  g'aE'mxaeg'a'da  £nE'mx-£Idalak'    Le'£lalayu  la'xa  ya'la  loxs  1 
gwe'x-£ldaasnukwae     q !6'x£wlda'masxa     £na'xwa     qa£s    ga'yolasa 
ya'laxa   dza'q!wa  LE£wa    xa'yoLe  LE£wa  yu'xdala    LE£wa    mEla'se, 
yixs  wa'x-£mae  La'k!wemasa. 

Wa,  he'£maexg-anu£xu  le'LEk'  la'xa  qwe'sala,  yixs  k!wa'xsalaeda  5 
yikwi'£layag'uL,  ylxa  ts!Eda'qe;  wa,    wa'x-£mese    he't!eda  bEgwa'- 


632  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.AMM.8S 

S  what  is  referred  to  by  the  Indians  as  "calm"-  |  then  the  mother 
of  twins  turns  her  face  |  to  the  north,  if  they  are  going  south;  and 

10  she  raises  her  ||  right  hand,  and  she  turns  her  hands  around  toward 
the  |  south;  and  she  says,  "I  call  you,  Northwest-Wind!"  |  She 
does  so  four  times.  Then  she  says,  "Paddle  away  from  the  |  north- 
west wind!"     And  the  man  also  does  the  same.  | 

15  When  it  is  foggy,  the  mother  of  twins  takes  her  hat  ||  and  lifts  it, 
and  she  holds  it  in  her  right  hand,  and  |  she  does  thus:  she  brings 
it  down  flat  to  her  stomach.  |  She  does  so  four  times  as  she  calls  the 
fog  to  |  get  all  inside  her  stomach;  and  when  a  man,  a  father  of 
twins  goes  hunting  |  and  it  is  foggy,  then  he  takes  his  hat  and  || 

20  draws  it  four  times  through  the  fog,  and  puts  it  down  behind  |  the 
place  where  he  is  sitting  in  the  bow  of  the  canoe.  Then  |  all  the  fog 
is  inside  the  hat;  and  when  the  hunter  has  no  |  hat,  he  catches  the 
fog  in  his  blanket  |  and  hides  it  in  his  stomach.     Four  times  he  || 

25  does  so;  and  four  times  also  the  woman,  the  mother  of  twins,  |  does 
so  with  her  blanket.  When  she  goes  clam-digging,  |  then  she  also 
takes  her  blanket  and  with  it  catches  the  fog.  |  Four  times  she 
catches  it  in  her  blanket.     Some  |  Indians  say  that  the  fog  is  all 

30  gone  into  the  ||  womb  of  the  mother  of  twins.  | 

7  nEme.  Wii,  gi'Pmes  k'leya/s  ya'la,  yixa  gwE£ya'sa  ba'klume  g'a'- 
maqala;  wa,  le'da  tslEda'q,  yi'xa  yikwI'£layag'UL  gwe'gEmx-£Id 
la'xa  gwii'£nakwe,  ylxs  lalaa'e  la'xa  £nE'ldze.     Wa,  la  e'k-  !e£staxes 

10  he'lk- lots  lima    qa£s     xF.'lpIkleses      a£yasowe'      gwayo'LElaa     la'xa 

£nE'ldze.     Wa,  la  £ne'k'a:  "Le'£lalEnLoL,  Dza'q  Iwalanukwe."     Wa, 

la  mo'plEna   he'    gwe'x-£ide,    la'e   £ne'ka:     "We'gll    la   se'xaltsux 

Dza'q  Iwalanukwex!"     Wii,  hei'Emxaa'wis  gwe'g'ileda  bEgwa'nEme. 

Wa,  g'l'l£mese  pE'lxEla  la'eda  yikwi'£layag'UL  ax£e'dxes  LEtE'ml 

15  qas  ae'k' !e£stes.  Wii,  laE'm  da'lases  he'lk!ots!ana  la.q.  Wii,  la 
he  gwe'leda  LEtE'ml  qa£s  g'a'xe  qapii'LElots  la'xes  tEk'Ie'.  Wii, 
la  mo'plEna  he  gwe'x-'Ide.  Wa,  laE'm  Le'£lalaxa  pE'lxEla  qa 
ga'xes  £wI/£laeL,  lax  tEk'Ie's;  loxs  ha'naLa'eda  bEgwa'nEin  yikwl'- 
£layag"uLa,  wa,  g1'l£mes  pE'lxEla,  la'e  ax£e'dxes  LEtE'ml  qa£s  mo'- 

20  plEne  xE'lplldEs  la'xa  pE'lxEla  qa£s  qapaLa'xse  lax  k!wa'abe- 
Laxsa  klwaxdza'sas  la'xa  a'glwa£yasa  xwa'kluna.  Wa,  laEm£lae 
£wllts!a'weda  pE'lxEla  la'xa  LEtE'mle.  Wii,  g'i'l£mese  k- lea's  le- 
tE'mleda  ha'nL  lenoxwe,  la'e  mo'qwases  £nEx£una'£ye  la'xa  pE'lxEla. 
Wii,  latla  qlula'Hts    la'xes    tEkMe'.     Wa,  la    mo'plEna    he    gwe'- 

25  x-£Ide.  Wa,  he'Emxaii'wise  gwe'g'ileda  tslEda'qe,  yi'xa  yikwi'£la- 
yag'ULyises  £nEx£una'£ye,  yixs  la'e  dze'k'axag'a'weqlanEme.  Wii, 
laE'mxaa  ax£e'dxes  £nEx£una'£ye  qa£s  m5'qwes  la'xa  pE'lxEla.  Wii, 
laE'mxaa  mo'p  !Ena  mo'xgwaedzEntses  £nEX£una'£ye,  wa,  laE'm  £ne'- 
k-eda  wao'kwe   ba'klumqexs   la'e  £wl'£la  la'ts!Eweda  pE'lxEla  lax 

30  ba'tslesa  yikwi'£layag-uLe.     Wii,  laE'm  gwa'ta. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  633 

When  an  Indian  wishes  for  snow,  |  twin-children  are  called;  and  31 
some  eagle-down  is  taken,  J  and  the  down  is  put  on  the  heads  of  the 
twins.  |  Then  the  man  who  wishes  to  have  snow  begins  to  speak,  || 
and  says,  "O  friends !  |  I  beg  of  you  that  you  call  down  the  snow,  for  35 
I  |  have  put  on  you  the  down,  on  your  heads,  the  down  of  our  winter 
dance.  |  These  are  snowflakes  at  the  place  where  you  come  from,  | 
supernatural  ones."  || 

Sometimes  the  twin-children  begin  at  once  |  to  cry,  for  they  think  40 
it  is  only  done  to  make  fun  of  I  them.     That  is  all  about  this. 


When  the  Indians  wish  for  rain,  |  twin-children  are  called;  and  1 
perch-oil,  |  which  is  kept  in  small  kelp  bottles,  is  taken,  and  is  put 
on  the  hands;  |  then  the  hands  are  rubbed  together,  so  that  they  get 
greasy.  ||  Then  it  is  put  with  the  right  hand  on  the  left-hand  side  of  5 
the  face  of  the  |  twin-child,  and  with  the  left  hand  on  the  |  right- 
hand  side  of  the  head  of  the  twin-child;  for,  indeed,  |  the  twin-children 
and  the  person  who  has  invited  them  sit  opposite  each  other.  This  is 
done  four  times  |  to  each  of  them.  The  person  who  invited  the  twin- 
children  ||  speaks  while  he  is  putting  the  |  hair-oil  on  the  twins,  and  10 

Wa,  gi'Pmes  wa'laqEleda  ba'klumaq,  k!we's£ida,  la'e  Le'£lalasE-  31 
£weda  yikwI'£lEme  gl'nginanEma  qa£s  ax£e'tsE£weda  qs'inxwasa 
kwe'kwe  qa£s  qE'mx£wIdayuwe  lax  x'ex'6'msasa  yikwi'£lEme  l!6- 
L!a'L!ayats!a£ye.  Wa,  la£mes  ya'q!Eg"a£leda  bEgwanEine,  yi'xa 
wa'iaqela  qa  k!we's£Ides.  Wa,  la  £ne'k-a:  "  Wa,£ne£nEmo'kwe,  35 
la£me  hawa'xElaLOL  qa£s  we'glLds  Le'LaxodElxa  na'£ya,  qaxgin 
la£me'k'  qE'mx£wItsoxda  qE'mxwexsanu£xu  ts!e'ts!eq!ena£ye  laxs 
x'ex-5'msaq5s.  Wa,  la'Lox  klwe'smis  la'xes  g'a'yanakiilasaos, 
nana'walakwe." 

Wa,  la  £na'l£nEmp!Eneda  yikwI'£lEme  L!e!La'L!ayadza£ye  ho'x'£i-  40 
daEm  q!we'g-a£la    qaxs  £ne'kae  a'Em    aE'mlala£ya,  yi'sa  he  gwe'- 
x-£uleq.     Wa,  laE'm  gwa'lecj. 

Wa,  g-fl£mes  walaqEleda  ba'klumaq  yu'gwa,  la'e  L§'£lalasE£weda  1 
yikwI'£lEme  L!e'L!aL!ayadza£ya.     Wa,  la  ax£e'tsE£weda  dze'klwise, 
yixs  g-its!ae  laxa  am:ama£ye  £wa£wade.     Wii,  la  xl'x-ts!anEndaya. 
Wa,  la  dza'kulayiiweda  e£e£yaso'  qa  £nEma'x£Ides  q  lE'lq  lElsala.   Wa, 
la    Lax£wldayuweda   helk!ots!ana£ye  lax   gEmxEiiuLEma£yasa   l!S.-  5 
l !ayadza£ye.  Wa,  la  Lax£widayuweda  gEmk-  lots  !ana£ye  lax  helk-  !odE- 
nQLEma£yasa  yikwI£lEme  L!ax!ayadze,  qaLaxs  k-i'mk-aqugEmlllaeda 
yikwi'£lEine  L!e'L!ai.!ayadze£  i,E£wa  Le'£lanEmeq.     Wa,  la  mo'plEna 
he  gwe'x-£IdEnaxwaq  la'qexs  £na'l£nEino'kwae.     Wa,  la  ya'q!Ent!a- 
ta£yeda   Le£lanEmexa   yikwi£lEine  L!e'L!aL!ayailza£ya,   lae  Latle'tsa  10 
dze'klwise  la'xa    yIkwi'£lEme    L!e'L!aiJayadza£ya.     Wii,  la  £ne'k-a: 


634  ETriNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTI.  I  cth.  ans.  ss 

12  says,  |  "O  Supernatural-Ones!  you  say  that  you  ran  control  the 
weather.     Let  |  your  world  be  all  wet;  for  therefore  I  oil  your  | 

15  heads,  that  it  may  begin  to  rain,  and  that  the  ||  rivers  may  rise,  for 
we  are  waiting  for  the  salmon  to  jump  in  the  |  mouth  of  the  river."  | 
As  soon  as  the  one  who  has  invited  them  stops  speaking,  |  the  twins 
will  sometimes  cry,  |  and  they  go  out  of  the  house  and  tell  their  | 
parents  about  it.  || 

20  When  an  Indian  wishes  for  good  weather,  he  |  calls  twin  children; 
and  as  soon  as  the  |  twins  come  into  his  house,  the  person  who 
invites  them  |  spreads  a  new  mat  in  the  rear  of  the  house.  |  He  takes 

25  a  cooking-box  and  pours  water  into  it,  and  he  II  picks  up  four  red- 
hot  stones  and  puts  them  J  into  the  water  in  the  cooking-box.  As 
soon  as  the  water  is  lukewarm,  |  the  one  who  invited  the  twins  calls 
them  |  to  sit  down  at  each  side  of  the  cooking-box,  and  the  |  man 

30  calls  his  wife  to  wash  their  faces.  ||  Immediately  the  woman  sils 
down  between  them.  |  She  takes  the  head  of  the  one  first  born  and 
washes  his  head;  and  when  she  finishes,  she  takes  |  soft,  shredded 
cedar-bark  and  wipes  off  the  head  of  the  twin-child ;  |  and  as  soon  as 

35  she  finishes  wiping  the  head  of  the  twin-child,  ||  the  woman  takes 


12  "Wa,  nana'walakwe,  £ne'kaa'qos  mema'lanukwa.  We'g'ax'ox 
g-a'xsta£yos  ma'leqos  qaxgln  he'£mek-  la'g'ila  La'datodxos 
x'ex'6'msaqos     qa      we'g'rltsox     yfi'gwax-£idEL,      qa      pa'Hdeltsa 

15  wa'x-a  qanu£xu  na'metsE£wa  g'a'xex  mana'la  k'!o'tEla  la'xwa 
5'xusiwa£yaxsa  wax."  Wa,  g-i'l£Em£la'wise  q!we'l£Id  ya'q!Ent!a- 
leda  Le'£lanEmeq  la'e  £na'l£nEmp!Ena  q!we'g'a£le  yikwI'£lEme  Lle'tfS- 
L!ayadza£ya  qa£s  le  ho'quwElsa  la'xa  g'o'kwe  loxs  la'e  ne'laxes 
g*I'g'aolnukwe. 

20  Wii,  g'i'Pmes  wa'laqEleda  ba'klumaq  ae'g'Jseda  £na'la,  la'e  Le'- 
£lalaxa  yikwi'£lEme  L!e'L!aL!ayadzaeya.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  g'a'xeda 
yikwI'£lEine  L!e'L!aL!a£yadze  ho'gwiL  la'xa  g"5'kwe,  la'eda  Le'£lanE- 
meq  LEp!a'lIlxa  alo'mase  le'£wa£ya  la'xa  o'gwiwalllases  g'o'kwe- 
Wa,  la  ax£e'dxa  q!o'lats!e  qa£s  guxtslo'desa    £wa'pe  laq.     Wa,  la 

25  k"!ip!e'dxa  mo'sgEme  x-I'x  ixsEmala  tle'sEma  qa£s  kMipstE'ndes 
la'xa  £wa'pe  q!o'ts!axa  q!o'lats!e.  Wa,  g'i'l£mese  kux"stax£I'deda 
£wa'pe,  la'eda  Le'£lanEmexa  yikwl'£lEme  L!e'L!aL!ayadze  Le'£hllaq 
qa  les  k!&s£a'lll  lax  £wa'x-s5tga£yasa  q!o'lats!e.  Wa,  le'da 
bEgwa'nEme  Le'£lalaxes  gEnE'me  qa  les  ts!o'ts!oxtimx"£idEq.    Wa, 

30  he'£x'£ida£mese  le'da  tslEda'qe  qa£s  le  k!wa'k!wago'dEq.  Wa, 
le'da  tslEda'qe  da'x-£IdEx  x'o'msasa  g'a'le  ma'yuLEmses  abE'mpe, 
wa,  la  kwTa's£IdEx  x'6'msas.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwa'la  la'e  ax£e'dxa 
qlo'yaakwe  k'a'dzEkwa  qa£s  da'sgEmdes  lax  x'o'msasa  yikwi'£lEme 
l !a'L !ayadze£.  Wa,  glomes  gwal  dadasgEmax  x'omsasa  yIyEkwi£lEme 

35  n!eL!a,L!ayadza£ya     la'e     ax£e'deda      tslEda'qaxa     ya'sEkwe     qa£s 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  635 

tallow  and  |  smears  it  on  the  faces  of  the  two  twin-children.  |  Then  36 
she  takes  red  ocher  and  brings  it  three  times  toward  the  |  face  of  the 
one,  and  the  fourth  time  she  paints  his  |  face  and  head;  and  when 
she  finishes  the  one,  she  ||  calls  the  other  one,  and  she  does  the  same  40 
to  him;  and  as  soon  |  as  she  finishes,  the  woman  sends  the  twin- 
child  to  |  sit  by  the  side  of  his  brother,  and  the  woman  puts  away  | 
her  cooking-box,  the  tallow,  and   the  paint-bag  of   dressed  skin.  | 
As  soon  as  this  has  been  done,  she  sits  down  and  she  calls  her  ||  hus-  45 
band,  and  she  tells  her  husband  to  go  on  and  to  |  pray  to  the  twin- 
children.     Immediately  |  the  man  arises  and  sits  down  in  front  of 
the  |  twin-children;  and  he  begins  to  speak,  and  says:  |  "Listen  to 
me,  you  Supernatural-Ones!  for  this  is  the  reason  why  I  ||  invited  50 
you,  that  you  may  work  your   supernatural  power  and  make  good 
weather  |  in  your  world.     Supernatural-Ones,  let  your  world  become 
summer,  |  salmon ! '     And   thus  I   pay  you  with    tallow  on  |  your 
faces,  and  red  ocher,   and  also   these  |  four  eagle-tails."     Thus  he 
says,  and  he  arises  ||  and  puts  four  eagle-feathers  on  the  head  of  each  55 
of   the  |  children.    Then  the  twins  only  look  downhearted.  |  That  is 
all.  I 


dzadzak-ams    lax   gegoguma£yasa  ma£lo'kwe    yeyikwI'£lEma.     Wa,  36 
la    ax£e'dxa    gWEgu'myime    qa£s     yfi'dux"p!Enenux£wIts    lax    go'- 
guma£yasa   £nEmo'kwe.      Wa,  la  mo'plEnaxs  la'e  gu'ms£idEx    go'- 
gurna£ya  lo£  x'o'msas.     Wa,  la  gwa'la  la'xa  £nEmo'kwe  la'e  e'tled 
Le'£lalaxa  £nEmo'kwe.  Wa,  he'Einxaa'wise  gwe'x£IdEq.     Wa,    g'i'l-  40 
£mese  gwa'le  la'e  £ya'laqeda  tsteda'qe  la'xa  L!ii'i.!ayadza£ye  qa  les 
k!wa'k!wagogul!l  LE£wis    £nE'mw5te.     Wa,  le'da  tslEda'qe  g'e'xa- 
xes    q!olats!e    LE£wa   ya'sEkwe    le£w!s    wadEx"sEme     gfl'myatsle. 
Wa,    g-i'l£mese    gwa'la    g'a'xae    klwa'g'alila.      Wa,    la    Le'£lrdaxes 
la'£wiinEme.     Wa,     la£me'se     wa'xaxes     la'£wunEme     qa     we'g'is  45 
ts!E'lwaqaxa    yeyikwI'£lEme    L!e'L!aL!ayadza£ya.      Wa,     he'x£ida- 
£meseda  bEgwa'iiEme  La'x£iilll  qa£s  le  k!wa'g-alll  lax  nEqEma'lilasa 
ye'ytkwiJlEineL!e'L!aL!ayadza£ya.  Wa,  laya'q!Eg-a£la.  Wa,laene'k-a: 
"  We'g-il  la  ho'LelaL  g-a'xEn,    yilL   £na£na'walaku.     He'dEn   lag'ila 
Le'£lalax"da£x5L    qas    we'g'iLos   £ne£nawfilaxuselaL  qa    ae'k- !Es£ida-  50 
g'iltsos  £na'lacios,£ne-'na'walakwe.    We'gpax"oxhe'EnxESLo  £na'laq6s 
me£ma'sile.        Wii,     yu'£mesEn     ayax"da£xoLo'xda     ya'sakwex     la 
axame'x-da£xoL    LE£wo'xda    gwEgu'myimex.     Wii,    g'a£me'seg,a'd:i 
mae'mots!aqEk-  ts!E'lk!Exsdesa  kwe'kwe,"  £ne'x'£laexsla'e  La'x£ulil 
qa£s    le    La'saLal5tsa    mae'mots!aqe  ts!E'lts!Elk*,  lax    x'ex'o'msasa  55 
g-i'nginanEme.     Wii,   hiE'm£lae    ii'Em   xu'ls£Ideda   ma£lo'kwe  L!e'- 
L!aL!ayadza£ya.     Wa,  laE'm  la'ba. 

1  Twins  are  considered  to  be  salmon. 


63(3  ETHNOLOGY   OP    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  as 

1  When  there  is  no  rain  in  the  world  |  and  the  risers  are  low  and  the 
salmon  can  not  ascend  the  rivers  |  because  they  are  very  dry,  and 
we  wait  in  vain  |  for  the  salmon  to  ascend  the  rivers;  then,  when  we  II 
5  get  tired  waiting  for  rain  to  come,  we  see  that  |  the  bodies  of  the 
salmon  turn  black.  Then  we  take  castorium  |  (of  the  beaver)  and 
we  give  it  to  a  virgin  |  to  dip  four  times  into  the  river,  for  four  days 

10  in  the  morning.  |  And  the  virgin  is  instructed  what  to  say  ||  every 
time  she  dips  the  castorium  into  the  river.  She  says:  |  "Let  your 
weather  come,  Weather-Owner!  This  one  who  —  |  calls  you,  South- 
west-Wind, and  Southeast-Wind.  Now  |  you  will  come  and  bring 
rain,  Rain-Wind  and    Hail-Wind.  I  Rain,  rain,  flood."     Thus  says 

15  the  virgin  every  time,  ||  after  she  has  dipped  the  castorium  into  the 
river.  |  Sometimes  it  will  rain  at  once  at  night,  |  when  the  castorium 
is  used.  |  Sometimes  it  may  not  rain  for  four  days,  |  for  this  is  a 

20  strong  rain-caller  of  the  Indians.  ||  And  there  is  one  next  to  cas- 
torium. | 

Now  you   will  listen    (to   it).     Another  one  is  blue  hellebore.  | 
When  there  is  no  castorium,  |  dried  blue  hellebore  is  taken  and  put 


1  Wii,  g'i'l£Em  he'niEnala  tslEtsle'xasEns  ena'lax,  wa,  la  he'x-£i- 
daEm  ko'l£Ideda  wi'wa;  wii,  la  k'leo's  gwe'x£idaas  tslE'lx/eda 
k"!o'k!utEla  qaxs  Lo'mae  la  lalE'mxwasa;  wa  lanu£xu  wuPe'iii 
nEme'sa  la'xa  kMo'tEla  qa  tslE'lx-£Ides;  wa,  g'i'l£mesEnu£xu  ya/- 
5  yaex-£ida  e'sEla  qa  yii'gwax'£Ides  Loxgwanu£xu  lek-  doqulaqexs 
la'e  ts!o'ts!aL£Enx'£ideda  k'!5'talexganu£xu  lek-  ax£e'dxa  gwa'ya- 
£lats!esa  tsla'we,  qanu£xu  tsla'wes  la'xa  klEya'la  tslEda'qa  qa 
les  mo'plEna  hapEnsaq  la'xa  waxa  gegaa'lasa  m5'xsa  fna'la. 
Wii,    la    Le'xsEX'£ItsE;we'da    klEya'la    tslEda'qa    qa    wa'ldEmsexs 

10  la'naxwae  gwal  hapEnaxa  gwa'j'a£lats !esa  tsla'we.  Wa,  laene'k'a: 
"  We'g'illax'os  £na'leqos  £ne£nalanukwex.  G'adeg'a  he'lEmx'stasilak- 
Le'£lal6L  Lla'sbalanukwe,  le£wox  MEla'lanukwex.  Wii,  laE'ms 
g-axL  yu'x£wldLEsa  Yu'gwalanukwax,  LEewa  TsE'lxtsElxalig'E£ya. 
Yu'gwas,  yu'gwas  wamo,"  £ne'xnaxweda    kMEya'la  tslEda'qa  la'e 

15  gwal  mo'plEna  hapEnsa  la'xa  wa,  yi'xa  gwa'ya£lats!esa  tsla'we. 
Wii,  £nii'l£nEmp  lEna  la'e  he'x-£idaEm  yu'gwax-£idxa  la  ga'nul5!- 
dayas  gi'lx'dEmas  ax£e'tsE£weda  gAva'ya£lats!esa  tsla'we.  Wii, 
la'£lae  £na'l£nEmplEna  la'laa  lax  mo'plEnxwa£se  £na'les  k'les 
yu'gwax"£ida,  qaxs  g-a'£mae  la'klwemas  ya'yuk!wa£layusoxda  ba'- 

20  klumex,  LE£wa  ma'kulaLaqEk'  liixg'a'da  gwa'ya£lats!eg'asa  tsla'we. 

Wii,  la£mets    ho'LelaL.      Wii,    he'£mis    £nE'mx,£idaLeda    a'xsole. 

Wa,    g'i'l£Em   k" lea's    gwa'yoLasxa    gwa'ya£lats!esa     tsla'we,    la'e 

ax£e'tsE£weda    a'xsolexs    lE'mxwae    qa£s    le    axsta'no    lii'xa     wa. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  637 

into  the  river.  |  Then  the  man  who  throws  it  into  the  river  speaks,  ||  25 
and  says,     *     *     *   (manuscript  incomplete).  | 

Blue 'sea-eggs  are  not  eaten  until  after  |  they  have  been  four  days 
in  the  house;  for  |  the  ancient  people  said  that  if  they  should  eat 
them  at  once,  |  there  would  be  bad  weather,  and  southeast  wind 
woidd  blow.  ||  for  it  is  said  the  blue  sea-eggs  are  the  grandfather  of  30 
the  southeast  wind.     Therefore  |  they  are  not  immediately  eaten.  | 

HUNTING  TABOOS 

I  have  been  asked  by  you  about  notices  set  up  by  a  hunter,  |  that  i 
his  wife  may  know  which  way  he  has  gone  |  into  the  woods,  or  when 
he  goes  paddling,  for  the  hunter  does  not  let  Ids  |  wife  know  for  some 
time  winch  way  he  intends  to  go  because  all  the  women  ||  talk  to  the  5 
other  women  which  way  their  husbands  are  going,  if  they  are  told 
by  their  husbands  |  the  way  they  will  go.  It  is  heard  by|  the  game 
of  the  hunters, — the  animals, — what  their  wives  say,  |  and  therefore 
the  animals  are  shy  and  are  in  vain  hunted  by  the  |  hunters. || 

If  the  wife  of  the  hunter  is  experienced,  she  will  sit  in  the  house  10 
watching  ]  her  husband  when  he  is  getting  ready,  and  she  never  asks  | 
where  he  is  going.     A  little  while  after  the  hunter,  her  husband,  has 
gone  out  |  the  woman  arises  and  goes  to  the  beach  to  ease  herself.  | 

Wii,  la  ya'q!Eg-a£leda  bEgwa'nEme,  yi'xa  la  axstE'ndEq  lfi'xa  wa 
Wa,  la£mes  £ne'k"a,     .     .     .     (manuscript  incomplete).  25 

Wii,1  laxae  k"!ets!enoxu  hex£id  tsax-£ulExa  lEwa  yixs  al£mae. 
tsax-£idqexs  lae  mop  !Enxwa£se  maliis  axel  laxa  g-6kwe,  qaxs  £ne- 
k'aeda  g-ale  DEgwanEmqexs  gil'melaxe  hex,£idaEinlax  tsax*sIdEq 
lalax£lae  hex£idaEm  lax  Eyi£yag-Es  laxa  mala  loxs  lelax  niEmlE- 
g'i£lala  qaxs  he£maEl  gagEmpsa  Mslalanukwa  lEwa.  Wa,  he£mis  30 
lagilas  k'!es  hex-£Id  tsax-£itsE£wa. 

Hunting  Taboos 

Wa,  g'a£mets£nEin  wuLasEwoseg'a  mamalt  !ek- !a£yasa  han£EiiL!e-  l 
noxwe  qa  q  lalag'ilts  gEiiEmasex  gwagwaagasas  lo£  he  gwagwaaqeda 
aL!e  lo£  la  sex£wida,  qaxs  k-  !esaeda  han££nL  !enoxwe  helq!alaxes 
gEiiEine  gEyol  q'filax  gwagwaagasLas  qaeda  maxwa  ts'.edaqa  yixs 
lae  gwagwex's-Tda  qaes  ts!edax£wiite  lax  laasLases  la£wunEme,  yixs  5 
nelasE£waases  la£wunEmases  laasi.a.  Wa,  heEm£lawis  wuLEltsa 
hanaL !asE£wasa  hani, lenoxweda  gilg'aomase  waldEmas  gEnEmas. 
Wii,  heEm£lawis  lag'ilas  hawInalEleda  gilgadmase  wax-  hanflidasSsa 
hanxlenoxwe. 

Wax'eda  egilwate  gEiiEmsa  haniJenoxwe  la  km  k'.wael  doqwa-  10 
laxes  laxes  la£wiinEmaxs  lae  xwanalEla.     Wa,  la£me  hewaxa  wuLax 
laasLas.     Wa,  gil£mese  la  gagiila  lawElse  haniJenoxwe  la'wunEms 
lae  Lax£uldeda   ts'.Edaqe  qa£s  la    k-!Ex-£alisa  laxa  LlEma£ise.     Wa, 


> Continued  from  p.  499,  line  15. 


638  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  |  inn  ann  35 

15  After  this  she  goes  up  the  beach,  not  going  fast  as  she  goes  up  ||  and 
she  enters  her  house  and  sits  down  on  the  floor,  and  she  keeps  quiet,  | 
and  eats  a  little  food.  She  never  eats  enough  to  be  satiated,  but  eats  a 
little  food.  It  is  said  that  )  the  animals  hunted  by  the  husband  of  the 
hunter's  wife  do  the  |  same  way  as  she  does,  and  the  animals  do  not  run 

20  about  when  they  go  about  looking  for  ||  food,  and  the  animals  do  not 
eat  enough  to  be  satiated.  | 

If  a  sea-hunter  hunts  sea-otters  and  fur-seal,  |  the  hunter's  wife  (that 
is  the  wife  of  the  hunter)  always  |  lies  down  in  her  bed  covered  with  a 
new  mat.  |  The  reason  why  the  hunter's  wife  does  this  is  that  the  sea- 

25  olter  and  the  ||  fur-seal  may  be  asleep  when  they  are  hunted  by  the 
husband  of  the  hunter's  wife.  | 

The  beloved  wives  of  the  land-hunters  and  sea-hunters  do  |  what  I 
have  said,  because,  indeed,  the  land-hunter  and  |  the  sea-hunter  get 
their  game  easily  if  their  wives  sit  at  home  well.  | 
If  the  wife  of  the  land-hunter  and  of  the  sea-hunter  is  not  experi- 

30  enced,  ||  when  she  is  a  young  woman  who  walks  about  all  the  time, 
she  is  not  told  by  her  husband  |  which  way  he  goes  hunting.  She 
is  generally  |  driven  away  by  the  hunter  her  husband  when  he  comes 
home;  for  then  he  does  not  |  get  any  game,  which  is  hunted  in  vain, 
and  the  hunter  is  ashamed;  |  therefore  he  sends  his  wife  away  when  | 
he  comes  home  to  his  house.  II 


g'il£mese  gwala  lae  lasdes  laxa  i.lEnmTse  k!es  yayanaxs  lasdesiolae 

15  qa£s  la  laeL  laxes  g'okwe  qa£s  lii  k'.wag'alela.  Wa,  la  nEnxwaakwa- 
lat'.exs  lae  hamx;idaxa  holale  hesha£ma£ya.  Wa,  laEm  hewaxa 
pol£ida,  qaxs  holalaes  hamx'£itsE£we.  Wa,  heEm£lawise  gweg'ileda 
g'ilg'admase  hanaL'.asos  la£wuiiEma  hanLlaxsEme  tslEdaqe  gwayi- 
£liilasas.     Wii,   la£meda  g'ilg'aomase   k'!es  awali£lalaxs  lae  ala  qa£s 

20  ha£rna£ya.     Wa,  la  k'!es  p5l£ida  yixa  gilg'aSmase. 

Wax'I  he  alexwasosa  ale£winoxwa  q'.asa  LE£wa  xa£wa,  wii  leda 
ale£waxsEme  tslEdaq,  yix  gEnEmasa  ale£winoxwe  aEm  hemEnel 
k(i£ld  laxes  ku£lelase  LEiisamalila  ts!Exase  le£we£  laq.  Wa,  heEm 
lag'ilas  he  gweg'ileda  ale£waxseme  tslEtlaqa,  qa  mexesa  q!asa  LE£wa 

25  xa£wa,  yixs  lae  alexwas5s  la£wunEmasa  ale£waxsEme  tslEdaqa. 

Wa,  has£taEm  laxula  gEnEmsa  hanL'.enoxwe  LE£wa  ale£winoxwa 
he  gweg'ilEn  la  waldEma  cjaxs  ala£mae  holEmaleda  haniJenoxwe 
LE£wa  alewinoxwaxs  qlalaaq  aek'iles  gEnEmaxs  amlexwae. 

WaxI  yiigilwateda  gEnEmasa  haniJenoxwe  LE£wa  ale£winoxwe 

30  yixs  alo£stagasaexa  qayElkwe,  wa,  he£m  k"!es  nelasoses  la£wunEine 
lax  gwagwaag'asasexs  hanaL!eLe.  Wa,  heEm  q!unala  hex"£idaEm 
k'ayasoses  haniJenoxwe  Ia£wuuEmxs  g'axae  na£nakwa,  yixs  k'!ea- 
sae  yanEma  laxes  wax'i  hanaL!asE£wa.  Wa,  la  maxts!eda  haiiLle- 
noxu  lagilas  k'ayaxes   gEUEinaxs  g'axae    na£nakwa    laxes   g'okwe. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  639 

I  have  forgotten  that  an  expert  hunter's  wife  does  not  lie  down  35 
with  the  hunter  her  husband.  |  When  her  husband  gets  ready,  he  tells 
his  wife  |  to  go  bathing  in  the  river  near  by;  and  when  they  arrive 
at  the  river,  the  hunter  goes  ahead  of  his  wife  back  into  the  woods,  || 
where  they  lie  down  and  cohabit.     After  this  they  come  out  of  the  40 
woods  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  |  both  take  off  their  blankets,  | 
the  hunter  and|  the  hunter's  wife.     Then  at  the  same  time  they  step 
into  the  water,  with  |  the  right  foot,  and  they  step  into  the  water  at  the 
same  time  with  the  ||  left  foot,  and  they  sit  down  |  in  the  water  at  the  45 
same  time.     And  both  at  the  same  time  spriukle  water  over  th  e  |  right 
side  of  the  body;  and  after  they  have  sprinkled  themselves  four  times,  | 
they  also  sprinkle  the  left  side  of  the  body;  |  and  finally  they  wash  the 
whole  body.     After  ||  they  have  done  so,  they  come  out  of  the  water  at  50 
the  same  time,  and  for  a  little  while  they  sit  on  the  ground ;  |  and  when 
they  are  dry,  the  hunter  puts  on  |  his  blanket  and  goes  away  leaving  his  | 
wife,  and  the  hunter  |  goes  straight  to  his  house.   He  takes  his  weapons,  | 
puts  them  into  his  hunting-canoe,  and  paddles  ||  away  to  the  place  55 
where  he  is  going  to  hunt.    Then  his  wife  remains  sitting  on  the  bank 
of  the  |  river;  and  not  long  after  her  husband  has  left  her,  she  arises 
slowly  |  and  goes  slowly  back  and  |  enters  her  house.     She  does  not  go 

HexoLEn    L'.Eleweso  laxa   egilwate    haiiLlenoxwaxsEm  tstedaqa,  35 
yixs  k'!esae  kulkiilk'a  LE£wis  hanL'.enoxwe  la£wunEina.     Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  xwanaMde    la£wunEnias   lae  axk-!aleda    kanLlenoxwaxes  gE- 
liEma   qa£s   le   la£sta   laxa   waxs    nExwalae.     Wa,  g'il£mese    lag'aa 
laxa  wa,  lae  g-alag'iwa£yeda  hanLlenoxwases  gEnEmaxs  lae  iiLe£sta 
laxa    aL!e£    qa£s   kulEmg'aElse    qa£s    £nExwalax,£idEx-da£xwe.     Wa,  40 
g'il£mese  gwala  lae   hox£wult!a    qa£s   le    lax    6xusiwa£yasa  wa  qa£s 
£nEmax'£ide    xEnx-£Idaxes     £naEnx£una£yeda    hanL'enoxwe     LE£wis 
haiiL'.enoxwaxsEme   gEnEina.    Wa,    la    £nEmax'£idaxat !    t!ep£stases 
lielk'!6tsldza£ye  laxa  £wape.     Wa,  laxae  £nEmax,£idaxat!  tlepstases 
gEmxots!dza£ye  laxa  £wape.      Wa,    laxae  £nEmax-£idaxat !  k!wa£sta  45 
laxa   £wape.      Wa,    laxae    £nEmax£IdExs    lae    xos£Itsa    £wape  laxes 
helk' !6t  !Ena£yases    ok!wina£ye.       Wa,    g'll£mese    mop!Ena    xos£itsa 
£wape  laq   lae  mdp'.Ena  xos£idaxaaxes  gEinxot  !Ena£yases  ok'.wina- 
£ye.      Wa,    lawisLe   guset!edxes    6k!wina£ye    laxeq.     Wa,  gil£mese 
gwala   lae   £nEmax£idaxat !   la£sta   laxa   £wape  qa£s  yawas£ide  k!Q-  50 
s£Elsa.      Wa,   gil£mese    lEmx£unx-£Ida    lae    £nEx£tindeda    hanLleno- 
xwases   £nEx£flna£ye.      Wa,    la    qas£ida    bases    gEnEme.      Wa,    la 
he£nakula£ma  hfinL!enoxwe  laxes  g'okwe  qa£s  ax£edexes  gwelgwa£la 
qa£s  mSxses  laxes  hanaL!aats!e  xwaxwaguma.     Wa,  la£me  sex£wida 
qa£s  la  laxes  hanaLlaasLe.     Wa,  la£me   km  klwase  gEnEmas  laxa  55 
wa.     Wa,  het!e  la  gala  la£wunEmas  bas  lae  k-!es  ealtselaxs  lae  l5x- 
£wElsa  qa£s  k'lese  yayanaxs  lae  qa£nakulaxs  lae  na£nakwa  qa£s  la 


640  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.85 

quickly,  and  she  sits  down  |  and  sits  still  without  moving,  and  she  only 

GO  eats  a  little.  ||  She  does  not  allow  herself  to  eat  much,  so  that  |  what  is 
hunted  by  her  husband  may  do  the  same.  This  is  called  by  the 
people  of  olden  times  |  ts!Egwelka  ("made  short  inside"),  when  she 
does  this  purifying  herself.  Some  hunters  never  lie  down  with  their 
wives. 

05  When  he  cohabits  with  another  woman  every  fourth  ||  day  and  when 
it  is  known  by  the  wife  of  the  hunter  that  her  husband  has  a  sweetheart  | 
and  she  is  expert  at  purifying  herself  on  behalf  of  the  hunter,  |  the 
hunter's  wife  gives  a  blanket  |  to  the  woman,  the  sweetheart  of  the 
hunter  her   husband,  so  that  it  may  not  |  remain  a  secret  that  the 

70  woman  and  the  husband  of  the  ||  hunter's  wife  are  sweethearts.  Gen- 
erally the  husband  of  the  |  woman  knows  that  she  has  a  hunter  for  her 
sweetheart,  but  he  does  not  become  |  jealous  because  he  takes  the 
blankets  that  are  given  to  his  wife.  |  Sometimes  forty,  or  even  a  hun- 
dred, blankets  are  given  |  by  the  hunter's  wife  to  the  husband  of  the  one 

75  who  is  the  sweetheart  of  the  ||  hunter  her  husband,  and  then  the  whole 
tribe  know  that  the  hunter  and  the  woman  |  are  sweethearts. 

And  this  is  the  reason  why  the  hunter  does  this.     He  does  not  lie 
with  his  wife,  and  his  sweetheart  does  not  lie  down  with  her  hus- 

80  band;  and  after  four  days  the  hunter  comes  ||  and  lies  down  with  his 


58  laeL  laxes  g'okwe  k'lesxat!  yineLa.  Wa,  la  k'.wagalila.  Wa, 
a£mise  la  sEldela  kMes  yawLx'Ela  ogii£la  laqexs  a£niae  hemEnel  xaL!a 

60  ha£mapa  laxes  k'letslena^ye  heiq!ala  qiek'hesa  qa  has  gweg'ile 
hanaiJ.asF/was  hVwunEinas.  Wii,  heEm  Legad  liixa  g'ale  bEgwa- 
nEms  ts!Egwelkuxa  he  gweg'ila  q  leqale.  Wax'eda  waokwe  hanEiuJe- 
noxwa  IS  hewaxa  kule£lenoxu  LE£wis  gEnEme. 

Wa,  la  6gu£laEm  ts!Edaqe  lanaxwa  nExwalaso£sexa  maemoplEn- 

65  xwa£se  £nala,  yix  q!al£mas  gEnEmasa  hant lenoxweqexs  Lalases 
la£wunEinexa  egilwate  lax  qleqEla  qaeda  hanrlenoxwe.  Wa, 
he£misa  haiiL!enoxwaxsEme  gEnEmsa  hanLlenoxwe  ts!asa  p!e1xe- 
lasgEme  laxa  ts'.Edaqe,  Lalases  hanLlenoxwe  la£wunEme,  qa  k'.eses 
t!at!aayaala  laxes  waLalaena£ya  ts!Eclaqe  lo£  la£wiinEmasa  hanLle- 

70  noxwaxsEme  ts'.Edaqa.  Wa,  la  q!unala  q!ala£me  la£wunEmasa 
tslEdaqaxs  La£lanokwaes  gEnEmasa  hanLlenoxwe.  Wa,  la  k'les 
babala  qaxs  he£mae  ax£edxa  p'.ElxElasgEnie  tslEwex  qaes  gEnE- 
mexa  £nal£nEmp'.Ena  moxusokwa  loxs  lakMEndaeda  p '.ElxElasgEme 
tslEwesa  gEnEmasa    hanLlenoxwe   lax   la£wunEmas  Lalases  hanLle- 

75  noxwe  la£wunEme.  Wa,  la  £naxwa£me  g"oktilotasa  hanLlenoxwe 
q'.alaqexs  wS,Lilae. 

Wa,  he£mis  lag'ilas  he  gweg'ileda  hanLlenoxwe,  yixs  k-!esae 
kulkulk'a  LE£wis  gEnEme.  Wa,  laxae  Lalas  k-!es  ktUkulk'a  LE£wis 
la£wunEme.     Wa,  g-il£mese    mop!Enxwa£se  £nalas  g'axaeda  haniJe- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  641 

sweetheart.     At  once  he  cohabits  with  his  sweetheart.     In  the  morn-  80 
ing,  when  daylight  comes,  the  |  hunter  and  his  sweetheart  arise  at 
the  same  time  and  go  down  |  to  the  beach  and  go  into  the  sea-water 
and  |  bathe  at  the  same  time.     They  dive  four  times  and  stay  under 
water  a  long  time:  and  after  ||  diving  they  rub  their  bodies.     After  |  85 
that  both  come  out  of  the  salt  water  at  the  same  time  and  sit  down  on 
the  |  beach;  and  after  their  bodies  are  dry,  they  |  put  on  their  blankets 
at  the  same  time,  and  both  |  arise  at  the  same  time  on  the  beach,  and 
the  hunter  goes  to  his  ||  house,  and  his  sweetheart  goes  to  her  own  90 
house,  and  they  both  do  not  |  go  quickly  as  they  are  walking.  | 

The  wife  of  the  hunter  always  gives  |  food  to  her  husband's  sweet- 
heart, and  she  always  eats  only  a  little.  |  The  wife  of  the  hunter  does 
not  observe  any  taboos.  This  is  called  ||  g'ildel.k'1  ("made  long  inside"),  95 
when  a  man  does  this  with  another  woman.  |  The  hunters  who  do  this 
are  those  whose  wives  are  foolish  |  walking  about  and  talking,  and 
going  after  men,  ami  who  do  not  know  |  the  taboos  to  be  observed  by 
a  hunter's  wife.  | 

The  hunter  only  tells  his  wife  not  ||  to  touch  his  bed  when  he  goes  100 
hunting  in  the  woods,  or  when  he  goes  paddling.  |  This  is  the  end  of 
what  is  being  done  by  the  |  hunter's  wife.  | 

noxwe  kulx£Id  laxes  Lala.     Wa,  la  hex£idaEm  nExwalaxes  Lalaxa  80 
haiiL'.enoxwe.      Wii,    k!es-mese  £nax-£Idxa  gaalaxs  lae    Lax£wideda 
haiiL'.enoxwe  £nEmax'£Ida    LE-"wis    Laleda    ts!Edaqe  qa£s  lit  lEntsles 
laxa  L'.Ema£ise.     Wit,  hoxsta  laxa  dEmsxe  Ewapa  qa£s  £nEniax-£ide 
das£ida.     Wa,  lamoplEna  das£ida  gegEyEnsEla.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwa} 
dasa   lae    guset  !eda    laxes    ok!wina£ye.      Wa,    gilmiese    gwala    lae  85 
£nEmax,£id  hox£wiista   laxa    dEmsxe    £wapa    qa£s   le  k!us£alis  laxa 
L'.Ema£ise.     Wii,  gihmese  lEmx£unx"£ide  ok!wina£yas  lae  £nEinax-£- 
idExs  lae    £nExiintses    £naEnx£Ona£ye.      Wa,    la   mF.max-idExs   lae 
LiixHdes    liixa    LlEma£isaxs     lae     na£nakweda    haiiL'.enoxwe    laxes 
g"okwe.     Wa,  la  Lalas    niimak"    laxes   hEsaq  g'okwa  laxes  k!ets!e-90 
na£ye  yaya£naxs  qa£nakfilae  £nEmala. 

Wii,  la£me  gEnEinasa  haiiL'.enoxwe  hemEnalaEin  LlawEntasa 
he£maomase  lax  Laliises  la;"wunKme  qa  hemEnel£Em  xaL'.a  ha£miis. 
Wii,  laLa  k-!eas  aek'ilasosa  gEnEmasa  haiiL'.enoxwe.  Wii,  heEin 
LegadEs  g'ildelk",  yixa  he  gweg"ila  LE£wa  ogu£la  tslsdaqa.  Wii,  95 
heEin  he  gweg'ileda  haiiL!enoxwe  yixs  liEnoiaes  gEUEinasxa  tslEda- 
qaxs  qayElkwae  loxs  k'atlalae  loxs  Llasgasaexa  k" lease  q!al  lax 
aek'ilasE£wasa  haiiL'.enoxwaxsEm  tslEdaqa. 

Wii,    lex-a£mes    waldEmsa   hanL'.enoxwaxes    gEiiEine     qa    k'!eses 
i.abalax  ku£le£lasas,  yixs  lae   hanaLla   laxa  aide   loxs   sex£widaeda  100 
haiiL!enoxwe.      Wii,    laEin     laba     lax     gwa£yilalasasa     gEnEmasa 
hfiiiLlenoxwe. 

75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  I 41 


642  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ann.  ss 

Now  I  will  talk  about  the  notice  for  the  |  wife  of  the  hunter,  which 

5  way  the  hunter  her  husband  goes,  ||  for  the  bed  of  the  hunter  is  not 

near  the  bed  of  his  |  wife,  and  generally  the  hunter  hardly  speaks  |  to 

his  wife.    When  the  hunter  dreams  |  that  he  is  making  love  to  a  living 

woman,  and  when  he  dreams  that  he  cohabits  |  with  the  living  woman 

10  to  whom  he  makes  love,  he  immediately  arises  out  of  his  ||  bed  and 
quietlv  goes,  takes  his  powder-box  |  and  his  gun  and  the  mat  which 
serves  as  his  seat  and  his  paddle,  and  |  he  goes  quietly  out  of  the  door 
of  the  house.  | 

As  soon  as  he  goes  out  of  the  house,  he  puts  a  mark  on  the  |  ground 

15  with  the  tip  of  his  hunting-paddle.  j|  The  mark  runs  in  the  way  in 
which  he  goes  out  paddling;  and  when  |  his  wife  arises  and  sees  that 
her  husband  is  not  in  Ins  bed,  |  the  woman  knows  at  once  that  her 
husband  had  a  good  dream  |  for  hunting.  She  goes  out  of  the  door  of 
the  house  |  and  looks  at  the  ground.     There  she  sees  her  husband's 

20  mark,  ||  and  then  she  knows  which  way  he  has  gone.  | 

As  soon  as  she  knows  which  way  he  has  gone,  she  goes  back  |  into 
her  house,  not  fast ,  and  sits  down,  and  she  takes  some  food  ]  and  cats  it , 
and  she  chews  for  a  long  time  what  she  is  eating,  |  and  she  swallows  it 

25  in  very  small  pieces;  that  is,  if  ||  the  hunter's  wife  is  an  experienced 
woman.     She  does  not  stop  eating  until  her  |  cheeks  ache.  | 

3  Wa,  la-rmesi',n  gwagwex-s£alal  laxa  mamalt  !ek' !a  qaeda  gE- 
nEinasa  hanLlenoxwe  lax  la  gwagwaagasases  hanLlenoxwe  la£\vii- 
5  nEina,  yixs  k"!esae  Lalallle  kii£le£lasasa  hanLlenoxwe  lax  ku£le£lasases 
gEiiEine.  Wa,  la  qlunala  k'!es  alai:in  yaeq'.Eg-a£leda  hanLlenoxwe 
LE£wis  gEiiF.me.  Wii,  he£mesexs  g"il£maeda  hanLlenoxwe  mexEla 
L'.Etaxa  <j!ula  tslEdaqa.  Wii,  g'il£mesa  hanLlenoxwe mexal a  aExwa- 
laxes      ].!i:tasi:£we     q!ula    tslEdaqa,    lii   hex-£idaF.m     Lax£ulll    laxes 

10  ku£le£lase  qa£s  sEltalexs  lae  dax,£Idxes  hanhanlk-edzats!e  g'lldasa 
i.i:£wis  hanLEme  LEewis  k!wa£ye  le£wa£}ra  LE£wis  se£wayowe.  Wii,  lii 
sEltalaxs  lae  lawEls  lax  t!Exiliises  g'okwe. 

Wa,  gil:mese  lawnls  lax  i.!asaiia£vases  g'okwe  lae  xiitlElsaxa 
awinakliise   yis  gexta£yases  hanaL'.ax'sa£yase  se£wayix.     Wii,  la£jne 

15  gwebale  xulta£yas  lax  gwagwaagasas  lae  sex£wida.  Wa,  gihmese 
Lax£wide  gEnEmas  lae  dox£waLElaxes  la£wunEmaxs  k'!easae  kmilla. 
Wa,  hex£ida£mesa  ts'.Ediiqe  q!al£aLElaxes  la£wunEinaxs  mexalaasa 
eke  laxes  hanL!eno£xwena£ye.  Wii,  lii  lawEls  laxa  tlEx'ilases  gokwe 
qa£s   dox£\videxa    awinakluse.     Wii,    lii    dox£waLElaxa    xulta£yases 

20  la£wiinEme.     Wa,  la£me  q'.ahai.Elax  gwagwaagasas  laxeq. 

Wii,  gihmese  q'.astax  gwagwaagasas  lae  asm  xwelaqa  la  laeL 
laxes  goku  k-'.es  yaya£na  qaes  lii  klwag-alila  qa£s  ax£edexa  hemao- 
mase  qa£s  hamx£Ideq.  Wii,  la£me  gegEg'ilil  malekwaxes  ha£ma£ye 
qa£s  nEx£wideqexs    lae  ala   la    ani£Kmayasta   yixs   eg'ilwataeda   gE- 

25  nEmasa  hanLlenoxwe  Wii,  al£mese  gwal  ha£miipExs  lae  ts!ets!E- 
nEmyax-£Ida. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  643 

When  the  front  of  the  house  is  stone  |  at  the  place  where  the  hunter  27 
sits  and  when  he  dreams  of  making  love  to  the  wife  of  |  another  man, 
he  has  no  way  of  letting  his  wife  know  that  he  goes  out  ||  hunting  on  30 
account  of  his  favorable  dream,  for  he  immediately  arises  and  goes  | 
out  in  his  canoe.  When  he  goes  out  of  the  house,  he  takes  |  a  long  split 
piece  of  cedar-wood  and  places  it  on  the  ground,  the  end  near  |  the 
door  of  the  house  pointing  down  to  the  beach,  and  the  lower  end  |  is 
pointing  south;  and  when  the  hunter  goes  straight  out  from  his  || 
house,  then  he  puts  the  cedar-stick  on  the  rock  (pointing  away  from  35 
the  door) ;  and  when  he  |  goes  north,  he  lavs  the  cedar-stick  (pointing 
north);  and  when  |  he  goes  back  into  the  woods, he  puts  the  cedar- 
stick  pointing  backward  at  ]  one  side  of  his  house.    | 

In  the  same  way  are  the  marks  which  he  puts  on  the  |  ground  about 
which  I  talked  first.   || 

This  is  onl\'  done  by  the  hunter  when  he  dreams  of  making  love  to  40 
a  |  living  woman.  When  he  dreams  of  making  love  to  a  dead  woman,  | 
he  knows  that  he  will  not  cat  ch  any  animal.  This  is  the  same  |  dream 
for  the  hunter  and  trapper;  for  when  |  the  trapper  dreams  of  making 
love  to  a  living  woman,  ||  he  knows  that  st  mething  will  be  in  his  trap,  45 
and  he  at  once  goes  to  |look  at  his  trap  to  take  out  what  is  caught  in  it : 
and  when  the  |   trapper  dreams  of  making  love  to  a  dead  woman,  he 

Wii,   g'il£mese    t!edzEk!wa   Lkisana-yasa    g'okwasa   hanL!enoxwe  27 
axes  hanaiJaedzase.     Wii,  glb'mese   mexEla   nExwalaxa  gEnEmaxa 
ogu£la  bEgwanF.nia,  wit,  lii  k* !e&s  gwex,£idaas  nelaxes  gEnEmax  laxe 
hanar.lal  qaes  ek'e  mexa£ya  qaxs  a£mae  hex£idaEm  i.ax-ullla  qa£s  lii  30 
alex£wida.     Wii,  g'ibmese  lalawultsla  laxes  g'okwaxs  lac  diigilxLa- 
laxa  g'ilt'.a  xoku  k!wa£xi>a£wa  qa-s  kat '.Elses  oba£yas  lax  max'sta- 
-lasas    t!EX"flases   g'okwe,   gwebala   laxa    L,!Ema£ise,  la  gwiigwebala 
laxa   £nEldze.     Wii,   g'il£mese  laLa   hanLlenoxwe   laxa  nEqawilases 
g'okwe   la    k'atlalotsa    k!wa£xxa£we  laxa  gwalaasa.1     Wii,  g-il£mese  35 
gwagwaaqa  laxa  gwanakwe  lae  k'atlalotsa  k!wa£xLa£we.     Wii,  gil- 
£mese    aai.aacpi    laxa  ai.'.e  lae   k'atlalotsa  k!wa£xEa£we  iiLEbiila  lax 
apsanii'yases    gokwe.     Wii,    heEmxaavvise     gwala    xulta£yas    laxa 
awlnak'.use  liixEii  g-ilx'de  gwagwexs;illasa. 

Wii,  lex'aEm  he  gweg'ilatsa  hanLlenoxwe  yixs  mexElae  nExwalaxa  40 
q'.ula  ts!Eclaqa.  Wii,  g'ib'mese  mexi-:la  nExwalaxa  la  1e£1  tsEdaqa, 
wii,  lii  q!a,LElaxs  k'leasaLe  yanEins  laxa  g'llg'aomas,  yixs  ;i\Kinax'is- 
£mae  mexayasa  haniJenoxwe  LE£wa  k!Elk'.Elk'!enoxwe,  yixs  g41- 
£maeda  k- '.Elk'Elk- !en5xwe  mexnla  nExwalaxa  q'.iila  ts'.Edaqa  lae 
q!aEElaqe  laEm  nuitslawes  k-'.Elg'ayo.  Wii,  hex-£ida£mese  la  do-  45 
qwaxa  k'lElg'ayowe  qa£s  k'.iilsex  matslawas.  Wa,  gil£mese k" !e1- 
k"!Elk-!enoxwe    mexEla   nExwalaxa  lE£le    ts'.Edaqa;  wa,   lii    qlaLE- 

1  Straight  down  to  beach. 


644  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

48  knows  |  that  his  trap  did  not  catch  anything,  and  that  his  trap  is 
broken  by  a  large  animal.    |    That  is  the  end.  || 

Means  of  Having  Children 

1  [We  will  talk  about  the  means  of  making  a  woman  have  children.  | 
There  was  TlatlEndzid,  who  had  been  married  eight  |  winters  to  his 
wife,  and  his  wife  had  never  been  pregnant;  |  and  this  is  what  he 
5  said: — ]  Now,  I  have  been  married  eight  ||  winters  to  my  wife,  and  she 
has  never  been  pregnant.  |  I  am  sorry;  for  that  was  the  reason  |  I 
married,  that  I  might  have  children.  Then  I  went  to  the  Koskimo,  | 
and  I  told  the  old  man  Qwa£x'iladze  that  I  |  felt  badly  because  my 

10  wife  had  not  been  pregnant  in  eight  ||  winters.  Then  Qwa£x'iladze 
laughed.  He  |  said: '  "O  my  dear!  listen  to  me,  and  I  |  will  inform 
you.     Just  listen !     When   I   first  |  married   Born-to-be-given-Pres- 

15  ents-First,  she  |  got  no  child,  and  I  had  her  for  my  wife  four  winters.  || 
Then  I  was  really  sick  at  heart.  |  I  invited  the  experts  in  medicine 
of  the  first  Koskimo;  |  and  I  spoke,  and  said,  'O  you  experts  in 
medicine  among  the  |  Koskimo,  listen  to  me !  I  pray  you,  have 
mercy  on  me,  |  and  treat  my  wife  so  that  she  may  have  chddren.' 

20  Thus  I  said   to  ||  those  experts  in   medicine  among   the  Koskimo. 

48  laxes  k'!Elgayaxs  wEyoLae  loxs  Llenkwaasa  £walase  g'ilg'aomases 
kMfilgayowe.     Wa,  laEm  laba. 

Means  of  Having  Children 

1  [Gwa'gwex"s£alaLEns  lil'xa  ba'wek!ul£yo  qa  bEwe'x£w!desa  ts!E- 
da'qe.  Wa,  he'£mae  Tlfi't  tents  !lde,  yixs  la'e  ma£lgii£na'l£Enxelaxa 
ts!E£wii'nxe  gEg-a'tses .  gEnE'me.  Wii,  la  hewa'xa  bEwe'x£wkla. 
Wa,  g-a£mes  wa'ldEmseg'a:]  He'£maaxgin  le'g-in  la  ma£lgu£na'- 
5  leEnxelaxa  ts!E-wu'nxe  gEg'a'tsEn  la  gEiiE'ma.  Wa,  la  hewa'xa 
bEwe'x£wida.  Wa,  la  tslEX'ilEn  na'qa£ye  qaxgln  he'£meq  la'g'Ila 
gEga'dEx£ld  qEii  xii'ngwadEx,£Ide.  Wa,  lEn  la'xa  Go'sgimoxwe. 
Wii,  lEn  ne'laxa  q!u'l£yakwe  Qwa£x-Iladze,  yisEn  na'qa£yaxs 
£\a'xsE£mae  qaE'n   gEiiE'maxs    k'le'sae    bEwe'x£wIdxa   la  ma£lgu- 

01  £na'l£Enx  ts!E£wii'nxa.  Wa,  la  dal-Tde  Qwa£xl'ladze.  Wa,  la 
£ne'ka:'  "£ya,  a'dats,  we'g'ak'a'sLEla  hoLe'laL  g"a'xEii,  qEn  ts!e- 
k'!a'l:i:lakasa<"ii,.  AVe'i.i:la  hu'LelakasLoL.  Wa,  he'k'as£maexg"in 
la'kasaek'  gEgadkatsox  G'a'laxaa'kwe.£lakwex.  Wa,  la'k'asono 
k'le'as  qE'lxela;   wii,  la'kasEn  mo'x-'iinxelaxe  ts!E£wE'nxe  gEg'a'd- 

15  katsono;  wii,  lii'k'ase  a'lak" !alak"as  ts!Exi'lEn  na'qek'ase.  Wii, 
la'kasEn  Le'laxe  wi£wa'no-ienoxwase  g'i'lk'asdii  Go'sgimoxwa. 
Wii,  Ieu  do't!Eg-a£la.  We,  lak'asEn  £nex-a:  'ya,  wPwano£lenoxs  Gos- 
g-imoxu.  Wi'k'asLEla  ho'LelaLOL  a'sa£yoLEiiLoL  qak'a'sos  wa£xa'os 
wa'nol£idk-asxEn     gEiiE'mk'asex  qa   qETxele£sox,'    £ne'x-k-asEnLax 

20  wI£wa'no£lenoxwase    Go'sg'imoxwe.     Wa,  lii'k-aslaene    d6't!Eg-a£te 

1  The  following  is  spoken  in  Koskimo  dialect. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  645 

Then  one  of  them  spoke,  |  and  said   'O  Chief  Qwaex  'lladze !  |  let  21 
Born-to-be-given-Presents-First  go  out  of  the  house,  else  |  she  will 
hear  what  we   are   talking  about  here.'     Then  |  Born-to-be-given  - 
Presents-First  was  driven  out.  || 

"As  soon  as  she  had  gone  out,  the  expert  in  medicine  spoke,  |  and  25 
said,  '0  chief!  go  and  |  send  the  little  children  to  search  for  one  | 
male  lizard  and  also  for  one  female  |  lizard.  They  shall  be  husband 
and  wife;  and  as  soon  as  |]  they  have  brought  them,  you  must  take  30 
them  and  put  them  together,  chest  to  chest,  j  and  tie  them  together 
in  that  way,  while  [  they  are  still  alive.  Then  tie  them  on  the  right 
side  of  your  |  waist,  and  let  them  be  there  thus  for  four  days.  | 
Then  untie  them  and  ||  take  some  food;'  and  I  chewed  it.  |  35 

"Then  I  took  the  fore-feet  of  one  of  the  lizards  |  and  put  them  into 
the  food,  and  I  chewed  it  again,  \  and  then  T  put  it  down  on  the 
floor  of  the  house;  and  then  I  also  |  took  the  hind-feet  of  the  lizard  || 
and  put  them  into  what  had  been  chewed.  Then  |  I  put  it  down  on  40 
the  floor  of  the  house.  Then  I  did  the  same  with  each  one.  |  Then  I 
took  it  up,  and  1  took  the  fore-feet,  |  both  of  them;  and  I  chewed 
them  together  |  with  the  food,  and  I  put  it  down  on  the  floor  of  the 


EnEmo'x\ve.  Wa,  la'k-as£laene  £ne'x-a:  '£ya  g  I'gamia,  Qwa'xi'ladze,  21 
wi'g'ELElax'Sno  la'wElsk'asLox  G'a'laxaa'kwe'lakwax.    n'rakasono 
wuLEla'  la'xEns  d6'dEt!alagililEmk-a'sax.'     Wa,  la'k-as£laene  k-a'- 
£yasokwase  G'a'laxaa'kwe-'laxwe. 

"Wa,  g-i'l£Em£laene  la'wEls  la'k'ase  do't!Eg'a£lk"ase  wii'no£laeno-  25 
xwe.  Wa,  la'k-as-"laene  £ne'x-a:  '  ya,  g'I'ga£ma,  wi'k"asLEla  £ya'- 
lax£idk-asLEse  g*l'ng"lna'iiEmk-asbedzaewa  qa  la'k"asese£ a/lax £nE'm- 
k"asa  wI'sEin  gwa'lasa.  Wa,  he'kas£mesene  £nE'mk"asa  tsteda'x 
gwa'lasa.  La'k'asLene  ha'vasEk  alaL.  Wa,  gi'lkas£Einlxaene 
g'a'xk'asL  qaka'sLEsono  ax'e'dkasLEqene  qak'a'ts  ha'qodkasao-  30 
saq.  Wa,  la'k'asLaxaas  ya'LodkasLEqene  qaxs  he'kas'maene 
a'lek'as  q!ula'.  Wii,  la'k'ats  yi'h'aLElo'ts  la'k'asxos  he'lk" lodEno- 
dza£yex  qEna'sa.  Wa,  la'kasLExae  mo'p!Eiixwa£sk"asLe  £na'las 
he  gwa'laLene.  Wii,  la'k-asLaxaas  qwe'l£idk-asLaqene.  Wa,  la'k'ats 
ax£e'dk-asxe  ma'^maleklwemak'ase,'   qaka£sEii  ma'lex-widaex.  35 

" Wa,  la'k'asEn  ax£edk-asxe  ma£le'  a£yaso'kwatse  gvva'lase  qaka'- 
sEn  a'x£Eqes  la'k-asxe  ma'emalek!wema  qak'a'sEn  e'tlede  ma'le- 
x£wldk-asqene.  Wii,  la'k'asxaEn  ax£a'lllaqene.  Wii,  la'k'asxatlEn 
e'tled  ax£e'dk-asxe  ma£le'  go'g-Egu£yo'se  gwa'lase  qak-fi'sEii 
e't'.ede  a'x£Eqiis  la'k'asxEn  la'kase  ma'lekwasokwa'sa.  Wa,  la'k'a-  40 
sEn  ax£a'lilak-asaq.  Wii,  la'k'asxat!En  he  gwe'x£Idk-asxe  £iiE'me. 
Wa,  laE'mxatlEn  ax^'e'dk^asqene  qak"i,'sEn  ax£e'dk"asex  a;vaso'- 
kwasas,  yik-a'sxe  ma£le'.  Wii.,  la'k'asEii  e'tled  ma'lexewidqene 
Lokwa'se     ma'£malek!wema.       Wii,     la'k-as£EmxaEii     ax£a'lllaqene. 


646  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL 


45  house.  II  Then  1  took  the  hind-feet  of  the  other  one,  |  and  I  chewed 
them  also  with  the  food.  |  Now  I  had  finished  four  mouthfuls.  | 
Now  they  were  on  the  floor  of  the  house.  Then  I  called  my  wife, 
and  I  |  asked  her  to  eat  what  had  been  chewed;  and  she  chewed  it 

50  and  ||  she  ate  it  up.  Deinde  |  in  cubiculum  vocavi  uxorem  meam. 
Deinde  nos  in  lecto  collocavimus.  |  Ego  iacui  ei  in  dextra  parte  et 

55  cum  ea  concubui.  Postquam  |  perfeci,  non  sivi  ||  uxorem  meam  se 
illo  die  commovere  et  sivi  cam  femina  illo  die  distinere  |  el  supinam 
ilia  nocte  recumbere.  Menstruare  quidem  modo  destiterat.  I  Num- 
quain  rursus  menstruavit.  Turn  |  facta  est  praegrians.  Then  she 
had  a  little  boy.  |  She  first  had   a  child  when  I  had  been  married  || 

60  five  winters  to  my  wife;  |  and  now  I  had  this  child,  Midiicd." 
Thus  said  the  chief,  |  speaking  the  Koskimo  language.  | 

At  once  I  went  home,  and  I  was  already  looking  for  |  lizards  on 

65  the  trail  of  Gwadze.  T  found  two — a  ||  female  and  a  male  lizard. 
At  once  |  I  tied  them  together,  chest  to  chest,  and  I  tied  them  to  my 
licit  |  and  put  it  around  my  waist,  and  I  kept  them  on  my  right 
side.  |  I  went  home  to  Newettee.  I  arrived  there  where  |  I  had  left 
my  wife.     For  two  days  I  kept  the  lizards  ||  on  my  waist.     Statim 

45  Wii,  la'k'asEn  ax£e'dk'asEx  a£lEmxLa'£ya  g'6'g'Egu£yo'se  !nE'me 
cpika'sEn  e'tlede  ma'lex£wldqene  Lokvva'se  ma'£malek!wema.  Wa, 
la'k'as  gwa'la,  la'k'as£Emxaene  mo'sgEme  ma'lexusE£makwe  la'k'as 
axe'lkasa.  Wa,  la'k'asEn.  Lel-a'lIlxEn  gEiiE'me.  Wa,  la'k'asEn 
axk' la'lak'asqene    qak'.a'saes    ma'lex£widxe   ma'leg'ikwe.     Wa,  la' 

50  k'asene  ma'lex£widk'asqene.  Wa,  la'kasene  £wllq tesaqene.  Wa, 
la'k'asEn  i.e'ltslalilakasxEn  gEiiE'me.  Wa,  la'kasEiui'x"  kiVlx'£Id- 
k'as  LE£we'ne.  Wa,  he'k'asEn  kii'Lv-'klkase  be'lk!otaga'wa£lIla- 
sEn  gEiiE'me.  Wa,  la'kasEinr'x"  gEX£wi'da.  Wa,  g-I'lk-asemesEn 
gwa'lk'as    gExwa'     LE£we'ne;     wa,    la'k'asEn    k'!e'£yas    £nex-    qa 

55  Le'kidilesEn  gEnE'maxe  Mia'la  qa  o'kwas£mesene  sE'nba  £yfla'laxe 
£na'la  tle'g'Il  le£w§  ne'g'ikwe,  yi'xe  he'kas£maene  a'lekas  gwal 
k!a£le.  Wa,  la'kas  he'heka  e'tled  k'!al£e'da.  Wa,  la'k"as£mene 
qElxk"!ae's£Idk-asa.  Wa,  la'k"as£mene  qE'lxelax-£Id,  yika'tse  ba'ba- 
giimc.     Wa,    a'lkas    qE'lxadEx£idk'asg'anu£xu    la'k'asaex'    sEk'la' 

CO  x£Enxelaxe  ts!E£wu'nxe  ga'lcala  Lokwa'sEn  geiiE'mk'asex.  Wii, 
la'k'as£maeg'in  qE'lxadkatsox  ME'inedex,"  £ne'k"eda  g'i'gama£ye 
la'xes  go'ts!alaena£ye.1 

Wa,  he'x,£ida£mesEn  gax  na'£nakwa.     Wa,  gvva'lEla£mesEn  a'laxa 
gwa'lase  la'xat!rx  i'liis  GwadzE£ye'.     Wa,  Ieu  qla'xa  ma£le',  £nE'ma 

65  ts!Eda'qe,  £nE'ma  bEgwa'nEme  la'xa  gwa'lase.  Wa,  he'x£ida£me- 
sEn  hfi'qodEq  qEn  ya'Lodeq.  Wa,  Ieii  yil£E'hts  la'xEii  wuse'gano, 
Ieii  wuse'x"£Its.  W&,  laE'm  axa'la  la'xEii  he'lk" !odEnodza£ye.  Wa 
Ieii  na'£nakwa  lax  Xu'mdasbe.  Wa,  la£mEn  hx'g'aa  laq,  ylxs 
a'mlexwaEn  gEiiE'me  laq.     Wa,  la  ma£lp !E'nxwa£se  £na'lasa  gwa'- 

i  The  following  is  again  Kw  agul  dialect. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  647 

voluit  |  uxor  mea  ut  secum  luderem.     Deinde  earn  rogavi,  ct  |  "Quan-  70 
do,''  inquam,  "menstrua visti V  sciebam  enim  cam  turn  menstruare.  | 
"Menstruo,"  inquit,  "quattuor  iam  dies."     Deindo,  |  statui  cum  ea 
ilia  nocte  non  coire.  ||  Cum  uxor  mecum  ludere  conaretur,  |  iratum  75 
me  simulavi.     Deindo  duas  noctes  dormii.  |  When   the  lizards  had 
been  on  my  waist    four  days,    j    I   took  a  biscuit   and  chewed  it- 
and  I  took  the  |  lizard  and  cut  off  the   fore-legs  of    the    one,    the 
male.  ||  Then   I   put  thorn   in   with   what  1  had   in  my  mouth    and  SO 
chewed    thorn.     When    I    |   had    done    so,    T    put    it    (what    I   had 
chewed)  down  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  and  I  again  took  a  biscuit  | 
and  bit  off  a  piece;  and  I  cut  off  the  hind-feet  |  of  the  lizard  and  put 
them  in  with  what  1  was  chewing.     When  |  I  had  finished,  I  bit  off 
again  a  piece  of  biscuit;  and  I  cut  off  ||  the  fore-feet  of  the  female  85 
lizard,  and  I  chewed  them  with  the  biscuit,  |  and  I  put  (what  I  had 
chewed)  down  on  the  floor  of  the  house.     Then   1  bit  off  another 
piece  of  |  biscuit,  and  I  cut  off  the  hind-feet  of  the  lizard  and  |  put 
them  in  with  the  biscuit  I  was  chewing.     Now  there  were  therefore  | 
four  piles  of  chewed  biscuit  on  the  floor.  || 

Then  I  called  my  wife  to  come  to  the  place  where  I  was  sitting.  |  90 
She  came  at  once.     I  put  my  arm  around  her,  and  f  gave  her  |  one 
of  the  pieces  of  biscuit.     I  told  her  to  eat  it.  |  She  ate  at  once  the 

la.se  axa'la    la'xEn    qEna'se.     Wa,    he'x,£ida£mesEn   gEnE'me  £nex-  70 
qEinr'x"   ama'lox£w!de.     Wa,   Ieii  wui.a'q;   wa,   Ieh  '"ne'k'a:    "  We'- 
laqwas    e'xEnte,"  qa£xg"in    q!a'LEla£meg"aqexs    e'xEntae.     Wa,    la 
6ne'k-Exs    la'e    mo'p!Enxwa£sa    £na'las    la    e'xEnta.      Wa,    Ieii   lii- 
klwe'masa'masxEn  na'qa£ye  qEii  k-  !e'se  nEXwa'lax-£Id  LE£we'xa  ga.'- 
nuLe.    Wa,  wa'xl£mesEn  gEnE'me  aE'mtq  !En£wa  g'a'xEn;  a'£mesEn  75 
la'wisbolaq.      Wa,    he'tlEn  la    ma£tp!E'nxwa£s    he. 'la    me'xe.      Wa, 
laE'm    mo'p!Enxwa:'so    ma'lasa    gwa'lase  axa'la  la'xgin  qEna'sik"; 
wa,  Ieii    ax£e'dxa  bi'sgito    qEn  ma'lex£wldeq.     Wa,    Ieu  ax£e'dxa 
gwa'lase  qEn    tlo'sodex    e£e'£yasa'sa  £nE'mexa  wI'sEme.     \Va,  Ieu 
a'x£Eqas  la'xEn  la    lia'uisgEinesE-wa   qEn  ma'lex£wideq.     Wa,    lEn  8f) 
gvval  ma'lekwaq;  wa,  Ieu  ax£a'lilaq.     Wa,  lEn  e'tled  ax£e-dxa  bi's- 
g'ite    qEn   e'tlede   qE'mx£wid    laq.     Wa,  Ieii    tlo'sodEX  go'g  r.giV 
£yasa  gwa'lase  qEn  a'x£Eqes  la'xEn  la  ma'lekwasE£wa.     Wa,  la'xae 
gwa'la;  wa,  Ieu  e'tled  q!E'mx£widxa  bi'sg'ite.     Wa,  la'xaEn  t!o's5- 
dEx  e'"o-yasa'sa  tslEda'qe  gwa'lasa  cjeii    ma'lex£wldeq    i.E£wa   bl's-  85 
g-ite.     Wa,    Ieii    e'tled    ax-'a'lllaq.     Wii,  Ieii    e'tled    q!E'mx£widxa 
bi'sg'ite.     Wa,  laxaEii  tlo'sodEX  g'6'g'Egu£yasa  gwa'lase  qEna'x£E- 
qes  la'xEn  la  ma'lekwasE£wa  bi'sg'ita.     Wa,  laE'm  Ewl'£la.     LaEin 
mosgEma  £niExumEgwT'le  ma'leg'Ek"  bi'sg'ita. 

Wa,    Ieii    Le'£lalaxEn    gEnE'me    qa    gTi'xes    la'xEn    klwae'lase.  !Ml 
Wii,  he'x-£ida£mese  g-fi'xa.     Wa,  Ieii  k-!ip!Exo'dEq.    Wa,  Ieii  tsla'sa 
£nE'msgEme   laq.      Wa,    lEn£ne'k'a:     'Hamx-£I'dasxwa  bisg'ite'x.' 
Wa,  he'x,£ida£mese  £wl£la  hamx'£i'dqexs  mo'sgEmae.     Wa,  Ieu  Lei- 


648  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

95  four  pieces.    Then  |  I  called  her  into  my  room  ||  and  barred  the  door. 

Peccavi,  |  nam  uxori  in  sinistra  parte  me  posui.     Deinde  |  cum  uxori 

mea  concuhui.     After  I  had   done  so,  I  spoke  |  and   said,    "O  my 

dear!  don't  wish   to  move  about  this  |  day  and  night;  just  lie  on 

100  your  back  with  legs  extended."     Thus  said  I  ||  to  my  wife.  | 

Then  she  obeyed  me;  and  my  wife  said  that  she  |  guessed  that  I 
was  treating  her  with  medicine,  thai  she  might  have  a  child.  |  Pos- 
tea  menstrua  |  uxoris  meae  desl  ilerunt.  Praegnans  erat  e<  puellam 
5  peperit.  |.Etenim  in  sinistra  parte  jacebam  dum  cum  uxore  ||  con- 
cumbeham.  Quare  infans  erat  puella.  Now  1  |  had  a  child;  and  I 
believe  in  the  medicine,  for  my  wife  never  |  had  had  a  child  for 
eight  winters.  1  |  gave  her  the  medicine  and  she  was  pregnant  at 
10  once  and  when  |  we  had  been  married  nine  winters  we  ||  had  a 
daughter.  | 

The  girl  was  four  months  old  when  my  wife  was  pregnant  again,  | 
and  she  had  another  girl.  |  Now  we  have  been  married  sixteen 
winters,  I  and  my  wife,  |  and  we  have  four  children,  all  girls.  Eight  [| 
15  winters  we  had  no  children.  Now  foi  eight  winters  we  have  had  | 
children.  The  only  reason  why  I  am  sick  at  heart  is  that  the  children 
are  all  |  girls,  for  there  is  no  boy.  [Thus  said  |  T  1st  lEndzid  of  the 
Seaward-Dwellers.]  | 

ts!aleLaq  la'xEn  g"ae'lase.  Wii,  g11£mesEnu£x"  la  liitsla'llla;  le'- 
95  gin  LEne'x"£Id\a  tlexi'lasEn  g'ae'lase.  Wii,  la£mEii  Le'xLeqfdlla, 
qaxg"in  hek'  kii'lx-£idaa'se  gEmxa'gawalllasEn  gEnE'me.  Wa,  lEn 
iiExwa'lax'£Id  le£weii  gEiiEme.  Wa,lEngwala.  Wa,  lEnyiiq!Ega£la. 
Wa,  Ieii  me'k'a:  "£ya,  a'de,  gwa'la  £nex-  cpis  yii'£wixildeL6sxwa 
iialaLex  LF/wa  ganuLex.  A'EmLEs  tle'g'llLoL  £yila'laL,"  me'k'En- 
100  naxEn  gEnE'me. 

Wa,  la  na'nageg-I  ga'xEn.  Wa,  la  me'k'En  gEiiE'maxs  lE£ma'e 
ko'tEn  laEin  pEta'q  qa  bEwe'x£wkles.  Wit,  la£me  gwal  e'xEntEii 
gEnE'me  la'xeq.  Wit,  la£me  bEwe'x£w!da.  Wa,  la  £ma'£yol£Itsa 
ts!a'ts!EdagEme.  Qii'Laxgln  gEmxagawa£l!leg-axg'in  lek'  nExwa'- 
5  lax-£Id  LE£wE'n  gEnE'me,  la'gilas  ts la'ts lEdagEme.  Wii,  la£mE'n 
xu'ngwadEx£Ida.  Wii,  la£niEn  o'ci!iis£Idxa  pEta'  qaxg'in  hewa'xek* 
dewc'x  \vi<liimasxEn  gEnE'maxa  ma£lgu£na'l£Enxe  ts!E£wu'nxa.  Wa, 
lEn  patle'dsq;  lii  he'x-£idaEm  bEwe'x£w!da.  Wa,  Ieu  na'£nEma- 
x£Enxelaxa  ts!E£wu'nxe  ha'yasEkalaxgin  la'g-anu£xu  xu'ngwa- 
10  dEx£itse  ts  la'ts  lEdagEme. 

Wa,  he'£mis  a'le'£s  mo'sgEinekileda  ts  la'ts  !E<lagEmaxs  la'e  e't!e- 
(Ieii  gEnE'me  bEwe'x£wkla.  Wii,  laE'mxae  ts  la'ts  lEdagEina.  Wa, 
l;i'nu£x"  c[!aLlax£E'nxagogwIlaxa  tslE£wii'nxe  gak'a'ia  le-'weh  gE- 
nE'me. Wii,  la  mo'kiin  sa'sEine  tsle'daxsii.  Ma£lgu£na'l£Enxa  tslE- 
15  Hvu'nxe  k- lea's  sa'sEma.  Wii,  lanu£xu  ma£lgii£na'l£Enxa  tslE£wu'nxe 
la  sii'sEmnokwa.  Wii,  le'x-a£mes  tslEnE'msEn  na'qa£yaxs  £na'xwa- 
£mae  tsle'daqEn  sa'sEine,  yixs  klea'sae  ba'baguma.  [£ne'k-e  Tla'- 
t  lEnts  ledasa  l la'L lasiqwala.] 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  649 

Birth 

The  woman  has  not  had  a  husband  for  a  long  time,  when  she  is  1 
with  child;  |  and  when  she   thinks   that  she  is  with  child,  both  of 
them  at  once  |  are  careful.  | 

Her  husband  takes  nothing  that  he  sees  ||  that  is  hurt  by  a  man,  5 
or  a  bird  with  blood  on  its  head,  or  |  a  seal  with  blood  on  its  head 
or  with  singed  hair.     He  and  |  his  wife  take  a  little  of  it,  and  hide 
it  at  a  dry  place  under  j  a  cedar-tree.     They  leave  it  there  until  the 
child  of  the  woman  is  born,  j  I  have  forgotten  this.     When  he  first 
wipes  off  with  soft  ||  shredded  cedar-bark  the  blood  of  whatever  be  10 
sees,  he  carries  it  to  his  house;  |  and  when  his  wife  is  lying  down,  he 
asks  her  to  sit  upon  the  floor;  |  and  when  she  sits  there,  the  man 
begins  at  the  back  of  his  wife's  head,  |  holding  the  bloody  cedar- 
bark,  and  passes  it  down  |  her  back;  and  as  he  is  passing  down  the 
cedar-bark,  he  says,  ||  "This  would 'happen  to  you."     He  does  this  15 
four  times,  |  passing  the  bloody  cedar-bark  down  her  back,  and  says 
four  times,  "This  |  would  happen  to  you"   (he  means  to  the  child 
that  she  is  bearing);  and  when  |  this  is  done,  he  goes  and  hides  it 
at  a  dry  place  under  a  cedar-tree.  | 

The  man  also  takes  the  tail  of  a  deer,  and  [|  the  ends  of  the  four  20 
arms  of  an  octopus,  and  the  tip  of  the  tail  of  a  snake,  |  and  the  feet  of 

Birth 

Wa,  k'!est!a  gala  liiwadeda    tstedaqaxs    lae    bEwex-wida.      Wa,  1 
gil'mese  oq!us£Id  laEm    bEwex£w!deda    tstedaqaxs  lae   hex£idaEm 
£naxwa  aek'ila. 

Wa,  laEm  leleas  k'!es  ax^etsosa  la'wiinEme  laxes  dox£waLEle  laxa 
yilkwa£yasa    bEgwanEine   LE£wa  Elkumala    fcs!ek!wa;    wa,    liemiisa  5 
megwate    Elkumala  loxs  ts!Ex-asEwae.       Wa,  ha-staEm  ax£edaatse 
LE'"wis  gEiiEme,  yixa  laewuiiEme,  qa£s  lii   qliilahclsaq  laxa    lEinwa- 
ga£ya  welkwe.     Wa,  la£me  hex'sal  gwesLe  lalaal  lax  miiyoldEmLasa 
tstedaqe.     Wa,  hexoLEn   LlElewesoxs  g'IPmae  dex"£Itsa  qloyaakwe 
k'adzEkwa  lax  Elkwases  dogidaxs  gaxae  dalaq  laxes  gokwe.     Wa,  10 
g-il£mese  qElgwile  gEUEmasExs  lae  axkMalaq  qa  klwag'aliles.     Wa, 
g-il£mese  klwaelExs  laeda  bEgwanEine  g-jiglLEla  lax  5xLaata£yases 
gEiiEme    daxsgEmexa    El£Elkula    k'adzEkwa,  qa£s    lanaxwe    haxEla 
lax  odzoxsdE£yases    gEiiEme.      Wii,  la£me    eneg"EtEwexs    lae    nasa 
k"adzEkwe;     "YuEms  heyolaxsdox."     Wa,  la£me  mSplEna  noxnno-  15 
kwasa  El£Elkida  k'adzEkwa.     Wii,  laxae  moplEna  Miek'a:     "YuEms 
heyolaxsdox,"    laxa    boxwa£yas    gEnEmas    noxusos.     A\':i,  gil£mese 
gwfdExs  lae  qlulalElsaq  lax  lEm£waga£yasa  welkwe. 

Wii,  he£mis  iixsosa   bEgwanEme    dayoxsda£yasa    gewase,     LE£wa 
mowe  dzedzElEinxsidzesa    t!Eqwa,    LE£wa    6ba£yas    oxsda£yasa    se-  20 


(550  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  I  imi.  ANN.  3S 

22  a  toad.  All  these  he  keeps;  |  and  he  passes  them  over  his  wife  when 
she  gives  birth  to  the  child.  | 

And  when  his  wife  has  been  with  child  for  nine  months,  the  man  | 

25  walks  continually.  He  goes  into  the  house  II  not  fast ;  but  when  he 
goes  out,  he  jumps  |  out.  | 

And  when  his  wife  feels  that  she  is  going  to  give  birth  to  the  child, 
he  asks  |  an  old  woman  to  act  as  midwife  for  her  and  to  take  care  of 

30  her  .  |  And  when  the  old  woman  comes,  she  at  once  asks  ||  the  woman 
to  lie  on  her  back,  knees  up,  with  spread  legs.  |  When  she  does  so, 
the  old  woman  feels  of  her  |  abdomen  [to  ascertain]  the  position 
of  the  child.  She  takes  |  perch-oil  and  rubs  her  hands  with  much 
of  it,  and  she  rubs  over  |  the  abdomen  of  the  woman  from  below 

35  the  breastbone  ||  to  the  groins.  After  she  has  done  so  she  sits  still  [ 
and  waits.  The  man  meanwhile  is  running  about  quickly.  |  He 
goes  very  slowly  when  he  enters  a  j  house,  and  he  is  very  fast  when 
he  comes  out.     Now  the  old  |  woman  takes  the  ends  of  the  tentacles 

40  of  the  octopus  and  the  II  deer-tail  and  the  snake-tail  and  the  toad- 
feet,  |  and  also  four  chitons;  and  she  takes  four  |  shells  of  (medium- 
sized)  clams,  and  puts  them  down  next  to  the  fire.  |  First  she  takes  the 
tongs  and  picks  up  the  deer-tail  |  and  puts  it  on  the  fire.     When  the 

2  I  Ikiuc;  wii,  he£misa  g'og'Egiiyasa  wuq'.iise.  Wii,  he£staEin  axelaxuse, 
qa£s  noyoLexes  gEiiEme  qo  mayoHdLo. 

Wa,  giPmese  helogwile  gEUEinasexs  lae  hemEnala£meda  bEgwa- 
nEme  la    yax-i£lala    qasa.     Wa,    g'il£mese   laeL   laxa   g'dkwaxs  lae 

25  k'  !es  yineLExs  lae  laei.a.  Wa,  g'il£mese  g'axawulsExs  lae  dzElx'E- 
wElsa. 

Wii,  gil£mese  p  !ep  lExwele  gEnEmasexs  lae  sixk'  lalaxa  mamayfd- 
tsllaenoxwe  q  lulyax"  tslEilaqa  qa  las  mamayultsllax  gEnEmas. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  lada  qlulyakwe  tslEdaqExs  lae  hex£idaEin  axk-!alaxa 

30  ts!Edaqe  qa  t!exlfaliles  k'losala;  wa,  he£mis  qa  £yilales.  Wa,  g'il- 
Emese he  gwaeleda  tslEclaqaxs  lae  p!ex£wideda  qlulyakwe  ts!E(hlqex 
tEk'Ias  lax  gwaedzasasa  glnanEme.  Wa,  he£mis  la  ax£edaatsexa 
dzeklwise,  qa£s  qlfilqlEltslanEndesa  qlenEine,  qa£s  la  LExultsEmes 
lax    tEk'lasa    ts'.Edaqe    g'ayabala    lax    bEnba£yas    LlEmaklubanas 

35  lag'aa  lax  na£xwas.  Wa.  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  sElt!alila.  Wa, 
la£me  olastogwalila.  Wa,  laEniLeda  bEgwanEine  alax£id  la  yax'i- 
£lalaxs  qflsae.  Wa,  la£me  Lomax-£Id  laLal  sEltalaxs  lae  laeL  laxa 
g'okwe,  qa£s  altlEqElexs  g'iixae  etEwulsa.  Wa,  la£meda  qlulya- 
kwe ts!Edaq  ax£edxa  dzedzElEms!dza£yasa  tEqlwa  LE£wa  doyoxs- 
da£yasa    gewase,  LE£wa  6xsdE£yasa    selEme,  LE£wa   g"6g-lguyowasa 

40  wiiqlase,  wa,  he£misa  mosgEine  qlaniisa.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  mowex- 
La  xftlaetsa  g'aweqlaiiEme  qa£s  mExEnolisEles  laxa  lEgwlle.  Wa, 
he£mis  gil  ax£etsoseda  tsIesLala  qa£s  k*!ip!edes  lilxa  doyoxsda- 
£yasa  gewase,  qa£s  aaxLales  laxes  lEgwlle.     Wa,  gil£mese  ts!Ex-£I- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  I',,")] 

hair  begins  to  burn,  ||  she  puts  the  burnt  hair  into  one  of  the  j  clam- 
shells. When  she  thinks  it  is  enough,  she  passes  the  |  deer-tail  up 
and  down  the  back  of  the  woman,  who  is  sitting  up.  |  She  does  this 
four  times;  and  she  says  four  times,  |  "This  would  happen  to  you;" 
and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  throws  it  into  the  ||  fire.  She  does  this  50 
with  all  the  other  things;  and  when  they  |  all  have  been  burnt  to  a 
crisp,  she  pours  some  water  on  the  remains  of  the  deer-tail,  j  After 
doing  this,  she  stirs  it,  and  then  she  lets  |  the  woman  drink  it.  Then 
she  takes  the  burnt  tentacles  |  of  the  octopus  and  pours  some  wat  cl- 
over them,  stirs  them,  [|  and  gives  it  to  the  woman  and  lets  her  drink  55 
it.  | 

Then  she  takes  some  perch-oil,  pours  a  little  of  it  on  the  |  burnt 
snake-tail,  and  she  does  the  same  with  the  |  burnt  toad-feet.  She 
stirs  it,  so  that  it  forms  a  paste,  |  and  rubs  it  on  the  stomach  of  the 
woman,  first  the  ||  snake  and  then  the  toad,  so  that  her  stomach  is  60 
blackened.  |  When  this  is  done,  she  takes  water  and  pours  it  on  the  I 
burnt  chiton,  and  stirs  it  until  it  is  watery.  When  [  the  birth- 
pains  come  often,  the  old  |  woman  takes  the  chiton  water  and  gives 
it  to  the  woman  to  drink;  ||  and  after  drinking  all  of  this,  she  waits  to  65 
see  what  is  going  to  happen.  When  |  the  pains  come  in  quick 
succession,  |  the  old  woman  pulls  up  her  petticoat  and  places  her 


deda  hfibEsas  lae  axtslalas  tslax'motas  habEsas  laxa  £nEinexi,a  15 
xalaesa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  k'otaq  laEm  helaxs  lae  nox£\v!tsa  tslax-- 
mote  doyoxsdesa  gewase  lax  awlg'a£yasa  tslEdaqaxs  klwaelae. 
Wa,  laEinxae  moplEnaxs  naas.  Wa,  laxae  mdplEna  mek'a:  "Yu- 
Ems  heyolaxsdSx."  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  tslEXLEndEq  laxes 
lEgwile.  Wii,  la  he£staEm  gwex"£ldxa  waokwe.  Wa,  g'il£mese  Mia-  50 
xwa  la  tslolkiixs  lae  guqlEqasa  £wape  laxa  ts!5ts!almote  doyoxs- 
desa gewase.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwal  xwetaqexs  lae  naqamats  laxa 
tslEdaqe.  Wa,  la£me  etled  ax£edxa  tslotslahnotasa  dzedzElEmbal- 
ts!ana£yasa  tEq!wa,  cpi^s  guq!Eqesa  £wa.pe  laq.  Wii,  laxae  xwetle- 
dEq.     Wii,  laxae  ts!as  laxa  tslEdaqe,  qa  nax£kleseq.  55 

Wii,  lii  ax£ed  laxa  dzeklwise,  qaes  xaLlaqe  guqlEqas  lax  ts!o- 
tslalmotas  5xsdE£yasa  selEme.  Wii,  laxae  heEm  gwex"£ldxa 
ts!ots!almotas  g'og'Egiiyasa  wuqliise.  Wa,  la  xwetledEq  qa.  gEn- 
k'es.  Wii,  lii  dzEx'sEmts  lax  tEk'lasa  tslEdaqe.  HeEm  g'aleda 
selEme.  Wii,  lii  mak'ileda  wflqlasaq.  Wii,  a£mis  la  tslole  tEk!iis.  (in 
Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  £wape  qa£s  guqlEqes  lax  ts!6- 
tslalmotasa  qlaniise.  Wii,  lii  xwetledEq  qa  £wapales.  Wii.  gil- 
£mese  nEnxwaakiile  sex"sex"aena£yasa  ginanEmaxs  laeda  qlulyakwe 
tslEdiiq  fix£edxa  q!ana£stala  £wapa  qa£s  naqamases  laxa  tslEdaqe. 
Wii,  gil£mese  £wl£la  nax£Idqexs  lae  etled  olastogwallla.  Wa,  g*il-  65 
£mese  Lomax'£Id  la  nEiixwaakule  sex-sex*aena£yasa  g'inanF.maxs  lae 
nexostodeda    qlulyakwe    tslEdaqxes    saxsda£ye,    qa£s    [dzexwalllexs 


652  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.ss 

68  legs  I  on  the  floor  as  she  sits  down.  She  takes  much  soft  shredded 
cedar-bark  and  |  places  it  between  her  knees;  and   after   this  has 

70  been  done,  ||  she  calls  the  woman  to  sit  on  her  knees.  |  The  woman 
has  her  legs  outside  of  the  thighs  of  the  old  |  woman,  and  the  old 
woman  puts  her  arms  around  her.  The  |  old  woman  puts  her  arms 
around  the  waist  of  the  woman;  and  when  the  child  is  about  to  be 

75  born,  |  the  old  woman  blows  down  each  side  of  the  neck  ||  of  the 
woman;  and  after  the  child  has  been  born,  she  tries  to  get  the  | 
afterbirth;  and  when  it  does  not  come  quickly,  she  takes  a  small 
dish  |  and  places  it  in  front  of  the  woman,  and  she  puts  her  finger 
down  her  throat  |  until  she  vomits.     Then  the  afterbirth  comes  out.  | 

80  Then  the  woman  moves  away,  and  they  call  her  husband.  ||  As  soon 
as  he  comes,  they  take  a  knife,  and  twisted  cotton  thread  |  with 
which  they  tie  the  umbilical  cord  of  the  child.  |  After  this  has  been 
done,  they  cut  it  off;  and  when  it  is  <>lf,  they  take  a  washtub  |  and 
pour  it  half  full  of  water.     Then  the  old  |  woman  puts  her  left  foot 

85  into  it,  and  ||  she  places  the  child  on  it  so  that  it  sits  on  the  instep,  | 
while  she  is  holding  it  with  her  left  hand.  She  washes  it  with  the 
right  hand;  |  and  when  this  is  -done,  she  takes  soft  shredded  cedar- 
bark  |  and  wipes  the  child's  body  with  it.  After  this  is  done,  she 
takes  red  ocher  |  and  puts  a  little  in  its  mouth  in  order  to  make  its 


68  k!waelae.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  qlenEme  q!oyaaku  k'SdzEkwa,  qa£s 
ax£oliles  liix    awagawa£yases    okwiix'a£ye.     Wii,  g'il£mese    gwiil£ali- 

70  Iexs  lae  Le£lalaxa  tstedaqe,  qa  liis  k!wak-ax-eq.  Wa,  la£ine  Lle- 
L!asot!Ena£ye  g'og'Eguyawasa  tstedaqe  lax  ewanolg-a£yasa  q!iilya- 
kwe  ts!Edaqa.  Wa,  la£me  k  ip!Exiiwa£yeda  tslEdaqaq.  Wa,  lada 
qiulyakwe  tslEdaq  k'iboyEwexa  tslEdaqe.  Wii,  g'il£mcse  sex-£ideda 
g'inanEmaxs  lae  poxwots!odeda  qiulyakwe  tslEdaqEx  £wax-sanolxa- 

75  wa£yasa  tstedaqe.  Wa,  g"il£mese  lawayeda  glnaiiEmaxs  lae  laloLlaxa 
maene.  Wa,  gil£mes§  k-  !es  gEyol  g'axExs  lae  ax£etsE£weda  lalogume, 
qa£s  la  k'figEmlllas  laxa  ts  lEdaqe.  Wii,  lii  gElx£witses  q  Iwiiq  Iwax'ts  !a- 
na£ye.  Wii,  g'Il£mese  hox£widExs  lae  lawiiyeda  maene.  Wii,  g'il£mese 
lawaxs  lae  Lequlilxa  tslEdiicje.    Wa,  la£me  Le£lalasE£we  la£wunEmas. 

80  Wii,  gil£mese  g-axExs  lae  ax£edxa  k-  lavvayowe  LE£wa  mEdEkwe  yawa- 
bEdzowa.  Wii,  he£mis  la  yIl£Idxats!EyoxLa£yasaginanEme.  Wa,g"il- 
'mese  gwfdExs  lae  t!5ts!EdEq.  Wa,  g'il£mese  lawaxs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!a- 
ts  !e,  qa£s  guxts  !5desa  k'oxsta  £wiip  laq.  Wa,  la£me  dzexusteda  q  !iilya- 
kwe    tslEdiixses    gEmxoltsidza£ye     g'oguyo    laq.      Wa,    he£mis    la 

85  q !El£aLElodaatsesa  ginanEme,  qa  klwales  lax  awlg'altsldza£yasexs 
lae  dalases  gEmxolts!ana£ye  liiqexs  lae  kwasases  helk!ots!ana£ye 
laq.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxa  qloyaakwe  k'adzEkwa, 
qa£s  deg-it!edes  laq.  Wii,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  gugum- 
yime,   qa£s    tobEnses    laq,    qa    halabales  k'!ix,£itsa  £yax"same  g-aes 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  653 

bowels  move,  so  that  the  bad  things  ||  in  the  belly  of  the  child  come  90 
out;  and  when  this  is  done,  she  puts  an  |  old  blanket  around  the 
child.     Now,  if  it  is  a  boy,  it  is  called  Tsaxis,  |  because  it  is  born 
at  Tsaxis,  and  that  name  is  given  to  him.  ) 

When  the  child  is  ten  months  old,  straps  are  put  on  him.     Then 
his  father  invites  |  his  tribe,  and  all  the  men  go  into  his  house.  ||  ■ 
They  sit  down  and  watch  the  singeing  of  the  hair  of  the  child;  for  95 
they  put  |  a  comb  under  the  hair  of  the  child,  take  dried  split  cedar- 
wood,  |  and  light  the  end  in  the  fire.     With  these  |  they  singe  off  the 
hair  of  the  child.     Wlien  it  is  all  off,  |  they  take  the  knee-straps  of 
skin  and  put  them  around  the  knees,  ||  and  the  ankle-straps  of  skin  100 
arc  put  around  the  ankles,  and  |  the  arm-straps  are  put  on  and  the 
wrist-straps.     When  this  is  done,  |  they  put  red  ocher  on  the  child's 
head;  and  after  this  is  done,  they  |  put  a  silk  handkerchief  around  the 
head.     Then  all  the  |  men  paint  themselves  with  ocher;  and  after  all 
this  is  done,  II  the  father  gives  a  silk    handkerchief  to  each  |  man.  5 
After  the  father  has  given  a  silk  handkerchief  to  them,  he  |  says, 
"  This  is  given  by  my  child  Deyad."     He  is  no  longer  called  |  Tsaxis.   | 

I  have  forgotten  about  the  afterbirth  of  the  child,  which  is  kept  in 
the  house  for  ||  four  days.     Then  the  man  takes  |  yew-wood  and  cuts  10 
one  end  of  it  so  that  it  is  sharp  like  |  a  needle.     It  is  four  finger- 
lax  tEkMasa  g'inanEme.     Wa,  g'il£mese     gwala   lae    q  lEiiepsEmtsa  90 
p !Elp telxamadzEse  laq.     Wa,  la£me  LegadEs  Tsaxise  yixs  babagu- 
mae,  qaxs  hae  mayuLEine  Tsaxise.     Wa,  la£me  yala  LeqElasos. 

Wa,  lii  helogwllaxs  lae  kunxwedEkwa,  yixs  lae  Le£lales  ompaxes 
g-okulote,  qa  las  ewIelaeL  lax  gokwasxa  bEgwanEmx"sa.  Wa,  la£me 
£naxwa  k!usemllxa  la  ts  LEX'iltsEmdEX  sE£yas,  yixs  axabayaeda  95 
xEgEinax  sE£yasa  g'lnanEmaxs  lae  ax£etsE£wa  lEnixwa  xok11  k!wa£x- 
Lawa.  Wa,  la£mese  mex'bEntso£  laxa  lEgwIle.  Wa,  hemiis  la 
tslEX'EltsEmdayox  sE'yiisa  g'inanEme.  Wa,  g-ll£mese  £wl£laxs  lae 
&xeetsEeweda  qeqEX'p  !eg-a£ye  k!uts!a,  qa£s  qeqEX"p  legindayowe  laq. 
Wa,  laxae  qeqEx'sIdzEntsosa  k lilts !e  qeqExsidza£ya,  LE£wa  qe-  100 
c[Ex'SEyap  !a£ye,  LE£wa  qeqEx'ts!ana£ye.  Wii,  g"Il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
qobEltsEintsE£we  x"omsasesa  giimse.  Wa,  gIFmese  gwalExs  lae 
c[Ex-imtsosa  silk'e  lalaxwiwaeya.  Wa,  g'ih'mese  gwalExs  lae  £naxwa 
gums£ideda  £naxwa  bebEgwanEma.  Wii,  gil'mese  £naxwa  gwalExs 
lae  ompase  yax£wltsa  £nalmEme  silk-  lalaxwiwe6  laxa  maxwa  5 
bebEgwanEma.  Wa,  glHmese  £wllxtosa  silk'e  laElalaxw!wa£yaxs  lae 
£nekeda  ompe:  "  Hasdoxwa  DeyadexEu  xunokwex.  La£mox  gwal 
TsaxisLa. ' ' 

HexoLEn  LElewesE£wa  maenasa  ginanEine  yixs  g-il£mae  mop !eii- 
xwa£se    £nalas     axel     laxa    g'okwaxs    laeda    bEgwanEme    ax£edxa  10 
LlEmqle  qa£s    k'!ax£widex    apsbaeya    qa    exbes,  qa  yuwes  gwex'sa 


654  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ass.  ss 

widths  I  long.     When   he    finishes    what    he    is   making,    he    takes 
twisted  |  sinew  of  the  black  bear  and  the  afterbirth,  in  the  evening, 

15  and  he  pushes  ||  the  point  of  the  yew  peg  into  its  hollow  end,  where 
the  |  umbilical  cord  has  been  cut  off.     When  it  is  three  |  finger- 
widths  in,  he  takes  the  |    twisted  sinew  and  ties  it  on.     He  ties  the 
•  end  of  the  |   afterbirth  around  the  cud  of    the   thing  that  has  been 

20  pushed  in  and  that  is  like  a  needle  of  yew-wood  in  ||  the  hollow 
end  of  the  afterbirth.     He  ties  it  as  firmly  as  possible,  |  and  it  is 

in  this  way:  |  r- 

When  this  is  ~~    x       X   done,  he  takes  an  old  mat  and  |  wraps 

it   around    it.  J      J  Late   at  night,   when   everybody  is 

asleep  |  in  the  —       village,  the  man   himself   takes  the 

25  clam-digging  stick  ||  and  the  afterbirth  that  has  been  tied  up,  and 
he  digs  a  hole  at  a  place  where  |  all  the  men  walk  on  the  street, 
lie  |  just  wishes  the  old  mat  containing  the  afterbirth  to  fit  into 
the  j  hole  that  he  digs,  and  he  puts  it  into  it.     He  wants  it  to  be 

30  one  span  |  deep  under  the  surface  of  the  soil.  ||  Then  he  covers  it  up 
and  levels  down  the  |  soil.  He  takes  a  bucket  with  water  and  pours 
it  |  over  it,  so  that  it  can  not  be  seen  that  the  soil  has  been  moved. 
When  this  has  been  done,  I  he  goes  home.  I    .  .   . 


12  qlEnayowe.  Wa,  lit  moduli  laxEiis  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  yix 
ewasgEinasas.  Wa,  gilmiese  gwale  axa£yasexs  lae  ax£edxa  mEdE- 
kwe  atlEmsa   L!a£ye    LE£wa   maenexa   la    dzaqwa.     Wa,  la  leiile- 

15q!Eqas  ex'ba£yasa  LlEmqle  lax  kwaxuba£yas  g-ax-saasas  t!ots!En- 
da£ye  laxa  ts  !EyoxLa£ye.  Wa,  gil£niese  la  yuduxudEn  laxEiis 
q!\vaq!wax-ts!ana£yex  yixa  lalaeltsa  LlEmqlaxs  lae  ax£edxa  medE- 
kwe  atlsma  qa  yil£aLElodes.  Wa,  la£me  yaLots  lax  oba£yasa 
maenaxs  lae  LlEiigeLEle  6bacyasa  he  gwex's  q!Ena£yo  LlEmqla  lax 

20  lolp!EgE£yasa  maene.  Wa,  lamie  lalak!Qt!aqexs  lae  yil£aLElodEq 
g-S  gwaleg-a  {fig.). 

\Y;i.  giPmese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  k'  !ak'  lobana,  qa£s  qlEnep- 
sF.mdi's  laq.  Wa,  gil'mese  gala  la  ganoLExs  lae  £naxwa  mex£e- 
deda  g'okulaxs  lae  xaniax£Ida£meda  bEgwaiiEme  ax£edxa  k'!ilakwe 

25  LE£wa  qlEuepsEmala  maenaxs  lae  qas£ida,  qa£s  la  £lap!lda  laxa 
hemEnalaeme  qayatsa  £naxwa  bebEgwanEmaxa  t!Exila.  Wa,  la£me 
ukiii  Enex"  qa  heldzEqElesa  k'  !ak'  lobanasgEinala  maene  laxes 
Elapa£yaxs  lae  axbEtEiits  laq.  Wa,  la£me  km  £nex'  qa  £iiEinp!En- 
g'lkElIsexa    d/.Eqwa  laxEns    q!\vac[  !waxts!ana£yex  ylx   £walabEtEl- 

30  dzasas;  yixs  lae  dzEmegEudEq.  Wa,  giPmese  la  £nEinakileda 
dzEqwiixs  lae  ax£edxa  ewabEts!ala  nagatsla,  qaxs  la  guqElsElas 
laq  qa  k'  !eses  awulx'Es  yawenkwa  dzEqwa.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs, 
g'axae  na£nakwa  laxes  g'okwe.    .    . 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  655 

Now  I  will  talk  about  the  woman,  the  wife  of  ||  the  man,  when  she  35 
gives   birth  to  her  child.     Then  the  man  heats  |   some  water;  and 
when  it  is  hot,  he  |  puts  a  little  oil  into  it,  and  gives  it  in  a  spoon  to 
his  wife.  j  He  puts  in  front  of  her  the  hot  water  and  the  oil,  and  |  his 
wife  continues  to  drink  it,  ||  that  the  two  "pillows"  and  the  blood  of  40 
the  womb  may  come  off.  |   Much  soft  cedar-bark  is  also  given  by  the 
man  to  his  wife   |   to  sit  on,  and  when  it  is  soaked  with  blood  |  he 
changes  it.     Then  he  puts   the  bloody  cedar-bark  |    into  a  basket. 
When  the  "pillows"  come  out  and    ||  the  blood,  and   the   child  is  45 
four  days  old,  |  the  man  washes  his  wife  in  hot  water,  and  she  wipes 
her  body  with  |  soft  shredded  cedar-bark:  and  after  doing  so,  |  she 
throws  the  cedar-bark  that  had  been  used  as  a  towel  on  the  other  | 
cedar-bark  in  the  basket.     Then  the  man  goes  up  to  the  ||  rear  of  the  50 
hcuse,  and  hangs  up  behind  the  post  the  basket  with  the  cedar- 
bark.  I  There  he  leaves  it  to  dry.     After  this  has  been  done,  |  he 
cuts  off  the  hair  of  his  wife  down  to  her  neck.  |  When  the  umbilical 
cord  comes  off  from  the  child,  and  he  wishes  |  the  child  to  become 
rich,  he  ties  up  the  cord  and  puts  it  ||  into  a  box  in  which  he  keeps  55 
his  expensive  copper.     Therefore  |  the  child  will  be  able  to  obtain 
coppers  easily  when  he  becomes  really  a  man.  |  That  is  all  about 
this.  I 

Wa,    la£mesEn    gwagwex-s£fdal    laxa     tstedaqe,    yix     gEiiEmasa  35 
bEgwanEmaxs  lae   mayuHda.     Wa,  la£me  ts!Elxustagileda  bEgwa- 
nEmaxa     -wape.      Wa,    g-il£mese     ts!Elxustax-£Ideda    £wapaxs    lae 
xai. lastEiitsa  L!e£na  laq.     Wa,  lii  tslasa  k'atslEnaqe  laxes  gEHEme. 
Wa,  la  hangEmlllasa  6wabEts lalaxa  ts!Elxusta    LEewa  L!e£na.     Wa, 
la£me  hemEnalag*ilil£me   gEnEmas  £yosaq,  qa    halabales   lawakillsa  40 
maltsEme  qex'qEnolitsa  ginanEme  LE-'wa  Elkwa  lax  batslas.     Wa, 
ke£mis  la  q  !enEm  ts  lEwesa   bEgwaiiEmaxes   gEiiEma  q  !enEme  cj  !o- 
yaax"  k"adzEk\va  qa  klwaxLawesos.    Wa,  g'ih'mese  LEX£Itsa  Elkwaxs 
lae  Llayoq.     Wii,  lanaxwe  lExtslots  laxa  lExaeyeda  EleElkiila  k'adzE- 
kwa.      Wa,    g'il£mese    lawiyeda    qex'qEnolisasa    g'inanEme    LEEwa  45 
Elkwaxs   lae  mop !Enxwa£se   enalasa  ginanEmaxs  lae  ts!Elqwet!ede 
gEiiEmasa  bEgwanEme    laxa  ts!Elxusta  ewapa.     Wa,  la   deg-it!itsa 
qloyaakwe    k-adzEkwa    laxes    ok!wina£ye.     Wa,    g'll£mese  gwatexs 
lae    lExtsloyEwe  deg"idanas    kiidzEk"    laxa   okuya£yasa     EleElkiila 
k*adzEku  lExtsla  laxa  lExa£ye.     Wa,  leda  bEgwanEme  lag'osta  lax  50 
ogwiwalllases    g'okwe,    qa£s    la    texll£waLElotsa    k'adzEgwats!e    liix 
awap!a£yasa  Lame.     Wa,  la£me   lEmxwaq.     Wa.  g-ilemese  gwabsxs 
lae    tsEx-£idEx    sE£yases    gEiiEine,  qa    tsetsEg  inolxawakwes.     Wa, 
la£me    lawaye    ts!EyoxLa£yas    xiinokwas.     Wa,    g-il£mese    £nex-    qa 
q!eq  lades    lae    yiltslEmdEq     laxa     ts!EyoxLa£ve     qa£s    la    g'itslots  55 
laxa    g'ildase    g'ltslEwatses    la£xula    L!aqwa.     Wa,    he£mis  lagilas 
holEmale  xunokwiixa    Llaqwaxs    lae  alax,£ld  la  bEgwanEma.     Wa, 
la£me  gwalwisLa  laxeq. 


656  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  86 

Treatment  of  Infants 

1  Washing  the  New-Born  Child. — When  the  child  is  born,  |  it  is 
taken  out  of  the  hole  by  the  midwife,  who  cuts  |  the  navel-string 
after  she  has  tied  the  end  with  twisted  yellow  cedar-bark.  She  | 
5  takes  a  wash-basin  and  pours  cold  water  into  it.  She  ||  puts  four 
stones,  not  very  large,  into  the  fire.  Then  the  woman  takes  |  well- 
rubbed  yellow  cedar-bark,  and  with  it  she  wipes  the  body  of  the 
child,  |  so  that  what  the  midwife  calls  the  "tallow"  of  the  body  of 
the  child  |  that  is  just  born  comes  off;  and  after  she  has  wiped  the 
body  of  the  child,  she  takes  |  a  pair  of  tongs  and  picks  up  one  of  the 

10  red-hot  stones;  and  ||  the  midwife  speaks  to  the  red-hot  stone,  and  | 
says:  "I  pray  to  you,  Supernatural-One,  to  give  to  our  darling  |  the 
power  to  withstand  sickness."  | 

And  after  she  has  finished  her  speech,  she  puts  (the  red-hot  stone)  | 

15  into  the  wash-basin  of  the  child.  Then  she  takes  another  ||  red-hot 
stone,  speaks  to  it  also,  and  |  says,  as  she  holds  the  child  in  the  left 
hand,  and  |  the  tongs  in  the  right  hand:  "I  pray  to  you,  Super- 
natural-One, |  that  the  curses  of  those  who  are  jealous  |  of  the 
name  of  his  father  may  not  harm  him."  || 

20  And  after  her  speech  is  at  an  end,  she  puts  (the  stone)  into  the  same 
place  where  she  put  down  the  first  one  |  she  prayed  to.     Then  she 

Treatment  of  Infants 

1  Washing  the  New-Born  Child.  — He£mexs  galae  mayol£idayoweda  gi- 
nfuiEnie,  wii,  lii  q'.ElElelEmsa  mamayoltslla  tslEdaqa  qa£s  t!ots!Eiidex 
tsh'.yuxi.a-yasexs  lae  gwal  yiLoyodEq  visa  medEkwe  dexwa,  wa,  la 
a£xeedxa  kwadzatsle  qa£s  guxts!odesa  £wiipe  wflda£sta  laq.  Wii,  lii 
.")  mdsgEma  k'les  awa  t  lesEm  axxala  laxa  lrcgwile.  Wii,  la£me  ax£ededa 
ts'.Edaqaxa  aek"  laakwe  qloyaak"  dexwa  qa£s  deg'ites  laxa  g  inanEme 
cja  ewi£lawesa  gwE£yasa  mamayoltslla  yasEx£unesa  ginaiiEmaxs  g'alae 
mayoLEma.  Wii,  g'ihmese  gwal  deg"itaxa  ginaiiEmaxs,  lae  ftx£edxa 
tslesLfila   qa£s   k!i])!ldes  laxa    xTxsEmala  tlesEma.    Wii,  la  yaq!E- 

10  g'a£leda  mamayoltslla  tslEdaq  laxa  x'lxsEmala  t!esEina.  Wa,  la 
£nek-a:  "  Wii,  la£mEn  hawaxEloL  nawalak"  qa£s  lasaosases  k"!ets!e- 
na£yos  labEdExusa  ts!ets!ax'q!olEme  laxg'anu£xu  wawalkinek-." 

Wii,  gih'mese  qlulbe  waldEmas  lae  k'lipstEnts  laxa  la  qlotsla  £wap 
laxa  kwadzatsleLaxa  g'lnanEme.     Wa,  la  et!ed  k- lipsEmdxa  £nEms- 

15  gEme  xixsEmala  t  lesEma.  Wa,  liixae  edzaqwa  yacj!Eg"a£la.  Wa, 
laxae  £nek"a  laxes  q!Elk'!EqElaena-'vaxa  ginanEme.  Wii,  la  dalases 
helk"!olts!ana£ye  laxa  ts!esULla:  "  Wii,  la-niKii  hawaxEloL  nawalak" 
qa£s  lasaosases  k'!ets!ena£yos  labEdExusa  hangwa£yasa  odzEgEme- 
qElas  LegEmas  ompasEk"." 

20  Wii,  gih'mese  qlulbe  wiildEmas  lae  k"!ipstEnts  laxa  laasasa  g'ilx'de 
ts!Elwaqaso£s.      Wii,    la    et!ed     k'lip'.Idxa    £nEinsgEme    x'lxsEmala 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  657 

takes  with  her  tongs  another  red-hot  |  stone.     She  speaks,  and  says:  22 
"Now  I  |  pray  to  you,  Supernatural-One,   to  protect  our  darling, 
that  |  no  trouble  may  befall  him  as  he  is  growing  |[  up."  |  25 

When  her  speech  is  at  an  end,  she  puts  the  stone  where  she  put  the  | 
former  ones,  and  she  takes  with  her  tongs  the  (last)  |  red-hot  stone, 
speaks,  and  says:  "Now,  I  |  pray  to  you,  Supernatural-One,  to  give 
to  our  darling  that  he  may  grow  up  without  trouble,  ]|  and  that  he  30 
may  never  be  weakly.  " 

As  soon  as  her  speech  is  at  an  end.  she  puts  the  stone  into  the  water 
in  the  |  dish  basin  in  which  she  is  going  to  wash  the  child.  She 
feels  of  the  water  to  ascertain  ]  whether  it  is  warm;  and  when  its 
temperature  is  right,  j  she  takes  out  the  four  stones  and  puts  them 
down.  ||  Then  she  puts  her  left  foot  into  the  water  in  the  basin,  |  35 
and  lets  the  child  sit  on  the  instep  of  her  foot.  |  She  takes  well- 
rubbed  yellow  cedar-bark  and  |  puts  it  into  the  water,  and  washes 
the  child  with  it,  so  that  all  the  "tallow"  of  the  body  may  come  off  | 
and  the  blood.  When  this  has  been  done,  she  wipes  the  body  with 
soft  yellowT  ||  cedar-bark.  |  40 

Forming  the  Head  of  the  Child. — When  the  body  of  the  child  is 
dry,  |  she  takes  a  kelp  bottle  containing  oil  of  silver-perch,  |  opens 
the  end,  and  pours  some    oil  into  her  right  hand.     She  |  rubs  it 

tlesEma.     Wii,  laxae  yaq!Eg"a£la.     Wa,  laxae  £nek-a:  "Wii,  lamiEn  22 
hawaxEloL  nawalak"  qa£s  dadamac"yeLosaxganuex"  wawalkinek'  qa 
k'l.easeltsEk'  odzEmalats  laxa  qlwax^akulaeneLaxg'am^x11  wiiwal- 
k-inek'."  25 

Wa,  g'il£mese  q!ulbe  waldEinas  lae  k'!ipstEnts  laxa  laasasa  g'ag'i- 
ll£ye  x'Lx'ixsEinala  tlesEma.  Wii,  la  et'.ed  k-!ip!idxa  -nEinsgEiiie 
x-IxsEmala  tlesEma.  Wa,  la  yaq'Eg'a'la.  Wa,  la  -neka:  "Wii, 
lamiEn  hawaxEloL  nawalak"  qa$s  hxsaosases  helolesElaena£yos  k"  !es 
qlults'.enoxwa  laxg-anu£xu  wawalk'inek-."  30 

Wii,  g-il£mese  qlulbe  wal&Emas  lae  kMipstEnts  laxa  q!ots!alilaxa 
kwiidzats!§Lasexa  g-inanEme.  Wa,  la  p!a£staxa  Ewape  qa-'s  p'.ex-wi- 
dex  ts !Elxstaena£yas.  Wii,  g'ihmese  helale  la  ts !Elxstaena£yas  lae 
axwustalaxa  mosgEine  tsletsteqlultsEm  tlesEma  qa£s  Sxnlllles.  Wii, 
lii  dzex"stases  gEmx6ltsidza£ye  lax  EwabEts!awasa  kwadzats!eLaxa  35 
g'inanEme.  Wa,  lii  k!wag"altsidzEntsa  ginaiiEme  laxes  awig-al- 
tsidza£ye.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  aek'Iaakwe  q'.oyaak"  dexwa  qa£s  axst  Eli- 
des laxa  £wape  qa£s  kwiisndexa  g'inanEme  qa  ewlelawes  yasExeu- 
na£yas  LE£wa  Elkwa.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwala  lae  deg"it!ltsa  qloyaakwe 
dexu  laq.  40 

Forming  the  Head  of  the  Child. — Wii,  gihmese  lEmx£unJideda  g-ina- 
nEmaxs   lae    ax£edxa    £wya£wade  pEnts'.E£watsa  dzek!wase.      Wii,  lii 
qwelExstEndEq  qa£s  x'lxts'.anEndes  laxes  helk-!olts!ana;ye.     Wii,  lii 
7r1nr,j^2l— 35  eth— pt  l 42 


658  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Leth.ann.85 

45  on  the  body,  face,  and  ||  head  of  the  child,  and  she  does  not  stop  until 
the  |  child  is  covered  with  fish-oil.  Then  she  takes  a  well-rubbed, 
split,  medium-  |  sized  (piece  of)  kelp,  covers  it  with  the  oil  of  the 
silver-perch,  and  after  |  tliis  is  done  she  puts  it  around  the  head  of 
the  child  just  above  the  |  ears.     The  piece  of  kelp  goes  four  times 

50  aiound  the  head.  ||  It  is  two  finger-widths  wide.  |  After  this  has 
been  done,  she  takes  the  cradle  and  puts  it  down  in  front  of  her.  | 
1  Cradling  the  Child. — She  takes  a  well-prepared  soft  |  skin  of  the 
kid  of  a  mountain-goat  and  spreads  it  out  behind  her.  She  puts  |  the 
child  on  it.  Then  she  takes  well-twisted,  thin,  |  long,  cedar-withes, 
and  places  them  lengthwise  on  the  cradle;  and  the  husband  of  the  || 
5  woman  who  has  given  birth  to  the  cliild  takes  , 

his    drill,    and    drills    a  hole    one    |    span    away    V~J    }    \    \     j~V 
from  the   head   of   the   cradle,    j    in    this  way: 

and  when  the  hole  goes  through,  he  drills  another  hole  |  four  finger- 
widths  away  from  the  first  one  that  he  |  drilled ;  and  he  continues 

10  drilling  holes  four  finger-widths  apart  towards  the  ||  foot-end  of  the 
cradle  along  its  side;  and  after  he  has  drilled  these  holes,  he  takes  |  a 
narrow  strip  of  deer-skin  and  pushes  it  through  the  first  hole,  and 
places  |  the  end  of  the  long  cedar-withe  along  with  it.  lie  sews  on 
(the  cedar-withe)  |  firmly.     After  he  has  done  so,  lie  takes  another 

LExwitas   lax   ok!wina£yasa    ginanEme   LE£wis   gogilina£ye    LE£wis 

45  x"6mses.     Wii,  Siamese   gwalExs   lae  alaklala   LEqe  £wFwulx-Lali'tsa 

ghiaiiEmasa     dzek'.wise.     Wa,    lii    ax£edxa    aek'.aakwe    q'.dyaak" 

LEpsaak"  hela  £vva£wada  qa£s  aek"!e  q'.eletsotsa  dzek'.wise  laq.     Wa, 

g'ilmiese  gsvah:xs  lae  qEX'SEmts  lax  x'omsasa  g'inanEme  ek'lago- 

dalax  p!ep'.Esp!E£yas.     Wii,  lii  m6p!Ene£staxa£wii£wade  Jaxx'oinsas. 

50  Wii,    la    ma£ldEn    laxEns    q!\vaq!\vax'ts!iina£ye   yix    £wiidzEwasasa 

£wa£wade.     Wii,  g  il£mese  gvvala  lae  ax£edxa  xaaple  qaes  k*ag"allle 

taxes  L'.asalile. 

1      Cradling    the   Child. — Wit,    la    ax-edxa    aek'  laakwe    papeq!waakL 

kluts'.ox  qa£nexe  qa£s  LEp'.allles  laxes  a,La£ye.     Wa,  lii  q!Edzolilasa 

ginaninne  laq.     Wii,  la  &x£edxa  aek"  laakwe  sElbEku  wIswuIeii  g'ils- 

giltla  dEwexa  qa£s  k'atiigEndes  laxa  xaaple.     Wa,  lii  la£wuiiEmasa 

5  mayoLa   ts'.Edaq    ax£edxes   sElEme   qa£s    sElx-sodexa   £nEm])'.Enk'e 

laxEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£ye  g'iig'iLEla  lax  6xta£yasa  xaap'.e  ga  gwa- 

leg'a    (fig.).     Wa,  g-il£mese   liix'sawe  sEla£yas    lae   etled    sElx£idxa 

modEne   laxEns    q!waq!waxts!ana£yex    awiilagalaasas   lo£  gilxde 

sEles.     Wii,  la  hanal  SElaxa  memodEnas  awalagalaas  gwE£y5lEla  lax 

10  6xsda£yasa  xaaple  liix  ogwaga£yas.    Wii,  gil£mese  gwiil  sElaxs  lae  ax- 

£edxa  tsleqladzo  k' lElxiwakwa  qa£s  nex'sodes  lax  (1).      Wii,  lak-a- 

t  laLElots  6ba£yasa  gilt  la  wii  sElbEk"  dEwex  laqexs  lae  t  !Eing-aaLElots 

aElas.     Wii,  gil£mese   gwala   lae   etled    iix£edxa   ogu£la   tsleqladzc 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  G59 

strip  |  of  deer-skin  and  puts  it  through  the  second  hole;  and  the|| 
long  withes  are  not  tight,  in  t  his  way.  .  and     he  15 

sews   them   on.  |  When   this   lias  been     \~j    J    \    <    {   /      done,  he 
again  takes  a  strip  of  deer-skin,  which  iscalled  | 

"Sewing  of  the  cradle-sewing,"  and  pushes  it  through  the  third 
hole,  |  and  he  sews  on  the  cedar-withes.  He  continues  doing  so 
through  the  J  fourth  and  fifth  holes;  and  after  he  has  done  so, 
he  does  the  same  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  II  cradle.  Then  he  20 
finishes  the  "strip  for  holding  in  the  child,"  for  that  is  the  name 
of  |  (the  cedar-withe)  (2).  | 

Then  the  man  takes  a  piece  of  cedar-wood  and  cuts  it  |  thin,  one  finger- 
width wide;  |  and  after  he  has  done  so,  he  puts  four  of  these  into  the 
cradle  ||  a  little  more  than  half  way  down  the  depth  of  the  cradle,  25 
in  this  way:  |  y\y\y\/\  V  These  are  called  "back-holders." 
At  the  same  \~'-  ' - '  ±  ±~y  time  the  midwife  |  splits  cedar- 
withes  about  the  thickness  of  the  little  fin- 
ger, about  |  one  span  less  two  finger-widths  shorter  than  the 
inside  of  the  |  cradle;  and  when  she  has  split  enough  of  these, 
she  takes  four  thin  ]|  cedar-sticks  a  little  shorter  than  30 
the  back-holder,  j  and  she  takes  the  E3  r  split  long  cedar- 
bark,  |  ami     ties    them   on     like    this:                    '  When    |     this     is 

done,  she  places  it    _, ,     on  the  back-holder.      This  is 

called   !  the  "back-  |    jj^j  )   rest;  "and  when  it  has  been  put 

in,  it  is  like  this: 


k'lElx'iwakwa  qa=*s  nex-sdde  lax  linage).  Wii,  liik'les  lEklutiilaxa 
giltla  dEwexa,  g-a  gwaleg'a  (Jig.).  Wa,  laxae  t  lEmg'aaLElots.  Wa,  15 
g'imnese  gwala  lae  et!ed  iix-edxa  ts!eq!adzo  k'!ilx'Iwakuxa  Legadiis 
tlEmak'agesa  ttex't  lEmag'Exse  qa£s  nex'sodes  lax  (yuduxu). 
Wa,  laxae  t!Emg"aaLElotsa  di:wexe.  Wii,  a£mese  la  he  gwe£nakulax 
(mowe)  lo£  (sEk-!a).  Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex£Idxa  gEmxan5dza£yasa 
xaap'.e.  Wii,  gihmese  gwala  t'.Ex"t!Emag"Exse  qaxs  he£mae  LegEms  20 
(ma£l) . 

Wii,  la  <ix£ededa  bEgwanEinaxa  k!wa£XLa£we  qa£s  k"  !ax£wldeq  qa 
pEldzowes.  Wa,  la  niEmdime  -"wadzEwasas  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!a- 
na£yex.  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwala  lae  ax-'iilExsas  laxa  xaap'.exa  mowe. 
Wii,  lamie  babanalagawe  ewalasgEmasasa  xaap!e  g'a  gwiileg-a  (fig.).  25 
Wa,  heEin  LegadEs  LadEnegexdEma.  Wit,  laxeda  mamayoltslla 
tslEdaq  papEx-s-alaxa  tEXEmexa  yo  -wag'itEns  seU  lax,  maldEnbala 
laxEns  q!waq!wax*ts!ana£yex  yix  ts  !Ekwagawa£yas  lax  ots'.awasa 
xaap'.a.  Wa,  gilmiese  heh'ale  pa£yas  lae  ax^edxa  mots'.aqe  wiswulto 
k!wa£xLawa.  Wii,  halsEla£mese  ts!Elts!Ekwagawesa  LadEneg'ex'dE-  30 
ma.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  ts!elts!Eq!astowe  g-ilsg-ilt!a  dzEXEk"  dE- 
nasa  qa£s  yibEdzodexa  tEXEine  qa  g-es  gwiileg-a  (fig.).  Wa,  g'il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  pax£Ents  laxa  LadEneg^ex'dEma.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs 
L&dEneg'e.     Wii,  lamie  g'a  gwiile  lax  otslawasa  xaap'.eg'a  (fig.)- 


660  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [BTH.  ann.  so 

35  Now  the  cradle  is  placed  on  its  side,  for  you  know  that  the  back- 
rest |  is  so  placed  that  it  does  not  reach  up  to  the  back  of  the  head  of 
the  child.  It  |  is  put  in  in  this  way  that  the  child  may  have  a  long 
neck  when  it  grows  up.  If  |  the  back-rest  should  reach  to  the  occi- 
put, the  child  would  have  a  |  short  neck  when  it  grows  up;  there- 

40  fore  ||  the  neck  of  the  child  is  bent  backward  when  it  is  put  into  the 
cradle.  | 

When  the  back-rest  is  finished,  the  midwife  takes  |  shredded 
cedar-bark  and  measures  the  length  of  the  |  inside  of  the  cradle,  so 
that  it  is  the  same  length  as  the  back-rest.     Then  she  cuts  |  it  off 

45  and  puts  it  on  the  back-rest.  There  are  four  layers  of  the  II  under- 
bedding.  This  is  un-rubbed  cedar-bark.  After  the  under-bedding 
has  been  finished,  |  she  takes  well-rubbed  cedar-bark  and  |  measures 
the  length  of  the  inside  of  the  cradle,  beginning  at  the  head  of  the  |  ■ 
cradle  down  to  where  the  feet  of  the  child  are  to  be.  Then  she  |  cuts 
it  off,  and  she  spreads  it  over  the  under-bedding.     This  is  called  II 

50  "soft  bedding."  There  are  four  layers  of  this  over  the  under-bedding. 
Now  it  is  in  |  this  way,  /I   the  soft  bedding  is  the 

first  to  go  in  at  the  place  |     ^l  -—) I   where  the  head  of  the 

child  lies.  |  \  ~-^~iy 

When  this  is  done,  she  takes  mountain-goat  wool  |  well  spun,  and 

55  spreads  it  over  the  soft  bedding.  ||  The  soft  wool  does  not  extend 


35  Wa,  laEni  qogwileda  xaap!e  qa£s  q!alaosax  gwalaasas  LadEneg'a- 
£yaxs,  yixs  k'lesae  lag'aa  lax  awap!a£yasa  ginanEme.  HeEm 
lag'ilas  he  gwale  qa  g'ilt'.Exowesa  g'inanEme  qo  q  !ulyax£wIdL6.  G'il- 
£Em  lag'aeda  LadEneg'a£ye  laxEns  £mEgwap  !a£yaxsEns  x'omsex,  lae 
ts!Ek!uxoweda  ginanEmaxs  lae   q!ulyax£wlda.     Wa,  ke£mis   lag'ilas 

40  LlotlExaleda  g'inanEmaxs  lae  xaaptslala  laxes  xaap!e. 

Wa,  laEm  gwaleda  LadEneg'a£ye.  Wa,  la  ax£ededa  mamayol- 
tsila  tslEdaqxa  kadzEkwe  qa£s  mEns£Ides  lax  £wasgEmg"Eg"aasasa 
otslawasa  xaap'.e  qa  £iiEmasgEmes  LE£wa  LadEneg'a£yaxs  laet!os£I- 
dEq  qa£s  ts!ak"Eyhides  laxa  LadEiieg'a£ye  lax  ha£moxsagalaena£yasa 

45  ts!ax"ts!a  k'les  q!o£yaaku  k'SdzEkwa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwaleda 
ts!ax-ts!axs  lae  ax£edxa  aekMaakwe  q'.oyaak"  k'adzEkwa  qa£s  mEns- 
£ides  lax  £wasgEmasas  otslawasa  xaap!e  g-ag"iLEla  lax  oxtEwilts !asa 
xaaple  lag'aa  laxa  axalaasLas  gog-Eguyasa  ginanEme.  Wa,  laxae 
t!os£idEq.     Wa,  la  LEpEyints  laxa  ts!ax-ts!awe.     Wa,  heEm  LegadEs 

50  tElxtsIawe.  Wa,  laEmxae  ha£moxusagalaxa  tElxts!a.  Wa,  la£me 
g'a  gwiileg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  heEm  ales  £nEma  tElxtsla.  lag'aa  lax 
axalaasLas  x'omsasa  g'manEine. 

Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalsxs  lae  ax£edxa  plalEmasa  £mElxLowexa  lii 
aek'!aaku  yibEkwa  qa£s  LEpEyindes  laxa  tElxts!a.     Wii,  la£me  heEm 

55  walalaxa  p!alEm  tElx£uneye  oba£yasa  LadEneg'a£ye  lax  oxLaatii£yasa 


B0AS3  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  661 

beyond  the  upper  end  of  the  back-rest  towards  the  back  of  the  head  56 
of  the  |  child,  and  the  child  lies  on  its  back  I  on  it.  | 

She  takes  some  more  well-spun  mountain-goat  wool  for  the  cover 
of  the  |  child.     This  is  called  "woolen  cover."     Now,  when  |]  this  is  60 
done,  she  takes  the  well-rubbed  soft  skin  of  the  mountain-goat  kid  | 
and  spreads  it  over  the  cover,  namely,  the  cover-mat  of  mountain- 
goat  kid.  |  After  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  wool  not  spun,  and  | 
puts  it  in  where  the  feet  and  the  legs  of  the  child  will  be,  beginning  at 
the  |  calf  of  the  legs  and  down  to  the  feet.     This  is  called  ||  "soft  (15 
wool  for  the  feet."     When  this  is  done,  she  takes  wool  and  |  pats  it 
between  her  hands  to  press  it  together  thin.  |  Then  she  lays  it  on  the 
soft  cedar-bark,  |  where  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  child  will  be. 
This  is  called  |  "soft  wool   for  the   head."     Then  she    takes  well- 
rubbed  ||  cedar-bark  and  pats  it  between  her  hands  until  it  becomes  70 
rounded;  and  |  she  puts  it  down  over  the  soft  under-bedding  at  the 
back  of  the  |  child  until  it  reaches  down  to  the  soft  wool  for  the  feet. 
It  is  called  "put  |  under  for  passing  water."  | 

Then  she  takes  well-rubbed  cedar-bark,  ||  not  very  much,  and  pats  75 
it  between  her  hands  until  it  becomes  thin;  and  |  she  folds  it  up 
until  it  is  three  finger-widths  |  wide  and  of  the  same  length  as  the 
width  of  the  |  head  of  the  cradle,  just  like  a  small  pillow.     She  lifts 


g'inanEme  yixa  p  !alEme  tElx£une.     Wii,  la/me  nELEdzEwe£ya   gina-  56 
nEmaq. 

Wii,  laxae  ax£edxa  ogu£la£maxat !  aek"!aaku  yibskwa  qa  mawidzesa 
g-inanEme.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  plalEm  £nawidze  Wa,  la£me 
gwiila.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  hap!Ena£yasa  qa£nexe  aekMaak"  q'.oyaak".  60 
Wa,  hesm  LEpEyesa  plakme  £nawidze,  yixa  qa£nexe  £nakuye. 
Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  plalEme  k"!es  yibEkwa  qa£s 
lEx£edes  lax  k"ataiaasLas  g'og'Eguyasa  g-inanEme,  g"agiLEla  lax 
awabedza£yas  lag'aa  lax  g'og'Eguyas.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  plalEm 
tElxsidze.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwatexs  lae  ax£edxa  plalEme  qa£s  aek'!e  65 
Laqi£lalases  e£eyasowe  laq  qa  qlEsmEnkwes  qa  pEldzowes.  Wii, 
gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  paqEyints  laxa  tslxtsla  k'adzEkwa  lax  axa- 
laasLasa  awap!a£yasa  g'inanEme.  Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  plalEm  t k1- 
q'.waple.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  axeedxa  aek'Iaakwe  q!o£yaak" 
k'adzEkwa  qa£s  Laqi£liileses  e£eyasowe  laq  qa  k"ilx-sEmes.  Wii,  la  70 
pax£its  lax  walalaasasa  oba£yasa  tElxtsIa,  lax  odzoxsda£yasa  g'ina- 
nEme lag-aa  lax  tElxsidze.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  kMExsaak"  k!ak'!El- 
gudzowe. 

Wa,  g-il£mese  gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxa  aek"!aaku  q!o£yaaku  k'adzEk" 
k-!es  q!enEma  qa£s  Laqi£liileses  e£eyasowe  hxq  qa  pEklzowe.     Wa,  lii  7;"> 
q  !anepi£lalaq    qa    yiiduxudEnes    laxEns    q!waq!wax-ts!anasyex   yix 
£wadzosgEmasas.    Wa,  la  heEm  £wasgEme  £wadzEgEgaasasa  x'Qmdza- 
sasa  xaaple  he  gwex"s£Eme  qEnole      Wii,  la  £wibEndxa  p!alEm  tr;l- 


662  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  85 

up  the  end  of  the  wool  |  under  the  head  and  puts  the  small  pillow 

80  under  the  ||  soft  woolen  pillow,  for  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  child 
rests  on  it  when  its  neck  is  bent  back,  |  so  that  it  may  have  a  long 
neck  when  it  grows  up.  It  is  called  |  "cedar  bark  pillow  near  the 
bottom."  | 

When  this  is  done,  she  takes  wool  and  does  as  she  did  |  before  with 

85  the  preceding  cushion.  She  places  ||  it  on  the  upper  side  of  the 
woolen  pillow,  where  the  head  of  the  child  will  |  rest,  and  it  is  called 
"wool  next  to  the  pillow."  |  Then  she  takes  well-rubbed  yellow 
cedar-bark,  |  which  is  very  soft,  and  measures  with  her  hand  until  it 
is  |  one  span  long.   There  she  cuts  it  off.   She  gathers  up  one  end  of  it,  || 

90  so  that  it  is  round,  splits  off  a  narrow  strip  of  yellow  cedar-bark, 
and  ties  up  |  one  end  of  it  so  that  it  is  like  this: 
This  is  called  |  "cedar-bark  cushion  for  the  side  of 
the  face."  Two  of  these  are  made,  and  the  ends| 
of  these  show  on  each  side  of  the  face  above  the  ears  when  the  child 
lies  on  its  back  in  the  cradle.   |  These  cedar-bark  cushions  are  made 

95  so  that  the  child  may  have  a  rounded  ||  face  when  it  grows  up.  | 

After  this  she  takes  yellow  cedar-bark  and  measures  off  a 
length  of  ]  one  span  and  two  finger-widths.  There  she  |  cuts  it 
off.     Then  she  splits  a  narrow  strip  of  cedar-bark,  |  gathers  up  one 

q!wap!e     qa£s    axabodesa   qeholbida£we    lax    awaba£yasa    plalEme 

80  tElqlwap'.e  qa  has  axaie  6xLaata£yasa  ginanEme  qa  Licit  textiles  qa 
g'iltlExowes  qo  q!iilyax£wIdLo.  Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  max'tsla,  k-a- 
dzEku  tElgwaple. 

Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  p!alEin  qa£s  hemiexat!  gwex-£- 
idqes    gweg'ilasaxa    inax'tsla,    k-adzEku    tElgwaple.     Wa,    axdzots 

85  lax  ek" !adza£yasa  plalEme  tElgwaple  laxaax  axasLas  oxLaata- 
£yasa  ginanEme.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  plalEm  mag'aple  tElgwaple 
Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  aelclaakwe  q!o£yaaku  dexwa 
qa  ales  tElqwa.  Wa,  la  bal£Itses  q!waq!waxts!ana£yasa  £nEm])!En- 
k'axs  lae  tlotslEndxa   dexwe.     Wa,  la£me  lex£iindEq  qa    lex,£Enes 

90  apsba£yas.  Wii,  la  dzExax5dxa  tsleqladzowe  dexwa  qa£s  k"!ilx'£Ides 
lax  apsba£yas  qa  g'es  gwalag'a  (fig.).  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  dex" 
tEltElgimoLEme.  Wii,  lii  malts  !aqe  axa£yas.  Wii,  heEm  nenlbala 
lax  ewanoLEma£yasa  ginanEmaxs  lae  t!ex-ts!axes  xaapla,  yixs 
he£mae   lag'ilas  exEnoLEmalaxes  tEltElgunoLEma£ye   qa  k'ilx'Eme- 

95  goguma£yasa  g  inanEme  qo  q  !uljTax£wklLO. 

Wii,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  iix£edxa  dexwe  qa£s  bal£Ideses  qlwiis 
q!wax"ts!ana£yexa  £iiEmp'.Enk'e,  he£misa  maldEne  £wasgEmasas  lae 
tlots'.EndEq.     Wii,  lii  dzExodxa   ts'.Eqladzo.     Wii,  lii  aek'la  qlaple- 


BOAS]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  663 

end  well,   and  ties  the  thin  end  with  the  strip  of  yellow  cedar-bark 
in  ||  this  way:  ^esg^   This  is  called  "cedar-bark  head-presser."  100 

It  is  |  put  on   @f  |    the  forehead  of  the  child  so  that  its  face 

may  be   flat-  *=as^8|r    tened  a  little,  and  so  that  the  |  forehead 

may  not  grow  to  be  too  round,  and  so  that  |  the  upper  end  of  the 
nose  may  be  flat,  and  the  eyes  not  set  deep  in  the  face.  |  The  cedar- 
bark  cushion  for  the  side  of  the  face  and  the  forehead-presser  together 
bring  the  face  of  the  child  to  a  good  shape,  II  in  the  way  the  Indians    5 
want  to  have  it.  | 

When  the  cedar-bark  forehead-presser  is  finished,  she  takes  wool 
and  |  pats  it  with  her  hands  until  it  becomes  thin  and  pressed- 
together.  |  Then  she  measures  it  across  the  forehead  of  the  child,  | 
beginning  at  the  e.yes,  and  going  to  the  back  of  the  head.  This  is  || 
to  be  laid  under  the  forehead-presser,  and  it  is  called  "soft  wool  for  10 
the  forehead."  j 

When  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  a  drill  and  drills  a  hole  |  one 
span  from  the  head-end  of  the  |  cradle;  and  when  the  hole  goes 
through,  she  drills  another  hole  |  the  same  distance  as  the  one  she 
made  on  the  upper  side  of  the  cradle;  and  ||  when  it  goes  through,  she  15 
takes  a  red-hot,  long,  thin  stone  and  |  pushes  it  into  the  hole,  in  order 
to  enlarge  it  and  to  make  it  smooth,  |  in  this  way:  ^  , 

This  is  called  "hole  for  the  twisted  hair  [  rope  of     \~"r~  *     '■ 
the  head-presser."  | 


x£idxa  apsba£ye  qa£s  yihldesa  ts!eq!adzowe  dexu  laxa  la  wilbesg'a 
gwiileg'a  {fig.).  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  dex"  tlak'Eme.  Wit,  heEm  100 
axala  lax  ogwiwa£yasa  ginanEine  qa  papagEmales  goguma£yas  lo£  qa  • 
k'lese  xEnLEla  qoquya  ogwiwa£yas.  Wa,  he£mis  qa  pEx£Enes  ekME- 
ba£yas  x'indzasas  qa  k'leses  walwunxsta.  Wii,  laicm  g'awaLaleda 
dexwe  tlak'Eme  LE£wa  tEltElgunoLEme  na£naqe£staaxa  goguma- 
£yasa  g'inanEme  lax  gwE£yasa  baklume  qa  gwex'sdEms.  5 

Wii,  g'il£mese  gwaleda  dexwe  t!ak"Emexs  lag  ax£edxa  ])!alEine  qa£s 
Lacu£laleses  e£eyasowe  laq  qa  pEldzowes.  Wa,  he£mis  qa  q'.EsmEl- 
kwes.  Wa,  laEm  heEm  mEn£yats!e  6gwiwaeyasa  ginaiiEme  gag"i- 
LEla  lax  gegEyagEsas  lag'aa  lax  6xLa£yas.  Wa,  heEm  la  tElgwabE- 
£wese  dexwe  t!akima£ya.    Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  p  !alEm  tElqwIwe.  10 

Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  sElEme  qa£s  sElx'sodexa  £nEin- 
p!Enk'e  liixEns  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex  g'agiLEla  lax  6xta£yasa 
xaap'.e.  Wa,  gil£mese  lax'sawe  sEla£yas  lae  et!ed  sElx£Idxa  he- 
£maxat!  walala  g'iig'iLEla  laxa  ftpsaxdza£yasa  xaaple.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  lax'saxs  lae  ftx£edxa  x"ixsEmala  gilt!a  wll  lex-En  t!esEm  qa£s  15 
L'.Enx'sodes  laxes  sEla£ye  qa  lalex£edales.  Wii,  he£mis  qa  qestoweses 
sEla£yexa  g'a  gwiileg'a  (fig.)-  Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  nex'siilatsa  sE-'ya- 
kp  !Ene  lamagEnoLEina£ye. 


664  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  86 

After  she  has  done  so,  she  takes  the  long  hair  of  a  woman  and  || 

20  makes  it  into  a  string.  She  stops  when  the  string  is  five  spans  | 
long.  Then  she  puts  one  end  through  the  hole.  |  It  serves  to  tie 
down  the  forehead-presser,  |  so  that  it  fits  closely  to  the  forehead  of 
the  child  on  the  upper  part  of  the  |  nose.  It  is  called  "hair  rope  for 
head-presser."  || 

25  After  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  strips  of  dressed  deer-skin,  | 
and  measures  off  a  strip  three  finger-widths  wide  and  cuts  it  off.  | 
Now  it  is  a  long  strip.  Then  she  measures  off  three  |  spans,  and  she 
cuts  off  |  four  of  these.     These  are  called  "deer-skin  head-strips."  || 

30  There  are  four  of  these  three  |  finger-widths  wide,  and  three  |  spans 
long.  When  this  is  done,  she  |  takes  cedar  sticks  and  splits  them 
into  thin  pieces  one  finger-width  wide,  |  and  half  a  finger-width  || 

35  thick,  and  a  short  span  long.  |  After  she  has  made  |  four  of  these,  she 
takes  two  more  cedar-sticks  and  measures  |  the  width  of  the  head- 
piece of  the  cradle  near  the  bottom.  |  She  breaks  them  off  in  this 
length.     Then  she  takes  another  measure  at  the  end  of  the  back-rest  || 

40  and  she  breaks  it  off.  She  takes  a  strip  of  |  narrow  split  cedar-bark, 
and  with  it  she  ties  them  together,  making  a  grate  of  the  |  four  pieces 

Wa,  g"il£mese  gwalcxs  lae  ax£edxa  g'ilsgllt'.a  sE£yasa  ts'.Edaqe  qa£s 

20  met!edeq.  Wa,  gil£mese  sEk"!ap!Enk-e  £wasgEmasas  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!wax-ts!ana£ye  lae  gwala.  Wa,  lii  nex'sots  laxa  nex'salatsa  sE£ya- 
k"!Ene  lamagEnoLEma£ya.  Wa,  heEm  lEk!uday5xa  dexwe  t!a- 
k'Eme  qa  ales  qtesala  lax  ogwiwa£yasa  g'inanEme  lo£  ek'!Eba£yas 
x'indzasas.     Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  medEk"  sE£yak'!En  lamagEnoLEmec. 

25  Wa,  g11£mese  gwala  lae  ax£edxa  alagini  tlEmak'ime.  Wa,  la 
mEns£Idxa  yuduxudEne  laxes  q!waq!wax-ts!ana£ye  lae  t!os£IdEq. 
Wa,  la£me  g'ilsgildEilzowa.  Wa,  la  et'.ed  mEns£Idxa  yuduxup!Enk-e 
laxes  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£ye  laxa  alagime  qa  £wasgEmats.  Wa,  la 
m5xuse  t!osa£yas  he  gwex'se.     Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  alagimdz5  t!E- 

30  mak'ime.  Wa,  la£me  moxsa  yuduxudEn  laxEns  q!waq!waxts!:l- 
na£yex  ylx  awadzE£wasas.  Wa,  la  yuduxup!Enk-  laxEns  q!wa- 
q!wa-xts!ana£yex  yix  iiwasgEmasas.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
ax£edxa  k!wa£xLawe  qa£s  papEX'sEndeqxa  £nEmdEnas  awadzE- 
£wase   laxEns   qhvfiq  !\vax'ts!ana£yex;  wa,  la  k"!odEn   laxEns  q!wa- 

35  q!wax'ts!ana£yex  y!x  wagwasas.  Wa,  la  ts!Exuts!ana£ye  awasgE- 
masas  laxEns  q!waq!\vaxts!ana£yex.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwala  mo- 
ts !aqe  axas  lae  ax£edxa  malts  !aqe  6gu£la  k!wa£XLawa  qa£s  mEns£Ides 
lax  £wadzEgEwasas  6xtEwilts!awasa  xaap!e  laxa  mag'ixse  lae  k"6- 
xs£EndEq.      Wa,   lii  et!ed  mEns£Itsa  £nEmts!aqe    lax    oba£yasa  La- 

40  dEneg'e.  Wa,  laxae  k'6xs£EndEq.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  dzEXEkwe 
ts!eq!adzo  dexwa.     Wa,  la£me  k"!Elg-Emnoxus  yixs  lae  yibEdzodxes 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  ()G5 

of  cedar-wood  that  she  split  before.  The  four  pieces  of  cedar-wood  42 
are  held  by  those  |  which  she  broke  last.  After  they  have  been  tied 
together,  they  are  in  this  way.  (They  form  the  head-rest.1)  |  This  is 
put  under  what  has  already  been  put  in  at  the  ||  head  end  of  the  45 
cradle.  Then  she  takes  the  four  pieces  of  dressed  deer-skin  |  (for 
pressing  the  forehead),  three  spans  in  length,  and  puts  them  under 
the  middle  |  of  the  head-rest  in  this  way,  rrn  and  she  straps 
them    over    the     cedar-bark  |  forehead-  =  ;   presser;  and 

after  she  has  tightened    them   over   the         ^         forehead,  |  she 
puts  the  head-string  over  it,  and  ||  puts  the  other  end  on  the  other  50 
side  of  the  cradle.     She  pulls  it  through  backward  and  forward 
many  times  on  each  side  of  the  head  of  the  cradle.     This  is  really 
put  on  tightly  by  the  midwife.  | 

When  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  yellow  cedar-bark,  splits  it 
into  |  narrow  strips,  and  makes  a  mat  one  |  span  and  four  finger- 
widths  ||  long  and  of  the  same  width.  |  This  is  called  ••yellow  cedar-  55 
bark  woven  head-cover."  |  It  is  used  to  cover  the  head  of  the  child 
when  |  he  sleeps  in  the  cradle  with  the  forehead-presser  on,  and  it 
covers  the  small  part  of  the  face  that  shows  |  and  the  cedar-bark 
for.ehead-presser.  || 

When  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  cedar-bark,  and  splits  it  into  |  60 
long,  narrow  strips,  and  she  makes  a  thin  |  rope.     When  she  thinks 

g'ile  xiiva  motslaqe  yixs  he£mae  yipdEmasa  malts  !aqe  k!wa£XLd  iile  42 
k'oqwes.     Wii,  giPmese  gwal  k"!ilk-aqexs  lae  g'a  gwiile£g-a  Ladaple.1 
Wii,  la£me  axabots  laxa  la£mai.iii  axts!a  qa  q'.EdzExses  laxa  oxt.E- 
wflts'.awasa    xaap'.e.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa   moxsa   eElag'im   fclEmak'ime   15 
xa  yOduxu]>'.Enk'as  awasgEmase   qa£s  axabodes  nenEgoya£yas  laxa 
Ladaple  laxa  g'a  gwaleg-a    {fig.).     Wa,    heEm   qEk"E£yexa   dexwe 
t  !Emak'ime  yixa  alag'lme  tlEmak'hne.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwfd  lak!uti- 
'lalasoxs  lae  qEk"Eyindayoweda  medEkwe  sE£yak-  ten  lacj  qa£s  lii  nex- 
so£yo  laxa  aps6taga£yasa  xaaple.     Wii,  lii  q!ep'.Enx-so  laxa  £wax-sa-  50 
noLEina£yasa  xaaple,  yixs  lae  ;\lak"!ala  lEk!ulaso£sa  mamayoltslla. 

Wii,  g"il£mese  gwrdEXs  lae  ax£edxa  dexwe  cja£s  dzEdzExs£Endeq  qa 
ts!elts!Eq!astowes.  Wii,  lii  yibEclzodEq.  Wii,  lii  £iiEmp!Enk"  laxEns 
q!waq!wax-ts!ana£yex,  wii,  he£misa  modEne  laxEns  q!waci'.waxts!a- 
na£yex  yix  £wasgEmasas.  Wii,  heEinxaiiwise  £wadzowes  £wasgEmase.  55 
Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  dex"  yibEdzEwak"  £naxume  Wa,  laEm  £naxu- 
mesa  g'manEmaxs  lae  t!ak-imalaxes  dexwe  t  !ak'ima£yaxs  lae 
mexts'.axes  xaap!e.  £wl£la  £naxw;ila  laxa  xaLlala  nelalas  goguma£yas 
LE£wis  dexwe  t!ak"ima£ya. 

Wii,  g-il£mese  gwiilExs  lae  ax£edxa  dEnase  qa£s  dzEdzExs£Endeq  60 
qa  g-Usg-iltstowe  ts'.elts'.Eqlasta.     Wii,  la  niElx-£IdEq    qaes   w!l£Enes 

i  See  fig.  on  p.  660. 


666  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Lkth.ann.ss 

63  she  has  twisted  enough  |  she  stops,  and  puts  it  on  to  the  cedar-bark 
loops.  She  |  pulls  it  backward  and  forward  (lacing  it  on).  Its 
name  now  is  "string  for  lacing  the  child  into  the  cradle."  || 

65  When  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  cedar-bark,  splits  it,  and  | 
twists  a  long  rope.  When  she  has  enough  for  |  hanging  the  cradle, 
she  stops  making  the  rope;  and  she  takes  the  |  cradle-rope  and  ties 
its  end  to  the  |  end  of  the  elastic  branch,  from  which  the  cradle  is 

70  suspended.  ||  Then  she  puts  up  the  branch  near  to  the  place  where 
the  mother  of  the  child  is  sitting;  |  and  after  it  has  been  done  she 
ties  the  end  of  the  thin  rope  |  to  its  end.1  This  is  called  the  "  pulling- 
rope,"  which  is  used  when  the  child  cries.  |  Now  she  has  finished 
the  work  at  the  cradle.  This  is  all  about  the  ways  of  the  | 
Nak!wax*da£xu  and  Kwag'ul,  and  the  various  tilings  that  belong  to 

75  the  ||  cradle,  and  their  names.  | 
1  Treatment  of  the  Infant. — After  four  days  |  the  kelp  band  around 
the  head  of  the  child  is  taken  off.  |  The  head  of  the  child  is 
well  oiled  with  oil  of  the  silver-perch.  When  |  this  has  been  dune, 
5  the  kelp  band  around  the  head  is  also  oiled,  ||  and  then  it  is  put 
back  around  the  head  of  the  |  child.  It  is  put  on  tight;  and  when 
this  has  been  done,  |  the  child  is  put  into  the  cradle,  and  |  the  skin 
strips  and  the  head-string  are  put  on  tightly;  and  |  after  the  woman 

62  dEiiEma.  Wa,  g'ilmiese  k'otaq  lasm  hel£asgEm  laxes  mElag'Ilaqexs 
lae  gwala.  Wa,  ax£aLElots  laxa  t!EX't!Emag"Exse.  Wa,  la£me 
nex'sawr-iiila  laq.     Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  dEnsEii  tlEinak'edEme. 

65  Wa,  g'ilmiese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  dEiiase  qaes  dzEdzExs£Endeq. 
Wa,  la  mElx,£IdEq  qa  g'iltles  dEiiEma.  Wa,  g'$l£mese  hel£ala  lax 
tegwelEmsa  xaap'.e  lae  gwal  mEla.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  tegwildEmasa 
xaap'.e.  Wa  la  ax£aLElotsa  tegwelEmsa  xaapla  lax  oba£yasa 
xusElaba£yasa   tegweldEmasa   xaap'.e.     Wii,  g'il£mese   gwalExs   lae 

70  Liig'alllas  laxa  £nExwala  lax  klwaelasas  iibEmpasa  g'inanEme.  Wa, 
i^ihinese  gwalExs  lae  moxubEntsa  wile  dEnEin  lax  oba^as.1 
Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  nexayo  dEnEm,  yixs  q'.wiigalaeda  g'inanEme. 
Wii,  laEm  gwala  eaxElaxa  xaap!.  Wii,  laEin  gwala  yix  gweg'ilasasa 
Nak!wax"da£xwe  LE£wa  Kwag'ulaxa  £wiixax'idalaasasa  gwelgwiilasa 

75  xaaple  lo£  LeLEgEmas. 
1  Treatment  of  the  Infant. — Wii,  gihmese  mop!Enxwa£se  malasexs 
lae  qweloyoweda  £wa£wade  qEX"SEmes  x'omsasa  ginanEme.  Wa,  la 
aek"!a  q!ElsetsE£we  x'omsasa  g'inanEmasa  dzeklwise.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  gwalExs  lae  q!EledzotsE£weda  £wa£wade  qEx'sEmesa  x'omsasa 
5  ginanEme.  Wii,  g  il£mese  gwalExs  lae  c}Ex"sEmdayo  lax  x'omsasa 
g'inanEme.  Wa,  la£me  lEk'.utEla.  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
xaapts'.odayo  laxes  xaaple.  Wii,  la£me  £naxwa  la  lak!uti£lalasE£weda 
iilag'ime  tlEmak'ime  LE£wa  sE£yak'!ine  lamagEnoLEme.      Wa,  g'il- 

1  See  Vol.  V,  pi.  31,  Publications  of  the  Jesup  Nor.h  Pacific  Expedition. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  667 

has  cared  for  the  child  (the  cradle)  is  hung  up  on  the  branch  of  the  || 
cradle.  |  10 

If  the  child  is  a  girl,  the  mother  of  twins,  |  a  good-looking  woman, 
is  called  to  come  to  the  house  of  the  parents  of  the  child  |  when  they 
untie  the  head-band  the  second  time.  This  is  after  eight  |  days, 
when  the  mother  of  twins  is  coming  to  put  her  tongue  to  the  eves  and 
face  of  the  child;  ||  and  then  she  presses  her  mouth  on  the  child's  face,  15 
so  that  she  may  be  good-looking  when  she  grows  up.  When  |  the 
child  has  had  the  head-band  of  kelp  around  its  head  for  eight- 
days,  |  they  call  a  woman,  the  mother  of  twins,  to  come  in  the  | 
morning,  and  to  take  the  child  out  of  the  cradle.  As  soon  as  |  she 
comes,  she  sits  down  where  they  put  down  the  cradle.  .She  first  ||- 
unties  the  head-line,  and  opens  the  |  ends  of  the  skin  strips.  Then  20 
she  turns  back  the  forehead-presser,  |  takes  the  wool  off  the  fore- 
head, and  she  also  takes  off  the  cedar-bark |  cushions  on  the  sides  of 
the  face.  |  Then  she  unlaces  the  cedar-bark  rope.  And  when  |  all 
this  is  off,  she  takes  off  the  bedding  of  the  child;  and  when  all  this  is 
off,  ||  she  takes  the  child  in  her  arms  out  of  the  cradle.  (I  forgot  that  25 
she  |  unties  the  kelp  head-band  of  the  child,  before  the  woman  |  puts 
her  feet  into  the  water.)  The  father  of  the  child  brings  her  the  | 
wash-basin,  and  puts  it  down  where  the  mother  of  twins  is  sitting,  | 
for  she  will  wash  the  child.     Then  they  pour  ||  cold  rain-water  into  30 


£mese  gwala  aaxsllaxa  ginanEme  lae  tex^walelEm  laxa  tegwelEmasa 
xaapie.  10 

Wa,  g'il£mese  ts!ats!adagEme  lae  Le£lalasE£weda  yikwilavag'dle 
ex'sok"  tstedaqa  qa  g'axes  lax  g'okwasa  g'Ig'aolnokwasa  g'inanEme 
qo  et'.edEl  qweloyoLe  qEx'sEina£yas  x'omsaxa  malgunialp  !EiixwaEsLa 
malal  qa  El£Elxstowesa  yikwelayag'ule  ts'Edaqxa  g'inanEme  lo£  qa 
p!ep!Eq!iigEmeseq  qa  ex'sokwes  qo  q!iilyax£wIdL6.  Wii,  g'ihmese  15 
malgiimalExse  malasa  g'inanEme  qEX'sEmales  x'omsaxa  fwa£wade 
qEX'sEmesa  x'omsa,  laas  Le£liilasE£weda  yikwllayag'ole  ts'.Edaqaxa 
gaala  qa  g"axes  qweltsEmdxa  g'inanEine  laxes  xaap!e.  Wa,  gil- 
£mese  g"ax  k!wag-allla  lax  hamelasasa  xaapie.  Wa,  la  heEm  g  il 
qweh'etsosexa  sE£yak'!Ene  lamagEiiOLEme.  Wa,  la  et!edxa  £wax-s-  20 
bax£Idxa  alaglme  t  lEmakime.  Wii,  la  iiELodxa  dexwe  t!akime. 
Wa,  la  axodxa  p!alEme  tElqwIwe.  Wii,  laxae  axodxa  dexwe 
tEltElgtinoLEme.  Wii,  la  qwelalaxa  tlEx'tlEinag-Exse.  Wji,  gilemese 
£wPlaxs  lae  £wPla  axalax  ma£masa  g'inanEme.  Wii,  g'ihmese  ewFlaxs 
lae  q'.Elwults!6dxa  giniinEme  laxes  xaapie.  (LlElewayEiiLaqexs  25 
qwelodaaxa  ewa£wade  qEX'SEmes  x-omsasa  g'manEmax,  k' !es-'mae 
dzexusteda  ts!Edaqaxa  £wape.)  Wii,  la,  ompasa  g'maiiEme,  ax£eilxa 
kwiidzats'.eLaq  qa£s  g'axe  hang'alilas  lax  klwaelasasa  yikwllayag'ole 
tslEdaq  qaxs  he£mae  kwiisalxa  g'inanEme.  Wii,  la  giixtsloyowa 
£wudaesta    tsiitsoxLe   laxa    kwadzats!eLaq.     Wa,  la  k'  Kpstanoweda  30 


668  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  S5 

31  the  wash-basin,  and  put  |  one  red-hot  stone  into  the  water  in  the 
wash-basin  |  for  the  child.  When  the  water  is  just  getting  warm, 
they  take  out  |  the  stone.     The  mother  of  twins  puts  her  |  left  foot 

35  into  the  water  in  the  wash-basin,  ||  and  puts  the  child  on  her  instep.  | 
Then  she  takes  well  softened  yellow  cedar-bark,  and  |  she  squirts 
water  on  it  out  of  her  mouth  four  times,  and  she  says,  |  "Now,  my 
darling,  I  give  you  my  good  health,  for  I  never  get  sick,  |  and  every- 
thing comes  to  me  without  difficulty.     You  shall  grow  up  well,  || 

40  and  you  shall  marry  princes'  of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes."  j- 

After  she  has  prayed,  she  takes  a  |  small  chamber-vessel  that  she 
kept  hidden,  and  which  is  almost  full  of  |  her  urine.     She  holds  it  in 

45  her  right  hand  ||  and  speaks  again,  and  says:  "Now,  |  my  darling, 
I  will  put  on  your  body  this  of  which  all  kinds  of  sickness  are  afraid,  | 
that  it  may  protect  you  against  danger,  and  that  the  spirits  may  be 
afraid  of  you."   | 

And  when  her  prayer  is  at  an  end,  she  pours  this  water  into  the 
chamber- vessel  |  in   which   she   is  going   to   wash   the  child.     She 

50  takes  yellow  cedar-bark,  and  dips  ||  it  into  the  urine  and  water. 
Then  she  begins  at  the  |  right-hand  side  of  the  head  of  the  child  and 
washes  it  with  the  yellow  cedar-bark,  going  along  the  right  side  of  the 
body;  |  and  after  she  finishes  the  right  side,  she  |  washes  the  left  side 


31  mEmsgEine  x'lxsEmala  tlesEm  laxa  la  q!ots!a  £wap  laxa  kwadzats!e- 
Laxa  g'inanEme.  Wa,  g'il£mese  k-ox"stax-£idExs  lae  k'lipwusta- 
noweda  tlesEme.  Wii,  lada  yikwllayag'ole  tstedaq  dzexustases 
gEmxoltsidza£ye  g"ogu£yo  laxa  £wabEts!awasa  kwiidzats'.cLaxa  g"ina- 

35  iiEute.  Wa,  la  k'.wag'altsidzEtsa  g'inanEme  laxes  awig-altsldza£ye. 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  aek'laakwe  tatElqlwaakwe  q'.oyaak"  dex"  qa£s  mo- 
plEne  sElboqases  £wapaeL!Exawa£ye  laq.  Wii,  la  £nek'a:  "Wii,  ada- 
tsaga,  la£mEn  lasasEn  helets!ena£ye  laL,  yixgin  kMesek"  ts!Ex-q!ae- 
noxwa  Loxgun  a£mek-  walalatsa  diidEk'ase;  wii,  he£mis  qa£s  helEin- 

40  g'ustaos  g'ig'agEmdalax  LOLaElgEma£yasa  g'ig'Egama£yasa  lelqwala- 
La£ye  qa£s  la£wunEmx-£idLos." 

Wa,  g'il£mese  gwal  tsMwaqaxs  lae  ax£edxes  qlulftLEkwexes  kwii- 
kwadzEmexa  halsElaEm  k"!es  qot!axa  kwats'.exa  hEs£maxa  yikwda- 
yag'ole    ts'.Edaq    asmesa.     Wii,    lii    dalases   helk-!olts!ana£ye    laxa 

45  kwakwiidzEme.     Wa,  la  edzaqwayaq!Eg-a£la.     Wa,  la  £neka:   "Wa, 

adatsagii,    laEmk-    lalg'ada    k"ilEmg-asa   £naxwa   ts!ets!Ex-q!6lEma 

lag'aaLElal  laL  qa  dadaniEweLol  qa£s  k'ilEmaosasa  haayalilalagase." 

Wa,   g'il£mese   q!ulbe     ts'.Elwaga£ayas    lae     giixstEntsa    kwatsle 

laxes  kwiidzasLaxa  g'inanEme.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  dexwe  qa£s  dzop- 

50  stEndes  laxa  kilkweqEla  £wapa.  Wii,  he£mis  giigiLEla  helk'IotE- 
ma£yasa  g'inanEmaxs  lae  kwiis£idEq  hiixEla  lax  helk!ot!Eiia£yas 
gusetasa  dexwe.     Wii,  gil£mese  gwalxa  helk"!ot!Ena£yaxs  lae  et!ed 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  GG9 

of  the  body.  After  this  she  wipes  the  body  with  |  soft  yellow  cedar- 
bark,  head  and  body.  ||  After  doing  this,  she  lays  the  child  face"  down  55 
across  her  knees,  |  with  the  head  towards  the  left  (of  the  mother  of 
twins) ;  |  and  she  puts  the  thumb  of  her  right  hand  at  the  left  of  the  | 
small  of  the  back  of  the  child,  and  she  puts  the  middle  finger  |  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  small  of  the  back,  and  pulls  them  together  towards 
the  middle;  ||  and  while  she  is  doing  so,  she  says:  "Dear  girl,  you  shall  60 
have  a  slender  waist  |  when  you  grow  up;  and  you  shall  not  eat  so 
much,  |  so  that  you  will  be  stout."  | 

She  pulls  together  thumb  and  middle  finger  four  times  |  over  the 
back  of  the  child,  and  she  repeats  four  times  H  what  she  said  before.  65 
After  doing  so,  she  turns  the  |  child  on  its  back,  so  that  it  lies  on  the 
knees  of  the  woman;  and  she  puts  two  |  fingers  of  her  right  hand  into 
her  mouth,  the  first  |  and  second  one,  wets  them,  and  |  presses  them 
on  the  face  of  the  child.     First  the  region  under  the  ||  eyebrows  on  70 
each  side  of  the  nose  is  pressed  into  shape.     Then  she  |  presses  the 
face  of  the  child  all  over.     This  is  called  by  the  Indians  |  "  putting  the 
face  of  the  child  into  shape;"  and  after  this  has  been  done,  she  |  licks 
the  child's  eyes;  and  the  mother  of  twins  says  before  |  licking  the 
child:  "O  darling!  now  I  give  you  my  good  looks,  ||  and  the  power  of  75 
my  eyes,  that  you  may  not  have  bad  eyes  hereafter  when  you  grow 

kwas£idEx  gEinx6t!Ena£yas.      Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs   lae  deg'itasa  53 
tatElq'.waakwe  q!o£yaaku  dexu  lax  x'omsas  LE£wis  uk!wina£}'e.     Wa, 
g  ihmese  gwalExs  lae  haxuk'ax'intsa   g'inanEme   laxes   okwax'a£ye  55 
gwextalaxa    g'inanEme    lax   gEmxot!Ena*"yasa  yikwilayagole   ts'.E- 
daqa.     Wa,  la  ax£aLElots  qomases  helk'!olts!ana£ye  lax  gEmxodeg'a- 
£yas   qEnasasa   g'inanEme.      Wa,    la    ax£aLElotses    £nolax'ts!ana£ye 
lax  helk'  !odeg'a£yas  qEnatsa.    Wa,  la  k'irugE£nakulas  lax  nEgeg'a£yas 
awig'a£yasa  g'inanEme.     Wa,  la  £nek"axs  hae  gweg'ile:  "HeloxuLEs  60 
adatsaga  qaso  q!ulyaxU£widLo;   k'lesLEs  q!eq!Ek'!ESL  lax  ka£mape, 
aLas  pEnL'.esLol." 

Wa,  la  mop'.Ena  k"imgE£nakulases  qoma  LE£wes  £nolax'ts!ana£ye 
lax  awlg'a£yasa  ginanEme.  Wa,  la  mop'.Endzaqwa  a,Em  nEgEltod- 
xes  gale  waldEma.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae  nEltse£stEndxa  g'ina-  65 
nEme  qa  nelk'axellles  lax  okwax-a£yas.  Wa,  la  p!aq!Esasa  male  lax 
q!waq!waxts!ana£yases  helk-  Jolts  !ana£yexes  ts!Emalax-ts!ana£ye 
LE£we  £nolax-ts!ana£ye.  Wa,  la  klunqe  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yas  lae 
p!ep!Eq!ugEmaxa  g'inanEme  heEm  g'il  p'.eq'.wasose  bEnk' lot  !Eiia£yas 
ai:nas  lo£  £wax'sot!Ena£yas  x'indzasas.  Wa,  la  £naxwa  p!eq!wi-  70 
elalax  goguma£yasa  g'inanEme.  HeEm  gwE£yosa  bak'.ume  naqe- 
£stEndEx  goguma£yasa  g'inanEme.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  lae 
El£Elxstod  gigE£yagEsas.  Wa,  la,  £nek'eda  yikwilayag'olaxs  k'  !es£mae 
El£ElxstodEq :  "Wa,  adatsaga,  la£mEn  lasasg'in  exsok!wenoku  la,L 
Logun  ex'SEmstoenek'    qa£s  k'leseLos  £yag'ilxstol  qaso  q!ulyax£wl-  75 


670  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  a.nn    ., 

76  up,  |  and  that  the  princes  of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  may  fall  in  love 
with  you,  |  and  that  your  beauty  may  be  praised  by  all  the  princes  | 
of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes."  | 

SO  When  her  speech  is  ended,  she  takes  oil  of  the  silver-perch  and  ||  oils 
the  body  of  the  child;  and  after  oiling  the  body  of  the  child,  |  she 
ods  its  head;  and  she  does  not  stop  until  the  head  of  the  child  |  is 
soaked  with  oil.  When  |  this  has  been  done,  she  puts  the  kelp  band 
around  the  head  of  the  child;  |  and  she  puts  on  the  bedding,  and  || 

85  everything  else  that  belongs  to  the  head  of  the  child.  After  doing 
this  she  |  gathers  the  cedar-bark  with  which  the  body  has  been  wiped, 
and  puts  it  into  a  |  water-tight  box, — the  same  one  into  which  she  put 
the  cedar-bark  on  which  the  mother  of  the  |  child  sat  after  giving 
birth  to  the  child;  and  into  which  the  first  excrement  of  the  child,  | 

90  and  what  was  used  for  wiping  its  body,  were  put.  This  ||  box  is 
called  "cedar-bark  box."  j 

When  the  mother  of  twins  finishes  taking  care  of  the  child,  |  she  is 
paid  four  pairs  of  blankets.  |  The  midwife  who  took  care  of  the  woman 

95  receives  the  same  pay.  |  They  take  (iff  the  kelp  ||  head-band  every 
eight  days,  and  put  it  back  around  the  head  |  after  putting  oil  on  the 
head  of  the  child.  |  It  is  kept  on  for  four  moons.     After  four  moons  | 

76  dELo  qa£s  mamawidalageLos  yis  LoLaElgEma£yas  g"Ig"igama£yasa 
lelqwfdai.a-ye;  he£mis  qa£s  x"ax"ElsgEmesEweL5sasa  £naxwa  LOLaEl- 
gama£yas  g-igigama£yasa  LelqwalaLa£ya,  adatsaga." 

Wa,  g'ik'mese  q!iilbe  waldsmas  lae  ax£edxa  dzeklwise  qa£s  q'.El- 

SO  slt!edes  lax  ok!wina£yasa  g'inanEme.  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wl£la  q'.Elekwe 
ok!wina£yas  lae  q'.EltsEnidEx  x'omsas.  Wa,  al£mese  gwalExs  lae 
alak"!ala  la  LEqsa  dzeklwise  x'omsasa  g'inanEme;  wa,  g'il£mese 
gwalExs  lae  (|Exsi:mdEX  x'omsasag'inanEinasa£wa£wade  qEX'sEmes 
romse.     Wii,    aemese   £wiela    ax£aLEl5dalas    memamasa   g'inanEme 

85  i.E£wa  gwelgwiilas  x'Omsasa  g  inanEme.  Wa,  g'il£me  e  gwalExs  lae 
q!ap!ex£idxa  deg'edayo  dex"  LEewa  k'adzEkwe  qa£s  axtslodes  laxa 
aEmxaakwegtldasa  yixla  getsl^watsa  k!wa£XLawesE£was  abEmpasa 
g'inanEmaxs  g'alae  gwal  mayoLa,  LEewa  g"ale  amax£idayosa  gina- 
nEme  LE£wa  deg'idanaq  la  £wl£la  getsla.  laq.     HeEm  Legadeda  g'il- 

1  M  dasas  k'adzEgwatsle. 

Wa,  g'ilnnese  gwala  yikwllayag'ole  eaxElaxa  g'inanEmaxs  lae 
halaqaso£sa  moxsa  p'.ElxElasgEma.  Wii,  heEmxaawise  £vvaxa  hala- 
gEmaxa  mamayoltslla  ts'.Edaqaxa  aaxsllilxa  ts!Edaqaxs  g'alae 
mayoLasa  g'inanEme.      Wa,la  hemEnfihiEm  qweloyoweda  £wa£wade 

95  qEX"sEmesa  x-omsexa  malgu£nalExsa  -rnala  qa£s  xwelaqe  qEX'Emda- 
yoxs  lae  gwal  q'.EltsEmtsE£we  x*omsasa  ginanEme  lalaa  laxa 
mosgEme   £mEkula.     Wa,    g-il£mese   mosgEmgilaxa   £mEkiilaxs   lae 


boas  J  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  671 

they  stop  putting  on  the  kelp  head-band  around  the  head  of  the  child.  | 
And  after  this  it  is  put  into  the  cedar-bark  ||  box;  and  nothing  is  100 
taken  off  from  all  the  things  belonging  to  the  child,  |  for  they  will  be 
taken  off  only  when  it  is  ten  months  old.  | 

As  soon  as  the  child  is  ten  months  old,  the  cedar-bark,  |  the  yellow 
cedar-bark,  and  the  wool  bedding  of  the  child  are  put  |  into  the 
cedar-bark  box;  and  after  the  hair  of  the  child  has  been  singed  off,  || 
and  the  anklets  and  arm-rings  have  been  put  on, — for  the  mother  of  5 
twins  |  also  singes  off  the  hair  from  the  head  of  the  child,  and  |  puts 
on  the  anklets  and  arm-rings, — she  goes  and  hides  the  cedar-bark 
box  |  under  the  rock  under  which  the  cedar-bark  is  hidden.  | 

This  is  the  custom  of   the  Kwag'ul,  Nak!wax'da£xu,  Gwa-sEla,  || 
and  Awlk'  !enoxu.  |  10 

The  reason  why  the  long-heads  of  the  Koskimo  and  |  Gwatslenox", 
G'ap!eiioxu,  l  !asq  !enoxu,  and  |  l  !aL  !asiqwala,  and  NaqEmg'ilisala 
are  different,  is  that  |  the  kelp  head-band  is  kept  on  for  twelve  days 
at  a  time,  until  the  girl  ||  is  ten  mouths  old.  It  is  a  little  different  15 
when  the  child  is  a  boy,  |  for  then  the  kelp  head-band  is  tied  around 
for  ten  days,  |  and  is  taken  off  after  eight  months.  |  The  head  of  the 
child  is  also  rubbed  with  oil  of  the  silver-perch  in  the  same  way  ]  as 
the  Kwag'ul  women  do  with  their  children.  || 


gwal     qEX'SEmale     x'omsasa     g'inanEmaxa    £waewade    qExsEinesa  98 
x'omse.     Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalEmx's  lae  lats'.oyo  laxa  k'adzEgwats'.e 
g'ildasa.     Wii,  laLa  k'!eas  lawo£yo  laxa  £naxwa  gwelgwalasa  g'ina-  100 
nEme,  yixs  5l£meLe  lawaLExs  liil  helogwilaxa  ginanEme. 

Wa,  gil£mese  helogwllaxs  lae  ewPla  lawoyEwe  k'ek'adzEk"  LE-wa 
dexwe  LE£wa  p!epalEme  gwelgwalasa  giniinEine  qa£s  la  latsloyo 
laxa  k"adzEgwats!e  g'ildasa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwal  ts'.ExiltsEmtsE£we 
x'omsasa  g'inanEme  LE£wa  kunxwedEm  yixs  he£maexa  yikwllaya-  5 
g'ole  tslEdaq  ts'.EX'iltsEmdEx  x'omsasa  ginanEme.  Wa,  heEmxaa- 
wis  kunxwetaq.  Wii,  heEmxaawis  la  qlulaLaxa  k-adzEgwats!e 
g'ildas  laxa  k-adzEk!waase. 

Wii,  heEm  gwayi£la£latsa  Kwakwiikwakwe  LE£wa  Nak!wax-da£xwe 
LE£wa  Gwa£sEla  LE£wa  Awik-!enoxwe.  10 

Wii,  g-a£mes  lag'ilas  Sguqala  g'ilsg'iltEma  Gosg'imuxwe  LE£wa 
Gwats!enoxwe  LE£wa  G"ap!enoxwe  LE£wa  L!asq!enoxwe  LE£wa 
L'.aLlasiqwala  LE£wa  NaqEmg'ilisala  yixs  malExsagh-uwae  £nalas 
qEX'sEmales  ts!ats!adagEme  xunoxuxa  £wa£wade  qEx'sEines  x'omsa, 
lalaa  laxes  helogw!laena£ye.  Wii,  lii  xiiLla  oguqaia  laqexs  babagii-  15 
mae,  yixs  nEqap !Enxwa£sae  £naliis  qEx'sEmfdes  xomsaxa  £wa£wade 
qEX'sEmes  x'omsa.  Wii,  la  malgunaltsEmg'ilaxs  lae  axdya.  Wii,  la 
heEmxat!  q!EltsEmdayosex  x'omsasa  g'manEina  dzeklwise  lax  gwe- 
cr'ilasasa  Kwakiitr'olaxsEmaxes  xunokwe. 


672  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ank.35 

20  Now  you  know  why  the  women  of  the  Koskimo  have  long  heads.  | 
All  the  bedding  in  the  cradles  of  the  Koskimo  women  |  and  Kwag'ul 
women  is  the  same.  Therefore  |  the  mountain-goat  wool  is  prized 
highly  when  it  is  bought  by  the  Koskimo  women  from  the  |  Kwag'ul.  || 

25  The  only  difference  is  in  the  lacing  of  the  child  among  the  Koskimo 
women.  |  They  use  deer-skin,  and  they  cut  a  narrow  strip  |  half  a 
finger-width  wide  and  |  very  long.  Two  pieces  are  cut  off.  After 
they  have  been  cut  off,  |  the  woman  takes  the  back-rest  and  lays  it 

30  down  flat  ||  where  she  sits.  Then  she  takes  the  long  strips  of  thin 
dressed  cedar-withes  |  and  puts  them  on  the  edge  of  the  back-rest, 
in    this   way:  She  takes  the  |  narrow  strip  of  deer- 

skin and  uses  ■]  ""  j "~~"  f^T  it  to  sew  on  at  (1).  |  After  that  she 
measures     off    J— —  — :  J      I-      the  cedar-withes  and  sews  it  on  at 

35   (2),  |  and  then  "      she  also  sews  it  on  at  (3),  ||  and  finally 

at  (4).  She  does  the  same  |  at  the  other  edge  of  the  back-rest. 
Alter  doing  so,  |  she  places  the  back-rest  on  the  back-rest  holder. 
Then  it  is  finished.  |  It  is  called  "deer-skin  rope  sewed  on  to  back- 
rest." |  This  is  the  old  style  of  the  Koskimo  women.  || 

40  If  a  child  dies,  the  cradle  and  |  the  clothing  are  taken  to  the 
cedar-bark  cave;  but  when  |  the  cluld  grows  up  to  be  healthy,  they 

20  Wa,  laEms  q!al£aLElax  lag'ilas  g-ilsg'iltEina  tsledaqasa  G'osg'imu- 
xwe.  Wa,  la  £naxwaEm  £nEmaxise  gwelgwalasa  xaap!iisa  Gogu- 
ts!axsEme  LE£wa  Kwakiig'olaxsEme,  yixs  ke£mae  lag'ila  qlEyoxwa 
p'.alEmasa  £mElxLowaxs  k-ElxwasE£waasa  Goguts  laxsEme  laxa 
Kwag'ule. 

25  Wa,  lex-a£mes  oguqalaxa  t!Ex-t!Emag"Exse  laxa  Goguts  laxsEme, 
yixs  lae  ax£edxa  k- !Elx-ewakwasa  gewase  qa£s  tlosodexa  ts'.eq'.adzowe 
laqxa  kModEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ana£yex  ylx  £wadzEwasas.  Wa, 
la  g'llsg'ildzowa.  Wa,  la  malExsa  t!osa£yas.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwala 
ts!(:daqe  tlosaqexs  lae  ax£edxa  LadEneg'a£ye  qa£s  pax£aliles  laxes 

30  klwaelase.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  g'ilsgllt'.a  wJswuitowe  sElbEku  dEwexa 
qa£s  k'atlaLElodes  oba£yas  laxag'a  gwaleg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  la  ax£edxa 
ts'.eqladzewe  k'!Elx-iwakwe  qa£s  tlEing'aaLElodes  lax  (1).  Wa, 
g"il£mese  gwala  lae  k'lESElaxa  dEwexe  lae  et!ed  t'.Emg'aaLElodEx 
(2).     Wa,   gil£mese   gwalExs  lae  e!ted  tlEmg-aaLElodEx    (3).     Wa, 

35  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae  et!ed  tlEmg'aaLElodEx  (4).  Wa,  la  heEmxaat! 
gwex-£Idxa  apsEnxa£yasa  LadEneg"a£ye.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
pax£Entsa  LadEneg-a£ye  laxa  LadEneg-ex'dEma.  Wa,  laEm  gwala. 
Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  k"!Elx-Iwaku  tlEmak'iigesa  t'.EX't'.Emag'Exse. 
Wa,  heEm  alakMala  g'ildzEse  gwalaasas  laxa  Goguts  laxsEme. 

40  Wa,  g'il£mese  lE£leda  g'inanEme  lae  £wi£laEm  layowa  xaap'.e  laxa 
k'adzeklwaase  LE£wes  gwelgwala  laxes  £waxax,£Idalaase.     Wa,  g'il- 


l«JiS]  BELIEFS    AXD    CUSTOMS  078 

keep  the  cradle  and  the  |  back-rest,  and  they  hide  the  clothing  and 
the  |  cedar  bark  forehead-presser  in  the  cave.     The}  keep     thecradle  45 
in  case  the  first-born  child  should  have  a  younger  sister.  | 

Twins.1 — They  only  change  the  cradle  when  a  woman  has  twins: 
for  if  she   shoidd  have  twin-children  after  having  many  other  chil- 
dren, |  the  cradle  is  put  away.  | 

Then  a  wood-worker  is  asked  to  make  for  the  twins  cradles  ||  with  5 
notched  head-pieces.     Then  the  wood-worker  goes  to  work  at  once 
trying  to  finish  the  cradles  with  the  notched  head-boards  |  before  the 
twins  are  four  days  old;  and  when  j  the  cradles  with   the  notched 
head  boards  are  finished,  and  the  twins   are   three   days   old,     they 
put  two  feathers  from  the  II  tail  of  the  eagle  into  $tt   if) 

two  holes  drilled  in  thenotched  headboard  [  of  the  r-"1 
cradle,  two  at  each  side,  in  this  way:  |  \ 

Now  the  twins  are  wrapped  up  well  in  |  soft  yellow  cedar-bark  and 
in  red  cedar-bark.  The  faces  of  the  |  twins  are  painted  red,  and  also 
those  of  the  mother  ||  and  father.  And  the  father  of  the  twins  must  15 
sit  still;  |  he  is  not  allowed  by  lus  tribe  to  do  anything;  he  is  not  even 
allowed  to  get  fire-wood  |  and  water.  His  relatives  |  always  sit 
by  his  side   in  the  house  in  order  to  get   the   fire-wood  |  and  the 

£mese  helEmg"ustaq!waxedag'inanEme  lii  axelasE£weda  xafq>!eLi:£wis  42 
LadEneg-a£ye.     Wa,    laLa  £wI£laEm    la    qlulaxa   gwelgwalas   le-'wcs 
dexwe  t!akEma£ye  laxa  k'adzEklwaase,  yixs  he-mae  lag'ilas  axela- 
sE£weda  xaap!e  qo  ts!a£yanoxuLes  g  ale  mayoLEma.  45 

Twins. — Wa,  lex'a£mes  Llayowatsa  xaaplaxs  yikwllae  yixa   ts'.E-  1 
daqe,  yixs  al£mae  jikwIlExs  lae  qlEyokwes  sasEme.      Wa,   aemese 
g-exasE£weda  xaap'.e. 

Wa,  la  g'ag-6£nasE£weda  gitlenoxwe  qa£s  xaapelex  ylkweelats!ama- 
lExi.a  qeqEXEg"E£yo  xexaapla.  Wa,  hex£ida£mese  eax£ideda  g'itle-  5 
noxwe  qaxs  hayalomalae  gwalamasxa  malEXLa  qeqEXEg'Eyo  xexa- 
aplaxs  k'!es£mae  moplEnela  yikwl£li:me  g'inginanEma.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  gwala  malEXLa  qeqEXEg'Eyo  xexaaplaxs  lae  yudilxuxsek"Eleda 
yikwI£lEmeging'inanEma  lae  Lasedayoweda  maemalts!aqeg-a£yol  lax- 
naxsdEy£asa  kwekwe  laxa  la  maemaldzEk"  sEle  laxa  qeqEXEg-iwa-  to 
£yasa  xexaap!exa  g'a  gwaleg'a  (Jig.). 

Wa,  laEmaEmq!Eq!EnepsEmlIledayikwI£lEmaxa  aekMaakwe  tatEl- 
qlwaakwe  dexwa  LE£wa  k'adzEkwe.  Wa,  la  gomexusa  gfig-um- 
yEma  yikwPlEine  g'ing'inanEma.  Wa, heEmxaawise gwale  abEmpas 
LE£wes  ompe,  yixs  a£mae  la  sEldela  ompasa  yikwPlEme  gingina-  i.", 
nEma  yixs  k-!esae  helqlolEm  axaxsalases  g'okulote,  wax-£ma  lEqwa 
LE£wa  £wape  la  k- !es  helq'.olEm  la  S.x£edEq.  Wa,  la£me  heda  i.-cle- 
r.alas  la  hemEnala  k'.wiimelEq  qa£s  axexa  £naxwa  ax£exstso£sxa  lsqwa 
r.E£wa  £wape  LE£wa   he£maomase   qaxs   k'lesae    helqlolEm    a£inelas- 

'  Sec  also  pp.  631-635. 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 43 


674  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.85 

20  water  and  food  ||  for  the  couple,  and  the  twins  who  belong  to  the 
Salmon,  are  not  allowed  to  have  misfortune  |  —  |. 

As  soon  as  the  twins  that  belong  to  the  Salmon  are  four  days  old,  | 
when  the  navel-string  comes  off ,  they  take  the  cradles  with  the  | 
notched  head-boards,  put  them  down  on  the  floor  one  on  the  right-hand 

25  side  of  ||  another  woman  who  has  been  the  mother  of  twins,  and  they 
put  down  |  the  other  one  on  the  left-hand  side;  and  when  everything  is 
ready,  |  they  put  the  bedding  into  the  two  cradles  with  notched  head- 
boards. There  is  [  no  difference  between  the  bedding  of  twins  and 
that  of  single  children,  j  The  only  difference  is  that  a  cradle  with  a 

30  notched  head-board  is  used,  and  that  the  four  ||  feathers  from  the  tail 
of  an  eagle  stand  on  the  [  notched  head-hoard  of  the  cradle,  and  that 
the  faces  of  the  twins  are  |  always  painted  red  every  fourth  day, 
together  with  the  faces  of  their  parents,  and  that  this  continues  | 
until  the  twins  are  ten  months  old. 

As  soon  as  the  woman  who  has  had  twins  before,  finishes  arranging 

35  the  bedding  ||  in  the  cradle  that  was  put  down  at  the  right-hand  side 
of  the  |  woman  who  has  had  twins  before,  she  takes  on  her  arms  |  the 
first-horn  child  belonging  to  the  Salmon.  She  takes  off  the|  wrap- 
pings of  yellow  cedar-bark  and  of  ved  cedar-bark;  and,  after  taking 
them  all  off,  |   she  takes  the  split  kelp  and  puts  it  around  the  head  of 

40  the  child  belonging  to  the  Salmon.  ||  And  this  is  different  in  regard  t<> 

20  nokwa  hayasEk'ala  LE£wis  yikwIdEine  idaidEyadza^ya  g'lng'lna- 
nEina. 

Wa,  g'il£mese  moxsekileda  vikwFlEme  L!aL!Eyadza£ya  gingina- 
nEme  yixs  lae  lawaye  ts!EyoxLaeya.  Wa,  la£me  &x£etsE£weda  miilEXLa 
qeqEXEg'Eyowe  xexaapla  qa£s  lii  hanalFlEma  £nEmexLa  lax  heik'  !o- 

25  tagawalilasa  ogii£la£maxat !  yikwllayag'ol  ts'.Edaqa.  Wa,  hang'all£- 
lEma  £nEmexLa  lax  gEinxagawalllas  lax  laena£yas  £wl£la  gwaiate 
axtslawe  gwelgwiilasa  mahsxLa  qeqEXEg'Eyowe  xexaapla,  yixs 
k' leasae  6gux£Its  gwelgwalas  lax  gwelgwalasa  £nEmok!wedza£ye 
mayoLEma  lax  ogiida  laxa  qeciExEg'Eyowe  xexaap'.a  LE£wa  maemo- 

30  tslaqe  ts'.EltslElk's  naxsdE£yasa  kwekwaxs  lae  LaLala  lax  agiwa£yasa 
qeqEXEg'Eyowe  xexaapla;  Wit,  he£misa  yikwelEme  g'mg'inanEinxs 
lae  heniEnalaEm  giimsa  LK£wes  g'Ig'aolnokwaxa  maemoxsa  £nala 
lalaa  lax  helogwIlaxdEmLasa  yikwi£lEme  ging'inanEma. 

Wa,    g'il£mese    gwala    yikwilayag'dle    tslEdaq    helax   gwelgwidiis 

35  5ts!a£wasa  £iiEmexLa  qKXEg'Eyo  xaa))!axa  ha£ni£le  lax  helk'Iotaga- 
walllasa  yikwllayag'ole  tslEdaqa.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwala  lae  qlElElI- 
laxa  g'ale  mayobidayo  LlaLlEyadze  g'inanEma.  Wa,  la  axodEx 
q!Eiiep!Ena£yas  dexu  LE£wa  k-adzEkwe.  Wa,  g'ibmese  £wi£laxs  lae 
&x£edxa  £wa£wade  LEpsaakwa  qa£s  qExsEindes  lax  xomsasa   idaLlE- 

10  yadze   g'inanEma.     Wii,  heEm   oguqalayosa  yikwFlEme  g'inanEma, 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  675 

twins;  |  that  they  do  not  put  on  the  head-hand  until  the  navel-string  41 
comes  off  on  the  |  fourth  day;  and  after  putting  the  head-hand 
around  the  head  of  the  |  child  belonging  to  the  Salmon,  the  woman 
who  has  had  twins  (before)  speaks  |  and  says  (Prayer  for  the  twins): 
"O  friend!  ||  that  is  the  reason  why  you  come.  You  come  to  benefit  45 
(hose  who  have  come  to  be  your  |  parents,  and  you  have  come  to 
make  them  rich  and  to  |  defend  them  against  sickness,  O  friend 
Salmon!  you,  Supernatural-One!"  | 

As  soon  as  the  prayer  has  been  ended,  she  puts  the  child  belong- 
ing to  the  Salmon  |  into  the  cradle  with  the  notched  head-board, 
and  she  ||  follows  the  way  that  is  done  with  those  who  are  not  twin-  50 
children.  | 

When  this  has  been  done,  she  turns  her  face  to  the  other  |  cradle 
with  the  notched  head-board,  arranges  everything  in  it;  and  after 
that,  |  she  takes  in  her  arms  the  child  belonging  to  the  Salmon,  takes 
off  the  bedding  j  of  yellow  cedar-bark  and  red  cedar-bark;  and  when 
it  is  all  off,  she  takes  the  II  split  kelp  and  puts  it  around  the  head  of  the  55 
child  |  belonging  to  the  Salmon;  and  after  this  she  puts  it  into  the  [ 
cradle  with  the  notched  head-board;  and  the  woman  who  had  borne 
twins  before  speaks,  |  pressing  with  her  left  hand  on  the  chest  of  the 
child  belonging  to  the  Salmon,  |  and  says  (a  prayer  for  the  second  || 
twin-child  in  the  cradle):  "O  friend!  I  beg  you,  Supernatural-One,  GO 
to  |  grow  up  well  with  your  brother,  YayaxwE£ya,  and  that  you  do  | 


yixs  al£mae  qEx'sEintsE£we  x'omsasexs  lae  lawiiye  ts!EyoxLa£yasxa  41 
la  niop!Eiixw£as  fnala.  Wii,  g"il£mese  gwfd  qEx'sEmdEX  x'Smsasa 
L!aL'.Eyadza£ye  ginanEma,  wa,  la  yaq'.Eg-a£leda  ylkwilayag-ole  ts!E- 
diiqa.  Wa,  la  £nek'a  (tstelwaqaxa  yikwIdEme  ginanEma):  "Yul, 
qasta,  heq'amaaqos  g'axele  qa£s  g'axaos  ek'anomaxos  g-axaqos  45 
gig'aolnokwa.  Wa,  he£mes  g'axelos  qa£s  q'.eq'.omg'ilaosaq";  wii, 
he£mis  qa£s  dadamayaosaq",  qastii,  mEyoxwa£na,  yQL,  £nawalak"." 

Wii,  gihmese  q!idbe  ts!Elwaq!ena£yas,  lae  q!Elts!otsa  L!aL!Eya- 
dza£ye  g'tnanEm  laxa  qEXEg'Eyowe  xaapla.  Wii,  la£me  aEin  nEgEt- 
tE£wex  gwayidiilase  qaeda  k-  !ese  yikwrdEina.  50 

Wii,  gihmese  gwalExs  lae  gwegEingilil  laxa  £nEmexLa  qEXEg'E- 
yowe xaap!a  qa£s  helidalex  gwelgwiilas.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwiilExs  lae 
q!ElElilaxa  L!aL!Eyadza£ye  g'inanEma.  Wii,  lii  axalax  qiEnepsEina- 
£yasxa  dexu  LE£wa  k'adzEkwe.  Wii,  g'ihmese  £wl£laxs  lae  ax£edxa 
LEpsaakwe  £wii£wade  qa£s  qEx'sEmdes  lax  x'omsasa  L!iiL!Eyadza£ye  55 
g  inanEma.  Wii,  gihmese  gwalExs  lae  q!Elts!otsa  g'inanEme  laxa 
qEXEg-Eyowe  xaapla.  Wii,  lii  yaq'.Eg'adeda  yikwdayag'ole  ts!E- 
daqa  laxes  LExwalaena£yases  gEmxoits!ana£ye  lax  obtVyasa  l!5l!e- 
yadza'ye  giniinEma.  Wii,  la  £neka  (tsMwaqaxa  ale,  xaiipts!oyo 
yikwFlEma):  "Yul,  qastii,  la£mEn  hawiixElaLOL  'iiawalak11  qa£s  60 
wag'iLos  helmalag'ilisLol  le£wox  £nEmwEyotex  YiiyaxwE£ya,  yix  qa£s 


676  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.AHN.-SS 

63  not  leave  us!  Make  your  parents  happy!  |  for  they  will  always  give 
away   property,   so    that    you   may    always   obtain  |  new   names,  0 

65  Ek!' eqElag'ila !  friend  Salmon !  ||  you,  Supernatural-One !  Do  not  come 
to  bring  us  misfortune!  Come  to  do  good!  You  bring  |  wealth,  you, 
Abalone-Maker !  You  have  come  from  the  sea  to  us  with  your  ] 
brother,  Supernatural-Salmon,  friend."  | 

As  soon  as  the  prayer  is  ended,  she  puts  on  the  bedding  |  of  yellow 

70  cedar-bark  and  of  red  cedar  bark  and  that  of  wool;  and  ||  after  tlris 
has  been  done,  she  puts  on  the  cedar-bark  forehead-presser,  and  the 
pillow ;  |  and  when  this  has  been  done,  she  puts  down  the  cradle  with 
notched  head-board.  She  )  puts  the  first  one,  with  the  child  belonging 
to  the  Salmon,  on  the  [  right-hand  side  of  the  bed  of  the  mother  (of 
the   new-born    twins);  and    she    puts    the  |  other   cradle   with    the 

75  notched  head-board,  and  the  ||  child  belonging  to  the  Salmon  in  it, 
on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  mother;  |  and  after  the  mother  of  twins 
has  done  this,  she  puts  in  order  the  sleeping-place  |  of  the  twin- 
children  and  of  their  mother.  | 

She  takes  cedar-poles,  not  thick,  and  |  one  fathom  long,  sharpens  || 

80  the  points,  and  drives  them  into  the  floor,  one  of  them  backwards  | 
from  the  place  where  the  heads  of  the  mother  of  twins  |  and  of  her 
husband  are;  and  the  other  one  she  drives  into  the  floor  at  the  | 
place  where  their  feet  are;  and  she  drives  one  into  the  floor  |  outward 
from  the  place  where  their  heads  are,  and  the  other  one  outward  from 


62  k'.eseLos  aweq'.wahiLol;  wa,  he£mis  qa£s  hemEnalamaos  ek!eqEla- 
masxox  g'ig'aohiokwex  qa  hemEiialaEmesox  £wa£walasdEmx-sila  qa 
aleg'eses   LeLEgEmos    yuLaxs    ek'!eqElagilaex,    qast   msyoxwa^na, 

65  yuL  £nawalaku  £yak-anomasos  laxes  g-ax£ena£yos  yixs  ek'anomaaqos 
vixs  qlomxsalisaaqos  yuL  ex'tsiEmg-ila,  yflLaxs  g'axsallsaex  LSgwa 
£nEmwEyotEk'  £nawalaku  mEy5xwa£na,  qast." 

Wii,  gih'mese  qhllbe  ts'.Elwaq!ena£yas  lae  mamelalas  £wiixax,£id;lla- 
asasa  dexwe  LE£wa  k-iidzEkwe  LE£wa  p'.alEine.     Wii,  g  ihmese  gwfi- 

70  Iexs  lae  axfiLEldtsa  dex"  t  '.ak'Emes  LE£wis  helEwaba£ye.  Wa, 
irihmese  gwfda  lae  kagilllaxa  qEXEg-Eyowe  xaap!a,  yixa  g'ale 
q'.Elts!odaatsesa  L!aL!Eyadza£ye  g-inanEma  qa£s  la  k-ag-alilas  lax 
helk-,.6dEn5LEinalIlas  kule£lasas  abEmpas.  Wa,  la  kagilllaxa 
£nEinexLa  qEXEg'Eyowe  xaap!a,  yixa  ale  q'.Eltslodaatsesa  L'.aL!Eya- 

75  dza£ye  ginanEma  qa£s  lii  k-ag'alilas  lax  gEmxanoLEmalilas  abEmpas. 
Wa  dhmese  gwala  yikwflayag-6le  ts'.Edac[a  lae  eax£edEx  kiile£la- 
sasa  L!aL'.EL!Eyadza£ye  glng'inanEm  LE£wes  abEmpe. 

Wii,  la£mes  ax£edxa  m5ts!ac[e  dzE£sEqwaxa  kMese  LESLEkwa.    Wii, 
lii  MiatoiEmp'.En-k"  laxEiis  baLaqe  awixsgEmasas.     Wii,  lii  dzodzox"- 

80  bEndEq  wlieta£yas.  Wa,  la  dex£walilasa  £nEmts!aqe  laxa  iiLodEta- 
lflasa  ku£le£lasasa  yikwile  ts'.Edaqa  LE£wis  E!aL!EL'.Eyadza£ye  sa- 
sEma  LE£wis  la£wunEme.     Wii,  la  et!ed  dex£wa£lilasa  £nEmts!aqe  lax 


BOAS]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  677 

whore  their  feet  are;  ||  and  after  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  an  85 
olachen-net  and  |  hangs  one  corner  to  the  top  of  the  rear  post  at  the 
head,  |    and  she  hangs  one  corner  to  the  rear  post  at  the  foot  of  the 
bed;  and  |  after  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  red  cedar-bark  and 
measures  off  two  spans.  |  There  she  cuts  it  off.     She  ||  splits  it  into  90 
narrow  strips.     After  she  has  split  them,  she  |  folds  them  in   the 
middle,  and  hangs  them  to  the  net  |  which  has  been  hung  up.     They 
are  placed  two  spans  apart.  |  When  she  reaches  the  end  of  the  bed  of 
the  |  mother  of  the  twins,  she  puts  them  in,  two  spans  ||  under  the  95 
first  row.     There  are  four  rows  of  red  cedar-bark.  |  Then  she  takes 
the  tail  of  a  white-tailed  eagle,  pulls  out  the  feathers,  |  and,  when 
she  has   them  all   off,  she    takes  spun  nettle-bark.  |  This  is  used 
to  tie  on  the   feathers,  which  are  hung  between  the  |  red    cedar- 
bark,  in  this  wav:      ,    .  , .  ,  A  ,  A  ,-,  A   ,       Now  it  is  done.  ||  Then  she  100 

.  \I/*E\1/K  /'■  WA>  I*?  -I.  ^  l'1 

takes    two    thin       lETf  rf  42j~33/:3       poles  and  puts  them  across 

the    two  |  posts       ^K^t=K^T7tt^v        over    which    the    net    has 
been   hung,    and  ~   she  places  the  |  other  pole 

over  the  outside  posts.      Then  she  takes  a  new,  |  large  mat  and  places 
it  across  as  a  roof,  and    she    also  puts  a  new  |  mat  at   each   end 


walalaasas  g'5g"Egiiyas.     Wa,  lii  etled  dex£wa£lllasa  £nEints!aqe  lax  83 
L'.asodEtiVyas;  wii,  lii  et!ed  dex^wa^ilasa  £nEmts!aqe  lax  L!iis£alllas 
g'og'Eguyas.     Wa,  g'ir-'mese  gwale  axa£yas  lae  ax£edxa  ptegwayaxa  85 
clzaxun  qa£s  gexutodes  apsEnxa£yas  lax  oxta£yasa  iiLodEtallle  Lama. 
Wa,   lii    gex£wutots    apsEnxa£yas    laxa    Lamasa   oxusklzalile.     Wa, 
gil£mese  gwala  lae  ax£edxa   L!agEkwe  qa£s   bal£Idesa   ma£lp!Enk'as 
awasgEmase  laxEns  q!waci!wax-ts!ana£yaxs  lae  t!os£idEq.  Wa,  lii  dzE- 
dzExs£EndECj  qa  t!elts!Eq!astowes.     Wii,   gil£mese  gwal  dzExaqexs  90 
lae  bEs£idEq  qa  naEngExLales.     Wa,  tetEgudzodalas  laxa  p!Egwayo 
la  ge£wila.     Wa,  la  maemalplEnke    awalagalaasas    laxEns    q!wa- 
q!wax-ts!iina£yex.    Wii,  g"il£mese  labEndEx  £wasgEmasasa  ku£lelasasa 
yikwlle   lae   et'.edxa    malp!Enk-e  laxEns  q!waq!wax"ts!ana£yex  lax 
ba£neLEliises   g'ale    axa£ya.     Wii,  lii   mots!agE£nakiilaxa   LlagF.kwe.  95 
Wa,  la  ax£edxa  naxsdE£yasa  £mEl£mElba  kwekwa  qa£s  nexalexa  tslEl- 
tslElk'as.     Wa,  g"il£mese  £wl£lamasqexs  lae  ax£edxa  mEdEkwe  gun. 
Wii,  he£mis  la  yiLEmsexs  lae  tetak'odalasa  ts!Elts!Elk"e  lax  awagawa- 
£yasa   L'.agEkwe   g"a    gwiileg'a    (fig.).     Wii,    la£me   gwala.     Wii,  la 
ax£edxa  malts!aqe  wiswiil  dzoxuma  qa£s  k"adEtodes  laxa  rnaltsUiqe  100 
LeLama  yix  la  gexutalaxa  plEgwayowe.     Wa,  la  k'adEtotsa  £nEm- 
tslaqe  dzoxiim  laxa   Llasallle  LeLama.      Wa,  la  ax£edxa  tslEX'ase 
£walas   le£wa£ya  qa£s    LEpEyindes   laq    qa   salas.     Wa,  ts!ets!EX'as- 
£Emxaiiwise  £nal="nEm  leEl£wa£ye  sasEba£yas  £wiix-sba£yasa  ku£le£lasa- 


678  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [ktii.  ran 

f>  of  the  bed  of  the  ||  mother  of  the  twins  and  her  Salmon  children. 
After  this  has  been  done,  |  she  takes  eagle-down  and  puts  it  on  the 
red  cedar-bark,  |  and  the  feathers  which  hang  from  the  net  on  the 
rear  of  the  wall  of  the  bedroom.  | 

When  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  the  after-birth  of  the  twins 
and  washes  it,  so  that  all  the  blood  comes  off;  and  after  doing  so. 

ID  she  II  hangs  it  up  near  the  bed  of  the  j  mother  and  of  the  twins;  and 
she  takes  the  wrapping  of  the  children,  and  |  puts  it  into  the  cedar- 
hark  box.  which  she  places  at  the  '  outside  of  the  head  of  the  bed 
that  she  made  for  the  mother  of  the  twins,  for  that  is  the  name  of 
the  |  bed  of  the  twin  mother  and  of  her  cliildren.     When  this  has 

15  been  done,  the  ||  woman  who  has  had  twins  before  speaks,  and  says 
to  the  mother  of  the  new-horn  twins  and  her  |  husband,  to  her  who 
is  still  sitting  on  the  floor  where  she  gave  birth  to  the  |  twins  near 
the  fire  of  the  house,  and  she  says:  |  "  Now,  take  care,  friends!  for  you 
will  take  up  in  your  arms  these  |  cradles  with  the  supernatural  ones, 

20  when  you  go  to  this  house  which  I  made  for  them;  for  you  ||  will 
really  take  care  of  both  of  those  whom  you  have  obtained  by  good 
luck,  your  |  friends,  so  that  they  can  not  complain  of  us  if  they  should 
get  sick.  |  I  say  so,  that  you  may  do  everything  in  the  right  way.  |  (I 
mean  that  the  Salmon  children  are  jealous;  J  for  it  kills  one  of  the  || 

25  twins  if  one  if  them  is  treated  well.  And  |  the  one  whom  you  do  not 
treat  well  will  become  weak  at  once,  go  away,  and  leave  behind  his  | 

5  sa  yikwlle  LE£wis  L!aL!EL'.Eyadza£yesasEma.  Wii,gil£mese  gwFdnx- 
lae  ax£edxa  qF.mxwasa  kwekwe  qa£s  qEmx£wides  laxa  L  !aL '.EgEkiila 
LE£wa  ts'.EltslEDrflasa  la  k'logwlg'alll  p!Egwa£yos  ku£le£lasa. 

Wa,  g'ltonese  gwalExs  lae  ax£edxa  maenasa  vikwFlEme  g'ing'ina- 
nEina  qa-s  aekle    ts!dx-widEq   qa  £wi£lawes   Elkwa.      Wa,   g'ibniese 

10  gwal  ts'.oxwaqexs  lae  ge.xwalilas  laxa  mExwfifa  laxa  ku-lelasasa 
yikwlle  i.i:-'wis  sasEme.  Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  qlEnepEmx'das  qaes  ax- 
ts'.odes  laxa  kadzEgwats!e  gildasa.  Wa,  lii  hang'alllas  lax  LlasodE- 
talllases  8xacya  yikwl£lats!e  g'aelasa,  qaxs  he£mae  LegEms  ku£!e- 
£lasasa  yikwlle    LF.Hvis  sasEme.     Wii,  g'il£mese  gwala,   laeda   yikwi- 

15  layag'ole  tslsdaq  yaq!Eg'a£la.  Wii,  la  melot  laxa  yikwlle  LE£wis 
liV'wfuiEmaxs  he£mae  k!udziie  mayoLelasasa  yikwilasa  ma£lokwe 
yikwI£lEms  liixa  £nExwanalise  lax  lEgwHasa  g'okwe.  Wa,  la  £nek'a: 
"Wiigil  la  yaLlai.Ex  £ne£nEmoku  qa£s  £nEmax£Ida£meLos  q!ElEl!lal- 
xa  xexaapts'.ala  enaenawalakwa  qaso  g'axr.  laxg'in  g'okwelek-  qaox, 

20  qaxsalak'!aliLaqos  £nEmalal  aek'ilal  qaoxs  wawalkina£yaqos,  £ne£nE- 
qaxsmok",  qa  k" leases  q!Emk'!alayolts6x  qo  lelagulx£edlaxo.  Wii,he- 
£mesEn  lagila£nex'  qa£s  walEmk"alaxda£xwaos  aek'ila  laxes  £naxwa- 
Laos  gwayi£lalasLEqu.  (HedEn  £ne£nak"ile  jixs  odzEgEmak'aexwa 
L!aL!Eyadza£yex  ging  inanEma,  yixs  he£mae  g'ayalatsa  £nEmdkwe 

25  laxa  yikwFlEme  ginginaiiErnxs  aek'ilasE£waexa  £nEm5kwe  qa£s  he- 
x'£ida£mes    lelagiilxudaxa    k' !ese    aek"ilasE£wa     qa£s    la    lowal£itses 


BOAS]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  679 

brother,  and  will    go    homo    to    the    Salmon    tribe    from    which  he  27 
came.)   |  That  is  what  I  mean,  friends !  that  you  may  take  good  care 
of  those  |  whom  you  obtain  by  good  luck."     Thus  says  the  woman 
who  has  had  twins  before,  II  to  the  woman  and  her  husband,  j  30 

As  soon  as  her  speech  is  ended,  the  young  mother  of  twins  |  and 
her  husband  arise,  and  both  take  up  at  the  same  time  the  cradles 
with  the  notched  head-boards.  |  Together  they  go, — the  woman  who 
has  had  twins  before  and  J  husband  and  wife, — side  by  side,  going 
towards  the  bed  in  the  room;  ||  and  when  they  reach  it,  they  put  35 
down  the  cradles  on  each  side  of  the  |  place  where  the  mother  of  the 
(new-born)  twins  is  going  to  lie  down.  Now  she  lies  down  between 
the  twins,  |  and  her  husband  sits  down  near  her  bed.  |  After  this 
the  woman  who  has  had  twins  before  takes  a  rest,  for  they  |  never 
pass  four  days  without  changing  the  II  kelp  head-bands  of  twin-  40 
children.  | 

When  four  days  have  passed,  the  woman  who  has  had  twins 
before  unties  |  the  head-band  of  the  twin-children.  She  takes  | 
perch-oil  and  oils  their  heads  and  |  also  their  bodies.  When  the 
heads  of  the  twin-children  are  soaked  with  perch-oil,  ||  she  takes  the  45 
kelp  head-bands  and  J  puts  them  around  their  heads,  with  the 
right  tightness:  j  and  after  she  has  done  so,  she  paints  their  faces. 
She  paints  them  both  in  the  same  way,  |  and  she  also  puts  the  same  | 


£nicmwEyote  qa£s  la  nii£nakwa  laxes  g-a£ya£nakidase  maesila.)     Wii,  27 
yu£mesEn  £ne>"nak"ilo  £ne£nEmok"  qa-s  iVmei.os   valval    laxes    aek'i- 
lasLaos,  qaos  wa£walk"ina£yex,"  £nex'£laeda  yikwFlayagole  tslsdaqa 
laxa  yikwile  hayasEk-ala.  30 

Wa,  g'thmese  q!ulbe  waldEmas  lae  EnEmax,£id  r.axnlllleda  yikwlle 
hayasi;k'ala  qa-s  rni:mx'£ide  dag'ildaxa  qeqEXEgEyo  xexaapla  qa-cs 
la  g'Slag'iwaleda  yikwilayagole  ts'.Edaqa.  Wii,  la  '"nEmagoLEmaleda 
yikwlle  hayasEkalaxs  lae  giiyolEla  laxes  kii£le£lasLe.  Wii,  gil- 
£mese  lag"aa  liiqexs  lae  £nEmx'-Id  hang-alllas  lax  :waxsanodza£yas  35 
kude-'lasLasa  yikwile.  Wa,  la£me  killkwagodxes  yikwi-lEme.  Wa, 
a£mes  la  klwag'alile  liFwfuiEmas  laxa  'nExwalalile  laxa  kicie£lase. 
Wii,  la£me  gwfd  laxeq  yawasJIdeda  yikwFlayag'ole  tslEdaqa,  qaxs 
k'!esae  hayaqax  mop!Enxwa£sa  i.!ai. !i:vadza£ye  qEX"sEmales  x'om- 
saxa  £wa£wade.  40 

Wii,  g'il£mese  m6p'.Enxwaesa  g'axaasa  yikwilayag'ole  ts!Edaq  ((wf'- 
lodp.x  qEX'sEma£ya  x"5msasa  L!a,L!EL!Eyadza£ye;  wii,  la  ax£edxa 
dzek!wese  qa£s  q!Els£Ides  lax  x'dmsasa  L!aL!EL'.Eyadza£ye.  Wa, 
lii  ogwaqax  ok!wina£yas.  Wii,  g'ihmese  LEqasa  dzek'.wese  x'omsasa 
L'.aL!EL!Eyadza£jraxs  lae  ax£edxa  £wa£wade  qEX'sEmes  x'oms  qa6s  45 
qExsEmdes  lax  x'omsas.  Wii,  la  heh'ale  lEk!utalaena£yas.  Wii, 
gil£mese  gwalExs  lae  gums£idEx  g'5guma£yas  £nEmala  LE£wa  £iie- 


680  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

painting  on  the  faces  of  the  mother  and  father;  that  is,  two  bands 

50  running  across  the  eyes,  ||  one  beginning  at  the  end  of  the  eyebrows 
and  passing  the  ends  of  the  |  eyes  to  the  lower  end  of  the  cheeks,  (lie 
other  across  the  |  middle  of  the  eyes  down  to  the  lower  end  of  the 
cheeks.1  |  After  this  has  been  done,  she  puts  the  children  into  the 
cradles;  |  and   the  woman  who  has  had   twins  before  comes  back 

55  every  four  days  to  II  untie  the  head-bands  of  the  twin-children,  and  | 
to  oil  with  perch-oil  their  heads  and  bodies.  |  This  continues  for  four 
months. 

After  four  months  she  stops  putting  the  head-bands  around  the  | 

60  heads  of  the  twin-children.  All  the  time  ||  the  faces  of  the  children 
and  of  their  parents  are  painted  with  ochre,  until  the  twin-children 
are  ten  months  old.  |  Mostly  the  |  children  continue  painting  with 
ochre  even  when  they  are  grown  up.  |  That  is  all  about  this.  | 

1  did  not  talk  about  this.     When  the  woman  who  has  had  twins  || 

65  first  puts  the  twin-children  into  the  cradles  with  the  notched  |  head- 
boards, when  they  are  four  days  old,  another  person  who  has  had 
twin-children,  a  man,  |  is  called  to  come  and  sit  down,  and  the  | 
numaym  of  the  father  of  the  (new-born)    twin  children  is  called  to  | 

70  come  into  his  house.  When  they  are  all  inside,  ||  the  chief  of  the 
numaym  of  the  father  of  the  (new-born)  twins  speaks,  |  and  says:  | 

48  m5ku.  Wa,  la-me  £nEmax  ise  giimsa£yas.  Wii,  heEmxaawise  gvviila 
giimsa£yasa  abEmpas  LE£wis  ompe,  yixs  L&LExstalaaxa  maemaltslaqe 

50  g'iig  lLElaxa  £nemts!aqe  gums  lax  oba£yas  aEnas  la  £wiibEndalax 
gE£yagEsas  lag'aa  lax  bEnba£yas  awodza£yas.  Wa,  la  nExsEmdalaxa 
£n Hints !aqe  gumse  lax  gE£yagEsas  g-ax£aLEla  lax  bEnba£yas  awo- 
dza£yasg'a  gwaleg'a.1  Wii,  g  il£mese  gwalF.xs  lae  xaaptslots.  Wa, 
hemEnala    g'axeda    ylkwilayag'ole    tstedaqxa    m5p!Enxwa£se   qa£s 

55  qwel£odex  qEX'sEma£yas  x'omsasa  L'a,L!EL!Eyadza£ye  g'ing'iniinEma 
qa-s  q'.Els£Idesa  dzEklwese  lax  x'ix'omsas  LE£wis  eok!wina£ye.  Wii, 
lii  mosgEmgilaxa  £mEkiila  he  gweg'ile. 

Wa,   g'il£mese    mosgEmg'ilaxa   £mEkiilaxs    lae   gwal   qEx'sEmala 
x'omsasa   L!aL'.EL!Eyadza£ye.      Wii,    laLa    hemEnalaEm   gflmsas6£sa 

60  gugum£yEme  LE£wis  gig'aolnokwe  lag'aa  laqexs  lae  helogwllaxa 
LlaLlEiJ.Eyadza^ye  ging'InanEma.  Wii,  £n5l£nEmp!Ena  hemEna- 
la£ma  g'tng'inani-:me  gumsasa  gugum-'vEmaxs  w;lx£mae  la  qlulsqWl- 
yakwa.     Wii,  laEin  gwai  liixeq. 

Wa,  Ieii  k'!es  gwagwcxsEx-'Id   laqexs  gil£mae  gwata  yikwllaya- 

65  goh"  ts'.Edaq  xaaptslotsa  yikwFlEme  g'ing'iniinEm  laxa  qeqEXEg'E- 
yowe  xexna]i!axs  lae  moxsek'ilaxs  lae  Le£lalasE£weda  ogii£la  yikwl- 
layagole  bEgwaiiEma  qa  g'axes  klwaela.  Wii,  la  £wi£la  Le£lalasE- 
£we  £nE£memotasa  ompasa  yikwPlEme  L!aLlEL!Eyadza£ya  qa  g'axes 
£wi£laeLEla  lax  g'okwas.     Wii,  gil£mese  £wi£laei.Exs  lae  yiiq!Eg'a£le 

70  g'igama£yasa  £nE£memotasa  yikwile  bEgwanEma.     Wii,la£me  £nek'a: 

1  On  each  side  of  the  face  one  vertical  line  running  from  the  outer  end  of  the  eyebrows,  and  one  from 
the  middle  of  the  eyebrows  down  to  the  level  of  the  mouth. 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  681 

"This  is  the  reason  why  you  were  called  to  come  into  the  house  of  72 
the  twins,  |  that  yon  may  make  a  dance  for  these  children  belonging 
to  the  Salmon,  for  |  we  will  let  our  world  know  about  these  who  came 
from  the  sea,  from  the  house  of  Swimmer  (the  Salmon).  ||  We  will  75 
take  these  supernatural  ones  who  belong  to  the  Salmon  out  of  this 
house.  |  Now  he  shall  carry  them  in  his  arms."  Thus  he  says,  and 
calls  the  name  of  the  |  man  who  has  had  twins  before,  and  he  also 
calls  a  woman  who  has  had  twins,  whom  lie  calls  [  his  wife,  although 
the  |  man  who  lias  had  twin-children  may  not  lie  her  husband.  || 

As  soon  as  his  speech  is  ended,  the  man  who  has  had  twin-children  |  SO 
goes  to  where  the  woman  who  lias  had  twin-children  is  seated,  I  and 
for  a  short  time  they  act  as  though  they  were  husband  and  wife.  He 
asks  for  ochre  |  and  eight  tail-feathers  of  an  eagle.  |  Then  the  elder 
brother  of  the  (new-born)  twin-children  |l  is  called  by  the  man  who  85 
has  had  twin-children  before  to  come  and  sit  down  by  his  side  |  and 
by  the  side  of  the  woman  who  for  the  time  being  acts  as  his  wife. 

When  Salmon-Head,  the  elder  brother  of  the  twins,  comes,  he 
sits  |  down  with  them,  and  they  paint  themselves  with  ochre, — the 
three  (the  man  and  the  woman)  |  and  Salmon-Head,  for  this  is  the 
name  of  the  woman's  child  ||  born  before  she  has  given  birth  to  twins.  |  90 
As  soon  as  a  woman  gives  birth  to  twins,  |  the  name  of  her  elder 
child  is  Salmon-Head;  and  if  the  child  horn  before  the  twin  children 


"  Yixs  hiie  Leelalag'il  qa  g'axes  -'wiMaeLEla  laxa  yikwr'latsle  g'Okwa  72 
qa£s  wag'i  kwexElaxa  L!ax!EL!Eyadza£ye  g'mginanEma  qF.ns  wagi 
nelalxEiis  malax  yisa  g"axsealisex  g'ax£id  la  g'6kwasmemEyoxwa£na. 
Wa,  hvmesEns  lawilsaltsoxwa  l  !aL  !el  !Eyadza£yex  £na£n&walakwa.  75 
Wa,  lamiesox  q!ElElaLox,"  £nex"  Lex£edEx  LegEmasa  yikwllayag'ole 
bEgwaiiEma.  "Wa,  yumiesox  gEUEmaxs"  £nex-  lcx-TmIex  LegEmas 
gEnEmasxa  yikwllayag'ole  ts'.Edaqa,  yixs  wax'£mae  k' !es  la£wadEsa 
yikwllayag'ole  bEgwanEma,  mek'e. 

Wa,  g'il£mese  qlulbe  waldEmas  lae  hex'-'ida-ma  yikwllayag'ole  80 
bEgwanEin  q!ap!eg"alH  LE£wa  yikwilayag-ole  tslEdaqa.  AVii,  la£me 
yawas-id  ha^yasEk'ogwalila.  Wa,  la-me  dak* !alax"da£xuq  gugum£yE- 
ma  lo£  malgiinalts'.aqa  ts Islts lElk'sa  naxsdE£yasa  kwekwe.  Wa, 
hemiise  £nolasa  ylkwPlEmeLlaLlELlEyadzeg'lng'tnanEma.  Wa,  la£me 
Leelalaso£sa  yikwllayag'ole  bEgwaiiEm  qa  g'axes  klwag'llilaxa  85 
yikwilayagole  bEgwaiiEm  LE£wis  yawas£Ide  gEnEma. 

Wii,  g'ihmese  g'axe  Hexi  !a-yc  yix  Enolasa  L!ai.!Ei.!Eyadza£ye  k!wa- 
g-flilaq.  Wii,  lax"da£xwe  gums£Itsa  gugum£yEme  laxes  yudukwae 
la  lo£  Hex't!a£ye,  qaxs  hemiae  LegEmsa  g-alagawa£ye  mayoLEmsa 
bstedaqaxs  k"!es£mae  yikwila.  Wii,  la  et!ed  bEwex£wida.  Wa.  on 
g*ll£mese  mayol£itsa  ma£lokwes  yikwPlEine,  wa,  la  hex,£idaEm  la 
Legade   moliises    Hex"t!a£ye,  wax'e   ts.!ats!adagEme  £nolasa  yekwi- 


682  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  anv  85 

93  is  a  girl,  her  name  is  Salmon-Head-Woman.  After  |  they  have  been 
painted,  they  put  red  cedar-bark   around   the  heads  of   the   three 

05  children;  and  ||  then  the  man  who  has  had  twin-children  before 
takes  eight  |  tail-feathers  of  the  eagle,  and  puts  one  over  the  middle 
of  the  forehead  in  the  |  red  cedar-hark  head-ring  of  Salmon-Head, 
and  he  puts  one  in  the  head-band  behind;  |  he  puts  one  over  the 
forehead  of  the  woman  who  acts  as  his  wife,  |  and  one  behind. 
There  arc  two  on  her.  Then  he  does  the  same  on  his  own  head-band 
.'()()  as  he  did  with  the  woman  ||  who  acts  as  his  wife.  Then  he  asks  for 
eagle-down;  |  and  when  it  lias  been  given  to  him,  he  \  takes  it  and 
scatters  it  so,  that  the  down  is  line;  and  |  after  doing  so,  he  puts  it  on 
Salmon-Head;  and  after  |  putting  it  on,  he  puts  it  on  the  younger 
5  brothers  of  Salmon-Head,  the  ||  two  twins.  And  alter  he  has  put 
down  on  them  |  he  puts  down  on  the  woman  acting  as  his  wife,  and 
finally  on  himself.  |  After  he  has  done  so,  he  and  the  woman  who  acts 
as  his  wife  arise,  |  and  he  calls  Salmon-Head  to  stand  between  them. 
Then  |  the  man  who  has  had  twin-children  speaks,  and  says:  | 

10       "Stand  up,  friends!  and   let  us  go  out  and  |  follow  the  rides  of 

Salmon-Chief!"     Thus  he  says.     And  all  stand  up.  j  They  all  have 

on  the  one  side  of  the     cedar-bark  head-rings  a  tail-feather  of  the 

!■")  eagle,  |  and  four  feathers  are  on   the  head-band  of  the  ||  parents  of 


93  li'mc  g-lnginanEma  la  LegadEX,eits  Hex-t!ega.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwal 
giimsaxs  lae  £nax\va  qEX  imtsa  LlagEkwe  laxes  yfidukwae.  Wii,  la 
05  ax£edxa  yikwllayag'ole  biegwanEmxa  matgu£nalts!aqe  ts  telts  telk'sa 
naxsdK£yasa  kwekwe.  Wii,  la  L!agEyotsa  -nEmts!iiqe  lax  nEqewa- 
•vas  L!agEkumaeyas  Hexrt!a£ye.  Wii,  lit  L'.aap'.Entsa  enEmts!aqe 
laxaaq.  Wii,  la  i.'.ag'Eyotsa  £nEmts!aqe  laxes  gEnEmbola.  Wii,  lii 
L'.aaplEntsa  malts'.aqe  laq.  Wii,  neEmxaawise  gwale  h&saqe  la 
200  gwalaatse  gEnEmbola.  Wa,  lii  dak*!alax  qEmxwasa  kwekwe,  yixa 
yikwilayag-ole  bEgwani;ma.  Wii,  lii  ts!aso-s;i  qEmxwa.  G'ifonese 
dax£Idqexs  lae  k!ulk!ulpsalaq  qa  ameamayastowesa  qEmxwa.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  gwala,  lae  c|euix£wh1kx  Hex't!aeye.  Wii,  gihmese  gwal 
qEmxwaqexs  lae  qEmx£widEx  ts!ats!aeyas  Hex*t!aeyexa  ma£lokwe 
5  ytkwielEm  L!a,L'.EL!Eyadzaeya.  Wii,  gil£mese  gwal  qEmxwaqexs  lae 
qEmx£w!dxes  gEnEmbola.  Wa,  i;il£mese  gwala  lae  q!ulx'seEm  qEm- 
x£wida.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwiila  lae  Lax£idll  LE£wis  gEnEmbola.  Wa, 
la  Leelalax  Hex-t!a£ye  qa  las  L&LEXwaweq.  Wa,  lii  yaq'.Eg'a£leda 
yikwllayag'olc  bi;g\vani;ma.  Wa,  la  £nek'a: 
10  "Wiigil  la  qlwagillLEX,  ene£nEmoku,  qEns  liilagil  hoquwiilsL  qions 
na£naxbaamex  waldEmas  maesila,"  £nExdaexs  lae  £nEmax'£id  q!wa- 
gilileda  £niixwa  bebEgwanEm  la  enaxwa  LaLanalis  qeqEX'Ema£ye 
L!agExuxa  £nal£nEmts!aqe  ts'.Elts'.Elk'asa  naxsde£yasa  kwekwe. 
Wa,  la    maemots'.aq  tslElts'.Elk'e  q!waq!wana£yax  qEx-Ema£ye  Lla- 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  683 

the    (new-born)    twins.     Then   the  parents  who  had   twin-childivn     13 
before  |  take  up  the  cradles  with  notched  head-boards.     And  their 
leader  is  |  Salmon-Head,  who  is  followed  by  his  father;  and  last  by 
his  mother.  |  Then  follows  the  man  who  has  had  twin-children  before : 
and  J  next   tn  him,   the  woman  who  acts  as  his  wife;  and  behind 
follow  ||  all  the  men.     They  go  out  of  the  house  of  the  twin-children.  |     20 
Salmon-Head  and  those  next  to  him —  J  that  is,  the  father  of  the 
(new-born)    twins,   and  behind  him   the  mother  of  the    (new-horn) 
twins, — that  is,  j  the  parents  of  Salmon-Head.     Next  to  them  is  the 
man  who  had  twin-children,  j  who  is  carrying  one  of  the  twin-children 
in  its  cradle  with  the  notched  head-board;  ||  and  next  to  him  followshis    25 
wife  with  the  |  other  cradle  with  the  notched  head-board   and   the 
other  twin-child  in  it;  |  and  behind  them  goes  the  numaym  of  the 
father  of  the  young  twins.  |  Now,  Salmon-Head  turns  to  the  j  right 
when  he  comes  out  of  the  door  of  the  house,  ||  and  the  whole  number    30 
follow  him;  and  when  they  come  to  the  space  between      the  house  in 
which  the  twins  were  horn  anil  the  next  one,  they  walk  through  the 
passage,  \  come  out  behind  the  house,  and  they  walk  behind  the  house 
in  which  the  twins  were  born.  |  They  come  out  at  the  right-hand  side 

(if  the  house  |  in  this  way:    ■— ■     Then  they  walk  along  the  front 

of    the   house   from  which    ;  i   they  started,  ||  and  walk  (past)  |     35 

thehousein  which  the  twin-  ;'| f |j  children    were    horn    and    the 

next  house,  and)    through    *L:-~- ''    the     passage     between     (that 

gExusa  yikwile  ha£yasEk"ala.  Wa,  heme  qlEtellleda  yeyikwilaya-  15 
g'olxa  £nal-nEmexLa  qeqEXEg'Eyowe  xexaapla.  Wa,  la  g  alagiwa;ye 
Hex"t!a£ye.  Wii,  la  niakile  ompaseq;  wa,  la  Elxueye  abEmpa- 
seq;  wii,  hemiis  la  mak'Eleda  yikwilayag'ole  bEgwanEmq.  Wa, 
la£mes  mak'ile  gEiiEinboliiseq.  Wii,  lamiese  £wi£la  la  eIxl.'i  \  a 
miixwa  bebEgwiinEmqexs  lae  hoqiiwEls  laxa  yikwi£lats!e  g'okwa.  20 
Wii,  lii  hemakule  g'iilaba£yase  Hex't  !a£ye  LE-wa  makiliiq  yixa 
j-ikwlle  bEgwiinEmq.  Wii,  la  ElxLa£3Ta  yikwile  tslEclaqa,  yix  g'lg'a- 
olnokwas  Hex-t!aEye;  wii,  he^mis  makilaqexa  yikwilayagole  bE- 
gwanEma  laxes  kalaenaJyaxa  xaaptslalasasa  L!aL!Eyadza£ya  qEXE- 
g-Eyowe  xaap'.a.  Wii,  la  makilacies  gEnEme  ogwaqa  k'alaxa  25 
mEmexLa  qEXEg"Eyowe  xaap'.a  xaaptslalatsa  mEmokwe  L!aL!Eya- 
dza£jra.  Wii,  he£mis  la  ElxLa£yaa  £nE£memotasa  yikwile  bEgwain:- 
ma.  Wii,  la£me  hegEm£nakiile  Hex"t!a£ye  lax  gwagawa£}'aasases 
helk'!olts!ana£yaxs  g'alae  lawEls  lax  t'.Ex-ilasa  yikwFlats'.e  gokwa. 
Wii,  lii  qas£Id  JwPla  laxes  £waxaase.  Wii,  gil£mese  liig'aa  lax  awaga-  :;o 
waeyasa  yikwl£lats!e  g'okwa  LE£wis  apsalase  lae  qaqEsolsaq  qa£s  lii 
nela  lax  aLana£yasa  g'okula.  Wa,  g'axe  aLakaxa  yikwl£lats!e 
g'okwa.  Wii,  iraxe  nel£id  lax  hel'k!odEnwa£yasa  yikwl£lats!e  g'okwa; 
g'a  gwiilcg'a  {fig.).  Wii.,  g'axe  L'.asanodiilaxes  g'iig'illlase  g'okwa 
qa£s  lexat!  qaqESElsa  awfigawa£ya  gEmxagawalase  g'okwa.     Wii,  la    35 


684  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  lBTH.AKN.S5 

36  and  the  next)  house  to  the  left,  and  |  do  the  same  as  they  did  with 
the  first  one.     In  this  way  they  go  around  four  houses  |  to  the  left 
in  (his  way:      _..„.........„.„......,       When  they  have  |  gone  around  the 

four   houses     :'|     |j|     |;;[|:j[>|ti       proceeding    toward    the    left,  until 
they  come     '-• *— '^-----v-t^'-^--         ^0  ^jle   |ast  |    house  they  go    along 

40  tlie  rear  of  the  four  houses  and  ||  come  out  of  the  right-hand  side 
of  the  house  in  which  the  children  were  born  and  they  all  go  in.  | 
When  they  arc  inside,  the  father  of  the  young  twins,  |  and  his 
wife,  and  Salmon-Head,  and  also  the  man  who  had  twin-chil- 
dren, |  and  (the  woman  acting  as)  his  wife,  who  are  carrying  the 
cradles  with  the  notched  head-boards  j  in  which  the  twin-children 

45  arc,  stand  up,  and  ||  stand  in  a  row.  Then  the  father-in-law  of  the  | 
father  of  the  young  twin-children  stands  up  and  gives  a  copper 
plate  as  a  marriage  gift  to  his  |  son-in-law  to  give  away  to  his  tribe. 
He  gives  him  no  names  |  for  the  twin-children,  for  the  right  to  give 

50  names  |  to  twins  belongs  to  a  grown  up  male  twin;  ||  often  a  grown 
up  twin-woman  names  them.  | 

Now,  the  tribe  invited  by  the  father  of  the  young  twins  come  |  and 
see  the  two  twin-children,  and  they  just  |  mention  the  name  of  (lie 
copper  until  the  property  of  the  father-in-law  of  the  |  father  of  the 
young   twins  is  ready  for  the  potlatch,     This  is  called  "buying  the 

55  copper"  when  ||  it  is  done  in  this  way.  | 


36  heEuixat !  gwex'-'Ides  gilx'de  gwex'£idaasa,  yixs  mosgEmae  g'ig'okwe 
gEmxsesstalasE£we  lir'stalasEwaxag'a  gwiileg'a  (fig.).  Wa,  gilmiese 
£wi£hi  lii'st  Elsidaxa  mosgEme  g'ig'okwalae  gEinxagElsElaxa  alElxsda- 
°ye  g-okwa  qaes  lit  heveka  iiLanodalaxa  mSsgEme  g"6kwa.  Wii,  la  L!a- 

40  sEX'sa  lax  helk" !odEnwaeyasa  yikwl£lats!e  gokwa.  Wa,  lii  hogwiLa 
£wi£la  laq.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wi£laeLExs  lae  asm  q!wag"a£lileda  yikwlle 
bEgwanEm  LEewis  gEnEme  Loe  Hext!a£yc  LE£wa  yikwllayag'ole  bE- 
gwanEm LE£wis  gEUEme  laxes  q!walxE£wnEkiilaena£ye  k'alaxa  qeqE- 
xcgEyowe  xexaaplaxa  xexaaptslalasasa  ylkwelEme  L!aL!EiJ.Eyadza- 

45  £ya  laxes  yipEmlI£lena£ye.  Wa,  he^mis  la  Lax£uli£latsbEgwanEme  iie- 
gflmpsa  yikwlle  bEgwanEma.  Wa,  la£me  wiiwalqiilasa  i.liiqwa  laxes 
nEgumpe  qap!Eseedayosexes  g'okulote.  Wa,lak"!eas  LegEm  layos  qa 
LegEmsa  yikwr'lEme  ginginanEma  qaxs  hets'.emasaa  Lex£ed  qa 
LgLEgEmsa  yikwPlEme  ginginanEma  la  qlulyak"  bEgwanEm  yikwl- 

50  £lEm.    Wii,  la  he  qliinala  Lex£ed  qa  LeLEgEmsxa  yikwFlEme  tslEdaqa. 

Wii,  laeme  LelElasE£we  g'okiilotasa  yikwlle  bEgwanEm  qa£s  g'axe 

xitslaxilaxa    maiokwe    yikwHlEm    L'.aL!Ei.!Eyadza£ya    qaxs   a£mae 

wul£Em  Lex£edxa  Lliiqwa,  qaxs  gwalil£mae    dadsk'asas    nEgiimpasa 

yikwlle   bEgwanEma.     Wii,  heEm   LegadEs  k  ilx"sEmdaxa  Llaqwaxa 

55  he  gwex-£ide. 


BOAS]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  685 

When  the  tribe  have  all  come  in,  |  the  father-in-law  (of  the  father)  56 
of  the  young  twins  buys  his  own  copper.     He  does  this,  |  that  the 
twin  children  may  have  a  name  on  account  of  the  |  copper  sold  at 
the  time  when  they  were  born.     Now,  ||  the  father  of  the  young  twins,  60 
and  his  wife,  are  dressed  up.     They  wear  blankets  set  with  J  abalone 
shells,  for  they  wish  the  twins  to  be  loved.  |  They  are  the  ones  who 
d<>  no  work  for  four  years,  and  |  they  carry  each  a  copper  when  they 
are  going  around  the  four  |  houses.     The  reason  why  they  each  carry 
a  copper  is  that  ||  they  wish  to  be  able  to  obtain  them  easily;  for  they  65 
often    carry  valuables  when   they  do   so,  |  going  around    the  four 
houses.     They  do  it,  because  they  have  to  work  |  for  their  beloved 
one  (that  is,  the  chief's  daughter),  who  must  not  do  any  work.  [ 
Those  who  have  many  relatives  do  this,  for  it  is  said  by  the  Indians 
that  |  all  the  relatives  will  die  if  they  do  not  follow  our  customs;  || 
that,  although  the  father  of  twins  |  and  his  wife  may  not  want  to  fol-  70 
low  the  rules,  all  the  relatives  beg  them  to  do  so,  |  and  to  purify  them- 
selves every  fourth  day  in  water  after  the  twins  are  |  four  days  old, 
and  that  they  do  not  [  forget  to  paint  themselves  with  ochre  after 
purifying  themselves  in  water,  ||  the  twins  as  well   as   the    married  75 
couple.     They  continue  to  do   this   until  the  twins  are  I  ten  months 
old.     When  the  minds  |  of  the  married  couple  who  are  the  parents 
of  twins  are  really  strong,  they  do  not  do  any  work  for  four  years;  | 

Wa,  g-il£mese  g'ax  £wi£laeLa  yix  g'okulotas.     Wa,  lii  kilxwa  yix  56 
nEgumpasa  yikwile  bEgwanEinxes  liEsmaq  Llaqwa.     I  let !  hegilts 
gwex,£Ide    qa  las    Legadaxa  yikwPlEine  ginginanEme    laxotg'ilaxa 
L'.aqwiixs   g'alae   mayol£Idaya.      Wa,    laeme    £nEmala    qlwalEnkwa 
yikwile  bEgwauEin  LEwis    gEnEine    yixs   £nEx£iinalaaxa  eex'tslEms-  60 
gEine  £naEnx£una£ya,  yixs   £nekae  qa£s  laxulanokweses  yikwFlEme 
g'ing'inanEina.     Wa,  heEm  mox£unxela  k'!eas   eaexenaeya.     HeEm 
dalaxa    enal£nEmsgEme    idaidEqwaxs    lae    la£stElsElaxa    mosgEme 
g'igokwa,  yixs  hae  lag'ilas  dalaxa  £nal£nEmsgEme  LlaiJEqwa  qa£s 
holEmaleq,  yixs  qlunalae  dalaxa  naxwa  lElxiilaemaxs  hae  gwex'£Ide  65 
yixs    la£stElsElaaxa     mosgEme    g'ig'okwa.      Wa,    heEm    gwegilas 
qaeda  laEl£wina£yexa  k-  !ease  ea£xena£ya.     Wa,  heEm  he  gwex"'"ideda 
c[!enEmas   LeLELala   qaxs    £nek-aeda   £naxwa   baklumcjexs  £\vl£wul- 
g'illlelaexa     LeLELaliixs    k"!esae    £wi£la   na£naxts!E£waxEns    la  gwa- 
gwex-s£ala,  yixs   wax-£mae    qlEmsa    aekilaxa    yikwile    bEgwaiiEm  70 
LE£wis  gEiiEme;  la  Enaxwa£me  LeLELaliis  hawaxElaq  qa  hemEnala- 
£mese  la£sta  laxa  £wapaxa  maemop'.Enxwa£se   £nala  gag'lLEla  laqexs 
lae  moxsekiles  yikwI£lEine  L!aLlEL!Eyadza£ya;  wa,  he£mis  qa  k'leses 
LlElewe  giims£Idxes  goguma£yaxs  lae  gwal  la£sta  laxa  Ewape  LE£wis 
yikwPlEme    L!aL!EL!Eyadza£yaxa   hayasEk'ala,   Ifdaa    laxa    helogwl-  75 
lax-dEmLases    yikwPlEme.      Wii,  g"il£mese  ala    ldk!wemase   nenaqa- 
£yasa    yikwile    hayasEk-alaxs  lae    mox£unxelaxa    ts!awiinxe    k"!eas 


686  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.S6 

78  that  is,  when  there  are  many  to  look  after  them  to  get  fire-wood 
and  |  food  for  them.  || 

SO  This  is  the  way  of  those  who  have  twin-children  and  who  have  no 
relatives, —  |  those  who  do  work  before  they  have  twin-children. 
When  (a  woman)  gives  birth  to  two  |  children,  what  she  often  does  is 
to  ask  |  the  midwife  to  choke  the  twin-  |  children,  that  they  may  go 

85  back  home  to  where  they  came  from;  and  ||  the  midwife  is  not 
allowed  to  disobey  the  wishes  of  the  one  |  of  whom  she  is  taking  care. 
Then  she  at  once  strangles  the  twins  |  that  belong  to  the  Salmon. 
She  tries  to  do  this  |  before  anyone  else  sees  the  woman  who  has 
given  birth;  and  when  j  the  twins  are  dead,  they  ask  the  father  of 

90  the  twins  ||  to  go  and  tell  his  relatives  that  his  wife  has  given  birth  to 
two  dead  twins.  |  Then  the  midwife  takes  the  afterbirth  and  washes 
it  weU:  |  after  washing  it,  she  hangs  it  up  to  dry.  |  Then  the  two  men 
who  climb  the  burial-tree  are  asked  |  to  come  and  bury  the  twins.  | 

95  When  ||  they  come,  they  quickly  make  two  boxes  for  the  |  twin- 
children.  They  are  of  exactly  the  same  size.  |  When  they  have  been 
finished,  they  take  a  board  out  of  the  right-hand  side  of  the  |  wall  of 
the  house  in  which  the  twins  were  born  to  take  out  the  twins;  |  for 
300  they  make  the  box  outside  of  the  II  house,  because  the  Indians  say 


78  ea£xena£ya  yixs  q'.enEmaes  helegime  qa  aneqaxa  li:qwa  Loe  qa  ha- 
£mek'Eyala  qae. 

80  Wa,g"a£mes  gwayi£lalatsa  k-  lease  LeLELala  yikwlle  hayasEk-ala,ytxa 
eeaxElaenoxwaxs  k"!es£mae  yikwll£eda.  Wa,  g"il£niese  mayorutsa 
ma£lokwe  ging  inanKma.  Wii,  het!a  qliinala  gwex£idaatsexs  iixklii- 
laeda  yikwlle  tslEdaqxa  mamayoltsIlaqqaqlwetslExodesexa  yikwI£lE- 
me  g"ing'inanEm  qa  liis  aedaaqa  na£naku  laxes  ga'x"£idaasa.     Wa,  la 

85  k!eas  gwex£idaatsa  mamayoltslla  tstedaq  Lalegwegex  waldEmases 
miimayoltsIlasE£we.  Wii.  la  hexndaEm  q Iwets lExodalaxa  yikwl-rh:me 
i.!ru.!EL!Eyadza£ya.  Wii,  la£me  hayalomalaa  he  gwex'eIdqexs  k'  !eas- 
£maeg'ax  oguda  doqwaxa  mayoi.a  tslEdaqa.  Wii,  g-llemese  lelE£leda 
yikwFlEme  ging'inanEma,  lae  hex-£ida£mes  omp  laxsdas  axk-!ala  qa 

90  las  nelasE£we  LeLELalasexs  lE£lalae  yikwi£lEmases  gEnEme.  Wii,  ia-'me 
ax£ededa  mamayoltslla  tslEdaqxa  maene  qa£s  aek"!e  tsSxwaq.  Wii, 
g'll£mese  gwal  tsloxwaqexs  lae  gex£walllaq  qa  lr:mx£wldes.  Wii, 
la£me  Le£lalasE£weda  ma£lokwe  hehEwenoxu  laxa  dExp!eqe  i.asa 
qa  g'axes  wunEmtaxa  ylkwFlEme  L!aLlEL!Eyadza£ya.     Wii,  gilcmese 

95  g'axExs  lae  halabala  wulx-£idxa  ma£ltsEme  qa  g'its'.Ewatsa  maslo- 
xude  L!a,L'.EL!Eyadze£  g'ing'manEma,  yixs  alae  £nEmfilasa  g'llgildase. 
Wa,  g"il£mese  gwiilExs  lae  k- !ExsotsE£we  helk  lodEnwalasasa  yikwl- 
£lats!e  g-okwa  qa  qlEltsSdaasxa  la  lelfid  yikwFlEm  L!ai>!EL!Eyadze 
g'ing'inanEma  qaxs  hae  wulasE£weda  g'ltslEwase  L!asana£yasa  yikwl- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  687 

that  it  brings  short  life  to  those  who  make  the  j  box  if  the  bodies  are  1 
pat  into  it  inside   the  house   of    the  parents,  even  !    in    the  case  of 
those  who  are  not  born  as  twins.     After  the  twins  j  have  been  put 
into  the  box,  they  paint  their  faces  with  ochre.     Now,  |  the  faces  of 
the  two  dead  children  have  been  painted  with  ochre.  ||  When  this  has  5 
been  done,  they  put  wrappings  around  them,  |  and  put  them  into  the 
box.     Then  |  they  take  a  long  cedar-bark  rope  and  put  it  around  the 
burial-box  |  to  hold  down  the  cover,  and  also  for  the  four  men  to 
carry  them,  j  when  they  bury  them.     Then  it  is  in  this  way: 
After  ||  the  ropes  have  been  put  around,  eight  Salmon  people  1 1 1  |  1 1    10 
come|  and  stand  by  the  sides  of  the  burial-boxes,  two  [on  each 
side:   so   that   there  are  four  people    carrying    |   each  burial-box  of 
those  who  are  dead.     Then  they  go  to  bury  them.  |   The  two  men 
who  climb  the  II  burial-tree  go  a  long  distance  ahead,  each  carrying  l"1 
one  short  board,  and  they  |  look  for  a  good  tree  with  good  branches  on 
which  to  place  the  boards,  on  which  the  burial  boxes  of  the  twins  are 
placed.     As  soon  as  they  find  what  they  are  looking  for,  j  they  climb 
up,  and  put  down  the  boards  where  |  they  are  to  be.     After  they  h;>\  e 
done  this,  those  who  are  going  to  bury  them  arrive,  and  ||  place  the  20 
burial-boxes  at  the  foot  of  the  twin  burial-tree.     Then   |  the  eight 
Salmon  people  sit  on  the  ground.     Now  one  of  the  tree-climbers 
comes   down,    takes    the   |   rope,    and    puts   it   around    the  middle 

slats!e  g'okwa,  yixs  £nek'aeda  baklumaqexs  wlwulg"llllilaexa  wulaxa  300 
g-its!EewasLasa  lE£le  lax  awlLEliis  g'okwasa  g'ig'aolnokwasa  wax-tm 
k"!es    yikwelEma.      Wa,    g'ibmese    latsloyoweda    yikwFlEme    Ifixa 
g"Its!E£wasas  lae  gums£itso£sa  gugum£yEme.     Wa,  la£me  hamElqEm- 
dEyowa  gugumvEme  lax  gogiigEma£yasa  madokwe  lelEd  g'lng'inanE- 
ma.     Wii,  g'ihmese  gwalExs  lae  qlEnepsEintsoses  q!Enel>Eme.     Wa,  5 
lawIsLe  latsloyo   laxes   g'Igits'.E£wase.     Wa,  g"il£mese   gwalExs   lae 
ax£etsE£weda  gilt'.a  cIeiiseii   dEiiEma   qa£s   qEx'sEmdavaxa    g'ltslE- 
£wase  qa  Elalayasa  3Tikiiya£ye;  wa,  he£niis  qa  dalaatsa  mokwe  bebE- 
gwaiiEin  qo   lal  wuuEmtai.Eqxa   g'a  gwaleg"a  (fig.).     Wa,  gil-nie-e 
gwala    wulxsEma£ye     g'axaasa    malgunaelokwe     L!at!EL!Eyadzaeya  1() 
qa£s  lii  LaLonElsaxa  g"Its!E£wasasa  L !a,L !el !Eyadza£yexa  maemado- 
kwe  lax  epsana£yas  lax  maemok!wina£yasa  L!aL!EL'.Eyadza£ye  dalaxa 
£nEmsgEine  g'Its'.E£watsa  la  lelE£la.     Wa,  la  qas£ideda  wiinEmta  yixs 
gEyolaaLal    qas£ideda    madokwe    bebEgwanEmxa  heliE^wenoxwaxa 
dKxpleqe  Lasa  dalaxa  £nal£nEinxsa  ts!ats!Ets!fixuSEma.     Wit,  la:me  15 
alax  ek'a  Las  lax  helalas    LlEnak'e  qa   paqalaatsa  hanx'dEmai.as.i 
dEgats'.asa  L!aL!EL'.Eyadza£ye.     Wa,  g'il£mese  qlaxes  alasEewe  lae 
gwalElaEm  la   hax£wida   cja£s   la     pax£ai.Elotsa    ts!ats!axusEme   lax 
axasi.as.     Wa,  g'il£mese  gwfde  axa£yas  g'axaasa  wunEmta  qa£s  han- 
g'aElsexa  dedEg'ats'.e  lax  6xLa£yasa  L'aLlELlEyadzep'.eqe  Lasa.    Wa,  20 
la  kltisElseda  malguna£lokwe  L!a,L'.EL!Eyadza£ya.     Wii,  g'Sxe  g'axa- 


688  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.85 

of     one    of     the     burial-boxes.    |    He  throws    up     the    other  end, 

'_'.")  which  is  used  as  a  hoisting-rope.  Then  it  is  caught  ||  by  the  other 
climber,  who  hoists  up  the  burial-box.  |  The  other  climber  goes  up 
at  the  same  time,  holding  the  box,|  so  that  it  does  not  knock  against 
the  burial-tree  while  it  is  being  [  hoisted  up.  When  it  reaches  the 
board  on  which  the  burial-box  |  of  the  twins  is  to  be  placed, the  one 

30  climber  ||  who  has  remained  in  the  tree  takes  it  and  puts  it  on  the  |  board 
where  it  is  to  stay.  After  this  has  been  done,  he  |  lets  go  of  the  rope; 
the  other  |  climber  goes  down,  and  puts  the  end  of  the  rope  |  around  the 

35  middle  of  the  other  burial-box.  Then  it  is  hauled  up  by  the  ||  climber 
who  stays  behind,  and  the  other  |  climber  holds  the  box  as  it  is  being 
hoisted  up.  When  it  reaches  the  place,  |  it  is  put  on  top  of  the  first 
one  that  they  have  put  up.  Then  |  the  end  of  the  rope  of  the  burial- 
box  is  untied  and  is  thrown  down.    |    The  one  climber  goes  down  with 

40  it;  ||  and  when  he  reaches  the  ground,  he  ties  another  hoard  to  the  |  end 
of  the  rope.  This  is  hauled  up  by  the  climber  who  stays  in  the  tree;  j 
and  when  it  reaches  the  board  where  |  the  two  burial-boxes  have  been 
placed,  it  is  taken  by  the  climber  who  remains  |  in  the  tree.     He  puts 

22  xeda  enEmokwe  laxa  heliE£wenoxwe  bebEgwiinEm  qa£s  ax£edexa  dE- 
nEnie  qa£s  qEX"SEmdes  lax  nEgoya£yasa  n£EmsgEme  dEg-ats!a.  Wii, 
la  tslEqostots  apsba£yasa  dEng'ostala£yo  dEnEma.     Wa,  la  dadala- 

25  so£sa  MiF.mdkwe  h.Vwenoxwa.  Wii,  lii  dEng'ustodxa  dEg-ats!e.  Wa, 
leda  £nEmokwe  ha£wenoxu  la  £nEma£niikula  ek'Iolida  dalaxa  dsg'atsle 
qa  k'leses  xEmsatEla  laxa  LlaLlEL'.EyadzepIeqe  LasExs  lae  dEng'o- 
stalaya.  Wit,  g'il£mese  lagaa  liixa  ts!ats!axusEme  handzosa  dEg"a- 
tslasa  L'.aLlEL'.Eyadzaxde.    Wa,  la  dadanodeda  ha£wenoxwe  bEgwa- 

30  nEmxa  hexsii  leda  ek'!e.  Wa,  la  dax-£IdEq  qa£s  handzodes  laxa 
ts!ats!ax"sEme  handzosa  dEg-ats!e.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalaaLElaxs  lae 
et!ed  ts'.Enkwaxotsa  dEiiEme.  Wa,  la£mese  lasgEma£ya  £nEmokwe 
haewenoxu  qaes  la  laxa.  Wa,  lii  qEx'sEmts  obasyasa  dEnsme  laxaax 
£nEgoya£yasa  dEg"ats!e.     Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalfexs   lae   dEng-ustoyosa 

35  ha£wenoxwe  bEgwanEm  laxa  ek'!e.  Wii,  lasEmxaawisa  £nEmokwe 
ha£wenox"  dalaqexs  lae  ek'Sotela.  Wii,  gihmese  lag'aaxs  lae 
hank'ayEiulayo  liixa  g'ale  la  hanalaLEla.  Wa,  g"il£mese  gwiila  lae 
qweloyowe  oba£yasa  dEiiEme  laxa  di:gats!e  qa£s  tslEqaxodes 
oba£yasa    dEnEme.     Wii,    la    lasgEina£ya    £nEmokwe    ha£wenoxuq. 

40  Wii,  g'il£mes6  lagilsExs  lae  ax£edxa  ts!ats!axusEme  qa£s  yltoyodes 
obaeyasa  dEnEme  laq.  Wii,  la£me  dEng'ustoyosa  hex'sii  leda  ek!e 
ha£wenoxwa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  lag'ustaweda  ts!ats!axusi:me  liixa  la 
niEXElaLElatsa  ma£ltsEme  dedEgpats!a  lae  dax-£Itsosa  heniEiialaLEla 
laxa  ek!e  ha£wenoxu  bEgwaiiEma  qa£s  paqEylndes  lax  6kiiya£yasa 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  689 

it  on  top  of  the  ||  upper  burial-box;  and  then  the  other  climber  goes  45 
up,  |  and  helps  his  friend  tie  the  |  burial-box  to  the  twin  burial-tree  with 
the  rope  which  they  have  used  for  hoisting  the  burial-boxes.   |  When 
this  has  been  done,  both  comedown;  |  and  as  soon  as  they  reach  the 
ground,  the  eight  ||  Salmon  people  rise  and  they  go  home  together  with  50 
the  two  |  climbers,  for  the  parents  of  the  dead  twins  do  not  go  along. 

Three  days  after  the  children  of   the  parents  of  the   twins  were 
born,  |  in  the  evening,  all  the  men  ||  of  the  tribe  of  the  parents  of  the  55 
twins  sit  down  outside  of  their  houses;  |  and  when  they  are  all  there, 
a  man  who  is  |  told  by  the  tribe  to  speak,  addresses  them,  for  this 
man  is  not  |  one  of  the  chiefs;  but  the  chiefs  have  asked  him  |  to 
speak,  for  the  chiefs  are  afraid  of  the  parents  of  twins,  ||  because  60 
nobody  ever  succeeds  in  anything  if  the  parents  of  twins  wish  ill  to 
him.  |  Therefore  the  chiefs  do  not  show  that  what  is  said  is  [  the 
speech  which  they  wish  to  be  made.     The  man  says,  |  "O  tribe!   1 
invited  you  to  come  here  and  be  seated,  that  I  may  ask  the  parents  of 
twins  |  whether  they  intend  to  keep  the  taboos.     Now  I  will  go  ami 
ask  them."    ||  Thus  he  says,  and  walks  into  the  house  in  which  the  65 
twins  were  born;  |  and  when  he  goes  in,  the  woman,  the  mother  of  the 
twins,  says  at  once  |  that  she  has  heard  what  was  said  by  the  people 

ek'leLEla  dEg'ats!ii.  Wa,  gil-cmese  gwala  lae  ek'!e£steda  £iiEmdk\\e  45 
ha-wenoxwa  qa£s  la  g'5x£widxes  £iiEmokwaxs  lae  yil£aLElotsa 
df'dEgatsIe  laxa  L'.aL!EL!Eyadzep!eqe  Lasa,  yises  dEng-ustalayoxude 
dEiiEma.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwala  g'axae  £wl£la  koqwaxaxs  ma'lokwae. 
Wa,  gilmiese  gTixElsa  lae  £wFla  q'.wag'ilseda  nialguna£lokwe  l!;il!e- 
i.!e\ adza£ya  qa£s  lax'da£xu  £nEmax,£Id  na£naku  LE£wa  ma£lokwe  50. 
hehE£wenox"  bebEgwaiiEma  qaxs  k'leasae  las  g'ig'aolnokwasa  la  1cIe£1 
L  !aL  !el  '.Eyadza£ya. 

Wa,  g'ilmiese  yudiixup!Enxwa£s  gwases  mayoldEmasa  yikwile 
hayasEk'ala;  wa,  g*ilemese  dzaqwaxs  lae  k!ussElseda  maxwa  bebE- 
gwanEms  g"6kulotasa  yikwile  hayasEk"ala  lax  L'.asana£yas  g'dkwas.  55 
Wii,  g-il£mese  £wilg-aElsExs  lae  yaq!Eg-a£leda  bEgwanEine  ylxa 
axk' !alasE£wases  g-5kulote  C[a  yaqlEiit'.ala,  yixs  k-!esae  g'ayol 
bEgwanEine  laxa  g"Ig'Egama£ye.  Wa,  laLa  he£ma  g'IgEgama've 
axk"!ala  qa  yaqlEnt'.ales  qaxs  kilEmaeda  yikwllasa  g"Ig-Egnma'"ve 
qa£s  k'lesae  wEySLlenoxwa  yikwllaxs  hankwaaxes  gwE£ya  qa  teeles.  fin 
Wa,  he£mis  lag"ilas  k"!es  neltsEinala  he  yaq!Eg-a£leda  gigEgama- 
£yases  waldEmexsde.  Wa,  la  £nek"eda  bEgwanEine:  "HedEn  lagila 
£nex-  qEns  g'axe  k!iis£Elsa,  g'okulot,  c[En  wiiLexwa  yikwllax  haya- 
sEk'ala  aek'IlaEinLilao  l5£  k'!es.  Wa,  la£mesEn  lal  wuLalqo," 
£nek-Exs  lae  qas£ida  qa£s  le  laeL  liixa  yikwl£lats!e  g'okwa.  Wa  G5 
gil£mese  laeLExs  lae  hex-£ida£meda  yikwile  tslEdaq  he  gil  yaqlE- 
g"a£la  qaxs  wuLEla£maax  waldEmasa  bEgwanEine  lax  Llasamvvases 
75052 — 21 — 35  eth — pt  1 44 


690  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.sb 

68  outside  of  the  |  house.  And  the  woman,  the  mother  of  the  twins,  says, 
"We  shall  not  |  observe  the  taboos.     We  are  going  to  dress  in  our 

70  work-clothes  in  ||  the  morning,  and  you  shall  come  and  beat  rapid 
time  when  we  go  out  of  this  |  house  in  which  the  twins  were  born." 
As  soon  as  she  ends  her  speech,  |  the  man  goes  out,  and  repeats  to  his 
tribe  what  the  ,  mother  of  the  twins  has  said;  and  the  man  tells  his  | 

75  tribe  to  rise  early,  when  daylight  comes,  and  beat  rapid  time  ||  for  the 
parents  of  the  twins,  in  front  of  the  house  in  which  the  twins  were 
born.  Thus  he  says.  J  And  when  he  ends  his  speech,  the  men  all  go 
home  |  to  their  houses.  Tn  the  morning,  when  it  gets  day,  |  the  men 
arise  from  their  sleep,  and  |  sit  down  outside  of  the  house  in  which  the 

80  twins  were  born;  and  when  ||  they  arrive,  they  take  their  batons 
and  distribute  them  |  one  to  cadi  man;  and  when  |  each  man  has 
one,  the  one  who  spoke  before,  |  when  the  tribe  first  sat  down,  goes 
into  the  house.  He  does  not  stay  there  a  long  time,  before  |  he 
comes  out  of  the  door  of  the  house  in  which  the  twins  were  born,  and 

85  says,  ||  "Now,  beat  time  rapidlj  !"  And  when  he  says  so,  all  |  the 
men  beat  time  rapidly  on  boards.  First  the  |  father  of  the  twins 
cumes  out,  and  lie  has  hanging  on  his  back  the  wedge-bag  in  which  are 
his  wedges  |  and  his  stone  hammer.     In  his  right  hand  he  carries  | 


68  gokwe.  Wa,  lii  £nekeda  yikwlle  tshsdaqa:  "K'leselg'amr^x" 
£nEmalal    aek'ilal.    Es£niaeLanu£xu    q!walEnxultsEnu£xu    eeaxElayax 

70  gaalaLa  qa£s  gaxlagii.os  Lex£ults !odEl  g'axEiiu£xu  laxwa 
yikwl£lats  !ex  g'okwa,"  £nek'Eq.  Wii,  g'il£mese  q!ulbe  waldEmas 
lae  lawElseda  bEgwiinEme  qa£s  le  ts!i:k' !ati:las  waldicmasa  yikwlle 
tslEdaq  laxes  g'okul5te.  Wa,  he£mis  waldEmsa  bEgwaiiEmaxes 
g'okulote  ({a  £wi£les  gag'ostil  qo  snax-£idLo,  qa£s  g'axlag'Il  lcxeweI- 

75  saxa  yikwlle  hayasnk'ala  laxes  yikwl£lats!e  g'Okwa,  £nek'e.  Wii, 
laEm  qlulbe  waldEmas  laxeq.  Wii,  licx-cida£mese  la  naenakweda 
maxwa  l)el)EgwanEm  liixes  g'ig'okwe.  Wii,  g'ilemese  £na£naku]axa 
gaiiliixs  lae  nvlda  Laxnvideda  mexax'de  bebEgwanEma  qa£s  lii 
k!us£Els  lax  L'.asaiuVyasa  yikwi£lats!c  g'okwa.     Wii,  g"il£mese  £wil- 

80  g'aElsa  lae  ax£etsEeweda  t!et!Emyayowe  f[a£s  tslEwanagEmaexa 
£nalenEmts !aqe  liixa  £nal£nEmokwe  bEgwani:ma.  Wii,  g'il£mese 
q'.walxoxtiiweda  bebEgwanEmxs  lae  laeLeda  yaq'.Entlalax'de  bEgwii- 
nEmxs  g'alae  k!us£Else  gokfdotas.  Wa,  k'!est!e  galaxs  gaxae 
g'axawEls    lax     tlExilasa     yikwl£lats!e    g'okwa.      Wii,    la    £nek'a: 

85  "  Weg'a  LexEdzodEx,"  enek'Exs  lae  £nEmiix'£id  LexEdzodeda  £naxwii 
bebEgwiinEmxa  pacjlEse  LexEdzowe  saokwa.  Wii,  he£me  g'iila- 
ba£ya  yikwlle  bEgwanEma  tegwek'Elaxr's  qlwaats'.ases  LEmlEing'ayo 
loxs  £niExuts!aes  pElpElqe  laq.  Wa,  laxae  dak' !olts '.aliases  helk'Iol- 
ts!ana£ye    laxes  se£wayowe.     Wii,    lii    dalases    gEmxolts!iina£yaxes 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  691 

his  paddle,  in  his  left  hand  his  ||  mat,  as  he  comes  walking  along.  90 
Next  to  him  comes  |  his  wife,  who  carries  on  her  back  her  clam- 
digging  |  basket,  and  in  it  is  her  berrying  basket.  J  Iii  her  right  hand 
she  carries  her  paddle  and  her  digging-stick:  |  in  her  left  hand,  her 
mat  and  her  bailer  made  of  ||  a  large  horse-clam  shell,  which  she  uses  95 
when  digging  clams;  |  and  an  old  mat  is  spread  over  her  back.     Both 
of  them,  |  she  and  her  husband,  wear  belts.     The  |  three  go  out,  fol- 
lowing one  another, — first  the  man  who  spoke,  |  next,  the  father  of 
the  twins,  and  last  the  mother  of  the  twins.  |]  Then  they  come  walk-  400 
ing  along,  and  stand  |  outside  the  door  of  the  house,  and  when  they 
stop  walking,  I  all  the  men  stop  beating  time;  and  that  |  man,  the 
only  one  who  speaks,  addresses  them,  and  tells  all  |  the  people  that 
tlie  parents  of  the  twins  will  not  obey  the  taboos,  ||  ami  that  they  will  5 
continue  to  work  as  they  used  to  do  before,  and  that  for  this  reason  | 
they  have  come  in  their  working-dresses.     Then  he  j  promises  a  pot- 
latch  to  his  tribe.  | 

Immediately  he  gives  away  blankets  to  his  tribe;  j  and  after  this 
has  been  done,  ||  the  man  and  his  wife,  the  parents  of  the  twins,  are  10 
at  once  allowed  to  work,  when  she  gets  strong  enough  to  work.   | 
Now  this  is  ended.  I 


le£wa£yaxs   g'axae    ex,JEm  qiimakfda.     Wii,  hecmes   makdlaqes   gE-  90 
nEme.      Wii,    laEmxae    t!egwik'Elaxes    dzeg'ats'.axa    gaweqlanEme 
lExa£ya.      Wii,     la     hants!aso£sa    hamyatsle    lExa£ya.     Wii,     laxae 
dak"!ohs!anases  helk'!olts!ana£ye  laxes   se£wayowe  LE£wis  k'liliikwe. 
Wii,  la  dalases  gEmxolts!ana£ye  laxes  le£wa£ye  LE£wis  xEloltslalayo 
£walas     xalaetsox     mEt!ana£yax     dzek'aaxa     gTtweqliinEme     laxes  95 
LEbek'ilaena£yaxa  k'  !ak*  lob  an  a.     Wii,  lii  cnEmalaEm  wlwuseg'oyala 
LE£we  hVwiinEme.     Wii,  la£me  dEnoxLiilaxs  yudukwae  ylxs  hemiae 
g'iilabesa     hayasEk'alaxa     yaq!Ent!alax-de    DEgwanEma.     Wii.     lii 
mak'ilaqexa  yikwile  bEgwaiiEma.     Wii,  la  Elxxa£ya  yikwile  tslEdaqa. 
Wa,    g'axe    ex£Em  q.Vnakula    qa£s    g'axe    q!wag"aEls    laxa    idasa-  400 
lElk'ase  lax  t'.EX'llases  g'okwe.     Wii,  gibmese  gwal  qasaxs  Lae  gwiil 
LexEdza£yeda  £naxwa  bebEgwanK.ma.     Wii,  la  yiiq'.Eg'adeda  bEgwa- 
nEine,  yixa  £nEmoxusiime    yaq'.Entlala.     Wa,  laeme  nelaxa  maxwa 
bebEgwanEinxs  k"  !esae   aek'ileda  yikwile   hayasEk'ala  ylxs   a£meLe 
h&yolisL  axax'salal  laxes  £nilxwa  ea£xemvva.     "Wii,  hemiislag'IlasEk-  5 
he  gwiila  g'ilx    q!waq!iilax'LEnu£xusg'as  eeaxElayuku."     Wii,    la.une 
dzoxwa  qaes  g-okidote  laxeq. 

Wii,  hex'£ida£mese    yaxewidxes  g"okulotasa    plElxElasgEme.    Wa, 
g'ibmese    gwalEXs  lae  hex-£idaEm    helq lolEmses    gokulote  axax'sa- 
laxa  yikwile  bEgwanEma  LF/wis  gimnmaxs  lae  hetats'.ala  axax'sala.  10 
Wa,  la£me  gwal  laxeq. 


692  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL 


12  Now  I  shall  talk  about  the  mother  of  twins,  |  who,  together  with 
her  husband,  obeys  the  taboos.  |  When  she  is  pregnant  again,  the 

15  woman  ||  and  her  husband,  paint  their  faces  with  ochre,  when 
daylight  comes  in  the  |  morning,  and  they  wear  around  their  heads 
rings  of  red  cedar-bark,  with  |  one  white  tail-feather  of  the  eagle 
standing  in  the  back.  They  wear  these  during  the  whole  time  of  her 
pregnancy ;   |  and  when  the  child  is  born,  is  at  once  given  the  name 

20  Salmon-Tail  if  it  is  a  boy;  ||  and  if  it  is  a  girl,  it  is  called  Salmon-Tail- 
Woman.  |  Then  they  take  one  of  the  cradles  with  notched  head- 
board |  of  the  twin  brothers  for  the  cradle  of  Salmon-Tail,  and  they  | 
do  everything  to  him  as  they  did   to  his  elder  brothers,  the  |  twins. 

25  And  when  Salmon-Tail  is  ten  months  old,  ||  he  is  taken  out  of  the 
cradle.  They  take  the  cradles  with  notched  head-boards  |  to  the 
cedar-bark  cave.  | 

I  have  forgotten  this.     When  the  twins  are  ten  months  old, — 
that  is,  if  they   are  recognized  as  olachens  by  an  old  man,  one  of 
twins —  |  generally  this  is  a  pair  of  twins,  consisting  of  a  boy  and  a 

30  girl, —  ||  and  leg-rings  and  arm-rings  are  put  on  them,  |  an  old  man, 
one  of  twins,  is  called  to  give  them  a  name  obtained  from  the  olachen. 
Then  he  looks  at  their  hands;  and  when  he  sees  that  the  twins  have  | 
small  hands,  the  old  man,  one  of  a  pair  of  twins,  says  to  the  |  boy, 

12  Wa,  la£mesEn  gwagwex-s£alal  laxa  yikwlle  ts!i:daqa,  ylxa  aeki- 
laxs  yikwllaeda  ts'.Edaqe  mEinala  LE£wis  hVwunEme.  Wa,  gil- 
emae    et  led    bEwex£wida   lae   Loma    la  aek'ileda    tslEdaqe   £nEmala 

15  LE£wis  hVwunEme  la-me  qlwalxoEin  gumsasa  gugumyEmaxa  g-alae 
£nax'£idxa  gegaala.  Wa,  laxae  hemEnalaEm  qeqEXEmalaxa 
L'.agEkwe  LeLaapIalaxa  fn;ll£nEints!aqe  £mEla  fcs!Elts!Elk"sa  naxsdE- 
£yasa  kwekwe;  lalaa  lax  helosgEmg'ilax'dEniLasa  bEwekwa.  Wa, 
gil£mese  mayol£Ida  lae  hexudaEm  LegadEs  Ts!asna£ye,  yixs  baba- 

20  gumae.  Wa,  g-il£mese  ts'.ats'.adagEms  lae  LegadEs  Tslasnega.  Wa, 
la£me  ax£etsE£weda  £nEmexLa  laxa  qeqEXEg'Eyowe  xaap !as  enolasxa 
yikwPlEmas  abEmpas  qa  xaap!as  Ts!asna£ye.  Wa,  la£me  aEm 
la  £wll£a  nEgEltEwesE£we  gwayi£lalase  qae  lax  gwayi£lalasax  £no£nE- 
lasxa  yikwi£lEmases  abEmpe.     Wii,  g-U£mese  helogwila  Ts!asna£yaxs 

25  lae  gwal  xaapasE£wa.  Wa,  la£me  lajTowa  malEXLa  qeqEXEg'Eyowe 
xexaap!a  laxa  k'adzEklwaase. 

Wa,  hexoLEn  L'.ElewesE£wa,  yixs  g-il£mae  helogwileda  yikwI£lEme 
L!aL'.EL!Eyadza£ya  yixa  malt  !ele  dzaxuna,  yisa  la  q!iilyaku  yikwl- 
£lEma,  yixs  q'.onalae    bExuk'!odEqEla,    wa,    la    tslEdaqa    £nEmoku. 

30  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl£la  qEx"£aLEle  kwekiinxwedEmas  lae  Le£lalasE£weda 
la  q'.ulyak"  yikwPlEma  qa£s  Lex£edes  LegEmas  laxes  g-ayolasa 
dzaxune,  yixs  hiie  doqwasose  eeyasas.  Wa,  gil£mese  doqiilaqexs 
am£amexts!ana£yexa  yikwrlEine    L'.aL'.Eyadza£ya,    wa,  la  £nek-eda 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  693 

"  O  friend  Making-Satiated !  yon  are  an  olachen, "  ||  for  that  is  a  name  35 
coming  from  the  home  |  of  the  olachen;  and  he  looks  at  the  other  one 
of  the  twins,  |  and  he  names  her  Making-Satiated- Woman.  When  the 
twins  come  from  |  the  Silver-Salmon,  then  the  girl  twin  is  called 
Ahalone- Woman,  |  and  the  boy  is  called  Only-One;  ||  and  when  the  40 
twin-children  come  from  |  the  Sockeye-Salmon,  the  girl  is  called 
Head-Dancer  and  |  the  boy  is  called  Head-Worker.  | 

Now  I  shall  talk  again  about  the  woman,  the  mother  of  |  Salmon- 
Tail,  the  younger  brother  of  the  twins.  You  already  ||  know  that  45 
the  cradles  with  notched  head-board  of  the  |  twins,  after  they  have 
been  used  for  their  younger  brother  Salmon-Tail,  j  are  taken  to  the 
cedar-bark  cave.  The  mother  of  twins  does  not  keep  their  cradles.  | 
If  the  woman  expects  another  child,  |  the  Indians  are  careful  not  to 
make  the  cradle  before  II  the  child  is  boin,  for  often  the  child  will  be  50 
dead  when  it  is  born;  |  therefore  the  cradle  is  made  after  the  child 
is  born.  |  When  the  child  is  born,  |  they  make  the  cradle  at  once. 
Then  |  the  child  and  his  parents  go  straight  back  to  the  old  ways. 
There  are  none  of  the  customs  that  are  being  observed  with  twins,  || 
and  with  their  parents,  and  the  |  child  of  the  mother  who  had  given  55 


yikwI'lEme  bEgwanEma-:  "Dzaxuns,  qast,  memEnletEla,"  laxa 
bExuk'!odEqEla,  qaxs  he£mae  LegEms  laxes  g-ax*£idaase  awlna-  35 
gwisasa  dzaxiine.  Wii,  la  d6x£widxa  £nEmokwe  yikwr-iEme  lISlIe- 
yadza£ya  wa,  la  Lex£edEs  MfmiEnlEyega  lilq.  Wii,  g'il£mese  g'ayola 
ylkwFlEme  laxa  dza'wune  lae  Lex'edayuwe  Ex'ts'.Emg'iyega  laxa 
tsIats'.adagEme  yikwFlEma.  Wii,  lii  Lex£edayuwe  £nEmg'E£ye  laxa 
babagume.  Wii,  ke£mis  LegEmsa  g'ayole  yikwI'lEme  g'inginanEin  40 
laxa  niElek'e  Yayaxflyiga  yixs  tsIats'.adagEmae.  Wii,  he£mis  Lex. 
6edayowe  HayalEye  laxa  babagume. 

Wa,  la;mesEn  et!edEl  gwagwex"sealal  laxa  tslEdaqe,  yix  abEmpas 
Ts!asna£ye,  jTixs  ts!aeyasa  yikwI£lEme  L!aL'.EL!Eyadza£ya,  yixs  lE£maa- 
qos  q!fllaqexs  lEEmae  layoweda  malEXLa  qeqEXEg-Eyowe  xexaiiplasa  45 
ylkwPlEme  L'.aLlELlEyadzexslae  g\v;il  xaapasE£we  ts!a£yase  Ts!asna- 
£ye  laxa  k-adzEk!waase.  Wii,  laEm  k'!eas  la  axelaso  xaaplasa 
yEkwIlayag'ole  tslEdiiqa.  Wii,  g'il£nu"so  bEwex£wid  etleda,  wii,  he- 
niEnala£ma  baklume  aek'ila  gEyol  xaiipelaxa  xaap'.axs  k'!es£mae 
mayol£ideda  ts'.Edaqe,  qaxsq'.unalae  lE£laleda  g'inanEmaxs  miiyoLE-  50 
mac.  Wii,  he£mis  lagilas  al£Ein  xaapelasE£weda  xaap!axs  lae  mayol- 
£ideda  tslEdaqe.  Wa,  g'll£mese  mayol£Ideda  tslEdaqasa  g'inanE- 
maxs lae  hex,£idaEm  xaapelasE£weda  xaii])!e.  Wa,  laEm  naqe£steda 
g"ina.nEme  LE£wis  g'Ig'aulnokwe.  La£me  k"!eas  la  axiilas  yikwl£lene- 
x'uiis  laxa  hayasEk'ala.     AV<i,  laEmxaawise  k'les  la   L!ai.!Evad/.a£ye  55 


()94  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  I  Era.  ANN.  86 

56  birth  to  twins  does  not  belong  to  the  Salmon.  It  is  an  ordinary 
child,  |  like  other  children  that  were  born  single.  | 

The  only  thing  that  is  different  in  the  case  of  a  mother  of  twins  |  is 
that  the  name  of  the  preceding  child  is  Salmon-Head;  and  when  || 

GO  the  mother  gives  birth  to  twins,  then,  when  Salmon-Head  is  ten 
months  old,  |  his  cradle  is  put  away;  and  they  make  the  two  cradles  | 
with  notched  j  head-boards  for  cradles  for  the  twin-children  |  be- 
longing to  the  Salmon.  |  They  do  the  same  as  they  |  did  before  to 

05  the  twins  when  they  were  born;  and  when  ||  the  twins  have  a 
younger  brother,  his  name  is  |  Salmon-Tail.  Now  I  have  finished  | 
talking  about  twin-children.  | 
1  Cauterizing.  —The  afterbirth  is  well  washed,  |  and  hung  up  until  il 
is  quite  dry.  When  it  is  dry,  |  it  is  folded  up  and  put  into  the  work- 
box  |  of  the  mother  of  the  twins.  It  is  kept  in  the  box  as  a  medi- 
5  cine.  ||  The  mother  of  the  twins  takes  well  rubbed  and  scraped  nettle- 
bark,  and  |  puts  it  into  the  same  box.  The  whole  tribe  |  know  that 
the  mother  of  twins  keeps  the  afterbirth.  She  also  |  keeps  in  the 
same  box  a  piece  of  cedar-wood  with  a  hole  burnt  through  it.  |  It  is  in 

1.0  this  way:    ,- s And  if  a  man  or  a  woman  is  sick,  ||  they 

go  to  the  ^  mother  of  twins  to  be  |  cauterized  by  her. 

5C  maydLEinas  g'inanEma,  visa  yikwllavagole.  Wa,  la£me  ginanEm- 
q'.alama  yu  gwex'sa  £nEmok!wedza£yex  g*lng"lnanEma. 

Wa,  lex'a£mes  6gux£idaatsa  g'lnanEmaxs  lae  et!ed  yikwfles  abEmpe. 
Wa,  la£me  LegadEs  Hex-t!a£ye   laxeq.     Wa,   gih'Em  et'.ed  ylkwile 

60  abEmpasexs  lae  gwal  helogilaxa  liixat!  et!ed  Hex't!a£ya  laas  itEm 
g-exasEewe  xaaplas.  Wa,  la  et!ed  xexaapIlasE£weda  malEXLa  qeqE- 
XEg'Eyowe  xexaap'.a  qa  xexaaplasa  la  et!ed  yikwPlEm  l!§,l!el!e- 
yadza£ye  g'lng'lnanEma.  Wii,  la£me  asm  naqEmgiitEwex  g'ale 
gweg'ilas  qaes  g'ale  yikwI-lEma  L,!ai,!Ei<!Eyadza£ya.     Wa,  gihmese 

65  et!ed  mayohldEs  ts!a£yasa  yikwi-lEme,  wii,  laEmxaawise  LegadEs 
Ts!asna£ye.  Wa,  lawIsLa  gwala  gwagwexs'ala  laxEn  Enaxwa  waldE- 
mi£lala  lax  mayoL!ena£yasa  tslEdaqe. 
1  Cauterizing. — Wii.  he£misa  maenas,  ylxs  lae  aek*!a  ts!5xwaso£ 
qa£s  la  gex£walI£lEma  qa  alak'iales  lEmx£wida.  Wii,  g'il£mese  Ieiux- 
£widExs  lae  aek'Ia  k"  !oxusEmtsE£wa  qa£s  le  g'ltsloyo  lax  g'ildasasa 
ylkwile  tshsdaqa.  Wa,  la£me  pespats!anoxus.  Wii,  g"il£mese  gwala 
5  lae  ax£ededa  ylkwile  ts'.Edaqxa  gune  aek'Iaakwe  xunkwa  qa£s  lexat! 
gits!ots  laxa  maenatsle  g-ildasa.  Wa,  la£me  £naxwa  q'.ale  g'okii- 
lotasa  ylkwile  tslEdaqExs  axelaaxa  maene.  Wa,  he£misa  x'obE- 
dzowe  pEgEdzowe  kwaxuba  k!wa£XLawa.  HeEm  la  gits'.axa  mae- 
natsle, e    g"lldasaxa  g"a    gwaleg'a    (jig.)-     Wa,    g"tl£mese    tslF.x'ile 

10  5k!wina£yasa  bEgwanEme  L5£ma  ts'.Edaqe,  lae  laxa  ylkwile  tsbsdaq 


iK'-is]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  095 

Then  the  mother  of  twins  opens  her  j  box  and    pinches  off  some  1? 
of  the  dry  afterbirth,  |  and  she  takes  some   of  the  soft  nettle-bark, 
and    also    her    stick    for    cauterizing.    |    She    takes    these    to     the 
house  of  the  one  whom  she  is  going  to  cauterize.     Generally  they 
cauterize  ||  the  knees  or    the    chest,   or  both   sides  of  the  head,  |   10 
if  a  person  has  headache;  or,  if  a,  [  man  or  woman  has  backache,  they 
cauterize  on  each  side  \  of   the   small  of    the  back;  or  if  they  have 
pains  in  the  chest,  they  |  cauterize  on  each  side  of  the  collar-bone, 
or  sometimes  above  the    nipples;  [|  or    when    there  is  pain  on  each  20 
side  of  the  head,  they  cauterize  both  temples  |  or  often  on  the  back 
of  the  neck  and  of  the  head,  |  but  most  frequently  they  cauterize  the 
knees.  | 

When  the  mother  of  twins  arrives,  she  sits  down.  She  takes  the  | 
afterbirth  and  breaks  it  up  into  small  pieces.  She  takes  the  ||  rubbed  25 
nettle-bark  and  loosens  it.  She  mixes  it  with  a  piece  of  the  after- 
birth, |  and  takes  the  cauterizing-stick.  She  puts  the  afterbirth 
and  |  nettle-bark  which  are  mixed  into  the  hole  at  the  end;  and  when 
the  hole  of  the  |  cauterizing  stick  is  full,  she  lays  it  on  the  place  where 
she  is  going  to  cauterize.  She  takes  |  cedar-wood,  puts  one  end  into 
the  fire,  and,  when  it  burns,  she  ||  sets  fire  to  the  material  in  the  cauter-  30 
izing-stick.     And  when  it  burns  evenly,  |  she  presses  it  down  with 


qa£s  lii  x'opasos.     Wii,  hex'£ida£meseda  yikwlle  tslEdaq  xaxfwldxes  11 
maenatsle  gildasa  qa£s  epodexa  g'ayole  laxa  lE£mokwe  maena.    Wa, 
he-inisa    qloyaakwe   guna.     Wii,  he£mises  xTiliFxlzowe.     Wa,  la£me 
dalaqexs  lae  lax  g'okwases  xopasoLe.     Wii,  heEm  qlunala  xopaso- 
wa    awagoLa£yaqEns    LEHviins    haqlubayex    LE£wfms    ewanoLEma- 15 
£yex,  yixs  ts!EX"ts!alaeda  bEgwanEine.     Wax-!  awiigoxLeqEnoweda 
bEgwanEine  Lo£ma  tslEdaqe  le  x-ox'apoxLEntsosa  ewaxsot !Enaeya- 
seiis  XEmomowega£yex.    Wiixe  ts!EnpEla  la  maemaltsEma  x-5pa£ye 
laxEns    hanasxawa£yex    loxs    yae    lox     ek*  !anaeyaxsEns    dzamex, 
wax'i  ts'.EX-ts!ala   lii    ewax"sanoLEmaeya     'nal-'nEmsgEine    x-opaJya  20 
loxs  ci'.iinalae  £nEmsgEma  xopa£ye  laxEns  oxLiiyex  LE£wuns  awapla- 
Eyex.     Wit,  yiiEmxat!  qlunala  x'o]iasE£vveda  okwax-a£ye. 

Wix,  gil£mese  g'ax  k!wag'allleda  yikwlle  tslEdaqa  lae  axeedxa 
maene  qa£s  tsotsEts!Endeq  qa  ales  am£amayasta.  Wii,  axeedxa 
qloyaakwe  guna  qa£s  bel-edeq.  Wa,  lii  gwegillqasa  q!welkwe  maen  25 
laq.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  X'obEdzowe.  Wa,  la  dzopstotsa  maenqEla 
gun  lax  kwaxuba£yas.  Wii,  gil£mese  qotlastowa  kwaxuba£yasa 
x-obayowaxs  lae  pax£ai.F.lots  laxes  x'opasoLe.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa 
k!\va£xLawe  qa£s  mex-LEndes  oba£yas.  Wii,  g-il£mese  xix£edExs  lae 
tsex'tots  laxes  x'obayowe.  Wii,  g11£mese  £nEmala  xlx£ede  £wadzE-  30 
gasasa  x'obayo  lae  Liiqwalaxa  yikwile  ts!Edaqses  gEmxolts!ana£ye 


696  ETHNOLOGY   OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  3-, 

32  her  left  hand  |  into  the  hole,  so  that  it  may  not  move;  for  generally 
the  |  person  moves  about  when  he  feels  the  burning  on  his  skin. 
This  is  the  thickness  |  of  the  cauterizing-stick,  and  this  the  size  of  the 

35  hole  at  the  end.1  When  ||  it  is  all  burnt  up,  she  lifts  the  cauterizing- 
stick,  and  only  j  the  ashes  of  the  afterbirth  and  of  the  nettle  remain 
sticking  to  the  skin.  The  mother  of  twins  presses  on  it  |  with  her 
first-finger,  so  that  the  ashes  go  in;  and  |  after  she  has  finished 
cauterizing,  she  is  paid  one  pair  of  |  blankets  for  every  place  she  has 

40  cauterized.  Sometimes  she  will  cauterize  in  four  places,  ||  and  she  is 
paid  four  pairs  of  blankets.  | 

Cripples. — Now  I  shall  talk  about  children  that  belong  to  the 
Salmon,  but  who  are  not  twins.  |  When  a  woman  gives  birth  to  a 
one-eyed  child,  then  |  all  the  men  say  that  it  belongs  to  the  Salmon.  | 

45  When  a  woman  gave  birth  to  a  girl  with  a  red  spot  like  a  ||  strawberry 
on  the  forehead,  here  at  Fort  Rupert,  |  it  was  said  that  (the  girl) 
belonged  to  the  Salmon;  and  a  Koskimo  woman  gave  birth  |  to  a  boy 
whose  right  leg  was  bent,  who  belonged  to  the  Salmon;  |  and  Kiinxu- 
layngwa,  a  |  l  !ar,  lasiqwala  woman,  gave  birth  to  a  child  |  who  was 
white  mi  one  side  of  the  face,  and  he  also  belonged  to  the  Salmon; 

5(1  and  ||  Ayaga,  a  Koskimo  woman,  gave  birth  to  |  a  boy  who  had  a 
scar  on  the  face;  |  and  also  those  who  have  scars  on  the  body  or 
who  |  lack  a  finger, — all  these  about  whom  I  am  talking  are  said  to 

32  laxa  x'obayowe  qa  kMeses  LeguLEla  qaxs  q '.finable  yawIx-Klllcda 
bEgwaiiEinaxs  lae  lEq!0t!edes  L'.ese.  Wii,  g'aEm  wagwatsa  xoba- 
yoweg'a.1  Wii,  ga-'mes  EwadzEgats  kwaxuba£yaseg'a.     Wii,  g'il£mese 

35  q!filx"£klExs  lae  wex£Idxa  x'obEdzowe.  Wii,  aunese  la  klutale 
gunaeyasa  maenqfila  gun.  Wii,  a£mesa  yikwlle  ts'.Edaq  tslEmsgEm- 
tses  ts'.Emalax-ts!ana£ye  laq  qa  labEtesa  gfina£ye.  Wii,  gll£mese 
gwiila  yikwlle  ts'.Edaq  x'opaxs  lae  halaqasdsa  maluiEmxsa  plElxE- 
iasgEm  qaeda  Enal£nEmsgEme  x-opes,  yixs  EnalEnEmp  lEnae  mosgEme 

40  x-6paeyas.     Wa,  la  hrda(iaso:sa  moxsa  ])!ElxElasgEma. 

Cripples. —Wii,  ia'nicsEn  gwagwexs£alal  laxa  k'  !ese  yikwi£lEin 
L!aLlEyadza£ya,  yixs  qlunalae  mayoi.cda  tslEdaqasa  kluxsto;  wii, 
laEm  hex-£idaEm  mek'eda  maxwa  bEgwanEmqexs  L!ai.!;iyadza-yae. 
Wax'a  mEinokwc  tslEdaq  mayoHdaa  axalaeda  LlaxsEme  he  gwex's 

45  lEg<">  lax  ugwiwa-yasa  ts!ats!adagEine  laxg'a  TsaxisEk*,  wii,  laEinxae 
niexsoxs  L!a,L!ayadzaeyae.  Witxeda  miiyoLEmasa  GotslaxsEine 
wak"ale  helk'  !oltsidza£yasa  babagume.  Wa,  laEmxae  Llaxdaya- 
dza-ya.  Wax'e  mayoLEmas  Ivunxillavngwa  LlaL'.asiq'waxsEmexa 
emElk'!otEma    babaguma.     Wii,   laEmxae    L!aL!Eyadzaeya.     Wax'e 

50  mayoLEmas  Ayagaxa  Gots'.axsEmexa  cjlutlosaes  mayoLEme  baba- 
guma. Wii,  he£mesa  qlutiis  ok!wina£ye  loxs  q'.Exuts!ana£yexa 
g'ayole  lax  <|!wrH|!wax"ts!iina£yas  hestasm  gwE£y5  l !a,L !el JEyadza- 

1 3  mm.  thickness  of  gauge-stick;  8  mm.  diameter  of  hole. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  697 

belong  to  the  Salmon.    |  I  have  seen  all  this,  when  the  people  1  of  all 
the  tribes  follow  the  rules  that  they  have  II  for  twin-children,  and  55 
their  parents  also  |  observe  the  taboos  that  belong  to  twin-children.  | 

Navel-string. — The  parents  keep  the  navel-string,  |  and  if  one  of  1 
the  twins  is  a  boy,  |  (the  mother)  wraps  it  in  cedar-bark  and  gives 
it  to  her  |  near  relative  who  is  a  seal-hunter,  that  the  boy,  one  of  the 
twins,  may  become  a  seal-hunter.  II  Then  the  seal-hunter  puts  the  5 
navel-string  between  |  the  prongs  of  his  harpoon-shaft.     It  is  tucked 
in  where  the  cross  is  shown.1  |  Sometimes  they  put  the  navel-string 
at  the  end  |  of  the  seal-hunter's  paddle.     They  |  wrap  helpline  over 
it  at  the  narrow  part  of  the  ||  hunter's  paddle.2     The  navel-string  of  10 
the  |  boy  is  put  under  a  wrapping  of  dried  helpline.  |  This  is  done 
with  the  navel-string  of  twins  and  of  those  who  are  not  (wins.  | 

If  they  wish  the  boy  to  be  a  canoe-maker,  they  put  |  the  navel- 
string  under  the  deer-skin  lashing  of  the  ||  adz  of  a  canoe-builder.  15 
This  is  the  navel-string  right  |  where  the  cross  is.3     Often  they  put 
the  navel-string  into  the  neck-ring  |  of  a  canoe-maker  or  of  a  seal- 
hunter.     When    they  wish  |  the  boy  to  be  a  song-leader  when  lie 

£yEn    la    gwagwex's£alasa.      Wii,    Ieh    enaxwaEm    doqtilaqexs    lae  53 
uEgEltEweEmq  g'ayEmolasas  leElqwalai.exes    gweg'ilase    qae    laxes 
gweg'ilase.  qaeda  yikwi-lEme  L!aL!EL!Eyadza£ya.  Wii,  laxae  g'lg'aol-  55 
nokwe  EwielaEm  nEgEltEwex  aekilasasa  yikwile  L!aL!EL<Eyadza£ya. 

Navel-string. — Wii,  hefmise  glgaolnokwas  axelaxa  ts!etsEyoxuLa-  1 
yas    loxs    gihrnae    bEgwanEina    £nEmokwe     lax     yikwi-lEmas    lae 
q'.EnepsEintsa    kadzF.kwe    laxa     ts!EyoxuLa£ye    qa£s    ts'.Ewes    laxes 
mag'ile   LeLEUilaxa    ale£wmoxwe    qa  ale£winoxweltses    yikwrlEme. 
Wii,  hex'£ida£meseda  ale£winoxwe  la  g'apotsa  ts !EyoxuLa£ye  lax  awa-  5 
gawa£yas    oxLa£yas    dzegumases   mastowexa    gayoyala   gF.beL'.Exa- 
wa£yaatsa   ts'.Eyoxi^Pye.1     Wii,  lit  £nal£nEmp!Ena  la   paq'.Exawa£ya 
ts!Eyox"La£yax  oxawa£yasa   alexusa£yas  se£wayasa   ale£winoxwe  yix 
lag'ilas  qEnx"sa  sanaplale  lax oxawa£yas-  alex"sayo se£wayasa  ale£wi- 
noxwasa  g'ale  bEgwaiiEma.      Wii,  la£me  cplqakina  ts!EyoxU£La£yasa  10 
babagume  lax  awaba/yasa  lEmokwe  sanap!ala,   yixs  enaxwa£mae  he 
gweg'ilasE£we   ts'.EyoxuLa£yasa  yikwi'iEme  LE£wa  k' !ese  ylkwFlEma. 

Wiix'e  £nex-so£  qa£s  LeqlenoxweLa  babagume  c[a£s  le  gip'.ai.Elo- 
dayowes  ts!EyoxuLa£ye  lax  awaba£yas  yiLEme  kp  !ilxewax"sa  k!im- 
Layasa   Leq!enoxwaxa   xwiik!una.      He.Em   ts!Eyox"La£ve    nEqosta-  15 
wasa  gayoyala.     Wii,  la  qlunala  tex£wuna£ya  ts!Eyo"La£yaxa  qEnxa- 
wa£yasa  Leq!enoxwe  Lo£ma  ale£wmoxwe.     Wii,  gihniese  walagEla  qa 

1  In  the  angle  between  the  two  prongs.    The  figure  showing  the  cross  has  been  omitted. 

'-Just  above  the  blade.  The  kelp  is  wrapped  about,  it  several  times,  so  as  to  cover  about  four  or  five 
inches  of  the  paddle  just  above  the  blade. 

3  Between  the  blade  of  the  adz  and  the  wrapping  holding  it.  The  figure  showing  the  cross  has  been 
omitted. 


698  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Ikth.  ANN.  ss 

grows  up,  the  baton  |  of  a  song-leader  is  taken,  and  a  hole  is  made  in 

20  the  end  with  a  thick  drill.  ||  The  hole  goes  in  deeply,  sometimes  three 
finger-widths  |  deep.  When  this  has  been  done,  they  |  fold  up  the 
navel-string  lengthwise,  and  push  it  into  the  drill-hole  |  at  the  heavy 
(Mid  of  the  song-leader's  baton.     They  cut  |  a  round  plug  of  cedar- 

25  wood  and  drive  it  over  the  navel-string;  and  ||  it  goes  in  tightly, 
for  they  wish  it  to  be  held  very  firmly.  |  And  after  they  have  driven 
it  in,  they  cut  off  the  cedar-stick  )  so  that  it  is  even  with  the  end  of 
the  baton.  | 

There  is  another  way  of  doing  this.     They  let  the  boy  sit  |  in  the 

30  drum;  and  they  ask  the  song-leader  to  beat  the  ||  drum,  not  too  loud, 
while  he  is  singing.  He  does  not  beat  hard  |  on  the  drum  when  he  is 
beating  it.     They  do  this  four  times  to  the  |  boy.  | 

If  it  is  desired  to  make  him  a  salmon-fisherman  or  halibut-fisher- 
man, |  they  put  the  navel-string  into  the  neck  ring  of  a  fisherman  || 

35  who  catches  all  kinds  of  fish;  and  the  same  is  done  with  the  halibut- 
fisherman;  |  he  also  puts  the  navel-string  into  his  neck  ring.  |  All 
the  expert  workmen  wear  the  naval-strings  of  boys,  |  and  wear  them 
around  their  necks.  | 

40  And  they  do  the  same  with  the  navel-strings  of  girls.  ||  There  are 
two  ways.     They  are  worn  around  the  wrist  |  by  a  mat-maker  or 

is  babagume  qa£s  nagades  qo  q!ulyax£wIdL5  lae  ax£etsE£we  tlEmya- 
yasa   nagade   <|a£s  sElbEntsE£wesa   LEkwe  sElsma.     Wii,  klwiibEta- 

20  £mese  sEla£ya,  yixs  £nal£nEmp '.Enae  yuduxudEn  laxEns  q!waq!wax"- 
ts!ana£yex  ytx  EwalahEdasasa  sEla£ye.  Wii,  g-il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
k" !ox£ilntsE£weda  ts'.EyoxuLa£ye  qa£s  wlgwiLEme  laxa  sEla£ye  lax 
LEXuba£yasa  naxsa£yase  t'.Knivava.  Wa,  la  k'  !ax£witsE£weda  k!wa£x- 
i.iiwe   qa   lex"£Enes.      Wii,    la    degwegints   laxa  ts!EyoxuLa£ye   lax 

25  tEk*Elaena£yasa  lex-£Ena  klwa-xi.iiwa  qaxs  £nek-ae  qa  ales  Elala. 
Wa,  gil-'mese  gwal  deqwaqexs  lae  k"!imtodEx  oxta£yasa  k!wa£xLiiwe 
qa  Tiles  £nF.mabala  lo£  oba£yasa  tlEmyayowe. 

Wii,  g-a£mes  £nEmx£idrda  gwegilasgada  yixs  k'.watsloyaexa  baba- 
gume laxa  niEJnats!e.     Wii,  lii  axk' !fdasE£weda  nagade  qa  mEX'Elexa 

30  mE£nats!axs  dEnxElae  k'les  hasEla.  Wii,  laxae  kMes  ealtsilaxs 
niEXElaaxa  mE£nats!e.  Wii,  la  mop!F.na  he  gwex'£ItsE£weda  baba- 
gume. 

Wiix'e  £nex-s6£    qa£s   yiihiEk!wenoxwexa    kMotEla   le!wh  p!a£ye, 
wii,  la  c[Enx5dayoweda  ts!EyoxuLa£ye  laxa  yiihiEk!wenoxu  bEgwa- 

35  nEmxa  enaxwa  kMok'.titEla.  Wa,  heEmxaiiwise  gwiilaxa  loqlwe- 
noxwaxa  p!a£ye,  laEmxae  qEnxalaxa  ts!EyoxuLa£ye.  Wa,  la  £na- 
xwarm  layowa  ts'.EyoxuLa£yasa  babagume  laxa  £naxwa  eeaxElae- 
nox"  bebicgwanEm  qa  las  cjeqEnxil  laq. 

Wii,  laxae   heEm  gweg'ilasE£we  ts!EyoxuLa£yasa   ts!ats!adagEme, 

40  jTixs  malae  liiliilasas  gweg'ilasaxa  ts!EyoxuLa£yas,  yixs  qEX'ts'.ana- 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  699 

basket-maker,  [  or  around  the  neck  by  a  woman  who  knows  how  to  |  42 
dry  halibut  or  who  knows  how  to  cut  salmon,  or  by  those  who  know 
how  to  dig  |  all  kinds  of  clams;  that  the  girl,  whenshegrows  up,  may 
get  these  without  difficulty.  ||  And  also,  when  they  wish  |  a  girl  or  a  45 
boy  to  be  a  good   dancer  when  he  or  she  grows  up,  they  put  |  the 
navel-string  of  the  girl  around  the  legs  of  a  woman  who  is  a  good 
dancer;  |  and  when  she  knows  well  how  to  tremble  with  her  hands, 
they  put  it  around  the  wrist  of  her  right  hand.     They  do  this,  ||  that  50 
the  girl  may  know  well  how  to  tremble  with  her  hands  when  she 
dances,  j   And  they  do  the  same  with  the  navel-string  of  the  boy;  it 
is  I  put  around  the  wrist  id'  an  expert  cannibal-dancer,  that  he  may 
become  a  good  dancer  |  when  he  grows  up.     That  is  all.  | 

Maturity 

This  is  the  princess  of  the  real  chief  of  the  numaym  |  Maamtag'ila.  1 
He  is  the  head  chief  of  all  the  numayms  of  all  |  the  tribes  of  the 
whole  people.  They  are  the  ones  about  whom  I  talked,  i  who  have 
for  their  chief  £maxuyalidze.  The  chief  has  for  his  princess  || 
K"  !edele£laku.  The  name  K'  !edele£laku  of  the  princess  comes  |  5 
from  her  father,  when  she  becomes  mature,  and  is  sitting  in 
the  house  for  the  maturing  girl;  |  therefore  she  is  called  princess 
(K' !edel,  "sitting  still  in  the  house")-  The  word  k' !edef  has  two 
meanings.  |  She  does  not  move  while  she  is  sitting  there,  her  knees 

£yaasa   k-'.Et  denoxwaxa    le£wa£ye    LE-wa    L'.abatilaenoxwe   tstedaqa.  41 
Wii,   lii     qEnxalaxa     ts  !EyoxuLa£yasa    ts  !ats  ladagEmexa    tMtsleno- 
xwaxa  k'lawase  LE£wa  xwax lenoxwaxa  klotEla  i.K-'wa  Lawenoxwaxa 
£naxwa   ts  lets  !sk  Swemasa  qa  holEmallltsa  ts!ats!adagEmaq  qo  q!ul- 
yax£wIdL6.     Wa,  he£rnlsexs  walagElae  qa£s  yE£winoxwes  qo  q'.ulya-  45 
x£wIc1lo,  yixa   ts!ats!adagEme   Lo£ma   babagume.     Wa,  laEjnxae  la 
qEX'sIdza£yax   ts!EyoxuLa£yasa  ts!ats!adagEmasa   yE£winoxwe  ts!E- 
daqa.      Wii,   g'il£mese     xuleqlwenoxwa    yF/winoxwe    tslEdaqa    lae 
qsx'ts !anaeyax    ts!EyoxuLafye   lax     helk-!olts!ana£ya.      Wa,    heEm 
lag'ilas  he  gwitle  qa  xuleqiilesas  ts !ats ladagEmaxs  lae  yE£wmoxwa.  50 
Wa,  laxaa  heEm    gweg"ilasE£we    ts'.EyoxuLa£yasa    babagume,    yixs 
laaxat!    qEX'tslanesa  yE£winoxwe    hamats'.a  cja  yE£winoxweLEs  cjo 
ci!ulyax£wklLo  yixa  babagume.     Wii,  laEin  gwala. 
Maturity 

IIe£mae  k'ledelasa  alakMala  g'Igamesa  £nE£memotasa  Maamta-  1 
gila,  wa,  heEm  xamagEmalatsa  £naxwa  £nal£nE£memasa  £naxwa 
lelqw&laLa£yasa  loxala,  laxEn  waldEmxgin  liix'dek'  gwagwexs'Td- 
laqexs  g'Igadaas  £maxuvalidze.  Wa,  leda  g"Igama£ye  k'!edadEs 
K'!eilele£lak".  Wa,  heEm  g'ag'iLF.lats  K'!edele£laku  la  k!edeltses5 
ompaxs  g'alae  exEntleda,  yixs  g"alae  lats lag" alii  laxes  k'!ede£lats!e 
exEndatsIa.  Wii,  la£me  k"!edel  laq.  Ma£le  gwebalaasasa 
kledele.      Wa,  la£me   aEni   sEldelExs  klwaelae   tEsales   okwaxave 


700  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  Leth.ank.S5 

pressed  |  against  her  breasts;  she  is  sitting  still  on  the  floor.     And 

10  when  she  eats,  ||  she  eats  four  pieces  of  broken  dried  salmon,  which 
are  put  into  the  dish  of  the  |  princess;  and  there  is  a  little  oil  into 
which  the  four  |  small  pieces  of  broken  dried  salmon  are  dipped. 
And  when  this  has  been  put  into  the  dish,  her  j  attendant,  who  is 
always  a  shaman,  takes  up  the  dish  and  |  puts  it  before  the  princess, 

15  and  the  princess  only  looks  at  the  ||  dish  which  is  placed  in  front  of  her. 
Then  the  attendant  goes  to  draw  |  water,  and  gives  it  to  the  princess. 
Then  the  attendant  |  shaman-woman  of  the  princess  takes  her 
drinking-tube  of  bone  |  taken  from  the  wing  of  an  eagle,  and  she  puts 
one    end    of    the  j  drinking-tube    into    the   water.     The    attendant 

20  shaman-woman  ||  holds  the  bucket  with  water,  and  the  attendant 
woman  speaks,  |  and  says,  "Now,  take  a  drink.  Don't  overdo  it.  | 
Put  the  end  of  the  drinking-tube  into  your  mouth  that  you  may  have 
a  small  mouth,  princess,  |  and  do  not  take  a  large  mouthful  when  you 
drink.     You  may  swallow  four  times  |  that  you  may  not  be  stout, 

-5  princess."  Thus  she  says.  ||  Then  the  princess  puts  her  mouth  to  the 
end  of  the  bone  drinking-tube,  |  and  she  just  opens  her  mouth  and 
pushes  the  end  of  the  |  bone  drinking-tube  into  it,  and  she  just  sucks 
at  it  and  |  swallows  water  four  times.  Then  she  stops,  for  the 
attendant  shaman-woman   watches  I  that  she  does  not  drink   too 


laxes  dzedzame.    Wa,  la£me  k"!edele.    Wa,  he'mesexs  lae  hamx'-Ida, 

10  wa,  la  mdxwedaleda  k'lobEkwe  xa£masa  axtslax  hiVmaats'.asa  k"!e- 
dele.  Wa,  he£mesa  holale  L!e£na  qa  tslEbatsesa  mox£widala  am- 
"ainfiyastos  k' !ope  xa£mase.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwal£alts!axs  laeda  ae- 
xEntsela tstedaq,  yixs  q'.unalae  paxala  dag'Jlilaxa  ha£maats!e  qa£s 
la  k-agEml!las  laxa  kledele.     Wa,  a£mese  doqw.aleda  k'ledelaxa  liii- 

15  £maats!axs  lae  k'figEmalilEq.  Wii,  lii  tsex-eideda  aexEntsela  tslE- 
daqxa  ewape  (ia£s  las  laxa  exEnta  k"  ledela.  Wii,  lii  axk'  laleda  aexEn- 
tsela  paxala  ts!Edaqxa  k'ledele  qa  ax£edesexes  nagayowe  xax£i:ii 
g'ayol  lax  p'.ELEmasa  kwekwe.  Wii,  lii  LlEnxstEnts  apsba£yases 
nagayowe  laxa  £wiipe    lax    heenemasa    aexEntsela   paxala  tslEdaq 

20  dalaxa  £wabEts!ala.  Wii,  lii  yaq!Ega£leda  aexEntsela  ts'.Edaqaq. 
Wa,  lii  Eneka:  " Wiig-illaga  nax£edLEX.  Gwala  hayaxsEqlaxs  laaqos 
metq'.EdzEnts5x  oba£yaxsos  nagayowaqos  qa£s  tloguxsteLos  k'ledel. 
Wii,  he£mis  qa£s  klesaos  awawaEmta  nEkwaaqosaxa  mosgEmstowe 
£wapaxes  nEx£wetsE£wos  qa£s  k"!esei-5s  pEiiL'.esLol,  k"  ledel,"  £nex"- 

25  =lae.  Wa,  laEm  hambEndeda  exEnta  k- ledelxes  x5x£Ene  nagayowa. 
Wa,  la£me  halsslaEm  ax£ede  sEmsas  lae  liambEndEX  oba£yases 
xax£Ene  nagayowa.  Wii,  lit  hiilsElaEm  klumtaq.  Wii,  la£me  mop'.E- 
lwEin  iiEx£we(lxa  £wapaxs  lae  gwala  qaxs  doqwala£maeda  aexEn- 
tsela  paxala  tslEdaqa,   qa   k'leses   niinagolost  lEqaxa  £wape.     Wa, 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  701 

much  water.  ||  After  she  has  finished  drinking  water,  she  takes  the  30 
broken  pieces  of  dried  salmon,  |  dips  them  into  the  oil  which  is  in  the 
small  oil-dish,  and  puts  them  J  into  her  mouth.     She  chews  very 
slowly,  and  she  continues  |  doing  this  while  she  is  eating  the  broken 
dried  salmon.     As  soon  as  she  has  swallowed  her  food  four  times,  j 
she  stops  eating,  and  immediately  ||  the  attendant  takes  her  dish  ami  •'!•"> 
oil-dish  and  |  puts  them  away.     She  draws  water  for  the  princess  to 
drink  after  eating;  for  |  the  various  kinds  of  straps  are  put  around  the 
body  of  the  princess,  |  who  wears  a  hat  with  a  tassel,  and  abalone 
shells  tied  to  the  |  outside  of  the  hat  and  abalone  shells  arc  sewed 
to  her  blanket.  ||  This  is  called  "the  abalone-blanket  of  the  maturing  40 
princess,"  |  and  her  hat  is  called  "the  abalone-hat  of  the  maturing 
princess."  |  If  her  father  owns  a  copper,  the  expensive  copper  stands 
at. the  right  side  of  the  maturing  princess.     The  copper  is  placed 
there  |  that  the  princess  may  easily  get  coppers  to  carry  on  her  back 
to  her  ||  future  husband.     She  continues  sitting  in  the  house  for  [  a  45 
month.     This  is  called  liaqadzd^'d  ("flat  things  meeting  inside  of  the 
house").  |  She   washes   four    times    every   fourth    day.  |  Then    the 
straps  are  taken  off  her  body,  and  it  is  called  "  taking  the  straps  off 
the  body  of  |  the  maturing  girl."     Then  the  eyebrows  are  pulled  out 
by  the  ||  attendant  shaman-woman,  and  she  cuts  off  |  her  hair.     Then  50 


g'ihmese  gwal  naqaxa  £wiipe,  lae  dax-£idxa  k'  lobEkwe  xa£masa  qa£s  30 
ts'.Ep!edes  laxa  L!e£na  q!ots!axa  ama^ye  tstebatsla  qa£s  tslEq'.Eses 
laxes  sEinse.  Wii,  la  awak'alaxs  lae  malekwaq.  Wa,  lii  hexsaF.m 
gwegilaxs  ha£mapaaxa  k"!obEku  xaJmasa.  Wii,  g-ilJmese  m5p!Ena 
nEx-wed  laxes  ha'ma£yaxs  lae  gwal  ha-mapa.  Wa,  hex'Jida£mesa 
aexEntsela  tslEdaq  ax£edEX  ha£maats!iis  LE£wa  ts!Ebats!e  qa'"s  lii  35 
g'exaq.  Wii,  lii  tsex-£idxa  £wape  qa  nageg'esa  exEnta  kMedela  laxes 
laena^ye  £wPlaEm  qeqEX'alaLEle  qEX'edEmasa  exEnta  kMedela  LEewis 
qwaLEXLixla  LEtEmla.  Wii,  laeme  q!Enq!Enaleda  ex'ts'.Eme  lax 
5sgEma£yas  LEtEmlas.  Wii,  laxae  q!Enq!Eii5leda  ex'tsteme  lax  iie- 
x£una£yas.  Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  exEiidEmk'lEn  ex"ts!Emala  hex-Ti-  40 
na£ye.  Wii,  he-cmise  LEtEmlas  yixs  Legadaas  exEntEml  extslEmala 
LEtEml.  Wa,  g'il£mese  ompas  axnogwatsa  Llaqwa,  lae  Laela  qlEyo- 
xwe  L!aqwa  lax  lielk'lodEnoLEmalilasa  exEnta  kMedela,  yix  lagilas 
he  gwaela  Lliiqwa  qa  holEmalesa  kMedelaxes  Llaqweg'iLa  laxes 
hVwunEiiiLa.  Wa,  la£me  lalaa  he  gwael  laxes  exEndatsle  g'okwa,  45 
laxes  etledEX'dEmLa  exEntal.  HeEm  LegadEs  haqadz:Vlilxa  exEn- 
taxs  lae  moplEna  kwasa  laxa  maemop '.Enxwaese.  Wii,  laEm  £wi-la 
lawoyowe  qeqEX'edEmas  laxeq.  Wii,  heEm  LegadEs  qwelet  !edi:x 
qeqEX"Elasa  exEnta.  Wii,  lac"me  k!ulx--itsE£we  aEnasa  exEnta  k'!e- 
del  yisa  aexEntsela  ts'.Edaq  paxala.     Wii,  heEmxaawis  klEbEltsEm-  50 


702  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  35 

52  the  attendant  woman  takes  |  the  straps  and  her  seat  made  of  soft 
cedar-bark  |  and  goes  into  the  woods,  where  she  looks  for  a  good 
vew-tree;  and  when  |  she  finds  it,  she  puts  the  straps  of  the  princess 

55  on  to  the  tree.  When  [|  this  has  been  done,  she  takes  the  cedar-bark 
and  places  it  in  the  |  cave  in  which  the  cedar-bark  is  hidden.  It  is 
finished  after  this.  | 

The  Sweat-Bath 

1  Now  I  shall  talk  about  the  ways  of  the  Kwakiutl  when  |  a  man  or 
woman  is  sick.  They  make  a  steaming-box;  |  that  is,  a  long  box  of 
the  same  length  as  the  |  sick  person,  for  the  height  of  the  steaming-box 
5  is  two  spans.  ||  When  it  is  finished,  |  not  many  stones  are  taken,  for 
when  there  are  many  |  there  are  twelve,  and  these  are  put  on  the  fire  of 
the.  house.  As  j  soon  as  they  are  all  on  the  fire,  a  large  basket  is  taken 
and  I  a  man  goes  down  to  the  beach  to  low  water  mark  carrying  a 

10  large  basket;  ||  ami  when  he  reaches  the  seaweed,  he  plucks  it  off  and 
puts  it  I  into  the  basket.  When  the  basket  is  full  of  seaweed,  he  |  carries 
the  seaweed-basket  on  his  back  up  the  beach  and  puts  it  down  by 
the  side  of  the  |  steaming-box.  Then  he  takes  many  yellow  cedar-tips 
and  I   places  them  down   alongside  of  the  steaming-box.     Then    he 

15  takes  the  seaweed  ||  and  puts  some  of  it  into  the  bottom  of  thesteaming- 


51  dEx  sE£yas  x'omsas.  Wa,  la£m§  gwal  laxeq.  Wii,  la£me  ax£ededa 
aexEntsela  tslEdaqxa  qEX'idEmas  LE'wa  k  !waxLawreso£  k'adzExusa 
exEntaxde  k'.edela  qa£s  la  laxa  aL!e  qa£s  aliix  ek'etElii  i.!F.mq!a. 
Wii,  gil-'mese  q'.aqexs  lae  <[Kxit  !edi:s  qEX'IdEmx'dasa  exEnta  laq. 

•"»■'  Wa,  gil-inese  gwala  lae  ax£edxa  k!waxLawesE£we  k'adzEkwa  qa£s  las 
laxa  kadzEk!waase.     Wa,  lawesLe  gwal  laxeq. 

Iv  !alasa 

1  La-'mEii  gwagwex's£alal  lax  gweg-i£lasasa  Kwag-ufaxa  ts!alts!Ex-Ite 
bEgwanEm  Lo£meda  tslEdaqe.  Wa,  heEin  ax£etsoweda  k!alasaats!e, 
yixa  gildEg'a  g'ildasaxa  £nEmasgEmg'ig'a  LE£wa  £wasgEmxsdaasasa 
bEgwanEme  ts Salts !Ex-Ita,  ylxs  maelp!Enkustae  laxEns  q!waq!wax-- 
5  ts!ana£yex  yix  £walasgEmasasa  k!iilasaats!e.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwrda 
lae  ax£etsE£weda  k"!ese  q!enEm  t'.esEina,  yixs  lE£mae  q'.enEmxs  ma£l- 
tsEmag'iyowae  qa£s  xEXLanowe  laxa  lEgwllasa  g'okwe.  Wii,  g-il- 
£mese  £wilx-Lalaxs  lae  ax£etsE£weda  £walase  lExa£ya  qa£s  la  lEnts'.esa 
bEgwanEme   laxa   LlEma£isaxa    x'atslaese  dalaxa  £walase  lExa£ya. 

10  Wii,  g  il£mese  lag'aa  laxa  L'.ESL!Eku  lae  k!ulx,£idEq  qa£s  lExts'ales 
laxa  lExa£ye.  Wa,  g"tl£mese  qot'.a  lExa£yasexa  L!EsL!Eku  lae  oxle- 
laxa  L'.Egwats!e  lExa£ya  qa£s  lii  SxLdsdesElaq  qa£s  lii  hanolilas  laxa 
k"!alasaats!e.  Wii,  lii  ax£edxa  dedExuta£yexa  q'enEme  qa£s  g'axe 
ax£alllas  lax  maginwalllasa  k!alasaats!e.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  l!esl!e- 

15  kwe  qa£s  lEX£alts!odesa  waokwe  laxa  6xLelts!awasa  k-!alasaats!e  qa 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  703 

box,  so  |  that  it  is  covered  with  seaweed.    The  thickness  of  the  seaweed  16 
is  four  fingers  |  in  the  bottom  of  the  steaming-box.    |   Then  he  takes 
tongs  and  takes  up  the  red-hot  stones  and  |  puts  them  on  the  seaweed. 
He  does  the  same  with  the  other  ||  red-hot  stones,  but  the  stones  are  20 
not  placed  close  together.   |  When    all  the  red-hot  stones  are  in,  he 
throws  more  |  seaweed  on,  four  fingers  thick.  |  Then  he  takes  yellow 
cedar-tips  and  lays  them  over  the  seaweed ;  |  and  when  there  are  many 
yellow  cedar-tips  on  it,  he  takes  an  old  blanket  and  ||  water  and  pours  25 
water  into  the  steaming-box;  |  and  after  he  has  poured  water  over  it, 
he  spreads  the  old  blanket  over  it.     Now  the  |  man  lies  down  on  his 
back  naked  in  the.  steaming-box,  and  the  |  old  blanket  is  taken  and  he 
is  covered  with  it,  so  that  only  his  head  shows.  |  Then  he  lies  for  some 
time  in  the  steaming-box  until  |[  the  stones  begin  to  get  cold.     Some-  30 
times  |  a  sick  person  lies  until  noon  in  the  steaming-box,  if  the  |  heat 
of  the  steam  bath  is  right.     If  the  heat  of  the  body  is  so  great  that  he 
can  not  endure  it,  |  then  the  sick  man  is  taken  out  again  |  and  some  of 
the  hot  stones  are  taken  out,  ||  that  the  heat  may  be  i  ight.    When  this  is  35 
done,  he  lies  down  on  it  again;  |  and  the  sick  person  does  not  come  out 
of  the  steaming-box  |  until  the  perspiration  of  his  body  begins  to  get 
cold.    Then  his  body  is  shaking  |  because  his  body  is  cold.    Then  they 


ha£niElxts!awesa  LlEsiJEkwe  laqxa  modEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!a-  16 
na£yex,  yix  wagwasasa  LlEsL'.Ekwe  lax  oxtelts lawasa  k'!alasaats!e. 
Wii,  la  ax£edxa  k-!ipL&laa  qa£s  k-!ip!edes  laxa  x'lxsEmala  t'.esEm 
qa£s  k'!ip!Eqes  laxa  L!ESL!Ekwe.     Wa,  la  ha£naltsa  waokwe  xIx-ex- 
sEinala  tlesEma    laqexs    k'lesae   mEinkalaxa   tlesEme.      Wa,  g'il-  20 
£mese    £wi£laxa    x'ix'ExsEmala    t!esEmxs    lae    lExayEntsa    waokwe 
L!EsL!Ek"  laqxa  modEne  laxEns  q!waq!wax'ts!ima£yex  yix  wagwasas. 
Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  dedExwata£ye  qa£s  LEXwayEndales  laxa  L'.EsL'.Ekwe. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  qlenEma  dedExuta£yaxs  lae  ax£edxa  p!Elxa£ma  LE£wa 
£wape.     Wii,  lii    tsadzELEyintsa   £wape  laxa  k"!alasEla.      Wa,   g'il- 25 
£mese  gwal  tsasaxs  lae  LEpEyintsa  p'.Elxa£ma  laq.     Wii,  lii  xanaleda 
bEgwanEmaxs   lae  nELEyindxa  la    k'SaMa.      Wii,  la  8,x£etsE£weda 
]) '.ElxElasgEme  qa£s  nasEyindayowe  laq.    Wii,  la£me  lexaEm  la  nelale 
xomsas.     Wii,   hex'sii£mes  gwetsla  laxa    k" lalasaats !e  lalaa  lacjexs 
k"!es£mae    wudEX'£Ideda  t!esEm,   yixs  enal£nEmp  !Enae    liig'aa  laxa  30 
nEcjaleda  ts  !alts '.EX'ite  bEgwanEm  kidgexa  klalasEliiq,  yixs  hel£alae 
ts'.Elqwalaena£yasa  k'lalasEliiq  wax'e  ts!Ets!Elxkuna  lit  k'.es  beba- 
k'.wema.     Wii,  he£mis  a,Em  la  xwelax£ults!Ewatsa  ts!alts!ExIte  bE- 
gwanEm.    Wii,  axwiiqalasE£weda  waokwe  ts'.Elqwa  tlesEma,  qa  hel- 
£ales  ts!Elqwalaena£yas.     Wii,  gil£mese   gwal    lae    xwelaqa    kulqaq.  35 
Wa,  laEm  al£Em  hilts '.aweda  tslalts'.Exite  bEgwanEm  laxa  k'  lalasElaq 
yixs  lae  wiidEX'£ide  gosiis  6k!wina£yas.     Wii,  la£me  xwanale   ok!wi- 
na£yas  qaexs  lae  klEnaesa.     Wa,  la£me  kwiis£ida  qa  liiwiiyesa  dexu- 


704  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  ss 

wash  him  to  remove  the  |   cedar  smell  from  his  body;  and  when  his 

40  body  has  been  wiped  off,||  oil  of  the  silver-perch  is  rubbed  on  his  body. 
After  |  this  has  been  done,  they  take  soft  shredded  cedar-hark  and 
wipe  off  his  |  body  to  remove  the  silver-perch  oil.  The  reason  why 
they  quickly  nib  the  body  with  |  silver-perch  oil  before  it  gets  dry  and 
whde  the  body  is  still  in  perspiration,  |  is  because  they  do  not  want 

45  the  skin  to  get  hard;  for  ||  they  say  that  the  skin  of  a  sick  person  who 
has  been  steamed  will  bo  |  very  painful  the  day  after,  if  the  silver- 
perch  oil  is  not  rubbed  on  the  body,  |  because  the  skin  gets  hard,  and 
he  feels  very  sick;  |  hut  the  skin  of  a  person  gets  never  hard  if  his 
body  is  rubbed  right  away  with  |  silver-perch  oil  before  it  gets  dry.|| 

50  Tins  is  all  about  one  way  of  (lie  sweat  bath.  | 

There  is  another  method  of  sweat  bathing.  As  soon  as  the  person 
conies  out  of  |  the  steaming-box,  be  washes  his  body  with  cold  water; 
and  after  |  this  is  done,  he  wipes  it  with  soft  shredded  cedar-bark. 
Then  another  person  |  takes  rough  sandstone  and  puts  it  into  water 

55  which  is  in  a  ||  dish.  Then  he  takes  the  root  of  blue  hellebore  and  rubs 
the  root  of  the  |  blue  hellebore  on  the  rough  sandstone  which  is  in  the 
water  in  the  dish.  |  As  soon  as  the  water  in  the  dish  becomes  roily,  the 
sick  |  person  sprinkles  his  body  with  the  blue  hellebore  mixed  with  the 
water,  |  after  he  finishes  steaming;  and  when  his  body  is  all  wet  with 

60  the  ||  blue  hellebore  mixed  with  water,  the  sick  person  remains  sitting 

p'.ala   lax   ok!wina£yas.     Wa,  g"il£mese  gwal  deg"itaxes  6k!wina£ye 

40  lae  ax-T'dxa  dzEkfwise  qa£s  qlElset'.edes  laxes  ok!wina£ye.  Wii,  g'il- 
£mese  gwala  lae  ax£edxa  qloyaakwe  k'adzEk"  qa£s  deg'ites  laxes 
ok!wina£ye  qa  lawayesa  dzeklwise,  yix  lag'ilas  hayalomala  qtelsetasa 
dzek!wise  laxes  6k!wina£yaxs  k,!esemae  lEinx£unx£Ida  yixs  he£mae 
ales   pose    ok!wina£yas    qaxs   gwaqtelaa    L!Emx£edes   Llese   qa£laxs 

15  Lomae  ts!EX'lla£Iae  i.lesasa  ts!alts!Ex-Ite  bEgwanEmxa  lEnsases 
k!rdasax<lEm  yixs  kMesae  q!Elset!etsa  dzek'.wise  laxes  ok!wina£ye 
qaxs  ala£mae  la  L!Ernx£wIde  L!esas.  Wa,  la£lae  alak"!ala  ts!Ex-ila. 
Wa,  la£lae  hewaxa  L!Emx£Ide  Llesasa  bEgwanEmaxs  hex"£idae  qlElse- 
t'.etsa  dzek! wise  laxes  ok!wina£yaxs  k-!es£mae  lEmx£unx-£Ida.     Wii, 

50  lasm  gwal  laxa  £nEmx-£idala  gweg'ilasxa  k"!alasa. 

Wii,  g-a£mes  £nEinx£idala  gweg'i£latsa  k'!alasa  yixs  g'il£mae  lalts!a 
laxes  k" lalasaase,  lae  ts!5x£wit!etsa  wiida£sta  £wapa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
gwala  lae  degitasa  qloyaakwe  kadzEkwa.  Wa,  leda  ogii£la  bsgwa- 
nEm   ax£edxa   k'loiJa    dE£na    qa£s    axstEndes  laxa  £wape  q!ots!axa 

55  loq.'.we.  Wa,  la  ax£edxa  LloplEk'asa  axsole  qa£s  g'exesa  E!op!Ek'asa 
axsole  laxa  k"!5L!a  dE£naxa  axstalile  lax  £wabEts!awe  hlxa  loq!wa. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  nex£wideda  £wape  £wabEts!asa  loqlwe  laeda  ts!alts!E- 
x  ite  bEgwanEm  xosit'.etsa  axsole£stala  £wapa  laxes  ok!wina£ye,  yixs 
lae  gwal  k'lalasa.     Wa,  g'il£mese  £naxwa  la  k'.unqe  ok!wina£yas  yisa 

60  :ixsole£stala  £wapa  lae  a£ma  tsIalts'.EX'Ite  bEgwanEm  sEltala  k!waela 


doas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  705 

still  |  to  let  it  dry  on  his  body;  and  when  his  body  is  dry,  |  another  61 
person  takes  oil  of  the  silver-perch  and  rubs  it  on  the  |  body  of  the 
sick  person;  and  when  his  body  is  covered  with  |  silver-perch  oil,  soft 
shredded  cedar-bark  is  taken  and  it  is  wiped  ||  off  from  the  body,  so  05 
that  the  silver-perch  oil  comes  off.  After  this  it  is  finished.  |  All  the 
Kwakiutl  tribes  use  the  steam  bath  for  medicine,  the  whole  number 
of  tribes.  |  And  generally  the  sick  person  gets  well.  |  There  are  only  a 
few  sick  |  men  or  women  who  do  not  get  well.     That  is  all.  [| 

Death 

When  a  beloved  child  is  dying,  |  the  parents  keep  on  pra3'ing  to  1 . 
the  spirit  not  |  to  try  to  take  away  their  child.     "I  will  |  pay  you 
with  these  clothes  of  this  my  child,  Sitting-on-Fire."  ||  Thus  they  say,  5 
while  they  put  on  the  fire  the  clothes  of  the  one  who  is  lying  there 
sick.  | 

Then  the  parents  of  the  one  who  is  lying  there  sick  pay  Sitting-on- 
Fire,  |  that  he  may  pray  to  the  souls  of  the  grandparents  of  the  one 
who  lies  sick,  that  they  may  not  |  wish  to  call  their  grandson.  And 
the  parents  of  the  |  one  who  lies  there  sick  take  four  kinds  of  food, 
dry  salmon  first.  [|  They  break  it  into  four  pieces.  When  it  is  ready,  10 
they  |   take  cinquef oil-roots  and  fold  them  up  in  four  pieces.  |  And 


qa  lEmx£wideses  6k!wina£ye.  Wii,  gihmese  lEmx£wide  ok!wina£yas  61 
laasa  6gii£la£me  bEgwanEin  ax£edxa  dzek!wise  qa£s  q  lElset  !edes  lax 
ok!wina£yasa  tsIalts'.EX'ite  bEgwanEina.  Wii,  g'il£mese  hamElx£Enxa 
dzek'.wesaxs  lae  &x£etsE£weda  qloyaakwe  k'iidzEk"  qa£s  deg'itleda- 
yowe  lax  6k!wina£yas  qa  lawayesa  dzeklwise.  Wii,  laEin  gwal  liixeq',  65 
£niixwa£maeda  Kwakwak'Ewakwe  pEtasa  k'lalasa  liix  £wiixasgEma- 
gwasasa  £naxwa  lelqwalaLa£ya.  Wii,  lix  q  lunala  hex-£ida£Em  ex£ideda 
tslalts'.EX'Ite  DEgwanEma.  Wa,  het!a  holala  k"!ese  ex-£ideda  ts!al- 
ts!EX'Ite  bEgwiinEm  LE£wa  ts'.edaqe.     Wii,  laEin  laba. 

Death 

Wa,  he'emaaxs  la'e  wa'wik'  !Egeda  la'£wina£ye  xiino'kwa;    wii,  la  1 
g'i'g'aolnokwas  he'mEnalaEin  ha'wax£Elaxa  ha'yalilagase  qa  k'!e'ses 
a£wa'lila    la'xes    hi'loL!aena£yasex     xiino'kwas.      "Wii,    la£me'sEn 
a'yaltsg'ada  gwelgwii'lagasg'En  xuno'kwik'  Iol  klwa'x'Lalii',"  £ne'- 
kixs  la'e  axLE'ntsa  gwelgwa'lasa  qE'lgwile  lii'xa  lEgwi'le.  5 

LaE'm£lae  hala'qe  gi'g'aolnokwasa  qE'lgwIlaxa  klwii'x'Liila  cja 
hawa'x£Eliisexa  bEx£unii'£yasa  ga'gEinpasa  qE'lgwile  qa  k-!es£ma- 
£wi'sLes  Lii'lelaciElaxes  ts!o'xuLEma.  Wii,  la  e't  !ede  gI'g-aolnokvvasa 
qE'lgwile  ax£e'dxa  mo'x£wIdala  he'£ma£ya, — yi'xa  xa£ma'se  g'ii'la. 
Wa,  la  k'!6'p!edEq  qaes  mo'xus£Endeq.  Wii,  la£me's  gwii'llla,  wii,  10 
la  e'tled  ax£e'dxa  t!Exuso'se  qa£s  k- !o'xusEmdalexa  mo'sgEme 
75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 45 


706  ETHNOLOGY   OP   THE    KWAKIUTL 


13  when  that  is  ready,  they  take  dried  berry-cakes  and  |  break  them 
into  four  pieces.     And  when  that  is  ready,  they  |  take  viburnum- 

15  berries,  lour  spoonfuls.  When  all  this  ||  is  ready,  the  father  of  the 
one  who  is  lying  sick  in  bed  takes  the  dry  salmon  and  |  throws  the 
pieces  into  the  fire,  one  by  one.  And  the  |  mother  of  the  one  who 
lies  sick  in  bed  says,  "O  Sitting-on-Fire !  now  eat,  and  protect  |  my 
child,  vSitting-on-Fire!" 

Then  the  father  of  the  one  who  lies  sick  in  bed  takes  also  cinque- 

20  foil  roots;  he  ||  takes  one  (root)  and  dips  it  into  the  oil.  And  | 
the  mother  of  the  one  who  lies  sick  in  bed  says  again,  "O  Sitting- 
on-Fire!  go  on,  and  pray  to  the  |  spirits,  that  they  may  have  mercy 
on  my  child!"     Thus  she  says.  | 

Then  the  father  takes  also  one  of  the  dried  berry-cakes,  dips  it  | 

25  into  oil,  and  throws  it  into  the  fire.  Then  he  himself  says,  ||  "O 
Sitting-on-Fire !  now  do  have  mercy  on  me,  and  |  keep  alive  my  child 
here,  Sitting-on-Fire!  Have  mercy  |  and  press  back  my  child  here, 
spirit,  and  I  will  take  care  of  this,  |  supernatural  one,  that  I  may  still 
have  for  a  while  my  son  here!    Long-Life-  |  Maker!"  || 

30  And  when  he  has  put  all  the  berry-cakes  on  the  fire  of  the  house, 
then  |  he  takes  one  of  the  spoonfuls  of  viburnum-berries,  and  three 
times  he  aims  at  |  the  fire  of  the  house.  The  fourth  time  he  pours 
them  on  the  fire;  and  he  |  says,  "Take  this,  Sitting-on-Fire!  and 

12  laq.  Wa,  laE'in  gwa'lila.  Wa,  la  e't!ed  ax£e'dxa  t!Eqa'  qa£s 
k-!6'p!edeq  qa£s  mo'xus£Endeq.  Wa,  laE'm  gwa'lila.  Wa,  la  e't.'ed 
ax£e'dxa    tte'lse    mowe'xLa     k'a'tslEnaqa.      Wa,    laE'm    ma'xwa 

15  gwa'lila.  Wa,  la  axee'de  6'mpasa  qE'lgwIlaxa  xa£ma/se  qa£s 
ma'hnEin'E'mke  tslEXLa'laq  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  la  £ne'k-e 
abE'mpasa  qE'lgwIle:  "Wa,  klwax'Lala,',  we'k'asqo  laE'ms  da'da- 
cmEwilxEn  xuno'kwaqEn,  kiwax'Lalai'!" 

Wa,  la  e't!ede  o'mpasa  qE'lgwIle  ax£e'dxa  t!Exuso'se,  qa£s  da'x-£I- 

20  dexa  £nE'me  qas  ts!Ep!e'des  la'xa  L!e'£na.  Wa,  la  e't!ed  ene'k'e 
abE'mpasa  qE'lgwIle:  "Wa,  kiwax'Lalai',  we'g'il  la  hawa'x£ElaLExa 
ha'ayalilagasa  c[a  wax£e'des  wa'sEn  qag-ln  xuno'kwik-,"  £ne'k-e. 

AVii,  la  e't!ede  5'mpas  ax£e'dxa  £nE'me  la'xa  t!Eqa'  qa£s  ts!Ep!e'des 
la'xa   L!e'£na.     Wii,  la   tslEXLE'nts.     Wa,  la  q!ule'x's£Em  £ne'k-a: 

25  "We'k'asla  kiwax'Lalai',  laE'ms  we'g-Il  g-a'xEn  qa£s  wa'x£Idaos  qa 
q lula'lag'Iltsgin  xuno'kwik-,  kiwax'Lalai'!  LaE'ms  waxL  La'la- 
gwalaqaltsgin  xuno'kwik-,  haya'luagasai'  cja  nQgwa£me  aa'xsIlaqEk-, 
£na'walakwai',  cja  no'gwa£ma£wIsLe£s  xwa'yEnxusIlaqEk-,  gl'lg-fido- 
kwilai'." 

30  Wa,  la  £wl'£leda  t!Eqa'  la'x'Lala  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  la  e't!ed 
&x£e'dxa  £nEme'xLa  k'a'tslEnaq  tte'lsa  qas  yo'duxup!Ene  noxuno- 
kwas  la'xa  lEgwi'le.  Wa,  la  mo'p!Enaxs  la'e  guxLE'nts.  Wa,  la 
£ne'ka:  "  We'k'as,  kiwax'Lalai',  laE'ms  hawa'x£Elalxa  hy'yalllaga- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  707 

pray  to  the  spirits  |  of  those  behind  us  that  they  have  mercy  on  me 
and  my  ||  wife  here !     Pray  to  the  Long-Life-Maker  that  he  may  |  35 
come  and  take  away  the  sickness  of  my  child  here !     Take  pity  on  me, 
and  |  ask   the  supernatural  one   to   come!     Wa!"     Thus  says  the 
father  to  Sitting-on-Fire.  |  Then  that  is  finished.  | 

Then  the  shaman  is  asked  to  think  of  this  while  he  is  asleep, 
when  ||  the  parents  finish  putting  into  the  fire  the  clothes  of  the  one  40 
who  is  lying  sick  abed  and  the  four  different  kinds  |  of  food.  And 
immediately  the- shaman  goes  into  the  woods,  |  trying  to  meet  what 
made  him  supernatural.  |  Then  the  one  who  is  sick  abed  is  asked  also 
to  bear  in  mind,  while  he  is  asleep  |  at  night,  what  the  spirits  of 
those  behind  us  and  ||  Sitting-on-Fire  would  say.  Then  the  parents  45 
also  bear  it  in  mind  |  while  they  sleep  during  the  night;  for  they  all, 
the  parents  |  and  the  one  sick  abed,  are  just  the  same  as  the  great 
shaman,  because  |  the  clothes  and  the  food  were  put  into  the  fire.  J 

Then  they  go  to  sleep.  Then  something  is  taken  that  belongs  to 
the  ||  one  sick  abed,  and  it  is  kept.  And  as  soon  as  he  goes  to  his  50 
bed,  |  he  hangs  it  up  over  the  head  of  his  bed.  And  as  soon  as  the 
shaman  |  comes  back,  he  lies  down  in  his  bed.  |  The  owner  of  what 
is  hanging  up  over  the  bed  thinks  of  it  continually.  |  And  as  soon  as 
the  one  lying  sick  abed  dreams,  laughing  while  he  is  asleep,  ||  then  he  55 
knows  that  he  is  not  going  to  die.     And  when  he  dreams  that  |  his 

sasEiis  a'Lagawa£ya  qa  wa'g'lltse    waxL   wa's£IdLEnu£xu  Logiin  gE- 
nE'mk'.       Wa,    laE'ms     hawa'x£ElaLEx     q!we'q!ulagila   qa    g-ax- 35 
la'g'lltse   waxL   he'lek'aLExgin    ximo'kwik-.     Wag'Il    la    wa£x    lal 
ha'yalek' !aLEq  £na'walakwa.      Wa,"  £ne'k-eda  o'mpe  la'xa  k!wax- 
La'la.     Wa,  la  gwa'la. 

Wa,  la  axk!a'lasE£weda  pa'xala  qa£s  q!a'p!altolilexs  la'e  gwa'le 
g'I'g'aolnukwe  lax'La'lasa  gwelgwa'liisa  qE'lgwile  u£wa  m5'x£wl-  40 
dfda  he'£ma£ya.  Wa,  he'x-£ida£mesa  pa'xala  la  qa's£ida  la'xa  a/ide. 
Wa,  laE'm£lae  lal  ba/bak"Eewal  LE£wa  £na'walakwamasaq.  Wa,  la 
axsE£we'da  qE'lgwile  qa  o'gwaqes  q !a'p laltolIlExs  la'e  me'x£edxa 
ga'nuLe  qa  wa'ldEniLasa  ha'yalllagasasEns  a'Lagawa£ya  Lo£ma 
klwa'x'Lala.  Wa,  la  5'gwaqa£me  g-I'g'aolnukwas  q!a'p!altolilExs  45 
la'e  me'x£edxa  la  gii'nuHda  qaxs  lE£ma'e  £na'xwa£ma  g'l'gaolnu- 
kwa  LE£wa  qE'lgwde  £nEma'x1s£Em  LE£wa  £wa'lase  pa'xala,  qaxs 
he'£mae  la'x'Lalasa  gwelgwa'la  LE£wa  he'£ma£ye  la'xa  lEgwI'le. 

Wa,  la£me  me'x£eda.  Wa,  laE'mx-de  ax£e'tsE£weda  g-a'yole  la'xa 
qE'lgwile  qa  las  a'xe£laxus.  Wa,  gi'Pmese  la,  la'xes  ku£le'lase  la'e  50 
te'x£walllaq  la'xes  6xta£lilases  kii£le'lase.  Wa,  g"i'l£mese  g-ax  na'- 
£nakweda  pa'xala,  wii,  le  ku'lx'£id  la'xes  ku£le'lase.  Wa,  he'niE- 
nala£mese  g-I'g'aeqalaxa  axno'gwadasa  la  ge'wil  lax  ku£le'lasas. 
Wii,  g'i'Pmese  me'xElaxa  qE'lgwile  da£lE'la,  ytxs  me'xae;  wa,  laE'm 
qla'LElaqexs   kMe'seLe  wa'laL.     Wa,    gl'l£mese    me'xElaq    la'lixE-  55 


708  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

56  hair  is  hanging  over  his  face,  then  the  shaman  knows  that  the  sick 
one  will  die.  |  When  he  dreams  that  he  is  laughing,  then  the 
shaman  |  sings  his  sacred  song  and  goes  into  the  woods.  He  goes 
to  search  for  the  soul  of  the  one  who  |  lies  sick  abed,  to  bring  it 
hack   to  him.     At  once  the  parents  of  the  one  who  lies  sick  abed 

60  feel  good  ||  at  heart  when  they  hear  the  shaman  |  singing  his  sacred 
song.  And  when  they  do  not  hear  him  singing  his  sacred  song,  | 
then  they  know  that  the  shaman  dreamed  that  hair  was  hanging 
over  his  face.  |  Then  he  never  sings  his  sacred  song.  | 

65  In  the  morning,  when  day  comes,  the  hearts  ||  of  the  parents  of  the 
one  who  lies  sick  abed  feel  bad,  for  they  know  that  |  their  child  will 
die.  Then  the  one  who  is  lying  sick  abed  is  growing  weak  very  fast.  | 
His  parents  now  take  all  the  best  kinds  of  |  food  and  the  best  clothing 
for  the  one  who  is  sick  abed,  who  is  dying,  j 

As  soon  as  (the  breath)  of  the  one  lying  sick  abed  breaks,  the  II 

70  parents  take  the  best  clothing  and  put  it  on  the  one  who  had  been 
sick  abed.  |  After  the  parents  have  done  so,  the  mother  kicks  her 
dead  child  four  times.  |  And  when  she  first  kicks  him,  she  says,  | 
"Don't  turn  your  head  back  to  me."  Then  she  turns  around,  and 
again  |  she  kicks  him.     And  as  she  kicks  him,  she  says,  "Don't  come 

75  back  again."  ||  Then  she  turns  around  again.  She  kicks  him;  and 
she  |  says  as  she  kicks  him,  "Just  go  straight  ahead."     And  then 


56  malaxes  sE£ya',  la  q!a'LEla£ma  paxa'liiqexs  lE£le'La  qE'lgwile. 
Wii,  he'£maaxs  me'xElaaq  da£lE'laa;  wii,  he'x-£ida£meseda  paxa'la 
yii'laqwa  qa£s  la  la'xa  a'lJe.  Wa,  laE'm  15l  a'lalxa  bEx£una'£yasa 
qE'lgwile  qaes    g-a'xe    ax£a'LElots  laq.     Wa,  he'x£ida£mes  e'x,£Ide 

60  na'qa£yas  g'l'g'aolnokwasa  qE'lgwile  qaxs  la'e  wuLa'x£aLElaqexs 
ya'laqiilaeda  pa'xala.  Wii,  gl'Pmese  k!es  wuLE'laq  ya'laqlwala; 
wa,  laE'm  qla'LElaqexs  lE£ma'e  me'xEleda  p&'xalaqexs  la'lexima- 
laaxes  sE£ya'.     Wii,  laE'm  hewa'xa  yii'laqwa  la'xeq. 

Wa,  la£me  £na'x"£idxa  gaa'la.     Wii,  la£me  £ya'x"SE£me  na'qa£yasa 

65  gi'g'aolnokwasa  qE'lgwile  qaxs  lE£ma'e  q!a'LElaqexs  lE£ma'e  1e£1lcs 
xuno'x"de.  Wii,  la£me  ha'£labala  la  waL!e'mas£ideda  qE'lgwile. 
Wii,  laE'm£lae  g'I'g'aolnokwas  ax£e'dxa  £na,'xwa  ek'  he'£maomas 
LE£wa  e'k'e  gwe'lgwala  qae's  qE'lgwile  wii'wanE£ma. 

Wii,  g"i'l£mese  El£E'lseda  qs'lgwllde;  wii,  la  he'x-£ida£me  g'l'g'a- 

70  6lnoxudiis  ax£e'dxa  e'k'e  gwe'lgwala  qa£s  q!o'xts!odes  la'xa  qE'l- 
gwllde.  Wa,  g-i'l£mese  gwa'leda  gi'g"aolnoxude,  la'e  mo'p!Ena  kwa'- 
s£Ideda  abE'mpaxes  xun5'xude.  Wii,  la  £ne'k'Exs  g'a'lae  kwa's£Ida: 
"K'le'sLEs  mEle'£xLal  ga'xEn."  Wii,  la  x'i'lp!eda  qa£s  e't!ede 
kwa's£IdEq.     Wa,  la  £ne'k'Exs  la'e  kwa's£IdEq:     "K'!esLEs  e'dgEm- 

75  g'ilisLOL."  Wii,  la  e'tled  xilpleda  qa£s  e'tlede  kwa's£IdEq.  Wa,  la 
£ne'k"Exs  la'e  kwa's£IdEq ;     "A'Emlts  he'gEmlesLQL."    Wa,  la  e'tled 


BOAS]  BELIEFS    AND    CUSTOMS  709 

she  |  kicks   him   again;  and   says,    "Only   protect   me   and   your  |  77 
father  from  sickness."     Thus  she  says,  and  she  leaves  him.  j 

The  (body)  is  taken  by  other  people  after  this,  and  is  taken 
through  ||  (a  hole),  planks  being  pulled  out  at  the  side  of  the  house.  80 
There  |  the  dead  one  is  put  into  his  coffin.  Then  he  is  |  buried. 
And  as  soon  as  all  those  who  have  buried  him  have  gone,  |  then  the 
mother  of  the  dead  one  gives  all  (lie  best  food  and  |  the  best  clothes 
to  other  women,  to  go  and  burn  them  ||  behind  the  village.  As  soon  85 
as  they  have  done  so,  they  come  back.  |  For  four  days  the  mother  of 
the  dead  one  does  so,  |  throwing  food  in  the  morning  into  the  fire  of 
her  house.  | 

That  is  what  the  ancestors  of  the  Kwakiutl  do  when  |  a  child 
belonging  to  the  nobility  dies;  and  the  II  roof-boards  of  his  father's  90 
house  are  at  once  pulled  down.     And  all  |  the  men  onl_y  stop  when 
all  the  roof-boards  have  been  pulled  down:  and  that  is    called''  crazi- 
ness  strikes  [en  the  end]  on  account  of  the  beloved  one  who  died." 

Four  days  after  the  child  has  died,  |  those  who  are  not  related  to 
him  are  called  to  cut  the  hair  of  the  mother  ]|  and  of  the  father,  and  of  95 
his  brothers,  for  it  is  bad  if  |  relatives  cut  the  hair.  When  they  cut  the 
hair,  it  is  |  just  as  though  they  were  cutting  the  throats  of  the  rela- 
tives.    Therefore  |  the  Indians  do  this  way.     They  will  not  let  |  the 


kwaVldEq.    Wa,  la  me'ka:    "A 'Emits  da'da£mowil  g"a/xEn  Lo'gwa  77 
a'sEk',"  £ne'x-£laexs  la'e  bas. 

Wa,  laE'm  &x£e'tsosa  a'l£6gii£la  bEgwa'iiEm  la'xeq  qa£s  la  lii'x'- 
so£yo  la'xa  k- !Exusa£wa'kwe  liix  apsa'inVyasa  go'kwe.  Wit,  he'-  80 
£mes  la  la'ts!odaasxa  wa'nEmx'de  la'xes  dEg"aa'ts!e.  Wa,  hr'me 
wunE'mt!etsE£wa.  Wa,  g"l'l£mese  la  ewl'£la  qa's£Ideda  wfmE'mta 
la'e  tsla'we  abE'mpdiisa  wa'nEinasa  'na'xvva  e.lc  he'-maomas  LE£wa 
e'k'e  gwe'lgwala  la'xa  5'gii£la£me  tsteda/q  qa  liis  lEqwe'laq  lax 
a'Lanaeyasa  g'o'kula.  Wa,  g'f'Pmese  gwa'texs  ga'xae  na'makwa,  85 
wit,  la'La  m6'p!Enxwa-se  '"na'las  he  gwe'g'ile  abE'mpdiisa  wa'nE- 
ma,    ts!EXLE'ntsa     ha£ma'£yaxa    gaa'la     lax     lEgwi'lases    g'o'kwe. 

Wit,  yi'Lax    gwe'gi£lasditsa    gi'lx'da    Kwa'g-ula,  giT'mae    na'x- 
sala    g'ina'nEmeda    wii'iiEmiixs    la'e    he'x£idai:m    lEk\va'xElasE£we 
la'dEkwas  g'o'kwas  o'mpdas.     Wa,  a'l£mes    gwfd  a'xso-sa  £na'xwa  90 
be'bEgwiinEmxs  lEema'e  ewi'£laxe  sa'las  g'o'x"diis;  wa,  he'Em  Le'- 
gadEs  ''no'lEmsIla  Lte'mkwa    qae'da  lE'lgvvala'"ye  wa'nEma." 

Wit,  la  mo'p!Enxwa£se  'na^las  wa'ni;max-dEmas  xuno'x"diis;  wii.la 
axsE£\va'  k"!e'se  LeLELa'la  qa£s  g-a'xe  tlo'sax  sE£yit'sa  abE'mpde 
LEewa'  o'mpde,  LE£wis  Ena'lenEmwotde  (|axs  £ya'x"sE£maeda  LeLELa'-  95 
liixs  he'e  tlo'saxa  sE£ya'.  G'i'l£Em£lae  he  tlo'saxa  sE£ya'xs  la'e 
£nEina'xis  lo£  t!o't!Ets!Exoda'laxes  LeLELa'la.  Wit,  he'£mis  la'gilas 
he    gwe'g'ileda    ba'k!ume    k"!es    he'lqlalaq    he    tlo'saxa     sE£ye'da 


710  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [Era.  ANN.  38 

relatives  cut  the  hair;  that  is  what  the  Indians  call  had  luck,  when 
100  the  hair  is  cut  ||  by  relatives.  Now  it  is  finished  in  this  manner. 
This  is  just  to  recognize  |  that  a  relative  of  those  whose  hair  has  been 
cut  has  died,  and  because  they  feel  sick  I  at  heart  for  the  one  who 
died.  |  ' 

The  Ghost  Country 

1  A  man  was  about  t<>  die.  A  woman  was  his  sweetheart.  |  She 
loved  him.  Then  the  woman  saw  her  lover.  |  "You  only  have  pity 
for  me,  for  I  am  anxious  about  your  state  in  the  house.  |  I  can  not 
stop  crying  all  these  nights.  There  is  always  crying  on  account  of  || 
5  the  state  in  which  you  are.  I  long  to  know  where  you  are  going, 
that  I  |  may  go  to  the  place  to  which  you  will  go,  for  I  shall  probably 
not  live  when  you  get  weak  (die)."  -  ■  |  "  Really,  take  care!"  said  on 
his  part  the  man  to  the  \  woman,  "and  1  will  come  and  take  you  if 
the  place  to  which  I  go  should  be  good.  |  I  shall  come  to  take  you 
that  we  may  go  to  my  future  place.     If  (the  place)  should  be  bad,"  || 

10  said  the  man  to  his  sweetheart,  "I  shall  not  come  and  take  you.  |  I 
have  beads  for  my  necklace,  t  hat  you  may  recognize  me  |  if  I  come  to 
take  you.     Don't  consent  to  be  taken  off  (by  anyone  else)."  | 

Then  the  man  became  weak  (died).     He  was  buried.     Then  |  the 

15  woman  did  not  sleep,  expecting  her  lover.  Her  lover  came.  ||  "Oh!" 
said   the   woman.     "Oh!"  said    the    man    on    his    part.  |  "I    come 


LeLELa'la.     Wa,  he'Em  gwE£ya'sa   ba'klume  aa'msexa  tlo'sax   se- 
100  £ya'ses  Le'LELa'la.     Wa,  laE'm  gwal  la'xeq.     La'La  a'Em  ma'£mal- 
t!ek!exs  Ir/lno'kwae  Le'LELa'lasa  tlEwe'kwas  sE-ya',  yixs  ts!Ex-i'lae 
na'qaeyas  qaes  wa'nEma. ' 

The  Ghost  Country 

1  Wa'wik"  !Eq  !aelaeda  bEgwa'nEm.  La'-lae  La'lanuxusa  mEmo'k" 
tslEda'q.  La'xulanux"'laes.  La'£laeda  tsteda/q  do'qwaxes  La/la. 
"A'Em£lax-s  ae'sayo^malaxg'in  gvva'yosE'lasik"  qao's  gwae'lasaqos, 
kic'sck-  r.!Ex£e'nox"xox  ga'ganuLcx.  He'mEnalaEm  q  iwa'sa  qaes 
5  gwe'x-£idaasLaos.  A'£meg-in  wa'laqeloL  qla'Maxes  laa'sLaos  qEn 
lamiii'lax  laxs  laa'sLaosgin  k!est!aakweLglnq!ula'L,  qaso  wa'tlema- 
s£eLo."  "  A'lagaEinlax-s  ya'i^ox,"  Ene'x-elat  !eda  bEgwa'nEmaxa 
tslEda'q,  qEn  g'a'xeLEn  da'LOL  qo  e'x,eEmlaxEn  laa'sLaEn,  la£me'- 
sEn  g'axL  axL5'L  qEns  la/Ens  la'xEn  laa'sLaEn.     Qo  sya'x'SEmL6," 

10  £ne'xElat  !eda  bEgwa'nEmaxes  La'la,  "  k"  !e'st  laLEn  g-a'xL  Sxlo'l. 
K'Je'osEs  L!a'£yala  qan  qEnxa'wa£ya  qafs  ma/malt  !ek' !§los  ga'xEn, 
qEiu.5  g'axL  da'LOL.     Gwa'la  he'lqlalax  ax<V-y6." 

La'£lae   we'k'  !Ex£ededa   bEgwa'nEm.     WunE'mtasE£wa.      La'£lae 
k"!es  me'x£enoxweda  tslEda'q  na'k'Ialaxes  La'la.     G'a/x£lae  La'les. 

15  "£ya,"     £ne'x-£laeda    tslEda'q.     "£ya,"    me'x-clat!eda    bEgwa'nEm. 

1  See  also  Addenda,  p.  1329. 


iioas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  711 

to    take   you,    that   we   may  go    to    the  place  where  I  have  gone.  16 
Behold!  it  is  good."  |  Then  the  woman  felt  of  the  necklace  of  the 
man.    |   "Let  us  go!"  said    the   woman.      Then  she  gathered  her  | 
belongings     and    they   started.     They    arrived  at    a    river.       "Go 
on,    shout!   II  that  we  may  he    taken    (across),"  said  on    his   part  20 
the  man  to  the  woman.  |  "Come,  fetch  us!"  said  on  her  part  the 
woman.    |     The    children    did  not  pay  any  attention;    they  were 
playing  on  the  ground,  poling  in  the  river.     "You  |  yourself  shout, 
that  we  may  be   taken    (across)."     Then   the  man  |  just  yawned. 
The  children  came  and  took  them  across,  and  ||  they  went  to  the  25 
house.     Then  they  went  up  and  entered  the  house.  | 

The  sisters  of  the  husband  of  the  woman  recognized  them. 
Then  |  they  sat  down  in  the  house.  Her  sisters-in-law  turned 
around  in  the  house.  The  woman  opened  her  little  bag  |  and  dis- 
tributed spoons  among  her  sisters-in-law.  |  They  did  nut  take  them. 
Then  the  husband  of  the  woman  said:  ||  "Put  those  spoons  on  the  30 
fire.  Indeed,  they  only  know  |  what  is  given  to  them  when  this  is 
done  to  them." — "That  is  very  strange;  |  you  only  turn  your  faces 
in  the  house  when  I  try  to  give  you  something,"  said  the  woman.  | 
Then  she  threw  them  on  the  lire  of  the  house,  and  all  the  spoons 
burned.  I  The  women  took  from  one  another  the  spoons  ||  when  they  35 
burned  inside.     The  women  took  care  |  of  the  spoons,  j 


"G'a'x£mEn  axo'L  qans  la'lag'aEiis  kVxKn  laa's,  e'x'£maa'xoLEs."  16 
La'£lae  p!e'x£wideda  ts!Eda'qasa  qEnxa'wa£yasa  bEgwa'nEm. 
•  ' pys£maeLEns  laL,"  £ne'x,£lat!eda  tslEda'q.  La'£lae  q !ap !e'x'£Idxes 
le£la/xula  qa£s  qaVlde.  La/£lae  la'g'aa  la'xa  wa.  "We'g'a  £la'qola- 
lag-a  qans  g-a'xe  da/sE£wa,"  £ne'x-£lat!eda  bEgwa'nEm,  la'xa  ts!E-  20 
da'q.  "Ge'la  da'nu£xwe';"  £ne'x-£lat  !eda  tslEda'q.  K!e'tsaEm£la- 
wls  qla'dzesa  g'i'nginanEm  a'mlEleis  ta'tenoma  la'xa  wa.  "So'- 
lag'adza£ma  -la'qula  qEns  g'a'xaEns  da/sE£wa.  La'£laeda  bEgwa'- 
nEm a'Em£lawis  ha'xila.  Ga'x£laeda  gi'nginanEm  da'wilaq  qa£s 
le  la'xes    g-oku.     La'£lae   ho'x£usdes  qa£s  le  hS'gwlL    la'xes   g-oku.  25 

G-a'x£lae  wi'waqlwas  la'£wunEinasa  tslEda'q  awu'lpata.  La'£lae 
kludzi't.  LEwi'ltses  pte'Fwtimp.  La'£lae  x'6'x£wldxes  Lia'iJaxa- 
meda  ts!Eda'q.  La'£lae  ya'x£witsa  k'a'tslEna'q  la'xes  phdphd- 
£wu'mp.  K-!e's£lat!a  ax£e'dEq.  La'£lae  £ne'k'e  la'£wunEmasa  tslE- 
da'q: "La'xLEnda'xwa  k'a'tsiEnaqex.  He'g'aEm  q!a'LEladzoxs  30 
ts!a'sE£waex,  yixs  he'ex  gwe'x'£idayu  a'*'ma." — "( )'£mlswist!a  axa', 
a'Einl  la£s  lixdawIlxsEn  wa'x'ex  ts!a'yoL,"  £ne'x-£laeda  tslEda'q. 
La'£lae  ts!EXLa'lax-£IdEs  la'xa  lEgwi'l.  La'£lae  x-I'x£ed  -'na'xweda 
k'a'tslEnaq.  La'£laeda  ts'.e'daq  le'iiEmap!ix-Idxa  ka'ts!i;naxs  la'e 
k!umk!umE'lg"ig-ax-£kleda  k-a'ts!Enaxde.  LaE'm  ya'Lioweda  ts!e'-  35 
daqxa  k'a'tslEnaq. 


712  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

37  Then  the  woman  was  pregnant,  and  gave  birth  to  a  child.  |  The 
child  she  had  borne  was  a  boy.  For  a  long  time  the  woman  staid  in 
the  house;  |  then  she  longed  for  her  father  and  her  mother.     "Let 

40  us  ||  see  the  grandparents  of  your  master!"  said  the  woman.  "Let  | 
us  go!"  said  the  man.  Then  they  went  out  to  go  to  their  |  house. 
They  entered  the  house.  The  mother  of  the  woman  saw  her  |  child. 
"Oh,  oh,  oh!"  said  the  mother  of  the  woman.     "Welcome,  |  my 

45  treasure !  Now  take  pity  on  your  slaves,  for  what  ||  can  surpass  our 
need  of  sympathy?  Welcome!  |  Bring  your  child,  that  I  may  carry 
it  in  my  arms."  |  Then  the  woman  put  her  child  in  her  arms,  and  | 
the  mother  of  the  woman  carried  it.  She  looked  the  child  in  the 
face.     "What  |  should  there  be?     Its  eyes  were  holes,  its  face  was  a 

50  little  green,  and  moss  was  on  the  side  of  its  face.  II  Then  the  woman 
said,  "Ah!"  and  threw  away  the  child.  |  "What  is  the  matter  with 
this  chdd  ?  Confound  it  [indeed,  you  begin  to  be  dead  in  the  house!]"  | 
said  on  her  part  the  mother  of  the  (woman).  "Don't  speak  about 
me  in  vain  anxiously,  |  that  I  should  come  again  (and  that  you 
should)  see  me.     I  just  had  pity  on  you;  |  therefore  I  came  and  tried 

55  to  get  to  you."  Thus  she  said  to  her  mother  and  her  ||  father.  Then 
the  mother  of  the  woman  followed  her.  "Come,  |  take  pity  on  me! 
Give  mo  your  child,  that  I  may  carry  it." — "O  my  dear!  I  am  | 
going  back.  I  do  not  return  to  you  at  all.  You  have  pushed  aside  | 
my  child,"  the  woman  just  said  to  her  mother.  |  The  mother  of  the 


37  La'£lae  bowe'x£w!deda  tslEda'q.  La'£lae  ma'yuHda.  BEgwa' 
nEm£lat!a  mii'yoLEmasa  tsteda/q.  La'lae  ga'leda  tsteda'q.  La'- 
£lae   tsHxi'le    na'qa£yas  qaes    omp  LE£wis  abE'mp.      "Ladza'x'ins 

40  do'x£w!dEq  gaa'gEmpasox  g'I'yaqos,"  £ne'x"£laeda  tslEda'q.  "We'- 
dzaxins,"  £ne'x,£lat!eda  bEgwa'nEm.  La/£lae  Lla'sta  qa£s  le  lii'xes 
g-oku.  La/'lae  lae'L.  La/£lae  do'x£waLEle  abE'mpasa  tsteda/qaxes 
xiino'ku.  "(),  6,  6,  6,"  £ne'x,£lat!eda  abE'mpasa  tshsda'q,  "ge'la- 
k-as£la  Lo'gwa£e.     LaE'mk-  wl'wosilagag'as  q!a'q!Ek'ugos  qa  £ma'- 

45  sesEnu£x11  la  e'taga'wa£yasg"anu£x"    wl'woslla    qag'anu£xu.      Ge'la- 

k"as£la     xuno'ku,     ge'latsos     xuno'kwaqos      qsn    q!al£e'daEnLaq." 

La'elae  qlala'maseda  tsiEda'qases  xuno'k".     LaEm£la'wis  q!al£e'- 

deda  abE'mpasa  tslsda'q.     La'£lae  do'qumdxa  gina'nEm.  £ma,'sLe- 

lawis?      Kwa'lkuxustobida£wa,    lE'nxEmbida£wa,    p!E'lp!EltsEnuLE- 

50  mala.  La'£lae  "ha,"  £ne'x"£laeda  tslEda'q,  ts!Ex£e'dxa  gina'nEm. 
"£ma'dzox  gwa'laasaxsa  g"ina'nEmx.  Ladza'£mas  lE£lEla'g'iliLa," 
£ne'x-£lat!a  abE'mpasa  g'Ina'nEm.  "Gwa'las  wul-'E'm  lE'lwiq  lalaLEii 
es  wal  c[En  g-a'xe  e't!ed  do'x£waLEla  g'a'xEn.  A'£mexdEg'in  wax' 
wa'sos  g'a'xeldEn  wax-  la'x'da£xoL,"   ene'x,£laexes  abE'mp  LE£wis 

55  omp.  La'£hie  qa'tsEmaeda  abE'mpasa  tslEda'q:  "Ge'lag'a  wa'- 
x£ex,  ge'ts5s  xuno'kwaqos  qEn  q!al£e'daEnLaq." — -"Aadit',  la£niEn 
l&L  ae'daaqaL,  es  wal  qan  la'En  ae'daaq  Iol,  e't!edadza  xe't!e- 
dExg'in     xuno'giin,"    £ne'x-£lat!a    a'Emxes     abE'mpeda     ts!Eda'q. 


BOAS]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  713 

woman  cried  in  vain.     The  woman  just  started  to  go  ||  to  her  hus-  GO 
band,  to  the  ghosts.     There  |  she  staid.     She  did  not  come  back. 
That  is  the  house  of  the  ghosts.     That  is  |  the  end.  | 

The  Soul  of  Man. — Now  I  shall  talk  |  about  what  the  shamans  and  1 
twins,  those  who  are  born  two  |  of  one  mother,  say.     This  is  what  is 
referred  to  as  Salmon  twin.  |  I  shall  talk  about  this  first,  because  she 
talked  franjdy  ||  about  the  sold  of  twin  male  and  |  female,  for  a  5 
woman  who  was  called  Yayaxuyega  talked  very  openly  about  it.  | 
She  had  a  large  scar  high  up  between  her  |  breasts.     I  asked  her  how 
she  was  hurt,  and  she  just  laughed.  |  She  said  to  me,  "Don't  you 
know?     I  am  a  Salmon  chdd,  ||  and  my  sweetheart  is  the  man  who  10 
was  born  with  me  as  twin  |  from  the  same  mother.     What  you  ask 
about  is  a  spear-mark  on  me,  |  made  when  we  were  going  up  the  river 
when  I  was  a  sockeye-salmon.  |  The  spear  of  the  one  who  speared  me 
broke  off.    And  then  I  went  home  to  our  house  (where  I  lived)  with  | 
Maesila  (guardian  of  salmon).      Our  souls  always  walk  about  among 
you  ||  in  your  villages,  but  you  don't  see  |  us,  for  we  are  only  souls.  15 
Then  I  |  asked   my   sweetheart  MamEnlaye£,  who  was  an  olachen, 
to  I  leave  (with  me)  our  tribe,  because  they  were  talking  about  my 
having  |  ManiEnlaye£  for  my  lover;    therefore  we  entered  ||  our  pre-  20 

Qlwa'saEl     wa'x-e    abE'mpasa    tslEcla'q.      A'Em£lawis    qiiVldeda 
tslEda'q  qa£s  la  la'xes  la'£wunEm,  laE'm  la'xa  la/£lenoxu.     LaE'm  60 
xEk'!a',  k'!es  ae'daaq.     He'Em  la  g-o'kul6tseda  la/£lenox".     LaE'm 
qlulba'. 

The  Soul  of  Man   (BEx£iinesa  bEgwiiiiEme). — La£mEn  gwagwex"s-  1 
EalaJ  lax  waldEmasa  paxala  LE£wa  yikwPlEinexa  ma£lokwas  mayoLE- 
mases  abEmp.     Wii,  heEm  gwE£yo  L!aL!ayadza£ya  ylkwFlEme.     He- 
dEn  lag-ila  he  g'il  gwagwex's£alase,  yixs  xEULElae  qlweq!ulk'!alaxs 
gwagwex-s£alae  laxa  bEx£iina£yasa   yikwFlEme   bEgwaiiEma  LoEma  5 
ts!Edaqe,  yixs   hae  xEnLEla  q!weq!uhY!aleda   tslEdaqexa   Legadas 
Yayaxuyega,    yixs    lexaeda    qlEta    lax    awagawaeyas    ek"!anaeyas 
dzedzamiis.     La£mesen  wuLaq  lax  yilgwasases;  aemese  daMda.    Wa, 
la   mek'a    g-axEn:    "  K'osLas    k-!es   qlaLElaxg'in   L!aL!ayadza£ygk' 
le£weii  waLElaxEn  bExuk"  !5tagawa£yex  laxEnu£xu  j'ikwFlEmeg'asE-  10 
nu£xu  lax  abEmpa.    Wii,  yu£maos  wiiLasE£waq5s  sElcayox  g-axEn- 
Laxg-anu£xu  laq  ts'.Elx'a  laxa  £wa  laxEn  mElek'ik'.     Wa,  la  &l£ede 
miisasa  sEX'£Ide   g'axEn.     A£mesEn  la  nii£naku  laxEnu£xu  g'okwe  lo£ 
Maesila.     Wa,    hemEnala£mesEnu£xu    g-ax     g'Ig-Elgexg-anu£xu    be- 
bExiine   lax-da£xoL   laxos   g'Ig'oxudEmsex.      Wii,    las   k!es   dociiila  15 
g'a,XEnu£xu   qaxg-anu£xu   £naxwa£mek'    bEx£una'"ya.     Wii,    lie-mesEn 
la  axk'!alasxEn  waLElax  laxoxMamEnlaya£ye,  yix  dzaxunae  qEnu£xu 
g'iixe   basEnu£xu   g-okwiilotaxs    xEiiLElae  dEntElasEnu£xu  waLalae- 
na£ye   le£wox   MamEidaya£e.     Wii,    he£mesEnu£xu    g-axela   lak'lae- 


714  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [Era.  ANN.  35 

21  tended  mother,  LaeLas,  and  therefore  |  we  just  call  her  by  that 
name."     Thus  said  Yayaxuyega.  | 

Then  I  questioned  her,  because  she  said  that  all  the  souls  of  |  twins 
went  back  to  the  village  of  Maesila  at  the  outer  edge  of  our  world,  | 
and  therefore  I  asked  her,  "Is  that  the  only  place  where  the  souls  of  || 

25  men  go,  to  Maesila?"  Thus  I  said  to  her.  Then  she  said,  "The  | 
village  of  Ealexusiwalis,  who  is  referred  to  by  us  as  killer-whale,  is  not- 
far  away.  The  |  sea-hunters  go  there;  for  the  souls  of  the  sea- 
hunters   come   from  |  Ealexusiwahs,    whom   we   call    killer-whale.  | 

30  When  the  souls  get  tired,  they  go  home  ||  to  the  village  of  Ealexusi- 
walis. Then  |  the  man,  the  owner  of  the  hunter's  soul,  does  not  live 
long  when  he  goes  home,  and  he  dies,  |  for  he  is  not  strong  when  his 
soul  does  not  hold  together  |  his  body.  Now  watch  my  lover 
MamEnlaye£,  |  who   came   with    me  when    we    escaped   from  our  || 

35  parents,  when  they  talked  too  much  about  our  |  being  lovers,  for  he 
says  that  he  is  going  home,  and  that  his  |  soul  has  already  gone  to  the 
souls  of  the  Salmon,  when  they  die  in  the  rivers  after  |  spawning. 
And  when  they  die,  their  souls  go  home  |  to  the  outside  of  our  world. 

40  Now  MamEnlaye£  ||  has  never  any  strength,  for  he  is  sleeping  all  the 
time.  |  He  has  no  happiness."     Then  I  asked  Yayaxuyega  |  why  the 

20  dzEndxox  laqEnu£xu  abEmpboIaxox  LaeLasex.  PIe£mEnu£xu  lag-ila 
aEm  LeqElas  LegEmasox,"  £nek'e  Yayaxuyega. 

Wa,  Ieii  wuLaq  qaxs  'neloiaqexs  £wi£la£mae  aedaaqe bExeuna£yasa 
LlfuJayadza^ye  lax  g'6kulasasa  Maesila  lax  L'.asodesasEns  £nalax. 
Wa,  he£mesEn  lag'ila  wuLaq:  "Lex'a£mae  laatsa  bE.x£una£yasa  bE- 

25  gwanEme  Maesila?"  £nek'EiiLaq.  Wii,  la  £nek"a  yixs  k'lesae  qwe- 
sale  g'okulasasa  Ealexusi\valisxi:ns  gwE£yowe  max£enoxu.  Wii,  heicm 
hVnakiVlatsa  bEx£una£yasa  es£alewinoxwe,  qaxs  he£mae  g-aya£na- 
kiile  bKx£iina£yasa  es£;ilewinoxwa  EalexusiwalisexEns gwE£yowe max- 
£enoxwa.     Wa,  g'il£mese  wisq!EX-£IdExs  yae  lox  lae  nil£nakwe  bEx- 

30  £iina£yas  lax  g-6kulasas  Ealexusiwalis.  Wa,  k"!est!e  gala  q!Qleda 
bEgwanEinexa  alewinoxwe  bEx£iinenux"sa  la  na£nak\va  lae  wik"!E- 
x£eda,  qaxs  k"  leasae  laxwa£ya  qaes  bKx£una£yaxs  k'leasae  la  axala 
lax  ok!winaeyas.  Wii,  laEms  doqulalxEn  wai.Elax  yixnx  MamEn- 
laya£vC'X,    yixEn    £nEmokwaxg'in     g,axaolg"anuexu    aweqwasEnu£xu 

35  g'ig'aolnokwa,  yixs  lae  Lomax-£id  gwagwex's£ala  g"axEnu£xu  laxE- 
nu£xu  war.alaena^e,  yixs  £nek"aex,  laEin  lal  nii£naxuLE,  lE£maes  bE- 
x£una£ya  liinEwex  bebEx£una£yasa  k' !ok" lutElax  Lae  h"'li:£l  laxa  ewaxs 
lae  xwela£wa.  Wii,  g"il£mese  £wi£la  lelE£lxs  lae  £wl£la  nii£nakwe  bebE- 
x£(ina£ye  lax  LlasodesasEns  £nalax.     Wa,  la£mesox  MamEnlaya£yex 

40  la  hewiixaF.m  la  lalox£w!da,  yixs  a£maex  la  hemEnal£Em  la  mexa; 
k"!es    la    elc!ex£edaenoxwa."      Wii,    lEn   wtiLax    Yayaxuyega    lax 


BOisJ  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  715 

heart  of  him  to  whom  she  referred  as  her  lover  was  bad.     She  only  42 
laughed  |  and  said,  "His  heart  is  bad,  because  I  am  married  to   | 
•maxumEwes."     Thus  she  said.     Then  Yiiynxiiyega  said,  "We  are 
always  ||  walking  along  with  the  souls  of  the  Salmon  in  the  night.   |  45 
for  they  are  all  human  beings."     Thus  she  said.     Then  I  asked  her 
about  |  the  seat  of  the  soul  of  the  Salmon,  and  also  of  man.  |  She 
laughed  again  and  said,  "Why,  don't  you  |  know?     It  always  sits 
on  the  head,  and  the  ||  soids  of  the  Salmon  also  sit  on  the  heads;  but  it  50 
is  different  with  the  souls  of  the  sea-hunters.  [  They  immediately  go 
into  their  killer-whale  masks,  |  and  they  go  hunting  seals."  | 

Then  I  questioned  her  again,  and  I  said  to  her,  "Go  on,  tell  me, 
now,  |  that  I  may  believe  that  you  really  know  what  you  are  talking 
about.  What  ||  becomes  of  our  souls  when  we  sleep  in  the  night?  55 
Doesn't  the  soul  also  go  to  |  sleep?"  Thus  I  said  to  her.  Then  she 
laughed  again  and  said,  "You  are  a  |  foolish  man,  really  you  are 
foolish  that  you  think  the  soul  \  of  man,  and  of  woman,  goes  to  sleep. 
No,  the  soul  never  |  goes  to  sleep  at  night,  nor  in  the  day.  In  the 
day  it  stays  together  ||  with  us,  and  keeps  watch  over  us.  But  when  60 
night  comes,  and  we  go  to  sleep,  |  then  our  soul  immediately  leaves 
us,  and  goes  to  a  distant  |  land.  And  then  we  dream  of  the  place  to 
which  our  soul  goes,  |  and  what  it  is  doing.  Now  the  person  is  not 
dead  when  he  sleeps,  |  only  he  has  no  strength  when  he  is  asleep,  for 

£yag'imas  naqa£yas  gwE£yas  waLEles  wEq'.wa.     A£mese  daMda.    Wii,  42 
la   £nek-a:    "HeEin-El    £y5g'imsox    naqa£yasoxgnn   lak"    liinvadEsox 
£maxuniEwesax",     mek'ox.     Wii,     laEin    snek-e    Yayaxuyegaxg'ins 
hemEnalamieg'ins  qaqEsala  LEewa bExsunaeyasa  k*  !ok"  lutElaxa  gaga-  45 
noLe  qaxs   £naxwa£mae   bebEgwanEma,"  meke.     Wii,  laEn  witi.aq 
lax    klwalaasas     bEx£iina£yasa     k'!ok!iitEla    r.6emEnsaxg'ins  bebE- 
gwanEmek".     Wii,   laxae   daWda.     Wii,  lii   £nEk'a:  "K'osi.as    k"!es 
qlaLElaa?   yomaas   klwalEns   oxLii£yex.     Wii,    laxae    hei:m    k!wale 
l)i;x£una£yasa  k"!ok!utEle  oxL:i£yas.     Wii,  lfii.a   oguqalaxa    l)i:x£una-  50 
£yasa  es£alewinoxwe,   yixs  a£mae   hex£idaEm  lats!a,  laxes  maxEmle 
qa£s  lii  alexwaxa  megwate. 

Wa,  laxaEn  et!ed  wiiLiiq.  Wii,  Ieu  £nek'Eq:  "Weg'a  gwas£Idiox 
qEn  6q!us£IdaoL,  alaEm  q!a,LElaxos  waldEmielalag"lliiex.  Watens 
bEx£una£yex,  yixgins  liig'ins  mex£edxa  ganoLe  k"  !esae  ogwaqaEm  55 
mexaa,"  £nEk-EiiLaq.  Wii,  laxae  clal^ida.  Wii,  lii  £neka:  "YuLaxs 
nEnolaex  bEgwaiiEma,  alas  iieiioIo,  yixs  ;'nek'aaxEnc[osaq  me£xeno- 
xwa  bE.x£una£yasa  birgwanEme  LE£wa  tslEdaqe.  K-!e;  yixs  kMesae 
me£xenoxwa  bEx£una£yaxa  ganoLe  LE£wa  £nala,  xa  £nala  lii  q!ap!ex'sa 
LE£wEns  qaes  q!aq!alalae  g'iixEiis,  wiix-e  ganoMda  liig'ins  mex£eda,  60 
wa,  hex'£ida£mesEns  bEx£una£ve  bawEns  qa£s  lii  laxa  qwesala 
awinagwisa.  Wii,  he£mesEns  g-ax  mexa£ye  lalalasasEns  l)Ex£una£ye 
LE£wis  gwegilase.  Wii,  laEin  k'!es  lE£lt5da  bEgwaiiEmaxs  mexae. 
La  a.Em  k-!eas  la  laxwes,  yixs  mexae  qaxs  lag  q!ane£stes  bEx£una£ye. 


716  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  35 

65  his  soul  goes  traveling  about;  If  and  when  it  is  near  day,  the  soul 
comes  back  again  and  \  sits  on  top  of  the  head  of  the  man.  Then  the 
man  awakes  |  and  gets  up.  If  the  soul  of  a  man  who  is  asleep  goes 
too  far  away  |  and  comes  not  back  again,  the  man  remains  in  bed  | 

70  asleep  and  is  dead.  The  time  when  this  happens  is  when  the  ||  soul 
goes  to  another  man  and  makes  a  mistake."  |  Then  I  questioned  her: 
"Where  do  the  souls  of  |  all  those  who  are  not  twins  and  who  are  not 
sea-hunters  go, — those  of  the  common  |  people?  Where  do  the  souls 
go  when  the  owner  of  the  soul  dies?"     Thus  |  I  said  to  her.     Then 

75  Yayaxuyega  became  angry  and  said,  ||  "Don't  they  always  stay  in 
the  village  not  very  far  from  the  other  end  |  of  the  village?  and  don't 
they  come  walking  about  at  night?"  |  Then  she  said,  "I  shall  stop 
answering  your  questions.  |  It  occurs  to  my  mind  that  I  have  been 
the  cause  of  anger  for  the  Salmon  and  of  the  souls  of  the   |  dead  ones, 

80  because  1  talk  about  it.  I  think  they  will  come  II  to  get  me  now  and 
take  me  home."  Then  I  said,  "Are  you  going  to  die?  and  do  you  say 
for  that  reason  |  that  you  will  go  home?"  Thus  I  said  to  her. 
Then  she  cried,  |  and  she  said,  "Indeed,  I  have  done  harm  to  myself, 
because  I  talked  to  you,  |  for  I  have  divulged  the  ways  of  the  |  Salmon 

85  people."  Now  I  was  really  in  her  disfavor,  and  she  was  ||  really  crying. 
Then  I  left  her.  I 


65  Wii,  g'il£mese  ex'iila  £nax£nlExs  g'axae  aedaaqeda  l>Kx£una£ye  qa£s  lii 
k'.waxLalabEndxa  bEgwaiiEme.  Wa,  lu''x£ida£mese  ts!Ex,£Ideda  bE- 
gwanEme,  qa£s  Lax£wide;  wiix'e  qwaqwesg'ilakina  bEx£iina£yasa  bE- 
gwanEinaxs  mexae  }Tixs  k-  lesae  g'ax  aedaaqa.  Wii,  la£me  xEk'  !ael 
mexeda  bEgwanEme,  laEin  lE£la.     HeEm  hex'dEms  gwex£ide  bE- 

70  x£una£yas,  yixs  lae  laxa  ogu£lame  bEgwanEma,  yixs  LexLek'Elsae, 
yixs  hee  gwex'£ide."  Wii,  laxaEn  wfiLiiq  lax  laasasa  bEx£ima£vasa 
£naxwaxa  kMese  L!aL!ayadza£ya  LE£wa  k'!ese  alewinoxwaxa  baxtise 
bEgwanEma,  £wl£ste  bEx£Qna£yas,  yixs  lae  1e£1§  bEx£unenok\vas, 
£nek"EnLaq.    Wii,  la£me  lawas£ida  yix    Yayaxuyega.    Wii,  la  £nek-a: 

75  "EsaeLa  hemEnaia  he  g'okuleda  k'lese  alaEm  qwesala  lax  apsba- 
lasasa  g'okula.  Wa,  hij£mis  g'ax  q!iinEme£stElsxa  gaganoLe.  Wa, 
la  £nek'a:  "La£niEn  gwal  nii£naxmexes  waLi£liilasE£wos.  La£megin 
mElx£waLElaxg  in  ts'.Engumelg'asa  k'!ok!iitEla  LEewox  bi;x£una- 
£yaxsa  la   lelE£laxg"in    la.k*    gwagwex's£ala  laq;  lax"Es£meg"in  gaxL 

80  dasol  qEii  lii  nii£nakwa."  Wii,  laxaEn  £nek'a:  "La£mas  lE£lLa  lag'i- 
laos  £nek'Exs  lEmaex  lal  nii£naxuL,"  enek"EnLaq.  Wii,  la£me  qlwii- 
g-a£la.  Wii,  lii  £neka:  QaL,  la£mEn  q!ulex'st!Eqa  qaEn  gwek'lE- 
g'alase  laL,  qaxg'in  liik'  bax£us£idamasxEiiu£xu  gwex-sdEmaxg-a- 
nu£x"  L!aL!ayadza£yek-."     Wa,  la£me    alax£Id  w  anex£idEn.     La£me 

So  alax£id  q'.wasa.     Wii  la£mEn  bas  laxeq. 


iioas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  717 

Now  her  brother   MamEnlayee,    to   whom  Yayaxiiyega  |  referred  86 
as  her  lover,  was  asleep  all  the  time.     He  was  depressed;  |  and  his 
father  Yaqal£Enala  went  up  to  the  roof  of  his  house,  |  and  he  called 
ManiEnlaye£  to  go  up   and   help  him.  ||  Immediately  MamEnlayaye  90 
went  up  to  the  roof  of  his  house;  |  and  when  he  just  reached  the  place 
where  his  father   Yaqal£Enala  was,   his  foot  slipped,  |  and  he    fell 
through  the  roof  of  the  house,  and  he  was  |  killed.     Then  Yayaxiiyega 
said  that  his  soul  had  |  gone  home  long  ago.     Not  long  after  this 
Yayaxiiyega  ||  also    died.     This   was   all   what   the  |  one   said  who  95 
spoke  openly  about  those  born  from  the  Salmon. 

I  forgot  one  thing.  When  I  asked  the  Salmon  woman  Yayaxii- 
yega |  what  the  soul  of  man  was,  whether  it  is  large  |  or  small,  she 
said,  ''Don't  you  see  your  shadow  on  the  ||  ground  when  the  sun  is  100 
shining?  That  is  just  like  the  soul.  When  |  the  soul  wishes  to  sit- 
where  it  is  always  seated,  |  on  our  head,  then  it  is  small.  In  the 
day  time  it  is  small,  |  but  when  we  are  asleep,  it  is  big,  when  it  trav- 
els about  where  it  is  going."  | 

And  Yayaxiiyega  said  also  this  to  her  mother  Laexas.  ||  There  were  5 
three  elder  sisters  of  Yayaxiiyega.     She  called  her  |  mother  to  come 
and  sit  down  on  her  bed,  and  she  said  to  her,  |  "You  and  your  hus- 
band are  very  bad,  for  3rou  do  not  know  how  |  to  take  care  of  us. 

Wa,  laEin  a£me   wEq'.wiise  MamEnlaya£ye,    yix  gwE£yas  Yayaxu- 86 
yeg'a  waLala  aEni  heniEnalaEin  mexa.     Wa,  laEm  xulse  naqa£yas. 
Wa,  la  ompas,  yix  Yaqal£Enala  lag'iis  lax  ogwasases  g'okwe.     Wa, 
la  Le£lalax  MamEnlaya£ye  qa  las  lag'usta  qa  g'lwaliseq.     Wa,  hex- 
£ida£niese    MamEnlayaeye   la   lag'usta     laxa   salases   g'okwe.     Wa,  90 
he£mis  ales  lag'aa  lax  axasases  ompe  Yaqal£Enala  laase  tsaxELEle 
g-dgu£yas.      Wa,    la£me     texsa      laxa     salases     g-okwe.       La£me 
hebaeya.     Wa,    a£niese    fnek"e    Yayaxuyeg'a    qlEyohlde    la   nama- 
kwe     bEXHina£yasox.     Wa,      k-!est!a      qweseg'a£ye     Yayaxiiyega 
laaxat!     ogwaqa    wIk'!Ex£eda.      Wa,    laEm    £wi£le    waklEmi£lalasa  95 
nEmoxume  g'ax  q!weq!ulk"!alasa  £naxwa  LaL!ayadza£ya. 

G"axoLEn  L'.Elewesogwa,  yixg'inlak'wuLaxa  L'.aL!ayadza£ye  Yaya- 
xuj-ega  lax  g'wex'sdEmasa  bEx£una£yasa  bEgwanEme  lo£  £walas 
lo£  Ema.  Wa,  la  £nek"a:  "Esas  doqfllaxes  g'ag'omasos  laxa  awl- 
nak'.usaxs  L!esElae.  Wa,  heEm  gwexsa  bEx£flna£ye.  Wa,  g  il£mese  100 
£nek-eda  bEx£una£ye  qa£s  lii  k'.wala  laxes  hemEnala£mex  k'.walaasEns 
6xLa£yex  la  amabido£  la.  Wa,  heEm  amax,£idEx£Emsexs  £nalae. 
Wa,  gil£mesEns  mexa  lae  £walas£Ida  yixslae  q!Ene£sta  laxes  lalalase." 

Wa,    he£mise    waldEmas    Yayaxiiyega    laxes    flbEmpe    LaeLase, 
yixs  yudukwae  ts'.edaqe  £no£nElas  Yayaxiiyega.     Wii,  la  Le£lalaxes  5 
abEmpe   qa  g'Sxes    k'.wag'alll   lax    qElgwi£lasas.     Wa,  la  £nek'Eq: 
"Lomas  £yaex"sEma  le£wos  la£wunEmaqos,  yixs  £yag  ilwataaqos  lax 
aek'ila   g-axEnu£xu.     Wa,    la£mesEn   laL   na£naku  qEnLo   £wI1olxox 


718  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth   ann.  35 

Now  I  shall  go  home,  and  take  the  |  souls  of  my  elder  sisters." 
110  Thus  she  said.  It  was  only  three  II  days  since  the  time  when  Yayaxii- 
yega  had  said  so  to  her  mother  when  she  died;  |  and  it  was  not  one 
winter  when  her  |  three  elder  sisters  died,  and  their  parents  soon 
followed  them.  I  That  is  all  to  be  said  about  this.  I 


1  Now  I  shall  talk  about  what  is  said  by  the  shaman,  about  the  | 
soul  of  man,  by  the  great  shaman  Qasnomalas.  That  is  |  his  name  as 
a  shaman,  as  a  |  chief  of  thenumaym  SisEiiL!e£  of  the  Nak  !wax'  da£xu 
5  his  name  is  G'ex"se£stalisEme£.  ||  When  Lanax'lanag'Eku,  the  princess 
of  Ts  lagEyos,  was  very  sick,  |  her  grave-box  had  already  been  made, 
and  they  were  about  to  wrap  up  her  body.  I  was  with  the  |  Nak  Iwax'- 
da£xu,  having  been  invited.  When  night  came,  the  |  shaman  Qas- 
nomalas was  asked  to  go  and  feel  for  the  sickness.  |  He  went  and  sat 

10  down  on  the  floor  towards  the  fire  from  the  woman.  ||  First  he  felt  of 
the  top  of  her  head,  and  he  had  not  felt  for  a  long  time,  |  when  the 
shaman  said,  "She  has  no  soul,  it  flew  away  long  ago.  |  Go  on,  clear 
your  house  that  my  tribe  the  Nak  !wax'da£xu  may  come,  |  and  I  shall 
try  to  get  back  her  soul.     Now  get  |  four  kinds  of  sweet  food,  and 

15  also  four  pretty  dishes,  ||  and  put  the  sweet  food  into  them,  and  also 
some  clo tiling  of  this  |  sick  one;  and  none  of  the  young  women  shall 

bebEx£una£yaxsEn  £non£Elax-,"  £nex-£lae.  Wa,  a£mese  yuduxup!En- 
110  xwa£s  £nale  £nex"dEinas  Yayaxuyega  laxes  abEinpdaxs  lae  wlk'lEx- 
£ida.  Wa,  k'!est!a  £nEmxEnxe  tslawEnx  lae  £wI£wEla  wik"!Ex£ides 
yudukwe  £no£nEla.  Wa,  a£mese  helEwig'aye  g'ig'aolnokwaseq.  Wii, 
laEin  laba  waldEmas  laxeq. 

1  Wii,  la£mesEn  gwagwex's£alal  lax  waldEmasa  pax&la  qaeda  bEx£ii- 
na£yasa  bEgwanEme,  yixa  £walasda  paxale  Qasnomalas.  Wii,  heEin 
LegEms  laxes  pExena£ye.  Wa,  la  LegadEs  G'exse£stalisEma£ye  liixes 
g"IgEma£yaasa  nE£memotasa  SlsEnL'.e£  laxa  Nak!wax"da£xwe.  Wa, 
5  lii  alak-!ala  ts!Ex-q!e  Liinax'lanag'Ekwe  k'ledelas  Ts'.agEyose,  ylxs 
lE£mae  gwalale  dEg-ats!e  LE£wes  qlanebEmLe.  Wii,  la£mesEn  g'igexa 
Nak!wax-da£xwe  yixs  LelElakwae.  Wii,  g-il£mese  ganol£ida  lae  ax- 
k"  !alasE£weda  paxale  Qasnomalase  qa£s  la  p!ex£widxa  ts!Ex-qa.  Wii, 
la£mese  qa£s  lii  k!wag-alil  lax  Llasalilasa  ts!Ex-q!a  tslEdaqa.     Wii, 

10  he£misgil  p !ex£witso£se  5xLa£yas.  Wa,  k'!est!e  geg'ilil  plexwaqexs 
lae  £nek"eda  p&xala:  "K" lease  bEX£una£yasox;  gEyol£ide  la  p!El£Ida. 
Wag'a  ex£w!dExs  g'okwaqos  qa  g'axlag'isEn  g'okulotaxa  Nak'.wax-- 
da£xwa  qEn  wiig'i  liiloL!ax  bEx£iina£yasox.  Wii,  laEms  laloiJaLEx 
moxwidala  ex-p!aemaha£ma£ya;  he£mise  mowexLa  esEk-  ha£maats!ii 

15  qa  g'ets'.Ewatsa  ex-p!aema  ha£ma£ya.  Wa,  he£mise  gwelgvviilasoxda 
ts'.EX'q'.ax.     Wii,  lal  k'!eas  g'axltsa  ealostagase  tsledaqa  qo  exEnta- 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  719 

come,   because   they  might  be   menstruating,"  |  said   the  shaman.  17 
Now  I  heard  what  he  said,  |  for  I  went  with  him,  because  he  is  the 
uncle  of  my  wife.     Now  we  ]  went  out  of  the  house,  and  then  the 
house  was   cleared  out;  and   ||  after  the  house    had   been    cleared  20 
out,  they  walked  and  called  all  the  grown-up  |  men  of  the  Gosg'i- 
muxu,   and   the  Nak!wax'da£xu,   and   also  |  the    grown-up    women. 
But  Qasnomalas  did  not  want  the  young  |  men  and  the  young  women 
to  come  as  spectators,  because  they  are  |  careless,  being  lovers  or 
menstruating,   for   their   exhalation  would  make   the   sick  woman 
worse,  I!  according  to  the  saying  of  the  Indians,  who  say  that  the  25 
sick  one  gets  at  once  worse  |  when  a  menstruating  woman  comes  near 
a  sick  person.     That  |  is  called  by  the  Indians  "  to  steam  the  sick 
one,"  when  a  menstruating  woman  goes  to  see  her  |  sick  relatives; 
and  therefore  the  relatives  of  the  |  sick  one  do  not  want  the  sick  one 
to  be  seen.     And  also  they  do  not  allow  young  people  II  who  are  just  30 
married  to  see  the  sick  one,  because  they  |  believe  that  they  are 
always  in  bed  together,   and  that  is  the  same  as  |  menstruation. 
Their  exhalation  is  bad  for  the  sick  one.  |  And  if  the  sick  one  dies,  | 
the  Indians  say  that  he  has  been  affected  by  the  exhalation.     If  a 
young  woman  goes  ||  to  see  him,  or  a  young  man  goes  to  see  the  sick  35 
one,  they  |  often  find  a  recently  used  napkin  of  a  menstruating  woman 
behind  the  I  taboo  house  of  the  sick  woman.  I 


laxo,"   £nek-eda  paxala.     Wa,  lamiEn  £wi£laEm  wuleIqx  waldEmas  17 
qaxg'in  la£mek"  lageq  qaxsq!uleyaasgin  gEiiEmk-.     Wa,  la£mEnu£xu 
hoqiiwEls  laxa  g'okwe.     Wa,  le  ekwasE-'weda  g-okwe.     Wii,  g'il£mese 
gwal    ekwiixa    g-okwe,    laase     qas£ideda    la    Le£lalaxa     ealak"'.Ene  20 
bebEgwanEmasa  Gosg'imuxwe  LE£wa  Nak!waxda£xu.     Wii,  he£misa 
alak'lEne  tsledaqs  qaxs  k'lesae  Qasnomalase  ketq!alaq  lada  ealo- 
stawe   ha£yala  LE£wa  ealostagase  ts!edaq  la  x"its!ax-ila  qaxs  k'!esae 
q!eq!ag'ilaleda  wewaLala  LE£wa  exEnta  q5  lalax  k"!al£Idxa  tslEX'qla 
ts  !Edaqa  lax  waldEmasa  bak !ume,  yixs  £nek*aaqexs  hex'£ida£mae  xeuI-  25 
£ideda  ts'.EX'q'.axs   lae  nExwax'£ideda  exEnta  ts'.Edaqxa  .ts!Exq!a. 
HeEin   gwE£yasa   bak'.ume    k'!al£Idxa  ts'.Ex-q!a,   yixa  exEntaxs  lae 
doqwaxes   LeLELalax    ts!Ex-qae.     Wii,  he£mis  lilg'ilasa   LeLELalasa 
ts!EX"q!a  k'!es  helq'.alaq  la  doqwasE£wes  ts'.EX'qla.    Wa,  heEmxat! 
k-!es  helqlolEm  la  doqwaxa  ts'.EX"q!axa  g-Eg-ilgowe  Elosta    ha£ya-  30 
sEk'ala  qaxsk'odElae  k"!es  gwal  nExwala  laxes  g'aelase,  yixs  £nEmii- 
x-is£maeda£nExwalaLE£wa  exEnta  £yax-sEm  qaeda  tslEX'qayixs  k'  !al- 
£edaaq.     Wa,  he£maasexs  lae  wlk- !Ex£Ideda  ts'.EX-q!ax-de   lii   hex-- 
£idaEm  £nek'eda  bakhimaqexs    k-!a£lkwae  yisa  alostagas  ts'.Edaq  la 
ddqwaq  loxs   alostaeda    bEgwiinEme    la    doqwaxa   ts!EX'q!a,    yixs  35 
q'.unalae  q!asE£weda  alomase  edEmsa  exEnta  dzEms  lax  aLana£yasa 
hose  ts!EX"q!aats!esa  tslEX'qla  ts!Edaq. 


720  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ajjs.S6 

When  all  the  Gosg'imuxu  and  the  Nak!wax'da£xu  had  gone  in,  | 

40  they  went  and  sat  down  in  the  rear  of  the  large  house.  Then  ||  a 
long  narrow  board  was  taken  and  was  put  down  in  the  rear  |  of  the 
house  between  two  rows  of  men  who  sat  facing  each  other.1  |  Then 
many  batons  were  taken  and  |  given  to  the  Gosg'imux"  and  the 
Nak  !wax'da£xu.  |  After  this  had  been  done,  eagle-down  was  taken  and 

45  was  put  on  ||  the  two  rows  of  men  who  sat  facing  each  other  in  the 
rear  |  of  the  house.  When  this  was  done,  the  sick  woman  was  taken 
and  |  was  placed  on  a  new  mat  which  was  spread  in  front  of  the  | 
outer  row  of  men  in  the  rear  of  the  house.  |  The  shamans  of  the 

50  Nak!wax'da£xu  gave  them  instructions  what  to  do;  ||  for  the  Gosg'i- 
muxu  did  not  know  what  would  be  done  by  the  |  Nak  !wax' da£xu  for 
the  great  shaman  Qasnomalas.  As  soon  as  |  everything  was  ready, 
they  all  beat  fast  time  together,  all  those  who  beat  time  for  the  | 
shaman;  and  they  had  not  beaten  time  long,  before  they  stopped.  | 
Four  times  this  was  done.     When  they  stopped  beating  fast  time  the 

55  last  time,  ||  the  shaman  Qasnomalas  came  in  carrying  his  rattle.  | 
Then  he  stood  on  the  floor  inside  of  the  door  of  the  house.  He  did 
not  |  make  any  noise.  He  only  looked  at  the  sick  woman.  Then  he  | 
said,  "Come,L  lemElxalag'ilis, — and  j'ouK'Enxwalayugwa, — and  you  | 

GO  max'  nag'  Em — and  you  Q  Iwalax' ilayugwa,  for  I  pray  you  to  help  ||  me. 

38  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wFlaeLeda  Gosg'imuxwe  LE£wa  Nak!wax'da£xwe 
laas  ha£staEm  klwaleda  ogwiwalllasa  £walase  g'okwa.     Wa,  la£me 

40  ax£etsE£vveda  g'ilt!a  ts!eq!a  saokwa  qa£s  la  pax£al!lEm  laxa  ogwiwa- 
lllasa g'okwe,  lax  awagawa£yasa  k'imk'EqEgEmllla  malts  !agu£nakula 
bebEgwanEma.  Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda  q!enEme  tletlEinyayuwa  qa£s  la 
ts!awaesElayu  laxa  Gdsgimuxwe  LE£wa  Nak!wax'da£xwe.  Wa,  g'il- 
£mese  gwala  lii  ax£etsE£we  qEmxwasa  kwekwe  qa£s  la  qEinxwidayu 

45  laxa  kimk'EqEgEinllle  malts !agu£nakula  bebEgwanEm  laxa  ogwiwa- 
walllasa  g'okwe.  Wa,  le  ax£etsE£weda  tslsx'qa  ts'.Edaqa  qa£s 
g'axe  qElgudzolIlEm  laxa  tslEX'ase  le£wa£ya  LEbel  lax  Llasalllasa 
L'.asEx-£idalIlesa  bebEgwanEme  laxa  ogwiwalllasa  g'okwe.  Wii, 
la£me  hex'sa£ma  pepaxalasa  Nak!wax'da£xwe  aaxsllax  gwegwalagi- 

50  lilasas  qaxs  k'lesae  q!aLEleda  Gosg'imuxwe  lax  gwayi£lalasasa  Na- 
k!wax'da£xwe  qaeda  £walase  paxalae  Qasnomalase.  Wa,  g'il£mese 
£wi£la  gwalala  laase  £nEmax'£id  LexEdzodeda  £naxwa  Lexemelxa 
]>fixala.  Wii,  k'!est!e  geg'illla  LexEdza£yaxs  lae  £nEmax'£Id  gwala. 
Wa,  liimop'.Ena  he  gwex£ide.     Wii,.  g'il£mese  gwal  LexEdzaya  eIx- 

55  La£ye  g'axaase  g'axeLeda  paxala,  yix  Qasnomalase  dalaxes  yadEne. 
Wa,  lii  Lax£ulll  lax  awlLEliisa  tlEX'ilasa  g'Skwe.  LaEm  k'leas 
gwek'liilats;  laEm  aEm  doqwalaxa  ts'.EX'q'.a  ts!Ediiqe.  Wa,  la 
£nek'a:  "Gela  L!emElxalag"flis,  so£mets  K'Enxwalayugwa,  so£mets 
£nax'nag'Em,  wa   so£mets   Q!walax'ilayugwa,    qa£s  waxaos   g'I£wala 

•'On  each  side  o[  the  long  narrow  board. 


BOAS]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  721 

You  are  not  prostitutes."     Thus  he  said  to  them.     Immediately  |  60 
the  four  women  went  to  where  he  was  standing.     Then  Qasnomalas 
asked  for  |  red  cedar-bark  for  neck-rings  and  for  head-rings,  and  also 
for  |  eagle-down.     Immediately  they  went  and  gave  it  to  him,  and  | 
he  gave  it  to  each  of  the  four  women.     When  they  all  had  ||  neck-  65 
rings  of  red  cedar-bark  and  head-rings,  the  shaman  j  Qasnomalas  put 
eagle-down  on  the  four  women;  |  and  as  soon  as  he  had  done  so,  he 
separated  the  women,  who  had  to  go  each  |  to  one  corner  of  the 
house.     Now  the  women  were  standing  there.  |  Then  Qasnomalas 
spoke  again,  and  said,   "Bring  ||  the  grave-box  into  which  you  were  70 
about  to  put  her  whom  1  shall  bring  back  to  life,  and  the  wrapping  in 
which  you  were  about  to  wrap  her,  |  if  she  had  been  taken  by  £yayak'i- 
laga;  f or  1  can  see  her  |  soul,  which  I  shaU  put  back."     Thus  said  the 
great  shaman.     Then  |  they  put  down  the  grave-box  which  was  full 
of  blankets,  which  were  to  have  been  wrapped  around  her  |  who  was 
to  be  brought  back  to  life  by  the  great  shaman.     And  he  asked  for  || 
some  clothing  of  the  sick  woman  who  was  to  be  brought  back  to  life,  |  75 
and  for  four  dishes  with  sweet  food.  |  All  this  was  put  down  where 
he   stood.     Then   he    asked    one    of    the  |  Nak!wax'da£xu,    another 
shaman,  to  come  and  break  up  the  grave-box,  |  and  to  throw  all  on 
the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  soul-catching  house.  ||  Then  the  other  80 
shaman  went  carrying  an  ax  and  broke  the  |  grave-box  into  pieces 

g'axEn.  So£maas  k'!es  LeLasgasa,"  mek'Eq.  Wa,  hex-£ida£mesa  60 
niokwe  ts!Edaq  la  lax  Lawilasas.  Wii,  lii  Qasnomalas  dakMalax 
LlagEkwa  qa  qeqEnxawes  Lo£  qa  qeqaxEnies.  Wii,  he£mise  qam- 
xwasa  kwekwe.  Wii,  hex£ida£mese  la  ts!E£we  laq.  Wa,  hemiis  la 
ts!Ewa£nakulas  laxa  mokwe  ts'.edaqa.  Wii,  gihmese  £wl£la  la  qeqEn- 
xalaxa  L!agEkwe  LE£wis  qeqEXEma£ye,  lae  he£ma  paxala,  yix  65 
Qasnomalas  qEinx£wItsa  qEmxwiisa  kwekwe  laxa  mokwe  tsledaqa. 
Wa,  gihmese  gwala  lae  gwela£liiasa  ts!edaqe  qa  la£s  £nrd£nEinokwala 
lax  eonegwllasa  g'okwe.  Wii,  la£me  i.ax'LEwileda  tsledaqe.  Wit, 
la  edzaqwa  yaq!Eg-a£le  Qasnomalas.  Wii,  lii  £nek"a:  Gelag'axI 
g"its!E£waslaxsdasEn  heli£liilas6£Lex  lo£  q!EnebEinlaxsdiisox  qaxo  70 
liilaxsdE  laLanEins  £yayak'ilagii  qaxg  in  la£mek'  doqiilaxox  dex- 
£iina£yaxsEn  heli£]alasoLex,"  £nekeda  £walase  paxala.  Wii,  g'axe 
hangalilEma  dEgats!e,  la  qot  !axa  plElxElasgEmexa  q!EnebEin- 
laxsdiis  heli£liilasE£wasa  £walase  paxala.  Wii,  lii  dak'Ialax 
g'ayola  lax  gwelgwiiliises  heli£lalasE£wexa  ts!Ex'q!a  tslEdaqa  75 
LE£wa  moxLa  gits!Ewatsa  ex-p!aema  lnVma£ya.  Wii,  g-ax£me 
£wi£la  ax£alelEm  lax  Lawilasas.  Wii,  la  axkMalaxa  g'ayole  laxa 
^.ak!wax-da£xwe  ogu£la  paxala  qa  g'iixes  tsotsExus£Eiulxa  dEgats'.e 
qa  £wi£les  moxuLalas  laxa  laqawalllasa  b:ibakwayoL!aats!e  g'okwa. 
Wa,    la£mesa  6gu£la  paxala   dalaxa  sobayo    qa£s   tsotsExus£Endexa  80 

75052—21—35  eth— pt  1 46 


722  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.3B 

81  which  he  threw  on  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house;  he  took  the 
many  |  blankets  that  were  to  be  wrapped  around  her,  and  threw 
them  on  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house.  Two  kinds  of  things  | 
were  put  on  the  fire  by  the  other  shaman.  Then  he  was  asked  by  the 
great  shaman  to  stand  in  the  house.  |  And  Qasnomalas  took  the  cloth- 

85  ing  of  the  ||  sick  woman,  carried  it  as  he  was  going  around  the  fire  in 
the  middle  of  the  |  house,  singing  his  sacred,  song  and  swinging  his 
rattle,  while  all  the  |  men  were  beating  fast  time.  When  he  came  to 
the  place  from  which  he  had  started,  |  he  sang  his  sacred  song  and 
threw  the  clothes  on  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  house.  |  Then  he 

90  took  the  dish  with  the  sweet  food,  and  put  it  on  the  ||  fire  in  the  mid- 
dle of  the  house.  Then  he  did  the  same  with  the  others.  They 
only  |  continued  beating  fast  time,  those  who  heat  time  for  the  great 
shaman  Qasnomalas;  for  |  all  the  men  are  called  time-beaters-for- 
the-shaman.  |  Then  the  time-beaters  beat  very  fast  time.  Qasnom- 
alas |  took  the  soul  when  many  (souls)  were  waiting  at  the  door  for  the 

95  clothes  that  were  being  burned  up.  ||  He  would  say,  "You  are  another 
one!"  |  and  let  it  go.  After  he  had  been  doing  so  for  a  long  time,  he 
took  hold,  with  his  |  right  hand,  of  the  soul  of  the  sick  woman. 
Then  |  the  time-beaters  of  the  shaman  stopped  beating  fast  time. 
Then  |  the  other  shaman  who  was  standing  there  began  .to  speak,  and 
100  said,  "Now  let  her  who  is  being  restored  sit  up,  ||  that  my  friend  may 
put  her  soul  back  into  her."  |  Thus  he  said,  and  the  shaman  made  the 


81  dEg'ats'.e  qa£s  moxuLales  laxa  laqawalile.  Wii,  la  ax£edxa  q!enEme 
plElxElasgEma  qa£s  lExxales  laxa  laqawalile.  Wa,  ma£ledala£me 
lax'Lanasa  ogu£la  paxala.  Wa,  laEm  axk'  !alaso£  qa£s  he£me  Lawile 
yisa    Ewalase   paxala.     Wa,    la    Qasnomalas   dax,£ldxa   gwelgwalasa 

85  ts!EX'q!a  tstadaqa  qa£s  daleqexs  lae  livstalllelaxa  laqawalilasa 
g'okwe  yalaqtila,  yatElases  yadEne,  laaLas  LexEdzayeda  £naxwa 
bebEgwanEmxes  LexEdzEwe.  Wa,  g'ihmese  lag'aa  laxes  g'iig"illlase 
lae  yalagwatEwexs  lae  lEXLalasa  gwelgwiila  laxa  laqawalile.  Wa,  la 
dax-£Idxa  ha£maats!e  g'its'.Ewatsa  ex'p'.aomase  qa£s  k'ax'LEndes  laxa 

90  laqawalile.  Wa,  la£me  £wl£la  he  gwex'£itsa  waokwe.  LaEm  aEm 
hayolia  LexEdzayeda  Lfilexemllaxa  £walas  paxS-le  Qasnomalas  qaxs, 
he£mae  LegEmsa  £naxwa  bebEgwanEme  Lalexemilaxa  paxala.  Wa 
la£me  alax'£id  LexEdzodeda  Liilexemlle.  Wa,  la£me  Qasnomalase 
dax'£idxa  bEx£iina£yaxs  g'axae  qlenEm  g'ax  5lastE£wex  lEqwIlag'i- 

95  laxa  gwelgwiila.  Wa,  lanaxwe  £nek'a:  "£ya,  ogMadzas  qa£s 
mEx£edeq."  Wii,  la  geg'illl  he  gweg'ile.  Wa,  la£me  dax-£itses 
helk"!olts!ana£ye  laxa  bEx£una£yasa  ts'.Ex'q'.a  ts!Eclaqa.  Wii,  la£me 
gwal  LexEdza£yeda  Lalexemilaxa  paxala.  Wii,  la£me  yaq!Eg'a£leda 
ogMa  paxalaxa  Lawile.  Wii,  la  £nek"a:  "Wiig'ax'ox  k'.wag'alfla 
100  helasE£wex  qa  lalag'Isg'En  £nEmokuk-  ax£aLElodEsg-a  bEx£uneg'a- 
sox,"  £nek-e.     Wa,    he£misa  paxala  la  kwlag'alilaxa  ts!Ex-q!a  ts!B- 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS  723 

sick  woman  sit  up.  |  As  soon  as  she  sat  up,  the  great  shaman  swung  2 
his  |  rattle,  and  all  the  time-beaters  beat  time.     Then  the  shaman  j 
went  towards  her,  opened  his  left  hand,  and  the  soul  was  sitting  on 
it.  ||  He  rattled  with  his  right  hand:  and  as  soon  as  he  came  |  to  the  5 
sick  woman,  he  gave  his  rattle  to  his  friend  the  shaman,  |  who  was 
holding  up  the  sick  woman.     And  he  made  the  soul  sit  |  on  her  head. 
For  a  long  time  he  blew  on  the  top  of  her  head ;  |  and  when  he  finished 
blowing  on  it,  he  pressed  the  top  of  the  head  of  the  sick  woman.  || 
Then  he  finished.     He  arose  and  spoke.     He  |  said,  "Now  let  our  10 
sisters  dance."     Thus   he   said  to    the   four  |  women  who  were  to 
dance  merrdy,  because  he  had  recovered  the  soul  of  the  one  who  had 
come  hack  to  life,  |  the  one  who  had  been  walking  with  the  spirits. 
Thus  he  said.     Then  he  sang  with  |  slow  time-beating,  and  the  time- 
beaters  began  to  sing.  ||  Now  the  four  women  danced  and  the  |  great  15 
shaman  also  danced.     As  soon  as  the  song  ended,  they  finished. 
Then  they  were  paid  by  him  with  one  hundred  blankets,  and  one 
hundred  |  blankets  were  given  to  the  time-beaters  of  the  shaman. 
Then  the  woman  came  back  to  life  |  after  this.     That  is  all  about 
this.  || 

Now  I  saw  Qasnomalas,  who  was  sitting  on  the  ground  |  not  far  20 
from  the  other  end  of  the  village  of  the  Gosg'imux"  at  the  |  north  end. 
He  called  me  to  come  the  day  following,  |  after  he  had  caught  the 
soul  of  Lanax'lanae'Ek".     I  went  I  and  sat  down  near  where  he  was 


daqa.     Wa,   gil£mese  klwag'allla  laas  yat'.ededa  £walase  paxalases  2 
yadEne.     Wii,  lii  £naxwa  LexEdzodeda  Lalexemile.      Wii,  la£me  gwa- 
yolaleda  pa.xa.la  dalales  gEmxolts !ana£ye  la  k'.wadzEweda  bExnina- 
£yaq.     Wa,    lii   yatElases   helk'!otts!ana£ye.     Wii,   gil£mese   lag'aa  5 
laxa  ts'.EX"q!a  tslEdaqa  lae  ts!ases  yadEne  laxes  cnEmokwa  paxa- 
laxa  la  dalaxa  ts!EX'q!a  ts'.Edaqa.     Wii,  lii   k!waxi.alabi:ntsa  bExui- 
na£ye  lax  5xLii£yas  x'omsas.     Wii,  lii  geg'ilil  poxwax  5xLa£yas.     Wa, 
g'ilemese  gwal  poxwaxs  lae'Laxwax  5xLasyasa   tslnxqla  tslsdaqa. 
Wa,    la£me    gwala.     Wa,    lii    Lax£ulila  qa£s    yaq'.Eg-a£le.     Wii,    lii  10 
£nek'a:    "Weg'ax'ins  yEx£weda  wiwEq!wa,"  enek'exa  mokwe  ts'.e- 
diiqa  qa£ns  eek"  lexsele  yExwaxs  lae  hiLEx  bEx£una£yasa  la  q!ulax,£I- 
deda  laEmx'de  g'Ig'ilgexa  hayalllagase,  ="nekExs  lae  keEin  daqalasa 
nEqaxaliis     tlEmyase.      Wii,    la£me     dEnx£ide    Lalexgmflaq.      Wii, 
la£me    yEX£wideda    mokwe    tsledaqa.      Wii,   lii   ogwaqa    yE.xweda  15 
£walase  paxala.     Wii,  g'ihmese  q  !ulbe  qlEmdEmas  lae  gwala.     Wii, 
la-cme    a£yaso£sa   lak''.Ende   plElxElasgEma;    wa,    he£misa   lak"!Ende 
p'.ElxElasgEm  halagEmxa  Lexemllaxa  paxala.      Wa,  la£me  q'.iileda 
ts'.Edaqe  laxeq.     Wii,  laEm  laba  laxeq. 

Wa,  la£mesEn    doqfllax  Qasnomalas,    yixs    £nEinok!wasae    k!was  20 
laxa  k"!ese  qwesala  lax  apsbalasasa  g-oxudEmsasa  Gosg'imuxwe  laxa 
gwabalase.     Wa,  lii   Le£liila   g-axEn   qEn   lii  laq   laxa  la   £nax-£IdES 
liix'dEmas   I&lex   bEx£una£yas    Lanax'lanagEkwe.      Wa,    la£mesEn 


724  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

25  sitting  on  the  ground,  and  he  spoke  first,  ||  and  said,  "O  son-in-law! 
Wliat  do  you  think  about  what  we  |  were  doing  here  last  night? " 
Thus  he  said.  I  just  listened  to  him,  and  I  |  replied  to  him.  I  said 
to  him,  "It  was  a  great  thing  that  you  did,  for  |  you  hroke  the  coffin 
of  the  one  who  woidd  have  been  |  not  a  little  sick."     Thus  I  said  to 

30  him.  Then  he  laughed  and  said,  ||  "That  is  not  my  wish,  son-in-law. 
It  is  the  supernatural  power  which  told  me  to  do  |  so,  and  the  sold 
of  the  sick  woman  which  I  |  saw  flying  about  inside  of  the  house.  | 
Therefore  I  did  so,  and  hroke  the  coffin."  Thus  said  the  great  | 
shaman.  || 

35  Then  I  asked  him  about  the  soid,  whether  the  soul  is  large  or  | 
small.  He  said,  "0  son-in-law!  Did  you  not  see  |  the  soul  last 
night,  which  came  and  sat  on  my  hand  ?  |  It  is  the  size  of  our  thumb, 
when  it  shrinks  and  |  becomes  small;  then  I  put  the  soul  on  top  of 

40  our  ||  head,  and  it  grows  so  that  it  is  of  the  same  size  as  our  body,  for  | 
the  body  is  the  house  of  the  soul,  for  the  souls  have  no  houses.  |  They 
just  fly  about  day  and  night.  |  And  the  owner  of  the  soul  is  their 
resting-place,  and  our  body  is  their  house.  |  Those  who  say  that  souls 

45  have  houses  ||  in  this  world  lie.  They  have  no  houses.  They  just  | 
fly  about  our  world.     In  the  morning  when  it  is  nearly  daylight,  | 

klwag'aEls  laxa  mak*alaEmliixk!wiidzasas.     Wii,  he£mis  gll  yaq!E- 

25  g-aEla.  Wa,  lii  £nek'a:  "£ya,  nEgiimp,  wiilos  naqaeyaqos  qaEns  gwe- 
gwalagilllasax  ganoLe,"  £nek-e.  Wa,  lEn  km  hoLelaq.  Wii,  Ieii 
na£naxmeq.  Wii,  Ieii  mek'Eq:  "Lomafmaasas  gwex,£idaasos,  yixs 
laaqos £nek'  qa£s  tsots5xusEiidaosaxa  dEg'ats!e  laxsdasa  k' !ese  aEm 
gwase    ts!Exq!a,"    enek'EnLaq.      Wii,    lii    dah'ida.     Wii,    lii   £nek"a: 

30  "  WrdidiilawesEu,  nEgiimp,  hemaase  mawalakwa  mek"  qEn  he  gwe- 
x£ide.  Wii,  he£mise  bKx£iina£yasa  ts'i:x<|!a  ts!i:da(|\g  in  la£meg"in 
doqulaqexs  g'ax£mae  p!aLi£lala  lax  awlLEliisa  gokwe.  Wii,  he£me- 
sEn  lag'ila  he  gwex,£Id  tsotsoxusEndxa  dEg'atsIe,"  £nek-eda  ewalase 
pax&la. 

35  Wii,  la£mesEn  wuLaq  laxa  bExeunaEye  wlx'se  £walas£mae  lo£ 
Ema£ya  l)KxHma£ye.  Wii,  la  £nek-a:  "£ya,  nEgiimp,  esas  doqiilaxa 
bEx£una£yax  giinoLexa  gaxe  k!wadzox"ts!aiiEnd  g'axEn,  yixs 
yu£mae  £walasEns  qomax'ts  !ana£yex,  yixs  lae  k' !ElwiitsEnda  qa£s 
ainiix'£ide  liighi  lagaar.Elots    lax  bEkwanokwas  lax  5xLa£yaxsEns 

40  x'omsex  lae  q!wax£Ida  qa£s  lii  yiiEm  la  EwalasEns  5k!wlna£yex  qaxs 
yii£mae  g"6xusa  bExeunaeyEns  ok!winaeyex,  qaxs  k'!eiisae  g'6xusa 
bEx£una£ye  yixs  a£mae  p'.ELEme£stalaxox  £nalax  LE£wa  giinoLe. 
Wa,  lii  heEm  x-5yatses  bE.\£iinayede  qaxg'ins  nogwamek"  g,6xus 
yixEns  ok!wina£ycx      Wii,  la  i.elk'.waeda  £nek'Eq  g'ogwadeda  bEx£u- 

45  na£ye  laxa  awinakluse,  yixs  k"!easae  g"5kwa.  La  aEm  hemEnalaEm 
p!ELEme£stala  liixEns  Enalax.     Wii,  g'il£mese  Eliiq  £nax-£Idxa  gaalaxs 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  725 

they  come  home  to  the  owners  of  the  souls.     And  then  they  tell  |  47 
where  they  have  been,  and  what  they  have  seen  where  they  have  been 
all  around  our  |  world,  and  that  is  what  we  call  dreams,  the  news  that 
are  told  by  the  souls  ||  when  they  come  back  to  us."     Sometimes  the  50 
souls  come  back  the  wrong  way,  |  when  they  return  to  the  owner  of 
the  soul,  and  then  the  soul  is  hurt, —  |  when  it  comes  quickly  and  goes 
in  crosswise,  or  upside  down,  into  the  |  body  of  the  owner  of  the  soul. 
Then  the  soul  is  not  strong  enough  |  to  come  out  where  it  is  held,  and 
the  man  at  once  looks  sick.  ||  He  is  not  strong.     He  does  not  die  55 
quickly,  |  but  he  asks  a  shaman  to  cure  him,  and  to  feel  for  his  | 
sickness.     Then  the  sides  of  the  head  |  and  the  back  of  the  head  are 
first  felt  of  by  the  shaman,  and  last  he  feels  of  the  top  of  the  |  head. 
Then  he  knows  that  something  is  wrong  about  the  soul.  ||  And  the  60 
shaman   teLls  him   that  his  soul  is    in   the  wrong  way.     Then  the 
man  |  asks  the  shaman  to  put  the  soul  right  when  |  night  comes. 
Thus  he  says.     And  the  shaman  only  says  that  he  will  |  do  so.     Then 
the  shaman  goes  out  of  the  house  |  into  the  woods  and  breaks  off  the 
tops  of  hemlock-branches,   ||  and   he  makes  a  ring  out   of    them,  65 
through  which  he  makes  the  man  go.  |  When  the  ring  is  done,  he 
hangs  it  up  under  the  shelter  of   a   thick  |  tree.      Then    lie  leaves 
it.     As  soon  as  night   comes,  a    man    goes    to  |  call  a   number   of 


g'fixae  £wi£la  nauiak"  laxes  bEx£unayede.     Wii,  he£mis  la  tslEk'IalE-  47 
lascs   lalalase   LE£wes    dodEgule    laxes  liiliilase    laxox    awI£staxsEns 
malax.     Wii,  hemiesEns  gwE£yo  mexaeye  ts!i;k-  lalEmasEns  liExnina- 
£yaxs  g-axae  lalaqa  g'axEns.     Wa,  la  qlunala  5dzEg-aaLEleda  1>ex£u-  50 
na£yaxs    g'axae     lalaqaxes    bEx'iinayede.      Wii,    heEin    yllgwatsa 
bEx£iina£yaxs     ylx'ak'Enae,    yixs    gayalae    loxs    ek- laxsdaiae    lax 
ok!winaeyases  bExmnayede.     Wii,  la  k"!eas  laxwesa  bEx£iina£ye  qa£s 
g-ax£wEqawe  laxes  la  XEk'Iayaasa.     Wii,  hex£ida£mese  tslEX'qlEma- 
lax-£ideda  bEgwanEine.      K-Mes  la  hlloqwala.      Wii,   la  k!es  gEyol  55 
lE£la.      Wa,   he£mis   la   hayalik' laatsexa   paxala  qa  las    p!excwidEx 
ts!Ex-q!olEmas.     Wii,  lii  heEm  g'il  p !exewItsoesa  paxale   ewanoLE- 
ma£yas   LE£wis    awap!aeye.      Wii,   lii    ElxLala   p!exewidEX    5xLaeyas 
x'omsas.      Wii,    la£me   q!al£aLElaqexs   odzasae   bEx£una£yas.      Wa, 
leda  paxala  nelaqexs  odzasae  bEx£iina£yas.     Wa,  la£meseda  bEgwa-  60 
iiEme    hawaxElaxa    paxala    qa    wiig'es    hel£idLEX   bEx£una£yas    qo 
ganohidLo,  £nek"e.     Wii,  a£meseda  paxala  £nek'Exs  lE£mae  wiigil  he 
gwex-£idELe.     Wit,  lamiese  lawElseda  paxala  liixa  g"okwe  qa£s  lii 
iiLe£sta    liixa    aL!e    qa£s   L'.EX£widexa    ''iiEnwalagwata£yasa    q!waxe. 
Wii,  la£me  qEnayogwilaq    qa£s    qEx-Elexa   bEgwanEine.     Wii,  gil-  65 
£mese  gwala    qEniiyowe   lae    tex£iilsaq    laxa    t  !Enyaga£yasa  LEkwe 
Lasa.     Wii,  g'iix£me  bas.     Wii,  g'ihmese  giinobidExs  lae  qas£ideda  la 
Le£lalaxa  ealak"  !Eiie  bebEgwiinEm  qa  liis  Lexemllxa  pfix&laxs  hele^ 


726  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  35 

elderly  men  to  beat  time  for  the  shaman  who  will  cure  |  the  soul. 

70  They  say  this,  calling  the  name  of  each  man.  Then  ||  the  shaman's 
messenger  goes  once,  for  all  the  men  wish  to  please  |  the  shaman, 
on  account  of  their  children,  in  case  they  should  be  sick;  |  therefore 
they  all  go  immediately  |  into  the  house  of  the  sick  person,  and 
immediately  each  one  |  is  given  a  baton,  and  eagle-down  is  put  on 

75  them  ||  quickly,  for  they  hear  the  shaman  singing  his  sacred  song  | 
in  the  woods.  Then  the  time-beaters  of  the  shaman  beat  quick 
time.  |  As  soon  as  they  stop,  a  new  mat  is  taken  and  is  |  spread  out 
towards  the  fire  from  the  time-beaters  of  the  shaman.  As  soon  as  | 
this  has  been  done,  the  man  comes  and  sits  down  on  it.     He  is  naked, 

SO  without  ||  a  shirt.  As  soon  as  they  finish,  the  time-beaters  of  the  sha- 
man beat  fast  time  again ;  |  and  after  they  have  beaten  time  four  times, 
Qasnomalas  comes  in  |  singing  his  sacred  song,  holding  in  both  hands 
the  large  ring.  |  As  soon  as  he  comes  into  the  door  of  the  house,  he  | 

85  standsin  the  house  and  looks  at  the  sick  man.  Then  another  ||  shaman 
carries  in  his  hand  eagle-down  and  puts  it  on  the  ring.  |  After  he  lias 
done  so,  Qasnomalas  says,  "Go  on!"  |  Immediately  the  time- 
beaters  beat  fast  time  on  the  beating-boards.  |  Then  the  shaman 
walks  holding  the  ring  on  each  side.     He  goes  to  the  man  |  and  sits 

90  down  on  the  mat;  and  when  he  comes  up  to  him,  ||  the  shaman  turns 
around.     Then  he  puts  the  ring  over  the  man.     The  |  ring  is  first 

70  Lax  bEx£una£yas,  £nek-  LeqElax  LegEmasa  bEgwanEme.  Wa,  la 
£nEmp!ene£sta£rna  qasElg"ise  qaeda  paxala  qaxs  enaxwa£mae  gagala- 
sE£wa  paxaliisa  £nax\va  bebEgwanEma  qaes  sasEme  qo  ts!EX'q!Ex-- 
£idlaxo.  Wa,  he£mes  heg"ilas  gweg'ile.  Aeui  hex"£idaEm  la  £wi£la 
hogweLa  laxa  gokwasa  ts!Ex-q!a  bEgwanEma.     Wa,  lit  hex'£idaEm 

75  tslEwanaedzEineda  tlEmyayowe  liiq.  Wii,  laxae  qEinxwasosa  qEm- 
xwiisa  kwekwe  halabala,  qaxs  lE="mae  wuLElaxa  paxala  yalaqlwala 
laxa  fiLle.  Wii,  la£rnes  LexEdzodeda  Lalexemilaxa  paxala.  Wii, 
gil£mese  q!wel£Ida,  lae  ax£etsE£weda  tslEX'ase  le£\va£ya  qa£s  g-axe 
LEp!aUlEm    lax    L'.asalllasa    Lalexemflaxa    paxala.      Wii,    g"il£mese 

80  gwala  g'axaasa  bEgwanEme  klwadzolllaq.  Wa,la£me  xanala,  k-!eas 
q'.EsEnes.  Wii,  gil£mese  gvval£allla  lae  el  led  Lexdzodeda  Lalexemi- 
laxa paxala.  Wa,  g'il£mese  moplEna  la  LexdzodExs  g'iixae  Qasno- 
malas yalagwata£ya  dadanEwex  £wax"sanayasea  lextsla  qEnfiyowe. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  g'axeL  lax    awiLElasa    tlEX'iliisa   gokwe;   lae  Lax£u- 

g5  lila  qa£s  doqwalexa  bEgwanEme.  Wa,  he£mis  laatsa  ogu£lame 
paxala  qlwetslEmexa  qEmxwasa  kwekwe  qa£s  lii  qEinx£wIdxa  qEna- 
yowe.  Wii,  g  il£mese  gwala  lae  he£me  Qasnomalas  £nek'a:  "Wa." 
Hex"£ida£mesa  Lfilexemilas  Lexdzodxes  tlEmedzowe  saokwa.  Wa, 
lii  qasElIleda  paxala  diidanEwexes  qEnayowe  cja£s  lii  liixa  bEgwanE- 

90  maxs  k Iwadzalilaaxa  le£waye£.  Wii,  g'il£mese  lag'aa  laqexs  lae 
xil])!ldeda  paxala.  Wa,  la£me  qEx'edxa  bEgwanEme  g'ayabaleda 
qEnayowe    lax    x'Smsasa    bEgwanEme.       Wii,    gil£mese    lag'aeda 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  727 

put  on  the  head  of  the  man.     When  |  the  ring  goes  down  to  the  knees  92 
of  the  man,  he  arises;  and  when  the  ring  reaches  the  floor,  |  he  steps 
out  with  his  right  foot.  |  Then  the  man  turns  to  the  right.     He  sits  • 
down  again  ||  on  the  mat.     And  he  does  this  four  times.     Then  he  |  95 
stops.     Then  the  time-beaters  also  stop  beating  time.     Now  |  the 
shaman  puts  down  his  ring,  and  he  feels  of  the  top  of  the  head  of 
the  |  man.     He  does  not  do  so  for  a  long  time  when  he  speaks.     Then 
the  |  shaman  says,  "Now  you  have  been  set  right."     Thus  he  says. 
Then  he  takes  each  side  of  the  ||  ring,  and  says,  "Go  on!"     At  once  200 
the  time-beaters  |  beat  fast  time,  and  he  goes  around  the  fire  in  the 
middle  of  the  house;  |  and  when  he  comes  back  to  the  place  where 
he  started,  he  throws  his  ring  |  into   the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the 
house.     Now  it  is  done  after  this.     And  the  man  becomes  well  |  after 
this.     I  just  wanted  to  talk  about  this.  || 

I  asked  Qasnomalas,  when  we  were  sitting  down,  to  how  many  |  5 
places  the  soul  of  man  goes;  and  he  said,  "There  are  many,  |  and 
these  are  the  places  to  which  the  soul  of  man  goes, — the  sea-hunters' 
place  at  sea,1  the  hunters'  place  in  the  woods,2  |  the  salmon  coun- 
try,3 and  the  owl  mask.4  | 

These  which  I  have  named  are  the  places  to  which  the  souls  go.  || 
But  the  ghost  is  not  a  soul,  for  it  is  only  seen  When  |  it  gives  notice  10 


qEnayo  lax  6kwax-a£yasa  bEgwaiiEmaxs  lae  Lax£iilllaxs  lag  qEx'a-  92 
llleda  qEnayowe.     Wii,    he£mis    la    gax-wElts!ixwats  helk" '.oltsldza- 
£yasa    bEgwanEme   qa£s   x'ilp'Ide    helk- !Ewe£sta,    qa£s    le   xwelaqa 
k'.wadzolliaxa    le£wa£ye.      Wii,    la     mop'.Ena    he     gwex-£IdExs    lae 
gwala.     Wii,    laEmxaawise    gwala    Lexdza£ya  Lalexemilas.     Wii,  lii  95 
g'ig'alileda    paxaliixes   qanayowe.      Wii,    lii   p!ex£w!dEx    oxLii£yasa 
bEgwiinEme.     Wii,   k"!est!e   gegilila   lae   yaq!Eg-a£la.     Wa,  la   £ne- 
k'eda   paxala:    "Wii,    laEms    naqe£sta,"  £nek'Exs    lae    diidawodxes 
qEnayowe.     Wii,  lii  £nek-a:  "Wiie."   Wii,  hi?x,£ida£mesa  Lalexemilas 
Lexdzoda.      Wa,    la£me   la£stali£lElaxa   laqawalilasa   g-okwe.      Wii,  200 
g'il£mese  g-ax£aLEla  laxes  g-iig11i£lasaxs  lae  laxxEntses  qEnayowe 
laxa  laqawalile.     Wii,  la£me  gwiil  laxeq.     Wii,  ala£mese  la  ex£ideda 
bEgwiinEme  laxeq.     Wii,  a£niEn  £nek'  qEn  gwagwex-s£ale  laq. 

Wii,  Ieii  wiiLax  Qasnomalas  laxEnu£xu  kludzase  LE£we;  g-ins£Idale  5 
laasas  bEx£iina£yasa  bEgwiinEme.     Wii,  lii  £nek-a:  "£ya,  q'.enEmaas, 
wa  heEm  laatsa  bEx£una£yasa   bEgwaiiEmaxa  esElexwalaLa£ye,  xa 
esElexwalalse,  xa  memEyoxwana,  he£misaxa  dEX'dEX'alelEinl. 

"Wii,  heEm  la£nakii£latsa  bEx£iina£yEn  la  LeLEqalasE£wa,"  £nek-e. 
Wii,  lii  k-'.es  bEx£iina£ya  lalenoxwe,  yixs  lex-a£mae  d5x£waLElasqexs  10 

i  The  home  o(  the  killer  whales,  lo  which  the  souls  of  sea-hunters  go. 

*  The  home  of  the  wolves,  to  which  the  souls  of  the  land-hunters  go. 
3  The  country  to  which  the  souls  of  twins  go. 

*  Common  people  become  owls. 


728  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  sb 

1 1  to  those  who  are  going  to  die,  those  who  see  him ;  for  he  has  the 

whole  body  |  of  a  man,  and  his  bones  are  those  of  people  who  have  long 

•  been  dead.     It  is  not  the  same  |  as  a  soul,  for  they  have  no  bones  in 

their  bodies,  and  they  have  no  |  blood,  for  the  souls  are  just  like 

15  smoke  or  shadows.  ||  And  they  have  no  house  besides  our  body,  the 
body  |  of  the  soul-owner.     That  is  the  end.    | 

I  have  seen  Qasnomalas  twice,  and  this  is  the  first  time  I  write 
about  it.  | 
1  Shamanism.—  I  will  talk  about  the  head  shaman.  |  The  "  head 
shaman"  is  not  nearly  the  same  as  the  shaman  of  the  Kwag'ul,  for  | 
the  Kwag'ul  call  the  head  man  of  the  Sparrow  Society  "head  shaman." 
That  is  the  same  as  q.'Entq.'adas  (place-of-eating-songs)  the  one 
who  has  a  head-ring  of  red  cedar-bark  and  who  never  disappears  (to 
5  be  initiated) ;  II  that  is  the  "head  shaman"  of  the  Kwag'ul,  and  they 
also  call  him  headman  of  the  Sparrow  Society.  |  He  is  not  a  shaman. 
However,  the  N;lk!wax'da£xu  |  use  the  name  "head  shaman  "for  the 
headman  of  the  shamans — the  head  chief  of  the  |  shamans.  They  do 
not  call  the  head  of  the  Sparrow  Society  "head shaman;"  j  they  call 
him  WadanEin.     He   is   the  head   of  the  Sparrow  Society  of  the 

10  Nak!wax'da£xu,  ||  Gwa£sEla,  Rivers   Inlet    tribe,  the    L  !ax  lasiqwfila, 
Gosg'imux",  Gap  !enoxu,  Gwats  !erioxu,  and  l  !asq  lenox",  all  of  these  | 


11  a£mae  q'.eqhiyak'ilaxes  gwE£yo  qa  dox£waLElaq,  yiqexs  sEnalafmae 
bEgwanEm  le£wis  xaqexa  la  gala  lE£la  bEgwanEma.  K'.es  he 
gwexsa  bEx£una£yaxs  k"!easae  xaxEq'.Ega£ya  yixs  k"!eas£maaxat! 
Klkwa,  yixs  a£mae  yu  gwex'sa  bEx£una£ya  kwax'ilax  LE£wa  g'ag'o- 

15  mas.  Wa,  la  k' leas  g'5xus  oguela  laxEiis  ok!wina£yex  lax  oklwina- 
£yas  bEx£unayede.     LaEm  laba." 

Lsn  malplEua  doqidax  Qasnomalas  i.k£weii  g'file  k"!ata£ya.' 
1  Shamanism. — lle-'mawfsLni.En  gil  gwagwex's£alasLa  pEXEme  yixs 
k-!esae  Lawagaleda  pEXEme  laxa  paxala  laxa  Kwag-ule,  yixs  hee 
gwEeyasa  Kwagule  pEXEmaeya  gwesEma£ye,  yix  gwexsdEmas 
q!Eintq!adas,  yixa  qEX'Emakwusa  LlagEkwexa  hewiixa  xis£eda. 
5  Wa,  hei:m  gwEeyo  pEXEmesa  Kwag'ul.  Wa,  laxae  i>eqElaso£s  gwe- 
sEma£ye.  Wa,  laK.m  k'les  paxala.  Wii,  hetleda  Nak!wax-da£xwe 
LeqElas  pEXEme  laxa  ])EXE£ma£yases  pepaxala  yix  6guma£yas 
pepaxalas.  Wii,  lit  k!es  LeqElas  pEXEme  laxa  gwesEina£ye,  yix 
gwE£yas  wadanEm  qaxs  he£mae   gwesEmesa    Nak!wax-da£xu  LE£wa 

10  Gwa£SEla  LE'wa  Awlk-!enoxu  LE£wa  LlaL  lasiqwala  LEswa  Gosg"imuxu 
LE£wa  Gap!enoxu  LE£wa  Gwats!enoxu  le:wii  L!asq!enoxu,    Ha£staEm 

'  The  terms  for  "  soul  "  among  the  various  tribes  are  as  follows: — 
liKX'uiui-yf'  (man  on  body)  Kwag'ul 
bKk\va£yi'  (manhood)  Gosg  imux» 
q!flelayu  (means  of  life)  DzawadEenoxu 
tsleklwa  (bird)  LlaLlasiqw.'lla 
bEgwanEmgEmt  (man's  mask)  Nak!\va.\-daex" 
bela'layu  (means  of  healing)  Awiklenox" 


BOAS]  3ELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  729 

own  the  WadanEm,  and  also  the  NaqEing'ilisEla.     The  |  Kwag'uland  12 
Q!6moya£ye,  £walas  Kwagul,  Q  !omk'  luthss,  |  Mamaleleqala,  Qwequ- 
sot!enoxu,  £nEmges,  ||  Lawets'.es,  Madilbe£,  L)Enax'da£x11,  |  AwalLEla,  15 
DzawadEenox",  H&xwamis,  Gwawaenox",  |  and  Legwilda£xu — all  four 

tribes(?) — own  the  |  "head  shaman,"  who  is  not  a  shaman,  on  whose 
head  red  cedar-bark  is  placed,  and  who  |  never  dances  in  the  winter 
ceremonial.  The  other  name  of  the  ||  head  man  of  the  Sparrow  Society  20 
is  "head  shaman;"  for  the  "head  shaman"  is  thesamc  as  a"doctor" 
in  a  |  museum,  who  is  just  called  "doctor  "but  who  is  not  a  doctor.  | 
It  is  the  same  with  the  "  head  shaman"  in  the  winter  dance.  As  soon 
as  the  |  winter  ceremonial  is  finished,  tliat  man  is  no  longer  |  "head 
shaman,"  for  he  is  only  like  a  head  shaman  in  the  winter  ceremonial, 
when  all  act  in  different  ways.  ||  It  is  the  same  with  the  "head  25 
shaman"  of  the  winter  ceremonial.  |  If  the  one  who  is  speaking 
wishes  to  call  him  "head  man  of  the  Sparrow  Society,"  |  then  he  calls 
hini  "neadman  of  the  Sparrow  Society."  When  another  man  |  sends 
him  to  call  the  cannibal  to  a  feast,  he  says,  "Go,  now,  |  head  shaman, 
and  call  our  friend;"  ||  lor  the  speakers  do  not  always  use  the  same  30 
words.  |  .  .  .  Therefore  they  want  to  have  only  one -speaker  of  the 
winter  dance  house. 

I  shall  first  say  what  I  know  about  the  shamans  when  they  heal 
the  |  sick;1  for  really  you  are  much  mistaken  in  what  you  say  about 

axnogwatsa   wadanEine    LE£wa    NaqEing'ilisEla.      Wii,    la    hededa  12 
Kwag-ul  LE£wa  Q!omoya£ye  LE£wa  £walas  Kwagul  LE£wa  Q!omk!u- 
t  !ks    i.K:wa    Mamaleleqala    LE£wa    Qweq"sot  !enox'J    LE£wa    £nEmges 
LE£wa    Lawets!es    LEswa     Miidilba£ye    LE£wa    DEnaxda£xu    LE£wa  15 
AwalLEla  LE£wa  DzawadEenox"  LE£wa  Haxwamis  LE£wa  Gwawae- 
nox" LE£wa  Legwllda£xu  £wi£laxs  mosgEmakwae,  wa,  ha£staEm  axno- 
gwatsa pEXEinexa    k'!es   paxala,  yixa    qEX'Emakwasa   LlagEkwexa 
hewiixa  yExwa  laxa  ts!ets!eqa.     Wii,  hemies  £nEm   LegEmse  gwesE- 
ma£ye    lo£    pExsme,    yixs    hae    gwex-sa    pExEma£ya    doctor    laxa  20 
museum,  yixs  wiih"mae  LeqElaso£s  doctor,  yixs  kMesae  doctor.     Wa, 
het'.a  gwexsa  pEXEme  laxa   ts!ets!eqa.     Wii,  gilmiese  gwala  ts!e- 
ts!eqa  lae    gwal    pEXEmexa    bEgwanEme    qaxs    a£mae    he  gwex'sa 
pEXEina£yasa  ts!ets!eqa,  }Tixs  a£mae  £naxwa  ts lagEkwe gwayi£lalasas. 
Wii.    he£mis    aEm    ogwaqa    gwex'sa    pEXEmesa    ts!etse!qa.      Wa.  25 
gll-'mesa  yaqtentlala   £nex"    qa£s   he   Lex£edayuwe  gwesEma£ye  laq 
lae    Lex£edEs   laxa    gwesEma£ye.     Wii,  g'il£mcsa  ogu£la   bEgwanEm 
£yalaqas  qa  las  Le£lalaxa  hamats!a  qa  liis  khvela,  lae  mek'a,  "Hag-a- 
xeiis    pEXEma£yex    Le£lalaxEns    £nEmokwa,    qaxs    k'lesae   qlunala 
naqale  waldEmasa  ya£yaq lEnlemlla.  .   .   .  He£mis  lag-ilas  -nevso  qa  30 
£nEmoxumesa  yayaqhmtemllasa  yaEwexilats!e  g'okwa. 

HeEinLEn  g-il  waldEmLa  q  !aq  !alak- !a£yasa  paxala  yixs  he£lik-a- 
axa  ts!EX'q!a  qaxs  alaaqos  klwag'ila  LexLeqwalrl  laxes  waldEmi- 
£lalayos,  yixs  £nek-a£yaqosaqexs  q  !aq  !alaiElg-Esnokwaeda   pepaxala 

1  The  following  is  a  reply  to  a  request  for  information  regarding  shamanism  received  in  the  years  1897 
and  1900. 


730  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

it,  |  when  you  say  that  the  shamans  nave  spies  who  look  out  for  || 

35  the  sick  among  all  the  men.  There  are  no  |  spies  such  as  you  refer 
to,  who  tell  them  about  sick  people,  and  about  the  place  |  where  to 
feel  for  sickness  of  the  body.  | 

And  this  is  also  a  mistake,  what  you  say,  when  you  say  |  that  the 

40  shaman  names  the  price  to  be  paid  by  the  sick  person  ||  whom  he 
cures.  | 

And  this  is  also  a  mistake,  when  you  say  that  the  |  shaman  bites 
his  tongue  and  swallows  the  blood,  and  vomits  it,  when  |  some  one 
passes  behind  him  when  he  is  eating.  | 

And  this  is  also  a  mistake,  when  you  say  that  the  shaman  sucksll 

45  at  the  place  of  the  sickness  and  bites  it  to  make  a  blue  mark  appear.  | 

And  this  is  also  a  mistake,  what  you  say  |  about  the  soul  being 

represented  b}r   dried   berries;  for   there   was   a   mischievous  man, 

K'  !eso£yak'ilis,  |  whose  soul  was  restored  by  a  female  shaman  of  the 

Nimkish,  whose  |  name  was  HelagolsEla.     K"  !eso£yak'ilis  said  that 

50  it  was  made  of  dried  berries,  [|  what  the  shaman  placed  on  her  hand) 
and  what  she  called  his  soul;  but  nobody  !  believed  what  K' !eso- 
£yak'ilis  said  to  all  the  people,  |  that  it  was  dried  berries,  for  K"  !eso- 
£yak'iliswas  an  expert  in  making  fun  of  |  all  the  strange  things  that 
one  sees  done  by  the  shamans.     I  have  never  |  spoken  with  the 

55  shaman  of  the  Nimkish,  HelagolsEla,  and  I  do  not  ||  know  whether 
it  is  true  that  these  were  dried  berries  or  not,  as  was  said  by  K'eso- 

35  lax  ts!ets!EX'(|!asa  £naxwa  bebEgwanEma.  Wa,  laEm  k"!eas  q!aq!ii- 
lalslgits  Yixes  gwE-yos  la  nelas  ts!EX'q!;isa  bEgwanEm  lo£  axiisas 
ts!EX"q!olEmas  lax  6k!wina£yas. 

Wa,  laEmxae  Leqwa,  wa,,  he'mis  waldEmos,  yixs  nelraaqosaq 
hemieda   pepaxala    Lex-ed    qa   £waxaats    ayasa   ts!EX"q!iiqexs    lae 

40  helik'aaq. 

Wa,  laEmxae  Leqwa,  wa,  he'"mesexs  £nek-aaqosaq  q!Ex-£ideda 
paxalaxes  kMilEine  qa£s  nsqwexa  Elkwa  qa£s  hoqwalaxs  lae  qaya- 
p  lEntsoxa  ha£mapae. 

Wa,  laEmxae  Leqwa,  wa,   he£mesexs   £nek'aaqosaqexs    k"!EX£we- 

45  daeda  paxalaxa  axasasa  ts!EX'q!olEm  cja£s  q!Ex-£Ideq  qa  t!ex£wides. 

Wa,  laEmxaas   Leqwa   yixes   waldEinos,  wa,   he£misa   waldEinos 

qaeda  bex£unaryexa  t!Eqa,  yixs  aletae  begwanEme  K-!eso£yakilisxa 

la  ax£aLElodayos  bEX£une,  yisa  tslEdaqe  paxalasa  £nEmgesxa  Lega- 

das  HelagolsEla.     Wa,  la  £nek"e  K"  !eso£yak'ilisaqexs  t!EC{ae  axtsla- 

50  na£ya£x  a£yasasa  paxala,  yix  gwE£yas  bEx£una£ya.  Wa,  la  k'  !eas 
6q!usEx  K-!eso£yakilisaxs  lae  ts!Ek-!alElaxa  £naxwa  bebEgwfinEm 
£nexqexs  t !Eqae,  yixs  eg'ilwatae  K" !eso£yakilise  lax  aEinlalasa 
£naxwa  EmLa  dogults  gweg'ilatsa  pepaxala.  Wa,  Ieii  hewiixa 
yaeq!Eg'a£l  LE£wa  paxalasa   £nEmgese   HelagolsEla.     Wa,  lEn  k"!es 

55  qlaLElaq  lo£    alaEin  [tlEqa  lo£  k-!es  yix  waldEmas  K-!eso£yakilis 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  731 

£yak'ilis,  |  for  he  was  a  liar.     What  1  mean  is,  that  |  all  the  people  56 
believe  that  HelagolsEla,  |  that   Nimkish  woman  is  a  shaman;  for 
all  the  men  |  and  women  of  the  Kwag'ul  are  angry  on  account  of 
what  K'  !eso£yak'ilis  said  ||  when  he  made  fun  of  her,  because  Hela-  60 
golsEla  only  goes  into  the  house  of  sick  people  |  to  cure  them.  | 

When  a  sick  man  or  woman  gets  well,  |  the  one  who  made  him 
well  never  asks  for  pay,  and  generally  they  |  are  not  paid.  When 
the  man  is  poor,  then  ||  he  does  not  pay  the  shaman;  but  when  the  65 
one  who  is  cured  is  a  chief,  |  then  he  would  be  ashamed  not  to  pay 
the  shaman,  because  he  is  a  chief,  for  he  would  be  made  fun  of  by 
his  |  tribe  if  he  did  not  pay  the  shaman.  All  the  shamans  act  that 
way,  |  and  not  one  of  them  names  the  price  to  be  paid  by  the  one 
who  is  cured,  |  for  if  it  is  a  common  man  who  is  cured  by  the  shaman,  || 
he  generally  pays  two  pairs  of  blankets  to  the  shaman,  but  |  often  70 
he  is  not  paid  at  all;  and  when  (the  patient)  is  a  chief,  |  then  the 
chief  gives  as  much  as  is  proper  for  the  greatness  of  his  position.  |  It 
depends  upon  his  own  wish  how  much  he  pays  the  shaman.  [  The 
shaman  never  names  the  price;  for  the  shaman  does  not  [|  talk  about  75 
the  chief  if  he  does  not  pay  him  well,  for  |  the  tribe  of  the  chief  talk 
about  their  chief  when  he  |  pays  little  to  the  shaman.  That  is  all 
about  this.  | 

qaxs  lawisLae  LexusEine  bEgwanF/mena^yas.     HedEn  £ne£nak'Ile  ylxs  56 
alae  mfixwa  oq  liiseda  bebEgwaiiEmaq  alalc  lala  paxale  HelagolsEla, 
yixa  ts'.Edaqe  paxalasa  enEmges,  qaxs  £naxwa£maeda  bebEgwaiiEme 
LE£wa  tsledaqasa  Kwag'ul  tslEnx"s  waldEmas  K' !eso£yak'Ilis  ylxs 
lae  aEmlalas  qaxs  ;Vmae  HelagolsEla  la  laex  lax  gokwasa  tslEx'qla  60 
qa£s  helex£Ideq. 

Wa,  g'iPmese  ex£ideda  tslExqa  bEgwanEm  loxs  tslEdaqae  la 
hewiixa  aa£yalaxes  la  ex'£idamatsE£wa.  Wa,  la  he  qiunalatsexs 
hewaxae  ayfisE£wa.  Wa  g'il£mese  wiwoselageda  bEgwanEine  hie 
k-!es  ayaq.  Wa,  g'iPmese  gigama£ye  helikasE£was  laeda  g'Igama£ye  65 
max'ts!a  k'les  ayaq  qaexs  gigama£yae  qaxs  lalaxe  aEmlalayolaxses 
g-okiilote  qo  k-!eslax  aya  laxa  paxala,  lax  Enaxwa  gweg-ilatsa 
pepaxfda  k' leasae  £nEinoku  Lex£edEs  qa  Ewaxaats  ayases  helik'a- 
sE£we,  }rixs  g'il£mae  bEgwanEmq !alaeme  helikasE€wasa  paxala,  wa, 
la  qlunala  ayasa  ma£lExsa  plElxElasgEm  laxa  paxala.  Wa,  lift 'a  7n 
qiunalatsexs  k'lesae  aya.  Wa,  g'iPmese  g'ayol  laxa  g'Ig'Egama£ya 
lae  he£ma  glgama£ye  aEm  gwaenaxodEx  £\vala'"yasases  g-eq!ena£ye. 
Wa,  has£meseq  naqn£yes gwE£yo  qa  £waxaatses  ayaxa  paxala.  Ivies 
hededa  paxala  £nEmplEna  Lex£eda,  yixs  k'lesae  hededa  paxala 
gwagwex-s£rda  laxa  g'Igama£yaxs  k'lesae  aekla  ayaxa  paxala  qaxs  75 
hae  g'okidotasa  gigama£ye  gwiigwex's-ala  laxes  g'Igama£yaxs  hale- 
gilae  ayaxa  paxala.     Wa,  laEm  laba. 


732  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  1eth.ann.3C 

78  And  this  is  about  the  shaman  who,  as  you  say,  bites  the  skin  of  the 
one  who  is  being  cured  |  to  make  the  skin  blue.     Now  you  shall 

SO  really  know  [|  what  is  done  by  the  shaman.  When  the  shaman  is 
asked  to  cure  a  person,  |  he  goes  at  once  and  sits  down  at  the  right- 
hand  side  where  the  sick  person  lies  in  bed.  |  Then  he  asks  the  sick 
person  for  the  place  where  he  feels  |  sick.  Then  the  sick  person  tells 
him,  putting  the  first  finger  |  on  the  place  where  he  feels  the  sickness. 

85  Then  the  shaman  [|  washes  his  hands  in  a  dish  containing  water, 
which  has  been  put  down  for  him  for  sucking  out  the  disease.  |  After 
the  shaman  has  washed  his  hands,  he  feels  of  the  place  referred  to 
by  |  the  sick  man.  Then  the  shaman  presses  his  |  first  finger  on 
the  place  where  the  sickness  is,  and  he  presses  it  down  for  a  long 

90  time.  |  As  soon  as  he  lifts  his  finger,  he  watches  the  ||  place  that  he 
has  pressed  in.  If  it  gets  red  at  once,  he  knows  |  that  the  sick  one 
will  get  well.  Then  the  shaman  is  glad.  |  When  the  place  which  he 
has  pressed  in  remains  white  and  never  gets  red,  |  then  the  shaman 
recognizes  that  the  sick  one  can  not  live  long  |  after  that.     When  it 

95  does  not  get  red  for  a  long  time  and  ||  gets  red  gradually,  the  shaman 
says  that  he  will  be  sick  for  a  long  time.  |  Then  he  sucks  at  the  place 
that  he  has  pressed  in;  and  when  he  lifts  his  head,  he  watches  |  the 
place  where  he  has  been  sucking.  And  when  it  turns  blue,  he  knows 
that  |  the  sick  one  will  not  live  long.     When   it  |  turns   red,  the 


78  Wii,  he-rmisa  paxala  vixs  £nek-aaqosaq  qhsk'ax  Llesases  helik'a- 
sE£we  qa  t!ex£wides  Llesas.     \V;i,  la£mets  alak'lalal  q!al£aLElal  lax 

80  gwa£yi£liilasasa  paxala.  Wii,  he£niaexs  lac  ha£yalik-!asE£weda  paxala 
fa  hex£idaEm  la  qa£s  k"!wag-allle  lax  helk'  !otaga£wa£lilasas  qslgwe- 
lasasa  ts!Exq!a.  Wa,  la  wiii.axa  ts!EX"q!a  lax  qlak'Elasasf-x.i 
tslExila.  Wii,  lii  neleda  ts'.Ex*q!axs  lac  ts!Kinx,£itses  tslEma- 
laxts!ana£ye  laxes  q'ag'ile  ts lEX'q !olEma.     Wii,  leda  paxala  ts.'En- 

85  ts!Enx-wlda  laxa  gax  ha£nela  k'!ats!e  q !ots !Ewaxusa  £wflpe.  Wii, 
g-llemese  gwaieda  paxala  tstentslEnkwaxs  lac  p!ex£widxa  gwE£y&sa 
tshsx'qla  bEgwanEm  ts!Exila.  Wii,  leda  paxala  tslEmbEtEiitscs 
tslEnnilax  ts!;inavc  lax  iiEqEliisa  tslExila.  Wa,  lii  gagiila  tslEmFi- 
laq.     Wii,  g'lPmese  wcx'idxes  ts !Emalax-ts !anacye    lae    doqiilaxes 

90  ts!Einalasoxude.  Wii,  gil£mese  hex-£idaEm  L!ax£wida,  lae  q.'ai.Ela- 
qexs  ex-£ida£meLa  ts!Ex-q!a.  Wii,  laeme  ek-e  naqa£yasa  paxala. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  aK.m  EmElstoLEle  ts lEmalaasdas,  hewaxa  L!ax£wida. 
Wii,  heEm  mamalt!ek!esa  piixaliixs  kMescLe  giilal  q!iilaLa  ts!Ex-q!a 
bEgwanEm    laxeq.     Wii,    gil£mese    gagiila    k!es    L!ax£wida,    wii,    la 

95  LlagiVnakula,  wii  lii  £nek-eda  paxalii<[cxs  galeLe  ts!Ex-q!at.  Wa,  la 
k'!Ex£widxcs  ts!Emalasoxude.  Wii,  gil'mese  x-it!edExs  lae  doqwa- 
laxes  k'!axumote.  Wa,  gil£niese.  k'!es  t!ex£wida  lae  qlaLElaqexs 
kleseLe   gala!    q'.iilaLa   ts!EX-qa   bEgwanEma.     Wa,  g-il£mese    aEin 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  733 

shaman  knows  that  he  will  lie  in  bed  for  a  long  time.  I]  And  when  the  100 
place  which  he  has  been  sucking  really  turns  blue  (?),  |  the  shaman 
knows  that  he  will  get  well  quickly.  ]  That  is  all  I  know  about  the 
matter  that  I  am  talking  about.  | 

Iv  Ialmohklanaga 

The  Nak  !wax'  da£xu  were   living  at  Tegiixstei.  |  Their  chief  was  1 
Q  !ade.     He  was  giving  a  winter  dance  that  winter.  | 

Then  the  sister  of  Qlade,  Q  Iwalanenega,  disappeared.      She  had 
not  |  disappeared  long,  when  Q'.walanenega  became  sick  at  the  place  || 
where  the  Nak  !wax' daexu  stay  when  they  disappear,  a  mountain  on  5 
the  ground  back  of  |  Tegiixste£.     She  had  not  been  there  long,  when 
she  became  really  sick.  |  Then  her  brother  Qlade  became  uneasy, 
because  he  saw  that  |  his  sister  could  not  recover;  and  Qlade  called 
the  |  chiefs  of  his  tribe,  the  Nak  !wax- daexu,  and  the  head  shamans, 
into  his  house  ||  after  midnight.     And  when  they  were  all  inside,   [  10 
Qlade  told  them  that  his  sister  Q'.walanenega  was  dying.  |  Then  the 
great  shaman  Lebid   spoke,   and  |  said,    "Look  into   jour  hearts, 
chiefs!  for  evidently  the  |  supernatural  powers  of  the  woods  are  not 
near  the  place  where  our  sister  is  staying  ||  in  her  house,  and  the  15. 
young    woman    who     has    disappeared   was   menstruating.    |   This 
frightened  away  the  spirits  of  the  woods  which  were  coming  to  help 
our  sister.  |  Now,  I  wish  that  she  come  out  of  the  woods,  and  that 

L!axewida,  wa,  la  qlaleda  paxalaqexs   ga£yielalal  qElgwelLa  tslEX'qla 
bEgwanEma.     Wa,   g'ib'mese   alak"!ala    t'.ex-'wide   k*!axumotas,   wa,  100 
la£me   qlaLEleda   paxalaqexs   halHaleLe    ex-£IdLa  ts!ex£q!a    bEgwa- 
nEma.    Wa,  heEm  w5xeii  qlale  laxEn  la  gwagwaxs£alasa. 

K"  Ialmodelanaga 

G'okulaeda  Nak!wrax'da£xwe  lax  Tegiixsta£ye.     Wit,  la£lae   g'Iga-  1 
ma£yase  Qlade  yawix'Elaxa  la  tslawfmxa. 

Wa,  laEimlae  x1s£ede  wuqlwas  Q lades  Q'.walanenega.     Wa,  kMes- 
Elat!a  gala  xisalas  laaEl  ts!EX*q!EX,£Ida  yix  Qlwalanenega  lax  laasas 
xix'Esalasa     Nak!wax-da£xwa     a,Laap!aeyasa     nEk'lEse    lax    aL!iis  5 
TeguxstaEye.     Wa,   la£lae   gagalaxs    laaEl   ahix-'Id   ts!EX-q!a.     Wa, 
laEm£lae   nole  wuqlwase  Q!iide  qaxs  lEinaaEl   doqiilaciexs   k'leasae 
gwex,£idaas    la     ex-£ides    wiiq!wa.      Wa,    la£lae    Qlade    Leltslodxa 
g'Ig-Egama£yases  g'okulota  Nak  !wax-da£xwe  LE£wa  pepEXEma£yasxa 
la  gwal  nEgeg'exa  giinuLe.     Wa,  g-ll£Em£lawise  £wI£laeLExs  lae  nele  10 
Qladiises    wuqlwe     Q Iwalanenegaxs    lE£mae    wawek'lEqla.        Wii, 
hex-£ida£Em£lawis  £yaq  lEg-a£leda  ewalase  paxale  Lebide.  Wa ,  laEimiae 
£nek"a:  "Weg-a  doqwalaxs   nenaqa£yaqos  gig'Egame£  qaxs  kleasaa- 
xEnt  nExwalasa  £nax-£nawalak!usa  lax  axasasEns  wuqlwa  laxea  g'l- 
g-Qk!wala.     Wa,  laxEnte     exentanokwa    ealqlasa    xisfdutse.     Wa,  15 
he£mis    kilEmsa   haayalilagasasa    aiJe    g'ax    helslsaxEns   wuqlwa. 
Wa,  la£mesEn  £nenk- leqEla  qa  g-axlag'ise  l5lt!a  qa  g-axese  qslgwll 


734  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  sa 

18  she  go  to  bed  |  in  this  winter-dance  house,  so  that  she  may  be  cured 
by  the  supernatural  powers  of  the  |  winter-dance  house."     Thus  he 

20  said,  and  immediately  all  the  chiefs  ||  agreed  to  what  the  great 
shaman  had  said.  And  as  soon  as  he  |  finished  his  speech,  they 
went  out.  | 

When  all  the  Nak!wax'da£xu  had  gone  to  sleep,  |  four  strong  men 
were  asked  to  go  to  the  place  where  those  who  disappear  assemble.  | 
They  carried  with  them  a  large  mat  on  which  Qlwalanenega  was  to 

25  lie  ||  when  they  brought  her  out  of  the  woods.  It  was  nearly  day- 
light |  when  they  came  back,  and  they  put  down  Qlwalanenega  | 
behind  a  board  put  on  its  edge  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  |  dance 
house.1     As  soon  as  she  lay  there,  she  was  just  |  like  dead,  and  they 

30  thought  that  she  had  died.  She  never  ||  moved  from  morning,  when 
daylight  came,  until  the  evening.  Then  |  they  called  the  great 
shaman  of  the  Nak!wax'da£xu,  whose  name  was  Fool,  |  to  feel  of  her, 
for  Qlade  thought  that  his  sister  had  died.  |  As  soon  as  Fool  finished 
feeling  of  her,  |  the  great  head  shaman  of  the  shamans,  Fool,  laughed, 

35  and  said,  ||  "O  dear  Qlade!  clean  the  bedroom  of  our  child  here,  | 
and  clear  out  everything  in  this  room.  When  you  have  |  done  so, 
take  a  new  mat  without  black  stripes,  and  |  spread  it  under  your 
sister,  and  also  her  bedding,  for  |  everything  must  be  made  new; 

18  laxwa  lobekwex  qa  wag-ilaxse  £nawalakwalIlasosa  £nax-£nawalagwl- 
laxsa  lobEkwex,"   £nex£lae.     Wa,   hex-£idaEm£lawisa  g'Ig-Egama£ye 

20  £na.\\va  ex'ak'Ex  waldicmasa  ewalase  paxala.  Wii,  g'il£Em£lawise 
gvvfde  waldEmasexs  lftaF.l  hoquwElsa. 

Wa,  g-il£Em£lawise  enaxwa  mex£ededa  Nak!wax-da£xwaxs  lae 
a.\k!rdasE£weda  mokwe  le£laku  bebEgwanEina  qa  las  laxa  qlaplEya- 
sasa  xix'Esala   dag'ilqElaxa   £walase    le£wa£ya    qa   qElgudzEweso£s 

25  Qlwalanenega  qo  g-axL  laltlanoLS.  Wa,  laem£lawise  •  Eliiq  £nax-£I- 
dExs  g'axae  aedaaqa.  Wa,  laeme  qElx£walelEme  Qlwalanenega  lax 
aLadze£hlasa  k' logwlle  'Wadzo  ts!ExusEm  saoku  lax  helk' lotewalilasa 
lobEkwe.  Wii,  gllEm£lawise  qElxwalfiEmxs  lae  alai:l  la  £nEmax"is 
LE£wa  la.  lE£la.     LaEin'lae  kotaso£  laEm  wlk'  !Ex£lda.     Wa,  hewaxa- 

,30  £lat!a  q!wenal£Idxa  la  £nax,£Idxa  gaala.  Wa,  la£lae  dzaqwaxs  lae 
Le£lalasE£weda  £\valase  paxalasa  Nak!wax-da£xwexa  Legadiis  NEnolo 
qa  las  plexwid  qaxs  lE£mae  £neke  Qliidaq  laEm  wlk- !Ex£Ides  wfl- 
q!wax-de.  Wa,  g'il£Ein£lawise  NEnolowe  gwal  plexwaqexs  laaEl 
dfdndeda  £walase  pEXEinesa  pepaxala  NEnolowe.     Wa,  la£lae  £nek-a: 

35  "£ya,  adii,  yuL  Qlade.  Weg'a  xekulelaxox  qElgwelasaxsEns  xun5- 
kwex  qa£s  alaos  ekwaxwa  £naxwax  gex-g-aela.  Wa,  g'il£Emlw!ts 
gwal,  wii  laLEs  ax£edLEx  ts!Ex-asa  k'les  dzadzeqEiaku  le£wa£ya  qa£s 
LEbabolilaosas  laxox  wuqlwaqEns.  Wa,  yu£mesox  mamaxs  qa 
£naxwa£mesox  tslEX'asa.     Wa,  gil£Emlwets  gwalalila  laaqos  ax£edxa 

1  That  is,  in  the  rear  right-hand  corner,  looking  toward  the  rear  of  the  house. 


boas]  BELIEFS  AND  CUSTOMS  '    735 

and  when  you  have  done  this,  take  ||  red  cedar-bark  and  split  it  into  40 
narrow  strips;  and  when  |  much  cedar-bark  has  been   split,   take 
four  |  slender  newly  chopped  cedar-trees  of  the  same  length  as  |  our 
sister  here,  and  also  four  j  stout  poles  half  a  fathom  in  length,  which 
are  to  be  the  posts  of  the  room  in  which  our  sister  is  to  he  down;  || 
and  when  they  have  been  put  down  there,  drive  one  of  the  |  posts  45 
into  the  floor  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  head  of  our  sister,  and  | 
drive  down  another  at  the  right-hand  side  of  her  foot,  and  still  | 
another  one  at  the  left  side  of  her  shoulder,  and  the  last  |  one  at  the 
left  side  of  her  feet;  and  when  you  have  finished  this,  ||  take  the  four  50 
slender  cedar-trees,  and  lay  their  ends  on  the  |  four  posts;  and  when 
you  have  done  so,  take  the  |  split  strips  of  red  cedar-bark,  and  hang 
them  from   the  |  four  poles  of  cedar-wood,  just  above  our  sister. 
When   thej-  have  been  |  hung  up,    take  much   eagle-down,   and  || 
strew  the  eagle-down  on  the  red  cedar-bark,  and  on  our  sister  where  55 
she  is  |  lying  down  in  the  middle  of  this  frame  which  you  made  to 
hang  up  the  |  cedar-bark  covered  with  eagle-down,  and  when  jtou 
have  done  so,  sweep  out  the  place  |  where  you  have  been  working,  so 
that  nothing  is  left  on  the  floor;  |  and  do  not  be  weak  on  account  of 
our  sister,  and  go  to  see  her.  ||  Don't  go  to  see  her  this  side  of  four  60 
days,  |  otherwise  you  will  frighten  away  wdiat  will  come  to  take  pity 

LlagEkwe    qa£s    dzEdzExsalaosaq  qa    ts lelts teq lastowes.     Wa,    gil-  40 
emese  qleiiEmes  dzExayos  LlagEkwa  laaqos  fix£edxa  motslaqewls- 
wiile  alomas  dzESEqwa,  ylxs  yfl/meLa  awasgEmox  £wasgEmxsdaasax- 
SEns  wiiqlwax.    Wa,  he£mis  motslaqa  haxk-  !ot  tebot  laxEns  baiax 
dzoxuma  LEsLEkuk-inaLe,  qa  LeLamsox  qElgwilasaxsEiis  wuq  !wax. 
Wa,  gil-'Emlwise  g'ax  ax-alil  laqu  qaso  lal  dex£wahlaxa  £nEmts!aqe  45 
Lain  laxox  helk"  !5dEnoLEma£yaxsEns  wtiq  '.wax.     Wa,  las  et  lalllasa 
enEmts!aqe  Lam  laxox  helk"  !otsIdzaeyaxs.     Wa,  las  et  lalllasa  siiEm- 
tslaqe   liix    gEmxoltsEyap  !aeyas.      Wa,    las    ElxL&lax    dex£walilasa 
£nEmts!aqe  lax  gEmxoltsklza£yaxs.      Wa,  gil£mese   gwales  axayos 
laaqos  ax'edxa  mots'.aqe  wiswul  dzESEqwa  cpa£s  k'adEtadoosas  laxa  50 
mots!aqe  LeLama.     Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  laaqos  ax£edxa  qlenEmos 
dzExe  ts  lelts  !Eq  !asto  LlagEkwa  qafs  gexundalaosas  laxa  dzedzESE- 
qwe  motslaqa   lax  ek'!a£yasEns  wiiqlwa.      Wa,  g-il£mese  £wlela   la 
gex£ulaLElaxs   laaqos    ax£edxa    qlenEme    qEmxwasa    kwekwe    qa£s 
qEmx£widaosas   laxa   L!agEkwTe   Lo£mEns    wuq!wa    laxos   laenaeyex  55 
qelx"ts!a    lax   nExtslawasa   klumodzfikwe  tetEX£unalaxa  qEinokwe 
LlagEkwa.     Wa,  g"il£mets    gwrdalaacjos  £wl£la  xex£wklxox  yalag"Ili- 
lasaqos  qa  k"  leases  g-ael  lax  yag'il£ma£yaxsos  axale£lEmaqos.     Wa, 
heemisa  waxEina  lElweqElasEns  wuqlwax  qa£s  g'axaos  dox£w!dEqu. 
Guno  g'axlax  dox£wklEqu  lax  g  vas£agawa£yas  mop!Enxwa£se  £nala,  60 
aLas  hawinalaxwa  g'axLex  wax-£ldL  helElIlalxEns  wuq  !wax  qa  q  !ule  • 


736  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.sb 

62  and  restore  our  sister  so  that  she  will  live.  |  You  will  only  bring  bad 
luck  to  our  sister  if  you  |  attempt  to  go  to  see  her  before  four  days 
nave  passed.     That  is  all,  |  Chief  Qlade."     Thus  said  Fool,  the  great 

65  shaman.  ||  As  soon  as  he  stopped  speaking,  he  went  out.  j 

Immediately  Qlade  did  the  work  that  he  was  told  to  do  by  the  | 
great  shaman  in  t lie  way  he  was  to  make  the  bedroom  for  Qlwala- 
nenega. When  [  it  was  finished,  Q  lade  left.  Now,  the  |  heart  of 
Qlade  was  really  sick  on  account  of  his  sister,  for  he  saw  that  his 

70  sister  ||  was  really  dead;  for  he  distrusted  the  words  of  |  the  great 
shaman,  for  Qa!de  always  opposed  the  shamans.  |  Therefore  he 
was  really  crying  as  he  was  walking  along.  Qlade  thought  |  he 
would  obey  the  advice  given  by  the  great  shaman,  |  and  Qlade 
never  went  near  the  place  where  his  sister  was  lying  down.  || 

75  Now,  two  nights  had  passed  since  the  dead  |  Qlwalanenega  had 
been  covered  with  red  cedar-bark.  When  night  came,  she  was 
heard  |  talking  with  the  one  who  is  called  Helemil.  And  |  Qlwala- 
nenega said  that  she  had  no  sacred  song;  and  Qlwalanenega  said 
again,  |  "Go  on,  now,  Helemil,  supernatural  one!  bring  me  back  to 

80  life,  so  that  I  11  may  be  named  Q  lulEnts  lesEmaga."  For  a  while  | 
Q!ulEnts!esEinaga  was  silent,  as  she  was  speaking  with  Helemil,  | 
and  then  Q  lulEnts  lesEmaga  sang  this  sacred  song :  | 


02  sox.  Wa,  aEmi.alts  £nex-L  qa£s  a£melamaseL5s  laxEns  wuqlwax 
qaso  g'axL  dox£widElqox  gwas'a'yasa  mop!Enxwa£se  £nala.  Wa,  yu- 
£moq,  g'Jgame£,  Tula  QIada;"  £nex-£lae  NEiiolowexa  £walase  paxala. 

05  Wa,  g'iPEm'lawise  qlweh'IdEXs  yiiqlEiitlalaaxs  lae  lawElsa. 

Wa,  hex';idaEmMa\visa  g-Igama£ye  Qlade  eax£eda  lax  gwE£yasa 
ewalase  paxala  qa  gwalaatsa  qElgwllasas  Qlwalanenega.  Wa,  gil- 
£Em£lawise  gwalaxs  g'axae  Qliide  Ms.  Wa,  laEm£lae  ala  tslEX'ile 
naqa£yas   Qlade   qaes   wuqlwa,  qaxs   lE£mae    doqulaxes   wiiqlwiixs 

70  li;£mae  alaklfda  Ie-Iu  qaxs  wioq  lustsokwalae  Qliidax  ale  waldEini- 
£liilasa  Ewalase  paxala  qaes  lelak!walaena£ye  Qladaxa  pepaxala. 
Wa,  he£mis  lag'ilas  ala  q!waq!uts!eqEla.  Wa,  lalaLa  £nenk'!eqE- 
la£me  Qlade  qa£s  nanageg'emex  Lexs£alayasa  £walase  paxalaq.  Wa, 
la£me  hewaxa  Qlade  la  £nExwabiilax  qElgwPlasases  wuqlwa. 

75  Wa,  he£lat!a  la  ma£lExse  ganoLas  la  LlaLlEgEkolakwa  la  1e£1§ 
Qlwalanenegiixs  laaEl  etled  ganoLEXs  laaEl  wuxax£aLElExs  lae 
yaeqlEntlala  LE£wes  gwF/ya.  Helemil.  Wa,  lai:m£lae  £neke  Qlwa- 
lanenegiixs k'leasae  yala£xuLEna.  Wii,  la£lae  etled  £neke  Qlwala- 
nenega: '-'Wag-ilia  Helemllts  £nawalak  q !ulax£idamasol  g'iixEn  qEn 

80  wag-iLEii  LegadElts  Q  lulEnts  lesEmaga."  Wa,  gagalaEm£lawise  l!e- 
k'lala  QIuIeihs  lesEmaga  laxes  laena£ye  yaeq!ant!ala  lo£  Helemil. 
Wa,  la£lae  yalaqwe  Q  lulEnts  lesEmaga  ytsg'a: 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  737 

1.  "O  friend,  Helemll!  I  pray  you  to  revive  me,  our  friend,  with  83 
your  |  life-bringer,  Helemil;  with  your  magic  power,  friend!     Wae 
wae  wit !  || 

2.  "O  friend,  Helemll!  I  pray  you   to  make  me  well,  our  friend !  85 
with  your  |  means  of  healing,  Helemll,  your  magic  power,  friend  ! 
Wae  wae  wa!  | 

3.  "0  friend,  Helemll!  I  pray  you  to  make  me  right,  our  friend, 
with  your  |  means  of  setting  right,  Helemll,  your  magie  power,  friend  ! 
Wae  wae  wa !  | 

4.  "0  friend,  Helemll!  have  mercy  on  me  with  your  life-bringer,  || 
Helemll,  your  magic  power,  friend  !     Wae  wae  wa!  |  90 

5.  "Go  on,  friend,  Helemil!  have  mercy  on  me  with  your  healing 
power,  |  that  1  may  come  to  be  a  healer  by  the  means  of  your  | 
healing  power,  Helemll,  by  your  magic  power,  friend!         ae."  | 

As  soon  as  she  had  stopped  singing,  she  talked  again  with  the  one 
with  whom  she  had  been  talking  before,  ||  and  QJwalanenega  95 
replied  to  what  Helemll  said.  |  "()  friend,  Helemll!  how  is  my 
sacred  song?  Do  I  j  succeed  nearly  in  the  way  1  do  it,  friend?" 
And  for  a  long  time  |  they  were  silent.  Then  Qlwalanenega  spoke 
again,  and  |  said,  "Thank  you,  friend,  Helemll,  that  you  have  had 
mercy  on  me,  and  brought  me  to  life,  |]  Long-Life-Giver,  super-  100 
natural  one !  I  will  do  as  you  tell  |  me,  this  coming  night."  That  is 
what  Q  Nvalanenega  |  said,  and  it  was  quiet  after  that.  | 

1.  Wag"a  qastii  Helemll  wax  q  !ulax"eidamaoxEns  enEmoxu£6x  visos  83 
q!weq!ulag'ilavaqos  Helemllts  mawalax"s,  qasta  wae  wae  wa. 

2.  Wag'a    qasta    Helemll    wax    helMalae6xEns    £nem<3xu£ox   yisos  85 
heli:l;ilayaqos  Helemllts  £nawalax"s,  qasta  wae  wae  wa. 

3.  Wiig'a  qastii  Helemll  wax  enaqeestEnda£oxEns  £nEmoxu-'ox  visrs 
niiqe'stEndayaqos  Helemllts  £nawalax"s.  <|astii  wae  wae  wa. 

4.  Wag'a  qastii  Helemll  waxedaeosos  q  !weq  !ulag*ilayaqos  Hele- 
mllts ;nawalax"s  mawalaxus  qasta,  wae  wae  wa.  90 

5.  Wiigilla  qastii  Helemll  waxeda£6  g'axEiiLasos  helig*a£yaqos 
qEn  wax-'owe  nogwa  g-ax  helig-ayonoxusos  helig-ayaqTs  Helemllts 
Enawalaxus  qastii,  wae. 

Wa,  gil£mese  q HveMdExs  lae  etled  yaeq!Eg-a£l  LE£wis  yaeq!Ent!a- 
lote.  Wa,  laEm£lae  namaxma've  Q Iwalanenegax  waldEmas  Hele-  9,5 
mllaq:  "  Yul,  qast,  Helemll,  wix-sEn  yalaqulaenaeye.  Le-hiueh 
nExts!axes  gwE£yaos  gEn  gwekMalasa,  qast."  Wa,  la£lae  gagala 
L!Ek-alaxs  laa-'las  edzaqwa  yaq!Eg'a;le  Qlwalanenega.  Wa,  la-lae 
meka:  "Yul,  gelakas'la  qast  Helemll  laEins  wax£ed  qlulamas 
gaxEn,  g'ilg-ildokwelas  enawalaku.  LamiesEn  lal  laxes  waldEmos  loo 
gaxEnraxwa  negikwex."  Wa,  hei:m  waxe  waldEmas  Qlwalane-, 
negiixs  lae  sElt  !eda. 

75052 — 21 — 35  kth — pt  1 47 


738  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  3i> 

3      And  before  long,  in  the  night,  Q Iwalanenega  was  heard  |  singing 
her  sacred  song  back  of  Teguxste£.     Now,  she  had  really  disap- 
5  peared;  ||  and  she  never  went  to  the  house  of  those  who  had  disap- 
peared, |  (the  house)  behind  the  mountain  back  of  Teguxste£.  | 

Then   Qliide  was   troubled    about   his  sister,   for  nobody  |  knew 
where  Q Iwalanenega  had  disappeared  to;  |  and  they  never  heard  her 

10  sacred  song.  ||  Sixteen  days  after  she  had  left  the  dance-house,  her 
sacred  song  was  heard  |  back  in  the  woods  behind  Teguxste5,  and  for 
a  little  while  she  came  towards  the  beach.  |  Then  she  really  came 
near  the  rear  of  the  houses,  |  and  she  went  far  away  again,  singing  her 
sacred    song.     Then  |  Qliide    became    glad,    for    lie    knew    that    his 

15  sister  was  still  alive.  ||  Then  Qliide  wished  that  they  should  capture 
quickly  |  three  of  those  who  stayed  in  the  woods,  and  also  Q  Iwala- 
nenega. |  In  the  morning,  as  soon  as  daylight  came,  the  men  and 
women  of  the  Nak!wax'da£xu  |  went  to  catch  the  three  who  were  in 
the  woods.     And  when  |  those  came  back  who  had  gone  to  capture 

20  those  who  stayed  in  the  woods,  and  when  they  went  into  the  ||  dance- 
house,  they  sang  the  songs  of  the  war-dancer,  the  tamer-dancer,  | 
and  the  fire-dancer;  and  when  the  three  dances  were  over,  |  they 
went  into  their  sacred  room.  Now,  the  Xiik  !wax'da£xu  thought 
that  |  Q Iwalanenega  would  be  a  great  shaman.     As  soon  as  night 

IT,  came,  |  the  Nak  Iwax'da-x"   were  called    to  come  into   the  ||  dance- 


3      Wii,  laEm£lawise  giila  nEg  ikuxs  laaEl  wiiLEle  Qlwalanenegaxs  lae 
yalaqlwala  lax  aLlas  Teguxsta£ye.    Wa,  laeme  alak"!ala  x_"!s£eda.    Wa, 
5  hrme  hewaxaEm  la  gwiibala  laxes  xisalote   laxes  g'ig'oklwale  lax 
auiapla-'vasa  nEg'ii  lax  aLlas  Teguxsta;ve. 

Wii,  la£me  etled  la  qleqlaek'Ele  Qlade  qaes  wuqlwaxs  lae  k- leas 
qlalasa  £naxwa  bebEgwaiiEiux  lax  xiyats  Q  Iwalanenega.  Wa, 
he£misexs  hewaxae  wule!  yalaqlwala.     Wa,  he£lat!a  la  qlELlExsa- 

10  g'iyowe  £naliis  la  basa  lobEkwaxs  lae  wuLaxa£LEl  yalaqiila  laxa 
aLala  lax  SlISs  Teguxstaye.  Wa,  lame  g-ax  yawas£Id  LlasolEla. 
Wa,  k-!es£lat!a  alaEin  g'ax  EnExwabala  laxa  aLana-yasa  gokulaxs 
lae  xwelaqa  qwesaxsda£nakulaxs  yalaqlwalae.  Wit,  la£me  ex£Ide 
naqa£yas   Qlade   qaxs   lE£mae  q  Ial£aLElaqexs    q!ula£maes    wuqlwa. 

15  Wa,  laEm£lae  £nek-e  Qliide  qa£s  hali£lalalag"i  k1m£yaxa  g-Ig-iya- 
k'Ela  yuduku  ogu'la  lax  Qlwalanenega.  Wa,  gil-'mese  £nax£Idxa 
gaalaxs  lae  £wl£la£ma  bebEgwanEme  LE£wa  tsledaqasa  Niiklwax-da- 
£xwe  la  k'im-'yaxa  yudukwe  glgiyak'Ela.  Wit,  g-il£mese  g'ax 
aedaaqaxa  k'lm£yaxa  glg'iyakila.     Wii,g'il£mese  £wlela  hdgwlL  laxa 

20  lobEkwTaxs  lae  qlEmtlets  q  lEinq  lEmdEmasa  olala  LE£wa  hayallkilale 
LE£wa  nonltse£stalale.  Wa,  g-il£Em£lawise  gwala  yudukwe  ytxwa 
laaEl  lats lalll  laxa  lE£melats!e.  Wa,  lai:in£lae  nEgeqala£me  Naklwax-- 
da£xwaq  £walasL  paxale  Qlwalanenega.  Wa,  gil£Ern£lawise  ganul£i- 
dExs   lae   qasasE£weda  Nak!wax#da£xwe  qa£s  gaxe  Ewi£laeLEla  laxa 


boas]  BELIEFS    AXD    CUSTOMS  73'J 

house  to  sing  for  the  three  who  had  stayed  in  the  woods.  |  As  soon  as  26 
they  were  all  in,  the  great  shaman,  |  Fool,  arose  and  spoke,  and  said, 
"O  friends!  |  take  your  batons  and  heat  quick  time  on  your  boards 
for  a  long  time.  \  And  as  soon  as  you  stop  beating,  then  make  no 
sound  for  a  long  time.  ||  Then  you  will  again  beat  fast  time  on  your  30 
boards.     You  will  do  so  |  four  times,  for  I  am  thinking  of  our  great: 
friend  |  Q  Iwalanenega.     Therefore  I  wish  that  you  should  beat  four 
times  on  your  |  boards,  for  we  shall  try  to  be  successful,  lor  she  may 
come  into  this  |  winter  dance-house  this  night;  and  also  these  shall 
hear    her    sing    her    sacred    song."  ||  Thus    said    Fool.     They    never  35 
heard  [  her  singing  her  sacred  song,  and  they  only  sang  the  songs  of 
the  |  three — the  war-dancer,  the  tamer-dancer,  and  the  fire-dancer.  [ 
Ami  after  they  had  finished,  they  went  out.     For  two  |  nights  they 
went  in  vain  to  the  dance-house,  and  ||  four  times  they  beat   the  40 
boards  in  vain.     Then  the  Xak  Nva\'da£x"  went  out      to  sleep.     And 
they  had  not  been  asleep  long,  when  the  sound  of  the     sacred  song 
came  from  the  rear  of  the  dance-house;  and  as  soon  as  the  sacred 
song   was   ended,  |  they    heard    the    cannibal   cry.     There   were    no 
whistles.  |  This  is  what  the  Nak  !wax"  da£xu  call  hamdzEdzEwe£,  ||  and  45 
it  is  called  by  the  Kwakiutl  oneqwa.  |  It  is  partly  a  great  shaman, 


lobskwe  qa£s  g-axe  qlEmta  qa  ylxwesa  yudukwe  g"Ig-iyak"Elax'de.  25 
Wa,  g-il£Enriawise  g'ax  £wi£laeLa  laa£las  Lax£ulileda  Ewalase  paxala 
NEiiolowe  qa£s  yaq!Eg-a£le.  Wa,  ladae  £nek-a:  '' £ya,  £ne£nEmokwai'. 
Wag'a  daxLEnd-Exs  tlEmyayaqos  qa£s  £wl£laos  glides  LexEdzodExs 
tlEmedzaqos.  Wa,  gil£EmhvIts  qlweHdEl  laxEs  gagalal  tsEmotala- 
l5l.  Wa,  15les  etledEl  LexEdzodExs  tlEmedzaqos.  Wa,  moplE-  30 
naLEs  hel  gwex"'idELe  qaxgin  gig'aeqEle  g'axEns  EnEmoxudzae 
Qlwalanenega.  IIedi:n  lag"ila  -nex-  qaes  moplEnaos  LexEdzodExs 
tlEmedzaqos  qaEns  wawuldzEwaena£ye  qa  gaxese  gaxeL  laxa 
lobEkwaxwa  ganoLex.  Wa,  heemis  qEns  w\lLaxeaLEleqe  yalaqlwa- 
lases  yalaqfdaya."  Miex'Mae  XeuoIowc.  Wa,  hr'me  hewaxa  Willi-  35 
x£aLElaqe  yalaqtila.  Wa,  aEin£lawise  dEnx£its  q !imq lEmdEmasa 
yfidukwexa  olala  LE£wa  hayallk'ilale  LE£wa  nonltse£stalale.  Wa, 
gil£Ein£lawise  gwalExs  Lae  hoquwelsa.  Wa,  ma£lp  !mxwa£9  lae 
ganoLas  wiil£Em  lanaxwa  £wl£laei.i.la  laxa  lobfikwe  qa£s  wul£me 
moplEna  LexLexa.  Wa,  la,Em£lawise  £wi£la  hSquwElseda  Nak!wax-da-  40 
£xwe  qa£s  la  mex£eda.  Wa,  k- !es£Em£lawise  gala  mexax  gaxaasa 
yalaqlwala  laxa  aLana-'yasa  lobEkwe.  Wa,  g-ileEmlawise  qlulbe 
yalaqulaena£yasexs  lae  hamts!Eg'a£la.  Wa,  laEm  k'leas  mEdzesEs 
gwex'sdEinas.  HeEm  gv\E£yosa  Nak!wax-da£xwe  hamdzEdzEwe- 
sE£we   gwex'sdemas.      Wa,  he£mis   gwE£yosa   Kwagule    oneqwaxa  45 


740  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.an».?5 

partly  h&mshamts  !es.  That  is  what  |  Qlwalanenega,  who  had 
become  a  shaman,  was,  when  she  disappeared.  And  it  was  Helemll's  | 
wish  who  made  her  hamdzEdzEwe£,  although  [  Qliide  did  not  own 
the  hanidzE(lzEwe£.  || 
50  (They  talk  much  about  what  is  done  by  those  who  disappear  to 
become  shamans;  |  for  I  hey  use  different  dances  when  they  show 
themselves,  although  |  none  belong  to  their  ancestors,  for  they  are 
according  to  the  order  of  spirits.)  j 

As  soon  as  Q Iwalanenega  had  uttered  the  cannibal-cry  she  sang 
her  sacred  song,  |  and  immediately  the  great  shaman,  Fool,  awak- 
55  ened  ||  all  the  men  and   asked    them  to  go  into   the   dance-house;  | 
and  when  they  were  all  inside  they  took  their  [  batons,  and  also  the 
women,  and  the  strong  children,  and  |  they  all  together  beat  fast 
time  on  the  boards.     They  had  not  been  |  heating  time  long,  when 
Q  Iwalanenega  uttered  the  cannibal-cry  at  the  door  of  the  dance- 
on  house.  II  And  as  soon  as  she  came  into  the  house,  she  turned  into  a 
shaman.  |  Now,  the  song  leaders  of  the  Nak!wax'da£xu  did  not  sing, 
for  |  none  knew   that   Q Iwalanenega  was  a  hamdzEdzEwe£.     She  [ 
just  sang  her  sacred  song;  and  as  soon  as  she  had  finished  singing  her 
sacred  song,  she  |  uttered  the  cannibal-cry.     Then  she  bit  four  men.  || 
G5  Then  the  song-leaders  of  the  Niik  !\vax'da£xu  said  that  they  would 
sing  a  new  |  song  for  her,  and  this  is  her  song:  | 

46  naxsaaple  lo£  £walas  paxala  LE£wa  h&mshamts !es§  lax  gwex"sdaas:is 
Qlwalanenegaxs  paxalax-'Idaaxs  xisatae.  Wa,  la  hasEx  Helemile 
naqa£ye  laena£yas  hamdzEdzEwesE£wa,  wax-£mae  k-!es  axnogwade 
QIadasa  hamdzEdzEwe. 

50  (Wa,  la  qleiiEma  q  layole  he'  gwex-£idiisa  xIx'Esfila  lae  paxalax-£ida 
yixs  xisalae.  Wa,  lii  ogiYlaEm  las  ledaxs  g'axae  nel'edaxa  wax'£me 
k'leas  lax  g-alEing"alisas  yixs  qssaax  waldEina  Haayalilagase.) 

Wa,  g"il£mese  gwal  hamtslalaxs  lae  Q Iwalanenega  etled  yalaqwa. 
Wa,  hex-£idaEm£lawisa  £walase  paxala,  ylx  NEnolowe  la  gwetslaxsta- 

55  laxa  £naxwa  bebEgwaiiEm  epi  g'axes  £wi£la  hogwiL  laxa  lobEkvve. 
Wa,  g-Il£Em£lawise  g'ftx  'wFlaeLExs  lae  hex'£idaEm  £wi£ia  ax£edxa 
tlEmyayowe  LE£\va  tslEdaqe  Lo£ma  hel£ak-!alasa  g'ing'inauEme  qa£s 
£nEmax-£ide  tlEmedzodxa  tlEmedzo.  Wa,  k-!es£Em£lawise  gegild 
tlEmsaxs  gaxae  hamdzElaqwe  Qlwalanenega  lax  tlExiliisa  lobEkwe. 

00  Wa,  g"il£Ein£lawise  g'axeL  laxa  g'okwaxs  lae  gwa£sta  laxes  pExena£ye. 
Wa,  laEm  k'leas  qlEmteles  nenagadasa  Nak!wax'da£xwe  qaexs 
k-!esae  qlaLElaqexs  hamdzEdzEwesEwae  Qlwalanenega.  Wa,  la£me 
km  yalaqidases  yalaxuLEne.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwal  yalaqiilaxs  lae 
hamadzElaqwa.     Wa,  la£me  q  !Ex-£idxa  mokwe  bebEgwaiiEma.     Wa, 

05  la£me  £nek'e  nenagadasa  Nak!wax-da£xwe  qa£s  dEnx£Ides  altsEma 
qlEmdEm  qae.     Wa,  g-a£mes  qlEmdEmseg'a: 


boar]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  741 

1.  "Who  is  getting  food    for  you,  Giver-of-Supernatural-Power,  67 
hamae  hamae  hama!  |  I  went  to  get  food  for  you,  Helemil  of  Can- 
nibal-at-North-End-of-World.  I! 

2.  "I   nearly    perished    there,    Cannibal-at-North-End-of- World,  |   70 
hamae  hamae  hama!     Then  I  was  taken  into  the  |  sacred  room  of 
Helemil  of  Camiibal-at-North-End-of-World.  | 

3.  "I    was    nearly    kept    by    Cannibal-at-North-End-of-World,  | 
hamae  hamae  hama !     Then   my   stomach  was  opened,  ||  and    the  75 
supernatural  power  was  put  into  me  by  Helemil  of  Cannibal-at- 
North-End-of-World.  | 

4.  "  Wlio  is  going  to  get  corpses  for  you?  Giver-of-Supernatural- 
Power,  hamae  hamae  hama!  |  I  went  to  get  corpses  for  Helemil 
of  Cannibal-at-North-End-of-World."  | 

As  soon  as  she  had  stopped  dancing,  Qiwalanenega  spoke.  ||  and  80 
said,  "  Thank  you,  friends !  I  have  been  brought  back  to  life  |  by  our 
friend  Helemil,  and  he  said  my  name  shall  be  QJulEnts'esEmaga.  | 
And  now  you  shall  call  me  thus,  and  |  none  of  you  shall  dare  to  make 
love  to  me  for  ten  years;  |  and  Helemil  said  to  me  that  if  any  one 
should  make  love  to  me  ||  inside  of  ten  years,  he  would  immediately  85 
kill  him.  Thus  said  our  |  great  friend  to  me.  And  for  ten  years  I 
shall  cure  |  the  sick  ones  among  you.     And  you  shall  not  pay  me 


1.  Wlhes  qa  hamasa£yalag-ilaos  LOgwalag'ila  hamae  hamae  hama  67 
hex'dos    lanogwa    hamasaeyalag-ilts    Helemllas    Bax"bakwalanux,i- 
slwakasdea. 

2.  Elahax'k'asdEwesEii     ayameia£mats6s     Bax"bakwalanux"srwa-  70 
krasdea    hamae  hamae    hama,  hehehex'dos    lanogwa    laeLEmae    lax 
li:tnxlaelasdes  Helemllas  Baxubakwalanuxusiwak-asdea. 

3.  ElahaxkasdEwesEii  hak!waaiiF,mx-des  Bax"bakwalanux"sl\va- 
kasdea  hamae  hamae  hama  hehehex'dds  lanogwa  mEgesafyasos 
fnEiiwalak !wena£yex-des  Helemllas  Baxl,bakwalanuxusiwak-asdea.       75 

4.  Wlhes  qae  lal6la'cyalag-ilaos  LOgwalag'ita  hamae  hamae  hama; 
hex'dos  lanogwa  laloia£yalag-Ilts  Helemllas  Baxubakwalanuxusi- 
wak'asdea. 

Wit,  gil£mese  gwal  yixwaxs  lae  yaq!Eg'a£le  Q!wrdanenega.  Wa, 
laelae  £nek-a:  "Gelak-as'la  Ene£nEmoku.  La£mEn  q!ulax""Idamatso- 80 
sEns  £nEmokwae  Helemlla.  Wii,  heEiu£lawisEn  LegEmLe  Q!filEnts!e- 
sEmaga.  Wa,  laEms  £naxwal  LeqEhiLES  g-fixEn.  Wii,  he'misa 
laEms  k-!easL  lal  nalal  gagak-Eyalal  g-axEn  lag'aal  laxa  nEqaxEn- 
xela.  Wit,  he£maa  waldEiu's  Helemlle  gaxEn  qaso  gagak'Eyalaso- 
lox  gwasa£yasa  nEqaxEnxe  laLEn  hex^idaEl  lE£lamasLECie,  £nekins  85 
=nEmoxudza    g-axEn.       Wii,    he-mesa    nEqaxEnxelai.En    helikaLExs 


742  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.ss 

88  for  it.  He  said  if  I  should  ask  you  for  pay,  |  that  then  Helemil 
would  kill  me."  Thus  said  QliilEutslesEmaga  |  to  her  tribe,  and 
after  that  she  was  a  great  shaman.  || 

The  Initiation   of  One  of   the  Ts  Iots  !ena  of   the  Awa£ilela 

The  ancestors  of  the  numaym  TslotslEna  lived  on  the  upper  part  | 
1  of  the  river  of  Hanwad,  and  their  village  site  has  the  name  TsEle- 
xwas.  |  Qleged  was  a  grizzly-bear  hunter.  He  was  not  a  chief,  but 
a  |  common  man,  for  this  is  not  a  myth.  It  is  a  tale  belonging  to  the 
time  ||  when  the  white  men  came  and  built  a  house  at  Fort  Rupert. 
5  Therefore  |  Qleged  hunted  with  a  gun.  Qleged's  wife  was  a  |  proud 
woman.  Her  name  was  Tslchvael.  Therefore  her  name  was 
Tslelwael,  |  because  she  always  talked  proudly,  and  scolded  |  her 
husband,  Qleged,  as  is  the  way  of  common  women,  because  ||  nothing 

10  is  good  for  them  except  their  pride.  Now  Qleged  |  paid  no  atten- 
tion to  his  wife  when  she  was  angry  with  him.  One  |  day  Ts  lelwael 
used  really  bad  words  against  her  husband,  |  and  therefore  Qleged 
struck  his  wife;  and  |  after  he  had  struck  her,  he  took  his  gun  and  || 

15  went  out  of  the  house  to  walk  1>\  the  river  of  Hanwad.  |  ThenQleged 
evidently  saw  a  grizzly  bear,  for  |  this  is  only  guessed  by  the  tribe 

87  tsletslExqliiqlos,  wit,  laLEs  k'les  aval  giixEn,  qa£laEnLo  aa£yalalax 
laEindawisEn  nogwal  lE£lamatsos  Helemila,"  £nex"£lae  QliilEntslesE- 
magaxes  g'okulote.     Wa,  laEin  £walas  paxala  laxeq'. 

The  Initiation  on  One  of  the  TsIotsIena  of  the  Awa£ilela 

1  Gokuladae  g'iiliisa  £nE£mei)iotasa  TslotslEna  lax  £nElk"  !odoya£- 
yas  was  Ilanwadcxa  Legadeda  g'6x"dEmsas  Tsslexwas.  Wii,  la- 
£lae  g'flg'Elaaenoxwe  Qlegedexa  k'lese  g"Igama£ya,  yixs  a£mae  bE- 
gwanEinq!ala£ma,  yixs  k' lesaex  no£yEma,  yixs  qlayolaex  g-ag-iLEla 
5  laqexs  g"alaol  g  ax  gox£walisa  mamal£a  lax  Tsiixis,  yix  lag'ilas 
laEin  hanLEine  hanaLElas  Qlegede.  Wit,  lsVlae  gEg'ade  Qlegediisa 
LEmqa  tstedaqxa  LegadEs  Tslelwael,  yix  liig'ilas  LegadEs  Tslel- 
wael qaxs  b.emEnalaemae  LEmlEmqlala  loxs  hemEnala£mae  ae£no- 
t  laxes    la-wunEine    Qlegede    lax    gweg-ilasasa    tsladagEX'sala,    yixs 

10  k'leasae  eg"asa  OgiVla  laxes  LEmqaena£ye.  Wa,  laEm£lawise  Qle- 
gede k"!es£El  qlasElaxes  gEnEinaxs  lawisaaq.  Wii,  la£lae  £nEmxsa 
£nalaxs  lae  ala  £yax-sEme  waldEmas  Tslelwaelaxes  lii£wunEme.  Wa, 
heEin-lawis  lagilas  Qlegede  k- !elax-£idxes  gEnEme.  Wii,  g-il£Em- 
£lawise   gwal  k' lelak'aqexs  lae  diix-ide  Qlegediixes    hauLEme    qa£s 

15  la  ISweIs  laxes  g'okwTe  qa£s  laid  qas£id  £na£nalaaqa  lax  wiis  Han- 
wade.  Wii,  laEm£lawise  Qlegede  dox£waLElanaxa  g"ila  qaxs 
a£mae  k'odidtses   g'okulote  qaxs  wuLEl£maaxs    malplEnae    MiilIe- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND    CUSTOMS  743 

because  they  heard  two  shuts.  !  It  was  late  in  the  evening  when  the 
shots  sounded.  |  It  was  dark,  tin  I  Qleged  did  not  come  hack.  ||  Then  20 
his  tribe  thought  that  he  had  been  hurt.     In  the  |  morning  when  day 
came,  lie  was  expected  in  vain  to  come  back,  |  and  later  in  the  clay 
Q  !eged  was  given  up.  |  Then  the  young  men  of  the  numaym  Ts  lots  !e- 
na    made    themselves  ready  j    to  go  and  look  for  Qleged,  who  had 
been  expected   (to  return).     They  started  ||  and  they  had  not  gone  25 
far  when  they  saw  his  tracks.  |  They  followed  them,  and  after  going 
a  long  way,  they  found   the  stock  of  his  gun.  |  They  searched,  and 
they  found  one  of  his  legs.  !       In   vain  they  kept  on  searching  for 
other  parts  |  of  his  body,  but  they  found  nothing  else  besides  the 
one     leg  and  the  stock  of  the  gun  and  the  barrel.  [  Then  those,  who  30 
had  looked  for  Qleged  went    home.     They  |  carried  with  them  the 
one  leg  and  the  part  of  the  gun.  ;  When   they  arrived  at  Qleged's 
house  and  [  told  his  wife  the  news,  she  told   them  to  bury  the  ||  one  35 
leg  of  her  husband.     The  reason  why  they  talked  about  Tslelwael 
was  that  she  |  almost  died  crying  for  her  husband,  |  because  it  was 
on  account  of  her  that  lie  had  gone  out.     Now  |  one  leg  of  her  hus- 
band had  been  buried  in  the  fall  of  the  year,  j  It  was  towards  winter 
when  Qleged   had   been   killed  ||  by   the  grizzly  bear.     Now  it  was  40 


g'a£la.      Wa,    laEmdae    klwiig'ila    dzaqwaxs    lae    hanLliila.       Wa,   la  IS 
£lae     p!EclEx,£ida.     HewaxaElat!a     g-ax     mi'makwe    Qlegede.     Wii, 
g-walElaEm£lawise    g-okulotas    k"otaq    IaEm    yElkwa.     Wii,    hVlae  20 
£nax-£Idxa  gaala  wul£Em£lawise  nak"  !alasE£wa  qa£s  g'axe  na£nakwa. 
Wii,  he£lat!a  la  gala  £niilaxs  lae    nanoxuq  lalayEwe  Qlegede.      Wii, 
laEindawise      xwanaMdeda      ha£yal£asa     £nE£memotasa    TslotslEna 
qa£s  lalag'e  liEniinuxfilax  Qlegede.    Wa,  lax-da£xulae  qas£ida.     Wii, 
ewilaxdze£lae  qwesg'ila  qasaxs  lae  dox£waLElax  qaqEsmotas.     Wii,  25 
hVlae  qastodsq.     Wii,  liidae  qwesg'ilaEm  qasaxs  lae  qlaxa  hanLEinas 
yix    oxLax'diis.     Wii,  la£lae    alex-£ida.     Wii,  laEmJlae   qlaxa   apso- 
tsldza£yas  g'oguyas.     Wii,  wax-£Em£lawise  banal  alax  ogu£lii  g'ayol 
lax  ok!wina£yas,  wii,  laelae  k'leas  6gu£la  qlasos  laxa  apsotsidza£ye 
g'ogujT5    LE£wa    oxLa£yasa    hauLEm,    wa,    he£mesa     dzEx-s£aniilas.  30 
Wii,  g-ax£lae  na£nakwa  nEniinuxulax  Q!egedEX"de.     Wii,  g-ax£Em- 
£lae    dag'ilqalaxa  apsotsidza£ye    g'ciguyo   LE£wa    gayole  laxa    han- 
LEme.     Wa,  gilJEmJlawise  lag'aa  laxa  goxudas  Qlegede    lae    ts'.E- 
kliil'idEx  gEUEmx'diis.     Wii,  laEm£lawise  £nek-  qa  wunEintasE-cwesa 
apsotsIdzaeye    g'ogiiyoses    laewunEmx' de,  yix  lag'ilas  gwagwex's'a-  35 
lasa  yixs  halsEla-mae  k' !es  qlwayalisEme    Ts'.elwaele  qaes    la£wu- 
nEinx'de,  yixs  has£maaq    uaqa£ye    laena£yas    qas£ida.      Wii,  laEin- 
£lae  gwala  wunEmtaxa  £nEme    g"5guyos    hVwunEm.vdexa   lavEnxe. 
Wa,    la.Em£lae    gwebe     laxa     tslfiwunxe,    yix     lax'di:nias    kMelax'- 
ntsE£we  QlegedExdasa  gila.     Wii,   laEmdiiwise    etled    hivF.nxa    la  40 


744  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.anv::, 

41  autumn  again  of  the  |  following  year  when  the  two  ends  of  the  year 
meet.  Then  Qleged  had  been  forgotten  J  by  his  tribe.  All  the  | 
men  and  the  women  went  out  of  their  houses,  and  were  sitting  on 
their  \  summer  seats  in  front  of  their  houses,  for  it  was  a  fine  day. 

45  They  had  not  II  been  sitting  in  their  summer  seats  a  long  time  when 
wolves  began  to  howl  |  at  the  upper  end  of  the  village.  Then  the 
wolves  howled  again  |  behind  the  village,  and  then  wolves  howled 
again  |  on  the  other  side  right  opposite  the  village,  |  and  then  the 

50  wolves  howled  again  where  they  had  first  ||  howled.  Many  wolves 
howled  together.  \  The  howling  of  many  wolves  kept  up  for  a  whole 
day  and  |  night.  The  men  were  curious  |  why  they  made  this  noise, 
for  it  seemed  that  the  |  wolves  wanted  something  from  the  village 

55  that  night.  Then  ||  the  ancestors  of  the  TslotslEna  were  afraid, 
because  the  howling  of  the  many  |  wolves  was  coming  near  behind 
the  village  that  night.  |  In  the  morning  when  day  came  one  of  the 
men  went  out  of  the  |  house,  and  he  saw  many  wolves  on  the  bank 

60  at  the  J  upper  end  of  the  village  walking  along  the  bank,  and  ||  a 
great  wolf  walked  out  of  the  woods,  and  back  of  his  head  a  man  was 
sitting.  At  once  |  the  man  called  his  tribe  to  look  at  him.  |  And  when 
the  men  and  women  came  out,  j  they  saw  a  great  wolf  and  the  man 


41  apsEyEnx,  laEm  dzedzak'owa  £nEmxEnxe.  Wa,  laEmdae  lEne£sta- 
se£wc  Q'.egedKx'diises  g-okidote.  Wii,  laEm£lawisa  £naxwa  bebE- 
gwanEm  LE£wis  tsledaqe  hoquwEls  laxes  gig"5kwe  qa£s  la  a£wax£- 
ulsa  lax  L'.a,L!asana£yases  g'ig'okwe  qaxs  ek'aeda  £nala.     Wa,  k"!es- 

45  £Em£lawise  alaEm  gex'gas  a£waqwalas  laasa  gEmot!Eg-a£leda  atanEm 
lax  £nalenagwisasa  g'5kula.  Wa,  la£lae  edzaqwa  gEmot!Eg-a£leda 
gaxanEme  laxa  a.Lana£yasa  g'okula.  Wa,  la£lae  edzaqwa  EinotlE- 
g-a£leda  ai.anEin  laxa  apsotasa  swa  lax  nExk'!otasa  g'okula. 
Wa,    lac"lae    edzaqwa    g'Emot!Eg:acleda    fii.anKin     lax    g'iklzagwas- 

50  dasa  gale  gEmotlala.  Wa,  la£lae  qlenEma  la  snEmadzaqwa  gEmo- 
tlaleda  axanEma;  Wa,  laEmelae  sEnbEndxa  £nala  p£wa  ganoLe 
gEmoteda  qlenEine  eaLaiiEma.  Wii,  laEin£lae  qlayaxeda  bebE- 
gwanEmas  heg'ilas  gwek!ale  qaxs  hae  gwexs  dadagiltsleda  eaxa- 
nEinaxagokulaxaganoLe.     Wa,  laKm'lae  -jiaxwa  ts'.EndEk'eda  gala 

55  EnEememotsa  TslotslEnasa  g"axe  xeuleIu  enExwabaleda  qlenEme 
gEmotlala  eai.ani:m  lax  ai,ana£yasa  g'okuliixa  ganoLe.  Wa,  laElae 
£nax-£idxa  gaala,  laa£lase  lawidseda  £nEmokwe  bEgwanEm  laxes 
g'okwe.  Wii,  la£lae  dox£waLElaxa  qlenE'm  eaLanEm  lax  £nalena- 
gwesasa  g"okula    g"ilEmg-llIsEla  laq.      Wii,    g*ax£lae    gilolt  laliseda 

60  £walase  aLanEm  k'.waxLaatalaxa  hEgwaiiEme.  Wa,  hex£idaEm- 
lawisa  bEgwanEme  la  gwaye£L !esx§s  g'okuldte  qa  dox£wideseq. 
Wa,  g'll£Em£lawise  g'ax  £wl£la  hoquwElseda  behEgwanEine  LE£wis 
tsledaqe,  wii,  laEmdae    dox£waxElaxa  £walase    aLanEmaxs  klwax- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  745 

sitting  |  behind  his  head,  and  many  wolves  walking  around  him.  || 
G'ilalalit  was  the  name  of  the  great  wolf  |  behind  whose  head   the  65 
man  was  sitting.     Then  they  recognized  |  that  the  man  was  Qleged, 
who  was  singing  a  sacred  song.     Then  the  old  people  |  told  ah  the 
men  and  women  to  purify  themselves  at  once.  |  Then  all  the  men 
and  ||  women  broke  off  hemlock  branches  back  of  the  |  houses,  and  70 
went  into  the  water  in  front  of  the  houses,  and  |  all  washed  them- 
selves with  hemlock  branches.     The  great  wolf  J  G'ilalalit  was  stand- 
ing still  as  though  he  was  watching  the   |  many  wolves,  what  they 
were   doing.     After  the   people  had   finished   purifing   themselves  || 
and  had  gone  out  of  the  river,  they  sat  down  in  front  of  |  the  house  75 
of  Qleged.     They  were  watching  what  was  going  to  happen.  |  They 
cleared  the  house  of  Qleged.  j  When  Qleged  saw  the  men  sitting  on 
the  ground,  he  got  off  from  the  neck  |  of  G'ilalalit,  and  stood  on  the 
beach.     Then  ||  G'ilalalit  and  the  many  wolves  went  back  into  the  NO 
woods.     Qleged  stood  on  the  beach  |  singing  his  sacred  song,  and  all 
the  men  made  ready  |  to  catch  him.     When  the  men  |  went  towards 
Q  leged,  who  was  standing  on  the  beach,  he  pointed  with  the  |  thing 
that  he  held,  which  was  like  a  baton,  towards  the  mountain  on  the 
other  side  of  the  river.  ||  And  immediately  the  mountain  caught  fire.  85 

Laatalaxa  bEgwanEme.  We,  heEnrlawisa  qlenEme  eaLaiiEm  gi- 
le£stalaq.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  Gilalalitexa  £walase  SLanEmxaklwax-  65 
Laatalaxa  bEgwaiiEme.  Wa,  laEm£lae  £malt!eg-aaLEleda  bE- 
gwanEme, he£me  Qlegededa  yalaqula.  Wa,  laEm£laeda  q!ulsq!ul- 
yakwe  £nex'  qa  amies  hex'£idaEm  £wi£la  q  !eqElax£ideda  c"naxwa  be- 
bEgwanF.m  LE£wis  tsledaqe.  Wa,  hex"sidaEmelawisa  miixwa  bebE- 
gwanEm LE£wis  tsledaqe  la  LlEx£wid  laxa  qlwaxe  lax  iiLamVyases  70 
g'ig'okwe,  qa£s  lit  hoxsta  laxa  Ewa  nEqEmalisases  g'ig'okwe.  Wa, 
laEm£lae  Enaxwa  ci!wax£eta.  Wa,  aEmelawisa  Ewalase  aLanEinxa 
G'Halatite  g'iles  he  gwex's  x'ltslax'ilax  gwegwalag'ilidzasas  LEewa 
cjlenEme  eaLaiiEma.  Wa,  g"ileEm£lawise  gwala  ([!eqElax£ide  laa£lase 
hox£wusta  laxa  £wii.  Wit,  lax'da£x"dae  k!us£Elsa  lax  Llasana£yas  75 
gokwas  Qlegede.  Wa,  laEm£lae  doqwalaxes  gwa£yi£l:ilasLa.  Wa, 
hex'£idaEinLa  ex£wetsE£we  g'okwas  Qlegede,  wit,  laEm£lae  doqu- 
la£ma  klutslEse  bebj;gwanEm  lax  Qlegediixs  lae  laxa  lax  oxLaata- 
£yasa  G'ilalalite.  Wa,  aEm£lawise  la  i.a£\ves  laalaLase  g"il£yag"ida 
G'ilalalite  LE£wa  cjlenEme  eaLanEma.  Wit,  laEm£lae  Qlegede  La£wis  80 
yalaqula.  Wii,  laF.m£laeda  £naxwa  bebEgwanEm  xwanatela  qa£s  la- 
lag'e  daq.  Wit,  g'il£Ein£lawise  £wi£la  qas£ideda  bebEgwanEm  gwE- 
£yolEla  lax  La£widzasas  Qlegede  laa£lase  Qlegede  ndx-'witscs  daa- 
kwe  he  gwex"s  tlEmyayo  laxa  nEg'ii  lax  apsotasa  £wa.  Wit,  he- 
x,£idaEm£lawise    Enaxwa    xix£ede    oguma£yasa    nEg'ii.     Wit,    la£lae  85 


746  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  36 

86  Then  |  he  pointed  his  fire-bringer  to  the  mountain  up  the  river,  | 
while  he  was  standing  on  the  beach,  and  continued  singing  his 
sacred  song.  Then  [  the  mountain  caught  fire.  Then  |  the  ances- 
tors of  the  numaym  TsIots'.Ena  were  afraid  on  account  of  what  was 

90  done  by  Q!eged.  ||  The  old  men  encouraged  all  |  the  men,  and  told 
them  not  to  be  afraid.  Then  all  |  the  men  stood  in  a  row,  and  walked 
together. 

When  they  came  near  him,  the  j  line  of  men  bent  around  Qieged; 

95  and  as  soon  as  the  II  ends  of  the  line  of  men  passed  Qieged,  who  was 
standing  on  the  beach,  |  they  encircled  hun.  Then  Q  leged  was  in  the 
middle  of  the  circle.  When  |  the  ring  of  men  was  getting  small 
Qleged  disappeared  and  [  stood  on  the  beach  farther  up  the  river 
from  those  who  tried  to  catch  him.  In  vain  |  the  men  surrounded 
100  him  again.  He  did  the  same  ||  as  he  had  done  before.  Then  an  old 
man  spoke,  |  and  said,  "O  Tribe!  let  us  go  home  for  a  while."  I 
Then  all  the  men  agreed  |  to  what  he  said,  and  they  all  started  and  | 
5  went  into  the  house  of  Q!eged.  As  soon  as  they  were  all  in  ||  the  old 
man  spoke,  and  said,  |  "Let  them  call  the  women  to  come  quickly, 
and  the  virgins."  j  At  once  four  young  men  ]  went  out  of  the  house 

86  et!ed  nox-wltses  xumtxiimtagila  laxa  nEgii,  lax  £niila£yas  i.awi- 
dzasas  liixes  hemEndzaqulaeneeme  yiilaqula.  Wii,  laEmxae  xlx- 
Eede  ogumaeyasa  nEg'a.  Wa,  laEm£lae  kek'iilex£ideda  g'ala  £nE- 
£memotasa    Ts'.otslEnas    gwiilag  ilidzasas    Qlegede.      Wa,    la£laed:t 

90  qlulsq'.ulyakwe  ai-.m  telakliilax  nenaqaeyasa  £naxwa  bebEgwanEm 
qa  k'leses  kilida.  Wa,  lai:m£liiwise  yipEing'aliseda  £naxwa  hebE- 
gwanr.ma.     Wa,  la£lae  £nEmax£Id  qas£ida. 

Wa,  g"il£Em£lawise  exa£nakfda   laqexs    lae  wag'E-'nakuleda  £was- 
gEmg'itElasasa      bebEgwanEmex     Q!egexle.      Wii,      gil£Em£lawise 

95  ha£yaqe  £waxsba£yasa  bebEgwanEinax  La£widzasas  Q!egediixs  lae 
k'EinesgEmlisaq.  Wii,  laEm£lae  nExts!alise  Qlegede.  Wii,  gil- 
£Em£lawise  t!oxts'  !a£nakilleda  bebEgwanEm,  lae  x'iseede  Qlegede 
qa£s  lit  i.ax£walis  lax  £mllalisasa  k'Em£yiiq;  wii,  lae  wiix"  et'.ededa 
bebEgwaiiEme  k-EmesgEmlisa(|.  Wii,  aEmdaxaiiwise,  he  gwex£ides 
100  gilx'de  gwex£idaasa.  Wa,  la£lae  yiiq!Eg"a£leda  q'.ulyakwe  bEgwii- 
nEma.  Wii,  la£lae  £neka:  "£ya,  gokOlot,  lalag'aEmasLEns  nii£na- 
kw7a,"  £nexlae.  Wii,  la-iae  hexi£da£ma  £naxwa  bebEgwanEm  ex£a- 
k"EX  wiildEinas.  W;i,  laxda£xu£lae  £wi£la  qas£ida  qa£s  lii  £wl;la 
hogweL  lax  gokwas  Q!egede.  Wii,  g'il£Em£lawise  £wI£laeLExs  lae 
5  yaq'.Eg'a£leda  qlulyakwe  bEgwanEma.  Wii,  la£lae  £nek-a:  "Hii- 
g'ax'i  Le£lalasE£wa  ts!Eda,qax  qa  g'axeso  £wi£la  LE£wa  k'!ek"!E£v:iliix 
ha£nak!wala,"  la  £nex'£lae.  Wa,  hex-£idaEm£lawisa  mokwe  haeyaPa 
la  hoquwEls  laxa  g'okwe  qa£s  lit  Le£lala  £wl£laxa  tsledaqe  Li/wa  k"!e- 


boas]  BELIEFS   AND   CUSTOMS  747 

and  called  all  the  women  and  the  |  virgins,  and  when  they  had  come,  the  || 
old  man  spoke,  and  said,  "Listen  why  I  j  call  you,  women.     I  suppose  10 
that  |  you  all  keep  your  napkins.    I  wish  that  you,  who  are  menstruat- 
ing, |  and  you,  virgins,  hum  your  napkins  |  around  the  great  Qleged, 
who  has  a  supernatural  treasure."     Thus  he  said.  ||  And  immediately  1"> 
the  menstruating  women  took  off  their  cedar-hark  napkins,  and  |  put  it 
down  on  the  floor  of  the  house.    And  others  who  were  not  menstruat- 
ing went  out  of  the  house  |  to  get  their  napkins  which  they  kept.  | 
When  they  had  brought  all,  the  |  men  and  the  women  and  the  virgins 
went  out.  ||  They  were  going   to   try   to   catch  Qleged;  and  |  when  20 
they  came  to  the  place  where  he  was  standing  on  the  beach,  they 
surrounded  him.     Then    they  put  fire  [  to  the  cedar-hark  napkins 
of  all  the  women;  and  when  the  fire  began  to  smoke,  |  all  the  men 
and  the  women   sat  down.  |  Then  the   smoke  of  the  fire  went  to- 
wards Qleged,  and  his  II  fire-bringer  and  death-bringer  disappeared.  25 
Then   Qleged   spoke,   and  |  said,   "Arise,   and  let  us  go  home,  for  | 
you    have    made   me    secular."     Thus    he    said.     Now,  Qleged  hail 
been  brought  back  |  by  this.      As  soon  as  he  went  into  his  house, 
he  |  told  them  that  the  wolves  had    gathered  all  the  pieces  of  his 
body,  ||   as   they    had    been    thrown    away    by    four    grizzly    bears.  30 

k'lE£yala.  Wa,  g-ax'dacxuelae  £wI£laeLa.  Wii,  la£lae  yaqlEga£leda 
qlulyakwe  bEgwanEma.  Wit,  lfriae  £nek'a:  "Weg'a  hoLelaxEn  10 
liigila  £nex'  qa£s  laos  Le£lalasE£wa  yfn.  ts'.edaq  qaxg'in  k'ota'megin- 
Lol  £naxwa  axelaxes  eedEmaos.  Wii,  la£mesEn  walaqeloi.  exEnta 
yiiL  k'lek'.Eyal,  yixg'Eii  £ne£nakelEk'  qEns  lalag'i  nE£wexse£stEnts 
eedF.maqos  laxa  £walase  Logwale  Qlegede,"  £nex'£lae.  Wii,  hex,£i- 
(hiF.in'lawisa  eexEnta  tsledaq  axalaxes  k'adzEkwe  eedEin  qa£s  15 
axalllEles.  Wa,  la£laeda  k'lese  eexEnta  hi  hoquwEls  laxa  g-5kwe 
qa£s  lit  ax£edxes  eedEmote  laxes  g'igokwe,  qaxs  eaxela£maaq. 
Wii  g-axda£xu£lae  dalaq.  Wii,  gil£Em£lawise  g'axExs  lae  £wi£la 
et!ede  hoqiiwElseda  bebEgwiinEm  LE£wa  ts'.edaqe  LE£wa  k'!ek"!E- 
£yala.  Wa,laEm£lae  £wi£la  lal  k-Em£yaLEx  Qlegede.  Wii,  g  il£Em£la-  20 
wise  lagaa  lax  La£widzasas  lac  xEme£stEndEq.  Wa,  la£lae  mEnqa- 
sE£wa  eedEmasa  £naxwa  ts'.edaqa.  Wii,  g il£Em£lawise  gQ£nex£\vidaxs 
lae  £naxwa  k!us£aliseda  £naxwa  bebEgwiinEm  LE£wa  tsledaqe.  Wii, 
gil-Eni£liiwise  lag'aeda  gii£nequla  lax  Q!egede,  lae  x'is£Ide  daakwas- 
xa  xumtxumtag-ila  halaya.  Wii,  la£lae  Qlegede  yaq!Eg-a£la.  Wa,  25 
la£lae  £nek'a:  "Weg'a  q!wag-Elis  qsns  lalag'i  na£nakwa  qaxs 
lE£maaq6s  baxus£idamas  gaxEn,"  £nex£lae.  Wa,  la£me  laLanEme 
Qlegede  laxeq.  Wii,  g-il£Eni-iawise  laeL  laxes  g  dkwaxs  lae  tslE_ 
klalElasa  aLanEinaxs  he£mae  la  mamEnsgEmax  £naxwa  wIwElxLa- 
las,   yixs  lae    tslEqEme£stala£yosa  g-fla  mowa.      Wii,  la-laeda   aLa-  ;;u 


748  ETHNOLOGY    OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  1eth.ann.3o 

31  The  wolves  |  had  taken  him  into  their  house,  and  put  together  the 
pieces  of  his  body.  |  Then  four  wolves  had  been  Rent  to  take  the  one  | 
leg  that  had  been  buried  by  the  tribe;  and  when  |  they"  had   come 

35  back  bringing  the  one  leg,  they  stuck  it  on  ||  where  it  had  been 
before;  and  after  they  had  done  so,  they  sprinkled  water  of  life  over 
him.  |  Then  Q!eged  had  come  back  to  life  after  that.  As  soon  as  | 
night  came,  they  bad  called  all  kinds  of  animals  |  to  come  and  see 
Nung"axta£ye,    the    £walas£axaaku,    that     night.  |  It    was    not    long 

40  before  the  four  men  ||  who  were  wolves  had  come  back.  They  had 
been  |  all  around  the  world,  and  it  was  not  long  before  |  all  kinds  of 
animals  had  come  into  the  large  house.  And  when  ;  all  were  in,  the 
song-leaders  had  beaten  time  on  the  |  time-beating  boards.     Then 

45  one  hundered  men  ||  with  wolf-head  fore-head-masks  had  conic  mil  of 
the  rear  of  the  house.  The  masks  were  made  like  the  heads  of  | 
wolves.  Then  they  had  gone  around  the  fire  in  the  middle  of  the 
house;  and  |  when  all  had  come  out,  the  song-leaders  had  sung 
four  |  songs.  And  alter  the  last  |  song  had  been  ended  by  the  song- 
leaders,  they  had  gone  back  into  the  sacred  room  on  which  was 

50  painted  ||  Gllalalit.  After  they  had  finished,  the  speaker  of  the 
house  had  spoken,  |  and  said,  "Are  you  watching,  J  friend  Qleged  ' 


31  nErne  laeLas  laxes  gokwe  qaes  lii  axodalax  wiwElx'Lalas.  Wa, 
g'axMae  eyalagEma  mowe  eaLanEm  qa  g'fixes  axEetsE£wa  apsotsi- 
dza£ye  g"5guyosxa  wunKintasK'wases  g-okul6te.  Wa,  g-il£Em£lawise 
la  aedaaqa  dag'ilqElaxa  apsotsidza£ye  g'ogtiyos  lae  k'.utlaLElodayo 

35  laxes  axalaase.  Wa,  g'll£Em£lawise  gwalExs  lae  xos£etsosa  qlula'sta 
£wapa.  Wa,  laEm£lae  q!ulax"£ide  Qlegede  laxeq.  Wa,  g'il£Em£la- 
wise  ganoMda  lae  qasasE£weda  cnaxwa  oguqlemas  gilg'aomas  qa 
g'fixes  x'itslax'ilax  Nung"axtaeye,  ylxs  ewalaseaxaakweLaxa  ganoLe. 
Wa,  k'!es£lat!a   galaxs  g'axae   aedaaqaxa  mokwe    la£naxwa   bebE- 

40  gwaiiKmxs  ai,aiu:in;niaaLal.  Wa,  laKiu-lae  £nek"Exs  laEmex'de 
la£stalisxEns  £nalax.  Wa,  k*!es£lat!a  galaxs  g'axae  hdgwei.Eleda 
£naxwa  oguqlemas  g'ilg'aemas,  laxa  Ewalase  g'okwa.  Wa,  g"ll£Em£la- 
wise  EwI£laeLa,  wa,  hex-£idaEm£lawise  LExEdzodeda  ne£nagadaxes 
LexEdzowe  saokwa.     Wa,  g*ax£lae  hox£wiilt !alileda  lakMEnde  heln- 

45  gwauF.m  x'Txesewfilaxa  x"Isewa£yexa  nanaxts !E£wa£max  x'omsasa 
aianEm.  Wa,  laEm£lae  la£stalllElaxa  laqawalllasa  g'okwe.  Wa, 
g-il£Em£lawise  £wl£l5lt lalila  lae  dEnx£ededa  ne£nagade.  Wa,  mos- 
gEm£laeda  qlEmqlEmdEmas.  \V;i,  k'  !es£Em£lawise  q  lulbeda  Elxi.a-'ve 
dKnx'eilavasa  nc;nagadaxs    lae    latslalil    laxa    mawile  k'  ladEdzalaxa 

.-,n  (iilalalit.  Wa,  laEm£lae  gwahi  laxeq.  Wa,  la£lae  yaq!Eg-a£le 
yayaqlEiilEinelasa  g"6kwe.  Wa,  la£lae  ;neka:  "Li:£mas  doqwalaa, 
qast,  Q'.egede.     LaEms  lal  LogwalaLExa  £walas£axaaku ;  wa,  he£misa 


BOAS]  BELIEFS    AND    CUSTOMS  749 

Now  you  will  obtain  the  Ewalas£axaaku  and  |  the  name  Nung'axta£ye.  53 
This  will  be  your  name,  and  yon  will  have  the  |  fire-bringer  and 
death-bringer.  You  shall  not  ||  stay  here  long,  only  until  the  end  55 
of  the  year.  Then  we  shall  j  take  you  home,  friend."  Thus  he  had 
said.  Thus  said  Qleged  while  he  was  telling  his  |  tribe  what  had 
happened.  Now  this  is  imitated  when  they  j  give  a  winter  dance, 
and  that  is  why  the  Awa£lLEla  own  the  £walas£axaaku.  |  That  is  the 
end  of  this.1  |l 

LegEinase  Nung-axta£ye.  Wa,  laEms  LegadElts.  Wa,  g-a£meseg-a  53 
xumtxiimtag'ilak'  halaya.  LaKmxaak-  lal  lax,  qast.  Wa,  k'lesLEs 
gala!  laqu.  Aeim.es  dzedzEkugwilal  yul  lox,  qast,  qEnu£xo  lal  55 
taodLos,  qast,"  £nex"£lae,  £nek-e  Qlegedaxs  lae  tslEk'laiElaxes 
g'okulote.  Wa,  a£mese  la  nanaxts !E£wax  gweg"i£lalasas  lae  yawi- 
x'Ela.  Wa,  heEm  lag'ilasa  Awa£iLEla  axnogwatsa  £walas£axaakwe. 
LaEm  laba  laxeq.' 

1  For  additional  beliefs  and  customs  see  Addenda,  p.  1331. 


VI.  SOCIAL  CUSTOMS 

Customs  Relating  to  Eating 

1  This  is  the  size  into  which  the  salmon  is  broken  when  a  chief- 
tainess  gives  to  eat  to  the  chief.  |  Into  larger  pieces  breaks  it  the 
wife  of  a  |  common  man.  | 

Distribution  of  Porpoise 

The  dorsal  fin  and  the  side-fins  of  the  porpoise  are  given  to  chiefs 
5  at  ||  great  feasts.     To  the  head  chief  is  given  |  the  chest  of  the  por- 
poise.    The  body  is  given  |  to    the  common  people.     That   is   all 
about  this.  | 

Distribution  of  Seal  ' 

The  hair-seal  also  teaches  the  common  people  their  place;  |  for 

10  chiefs  receive  the  chest .  and  ||  the  chiefs  next  in  rank  receive  the 

limbs.     They  only  give  pieces  of  the  body  of  the  |  seal  to  common 

people  of  the  tribes,  and  they  give  the  |  tail  of  the  seal  to  people 

Customs  Relating  to  Eating 

1  Wa,  heEin  kMopesa  m5dzllasa  g'Jgamaeyaxs  hamg'ilaaxa  bE- 
gwanEme.  Wa,  laLa  awiiwastowe  k"!opa£yasa  gEnEmasa  bEgwa- 
iiEinax'sala. 

Distribution  of  Porpoise 

Wa,  heEin  yaqlwemasa  g"Ig'Egama-ya  Liig-a5ye  LEEwa  basbEle  laxa 
5  Ewalase    sakwelaxa   k'!6lot!e.     Wa,    he£mis   yaqlwemasa   xamagE- 
ma£ye   g'Igama£ya    haq  Iwayasa    k'  !olot  !e.      Wa,    lii   yax£widayuwa 
ogwida£ye  laxa  bebEgwanEmq lalame.     Wa,  hi  Kin  gwal  laxeq. 

Distribution  of  Seal  ' 

Wa,  heEinxaeda    megwate.  q !oleaLElatsa  bEgiilIda£yaxes  awalox£- 

ttnase     qaeda    g"ig"Egama£yaxs     yagwadaasa     haqlwayowe     LEJwa 

10  LasLfda  laxa  g'iigEle.     Wa,  a£mese  la  yEyaqwax's£alayo  ogwida£yasa 

megwate  laxa  bEgulidaeyasa  lelqwalaLa£ye.     Wii,  la  yax£widayowe 

1  See  also  p.  544,  lines  2U6-209.  the  translation  of  which  is  as  follows:  Only  this  teaches  the  common 
people  their  low  position;  for  when  cinquefoil-roots  are  given  at  a  feast,  the  chiefs  receive  the  long 
cinquefoil-roots,  and  the  short  roots  are  given  to  (the  common  people);   for  chiefs  eat  the  long  cinque- 
foil-roots, and  all  the  common  pnople  eat  the  short  roots. 
750 


boas]  SOCIAL    CUSTOMS  751 

lowest  in  rank.     Therefore  |  trouble  often  follows  a  seal-feast  and  a  13 
least    of   short   and   long  |  cinquef oil-roots;  for   when    a    man    who 
gives  ||  a  seal-feast  with  many  seals  hales  another  man,  he  gives  him  15 
a  piece  of  blubber  from  the  body,  [  although  he  may  be  of  noble 
descent;  and   they  do   the  same  with   the  short  cinquefoil-roots.  | 
That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Feast  of  Currants 

As  soon  as  everything  has  been  brought  out  and  put  down,  (the 
woman)   sends   two  young  men  |  to   go   and   invite  her  husband's 
tribe.     They  go;  ||  and  after  they  have  gone  into  all  the  houses  of  the  20 
village,  they  come  back.     They  are  also  |  sent  to  draw  water:  and 
immediately  each  takes  a  |  large  water-bucket  in  each  hand,  and 
they  go  down  to  draw  water.     When  they  come  back,  they  pour  |  a 
little  into  each  dish  that  stands  on  the  floor.     When  the  buckets  are 
empty,  |  they  go  to  draw  more  water  in  the  same  four  large  ||  buck-  25 
ets.     When  they  come  back,  carrying  the  bucket  with  water  one  in 
each  hand,  |  the  two  water-carriers  are  told  to  put  down  the  buckets  | 
and  to  call  those  who  are  to  eat  the  currant  cakes.  |  They  go  into  all 
the  houses,  and  then  they  come  back  again;  and  when  |  they  come 
back,  the  two  young  men  who  act  as  messengers  are  told  to  ||  spread  30 
the  long  mats  around  the  house  in  which  the  currants  are  to  be  eaten.  | 

L!odzayoxsda£yasa    megwate    lax    bEkwaxa.     Wa,    he£mis    lag"ilas  12 
qlunala  xomatelasa  sakwelaxa    megwate   LE£wa    tteqwelaxa  t!Exu- 
sose     LE£wa    Laxapelaxa     Laxabillise     qaxs     giPmae    L!eL!asaleda 
sakwelaxa    qlenEme    megwata    qa£s  lasa  ogwidedzEse   xiidze    laxa  15 
wax"eEm    g'eqamena,    wa,     laxae     heEm     gwegilayowa    t!Exusose. 
Wa,  laEin  gwal  laxeq. 

Feast  of  Currants 

Wii,  g-iPmese  g'ax  £wl£la  gwax'gulIlExs  lae  £yalaqasa  ha£yaT"a 
ma'lokwa  qa  las  Le£lalax  gokulotases  hVwiinEme.  Wa,  laxda;xwe. 
Wa,  glPmese  EwIlxtolsaxa  gokuliixs  g-axae  aedaaqa.  Wa,  laxae  20 
eyalagEm  qa£s  la  tsax  ewapa.  Wa,  hex-£ida£mes§  £wax-sEnx£wulxa 
awawe  naEngatslii  qa£s  lit  tsex-£Idxa  £wape,  qa£s  g'axe  giixtslalasa 
holale  laxa  loElqlwaxs  lae  mExela.  WTii,  gib'mese  £wilgilts!aweda 
iiaEngatsIaxs  lae  et!edEX'da£xu  tsex'£ida  ylxaasa  mosgEme  awa 
naEngatsla.  Wa,  giPmese  g-ax  £wax-sEnkulaxa  £wabEts!ala  miEn- 25 
gatslexs  lae  axsE£weda  ma£lokwe  tsetsEyilgls,  qa£s  hanEmg-aliles, 
qa£s  lii  etse£staxa  t!Ext!aqLaxa  qledzEdzowe  tlEqa.  Wa,  gil'Km- 
xaawise  £wllxtolsaxa  gokuliixs  g-axae  aedaaqa.  Wa,  gil£mese 
g-ax  aedaaqeda  ma£loku  etse£stElg1s  ha£yal£axs  lae  &xk-!alaso£,  qa£s 
LEp lalllElesa  gllsg-ildEclzowe  le£wa£ya  lax  awr'stalllasa  t!Ext!agats!e-  30 


752  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  86 

32  Immediately  they  obey  the  order  of  the  |  host  who  is  about  to  give 
a  feast  of  currant  cakes.  When  this  is  done  they  really  |  go  to  call 
again.  Now  they  stay  longer  in  each  house  while  they  are  calling,  | 
and  some  of  the  guests  begin  to  conic  when  they  arc  called  this  time. 

35  After  they  have  gone  through  ||  the  whole  village,  they  go  back  again; 
and  now  the  two  messengers  |  take  the  tire-wood  and  put  it  on  the 
fire.  After  they  have  done  so,  |  they  are  sent  by  the  host  who  is 
about  to  give  the  currant-feast  to  [look  for  faces]  call  a  fourth  time.  | 
They  go  out,  enter  all  the  houses,  |  and  say  the  following  as  they  go 
in:  " [We  are]  looking  for  a  face,  [we  are]  looking  for  a  lace."     When 

40  they  find  a  ||  man  or  a  woman,  both  say  at  the  same  time,  |  "Wo, 
wo,  wo,  wo!  Get  up  and  go  to  the  feast!"  This  is  the  way  |  they 
speak  when  it  is  winter-dance  season;  l>ut  they  do  nol  say  this 
during  the  secular  summer  season,  for  in  summer  they  just  say, 
when  they  go  the  fourth  time  calling,  |  "We  come  back  to  call  you, 
the  only  one  (who  has  not  come  yet);"  and  they  just  stand  waiting 

45  for  the  one  for  whom  ||  they  went  to  get  ready;  and  when  he  finishes, 
the  |  messengers  go  hack  with  him.  When  they  come  in,  (it  is  seen 
that)  |  it  is  generally  the  son  (or  daughter)  of  a  chief  who  is  ashamed 
because  of  it.  |  As  soon  as  he  sits  down,  he  asks  the  song-leader  to  sing  | 
his  feast-song ;  (he  continues)  "for  it  is  obtained  by  me  because  my  child 

50  ditl  not  come  earlier."  ||  Thus  speaks  the  one  who  has  been  called  last ; 

31  Laxa  q ledzEdzowe gokwa.  Wii,  hex,£idaemese nanagegex waldEmasa 
qleselaLaxa  qledzEdzowe  tlEqa.  Wii,  g'tPmese  gwabsxs  lae  alak" 
etse£sta.  Wii,  la£me  gageg"illlEla  lax  g'ig'okwases  etseestasE£we. 
Wii,  hr'me  g'iixaniEnqule   etse£stasE£was.     Wa,  gil£mese  labElsaxa 

35  goxudEmsaxs  g'iixae  aedaaqa.  Wa, lax,daexU£meda  ma£lokwe  etse- 
£stElg-is  ax£edxa  lEqwa  qa£s  lEqwelax'£ide.  Wii,  g'il£mese  gwalExs 
lae  £yalagEinsa  qleselaLaxa  qledzEdzowe  tlEqa,  qa£s  lil  dadoquma. 
Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  lax*da£xwa,  qa£s  lii  laLlESEla  laxa  gokula. 
Wa,  he£me  la  waldEmxtE£wese  "daddqumai'."     Wa,  gil£mese  q!axa 

40  £nEmokwe  bEgwanEma  Lo£ma  tslEdaqe,  lae  £nEmax-£Id  £nek*a: 
"Wo,  wo,  wo,  wo!  Lax£wld  cpx£s  laos  k!wela."  Wii,  heEm  gwe- 
k"!alatsexs  ts!ets!eqae.  Wii,  lii  k-!es  he  gwek'liilaxs  baxusaaxa 
heEnxe,  yixs  a£mae  £nex#xa  heEiixaxs  lae  mop!ene£sta  etse£sta: 
"G'axniEnu£xu    '"iiEnqEma    etse'"stoL."      Wii,    lii   aEin   i.axwemlLxes 

45  etse£stanEmaxs  lae  xwanal'lda.  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs  gaxaeda 
etse£stElg-fse  qaqElaxes  etse£stanEme.  Wa,  gil'"mese  £wi£laeLExs 
lae  qlunala  miix-ts!eda  alexe  etse£stanEmxs  naxsalae  bEk!wena£yas. 
Wa,  g'Il£mese  k!wag"alllExs  lae  axk'ialaxa  nagade,  qa  dEnx£e- 
desesa  klwelayalayowa  q!EmdEms,  "qa  gwaiiEinsEn  genet !ena£ye," 

50  £nek'a  alElxsda£ye  etse£stanEma.     Wii,  hex£ida£mese  dEivx£edayowe 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  753 

and  immediately  they  sing  his  |  feast-song.     When  the  guests  stop  51 
singing,  |  he  calls  a  speaker  from  his  own  numaym,  |  who  can  speak 
well;  and  as  soon  as  the  speaker  arrives,  the  one  who  came  late  tells 
the  one  whom  he  called  |  to  promise  a  feast,  and  to  say  that  he  will  || 
sell  a  canoe  for  it;  for  generally  the}'  say  that  they  will  sell  a  canoe,  55 
and  this  is  the  way  they  do  in  summer.  |  It  is  somewhat  different 
during  the  winter-dancing  season,  when  the  messengers  go  back  to 
look  for  those  who  have  |  not  come  in  yet  before  the  cannibal  dancers 
and  the  Seal  Society  come  in ;  and  if  |  the}'  do  not  find  the  one  whom 
they  want,  and  particularly  a   (chief's)   beloved  daughter,  |  if  she 
stays  away  too  long  and  does  not  come  home,  then  they  give  up 
waiting,  ||  and  they  just  go  and  call  the  cannibal  dancer  and  the  Seal  60 
Society,  j  As  soon  as  they  come  in  and  sit  down  in  the  rear  of  the 
house  where  the  cakes  of  currants  |  are  to  be  eaten,  after  making  a 
speech  in  praise  of  them,   (the  messengers)  |  go  out  of  the  house. 
Then  he  sees  the  one  for  whom  they  went,  |  and  who  has  arrived  on 
the  beach  after  having  paddled.     Then  they  go  back  into  the  house, 
and  ||  tell  the  host  that  the  one  whom  they  could  not  find  has  arrived.  |  65 
Then  at  once  she  is  called  in  by  the  two  [  messengers;  and  when  they 
come  to  the  one  whom  they  are  calling,  the  two  |  messengers  say, 
"Only  you  have  been  awaited!     Come!     We  have  been  |  sent  for 
you  by  the  host  to  bring  you  in."     Thus  they  say  ||  to  her.     Then  70 
she  puts  on  a  good  blanket,  and,  |  after  doing  so,  she  walks  among 


klwelayalayas    qtemdEma.     Wa,    gil£mese    q!wel£ideda    k!welalaxs  51 
lae  Le£lalaxa  egilwate  lax  yaq tent lalaxa  Elkwe  g'ayol  lax  £nE£me- 
motas.     Wa,  giPmese  g'fixa  laeda   genete   laxes   Le£lalasE£we,  qa£s 
axk'lalaq,  qa  qasowes  hamaxasa  xwakluna,  qaxs  he£mae  qiunala 
Lex£etso£sa  qasowe.     Wii,  heEm  gweg'ilasxa  heEnxe.     Wa,  gil£mese  55 
ts!ets!eqaxs    lae    aogu£qela,    yixs    lae    dadoqumeda    etse£sta,    yixs 
k'!es£mae  g'ax  hogwlLa  haamatsla    LE£wa    meEmgwate.     Wa,  gil- 
£mese  k'!es    q!axa  lElwegEme    la£wene   tslEdaqa,  yixs   laasnokwae. 
Wii,  g-il£mese   xEULEla   gala    k'  !es   g'ax   na£nakuxs   lae   pEX'Idaya. 
Wa,  a£mise  la  etse£stasE£weda  haamatsia  LE£wa  meEmgwate.     Wa,  60 
gil£mese  g"ax  hogwlLaxs  lae    k!us£a,llla   laxa  nEcjewalllasa  c[!esq!a- 
dzatsleLaxa  c|!edzEdzowe  tlEqa.     Wa,  g'lPmese  gwala  tslEhvaqaqes 
laas  lawElse  laxa  g'okwe.     Wa,  la  dox£\vaLElaxa  vale  etse£staso£xs 
g'axae    g"ax£alisax    sex£wklEX'de.     Wa,  la  edeLa   laxa   g'Qkwe  qa£s 
la   nenlElaxa  klwelasaxs    g'ax£mae    na£nakwa    la  £yag'ils    etse£sta-  65 
sE£wa.     Wa,  hex'eida£mese  la  etse£staso£sa  eetse£stElgise  ma£lokwa. 
Wa,  g  il£mese  lag'aa  laxes  etse£stasE£waxs  lae  £nex-da£xweda  ma£lo- 
kwe  eetse£stElg"isa:  "AEmsla  ets!eltsE£wa.     Gelaga,  g-ax£mEnu£xu 
niEnqEma  eyalagEmsa  klwelase,  qEnu£xu  g-axe  etse£stoL,"  £nex'da£- 
xweq.     Wa,  hex-£idaJmese  la  ax£edxes  eke  nEx£iina£ya  qa£s  iiEX£un-  70 
des.      Wa,    g-il£mese     gwalExs     lae    qagexa     etse£stanEinaq.     Wa, 
75052—21—35  eth — pt  1 -48 


754  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

72  those  who  are  calling  her.  |  The  two  messengers  go  in  first;  and  as 
soon  as  they  enter  |  the  door  of  the  feast-house,  they  say,  |  "Look  at 
her!     She  has  arrived  now."     And  as  soon  as  the  woman  walks  in,  || 

75  the  guests  all  shout,  and  say,  "You  have  been  called,  you  have  been 
called  in!"  The  |  woman  goes  in  and  stands  in  the  rear  of  the  house, 
just  I  outside  of  the  feasters,  between  them  and  the  fire  in  the  middle 
of  the  house;  |  and  at  once  her  father  gets  up  and  tells  the  song- 
leader  to  I  sing  his  daughter's  song.     Then  the  guests  begin  to  sing,  || 

SO  and  the  woman  begins  to  dance;  and  as  soon  as  the  |  singing  stops, 
the  woman  sits  down  among  the  women  to  whom  she  belongs,  |  and 
her  father  promises  a  feast  to  his  tribe.  | 

Huckleberry  Feast 

1  When  this  has  been  done,1  the  husband  and  the  wife  get  the  | 
huckleberry-dishes  and  spoons,  |  and  put  them  down  at  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  door  of  the  house  in  which  huckleberries  are  to  be 

5  eaten  and  also  oil.  |  The  woman  puts  them  down,  while  ||  the 
husband  clears  out  the  house,  and  he  |  spreads  the  mats  for  the 
huckleberry-eaters  to  sit  down  on.  |  As  soon  as  he  has  done  so,  he 
calls  his  tribe  to  come  in  to  |  eat  huckleberries;  and  as  soon  as  he  has 
been  to  all  the  houses,  |  he  goes  back  again ;  and  now  two  young  men 

72  he£mis  g'Slag'iwa£yeda  ma£lokwe  eetse£stElg'isa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  laeL- 
da£xu  laxa  tlex'flasa  k!weladzats!e  g'okwa,  lae  £iiEmax'£Id  £nek'a: 
"Wag'a,  doqwalalag'ax£Emga."     Wa, g"ilemese laeLeda  tslEdaqaxs, 

75  lae  £naxwa£ma  klwele  £nek'a:  "Genet,  genet,  genet."  Wa,  a£meseda 
tslEdaqe  qasa,  qa£s  la  Liix£ulll  laxa  ogwiwalllasa  g'okwe,  lax 
Uasahlasa  klwele  lax  awagawalilas  i.E£wa  laqwawallle.  Wa, 
hex'£ida£mese  ompas  Lax£idlla,  qa£s  wiixexa  nenagade,  qa- 
dEnx£edeses    qlEmdEmases    xunokwe.     Wa,    hex'£ida£mese    dEnx£e- 

80  deda  klwele.  Wa,  la  yEx£wldeda  tslEdaqe.  Wa,  g-il£mese  q!we 
l£ldeda  dEnxElaxs  lae  klwaqeda  tslEdaqaxes  ts!Edaqwtite.  Wa, 
la£me  qasowe  ompas  cpaes  g'okulote. 

Huckleberry   Feast 

1  Wa,  gil£mese  gwalExs1  lae  hogwlLeda  ha£yasEk'ala  qa£s  la  k"!E- 
nEmg'alilaxes  gwatgudats!eLe  loElq'.wa;  wa,  he£misa  kak'EtslEnaqe 
cja£s  g-axe  mEx£alilElas  lax  gEmxdtstolilases  gwatelatsleLe  g'okwa. 
Wa,  he£misa  L!e£na.     Wa,   he£meda  tslEdaqe  g-ax  ax£alIlElas,  yixs 

5  la'aLes  hVwunEme  ekwaxes  gwatelatsleLe  g'okwa.  Wa,  lfixae 
LEp lalllElasa  leElwa£ye  qa  klwadzoltses  gwatelagiLaxa  gwadEme. 
Wa,  g'il£mese  gwab'alllExs  lae  Le£lalaxes  g'okulote,  qa  g'axes  gii- 
gwadEmg'Exa  gwadEme.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wllxtolsaxa  g'okfllaxs 
rr'&x&e    aedaaqa.      Wa,   laEin    gax    liig'aya    g'ayole    lax    £nE£me- 

'When  the  berries  have  been  cleaned.    Continued  from  p.  5Sl,llne34. 


boas]  SOCIAL    CUSTOMS  755 

who  belong  to  his  numaym  come  with  him.  ||  When  he  invites  to  the  10 
huckleberry  feast,  he  says,  |  when  he  first  invites  the  tribe,  "I  invite 
you  to  |  come  and  eat  the  huckleberries  of  Breakfast-Food-Giver." 
Then  he  sends  the  two  |  young  men  to  call  again;  and  they  say, 
"We  come  to  call  you  again  |  to  eat  the  huckleberries  of  Breakfast- 
Food-Giver;"  for  this  name  belongs  to  the  huckleberry  feast  ||  when  15 
they  are  given  at  a  feast  to  many  tribes.     They  have  to  call  |  four 
times  for  a  huckleberry  feast.     When  |  the  people  come  in,  the  host 
who  gives  the  huckleberries  at  once  gets  ready,  |  and  at  the  same 
time  the  guests  begin  to  sing  the  songs.  |  Then  they  put  the  huckle- 
berries into  the  dishes,  so  that  they  are  half  full.  II  They  take  oil  and  20 
pour  it  over  them,  so  that  it  is  one  |  half  huckleberries  and  one  half 
oil.     After  doing  so,  |  they  distribute  the  spoons;  and  when  every 
one  has  his  spoon,   they  put  the  |  huckleberry-dishes  one  each  in 
front  of  six  men;  |  and  after  they  have  been  put  down,  they  ||  all  eat  25 
with  their  spoons,  and  they  eat  the  huckleberries  covered  |  with  oil; 
and  they  do  not  stop  until  they  have  eaten  all  the  huckleberries  |  and 
oil.     After  they  have  been  eaten,  they  all  go  |  out  of  the  house.  | 

Viburnum-Berry  Feast 

Now  I  shall  talk  about  viburnum-berries,  which  are  given  at  a  l 
feast,  |  for  this  feast  is  next  in  greatness  to  the  oil  feast,  |  which  is 

motasxa     ma£lokwe     ha£yal£a.     Wii,     he£mis     waklEmsa     gwatela-  10 
Laxa  gwadEmaxs  g'fdae  la  Le£lalaxes  g'okulote:   "Le£lalEiiLoL,  qa£s 
layos  gwatgut  lax  GamolsElas."     Wa,  lii  £yalaqasa  ma£lokwe  ha£y&- 
i£a  qa  las  etse£sta.     Wa,  lii    £nek'a:    "  La£nii:nirxu  etse£staai  qaEns, 
gwatgiidasLe  GamolsElas,"  qaxs  he£mae  g-ega£ya  gwadEinaxa  Legad- 
g-Ile  khveladzEina  laxa  q!enEme  lelqwalaLa£ya.     Wa,  laxae  moplE-  15 
ne£sta  etse£stasE£weda  gvvatgutLaxa  gwadEme,     Wa,  gil£mese    g-5x 
£w!laeLExs  lae  hex,eida    xwanal£Ideda    gwatelaLaxa  gwadEme,  yixs 
laaLal    dEnxElasa    klwelayalayowa    gwatgutLaxa  gwadEme.      Wa, 
la£me    k!ats!alasa  gwadEme    laxa  l6Elq!we,    qa    naEtigoyoxsdales. 
Wa,  lii  ax£edxa  L!e£na,  qa="s  klungiLEyindes  laq.     Wa,  la£me  nax-  20 
saap!cda  gwadEme  LE£wa  L!e'"na.     Wa,  gil£mese  gwiilExs  lae    ts!E- 
wanaedzEma   k"akEts!Enaqe.     Wa,  g"il£mese   wilxtoxs  lae  k'aedzE- 
ma  gwegwatgudats  !e  loElqlwa  laxa  q!eq  lELokwe  bebEgwanEm  laxa 
£niil£nEmexLa    loqhva.      Wa,   gil£mese   £wIlg-alilExs  lae  hex,£idaEm 
£naxwa  £yos£Itses  k-ak-Ets!Enaqe,    qa£s    gwatgut  !edexa    t!Ep!EgEh"-  25 
saxa  L!e£na  gwadEina.     Wii,  ah'mese  gwalExs  lae  £wl£laxa  gwadEme 
LE£wa  L!e£na.     Wa,  gil£mese  £wl£laqexs  lae  hex,£idaEm  la  £wi£la  li5- 
qiiwElsa. 

Viburnum-Berry  Feast 

Wii,    la'mesEn    g\vagwex'sEX,£IdEl    laxa    ttelsaxs  lae    tlElseleda  1 
t!Elyadasa  tfelse,  yixs  he£mae  makllaxa  L!§£nag"ilaxa  L!e£naxs  £wa- 


756  ETHNOLOGY    OF    THE    KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ANN.  35 

the  greatest  feast  given  to  many  tribes.  Next  to  the  |  viburnum- 
5  berry  feast  is  the  seal  feast,  which  is  given  to  many  tribes.  ||  These  are 
put  into  house-dishes,  the  killer-whale  |  dish,  hair-seal  dish,  whale 
dish,  sea-lion  dish,  |  beaver  dish,  grizzly-bear  dish,  wolf  dish,  and  | 
Dzo'noq  !wa  dish,  and  also  into  the  double-headed  |  serpent  dish. 
These  which  I  name  are  the  dishes  out  of  which  the}'  eat  at  great 

10  feasts,  ||  and  belong  to  the  various  numayms  of  the  different  tribes. 
When  they  have  a  winter  dance  in  winter,  they  come  together  to 
have  a  great  dance,  |  all  the  tribes.  They  are  invited  by  the  one  who 
is  going  |  to  give  a  viburnum-berry  feast.  When  they  go  the  first 
time  to  invite,  |  they  put  down  all  the  berry -boxes  on  the  left-hand 

15  side  of  the  door  of  the  II  f easting-house  inside,  and  also  oil-boxes. 
Generally  |  there  are  two  boxes  full  of  oil  to  be  poured  into  ten 
boxes  |  of  viburnum-berries,  when  these  are  given  at  a  feast.  There 
are  also  the  various  kinds  of  house-dishes.  |  There  are  always  four 

20  kinds.  These  are  |  left  outside  the  feasting-house.  The  II  small 
long  dishes  for  feasting  are  placed  behind  the  boxes  containing  the 
berries  and  the  |  oil-boxes,  and  the  spoon-baskets  are  also  |  put 
where  the  small  dishes  are.  Mats  are  then  spread  all  round  the 
house  |  for  the  guests  who  are  to  eat  the  viburnum-berries  to  sit 
down  on  when  they  come.  When  |  those  who  are  to  eat  the 
viburnum-berries  have  come  in,  after  having  been  called  four  times,  || 

3  lasae  klweladzEma  laxa  qleiiEme  lelqwalaLa£ya.  Wa,  he£me  gwasa 
tlElsa  megwatelaxa  megwataxs  sakwelag'ilaeda  q!eiiEme  lelqwala- 
5  La£ya.  Wii,  ha£staEm  lExuts!oyo  laxa  leloqulilexa  max£enoxwe 
loqullla  LE£wa  megwate,  LE£wa  gwE£ymie,  LE£wa  iJexEne  loqulll 
LEwa  tslawe  loqullla,  LE£wa  nane,  LE£wa  aLanEme  loqulila,  LE£wa 
dEndELagesE£we  dzonoq!wa  loqullla;  wa,  he£misLeda  £wax-sgEmlIle 
sIsEyoLa.      Wa,  ha£staEm    ha£maats!exEn    la    LeLEqElasE£wa   laxa 

10  axnogwadas  laxa  £nal£nE£memasasa  oguxsEmakwe  lelqwalaLa£ya. 
Wa,  he£maaxs  lae  ts!ets!eqa  la  tslawunxa,  lae  ts!Ets!aqEweda 
LelElaxa  £naxwa  lelqwalaLa£ya.  Wa,  la  Le£lalasE£wa  yisa  tlElsela- 
Laxa  t!Else.  Wa,  g-il£mese  la  g'aleda  g-ale£sta  Le£lalaxs  g'iixae 
mEx£alllElayEwa  t!et!Elyats!e   laxa  gEmxotstalI£las  tlEx'ilasa  tlEls- 

15  t!ayats!eLe  g'okwa;  wa,  he£misa  dedEiigwatsle  L!e£naxs  q!u- 
nalae  ma£ltsEma  dedEiigwatsle  L!e£naxs  klungEmaxsesa  nEqasgEine 
t!et!Elyats!eye  klweladzEmasa  bEgwanEme.  Wa,  he£misa  loqull- 
laxs  hemEnalae  mowexLa  laxes  gwegwex'sdEme.  Wa,  heEm 
mEXEsa    L!asana£yasa  t!Elst!ayats!eLe  g'okwa.     Wa,   he£misLa  £wl- 

20  £la  mExolIla  leloguma  aLalllasa  t!et!Elyats!e  LE£wa  dedEiigwatsle 
L!e£na;  wa,  he£misa  kek-ayats!e  g-ax  hax'hanela  lax  memExoli£- 
lasasa  lelSgiinie,  yixs  lE£maaxat!  LEpse£stalekwa  g'okwasa  l§Elwa£ye 
qa  kludzEdzEwIltsoltsa  tlElstlasLaxa  tlElse.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl£- 
laeLeda  t!Elst!asLaxs  lae  mop!Ene£sta  etse£stasE£wa,  la  hex-£idaEm 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  757 

they  sing  the  great  feasting-songs,   and  |  all  the  members  of  the  2.5 
nurnaym  of  the  host  sit  down  together.     After  |  singing,  the  mem- 
bers of  the  nurnaym  of  the  host  get  up.  |  The  young  men  go  out  of 
the  house  and  take  hold  of  the  four  house-dishes,  |  which  they  bring 
in.     They  put  them  down  all  heading  to  the  rear  of  the  feasting- 
house.  ||  They  take  hold  of  each  corner  of  a  berry-box  and  pour  |  the  30 
viburnum-berries  into  the  house-dishes.     Then  they  go  and  |  pour 
one  box  of  berries  into  each  of  the  house-dishes;  and  as  soon  as  this 
has  been  done,  |  they  take  the  small  f easting-dishes  and  put  them 
on  the  edge  of  the  other  berry-box.  |  They  take  a  long-handled  ladle 
and  dip  it  into  the  berries.  ||  When  it  is  full,  they  empty  it  into  each  35 
one  of  the  small  dishes;  |  and  when   the  viburnum-berries  are  in 
them,   they  put  the  dishes  on   the  floor,  just  behind   the  |  house- 
dishes.     Generally  they  do  not  touch  two  of  the  berry-boxes,  |  and 
they  give  large  spoons  to  the  chiefs  of  the  guests  who  have  been 
invited  to  eat  viburnum-berries.  |  When  the  berries  have  been  put 
into  the  small  dishes,  they  pour  much  ||  od  over  them.     They  take  a  40 
long-handled  ladle,  dip  it  |  into  the  oil,  and  rill  it.     Then  they  pour 
the  oil  over  the  berries  in  the  house-dish.  |  They  also  take  one  ladleful 
of  oil,  which  they  |  pour  into  each  of  the  house-dishes.     After  this 
has  been  done,  |  the  speaker  of  the  host  stands  up  and  speaks.  ||  He  45 
asks  the  chiefs  of  all  the  tribes  to  take  care  |  and  to  try  to  eat  all  the 

dEnx£Itsa  £walayalayo  mEn£lala  qlEmdEma.  Wa,  a£mese  k!usala  25 
£n§xweda  £nE£memotasa  ttelsElaxa  t!Else.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwal 
dEnxElaxs  lae  qlwalex'Elfle  £nE£memotasa  tlElselaxa  t!Else.  Wa, 
la£me  hoqiiwElseda  ha£yal£a,  qa£s  la  dadEbEndxa  mEwexLa  leloqulila, 
qa£s  gaxe  mEX£alIlElas  gwegwegEmala  lax  ogwiwalllasa  t!Elst!aya- 
tsleLe  g'okwa.  Wa,  la  dadanodxa  tlElyats'.e,  qa£s  lii  guqasasa  30 
tlElse  laxa  ISqulile.  Wa,  lax"da£xu£me  £nal£nEmsgEm  t!Elyats!e 
giiqadzEmas  laxa  £nal£nEmexLa  leloqulila.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalExs 
lae  ax£edxa  lElogume  qa£s  la  hang'agEnts  laxa  waSkwe  t!et!El- 
yats!a.  Wa,  la  ax£etsE£weda  tsexLa,  qa£s  la  tsestano  laxa  tlElse. 
Wa,  la  £nal£nEmexLa  qoqut!a  laxa  £nal£nEmexLa  lEloguma.  35 
Wa,  gIPmese  la  t!Elts!alaxa  ttelsaxs  lae  mEx£alllElayo  lax  aLalllasa 
loElqulile.  Wa,  la  heniEnalaEm  k'!es  Labalaxa  ma£ltsEme  t!et!F.lya- 
ts!a,  qa£s  tleqiilalxa  g'Ig'Egama£yases  tlElselagilaxa  t!Else.  Wa, 
g-il£mese  £wiwElts!Ewakweda  lElogiimaxs  lae  k!miq!Eqasa  q!enEme 
L!e£na  laq.  Wa,  la  ax£edEx-da£xuxa  £walase  tsexLa,  qa£s  tsex,£Ides  40 
laxa  L!e£na,  qa  qot!esexs  lae  giiqlEqas  laxa  loqidlltslala  tlElsa. 
Wa,  laEmxae  £nal£nEinexLeda  tsexLa  qoqutla  laxa  i.!e£naxs  lae 
giiqlEgEm  laxa  £nal£nEmexLa  loqullla.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwalExs  lae 
Lax£iillle  Elkwasa  t!Elst!ayasaxa  tlElse,  qa£s  yaq!Eg-a£le.  Wii,  laEin 
£nex"  qa  weg'es  yaL!Ewlla  gIg"Eg8ma£yasa  £wI£WElsgEinakwe lelqwa-  45 


758  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Leth.  ANN.  36 

47  viburnum-berries  in  the  house-dishes.  |  He  calls  the  young  men  of 
his  numaym  to  carry  the  |  house-dishes  and  to  put  them  down  in 
front  of  the  tribe  first  in  rank  of  those  who  are  to  eat  the  berries. 

50  Then  |  the  young  men  arise  and  take  off  their  ||  blankets,  for  they 
do  not  want  to  have  them  in  the  way  if  they  should  get  twisted 
around  their  feet  |  when  they  lift  the  house-dishes.  As  soon  as  the 
blankets  are  off,  |  one  of  them,  the  oldest  one,  speaks,  and  tells  |  the 
young  men  to  take  hold  of  each  end  |  of  the  house-dishes;  and 
they  all  go  and  take  hold  of  each  end,  and  others  take  hold  of  the 

55  sides.  Then  ||  the  eldest  one  shouts  while  lie  is  standing  in  the  house, 
"  Wooye!"  |  and  the  young  men  also  cry  all  at  the  same  time, 
"Wooye!"  |  After  they  have  done  so  four  times,  they  lift  the  house- 
dish  and  |  put  it  down  in  front  of  the  tribe  highest  in  rank  among 
the  tribes.     These  are  the  Mamaleleqala;  |  that  is,  if  the  Kwag'ul 

60  give  the  viburnum-berry  feast.  ||  Then  the  oldest  one  of  the  young 
men  follows  them;  and  as  soon  as  they  put  the  dish  down  in  front 
of  the  guests,  he  says,  |  "This  dish  is  for  you,  Mamaleleqala,  for  two 
of  you,  also  for  the  Qwequsot!enoxu ."  |  Then  they  shout  as  they  did 
before,  "Wooye!"  for  the  dish  which  they  give  to  the  Nimkish  |  and 
Lawets  !es.  There  are  again  two  (tribes),  and  they  receive  one  house- 
dish.    Then  they  go  to  the  |  other  house-dish  and  they  cry  "  Wooye  !" 

65  and  they  put  it  down  before  the  Maamtag'ila  ||  and  Gwawaenox". 


46  laLa£ya,  qa£s  giinx£Idel  £wa£wilaalxa  ttelse  g'etslaxa  ISElqiilile. 
Wa,  la  Le£lalaxa  ha£yalJases  £nE£memote,  qa  lalag-Is  k'ax'dzamotsa 
loElqulite  laxa  niEkwetEma£yasa  t!Elst!asLaxa  tlElse.  Wa,  he£mis 
la  q  Iwagilllatsa  ha£yiil£a.      Wa,    laEm     £naxwa    xanEmgalilElaxes 

50  £naEnx£ii£na£ye,  qaxs  gwaqtelae  aodzEk'Ialaq  qo  x'ilpseslax  laqexs 
lae  wig'ElIlaxa  loElqiillle.  Wa,  g'iPmese  £niixwa  la  xaxEnalaxs 
lae.  yaq  !Ega£leda  £nEmokwe  lax  q  !ulyak!uga£yas.  Wa,  la£me  waxaxa 
ha£yal£a  qa  weg'Is  dadEbEndxa  loqttllle.  Wa,  lii  £naxvva  dadE- 
bEndeda  ha£yal£aq.     Wa,  laxae  dedag'aga£yeda  waokwaci.     Wa,  he- 

55  £mis  la  £neg-atsa  q!ulyak!flgayasex  a£mae  Lawlla:  "Wooye!"  Wa, 
la  £naxwa  £neg'aba£ya  ha£yal£a  £nEmadzaqwa:  "Wooye!".  Wa, 
het'.ala  mop!Endzaq\va  wooyexaxs  lae  weg-ililaxa  loqiillle  qa£s  lit 
hanxclzamolllas  laxa  niEkuma£yasa  lelqwalaLa£yexa  Mamaleleqala, 
yixs  Kwag'ulaeda  t!Elst!a£yasaxa  t!Else.     Wii,  la    lasgEme  q  !ulya- 

60  k!iiga£yasa  ha£yal£a,  wii,  gl^mese  hanx'dzamoliLEma  lae  £neka: 
"Loqulas  Mamaleleqala  mfi£ltaLEs  lo£  Qwequs6t!enoxwe".  Wa,  la 
et!ed  heEm  gwek-!alaxs  wooyexae,  qa  loqulas  £nEmgese  lo£  Lawe- 
ts !esaxs  ma£ltae  LE£we  laxa  £nEmexLa  loqiillla.  Wa,  lii  et!etsa 
£nEmexLa  loqfdlla  wooyexaxs  lae  k'ax'dzamolllas  lax  Maamtag'ila 

65  l5£  Gwawaenoxwe.     Wa,  la  etletsa  ElxLa£ye  wooyexaxs  lae  kax- 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  759 

And  with  the  last  they  shout  again,  "Wooye!"  and  they  |  put  the  66 
dish  down  in  front  of  the  DzawadEenox"  and  Haxwamis.     Then  | 
all  the  house-dishes  have  been  put  down,  and  the  young  men  take 
up  the  small  dishes  |  and  put  these  one  in  front  of  each  four  of  the 
men,   |  and   the  larger  ones  each  in  front  of  six  men.     As  soon  as  || 
they  put  down  all  of  them,  the  speaker  of  the  host  who  is  giving  the  70 
viburnum-berry   feast   stands   up  and    tells   them  to  |  start  in  and 
eat  the  viburnum-berries;  and  immediately  the  |  chiefs  of  each  two 
tribes  stand  up  from  their  seats.     They  leave  their  |  blankets  on  the 
ground  in  their  seats,  for  they  leave  them  there  |  where  they  were 
sitting,  and  they  go  and  sit  around  the  house-dishes  ||  which  contain  75 
the  viburnum-berries;  and  they  eat  with  their  spoons,  for  the  food 
has  already  been  given  to  them;  |  and  the  common  people  also  eat 
with  their  spoons  |  out  of  their  small  dishes;  and  as  soon  as  they 
have  eaten,  |  the  speaker  of  the  host' who  gives  the  berry-feast  speaks, 
and  tells  |  the  members  of  his  numaym  to  gather  in  the  house  and 
to  sing  the  feasting-song.  ||  Then  the  child  of  the  host  stands  out  in  80 
front  of  them;  and  |  when   the  members  of  the  numaym  sing  the 
song,    his    daughter    dances;  |  and    when    they    have    sung    one- 
half  of  the  song,  the  guests  j  shout,  "Woosqu!"     They  shout  all  at 
the  same  time,  "  Woosq"!"     Then  |  two  men,  the  nearest  relatives  of 
the  host,  take  ||  each  one  large  long-handled  ladle  and  carry  it  on  85 
their  shoulders,  |  dancing  a  little  while.     After  doing  so,  they  go  | 
and  dip  the  ladle  into  the  box  which  has  not  been  touched.     As  soon 


dzamolllas    lax    DzawadEenoxwe    LEEwa    Haxwamise.      Wa,    laEin  66 
£wllg'allla  loElqidllaxs  lae  £naxwa£ma    ha£yal£a   k'lk-ag'illlaxa   IoeI- 
giime,  qa£s    lii    k'ax'dzamolilElas    laxa    maemokwe    bebEgwanEina 
l5xs    q!eq!ai>aeda     waokwaxa    awawe    loElguma.       Wa,    giPmese 
£wilg'al!lExs  lae  Lfix-'uhle  Elkwasa  t!Elst!ayasaxa  ttelse,  qa£s  wiixexa  70 
t!Elst!asLaxa    tlElse,    qa     wages    t!Elst!as£Ida.     Wa,  hex-£idasmesa 
g'Ig'Egama;yasa   maemaltsEmakwe   q!wagillla    laxes     k-  lets !ena£ye 
£naEnx£unalaxes     naEnx£una£ye,    ylxs    a£mae     xixilgelalaq     laxes 
kludzelasde,   qa£s   lii    k!iisagElllaxes    loqula    t!et!Elsts!ala    loElqulI- 
laxs    lae    £yos£itses    k'ak'!Ets!Enaqe,    qaxs     la£mex-de    tslswanae-  75 
dzEm  laq.      Wa,  laxaeda  bebEgulkla£yas  ogwaqa  £yoseItses  k'ak-E- 
tslEnaqe   hixes    leloqfdeda    loElgtime.     Wa,  g'iPmese    JyosJida,  laas 
yaq!Eg'aEle    Elkwiisa    ttelstlayasaxa    t!Else.      Wa,    lai<:m    waxaxes 
£nE£memote,    cpi     q!ap  legible,    qaes     k!wamelale     dEnxEla.      Wa, 
he£mis  la  L!asgiliJlats   xiinokwasa  t!Elst!ayasaxa  ttelse.     Wa,  g"Il-  80 
Jmese    dEiix£ide    £nEEmemotasexs    lae    ylx£wide   tslEdaqe    xun5xus. 
Wa,   g11£mese   nExsEmallla   yixwilxs   lae  woosq11,  mek'eda  ttelstla- 
saxa  t!Else.     Wa,   la£me  £nEmatlzaqwa  woosqwaxa.     Wi'i,  he£mis  la 
dax-£idaatsa    ma£lokwe    max-mEg'll    LeLELaliisa   tlElseliixa  tlElsaxa 
malmEine    awa,    g'ilsgiltlEXLfda     tsetsexLa,    qaEs    wekileqexs    lae  85 
yawas'ld    yEx-wIde.     Wa,    gIPmese     gwalExs    hie    qas£IdEx"da£xu, 


760  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

S7  as  I  the  ladles  are  full,  they  go  to  stand  in  front  of  a  |  chief,  of  one 
90  who  belongs  to  the  Mamaleleqfila,  and  the  other  one  ||  in  front  of  one 
who  belongs  to  the  Qwequsot!enoxu;  and  they  say  when  they  give 
them  I  to  them,  "Now,  chief,  draw  in  your  breath!"  Then  the  one 
to  whom  it  is  given  stands  up,  |  takes  the  spoon,  and  drinks  the  juice 
of  the  berries;  |  and  when  he  has  had  enough,  he  pours  what  is  left 
over  into  the  house-dish,  |  while  the  daughter  of  the  host  is  still 
95  dancing.  ||  The  two  men  continue  doing  this  with  the  two  |  long- 
handled  ladles;  and  when  the  boxes  are  empty,  they  stop.  Then  the 
guests  go  out  I  when  this  is  finished.  When  those  who  have  eaten 
the  viburnum-berries  go  out,  |  then  the  members  of  the  numaym 
take  the  house-dishes  that  have  been  given  |  to  the  head  chiefs  of  the 
100  various  tribes,  ||  and  they  divide  (the  contents  of  each  between)  the 
chiefs  of  the  tribes  that  have  been  eating  together;  and  when  |  all 
the  small  dishes  have  been  taken  out,  they  keep  quiet.  That  is  all 
about  this.  | 

Salmon-Berry  Feast 

1  As  soon '  as  all  the  salmon-berry  pickers  have  brought  their  salmon- 
berries,  I  and  when  (the  host)  has  poured  them  all  into  the  oil-box — 
for  sometimes  |  five  salmon-berry  boxes  half  fill  the  oil-box  |  which 


87  qa£s  lii  tsex£Id  laxa  k'!esEm  Labal  t!et!Elyats!a.  Wa,  g'il£mese 
qoqut!eda  tsexLaxs  lae  qas£IdExda£xwa,  qa£s  la  Laxiimlilaxa 
g'Ig'Egamafye  £nEmoku  g'ayol  laxa  Mamaleleqala;  wa,  la  £iiEmokwa 

90  g'ayole  laxa.  Qwequsot!enoxwe.  Wa,  la  £nex'da£xwa  lae  tslalas 
laq:  "LaEm  xwotledLOLe  g'lgama^ye,"  £nekixs lae  LaxEiilileda  tseqa- 
sE£we,  qa£s  dax£idexa  tsexLa,  qa£s  nax£Idex  £wapalasa  tlElse. 
Wii,  g'iFmese  helak-!EsExs  lae  qEpts!5tses  anex'saye  laxa  loqiill- 
iaxs    he£mae   ales    yala     yixwe    xunokwasa    ttelstlayasaxa    t!Else. 

95  Wii,  la£me  yala  he  gwegileda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwiinEmsa  ma£le  tse- 
tsexLa.  Wa,  g-il£mese  £wl£laxs  lae  gwala.  Wa,  a£mise  la  h5quwEl- 
sexs  lae  gwala.  Wa,  g'il£mese  la  £wI£lEWElseda  t!Elst!asdiixa 
tlElsaxs  lae  kek'aodale  £nE£memotasa  t!ElsIliixa  tlElsexa  loElqfdlle 
laxa  xamagEma£ye  g-Jg-Egamesa  £nal£iiEmsgEinakwe  lelqwalaLa£ya. 
100  Wii,  lii  a,Em  ma£lts!Eq  lo£  g'Igama£yases  ma£ltsEmakulotaq.  Wii, 
g'il£mese  £w!£lEWElseda  lElogumaxs  lae  sElt  !eda.     Wii,  laEm  gwala. 

Salmon-Berry  Feast 

1  Wa,1  gihmese  g'iix  £wllg-allsa  hamsax'daxa  q!EmdzEkwaxs,  lae 
£wi£laEm  la  guxtslalas  laxa  dedEngwats!em5te,  ytxs  £nal£nEmp!E- 
nae    sEkMasgEma    q!EmdzEgwats!e    naEng'oyala  dedEngwatslemot 

1  Continued  from  p.  212,  line  33. 


boas]  SOCIAL,   CUSTOMS  761 

is  used  for  the  salmon-berry  feast  by  a  man — as  soon  as  he  has  every- 
thing ||  in  the  box  that  the  engaged  women  have  picked,  he  calls  |  his  5 
tribe,  for  salmon-berries  are  only  given  to  one's  own  tribe.  |  They  go 
at  once  and  bring  the  oil,  which  is  |  placed  on  the  floor.  Now,  I  do 
not  want  to  talk  about  it  again,  |  for  it  is  all  the  same  as  is  done  with 
the  viburnum-berries  ||  when  they  are  eaten,  as  I  first  described  when  10 
they  are  put  into  house-dishes,  |  and  it  is  done  in  the  same  way  with 
salmon-berries  in  house-dishes.  I  have  seen  here  |  the  Kwakiutl 
when  they  do  this,  when  they  are  eating  salmon-berries  |  and  od  out 
of  house  dishes.  They  first  give  to  the  Maamtag'ila,  |  and  with 
them  are  the  G'  exsEm ;  and  the  next  are  the  Kiikwak  !um,  together 
with  the  SeiiLlEm;  ||  and  to  the  Layalalawa,  together  with  the  15 
Lafilax-s£Endayo.  |  Each  of  these  had  one  carved  dish;  that  is,  when 
a  salmon-berry  feast  is  given  by  the  Q!omoya£e,  |  and  it  is  done  in 
the  same  way  when  a  salmon-berry  feast  is  given  by  the  Walas 
Kwakiutl:  |  for  it  is  the  same  way  for  the  viburnum-beny  feast  and 
for  the  salmon-berry  feast.  |  There  is  only  very  little  difference,  for 
the  oil  is  given  in  large  ladles  to  the  chiefs  ||  to  drink  in  the  salmon-  20 
berry  feast.  That  is  all  about  this;  |  for  there  is  no  way  in  which 
they  are  cooked.  |  Thej7  have  too  much  juice  to  be  dried  into  cakes. 
That  is  the  end.  I 


q  !EmdzEkwelasosa  £nEmokwe  bEgwanEma.     Wii,  gIPmese  £wI£laeLe 
hamyanEmasa  tsledaqe    he£lanEmaxs  lae    hex-'idaEm  lada  Le£lalax  5 
gokulotas,  qaxs  a£mae  tlEiiselayoweda  q  JEmdzEkwe  hixa  g'okiilote. 
Wa,    laEmxae    kex-£idaEm    la    axwultalelEma    L!e£na,    qa£s    g'iixe 
ha£nela.     Wa,  wEhnesEn   £nex"    qEn    edeltslaxstale    gwagwex-s£fda 
laqexs  a£mae   la    naqEmg"iltawi£liilax  gwayi'liilasasa   tlElselaxs    lae 
t!Elst!asa  laxEn  g'ale   gwagwex-s£alasa    ioqfililtsloleda  tlElse.     Wa,  10 
la  heEmxat!   gweg'ileda   lEXuts!odaxa    qlEmdzEkwe,    yixEn    doguie 
laxg'ada  Kwag'ulEk' ;  yixs  hae  gweg'ilaxs  lEx"laq\vaaxa  qlEmdzEkwe 
L!eenaqEla.     Wa,    heEm    g'il   kax-£Itsoeseda  Mafimtagila.     Wii,  la 
ma£lta  lo£  G'exsEme.     Wii,  lalasa  Kukwakliime   ma£lta  lo£   SeiiLlE- 
me.     Wii,    lalasa    Layalalawa    maflta    LE£wa    Laalax-s£Endayo  laxa  15 
£nal£nEinexLa  leloqulila,  }rixs    hiie  q  lEmdzEkwilanokwa  Q!omoya£e 
Wii,  liixae  heEin  gweg'ilaxs  hiie  q  lEmdzEkwilanokwa  £w<ilase  Kwa- 
gida,  yixs  £nEmmaes  gwayi£liilase  LE£wa  tlElsaxs  lExuts!oyae.     Wii, 
la   halebida£we  ogux£lda£yiis,  yixs  L!e£naeda   la    tseqElaxa  g'ig'iga- 
ma£yasa   q teq lEmdzEgwiixa  qlEmdzEkwe.     Wa,  laEm   laba    laxeq,  20 
qaxs    k-!easae    hanx'LEndaeneq,    qa    L!obatsa     qlEmdzEkwe.     Wa, 
laxae  q!Eci!ekine  saaqas  lax  t!Eqag"ilasE£we.     Wii,  lawesLa  Laba. 


762  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  36 

Ckabapple  Feast 

1  The  name  of  the  boiled  crabapples  is  changed  when  they  are  put 
into  |  the  empty  oil-box,  when  winter  comes.  They  |  are  called 
"crabapples  in  water,"  for  that  means  crabapples  and  water.  | 
Therefore  they  are  called  "  crabapples  in  water."  || 
5  Now  I  will  talk  about  a  crabapple  feast,  which  the  |  chief  gives  to 
many  tribes.  Generally  they  have  ten  |  boxes  of  crabapples  with 
water;  and,  if  a  chief  is  (very)  angry,  he  may  get  twenty  |  boxes  of 
crabapples  and  water.  I  mean  that  the  price  of  each  box  of  crab- 
apples and  water  is  ten  pairs  of  blankets  |  when  it  is  sold.    That  is  the 

10  same  as  ||  ten  dollars  for  each  box  of  crabapples  and  water;  |  and 
this  is  also  the  price  of  the  box  of  viburnum-berries.  Each  box 
contains  five  |  coal-oil  tins  of  crabapples.  |  The  common  people 
can  not  afford  to  buy  these.  | 

Now  I  will  talk  about  the.  invitation   to   a  crabapplc-and-water 

15  feast;  ||  for  first  of  all  they  get  the  house-dishes  ready,  which  |  are  put 
down  outside  of  the  feasting-house.  |  The  host  also  sends  out  two 
young  men  of  his  numaym  to  |  go  and  get  fire-wood  for  the  house- 
fire  in  the  feasting-house.     They  |  take  a  Chinook  canoe,  and  the 

20  young  men  go  to  get  a  dead  cedar.  ||  They  do  not  go  to  get  fire-wood 

Crabapple  Feast  (TsElxwelaxa  tsElxusta) 

1  Wit,  laEm  Llayowe  LegEmasa  q!5lkwe  tsElxwaxs  lae  g"Its!a  laxa 
tsElwatsle  dEngwatslemota,  yixs  lae  ts!awiinx£eda.  Wii,  laEm 
LegadEs  tsElx"sta,  yixs  he£mae  £ne£nakilqexs  tsElxwa  LE£wa  £wape; 
lag'ilas  tsElx"staxElasE£wa. 
5  Wii,  la£mesEn  gwagwex's£alal  laqexs  lae  tsElxustag'ileda  g'lga- 
ma£ye  qaeda  q!enEme  lelqwalaLa£ya,  yixs  qlunalae  nEqasgEina 
tsElxustaats !  lox  g'il£mae.  lawisa  glgama£yaxs  lae  ma£ltsEing-6stowa 
tsetsElxustaats!e,  yixEn  memakilaxs  naEnqaxsaxwaasa  ptelxElas- 
gEma    £nEinsgEme     tsElxustaats !exs     kilxwasE£wae    £nEina,xis    lo£ 

10  nEqasgEin    dziik' !Ema   laqexs    £nEmsgEmaeda    tsElxustaats!e.     Wa, 

heEmxaawis  laxusa  tlElsaxs  £nEmsgEmae    t!Elyats!a,  yix  sesEk'las- 

gEmtslaeda  £iiEmsgEme  tsElx"staats!exa   koninatsle  k!EWElxusEma. 

Wa,  he£mis  wayatsloltsa  bEgwlleda£yasa  g'ig'igama£ye  la£xwas. 

Wa,  la£mesEn  wiig'il  gwagwex-s£alal  laqexs  lae  Le£laleda   tsElxu- 

15  stag'ilaLaxa  tsElx"sta,  yixs  he£mae  gil  ax£etsoses  ISElqulile,  qa 
g'axes  mExEs  lax  l  !risana£yases  tsElxustag'i£lats!e  g'okwa.  Wii, 
laxae  £yalaqasa  ma£lokwe  ha£yiil£a  g'ayol  laxes  £nE£memote,  qa 
las  aneqax  lsqwii,  qa£s  tsElx"stag"ilax-dEma  lEgwila.  Wii,  la£me 
ax£edxa     xwedEkwe     xwakliina,     qa£s     anegatslexa     LledzEkweda 

20  ha£yiil£a.     Wit,  laEm  lc'.es  he  fineqaxa  lEqweda  LlEma£ise,  yixs  hiie 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  763 

from  the  beach;  but  they  go  ]  to  the  woods  on  the  islands,  for  they  21 
do  not  need  to  go  far  into  the  woods  to  find  a  dead  cedar.  |  It  is  not 
long  before  they  come  back,  carrying  a  load  of  blocks  of  dead  cedar- 
wood.  |  When  they  reach  the  beach  of  the  house,  they  are  met  by 
the  numaym  of  |  the  host.     They  carry  on  their  shoulders  the  cedar- 
wood  ||  which  they  carry  up  from  the  beach,  and  put  down  |  outside  25 
of  the  feasting-house.     When  it  is  all  up,  |  they  go  and  call  two  or 
even  four  young  men  of  |  the  numaym  (to  go  inviting).     As  soon  as 
they  have  been  to  all  the  houses,  they  come  |  back.     Then  they  put 
out  the  boxes  containing  the  crabapples,  ||  and  place  them  inside  the  30 
door  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  feasting-  |  house.     If  there  are  ten 
boxes  of  crabapples,  there  will  be  five  |  boxes  of  oil  to  be  poured  on. 
They  bring  out  everything  and  put  it  down,  |  and  also  four  long- 
handled  ladles  are  brought  down  and  are  hidden  |  on  one  side  of  the 
door.     When   everything  is  ready,  the  ||  young  men  carry   in   the  35 
blocks  of  dead  cedar-wood  and  build  a  fire  |  in  the  middle  of  the 
feasting-house.     After  this  has  been  finished,  |  and  when  the  fire  in 
the  middle  of  the  house  blazes  up,  they  go  calling  again.     They  call 
four  times,  |  then  all  those  who  are  to  eat  the  crabapples  come  in. 
When  they  have  come,  |  they  sit  down  in  their  proper  seats.     They 
never  move  their  seats.     Then  ||  the  drum  is  taken  to  them  to  sing  40 
the  feasting-songs.  |  First  of  all,  they  sing  the  feasting-song  of  the  | 


leda    arJasa    maEmkala,    qaxs    k"!esae    aLales    LledzEkwe.      Wa,  21 
k-!est!a  galaxs  g'axae  aedaaqamalaxa  tEmgikwe  iJedzEkwa.     Wa, 
gihmese  g'ax£alis  lax  LlEma£isasa  g'okwaxs  lae  lalale  £nE£memotasa 
tsElxustag"ilaLaxa  tsElxusta,  qa£s    lii    wawig'alaxa    anegaiiEme    l!§- 
dzEkwa,  qa£s  la  wex"wusdesElaq  laxa    L!Ema£ise,  qa£s  lii  wIx'Elsaq  25 
lax  l !asana£yasa  tsElxustag'ielats!e    gokwa.     Wa,  giPmese  £wi£los- 
desExs  lae    Le£laleda    ma£lokwe    loxs    mokwaeda    haeyal£a   g'ayol 
lax  £nE£memotas.     Wii,  giPmese    la  £wIlxtolsaxa  gokiiliixs  g'axae 
aedaacja.     Wa,  laJme    hanolt!alilElaxa  tsetsElxustaats!e,   qa  g'axes 
hax'hanel  lax  gEmxotstrililas    aweLEliis  tlExiliisa  tsElxutsawats!eLe  3Q 
g'okwa.    Wa,  g'IPEm  nEqasgEma  tsetsElxustaats!axs  lae  sEk-  lasgEma 
dEndagwats!e  klungEmaxses  L!e£na.     Wa,  he£mis  g-ax  £wFla  hax'ha- 
nele.     Wa,  he^misa  mEwexLa  fiwa,  tseqEla  tsetsexLa  g-ax   qlulaLel 
lax    apsostalllasa   t!EX"ila.     Wa,    giPmese    £wl£la    la  gwalllExs    lae 
weg'iLEleda  ha£yal-axa    tEingikwe   L!edzEku  lEqwa,  qa£s  laqolllexa  35 
awagawalllasa  tsElxutsawats!eLe  gokwa.     Wii,  glPmese  gwalExs  lae 
xiqostawes    laqollla^yaxs    lae    etse^sta.     Wii,    la£me    mop!ene-staxs 
g'axae  £wI£laeLeda  tsElxutsaxuLaxa  tsElxwe.     Wii,  g-ih"mese  ewl-lae- 
lexs  lae  klustalll  laxes    k!waJyexa   k-!ese    Leqwi£liila.     Wii,  hex-£i- 
da£mese  liiyowa  mEnatsle  laq,  qa  dEnx£idesesa    k!wela£yala  q!Em-  40 
dEma.     Wa,   la£me    he    g'il    dEnx£Idayose   k!wela£yala   q!EindEms 


764  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

42  chief  of  the  head  tribe,  the  Mamaleleqala,  if  the  Kwakiutl  give  a  | 
crabapple  feast.     After  this  song  is  ended,   the  Qwequsot  !enoxu  | 

45  sing  their  f easting-song;  and  when  ||  that  is  done,  the  Nimkish  |  sing 
their  f  easting-song;  and  when  they  end  their  song,  |  the  Lawets  !es  sing 
their  f easting-song ;  and  when  |  they  are  through  singing,  the  Maam- 
tag'ila  sing  their  |  feasting-song;  and  when  the  songs  are  ended,  they  || 

50  take  the  drum  and  put  it  down  near  the  door  of  the  house.  |  Immedi- 
ately they  go  and  take  the  house-dishes  from  outside  of  the  |  house, 
and  put  them  down  with  the  head  towards  the  rear  of  the  |  house. 
They  take  one  of  the  crabapple-boxes  and  pour  |  the  contents  into 

55  the  house-dish  for  the  Mamaleleqala  and  Qwequsot  !enoxu.  II  When 
the  crabapple-box  has  been  emptied,  they  put  it  |  out  of  the  house. 
Then  the  young  men  take  another  |  box  of  crabapples  and  pour  them 
into  the  house-dish  for  the  Nimkish.  |  Then  they  put  the  empty  box 

60  out  of  the  I  house.  The  young  men  come  and  take  another  ||  box  of 
crabapples  and  pour  them  into  the  house-dish  for  the  Lawets  !es,  | 
and  they  go  again  and  put  the  empty  box  out  of  the  house.  |  Then 
they  take  another  box  of  crabapples  and  pour  them  into  the  |  house- 
dish  fcr  the  Maamtag'ila,  and  then  they  put  the  empty  box  |  out  of 
the  house.     Then  they  come  in  again,  and  take  many  small  dishes,  || 


42  g'Igama£yasa  mEkwetEina£yexa  Mamaleleqaliixs  Kwagulaeda  tsElx"- 
stag'ilaxa  tsElxwe.  Wa,  g'il£mese  qlulbe  dEn£xena£yasexs  lae 
dEnx£ideda    Qweq"sot!enoxwases   k!wela£yalayo    qlEmdEma.       Wa, 

45  g  il£Emxaawise  q  liilbe  dEii£xena£yasexs  lae  dEnx£ideda  £nEmgesases 
k  !welaeyala  q  !EindEina.  Wii,  g'il£Emxaawise  q  lulbe  dEn£xena£yasexs 
lae  dEnx'kleda  Lawets!esases  k!wela£yala  qlEmdEma.  Wii,  g'il£Ein- 
xaawise  qkllbe  dEn£xena£yasexs  lae  dEnx£ideda  Maamtag'ilases 
k!wela£yala    qlEmdEma.     Wii,    g-il£mese   qlulbe  qlEmdEinasexs  lae 

50  ax£etsE£weda  m.Enats!e,  qa£s  la,  hang'alllEm  laxa  ostalilasa  g-okwe. 
Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  la  ax£etsE£weda  loElqultte  laxa  L!asana£yasa 
g'okwe,  qa£s  g'axe  mEx£alilEm  gwegugEmala  lax  ogwiwalllasa 
g'okwe.  Wa,  lii  ax£etsE£weda  £iiEmsgEme  tsElxustaats  !e,  cja£s  lii 
gflxtsloyo    lax    loqiilaLasa  Mamaleleqala    LE£wa  Qwequsot!enoxwe. 

55  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wllg'ilts!aweda  tsElx"staats!iixs  lae  hanwildzEin 
lax  L!iisana£yasa  g'okwe.  Wa,  g'iixaeda  ha£yiil£a  ax£edxa  £nEms- 
gEme  tsElxustaats!ii,  qa£s  lii  guxtslots  lax  loqiilaLasa  £nEmgese. 
Wii,  laxae  hanwllsasa  lolapmote  tsElx"staats!e  lax  L!iisana£yasa 
g'okwe.      Wii,     g-axaeda      ha£yal£a,     qa£s      ax£edexa     £nEmsgEme 

60  tsElxustaats!ii,  qa£s  lii  guxtslots  lax  loqiilaLasa  Lawets  !ese. 
Wa,  liixae  hiinwElsaxa  lolapmdte  lax  L!asana£yasa  g'okwe.  Wa, 
laxae  ax£edxa  £nEmsgEm§  tsElxustaats!a,  qa£s  liixat!  gflxts!6ts  lax 
loqiilaLasa  Maamtag'ila.  Wii,  laxae  hanwElsaxa  lolapmote  lax  Lla- 
sana/yasa   g'okwe.      Wii,     g'axe    edeLExs    lae     ax£edxa    loElgiime 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  765 

and  put  the  crabapples  into  them  so  that  they  are  all  |  half  full.  65 
They  do  not  empty  all  the  boxes  containing  crabapples,  [  but  they 
keep  one  of  them,  which  |  they  do  not  touch.  Then  they  take  the 
four  boxes  of  oil  and  |  pour  the  oil  over  the  crabapples  until  there  is 
half  as  much  oil  as  crabapples  ||  in  the  carved  dishes  and  small  70 
dishes.  After  this  has  been  done,  |  they  distribute  the  spoons;  and 
when  every  one  has  his  spoon,  |  the  speaker  of  the  host  stands  up  and 
gives  out  |  one  of  the  house-dishes  containing  crabapples  and  water 
to  the  Mamalelaqala  and  Qweq"sot  !enoxu.  |  Then  the  young  men  go 
to  each  side  of  the  carved  dish  Hand  shout  four  times,  "Wooye!"  as  75 
they  lift  it  up.  Then  they  go  and  put  it  down  |  immediately  in 
front  of  the  Mamaleleqala  and  Qwequsot  !enoxu;  |  and  as  soon  as  they 
put  it  down,  one,  the  oldest  of  the  young  men,  |  says,  "This  house- 
dish  is  for  you,  Mamaleleqala,  for  two  tribes,  for  you  and  the 
Qwequsot!enoxu.  |  Now,  eat!"  Then  the  young  men  go  and  ||  stand  80 
on  each  side  of  another  house-dish,  and  they  shout  again  four  times, 
"Wooye!"  |  and  lift  it  up.  Then  they  go  and  put  it  down  in  front 
of  the  Nimkish;  and  the  |  one  who  gives  out  the  dishes  says,  "This 
house-dish  is  for  you,  Nimkish.  Now,  eat!"  |  and  they  shout  also  in 
the  same  way  for  the  house-dishes  of  the  other  chiefs  of  the  Lawets  !es  | 
and  Maamtag'ila.  As  soon  as  the  four  house-dishes  have  been  put 
down  ||  the  host  picks  out  the  one  who  had  given  before  a  crabapple  feast  85 

q!exLa  qa£s  tsets!alesa  tsElxusta  laq.  Wii,  la£me  £naxwaEin  naEngo-  65 
yoxsdalaxa  tsElxusta.  Wa,  la  k'  !es  Enaxwa  £wIlg-E$ts  laweda  tsetsElxu- 
staats!axa  tsElxusta.  Wa,  la  axelaxa  £nEinsgEme  tsElxustaats!ii.  Wa, 
laEm  k'  !es  Labalaq.  Wa,  la  &x£edxa  mosgEme  dedEngwats  !a,  qa£s 
k!ungEqes  laq.  Wii,  laEm  naxsaapieda  l !e£na  p£wa  tsElxusta 
laxa  t6Elqulllts!ala  LE£wa  lElogumts!ala.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwalsxs  lae  70 
ts!EwanaedzEma  k'ak'EtsiEnaqe.  Wa,  giPmese  'wllxtoxs  lae  Laxu- 
llle  Elkwasa  tsElxustagilaxa  tsElxusta.  Wa,la£me  k'ak'!Eg'altsa  £nE- 
mexLa  tsElxustats  !a  la  loqulll  laxa  Mamaleleqala  LEewa  Qwequso- 
t!enoxwe.  Wa,  la£mesa  ha£yal£a  lax  £wax-sanodza£yasa  loqulll. 
Wa,  la  moptena  wooyexaxs  lae  wegilllaq,  qa£s  la  k"ax"dzamolilas  75 
lax  nExdzamolllasa  Mamaleleqala  LE£wa  Qwequsot  lenoxwe.  Wa, 
g'il£mese  k'iig'alllEmxs  lae  £nek'eda  £nEmokwe  q!iilyak!ugesa  ha£ya- 
l£a:  Lociulas  Mamaleleqala,  ma£ltalts  lo£  Qwequsot!enoxwe.  Wa, 
laEms  hamx"£IdLOL."  Wa,  la  aedaaqeda  ha£ya£l£a,  qa£s  laxat! 
qiwagagEndxa  £nEmexLa  loqiilila.  Wa,  laxe  wooyexa  mop!Enaxs  80 
lae  wlg'illlaq.  Wa,  la  k'ax'dzamolllas  laxa  £nEmgese.  Wa,  lae  £nek-eda 
k'akMalElg'ise:  "LoqulaLes  £nEingese.  LaEms  hamx,£IdLOL."  Wa, 
laxae  heEm  gwek"!alax  loqiilasa  waokwe  g'Ig"Egamesa  Lawets  !ese 
LE£wa  Maamtag'ila.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £wllg-allleda  mEwexLa  loElqulilExs 
lae    k'ak-oqEwasa  tsetsElxustaats!e    laxes  lelfilwIgEme  lax  g-ig'Ega-  85 


766  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKITJTL  [eth.  ann.  36 

86  to  him,  [  which  he  is  now  paying  back  with  his  own  crabapples 
that  he  has  in  the  boxes;  |  for  thus  it  is  made  clear,  who  was 
the  one  who  had  given  a  crabapple  feast  before.  [  Then  the  one  who 
gives  out  the  dishes  says,  as  he  |  puts  down  the  box  with  crabapples 

90  in  front  of  the  chief:  "This  dish  is  for  you,  LelEgEmllla.  ||  It  is 
difficult  for  me  to  take  this  from  you, chief."  [I  just  use  |  this  name, 
LelEgEmllla,  for  his  name,  in  order  to  show  plainly  what  they  say  | 
when  they  give  out  the  house-dishes  and  the  crabapple-boxes].  As 
soon  as  all  |  have  been  put  down,  they  take  the  small  dishes  and  put 
them  |  in  front  of  the  common  people  of  the  chiefs;  and  when  they 

95  all  have  them,  ||  then  they  eat  with  their  spoons.  They  eat  the 
crabapples.  |  The  young  men  build  up  the  fire  with  the  dead  cedar- 
wood  to  make  the  guests  feel  uneasy ;  |  and  when  the  fire  in  the  middle 
of  the  feasting-house  burns  up  well,  |  the  speaker  stands  up  and  calls 
100  his  |  numaym  together  to  assemble  close  to  the  door  of  the  ||  feast- 
house.  Then  he  tells  them  to  go  ahead  and  |  sing  the  new  feasting- 
songs,  for  they  have  new  songs  made  for  a  |  crabapple  feast  the  same 
way  as  they  do  for  an  oil  feast  or  a  viburnum-berry  feast.  |  They  all 
stand  together  in  a  circle.  |  Only  the  near  relatives  of  the  host  and  || 
5  the  host's  daughter  do  not  go  there,  because  she  |  will  dance.  Now 
they  sing  the  new  feasting-song,  |  and  immediately   the  daughter 


86  ma£yasa  aloguxsEmakwe  lelqwalaLa£yaxa  wax,£me  k-!es  q!eq!Ets!axa 
tsElxusta,  yixs  he£mae  awElx-isllasE£weda  tsetsElxustag'ilaenoxwe  la 
lelogwatsa  tsetsElxustaats!e.  Wa,  g"a£mes  waldEmsa  leak-  !alElg'isaxs 
leahangEmlilEmatsElxustaats!elaxag"Igama£ye:"LoqulaLesLelEgEm- 

90  Ilia.  Yu£mEn  laxumx-£itsEwol  laLg"Igame£."  (La£mEn  aEin  Lek'anE- 
max  LelEgEmlllase  qsns  LeqElasE£wa,  qa  awElg'iltsIlex  gwek'  liilasasa 
k-ak"  lalElg'ise  leloqulile,  LE£wa  tsetsElxustaats!e.)  Wii,  g'il£mese  £wll- 
g'alllExs,  laeax£etsE£wedatsetsElxustats!alaloElgiima,  qa£slak'ax-dza- 
molIlElayo  laxa  bEgulida£yasa  g'Ig'Egama£ye.    Wa,  g-il£mese  £wTlxtoxs 

95  lae  £yos£Itses  kak'EtslEnaqe.  Wii,  la£me  tsEtsElxv,staagux-£Ida.  Wii, 
la£me  alax,£id  lEciwelax£ldeda  ha£yal£iisa  l  !edzEkwe  lEqwa,  qa  odzElqE- 
lesa  tsEtsElxustaagwaxa  tsElxusta.  Wa,  g"il£mese  alax'£Id  la  x'ix£e- 
deda  klwelasdEma  lEgwilExs  lae  Lax£Qlileda  Elkwe,  qa£s  Le£lalexes 
£nE£memote,  qa  g-axes  q!ap!eg-illl  laxa  max'stalilas  awiLElasa  tsE- 
100  tsElxustag*aats!e  g'okwa.  Wa,  la£me  waxaq  qa  weg'is  k!wamllala 
dEnx£etsa  altsEme  k!welaeyala  qlEmdEma,  qaxs  q!EindadEg'Ilaeda 
tsElxustiixs  klweladzEinae  he  gwex-sa  L!e£nag-ila  LE£wa  t!Elstagiliixa 
tlElse.  Wii,  la£mese  £wi£la  q Iwag'alila  liixes  kilx'alaena£ye.  Wii,  la£me 
lex-aEm  k-  !es  la  max'niEg'ile  LeLELalasii  tsElxustag'ilaxa  tsElxusta. 
5  Wa,  he£mise  tslEdaqe  xun5xusa  tsElxustag'iliixa  tsElxusta,  qaxs  he£mae 
yixwaLe.  Wii,  la£me  dEnx£itsa  klwamiliilayowe  altsEm  q!EmdEma. 
Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  la  lolt!aleleda  ts'.Edaqe  xun6xus,  qa£s  yix£wlde. 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  767 

comes  out  and  dances.  |  She  is  followed  by  four  men  who  carry  on  8 
their  shoulders  |  each  a  long-handled  ladle.     They  separate  in  twos 
as  they  dance,  ||  two  on  each  side  of  the  woman.     The  four  men  do  10 
not  |  dance  long.     Then  they  leave  the  woman,  who  is  still  dancing.  | 
Two  men  go  to  the  box  containing  the  crabapples,  j  dip  the  long- 
handled  ladle  into  it,  and  the  other  two  men  dip  theirs  |  into  the  oil. 
Then  the  two  go  and  give  it  to  drink  to  ||  the  chiefs  who  have  given  a  15 
crabapple  feast  before;  and  the  two  others  give  |  the  oil  to  the  chiefs 
who  have  given  an  oil  feast  before;  and  this  is  |  what  they  say,  stand- 
ing before  the  one  |  who  is  going  to  be  given  to  drink,"  Now,  chief,  | 
draw  this  in !"    Then  the  chief  stands  up,  |  takes  hold  of  each  end  of 
the   ladle,    and    drinks;  and  when  he  has   had  enough,  ||  he  pours  20 
what  is  left  over  into  the  house-dish.     As  soon  as  the  crabapples  are 
nearly  |  gone,  the  two  men  dip  up  the  whole  of  what  is  left,  |  and 
two   other  men  do    the  same  |  with   the  oil.     The  woman  is  still 
dancing;  and  then  |  the  four  men  who  are  giving  to  the  chiefs  to 
drink  (for  that  is  the  name  of  the  work  that  they  are  doing)  ||  dance.  25 
The}-  do  not  dance  very  long  before  they  pour  the  contents  of  the 
two  |  long-handled  ladles  with  crabapples  and  with  oil  into  the  | 
fire;  and  after  they  have  done  this,  the  guests  |  shout,  "Woosqu!" 
That  is  as  though  |  they  would  say,  "The  food  that  we  are  eating  is 

Wa,    a£mese    ElxLalaxa    mokwe    bebEgwanEm    wiwex-sEyap!alaxa  8 
£nfd£LiEmexLa  tsexLaxs  lae  £wax-se£sta,  qa£s  la  ogwaqa  yix£wld  lax 
£wax-salllasa    tstedaqe  yixwa.       ••      +     ••       Wa,    k'!est!e    gegilll  10 

men  woman  men 

yixweda  mokwe  bebEgwaiiEmxs  lae  basa  tslEclaqaxs  yalax"sa£mae 
yixwa.  Wit,  la£meda  nia£lokwe  bebEgwanEm  laxa  tsElxustaats!e,  qa£s 
la  tsex'£itses  tsexxa  laq.  Wa,  laxaeda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEm  tsex'£Id 
laxa  L'.e£na.  Wii,  la£me  lal  naqamasLeda  ma£l5kwasa  tsElxusta  laxa 
tsetsElxustag-Ilaenoxweg-Ig-Egama£ya.  Wa,  lada  ma£lokwe  naqamasl-  15 
tsa  L!e£na  laxa  L!eL!e£nag'ilaenoxwe  g-Ig-Egama£ya.  Wa,  g-a£mes 
wahlEinsexs  lae  Laxumalilxes  naqamatsoLe:  "Wa,  g'igama£ye, 
laEms  xut!edLOL."  Wa,  hex-£ida£mese  Lax£ullleda  g-Igama£ye,  qa£s 
dadEbEndexa  tsexLa  qa£s  nax£idelaq.  Wa,  gil£mese  helak^ESExs 
lae  aEm  guqEyintses  anex-saye  laxes  loqula.  Wa,  gil£mese  Elaq  20 
£wl£leda  tsElxustaxs  lae  £wi£la  tsex"£ldeda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwanEm 
laxa  tsElxusta.  Wa,  laxae  heEm  gwex-£ideda  ma£lokwe  bebEgwa- 
nEm laxa  L!e£na,  ylxs  he£mae  ales  yixweda  ts!Edaq.  Wa,  lax'da- 
£xwa  mokwe  bebEgwanEinxa  tlequlg  ise,  qaxs  he£mae  LegEmse  eaxe- 
na£yas,  yix£wida.  Wa,  k-!est!e  geg-illlExs  lae  guxLEntsa  malEXLa  25 
tsetsElxustats!ala  tsexxa  LE£wa  malEXLa  L!eL!e£nats!ala  tsexLa  laxa 
lEgwlle.  Wa,  g-il£mese  gwal  he  gwex-£ldExs  lae  £nEmadzaqwa  ba- 
sEla  £nek-eda  tsEtsELxustagaxa  tsElxusta-woosqu.  Wa,la£me  £nEma- 
x-is  l5£  £nek-eda  tsEtsElxustag-axs  ex-p!asE£wae  laxes  ha£maena£ye. 


768  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  as 

30  sweet."  ||  After  the  feasters  have  finished  the  f easting-song,  they 
stop  |  eating.  Then  the  speakers  of  each  side  |  exchange  compli- 
ments; and  when  they  stop  speaking,  all  go  out.  Then  |  the  house- 
dishes  are  taken  by  the  feasters  of  the  numaym  to  those  who  have 
not  eaten  all  the  contents.     That  is  all  |  about  this.  || 

Feast  of  Salal-Berries  and  Crabapples  Mixed 

1  When  a  chief  wishes  to  give  a  very  great  feast,  when  he  gets  angry 
(with  another  chief),  |  he  buys  many  boxes  of  crabapples  with  water 
and  |  many  bundles  of  dried  salal-berry  cakes  and  oil.  When  |  he 
5  has  them  all,  he  takes  a  small  canoe,  which  is  ||  washed  out  well. 
When  it  is  clean,  it  is  carried  into  his  house.  |  His  wife  unties  the 
covers  of  her  salal-berry  boxes,  for  |  sometimes  they  use  five  or  even 
eight  salal-berry  boxes,  |  if  the  chief  has  much  property  to  buy  them 

10  with.  |  Then  the  woman  takes  them  out  and  puts  them  ||  into  the  small 
canoe.  Now,  there  is  one  salal-berry  box  |  to  each  canoe.  They  are 
put  into  the  canoes  to  soak.  |  Then  she  asks  the  young  men  of  her 
husband's  numaym  |  to  go  and  draw  much  fresh  water.  |  The  young 

15  men  go,  carrying  a  bucket  in  each  hand,  and  draw  water;  and  ||  when 
they  come  back,  they  pour  it  into  the  canoe  for  soaking  the  dried 
salal-berry  cakes.  |  When   the  salal-berry   cakes  are  just  covered, 


30  Wa,  g'iFmese  q!wel£ideda  klwamelala  dEnxElaxs  lae  gwal  tsE- 
tsElxustag"eda  klwele.  Wa,  la£me  yaeq!Eiit!aleda  ayilkwasa  £wa- 
£wax'sawa.  Wa,  g"ll£mese  q!wel£IdExs  lae  koqiiwElsa.  Wii,  la£me 
k'aodalayowe  leloqulasa  k!welde  yis  £nE£memotas.  Wa,  laEin  gwal 
laxeq. 

Feast  of  Salal-Berries  and  Crabapples  Mixed 

1  Wii,  he£maxs  Lomax,£Idae  £nek"eda  g"igama£ye,  qa£s  tslEndEg'ime 
£walas  klwelasa,  wa,  la  k-ilx£wldxa  qlenEme  tsetsElxustaats!a  le- 
£wa  qlex'sayokwe  t!Eqa.  Wa,  he£misLeda  L!e£na.  Wa,  g'iFmese 
£wl£la  laLEqexs  lae  ax£edxa  am£amaye  xwaxuxwagiima,  qa£s  aek-!e 
5  ts!oxiig-indEq.  Wii,  g'iFmese  eg"ig-axs  lae  LEleLElaq  liixes  g'okwe. 
Wa,  la  gEnEmas  x-ox£widxes  t!et!Eqaats!e  xaxExatsEma,  yixs  £nal- 
£nEmp!Enae  sEk- lasgEma  lox  la,L£maax  ma£lgunaltsEma  t!et!Egats!e 
xaxExatsEma,  yixs  q!enEmae  dadEk'asasa  g'Igama£ya  qa£s  kilomq. 
Wa,    he£mis    la   axwults!alas5sa    tslEdaqe,    qa£s    la.  pElx,£atExsElas 

10  laxa  xwaxwagume.  Wii,  la£me  £nEmsgEma  t!Egats!e  xaxatsEm 
laxa  £nEmts!aqe  xwiixwaguma.  Wii,  g-il£mese  £wi£la  la  pagExdzE- 
kwa  xwaxuxwagumasa  tlEqaxs  lae  ha£yalaax  ha£yal£iis  £nE£memo- 
tases  la.£wunEme,  qa  las  tsaxq!enEma  £WE£wap!Ema.  Wii,  liix'da- 
£xwe  £naxu£ma  ha£yal£a  £wj£wax'sgEmxa    naEngatslax  lae   tsa,  qa£s 

15  gaxe  giix£alExsElas  laxa  pepegwats!axa  tlEqa  xwaxuxwaguma. 
Wa,  g-il£mese  t  lEpEya  £naxweda  t  !Eqiixs  lae  gwala.    Wa,  la£me  hex'sal 


boas]  SOCIAL    CUSTOMS  769 

they  stop.     They  leave  them  there  |  a  whole  day  and  ;i  whole  night,  17 
soaking  the  salal-berry  cakes,  for  |  the  chief  is  going  to  give  a  feast 
to  many  tribes.     In  the  morning,  when  day  conies,      they  bring  into 
his  house  the  house-dishes  and  ||  the  small  dishes  and    the  spoons.  20 
They    also  |  bring   dead   cedar-wood.     Now    it    is   already    piled    up 
crosswise   in    the   middle  j  of   the   house.     When    everything   is   in 
readiness,  they  take  a  rest:  |  and  in  the  evening  the  chief  calls  his 
numaym  j  to  a  meeting.     When  they  are  all  in,  the  chief  tells  them 
to  take  care  ||  and  to  be  ready   to  help  him  if  |  some  of  the  guests  25 
should  try  to  put  the  lire  out,  and  he  tells  his  numaym  what  he  is 
planning  to  do.  |  He  calls  the  names  of  those  who  art'  to  speak 
when  the  house-dishes  are  being  handled,  and  who  are  to  speak  for  the 
small  canoe  which  is  to  he  a  feasting-dish.  |  Then  he  asks  the  song- 
leader  to  sing  ||  a  feasting-song.     Then    the  song-leader  sings  |  the  30 
song  which  he  kept  to  himself.     Now  they  learn  the  song;     and  when 
his  assistants  can  sing  the  tune  of  the  song,  j  then  (the  men)  put  the 
words  into  it,  whatever  they  wish  to  say,  J  and  whatever  they  heard  || 
the  rival  chief  say  against   the  chief  who  is  going  to  give  the  great  :i."i 
feast.     When  |  they   can  sing  this  song,   the  chief  sends  the  young 
men  |  the  night  (before  the  feast)  to  call  the  tribes,  when  it  is  secular 
season.  |  Immediately  the  young  men  go  and   J  call  the  names  of  all 

gwaelxa£nala  le£\v;i  £iiEmxsa  ganoi.a  pex"stalli.eda  t  teqa,  qaxs  lE£mae  17 
klwelasLa  g'Igama£yas  laxa  qlenEine  lelqwalaLexa  lfn.a  £nax-£IdElxa 
gaala.     Wa,   <Vmise  -naxwaEm  g'ax   gwavguhleda    leloqfillle  LE£wa 
lElogume    LE-wa   k'ak'Etstenaqe    lax   g-okwas.     Wa,    he>"misa    Lie-  20 
dzEkwe  lEqwa.     LaEinxae    gwfilala    geg'ustalakwa    lax    awagawali- 
lasa  g'okwe.     Wit,  g'ihmese  'nii.xwa  gwax'gullbsxs  lae  x-os£id  £wi£la. 
Wii,  g-il£mese  dzaqwaxs  lae  Leltslodeda  gigama£yaxes  EnE£memote, 
qa  g-axes    £wI£laeLEla.     Wa,  gihmese    ewi£laeLExs  lae    ha£yaL!oleda 
g"Igama£yaq,  qa  £naxwa£mes  gwalala,  qa£s  g-6x£wIdelaxEq,  qo  k'lil-  25 
xasolaxses    Le£laiiEinLe.     Wii,    laEin    nex-£alllElas    gwalaasases    na- 
qa£ye     hixes     £uE-memote.     Wii,    la-me     LeLEqElaxa     yaq lEnt lalila 
qaeda  leloqfillle.     Wii,  he£mis  yaqlEiit  !alai.a   qaeda  leloqulile  xwa- 
xuxwagiima.     Wii,    he£mis    lii    helatsexa    nagade,    qa    dEnx£edeses 
niEnEla£laya     k!wela£yala    qlEmdEma.      Wa,    hexida-mese    dEiix£e-  30 
deila    nagadases    q!EmdEmg-ilts!ala.     Wa,    la£me    qtemdela.     Wii. 
g-ihmese      qleda     £naxwa       k!wek!wanoLEmex     ayasa      qlEmdE- 
maxs     lae     £naxwa£ma    bebEgwiiiiEme     qayasEntses    £nenk'!ega£ye 
qa£s     lii     wiildEink' !indayoxa     qlEmdEme,     LE£wis      wuLEle      wal- 
dEins    apsek!Esasa    £walasLe    k!welasa   g-Igama£ye.     Wii,    gil£mese  35 
q!;ixa    qlEindEmaxs    lae    £yalaqeda    giganur'yasa    ha£y;il£a.    qa    liis 
LelElklusaxa  la  ganuLa  laxa  enaxwa  lelqwalaLa£ya  laqexs  baxnsae. 
Wii,    hex'£ida£mese    lada    qlemala    hii£yal-a,  qa£s    lii  £wa£wllxtEwa 

750.JL.'— 21—  35    ETH— PT    1 49 


770  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [bth.ann.35 

40  the  men  in  each  of  the  II  houses.  When  they  have  called  all  the  names 
of  those  |  who  live  in  each  of  the  houses,  the  young  men  shout,  to- 
gether "This  is  for  '  Making-Satiated!"  They  come  out  and  go  into 
the  next  house,  |  and  one  of  the  young  men  who  call  says, 
"We  come  |  to  call  you,"  calling  the  name  of  the  man;  and  hecon- 

45  tinues  ||  saying  this,  calling  them,  until  they  reach  the  end  of  the 
houses.  Then  they  all  j  scatter  and  go  home  to  their  houses.  All 
the  tribes  |  go  to  bed  early;  for  they  do  not  know  what  the  chief  is 
planning,  |  and  they  are  afraid  of  the  feast  of  salal-berry  cakes  and 
crabapples  |  and  oil,  if  there  is  much  of  it,  because  it  makes  one  feel 

50  squeamish.  Therefore  ||  all  the  chiefs  and  common  people  are 
afraid  of  it;  |  but  there  is  no  way  of  not  going  to  the  feast,  because 
they  would  be  laughed  at  |  by  the  numaym  of  the  host.  The  host 
gets  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  he  |  himself  wakes  up  the  members 
of  his  numaym  to  come  and  eat  breakfast  in  his  house.  |  As  soon  as 

55  they  have  done  so,  they  dress  themselves,  and  ||  those  who  carry  the 
long-handled  ladles  blacken  their  faces.  There  arc  four  of  these,  | 
and  they  paint  their  faces  as  though  they  wTcrc  angry.  The  chief 
who  is  host  does  the  same  |  if  he  is  going  to  break  a  copper  for  a 
crosspiece  over  his  fire.  Then  lie  also  blackens  bis  face,  |  and  he 
puts  on  an  angry  face,  and  his  speakers  dress  the  same  as  J  he  has 


LeqElax    LeLEgEmasa    £naxwa    bebEgwanEm    laxa    £nfd£nEmsgEmse 

40  g'ig'okwa.  Wii,  gil  £naxwa£mese  £w!lxtodEx  LeLEgEmasa  g'okwa- 
x"lla  laxa  £iiEmsgEmse  gokuxs  lae  £nek'  £nEmadzaqweda  ha£yfd£a, 
qa  PoLElasa.  Wa,  la  hoqiiwF.lsa,  qa£s  la  laxa  apsalase  gokwa. 
Wii,  laxae £nek'eda  £nEmf>kwe  laxa  ha£yal£a  Le£lalElg-isa:  "La£mEiurx" 
Le£lal6Lai',"    Lex£edEx   LegEinasa    bEgwanEme.      Wa,    hex-sa£mese 

45  gwekliilaxs  Le£]alae.  Wa,  gfl£mese  laxtolsaxa  g'qkulaxs  lae  £naxwa 
gweTida  qa£s  la  naenaku  laxes  g'igokwe.  Wa,  la£me  £naxwaEm 
gax'staela  lelqwrdaLa£ye,  yixa  k'  !ese  q  laLElax  naqa£yasa  g'lga- 
ma£_ye,  qaxs  kilEmaeda  malaqEla  tlEqa  LE-'wa  tsElxusta.  Wii, 
liesmesLeda  L!e£n;'ixs    qlenEmae,    yixs    ts!Enk!idEmae.     Wii,  he£mis 

50  lalaesElayosa  £naxwa  gig'Egania£ye  L6£mes  bEgiilIda£ye.  Wa,  laxae 
k'leas  gwex£idaas  k-!es  la  klwela  gwaqMae  q lEing'ilayos  £nE£me- 
motasa  klwelasLe.  Wii,  la£me  gag'ostaweda  k!welasLe,  qa£s  la.  xame- 
LlEsEla  gwitxes  £iiE£memote  qa  g'iixes  tiigwekwa  lax  g'okwas. 
Wa,  g'iPmese  gwalExs  lae  q!walax"£id  £wl£la.     Wii,  la£me  ts!ots!E- 

55  tslElEmakwa  tsetsats  !exsilaLaxa  tsexLa,  yixs  mokwae.  Wa,  la£me 
lElwesEmakwa.  Wii,  he£misa  g"Igama£ye,  yixa  klwelasLe,  yixs 
g'iFmae  yagun5lislxa  iJaqwa.  Wii,  laxae  ts!ots!ElEinda.  Wii, 
laEmxae  lElwesEmakwa.  Wii,  he£misLa  Elkwiis  heEmxae  g^vale 
q!walax'aeyas.      Wii,    liiLe    £naxwaEm     cjIwalEnkwe    £nE£memotas. 


B0AS1  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  771 

done.     Now  all  the  members  of  the  numaym  are  dressed;  [|  and  after  60 
tins,  they  send  out  four  men   to  go   and   call  again,  |  for  the  first 
calling  of  the  tribes  has  been  given  the  night  before,  j  As  soon  as  the 
messengers  come  back,   they   take  a   paddle  and  |  stir  with  it  the 
soaked  salal-berries ;  and  as  soon  as  all  the  water  j  has  been  soaked 
into  the  salal-berries,  they  are  mushy.     Then  the  four  men  take  ||    . 
long-handled  ladles  and  dip  them  J  into   the  crabapples,  and  pour  05 
these  on  the  soaked  salal-berries.  j  They  do  not  stop  until  all  the 
crabapples  have  been  put  on  the  salal-berries.     Then  ,  they  take  the 
house-dishes  and  put   them  down  heading      towards  the  rear  of  the 
house,  and  they  stir  the  ||  salal-berries  mixed  with  crabapples.     When  70 
they  are  mixed,-  they  j  dip  them  out  with  their  ladles  from  their 
small  canoe  into  the  house-dishes.     Then  they  put  them  into  the  | 
house-dishes.     When  these  are  half  full,  there  is  enough  in  them;  j 
and  after  they  have  done  so,  they  take  small  dishes  and  put  them 
down  at  |  one  side  of  the  door.     After  doing  so,  they  go  again  calling 
(the  guests);  ||  and  when  the  people  come  who  have  been  called,  the  75 
speaker  of  the  host  stands  up  J  and  calls  out  to  those  who  are  coming 
in,     and     assigns    to    them    their  seats.     Then    he    |    says,   "Walk 
on,  chief,   to  your    seat    that    belongs  to  your  position!"   |   Every 
man  knows  his  seat,  j  and   they  go  right   to  it   and  sit  down.     As 
soon  as  ||  all  are  in,   they  give   the  drum  to   the  head   tribe,  |  the  SO 


Wa,  g'ibmese  gwab'allla  laas  eyalagEmeda  mokwe,  qa£s  la  etse£sta,  60 
qa  laenennaLas  LelElk!tisasE£weda  lelqwalaLa£yaxa  ganuxe.  Wa, 
g'ibmese  g'ax  aedaaqeda  etse£staxs  lae  ax-"edxa  se£wayowe,  qa 
xwetEga'yes  laxa  peqlugElIle  tlEqa,  yixs  lae  £wl£WElaqeda  -wape 
laxa  tlEqa.  Wa,  he£mis  lagilas  la  gEnke.  Wa,  la  ax£ededa 
tsetsatsexselElg  ise  moku  bebEgwaiiEmaxes  tsetsexLa,  qa£s  tsex£I-  65 
des  laxa  tsElxusta,  qa£s  la  giiqlEqas  laxa  pegEkwe  tlEqa.  Wa, 
al-mese  gwalExs  lae  £wI:wElaqeda  tsElx'sta  laxa  tlEqa.  Wa,  laxae 
&xeedxa  leloqiillle,  cpa£s  g'axe  mEx^llllElas.  Wa,  la£me  gwegwe- 
gEmlll  laxa  ogwlwalitasa  g'okwe.  Wa,  lax-da£xwe  xwetElgEndxa 
malaqEla  tlEqa  LE£wa  tsEl.x"sta.  Wii,  g-il£mese  lElgoxs  lae  tse-  70 
x-£itses  tsetsexLa  xwaxuxwagume  loquhla,  qa£s  la  tsEyasElas  laxa 
leloqiillle.  Wa,  gib'mese  naEngoyoxsdalaxs  lae  ha£yalats!a.  Wa, 
g'll£mese  gwalEXs  lae  ax'edxa  li:logume,  qa  g'axes  mExel  laxa 
apsostalilasa  tlEX'ila.  Wa,  giHmese  gwatexs  lae  etled  etseJsta. 
Wa,  gil'mese  g'axe  etseestanEmas  lae  Lax£ulila  Elkwasa  klwelase,  75 
qa£s  q!ax-sldza£yex  hogwiLElaena£yasa  bebEgwanEme.  Wa,  hesm 
eneg-atse:  "Qasak-as  g'Igama£ya  laxs  gugilasaos  k!wa£ya  g"iga- 
ma£ya."  Wa,  lii  £naxwa£ma  bebEgwanEme  qlalaxes  k!wa£ye. 
Wa,  la£me  he£nakulaEm  laq,  qa£s  la  k!wagalll  laq.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
EwielaeLExs  lae   hex£idaEm    XEmsasosa   mr.natsle    laxa    mi-.kuma£ya  80 


772  ETHNOLOGY  OF  THE  KWAKITJTL  Letb.  ann.  35 

£$2  Mamaleleqala,  to  sing  their  song.  (  You  know  how  the  drum  is  passed 
to  every  one  of  the  tribes,  |  (beginning  al  the  head  tribe),  for  each  one 

85  has  I  a  song  for  the  feast.  When  [i  they  have  all  sung  their  feast- 
songs,  the  drum  is  put  away  and  placed  |  at  one  side  of  the  door. 
Then  they  go  and  distribute  the  house-dishes;  and  when  this  has 
■  been  done,  they  carry  the  canoe  which  serves  as  a  house-dish  |  and 
put  it  down  in  front  of  the  one  who  has  given  a  feast  of  salal-berry 
cakes  j  and  crabapples  before,  for  this  is  to  show  who  has  given  such 

90  a  feast:  the  giving  of  the  !  small  canoe.  Then  they  call  out  the  name 
of  the  former  host.  |  and  then  he  speaks  proudly.  As  soon  as  | 
everything  has  been  distributed,  they  pass  about  the  small  dishes 
among  the  common  people  of  the  |  chiefs.  When  everything  has 
been  given  out,  they  eat  with  the  spoons,  for  these  |  have  been  dis- 

95  tributcd  already.  Now  the  speaker  rises  and  calls  his  numaym  to 
assemble  and  |  sing  their  feasting-song.  | 

I  have  forgotten  the  oil,  for  they  pour  some  on  the  |  mixed  salal- 
berries  and  crabapples  in  the  house-dishes.  As  soon  as  |  the  song- 
leader  has  sung  the  first  song,  the  daughter  of  the  host  comes  out,  || 
100  carrying  in  one  hand  the  copper:  and  when  the  numaym  |  of  the 
young  woman's  father  sings,  she  dances,  holding  !  the  copper  the 
lower  end  up  in  the  right  hand.      Then      lour  men  come  out,  carrying 

81  Mamaleleqala,  qa  dEnxEedeses  klwelayalayEwe  qlEmdEma.  Wfi, 
laEmLas  £naxwa  qlalax  laxtodalaena£yasa  mEnatsle  lax  gwalllEla- 
ena£yas  £waxasgEinagwasasa  lelqwalaLa£ye,  yixs  £naxwa£mae  klwel- 
g-a£l    dEnx£etses  k!wek!wela£yala    qlEinqlEmdEma.     Wa,    g"il£mese 

85  £wl£la  k!\velg'a£lExs  lac  ax£etsE£weda  mEnatsle,  qass  la  xEinstoli-iEm 
lax  apsostalilasa  ttexila.  Wa,  la£mese  hex'idaEm  k"ax,£idayoweda 
leloqulfle.  Wa,  g'il£mese  £v\i£laxs  lae  LElEmgilllEma  leloqulfle  xwa- 
xuxwagiima,  qa£s  lii  kaxdzamolIlEin  laxa  klwelesElaxa  malaqEla 
tlEqa    LE£wa    tsElx"sta,    qaxs    hermae    awElx'isalayoseda    leloqullle 

90  xwaxuxwaguma.  Wii,  he£me  la  LeqElasE£we  LegEmasa  klwcle- 
sEla.  Wa,  he'mis  la  LEmq!alag"llilats  yaq!Ent!alae.  Wa,  g-il£mese 
£wilgalilExs  lae  k*ax"£idayoweda  tElogume  laxa  bEgulkla£yasa  g'lg'E- 
gama£ye.  Wit,  gil£mese  '"wflg'alllExs  lae  £yos£Ida,  qaxs  lamiex'de 
tslEwanaedzEina    kak'EtslEnaqe.     Wii,     heme     Lax£ulileda    Elkwe. 

95  Wii,  la£me  Le£lalaxes  £nE£memote  qa  q  lap  !eg"lllles  qa  wiig'es  k!wa- 
melg-a£l  dEnx£eda. 

HexoLEn  LlElewesE-'wa  L!e£naxs  la£mex-de  k!unx£Idayo  laxa  ma- 
laqElatslaliixa  tteqa  LE£wa  tsElx"sta  leloqullla.  Wa,  gil-mese" 
doqaleda  nagadiixs  g'axae  1  a  1 1  lallle  tstedaqe  xunoxusa  klwelase 
100  dak" !olts lanaxa  Llaqwa.  Wa,  gil-mese  £naxwa  dEnx£ede  £nE£me- 
motas  ompasa  tslEdaqaxs,  lae  ylx£wida.  Wii,  la£me  ek'laxsda- 
leda    rJaqwitxs    dalaases    helk"  !ots!ana£ye    laq.     Wii,    he£mis    g-ax 


n0AS]  SOCIAL    CUSTOMS  773 

on  their  shoulders  the  empty  j  ladles.     They  dance  on  each  side  of 
the  woman  while     she  is  dancing,   two  on  each  side  of  her.  |  The  5 
four  men  do  not  dance  long  before     they  go  hack  to  where  the  oil- 
boxes  have  been  put  down.     All  four  of  them  J  dip  into  the  oil  with 
their  ladles  until  they  overflow.     Then  |  they  go,  so   that    the  oil 
drips  out,  and  they  give  it   to  the  chiefs,  ||  and  the  chiefs  stand  up.  10 
They  take  hold  of  each  end  of  the  ;  overflowing  ladle;  and  then  the 
men  who  handled  the  ladles  say  to  each  of  them,  |  "  Now,  chief,  draw 
this  in  with  your  breath,"  mentioning  his  I  name.     Then  theyreallv 
drink  all  the  oil;  and  j  if  some  of  the  chiefs  can  not  drink  it,  they 
just  ||  put  their  lips  to  the  ladle   and  pour  it     into  the  feast-dish.  15 
They  continue  doing  this,  although  they  have  now  ,  stopped  singing 
their  feasting-song.     When  the  [  oil-ladle  reaches  the  rival  of  the  host 
who  gives  the  salal-berry  and  |  crabapple  feast,   the  ladle  is  filled 
entirely  with  oil;  and  li  they  treat  it  roughly  when  they  go   to   the  •_>() 
place  where  (the  rival)  is  sitting,  so  that  the  oil  drips  out,  j  and  the 
young  man  who  brings  it  pretends  not   to  see  him  in  his  seat,  and 
thus  he  lets  I  the  oil  drip  on  the  chief  who  is  sitting  down.     Then 
he  stands  up  |   and  speaks,  and  sends  out  some  men  of  his  |  numavm 
to  bring  a  hundred  blankets,  or  even  two  hundred.  ||  Then  some  men  of  25 


hox£ult  lalllatsa  mokwe  bebEgwaiiEm  wIwix'SEyap  lalaxa  lopEmtsla- 3 
we     tsetsexLa,  qa£s     yix£wlde     lax     £\viix-sagawallla.sa     tsbsdaqaxs 
ylxwae.     Wa,  la-"me  maemalokwa  bebEgwanEme  lax  £wax-sagawa-  5 
bias.     Wa,    k'lest'e    gegilll    vixweda    mokwe    bebEgwanEmxs    lae 
ai.e;"sta  lax  hax'hanPlasasa  dedEngwats !e,  qa£s  la  £naxwaxs  mokwae 
tse£stases  tsetsexLa  laxa  L!e£na.     Wa,  la*  alakMala  tsetsKxulaxs  lae 
qas'Ideda    ts  lets  laoqiilxLalaxa  L'e£niixs  lae  tseqElilax  g'Tg'Egama've. 
Wa,  hex'-idarmese  Laxiimgillleda  g-Ig-Egama£ye,    qa£s  dadEbEndexa  ]o 
tsetsawek'ilaxa  L!e£na  tsext-a.  Wa,  hermis  la  £neg-atsa  tsatsexsilElg'ise 
bEgwanEiua:     "Wa,  gigiima£yii.  laEtn  xumt  ledi.oi.ai'."  i.ex£edE.x  i.e- 
gEmas.     Wii,  la£me  alax'-id  nax'ideda  nenaq  lenoxwaxa  l  !e£na.     Wa, 
gil'mese  wayatslala    aaqeda  vraokwe  glgi;gama-ya    lae  ai;m  ham- 
g-agEndxa     tsetsawek'llaxa      L!e£na     tsexLa,     qa£s     la     giiqEylnts  \:> 
laxes    loqula.      Wii,     la£me    he.vsaEin    gwegilaxs    wax-"mae    lai.al 
qlwel'ideda  k!wame£lala    dEnxEla.     Wa,  g'il£mese    lag'aa    tseqlena- 
£vasesa    L!e£na    laxa    hayotasa    klwelasasa    malaqEla   tteqa    LE£wa 
tsElx"staxs  lae   alax-£id    la    qotlamasxa    tsexi.iisa    L!e£na.     Wii,   hi 
eMtsilaxs   lae    guyobsla    lax     k!wae£lasas,    qa    tsawelcilesa    L!e£na.  £0 
Wa,  la  esbola    doqulaqexs    klwaelae.     Wa,  he-'mis   la  tsawex£aLE- 
latsa    L!ec"na  laxa   g-igama£yaxs    klwaelae.     Wa,   he£mis  la  i.nx-ulT- 
datse,  qa£s  yaq!Eg-a£le.     Wii,  la£me  £yalaqasa  g-ayole  lax    EnE£me- 
motas,  qa  liis  gEmxaxa  lak^Ende  ptelxElasgEma  loxs   ma£lp!Enya- 
gae.     Wii,  la  hex-£ida£mese  la  hoquwElse  £nE£memotas.     We.  laEin  l., 


774  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ieth.  ann.  35 

26  his  numaym  at  once  go  out,  but  |  he  never  takes  the  ladle,  and  the 
one  who  handles  the  ladles  [  returns  with  it.  Then  he  tells  his 
numaym  to  take  care  not  |  to  let  their  fire  be  putout  by  the  fire  of  the 
rival  chief:  and  while  he  says  this,  he  pours  into  the  fire  [  the  oil 
(that  was  to  have  been  drunk) ;  and  then  he  says  to  the  fire,  "Now,  || 

30  spirit  of  the  fire,  open  your  mouth,  son,  so  that  you  get  enough  to 
eat!"  I 

Then  those  who  went  out  to  get  the  blankets  come  in,  |  and  then 
the  members  of  the  numaym  of  the  rival  chief  each  takes  hold  of 
an  end  of  the  |  blankets  and  spread  them  over  the  fire  of  the  host.  | 

35  Now  they  put  it  out,  and  then  the  host  goes  and  takes  more  II  salal- 
berries  and  crabapples,  and  the  copper  which  his  daughter  was  car- 
rying I  when  she  was  dancing,  and  he  pushes  it  under  the  feast-fire.  | 
At  the  same  time  the  four  young  men  who  handle  the  ladles  dip  them 
into  the  oil;  and  when  they  are  |  full,  they  pour  the  oil  into  the 
fire;  |  and  then  those  who  try  to  put  out  the  fire  run  away  on  account 

40  of  the  heat,  for  ||  the  oil  and  the  blankets  are  burning  together;  and 
then  I  the  host  takes  the  oil  and  pours  it  among  his  rivals.  | 

Nolis,  who  died  some  time  ago  at  Alert  Bay,  tried  to  put  out  the 
fire  with  seven  canoes,  |  and  he  had  the  oil  poured  on  his  face  by  the 
great   host  of  the  Lawetsles.     Besides,  |   he  put   on  four  hundred 

45  blankets.     The  house  was  nearly  ||  burned.     All  the  roof-boards  were 

26  hewaxa  dadalaxa  L!e£nats!ala  tsexLa.  Wit,  tVmeseda  tsatsexsllElgfse 
g"ax  aedaaqas.  Wa,  la£me  ha£yaL!5laxes  £nE£memote,  qa  k'leses 
k'!ilx£ide  lEgwIlases  glgama£ye.  A'nie.  £nek'ixs  lae  gu.xLEntsa 
L!e-na    laxa    lEgwile.     Wa,    he£rais    la    £neg"atsexa    lEgwIle:"   Wii, 

30  klwaxxala,  aqalala,  wisa,  qa£s  poLElaos." 

Wii,  g-ax£me  hogwlusleda  lax'de  gEmxaxa  p!ElxElasgEme.  Wii, 
hex'ida£mese  g'iig'alaplo  £nE£memotasa  g-eqEmx,£Ide  dadEnxaxa 
plElxElasgEme,  qa£s  lii  LEpLalas  laxa  klwelasdEma  lEgwIla.  Wii, 
laEm    k'lilxaq.     Wii,    he£mis    la    ax£edaatsa   k!welasasa    malaqElii 

35  tlEqa  LE£wa  tsElxustaxa  Llaqwa,  yix  daaxudases  xiinokwaxs 
gaxex'de  yixwa,  qa£s  L&yabodes  faxes  klwelasdEma  lEgwIla;  wii, 
lada  mokwe  tsetsaxsilElg'is  tsex,£id  laxa  L!e£na.  Wa,  lii  £naxwa 
qoqiitlaxs  lae  £nEmax,£Id  giixLEnts  laxa  klwelasdEma  lsgwila. 
Wa,  he£mis  la  yawas£ld  bawatsa    k"!ilxaxa    Llesaliisa  lEgwile,   qaxs 

40  lae  xTx'aqiiweda  i.!ecna  LE£wa  plElxElasgEme.  Wii,  he£mis  la 
guqElgEndaatsa    klwelase  g'Igamesa  L!e£na  laxes  hilyote. 

Yix  Nolisde  lax  £yillse  laek-!ilxasa  aLEbotsIaqe  xwaxwfiklflnaxs 
lae  guqEmtsosa  L!e£niisa  £wiilase  klwelatsa  Liiwetslese.  Wa,  he- 
£misa   moplEnyag'e    p!ElxElasgEina;    wii  he£misa   gokwax  halsEla- 

45  £mae  k'les  £naxwaEm  xumt!edes  sala.     Wii,  he£mEn  dogid  ala  k"!il- 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  775 

burned.     And  this  is  the  most  real  attempt  at  |  putting  out  the  fire  4fi 
of  a  feast  that  I  have  seen.     The  feastgiver  of  the  Lawetsles  had 
two  hundred  j  blankets  and    five  canoes,     and   also   small  cuppers. 
This  is  the  |  worst  thing  that  chiefs  do  when  they  really  get  angry, 
and  II  at  such  a  time  the  house-dishes  are  scorched  by  the  lire.  |  50 

When  all  this  is  done,  they  go  out.  Then  |  the  floor  of  the  house 
is  soaked  with  oil.  j  The  numaym  of  the  host  go  out  and  carry  the 
house-dishes  and  the  small  canoe  that  served  as  a  feast-dish  to  those 
to  whom  they  belong;  and  as  soon  as  they  have  been  carried  out,  itis 
finished.  ||  That  is  all  about  this.  |  .  55 

Feast  of  Qot  !xole 

Now,  when  the  winter  conies,  the  owner  of  the  qot  !xole  [  intends  1 
to  give  a  feast  to  his  people  of  berries  mixed  with  oil.  |  Then  he  sends 
out  the  young  men  belonging  to  his  numaym  to  |  call  his  guests:  and 
as  soon  as  they  go,  his  wife  takes  the     dishes  and  puts  them  down  5 
next  to  her  place,  and  also  her  spoons,  j  and  shredded  cedar-bark  to 
wipe  out  the  dishes     and  spoons.     Now  she  wipes  them  out  while 
her     husband   is  clearing  out   the  house.     He  also  spreads  down  j 
mats  for  his  guests  to  sit  on;  and  he  takes  out  the  II  box  containing  10 
the  berries  and  oil,  which  is  put  down  at  the  left-hand  side  of  the   j 
door  of  the  house.     As  soon  as  the  young  men  have  called  four 

x£edamasxa  k'welasdEma  lEgwIla.     Wa.,  la  maslp!Enyaga£me  p!El-  46 
xElasgEmasa    klwelase  Lawetslesa;  wa,    he£misa  sEk!ats!aqe    xwa- 
xwakluna;     wa     he£misLeda     LlaiJagume.      Wa,    heEin     alakMala 
eyax-sEm  gweg'ilatsa  g"Ig'Egama£ye,  yixs  alak"!alae  laElwis£Ida.    Wa, 
he£mis  la  EnaxwaEm  la  k!wek!umElx-EIdaatsa  teloqullle.  50 

Wa,  giFniese  gwatexs  lae  hoqiiwElsa.  Wa,  la£me  '"naxwaEm 
la  LEqe  awlnagwllasa  gokwasa  L!e£na.  Wa,  fr'mise  la  £wljla  la 
k'aodale  EnEEmemotasa  klwelasaxa  leloqulfle  LEewa  lelociEla  xwa- 
xuxwagum  lax  klkiikElaq.  Wa,  gik'mese  £\\  idawElsExs  lae  gwala. 
Wit,  lafme  gwal  laxeq.  55 

Feast  of  QotIxole 
Wii,  la£mes   ts!awiinx-IdExs   lae    £nenk' !ex:ideda    qodadasa    qot!- 1 
xole,  qaes  wiig'e  qotqwatamasxes    g"6kfllote  laxa  Llakwe    qotlxola. 
Wa,  la£mese    eyalaqasa    haeyalea    g'ayol  laxes    -iiE;memote,  qa  las 
Leelala.     Wii,  gil-mese  laxs  lae  hex-£idaeme  g-EiiEmas  ax£edxes  IoeI- 
cjlwe,  qa£s    g'iixe .  niEx£al!lElaq    laxes  klwaelase    LE£wis    k-ak"Ets!E- 5 
naqe   LE-wa   qloyaakwe   k'adzEkwa  qafs    dedEg"iganoxes    loElqlwe 
i.E£wa   k'ak'EtslEiiaqe.      Wa,   hr'me    dedEg'ig'as  laq,  yixs  laai.es   la- 
EwunEme  ekwaxa   awiestal2ases  g"5kwe.      Wa,   laxae    LEp  lalllElaxa 
leF.l£\va£ye,    qa  k IwadzEwesolts  i.e£laiiEmi.as.     Wa,  he£misa  Llagwa- 
ts!e  qotlxole  Lawatsaxs  g-fixae  hanstolllas  lax  gEmxotsalilas  t!Exi-     10 
his   g-okwas.      Wa,  g'iFmese    mop!Ene£steda    ha£yrd£a    la   etse£staxs 


776  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Hern.  ann.  35 

12  times,  |  the  guests  come  in:  and  when  they  are  in.  they  sing  |  an 
ordinary  song,  not  a  feast-song.  |  After  having  sung  four  songs,  the 

15  young  men  take  the  dishes  and  II  put  into  them  the  oil  and  berries. 
■They  do  not  put  much  in,  because  it  is  difficult  to  eat  and  to 
swallow.  Therefore  they  put  a  little  into  the  dishes.  After  this 
has  been  done,  they  put  them  down,  one  dish  in  front  of  each  | 
four  men.     At  the  same  time  when  they  put  down  the  dishes,  |  the 

20  spoons  are  distributed;  and  when  everything  has  been  placed,  II  the 
guests  begin  to  eat  the  oil  and  berries.  They  never  |  eat  it  all, 
because  it  is  hard  work  to  eat  it.  When  they  |  have  finished,  they 
go  out.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

Social  Position   and  Marriage  Laws  ' 

1  Chief's  Daughter.2 — Generally  the  princess  of  )  Chief  £maxuyalidze 
gets  married  at  once  when  Iv'  !edele£laku  |  comes  out  of  the  place 
where  she  has  been  sitting  still.  As  soon  as  the  princess  is  married, 
she  I  has  the  name  modzll  (Keeping-up-the-Blanket) ,  if  she  becomes 
the  modzll  of  a  real  chief.  || 

5  However,  she  remains  a  princess  of  the  chief  if  her  husband  is  a 
common  man.  |    Then  she  is  never  called  modzll  as  wife  (of  the  com- 


12  g'axae  £wrlaeLes  Le£lanEme.  Wa,  g  iPmese  £wilaeLExs  lae  dEnx£i- 
deda  klwelasa  qlEmdEniexa  k'lese  klwelayalayo  qlEnulEma.  Wa, 
g-il£mese    mosgEmodExs    lae  ax£ededa   ha'yfd'axa  loElq  !we,  qa£s  la 

15  tsets!alasa  Llakwe  qotlxole  laq.  Wa,  lii  k!es  q!eq!Ets!a,  qaxs  alae 
laxuml  lax  qotqwattsE£wa  Llakwe  qotlxola.  Wa,  he£mis  lag'ila  ho- 
laltslaweda  loElqlwe.  Wa,  gil-mese  gwatexs  lae  k'agEinlllElas  laxa 
maemokwe  bebEgwanEma.  Wii,  la  'nEmfdagillla  k'iisa  loElqlwe 
LE£wa    k"ak-Ets!Enaqaxs   lae    ts lEwanaedzEma.     Wii,  giFmese  ewil- 

20  g'alilExs  lae  qotqwat!edExda£x"xa  Llakwe  qotlxola.  Wii,  la  k!ets!e- 
nox"  £wI£lasE£wa,  qaxs  alae  laxuml  lax  ha£ma£ye.  Wii,  g'il£mese 
gwfdExs  lae  hoqiiwElsa.     Wii,  la£me  gwal  laxeq. 

Social  Position  and  Marriage  Laws  ' 

1  Chief's  Daughter.-' — Wii.  lii  qlunala  hex,£idaEm  qadz§LasE£we  k'!e- 
delasa  g*Igania£ye  miaxuyalidze.  ytxa  lalosEla  k'!edeltse  K:!ede- 
leflakwe.  Wii,  g'ilmiese  qadzeLasE£weda  k"!edete  lae  hex'£idaEm 
LegadEs  inodzele  yixs  alak'lalae  g-igama£yes  modzelide. 

5  Wii.  wiix';mese  kedeltsa  g"Iga,ma£ya  la£wadasa  bEgwanEmq la- 
lame,  wii,  lii  hewaxaEm    Leqalayuwe    modzele  lax  gEnicmas.     Wii, 

1  For  additional  matter  sec  Addenda,  p.  1333. 
^Continued  from  p.  701,  line  .",:. 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  777 

mon  man),  |  and  she  is  still  the  princess  of  her  father  the  chief.     I  7 
just  wanted  to  talk  |  about  the  common  men.  j 

Now  when  the  princess  is  married  to  a  chief,  then  she  is  ||  called  a  ID 
modzil,  when  she  first  goes  into  the  house  of  her  husband.  |  Now  I 
am  talking  about  the  chief  of    the  numaym  Maamtag'ila.  j    £maxu- 
yalidze,  whose  princess  is   K'  ledeledak11.     Not  |  long  after  she   has 
been  married  to  her  husband,  her  father  pays  the  marriage  debt :  and 
she  has  for  her  canoe  mast  |  an  expensive  copper.     And  he  gives  as  a 
marriage-gift  a  name  to  the  husband  ||  of  his  princess  and  much  food  15 
with  it,  and  also  canoes.  |  This  is  what  is  called  "paying-t he-marriage- 
debt,   sitting-in-the-canoe-of-the-princess;"  for   generally    there    are 
twenty  |  who  sit  in  the  canoes  of  the  princess  of  a  real  chief,  |  when 
they  put  down  the  copper  j  bracelets  and  small  coppers  and  many 
dishes  and  the  ||  anchor-line  of  many  spoons;when  all  this  has  been  20 
put  |  down  Chief  miaxuvalidze  says,  "Now  f  will  go  and  |  call  my 
princess  that  you  may  see  her  come.''     Thus  lie  says,  and  goes  into  j 
his  house.     And  before  long  he  comes  back  walking  ahead  of  j  his 
princess,  and  the  chief  stands  outside  id' his  ||  house,  and  his  princess  25 
comes  and  stands  by  his  side.     She  wears  j  a  blanket  covered  with 
abalone  shells,  and  entirely  covered  with  abalone  shells  |  is  her  hat. 
Her  abalone-covered  blanket  j  is  called  "  the-heavy-abalone-covercd 


IfiLe  k-!edelts;iEmses  g"igama£ye  ompa.    A;mi:n  £nex-  qEn  gwagwex--  7 
sEX'£Ide  laxa  bEgwanEmq  lalame. 

Wa,   la£me   lawadeda    k'ledelasa    g'igama£ye,    wa.  la  hex*£idaEm 
LegadEs  modzlle,  yixs  g-alae  laei.  lax  g'okwases  la:wunicme,  laxEn  10 
heena'ye  gwagwex-s£alase  g"igama£yasa    EnE£memotasa  Maamt  ag'ila 
lax  £maxuyalidze,  yixs  kMedadaases    K- !edele£lakwe.     Wa,  k'!est!a 
gala  la-'watses  hvwunEine  lae  qotex'a  ompas.     Wa,  la   Lak'Eyalaxa 
qteyoxwe  Llaqwa.     Wa   LegEmg'ElxLala    qa  LegEms  la£wunEmawa- 
ses  k"!edele    LE£wa  qlenEme    ha£mayaaxses  LO£ma   xwaxwaklunaxa  15 
gwE£yasa  qotex'a  k!waxsalats!esa  k"!edele,  yixs  qlunalae  maltsEm- 
g'ustawa    k!waxsalats!e    xwaxwaklunas    k'ledelnsa    alak"!ala    gigE- 
ma'va.      Wa,    gihniese  £wl£la    g'ax    ax£EldzEmaxa    l  lax  laqwak"  line 
k-!6kiila  LE£wa  L!ax!axsEme;  wa,  he£misa  qlenEme  teloqlwa   LE£wa 
mogwaiuV'ya    qlenEme     k-ak-ats!Enaqa.     Wa,    g-il£mese    £wi£la    ax-  Hi) 
:"i:lsa  laeda  g'igama£ye    £maxuyalidze    £nek-a:     "LamiEii   lal    i.e-'la- 
lalxEn  k'lt'dela  qa£s    g"5.xlag-aos    dox£waLElaqe,"  mek'Kxs    lae  laeL 
laxes     g-okwe.      Wa,    k-!est!a    galaxs    g-ftxae      aedaaqa     g-alag-i- 
weses  k'.edele.     Wa,  hr'me  i.axullseda  g'lgama^e  lax  i.lasana-  vases 
g-okwe.     Wit,  g-axe    kMedelas    LawunSdzElsaq.     Wa,  la-me    nicxu    25 
nalaxa  mEgEsgEmalaxa  exts!i:me.     Wa,  laxae  ;"naxwai:m  ex'tslEme 
osgEma-"yas    LEtEmlas.     Wa,  beEin    i.egade   ex'ts lEmsgEme  rni:x£u- 
neses  ex-ts lEmala  6max-dEmk' !ed  iiEx'Tme.     Wa,  la  r.egade  LEtEmlas 


778  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [ETH.  ANN.  SB 

blanket,"  and  her  hat  is  called  |  "  the-heavy-abalone-covered  hat." 

30  Then  the  chief,  II  the  father  of  K'  !edele£lakn  speaks,  and  says, 
"Come  and  look  at  this  |  weight  which  originates  with  our  family 
history,  when  the  chieftainess  carried  the  copper.  Now  stand  up,  | 
son-in-law,  I  will  dress  you."  Thus  says  the  chief,  and  takes  |  the 
alialone-covered  blanket  of  the  chieftainess  and  her  abalone-covered 
hat  and  |  promises  to  give  them  to  his  son-in-law,  and  he  takes  his 

35  copper  and  gives  ||  it  also  to  his  son-in-law.  Then  he  calls  his  son-in- 
law  to  come  and  |  take  them.  The  son-in-law  comes  and  stands  in 
front  of  his  |  father-in-law  and  of  his  wife,  the  chieftainess.  Then 
the  |  abalone-covered  blanket  is  put  on  to  him  and  the  abalone- 
covered  hat  is  put  on  to  him,  |  and  he  is  given  the  copper.     Then  the 

40  chief  says  to  his  ||  son-in-law,  "O  son-in-law!  now  I  have  changed 
your  chief's  dress,  |  son-in-law.  Nowgo!  It  is  finished.  Youliavemy 
chieftainess  for  your  wife."  Thus  he  says,  |  and  takes  off  the  large 
ear-ornaments  of  abalone  shell  on  each  ear  of  the  chieftainess  and 
the  j  nose-ornament  of  abalone  shell  and  attaches  the  ear-ornaments 
to  his  son-in-law,  and  |  he  also  puts   the  nose-ornament  of  abalone 

45  on  to  him.  Then  his  son-in-law  ||  goes  back  and  stands  where  his 
nuinayin  is  standing,  and  he  |  speaks,  and  says,  "Look  at  me, 
numaym!  )  Now  my  whole  chief's  dress  has  been  changed  by  my 
father-in-law.  [  Now  the  chieftainess  my  wife,  has  no  dress."  Thus 
he  says  as  he  walks  along  j  and  goes  into  his  house,  and  the  property 

yJs  e.vts iF.mala  omagEml  LEtEml.  Wii,  la£me  yaq  !Eg,a£ledag"igama£ye 

30  omps  K'!edele'lakwe.  Wa,  la  £neka:  "Weg'a,  doqwalaxg'ada  no- 
yambalisEk'  o£ma  lax  dalaeda  o'maxa  Llaqwa.  Wa,  Lax£uls  lag-a 
nEgiimp,  qF.n  q!walax-£idaOL,"  ;nek-eda  g"Igama£yaxs  lae  axodEX 
ex-ts'.Emala  enEX£unesa  o-ma  i.E-wes  ex"ts!Emala  LEtEml.  Wa,  la£me 
lak" !Eg-a£lts  laxes  nEgumpe.     Wii,  la  ax£edxa  Llaqwa  qa£s  sapledes 

35  laxaaxes  nEgumpe.  Wa,  la  Le£lalaxes  nEgumpe  qa  he£mes  g"Jix 
ax£edi:q.  Wa,  g'axe  nEgumpas  Lax£uls  lax  iiEqEmalasases  nE- 
gumpe LF/wis  gEnEmas  5£ma.  Wa,  la£me  £nEx£unyowa  ex'tslE- 
mala  £nEx£une  laq.  Wa.laxae  LEtEmdayuwaex/ts'.Emala  LEtEml  laq. 
Wii,   lii  tslaya  Llaqwa    laq.      Wa,  lii    Enekeda    gigama£yaxes    nE- 

40  giimpe:  "Wa,  nicgump,  la£mEn  L  !ayEwi£lalaxos  g'exdEmk"  Itnaqos, 
nEgiimp.  Wii,  hag'a,  laFins  gwal  gEg'adEsg'En  o£mak\"  -'nek'Exs 
lae  axodEx  awawe  xogum  ex'tslEm  £waxsodatEwesa  6£ma  le£wii 
kedzelba£yas  ex'tslEma,  qa£s  tleg'atodales  laxes  nEgumpe.  Wii, 
laxae    kedzelbEntsa    extslEme    laq.       Wii,     lawisi.a    nEgumpas  la 

45  qas£ida  qa£s  lii  Lax£uls  lax  Lax£wEdzasas  £nE£memotas.  We,  la£me 
vaq!Eg-a£la.  Wii,  la  £nek'a;  "Wag'a,  dox£wid  gaxEn,  nos  £nE£me- 
mot.  LaEmg"a  L!ayEwi£lalaso£giin  g"exdEmk"!Eng'a  ylsEii  nEgumpe. 
La£me  aEm  la  xanalalElseda  o£maxEn  gEnEme,"  £nek,Exs  lae  qas£ida 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  779 

with  which   the  marriage  debt  has  been  paid  is  carried  II  into  his  50 
house.     When  everything  has  been  carried   in,  it   is  given  away  to 
all  |  the  tribes,  when  day  comes.     That  is  all  about  this.  | 

When  the  father  (of  a  princess)  dies,  then  her  brother  has  her  for 
his  princess.  Then  he  is  no  longer  her  brother,  for  |  she  is  now  the 
princess  of  her  brother  who  is  now  her  lather.  [  Only  the  eldest  one 
of  the  brothers  has  his  youngest  sister  for  his  princess.  II  As  soon  as  55 
she  gets  married,  she  is  modzil  of  her  husband;  |  and  her  elder 
brother  pays  the  marriage-debt  to  the  husband  of  his  princess,  his 
sister,  |  because  they  never  stop  calling  the  daughter  of  a  chief 
princess,  |  unless  she  becomes  a  chieftainess.  When  she  is  chief- 
tainess, she  is  no  more  |  princess,  and  she  gives  the  name  princess  to 
her  daughter;  ||  but  the  name  modzil  is  different,  for  she  has  only  the  60 
name  modzil  |  when  she  has  for  her  husband  a  chief.  If  she  should 
separate  from  her  husband,  |  then  she  is  no  longer  called  modzil  of 
her  husband;  but  if  j  she  takes  another  husband  who  is  a  real  chief, 
then  she  is  again  |  modzil  of  her  husband.     That  is  all.  || 

Chieftainess.' — It  hurt  (£niaxulayfigwa's)  heart  that  she  was  never  j   1 
called  the  modzil  of  (Wag'idis) ;  for  thus  they  call  tin-  wife  of  a  |  real 
chief  as  soon  as  a  chief ^ marries  a  princess  of  j    another  chief  (it  is 
well  for  me  to  name  the  other  ||  chief,  so  that  you  kn<  iw  how  they  call  the  5 

qa£s  lii  laei>  laxes  g'okwe.     Wii,  laeme  mEweLElayowa  qotenayowe 
lax  g'okwas.     Wa,  gihmese  EwI£laeLa    lac  yax£widayo  laxa  '"naxwa  50 
lelqwalaLa£yaxa  la  £nax'£ida.     Wa,  laicm  Laba  laxeq. 

Gil£Em  lE£le  omps  lae  bEgwaiiEm  wF.qNvas  hela  k'ledadES.  Wii, 
la£me  wEq  !wanuxus  qaxs  la£me  k-  ledeltses  wEq  Iwaxes  la  ompa,  yixs  le- 
x-a£maeda  Enolast!EgEma£yasa  EnE£mema  la  k/!edadEses  ts!a£ya  ts!E- 
daqa.  Wa,  giPmese  lawada  visa  gigama£ye  lae  mSdzIltses  hVwiinEme.  55 
Wa,  he£mise  noliis  la  qotexax  lanvunEmases  kledeles  WEqlwa 
laqexs  hewaxae  gwal  LegadEs  k'ledela  tstedaqe  xunoxusa  g"Iga- 
ma£ye  lag-aa  laqexs  lae  o£ma.  Wii,  gih'mese  la  6£maxs  lae  gwal 
k-Iedela.  Wii,  la£me  lasases  k'ledele  LegEm  laxes  xiinokwe  is!e- 
daqa.  Wa,  lii  ogwaqaleda  modzele  yixs  lex"a£mae  Legadaatses  mo-  60 
dzile,  yix  hVwadaasa  gigama-ye.  YViixe  \v  !asa  LE£wes  la£wunEme 
lae  hex-£idaEm  gwal  LegadEs  modzllases  la£wunEme.  Wax'e  la- 
£wadEx-£Itsa  ogMa  alak:!ala  g?gama£ya  lae  etled  la  LegadEs  mo- 
dzllases hVwiinEme.     Wii,   lar.m   laba. 

Chieftainess.1— Wa,  heEm  ts'.EX'ila  lax  naqa-'yas  (£maxulayugwa)  1 
yixs  hewaxae  Leqalasos  modzilas  (Wag'idis)  liix  gwek- lalasaxa  gknE- 
masaalak-!alag-Igama£ya,ylxsgll£maeqadzeLasE£wa  k" ledelasagTga- 
ma£ye,    yisa   ogiVla    gigama£yae — ex'EmLEULo    Lex£edEx    LegEmas 
£nEmokwa  g-igama£ya  qa£s  q!ala5sax  gwekMiilasax  ale  gEiiEms, — yix  5 

'  Continued  from  p.  1117,  line  2S4. 


780  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Iexh.ann.35 

6  new  wife)  Emaxuyalidze.  |  And  when  Emaxfl.yalidze  lias  been  married 

four  days  |  to  his  wife,  then  all  the  men  say,  "Go  on,  let  us  |  sec  the 
chief taincss  of  onr  chief  £maxuy.alidze,"  |  and  they  all  go  into  the 

10  door  of  the  house.  Then  the  ||  leader  says,  "We  come  to  sec  the 
back  of  the  chieftainess  of  |  Emaxuyalidze."  If  she  is  a  good  chief- 
tainess, she  arises  and  |  takes  her  belt.  She  lifts  her  blanket  so  that 
it  is  |  just  below  her  knees.     Then  she  puts  on  her  belt;  |  and  after 

15  doing  so, she  quickly  spreads  mats  on  the  floor  ||  for  those  to  siton  who 
come  to  see  her  back.  Then  she  |  gets  food  for  those  who  come  to 
see  the  back  of  the  chieftainess  of  'maxuvalidze.  J 

This  is  called  by  the  Indians  "a  good  chieftainess  of  the  chief," 
who  does  |  this,  and  they  call  her  modzll  (  =  lifting-blanket-in-the 
house),  because  she  lifts  her     blanket,  and  puts  on  her  belt.     She  is 

20  a  bad  ||  chieftainess  of  the  chief  if  she  just  sits  down  when  those  conic 
in  who  come  to  see  her  back.  J  She  just  asks  her  husband's  young 
men  to  [  take  care  of  the  food  that  she  is  going  to  give.  After  those 
have  eaten  who  come  to  see  her  back,  |  they  go  out.  Often  the 
chief  |  tells  his  chieftainess   to  go   away,   and    to  go    to   her  house, 

25  because  the  chief  is  ashamed  ||  if  the  chieftainess  does  not  lead  his 
tribe  to  their  places  when  they  j  come  into  his  house.  That  is  all 
about  this.  | 


6  Emaxuyalidze.  Wa,  g'ilEmese  mop!EnxwaEs  qadzeLayag-ule  Emaxu- 
yalidzaxes  gEnEme  lae  EnaxwaEma  bebEgwanEme  Enek-a:  "  Wedza- 
xins  dogwig"alllaxox  modzilaxsEns  g"igamaeyax  laxox  emaxuyali- 
dzax."     Wa,  lax-daExwe   hogwiLa  laxa   tlEX'llasa  gokwe.     Wa,  la 

10  Eneke  g"alag'iwaEyas:  "GaxEnu-'x"  dogwigwalllax  modzilexs  !ma- 
xuyalidze,"  nek'e.  Wa,  g*tlEmese  eka  modzile  lae  hex"EidaEm 
Laxmllla  qa£s  dax'-ide.xes  wuseg'ano.  \\-\,  lii  moseidxes  ;'iiex£u- 
naEye  qa  halsElaEmes  bEnagawes  okwiix'a-yas  lae  wuseg'oEyotses 
wiiseg"anowe.      Wii,  g"llEmese    gwala   lae    hanakwila    LEplalilElasa 

15  leElEwaEye  qaklwadzaliltsosa  dogw!g"alilaq.  Wa,  laEme  la  axEedxa 
lnr'miii.asa  dogwig" alflax  modzilas  Emaxuyalidze. 

Wa,  hi'icni  gwEeyosa  baklume  ex'  mod/.iltsa  g"igamaEya  he 
gwexse.  Wa,  licicm  lag'ilas  LegadEs  modzil,  yixs  lae  mosEidxes 
EnExEunaEye  qaEs  wuseg-oEyodeses  wuseg'ano.     Wax'eda  Eyax-sEme 

20  niodziltsa  g-Ig-amaEye  aEmese  klwaeb'.xs  g'axae  hogwiLeda  dogvvl- 
g-alilaq.  Wa,  aEmes  la  axk- !ale  laEwunEmasexa  haEyalEa  qa  heEmes 
aaxsllax  hamg-ilay5Laseq.  AVii,  g  ikmese  gwfil  haEmapeda  dogwi- 
g'alilaq,  lae  hoqtiwElsa.  Wii,  lii  qlunala  aEmhex'EidaEma  g-igamaEye- 
qayawElsaxes  mSdzil  qa  las  nir'nak"  laxes  g'okwe;  qaxs  max'ts'.aeda 

25  g"igamaEyaxs  k"!esae  q!ax*sIdzaEyes  modzilaxes  g'okulotaxs  g'axae 
hogwlL  lax  g'okwas.     Wa,  lawesLa  laba. 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  7M 

Endogamy. — I'll  talk  about  LalellLla,  head  chief  |  of  the  numaym   1 
DzedzEmeleqala  of  the  Nak!wax'da£xu.  j  Now  LalellLla  had  for  his 
wife  the  daughter  of  his  younger  brother  YaxLEn,  |  whose  name  was 
Ha£meLas.     The  first  wife  of  LalellLla  was  his  niece.  ||  Then   LalellLla  5 
married  again  XwelageLas,  the  |  princess  of  Hayalk'En,  chic!'  of  the 
numaym  SesEnL  !e£  of  the  |  Gwa£sEla.     Then  LalellLla  had  two  wives. 
His  head   wife  was  his  niece  |  Hiim£eLas,   and   his  second   wife  was 
XwelageLas.     Then  |  Ha£m§Las  gave  birth  to  a  daughter,  and  she 
was  named  Llaqwag'ilayugwa.  ||  Then  his  second  wife  gave  birth  to  10 
a  boy,  and  j  he  had  the  name  Sewid.     As  soon  as  Sewid  was  grown 
up,  |  he    married   Llaqwag'ilayugwa,  and    Sewid    and  j  Llaqwag'ila- 
yugwa were  not  married  for  a  long  time.     Llaqwag'ilayugwa  had  a 
younger  sister  |  Llalaga.     Then  Llaqwag'ilayugwa  married  Helamas,|| 
the  eagle  of   the  numaym  G'exsEm  of   the  Nak!wax'da£xu.  ]  Then  15 
Llalaga  married  Gwales  G'exk'Endze,  head  chief  of  the  numaym  | 
Sesr.ni.  leof  theNak  !wax"da£xu.  And  \  Ilelamas  andhiswife  l  laqwag'i- 
'avugwa  had  not  been  married  for  a  long  time  when  she  was  with 
child,  |  and  her  younger  sister   Llalaga   was  also  witli  child.      And 
i.  Ifiqwag' ilayugwa  had  been  with  child  for  six  H  months  her  husband  He-  20 
lamas  [became  ill  and  after  a  short  time  he  died.  |  He  left  his  wife  i.laq- 
wag'  ilayugwa  with  child.   Then  l  laqwag'  ilayugwa  gave  birth  j  to  a  boy, 

Endogamy. — HeEmi.nn     gwagwex,s£alasLe     LalellLlaxa     xamagE-  1 
ma£ye  gigamesa    £nE£memotasa   DzedzEmeleqalasa    Naklwax'da-'x". 
Wii,  la£lae  LalellLla  gEg'adics  tslEdaqe  xiinokwases  ts!a£ye  YaxLEn- 
xa  Legadiis  H;i£meLas.     Wii,  heEm  g"il£El  gEnEms  LalellLlaxes  i.ole- 
gas.     Wii.  la-lae    etlede    LalellLla    gEg"adEx-£IdEs " XwelageLas  yix  5 
k'ledelas  Hayalk'En,  yixa  g*igama£yasa  £nE£memotasa  SesEin.  !a£yasa 
Gwa£sEla.     Wii,  la£me  ma-lele  LalellLla.     Wii,  la£me  gF.qEinalTle  Lole- 
gasase  Ha£meLas.     Wii.  lit   alele  XwelageLas.     Wa,  la£me  mayohide 
Ha£meLasasa    ts  lats  ladagEm.      Wa.   la£me    LegadEs    Llaqwag'ilayu- 
gwa.     Wii,  lii    maydhide  alele    gEiiEmsesa  babagume.     Wa,  heme  in 
LegadEs    Sewide.     Wa,    gih'mese     q  lulsq  !ul£yax£wida    lae     Sewide 
gEg"adEx-£idES  Llaqwag'ilayugwa.     Wa,  k'est  la  gala  gEg'ade  Sewi- 
diis  Llaqwag'ilayugwa,    wii,  laEm  ts  !a£yanokwe   Llaqwag'ilayugwas 
Llalaga.     Wa,  la  la£wadEX'£id  etlede  Llaqwag'ilayugwas  Helamasxa 
kwekwasa     £nEememotasa    G'exsEmasa     Nak  !wax'da£xu.       Wii,     lii  15 
Ia.£wadEX"£ide  Llalagas  Gwales  G'exk'Endzexa  g"igama£yasa  EnE£me- 
motasa  SesEnLle  yisa  Nak!wax'da£xu.     Wii,  k' lest  la  giila  ha£yasEk'ale 
Ilelamas  LE'wes  gEiiEine  Llaqwag'ilayugwa  lae  l>Ewex-\vida.      Wa. 
laxae  ogwaqa  bEwex£wide  ts!a£yase  Llalaga.     Wii,  he-mes  ales  qlE- 
LlEsgEing'ilaxa   '"mEkula   bEwekwe   Llaqwag'ilayugwa  lae   yawas£id  20 
tslEX'qlEX'£Ide  la'wunEmase  Ilelamase,    lae  wek'lEX-lda.      Wii,  la;me 
l)Ewegwilrrdaxes  gEiiEmx'de    Llaqwag'ilayugwa.      Wa.  la   mayoHde 
Lliiqwag'ilayugwiisa  babagume.     Wii,  la£me  la  Legadeda  babagumas 


782  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  m 

and  the  boy  had  the  name  |  Helamas.     And  i.  Iftlaga  also  gave  birth 

25  to  a  girl,  and  ||  her  name  was  Ha£yosdesElas.  And  when  ILVyos- 
desElas  grew  up,  |  she  married  Helamas;  and  Helamas  had  not  been 
married  long  |  with  his  cousin  Ha-yosdesElas,  when  she  was  with 
child,  and  |  she  gave  birth  to  a  |  girl. 

30  She  did  not  live  long  before  she  died.  Then  ||  Ha£yosdesElas  gave 
birth  to  a  boy.  He  lived  for  twenty  days.  |  Then  he  died.  Then 
she  gave  birth  to  another  boy,  |  and  he  lived.  His  name  was  K'ene, 
ami  he  is  now  six  j  years  old.  | 

35  I  tried  to  learn  why  the  relatives  descended  from  ||  LalellL  !a  do  this, 
and  also  the  various  tribes,  |  for  many  chiefs  of  the  tribes  do  the 
same.  |  They  marry  the  daughters  of  their  younger  brothers.  Then 
the  one  whom  I  asked  said  to  me  |  that  they  do  this  because  they  do 
not  want  their  privileges  to  go  |  out  of  their  family.     They  keep  their 

40  privileges  among  themselves  ||  by  doing  so.1  | 

1       Marrying  outside  of  one's  own  tribe. — I  will  talk  about  a  |  prince  of 

a  chief  who  takes  for  his  wile  the  princess  of  a  chief  |  of  another  tribe. 

This  is  called  "  taking  a  wife  outside."  |  Then  the  wife  "takes  a  hus- 

5  band  outside."  fur  thus  it  is  called  when  ||  they  do  this,  as  was  done 

Helamase.     Wa,  laxae   mayol£ide    L'.alagasa   ts !ats  ladagEme.      Wii, 

'-'5  la£me  LegadEs  Ha£yosdesElas.  Wii,  g11£mese'  exEntlede  Ha£yosde- 
sElas  lae  qadzeLasos  Helamas.  Wii,  k- lest  la  gala  ha£yasElcale  Hela- 
mase LE£wes  £nEmwEyote  Ila-ydsdesElase  lae  bEwex£wida.  Wa,  lii 
ma'yol-itsa  ts  lilts  ladagEme. 

W;i,  k- lest  la  gael   qlulaxs  lae  wek'licx-'ida.     Wit,  la  etled  mayo- 

30  lcide  Ha£yosdesElasasa  babagiime.  Wa,  g'ig'agalag'ilaxa  enala  cjlfi- 
laxs  lae  wek-!Ex="ida.  Wii,  la  etled  mayol£itsa  babagiime.  Wa, 
laine  qlula.  Wa,  laEm  LegadEs  K'ene.  Wii,  lak*  qlELlEx£Enxe 
ts'awEnxas  K-ene. 

Wa,   Ieii  q!aq!e£staax    lag'ilas    he   gweg'ilaxa  £iiEmxLfda  £nE£me- 

35  maxa  g'a£ya  lax  Lalebila  EE-'wa  «il£6guxsEmakwe  lelqwalaLa£ya 
<|axs  cjlenEmae  he  gwegulasa  g-Ig"Egama£yasa  lelqwalaLa£yexa 
gEg'adiis  xunokwases  ts!a£ya.  Wii,  la  £nek'En  wuLasE£waqexs 
hiie  lag'ilas  he  gweg'ilaxs  yax'stosaa  laltslawes  k"!ek-lEs£o  laxes 
enEmxLalaenaeye.     Wii,  lii  alaEm  la  asm  wElx'ElqElaxes  k-!ek-lEs£o 

40  laxes  gweg'ilase.1 

1       Marrying  outside  of  one's  own  tribe. — Hcleu  gwagwex-s£alasLa  le- 

WElgama£yasa  gigama£yaxs  lae    gEg'adEsa    kledelasa  g'igama£yasa 

5guxsEmakwe    lelqwalaLa£ya.       Wii,    heEm    LegadEs     gEg'adExtla. 

Wii,  lii  gEUEmas  la£wadExt!a  qaxs  he£mae  LegEmsa  he  gwex,£ide  lax 

5  gwex-£idaasasEii  xunokwe  'iiEmogwis,  lae  gEgadExt'.a  laxes  gEiiEme 

'This  form  of  marriage  is  called  t!Ent!E»o.  In  Kurt   Rupert  there  are  two  chiefs  who  married  the 

daughters  of  their  half-sisters.    One  of  these  i  Kuaiiox'dze  of  the  Laalax-'sEndayu,  who  married  the 

daughter  of  his  father  and  of  his  stepmother.  His  wife's  name  is  UaUaqoliMak".    See  also  Addenda, 
p.  134-1. 


B0AS1  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  783 

by  my  son  £nEinogwis  when  he  took  from  outside  his  wife  |  l  laqwag'i-  G 
layugwa.     Then  Llaqwag'ilayugwa,  the  princess  of    |   Chief  Gwex- 
se£sElasEine%  took  as  her  husband  from  outside  my  son  |  mEinogwis. 
Now  we  are  all  related   by  marriage  to   the  father  of  i  Llaqwag'i- 
layugwa and  to  all  those  to  whom  marriage  presents  were  given  by 
mEinogwIs.     Now  ||  Llaqwag'ilayugwa  lived  in  marriage  away  from  10 
her  house  in  the  house  of  her  husband  £nEmogwis  here  in  [  Fort 
Rupert.     Now  Llaqwag'ilayugwa   is  called   "obtained  from  far  off 
outside    |   by   £nEinogwis."     Only    the   woman  is   called    "obtained 
from  far  off  outside."  |  "Obtained  from  far  off  outside"  is  not  said 
of  mEinogwis  when  he  takes  a  wife  from  outside  |  from  another  tribe. 
When  ||  Llaqwag'ilayugwa  wishes  her  husband  mEmogwis    to  give  15 
a  feast,  she    says  to  her    |    husband,    -HEmogwis,      "Let  us   go  to 
your  father-in-law  |  Gwex'se£sElasEine£  to  get  some  tiling  out  of  his 
house,  so  that  you  may  give  a  feast,  for  you  |  have  taken  me  from  a 
long  way  off."     Thus  she  says.     And  immediately  they  start  |  to  get 
something  out  of  the  house,  and   they  go  to  Qalogwis,  for  Gwex- 
se£sElasEine£  is  the  head  chief  of  the  ||  numaym  SesEiiL  !e£  of  the  20 
Lawetsles,  and   Gwex'se£sElasEme£    |    can  not  avoid  giving  a  mar- 
riage gift  of  food  to  his  |  son-in-law,  mEinogwis,  because  the  princess 
of  the  chief  has  been  taken  faraway.   |  If  Gwex'se£sElasEme£  should 
not   take  notice  of  his  princess  when  she  |  comes  to  get  something 
out  of   the   house  of  her  father,   then  Gwex'se£sElasEme£  ||  and   his  25 
princess     would    be    ridiculed     by   their  tribe    the  Lawetsles,   and 

Llaqwag'ilayugwa.      Wa,   g'axe    Llaqwag-ilayugwa,   ylx   k'ledelasa  6 
g"igamaeye  Owex'se£sElasEma£ve  la£wadExt  lasEn  xundkwe   £nEmo- 
gwise.     Wa,  lanu£x"  ewiela  la   Lawalagala  lax  ompas  Llaqwag'ilayu- 
gwa lo£  £naxwe  ts!6ts!akwas  £nEmogwise.     Wa,  g"ax£me  hesEkwa6le 
Llaqwag'ilayugwa  lax  g'okwases  la£wunEme  £nEmogwise  laxg-a  Tsii-  H) 
xisi;k'.     Wa,  la£me  LegadEs  Llaqwag'ilayugwas  qwesExtlanEms  £ue- 
mogwise.     Wa,  la£me  lexa£ma  tslEdaqe  LeqElaso£s  qwesExtla.     Wa, 
lii  k'!es  qwesExt!axElasE£we  £nEmogwise  qaes  laena£ye  gEg'adExtla 
laxa  oguxsEmakwe  lelqwalaLaeya.     Wa,  gil£mese  £nek-e  Llaqwag'i- 
layugwa  qa  klwelaseses   la£wfmEme    £nEmogwise    lae    £nek'a  laxes  15 
hVwuiiEme  £nEmogwise:   "La£vvadExt!eg'En;  wIxeus  lax  nEgiimpae 
Gwex-se£sElasEma£ya  qEns  lii  g'okune,  qa£s  klweladzEmos  lE£maaqos 
qwesExtlanEma  g'axEn,"  £nek'e.     Wii,  hex,£ida£mese  la  ale.\£wideda 
g'okune  qa£s  lii   lax  Qalogwis   qaxs   he£mae   xamagEme    g'Igamesa 
enE£memotasa  SlsEULa£yasa Lawets!ese  (lwr'x'sr'sElasEm:isy(;'.      Wii,  20 
lii  k' !eas  gwex,£idaasa  Gwexse£sElasEma£ye  k' !es  wawalqalaxes  nE- 
gumpe  £nEinogwise  qaxs  qwesExt  lanEmaax    k'ledelasa  g'igama£ye 
qo    k"  leslaxe      Gwex'seesElasEmaeye      q  liisElaxes      k'  ledelaxs      lae 
g'okilne    laxes   ompe    lalaxe     aEmlala£yolaxe    Gwexse£sElasEina£ye 
LE£wis  k'ledelases  gokulote  Lawetslese.     Wii,  la£me  LegadEx'de  L!a-  25 


784  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.ann.  35 

26  l  laqwag'ilayugwa   |  would  bo  called  a  princess  whom  her  father,  the 
chief,  dues  not  love.     That  is  |  the  end.  | 
1       The   Eagles. — This    was    your    question,    how    the    eagles  j  were 
obtained    by    the   ancestor   of    the   mimayni    Maamtag'ila;  namely, 
Llaqwag'ila.  the  prince  |  of  emaxuyalidze.     He  was  the  one  who  was 
the  first  chief  of  all   the  |  tribes,  although  first  among   them  was 
5  0£maxt  !alaLe£  and  all  ||  the  first  ancestor  of  the  different  numayms.  | 
Only  -maxuyalidze  was  the  first  to  make  a  potlatch;  and  therefore  | 
he  thought  that  he  was  the  only  one  who  was  the  first  to  make  a 
potlatch.     And  j  it  occurred  to  him  that  the  eagle  was  the  only  head 
chief  and  leader  who  was  feared  by  all  the  |  birds,  and  that  therefore 
10  he  would  be  the  eagle,  because  he  was  the  first  one  ||  to  give  a  pot- 
latch; anil  therefore  the  head  chief,  the  Eagle,  began  to  be  feared  | 
by  all  the  tribes.     It  is  the  same  as  the  eagle  who  is  the  first     to  eal 
of  any  carrion  and  of  what  he  catches:  and  afterwards  come  |  the 
different  kinds  of  birds  each  of  which  eats  on  the  beach  what  is  left 
over  by  the  eagle.  |  And  ^maxuyalidze  tried  to  imitate  this.     There- 
in fore  he  is  now  the  head  ||  eagle  of  all  the  numayms  of  the  Kwakiutl.  | 
And   the  DzEndzEuxq  !ayu,  the  nuinaym  of  the  Walas  Kwakiutl, 
say  j  that  Doqwayis  first  got  the  eagle,  and   the  |  numaym  Maamta- 
g'ila say  that  they  had  the  first  |  eagle,  and  the  name  Llaqwag'ila  is 
20  still  the  first  among  all  the  eagles  ||  of  all  the  tribes.     That  is  all.  | 

26  qwag'ilayugwas  weme  k'ledeltses  g'igamaeye  ompa.  Wa,  hiEm 
laba. 

1  The  Eagles. — He£maes  \vilLasE;wa  kwekwe,  yix  lag'ilas  kwekwe 
g'alaxasa  EnE£memotasa  Maamtag'ila  yix  L!aqwag"ilaxs  LEWElgE- 
ma£yaas  emaxuyalidzexa  -nEmox"-me  gil  g'ales  g'igamesa  enaxwa 
lelqwaLaurya,  yixs  wax-£mae  g  iilagalax  0£maxt  !alaLa£ye  lo£  enaxwe 
5  g'alEmg'alise  g'ig'Egamesa  alogwaq  liise  £nal£nE£memasa.  Wa . 
lex'aEm-lawise  g'il  p!Es£ide  cmaxuyalidze.  Wa,  he£mis  lag'ilas 
g'Ig-aex£edExs  £nEmoxu£mae  g"flg'ilenoxusa  lax  p!asap!a.  Wa,  la 
g"ig-aex£Idxa  kwekwaxs  'liEmae  ogiime  lo£  g'alabe  k'ilEmsa  £naxwax 
ts!elts!Ek!wa.     Wii,  he£mis  hlg'ilas  £nek- qa£s  kwekwa  qaes  g'alaba- 

10  £yae  plEsa.  Wa,  he£mis  lagilas  gwalElaEiu  ogume  k'ilEm  glgE- 
ma£ya  kwex"sa  £naxwa  lelqwalai.aeya  he  gwex'sa  kwekwaxs  g'il 
qliclsae  laxes  lemEiise  LE£wes  xabanEme.  Wii,  al£mese  gTixeda 
alogu£la  ts!elts!Ek!wa  hamg'Elis  lax  hemaxLa£yasa  kweku.  Wii, 
he£mis  la  nanaxts  !E£wasos  £maxuyalidze;  he£mes  liig'ilas  la  ogumesa 

15  kwekwekwasa  £naxwa  £nal£iiE£memasasa  Kwakugule. 

Wii,  la  £nek'eda  DzEndzEnx-q!a_yoxa  £nE£memotasa  £walas  Kwa- 
gulaxs  hae  gil  axnogwatsa  kwek",  yix  Doqwayise.  Wii,  la  £nek-e 
nE£memotasa  Maamtaguliixs  he£mae  g'il  kwekwe  laxes  laena£ye 
kwekwa.     Wa,  hex'sii£mese  Llaqwag'ila  g'alaxasa  £nfixwa  kwekwe- 

20  kwasa  enaxwa  lelqwalaLa£ya.     Wii,  hiEm  laba. 


BOisJ  SOCIAL,   CUSTOMS  785 

Names  and  Crests  of  the  Maamtag'ila. — This  is  when   |  the  son  of  21 
?maxuyalidze,  who  had  the  name  YaqoLas,  began  to  be  a  prince:  i 
that  is,  when  he  had  a  man's  name,  when  the  father  of  |  YaqoLas 
gave  a  potlatch  on  account  of  the  greatness  of  the  name  of  his  prince 
laqoLas.  ||  Then   £maxuyalidze   gave  his  eagle(-seat)   to  his   prince  25 
YaqoLas,  |  and  also  the  eagle-name  Llaqwag'ila;  for  that  |  was  the 
name  of  £maxuyalidze,  Llaqwag'ila,  when  he  was  an  |  eagle.     When 
he  made  over  his  eagle  (-seat)  and  the  name  |  Llaqwag'ila  that  goes 
witli  it  to  his  prince  Llaqwag'ila,  and  when  ||  Llaqwag'ila  took  the  30 
name  of  his  father  £maxiiyalidze,  he    |  himself  gave  a  potlatch  for 
his  greatness — for  he  was  now  an  eagle —  |  and  oix  account  of  his 
name  Llaqwag'ila.     And  all  the  |  privileges  were  given  to  Llaqwa- 
g'ila by  his  father  £maxuyalidze,  the  house  with  the  carved  |  posts, 
the  two  speaking-posts  in  the  form  of  men  ||  at  each  side  of  the  door,  35 
standing  on  top  of  the  heads  of  grizzly  bears,  |  and  eagles  sitting  on 
top  of  the  heads  of  the  grizzly  bear  of  the  |  post  on  each  side  of  the 
rear  of  the  house  of  £maxuyalidze.     And  large  |  coppers  lay  flat  on 
the  chests  of  the  eagles  on  the  posts  in  the  rear  of  the  |  house.     And 
the  front  of  the  house  was  painted  with  a  copper,  as  it  was  first  [| 
found  by  the  ancestor  of  Chief  £niaxiiyalidze  at  K'  lodagala,  for  |  that  4d 
is  where  the  ancestors  of  Chief  niiaxiiyalidze  lived,  at  K"  lodagala  | 
inside  of  Gwadze£;  for  £maxuyalidze's  numavm  were   the  Maam- 

Names   and    Crests   of    the   Maamtag'ila. — HeEm    gag'iLElats   la  21 
LEWElgamac'ye    xiinokwas    £maxuyalidzaxs  hie     i.egadEs    YaqoLas, 
yixs  lae    LegadEs     LegEinasa    bEgwanEme,    yixs    lae    p!Esa  5mpas 
YaqoLas,  qa  o£mayos    LegEmases    LEWElgamaeye     YaqoLas.     Wa, 
la£me    lase      £milxuyalidzases     kwekwe    laxes    LEWElgamaeye    Ya-  25 
qoLas    LE£wa    LegEmasa    kwekwe,    ytx    Llaqwag'ila    qaxs    he£mae 
LegEms     £maxiiyalidze     yix     Llaqwag'ila,     j-ixs    he£mae    ales     he 
kwekwe.     Wa,  g'ih'mese  lasasa  kwekwe  LE£wa  LegEme  £nami£lalotse 
Llaqwag'ila     laxes    LEWElgama£ye    Llaqwag'ila;    wa,    g-il£mese  lasa 
lae     LegadEx,£Ide    ompas    Llaqwag'ilas   £maxuyalidze.     Wa,  la£me  30 
xamax'£id     plEs£Ide     Llaqwag'ila   C[a     o£mayoses    laena£ye    kwekwa 
LE£wia   la  LegEme    Llaqwag'ila.     Wa,   laxae    £wi£la    layowa   £naxwa 
k'!ek'lEs£6  lax  Llaqwag'ila  vises  ompe  £maxuvalidzexa  k'lexk' ladzE- 
kwas    LeLame    g'okwaxa     ma£lokwe     bebEgwanEm     yeyaqlEiitlEq 
LeLam  lax  wax'sotstalilasa    tlEX'ila  LeLaxQtEwex   x'ix'dmsasa  ne-  35 
nane.     Wa,  la  kwekwekwa  k!wek!fidzEta}rax  x'ix'omsasa  nenanexa 
LeLamasa  £wax'sotiwalilasa  g'5kwas  £maxuyalidze.     Wa,  la£lae  awa 
LlaLlEqwe  paqala  lax  oba-"yasa  kwekwekwe  LeLamasa  ogwiwalllasa 
g'okwe.     Wa,   la£lae   k'latEmalaxa    g'okwaxa   Llaqwa,    yixs    g'alae 
Logwesa    g'alasa    g'Igama£ye    £maxuvalidze     lax    K'lodagala,    qaxs   in 
he£mae  g'okulats  gilg'alisasa  g'igama£}Te  £maxuyalidze   K'lodagala 
lax  ots  lawas  Gwadze£  yixs   £nE£memodadae  £maxuyalidziisa  Maam- 
75052—21—35  eth — pt  1 50 


786  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  35 

tag'ila.  I  The    dull-white    Seagulls    were    the    ancestors    of  |  Chief 
£maxiivalidze.     It  was  he  who  was  named  MatmatEla;  namely,  || 

45  the  dull-white  Seagull.  He  is  now  called  Matag'ila.  |  Now  Matag'ila 
had  many  men  who  are  now  named  Maamtag'da;  for  that  |  is  the 
numaym  of  his  children,  when  there  came  to  be  many  of  them.  |  That 
is  what  is  said  about  the  first  one,  the  head  of  the  |  numayms,  the  | 

50  Maamtag'da.  Now  you  know  what  I  say.  ||  That  is  all.  | 
1  Names. — Now  I  will  talk  about  what  I  have  been  asked  by  you  in  re- 
gard to  I  the  family  names  of  the  chiefs.  I  will  talk  about  the  chief  | 
of  the  numaym  Kiikwak  him  of  the  Kwexa,  YaqoLadze.  |  He  continu- 
ally changed  wives,  and  with  each  one  a  name  was  given  to  him  by 
5  Ms  father-in-law,  really  ||  great  names.  He  used  these  names  given 
in  marriage  for  a  short  time  |  when  he  gave  a  potlatch  with  the 
blankets  which  he  obtained  as  a  marriage-gift  from  (each  of)  his 
fathers-in-law;  |  and  when  he  gave  an  oil  feast  with  his  marriage- 
gift,  then  he  used  the  name  given  in  marriage  as  a  feast-name.  | 
They  desire  to  keep  the  feast-names  obtained  |  from  the  father-in-law, 

10  for  the  feast-name  is  like  the  ||  winter-name.  When  the  Kwakiutl 
first  begin  to  perform  the  winter  ceremonial,  they  all  change  their 
names  |  — men  and  women.  Thus  it  is  also  with  the  |  guests  of  a 
chief  who  gives  a  feast  with  od,  a  great  od  feast.  |  As  soon  as  aU  the 
guests  go  into  the  house  in  which  the  od  feast  is  to  be  given,  |  the 

43  tag'ilaxwa  wex'doxsEmex  £niElsgEm  ts!ek!wa,  yix  gllg-alisasa 
g'Igama£ye   £maxuyalidze ;    heEm    LegadEs   MatmatElaxa    wex'dox- 

45  sEme  £mElsgEm  ts!ek!wa.  Wa,  he£mis  la  LegadEs  Matag'ila.  Wa, 
la  q!ex'£id  bEgwanEme  Matag'ila,  la  Lex£edEs  Maamtag'da  laxes 
£nE£memote,  yixs  he£mae  la  £nE£memotses  sasEme  lae  q!ex-£ida  la 
bEgwanEm.  Wa,  yQEm  gwalaats  g'llg'alisasa  £mEkuma£ye  £nE£me- 
motsa  Maamtag'da.     Wa,  laEmxaas  qlalaxg'in  lax-  waldEma.     Wa, 

50  laEm  lfiba. 
I  Names. — Wa,  la-'mesEii  gwagwex's£alal  laxes  wELasEwosxa  LexLE- 
gEmelasa  g'Igama£ye.  Wa,  heLEn  gwagwex's£alasLeda  g'lgama- 
£yas  £nE£memotasa  Kukwak  !umasa  Kwexa,  yix  YaqoLadze,  yixs  gE- 
g'adElkwae.  Wii,  la  q  SwalxoEm  LegEmg-Elxxale  nEgumpas,  yisa  ala 
^  awa  LeLEgEma.  Wa,  a£mese  yawas£id  Legadssa  LegEmg'ElxLa£yaxs 
lae  p!Es£itsa  p  !ElxElasgEine  wawalqalayoses  nEgumpaq;  wax'e 
L!e£na  wawalqalayo.  Wa,  la  LegEmg'ElxLalaxa  k  IweladzEXLayo 
LegEma.  Wa,  heEm  lalaxulaaso£  LegEma  k.'weladzEXLayo  LegE- 
masa  nEgumpa,  yixs  hae  gwex'sa  klweladzEXEayo   LegEinasa  ts!e- 

2Q  tsleqa  yixs  g'il£mae  ts!ets!ex£ideda  Kwag'ulaxs  lae  £wl£la  Llayu- 
XLada  bebEgwanEme  LE£wis  ts!edaqe.  Wa,  he£mise  gwex'sa 
Le£lanEmasa  g'igama£yaxs  k!welasaasa  L!e£naxa  £walase  L!e£nag'ila. 
Wa,  la  g'il£mese  £wi£laeLeda  Le£lanEme  laxa  L!e£nag'i£lats!e  g-6kwa 
lae  Lax£iilile  Elkwasa  g'igama£ye  qa£s  yaq  !Eg'a£le.    Wa,  la£me  LeLEqE- 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  787 

speaker  of  the  chief  rises,  and  speaks,  and  calls  ||  the  chiefs  by  their  15 
feast-names,  those  who  have  given  an  oil  feast;  |  hut  he  does  not 
call  the  names  of  those,  even  if  they  are  head  chiefs,  who  have  |  not  a 
feast-name.     Then  the  chiefs  are  ashamed  |  because  their  names  have 
not  been  called;  and  therefore  coppers  are  generally  broken  |  in  oil 
feasts  by  the  chiefs  who  are  guests,  in  order  to  cover  their  shame,  || 
when  their  names  are  not  called.     This  is  called  "extinguishing  the  20 
fire  of  the  |  oil  feast."     When  the  feast  is  at  an  end,  all  the  men  go 
out;  I  and  then  the_y  have  no  longer  their  feast-names,  |  but  they 
are  called  by  their  potlatch-names  after  this,  |  which  are  the  true 
family  names;  for  the  chiefs  do  not  like  to  keep  ||  the  names  obtained  25 
in  marriage  as   their  potlatch-names.     Oidy  when  they  first  give 
away  blankets  do  they  |  use  the  names  which  the}'  obtained  from  the 
father-in-law.     After  they  |  have  given  away  blankets,  all  the  men 
go  out.  I  Then  the  chief  has  no  longer  the  name  obtained  from  his 
father-in-law,   for  he  |  has   again  his  name  YaqoLadze.     He   puts 
away  the  II  name  obtained  in  marriage.     When  his  princess  takes  a  30 
husband,  the  name  |  given  in  marriage  is  given  to  the  son-in-law; 
but  no  I  famdy  name  can  be  given  away  in  marriage  to  the  |  husband 
of  a  princess,  because  they  keep  their  names  and  all  the  |  privileges 
for  the  eldest  son,  because  all  the  privdeges  belong  to  him.  ||  That  is  35 
the  end.  |  ' 

lax  k!wek!weladzEXLiiyasa  g-Ig-Egama£yexa  k!wek!iilats!enoxwasa  15 
L!e£na.  Wit,  la.  k"!es  LeqElasE£wa  wax,£Em  wElgEme  g'lgamexs 
k'leasae  klwelatsdzEXLayo  LegEma.  Wit,  la  max-ts!eda  g'lgama- 
£yaxs  k-  !esae  Lex£etsE£wa.  Wa,  heErn  lagilas  q  Iiinala  k'oqwasE£weda 
Llaqwa  laxa  L!e£nag-ila  yisa  g-Igama£ye  klwele  yixs  mamx'tslEsIlae 
qaxs  k'lesae  Lex£etsE£wa.  Wa,  heEm  LegadEs  k-!ilxax  lEgwIlasa  20 
L!e£nag'ila  klwelasa.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwala  klwelase,  lae  £wi*la  hoqii- 
wElseda  £naxwa  bebEgwanEm.  Wa,  la£me  gwal  Legatses  k!wek!wela- 
dzExLiiyo  laxeq.  Wa,  la£me  LeqElaso£ses  p!ep!EdzEXLayo  laxeqxa 
ala  i.exLEgEmela  qaxs  k-  !esae  hlxfdanokwa  g'Ig'Egam  a£yasa  Le- 
gEmg-Elxxe.  plEtsaas  LegEma,  ylxs  g'il£mae  yax£witsa  p  lElxElasgEme  25 
lae  Lex£edEs  LegEmg'ElxLa£yases  nEgumpe.  Wa,  g'il£mese  gwal 
yaqwasa  p  lElxElasgEmaxs  lae  hoquwElseda  £naxwa  bebEgwanEm. 
Wa,  lii  gwal  Legadeda  g'Igiima£yasa  LegEmg'ElxLa£ye  et!eda  cpa£s  lit 
xwelaqa  Legatses  LegEme  YaqoLadze.  Wit,  a£mese  la  g-exaxa 
LegEme  LegEmgElxLe.  Wa,  gihmese  la£wade  kMedelas  lae  LegEm-  30 
g-ElxLalaxa  LegEmg-ElxLex-de  liiq,  laxes  nEgumpe.  Wa,  lii  k-!eas 
gwex-£idaats  iix£ed  laxes  LexLEgEmele  qa£s  la  LegEmg-ElxLalaq  lax 
la£wunEmases  k-!edele  qaxs  axelaaxa  LeLEgEine  LE£wes  £naxwa 
k'!ek-!Es£6  qaes  LEWElgEma£ye,  qaxs  £wl£la£mae  has  laxa  k"!ek!Es£o. 
Wa,  laEm  laba.  35 

'  See  Addenda,  pp.  1315-1385. 


788  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  Ibth.  ann.  sb 

Speeches  Delivered  in  Feasts 

1  When  the  chief  of  the  numaym  SenLtem  invites  the  |  other 
numayms  of  the  Kwag'ul  to  a  feast,  then  as  soon  as  |  all  the  guests 
come  in  the  speaker  of  the  chief  arises  and  he  |  turns  his  face  to  the 
5  place  where  his  numaym  SenL  !Em  are  sitting  next  to  the  [I  door  of  the 
feast  house.  Then  the  speaker  of  the  chief  speaks,  |  for  the  speaker 
of  the  chiefs  of  the  numayms  always  |  first  speak  to  the  chiefs  of  the 
numayms  and  their  names  |  are  called.  And  this  is  what  (the 
speaker)  says  to  his  numaym  as  he  is  |  speaking:  || 

10  "Indeed,  Chief  £nEmogwis,  indeed  HamisElal,  indeed  |  Ma£nakul, 
am  I  not  going  to  talk  with  gladness  to  the  guests  of  my  |  chief,  for 
they  have  all  come  into  this  house,  into  this  good  house  |  of  my 
chief?"  Thus  he  says,  and  turns  Ids  face  to  the  guests.  |  Then  he 
says:  || 

15  "Welcome,  Chief  AwaxElag'ilis;  welcome,  Chief  K'imk'EqEwed  ;| 
welcome,  Chief  Tstex£ed;  welcome,  Chief  Hfiwllkulal;  welcome, 
Chief  |  Llaqwalal;  welcome,  Chief  G'exk'Enis,  come  now  to  |  jour 
seats,  to  the  seats  of  your  late  fathers,  and  just  sit  down  |  in  your 
seats,   chiefs,   which   are   prepared   for  you.     Now   sit   down   well, 

20  chiefs,  |1  and  your  people.  You  do  not  come  here,  chiefs,  to  |  feel 
badly  in  this  house  of  my  chief.     Now,  sing  feasting-songs  |  to  tell 

Speeches  Delivered  in  Feasts 

1  Gil£Em  he  Legale  g'Igama£yasa  £nE£memotasa  SenLteme  laxa  alo- 
guq'.Ese  £nfd£nE£mematsa  Kwag'ule  qa  las  klwela.  Wa,  g'il£rnese 
£wI£laeLeda  Le£lanEme  lae  Lax£ullle  Elkwasa  gigama£ye.  Wa,  la 
gwegEmala  lax  k'.udzelasases  £nE£memota  SenLteme  laxa  max'sta,- 
5  lilasa  ttexllasa  k'weladzatsle  g'okwa.  Wa,  la  yaqteg'a£le  Elkwasa 
g'Igama£ye  qaxs  hemEnala£maeda  a£yilkwasa  g'Ig'Egama£ye  he  gil 
yaq!Eg'a£ltsE£we  g'Ig'Egama£yases  £nE£memote,  yixs  lalaxtEwae 
LeLEqElax  LeLEgEmas.  Wa,  g'a£mes  waldEmsexes  £nE£memotaxs 
lae  yaqtent'.ala: — 

10  "  QiiLaLEn  glgame  £nEmogwis;  qaLaLEn  HamisElal:  qiiLaLEn 
Ma£nakul.  Esc"maeLEn  wag'il  momF.lk- !alaltsox  Le£lanEmaxsEn 
g-Igama£yex  qa5xs  g'axae  £wi£laeLa  laxwa  lax  aek-  laakwa  g'okwax- 
SEii  g'Igama£yex,"  £nek-Exs  lae  gwegEmx-£Id  laxa  Le£lanEme.  Wa, 
la  £nek-a: — 

15  "Gelag'a  gigame  AwaxElag'ilis;  gelag'a  g'Igame  K'imk'EqEwed; 
gelag'a  g'igame  Tstex£ed;  gelag'a  g'igame  Hawilkulal;  gelag'a 
g'lgame  Llaqwalal;  gelag'a  g'igame  G'exk'Enis.  Wa,  gelag'a  laxwa 
klwayaqos  liixox  k!wek!wa£yaxs  easwulaxoxs  a£maqos  la  klwastoll- 
lasE£wa  g'ig'Egame.     La£mo  aek'!aakwa.     Wag'a  hel£alll  laqo  g'lg'E- 

20  game  le£wos  g'Igedaqos.  Wa,  hewets  g'axelos  g'ig'Egame,  qa£s 
£'yax'q!Esalaos  laxox  g'okwaxsg'En  g'igamek'.  Wa,  wag'il  lak!welg'a£l 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  789 

our  world,  chiefs."     Thus  speaks  the  speaker,  |  and  turns  his  face  23 
to  his  numaym  and  says:  | 

"O  numaym!     Now  the  word  of  my  chief  has  gone  to  the  floor  of 
the  house;  for  ||  the  way  we  speak  in  this  house  of  my  chief  has  been  25 
marked  out  by  our  ancestors,  for  us  to  do  as  they  say  |  in  the  way  we 
do  in  this  house  of  our  chief.     Now  give  a  |  drum  to  our  chiefs  that 
they  may  sing."     Thus  he  says  to  the  |  young  men  of  his  numaym. 
At  once  they  take  the  drum  to  the  rear  |  of  the  feasting-house,  and 
the  three  ||  numayms,  the  Maamtag'ila,  G'exsEm,  and  Losyalaiawe,  |  30 
sing  one  song.     As  soon  as   the  f easting-song  is  at  an  end,  |  the 
Kukwaklurn   sing.     And   when   their  feasting-song   is   ended,  |  the 
SenL  !Ein  sing.     And  when  their  feasting-song  is  ended,  the  |  Laalax'- 
sfEndayo   and  the  Elgtinwe£  sing  one  feasting-  ||  song.     And   when  35 
their  song  is  ended,  then  there  are  |  four  feast  songs  by  the  seven  ; 
numayms  of  the  Kwag'ul  when  they  are  invited  by  another  |  tribe. 
After  they  have  finished  singing,  a  young  man  |  takes  the  drum  from 
the  rear  of  the  feasting-house — some  ||  Indians  say  instead  of  klwela-  40 
dzats.'e,  \  Jc!welayats!e,  and  both  words   are  right — and  he  |  puts  it 
down  inside  of  the  door.     Then  many  |  young  men  prepare  the  food 
for  the  guests.     And  after  they  have  done  so,  they  put  the  |  dishes 


dEiix£edEl  qa£s  nelaosaxEns  malax  g'ig'Egame,"  mek'eda  Elkwaxs  22 
lae  gwegEmx,£Id  laxes  £nE£memote.     Wit,  lii  Enek'a: 

"Wa,  £nE£memot  la£me  lag'alile  waldEinasEiis   g'lgama^yex  qaxs 
lE£maolex    xiilt  UxlidzEinsEns    g'alEmg'alisa  qEns  gwek'lalas  laxEns  25 
g'Sxex  gwaelas  laxwa  g'okwaxsg'Eil  g'Igamek".     Wa,  wag'ats  iue- 
£nats!a  laxEns  g"Ig"Egama£ye  qa  wag'es  k!welga£l  dEnx£eda,"  £nek'ex 
ha?yaleases  £nE£memote.     Wii,  g'il£mese  laya  mE£nat!se  laxa  ogwi- 
wahlasa   k!weladzats!e    g'Skwa,    lae    dEnx£ededa   yuduxuSEmakwe 
£nal£nE£memasaxa  Masimtagila  Le£wa  G'exsEm  LE£wa  Lo£yalalawasa  30 
£nEinsgEme     q'.EmdEma.      Wii,    g'ilmiese    q!ffibe    k!we£la£layas   lae 
dEnx£ededa  Kiikwaklume.     Wii,  g'il£mese  q!fdbe£  k!we£la£layas  lae 
dEiix£ededa  SenLlEm.     Wa,  gilemese  qlulbe  k!we£la£layas  lae  dEnx- 
£ededa  Laalax-seEndayo  LE£wa  Elgunwe£,  ylsa  eiiEmsgEme   k!we£la- 
£layo  qlEmdEma.      Wii,  gil£mese  qlulbe  k!we£lii£layas,  wii,  la£me  35 
hamosgEingowe  k!we£lii£layo  q'.EinqlEmdEme  dEnx£edayasa  aLEbos- 
gEmakwe  £niil£nEmematsa  Kwag'ulaxs  Le£lanEmaasa  6guxsE£makwe 
lelqwalaLa£ya.      Wa,  g-tl£mese    £wi£la  gwiil    dEnxElaxs   laeda   hel£a 
a,x£edxa  mE£nats!e  laxa  ogwiwalllasa  k!we£ladzats!e  g-okwa, —  yixs 
£nek"aeda  waokwe  bakluma  yixs  Lex£edaaxa  k!weladzats!e  g'okwa,  411 
k!welayats!e  g'okwa,  wa,  lii  maxwaEm  nEqa  laxes  waldEme, — qa£s 
lii  hang-alilas  laxa  awlLEliisa  t!Exila.     Wii,  la  aaxsileda  qleiiEme 
ha£yal£axa  ha£miiLasa  k'.wele.     Wii,  g-il£mese  gwala  lae  k'agEmlihs- 


790  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth  ann.  ss 

45  before  the  guests.  As  soon  as  all  has  been  put  down,  ||  the  guests 
begin  to  eat  what  has  been  put  before  them.  And  when  they  have 
half  finished  |  eating,  the  speaker  of  the  numaym  Maamtag'da  | 
speaks.  He  also  speaks  first  to  his  fellow-guests,  and  he  |  turns  his 
face  to  his  fellow-guests,  and  the  speaker  says:  | 

"Indeed,    Chief    AwaxElag'ilis;  indeed,   Chief    K'imk'EqEwed;  || 

50  indeed,  Chief  Ts!Ex£ed;  indeed,  Chief  Hawllkulal;  indeed,  |  Chief 
Llaqwalal;  indeed,  Chief  G'exk'Enis;  do  we  not  |  speak  with  glad- 
ness to  them  on  account  of  the  way  we  come  into  this  great  house  of  | 
Chief  £nEmogwis  ? "  Thus  he  says,  and  turns  his  face  to  the  door.  | 
Then  he  says:  || 

55  "Sit  still,  great  numaym,  you  SenLlEm,  and  listen  |  to  me.  Wel- 
come, Chief  £nEmogwis;  welcome,  Chief  |  HamesElal.  Indeed,  I 
shall  say  this,  Chief  Ma£nakul.  Oh,  welcome,  |  welcome !  you  have 
done  this  well.     Keep  on,  |  Chief  £nEmogwis,  look  out  and  do  not  let 

GO  the  fire  of  ||  your  house  go  out,  Chief,  on  account  of  your  tribe,  Chief, 
that  we  may  come  |  and  be  happy  in  your  house,  Chief.  Now  we  are 
treated  with  sweet  food,  |  Chief.  Walk  along  the  trail  of  the  chief- 
maker,  Chief  j  £nEin5gwis.  Thank  you,  Chief,  for  your  kindness 
to  your  |  people,  Chief."     Thus  he  says,  and  turns  his  face  to  his 

65  numaym.  ||  And  he  says,  "Let  us  say  this,  chiefs^  Wa  wa!"     After  | 

lasa  loElqlwe  laxa  Le£lanEme.     Wa,  g'il£mese  £wllg'allla  laase  £wl£la 

45  hamx-£ldeda  Le£lanEmaxa   la   k*agEmalIlEq.     Wa,  g'il£mese  nExsE- 

g'ilallla  la  ha£mapaxs  lae  yaq!Eg-a£la  Elkwasa  £nE£memotasa  Maam- 

tag'ila.     Wii,  laEmxae  he  g'il  yaq!Ent!alaso£ses  k!welwute.     Wa,  la 

£nek'a  £wa£wax'sgami£lala  laxes  k!welwute.Wa,  la  £nek'eda  Elkwe: — 

"QiiLaLEn,  g'Igame  AwaxElag'ilis;  qiiLaLEn    g'Igame   Kimk'F.qE- 

50  wed;  qaLaLEii  g'Igame  Ts!Ex£ed;  qaxaLEn  g'Igame  Hawllkulal;  qa'La- 
LEn  g'Igame  Llaqwalal;  qaLaLEn  g'Igame  G'exk'Enis;  es£maeLEns 
wag'il  moniElk'  lalaltsox  g'axa  qEns  gwaelas  laxwa  £walasex  g'oxu  sa 
gigama£ye  £nEmogwise,"  £nek'Exs  lae  gwegEmx,£Id  laxa  t!ExiIa. 
Wa,  la  £nek'a: — 

55  "Weg'a,  sElt!edEx  £walas  £nE£mem,  yiiL  SenLlEm  qa£s  hoLelaos 
g'axEn.  Wii,  g'elag'a  g'Igame  £nEmogwis.  Wii,  gelag'a  g'Igame 
HamesElal,  qaLag'En  waldEmLEk'  g'Igame  Ma£nakfll.  Wa,  gela- 
g'a. Wa,  gelak'as£o  lax'a  eg'Einaxs  g'Igame  yixs  hemEnala£maaqos 
g'Igame  £nEmogwis  q!aq!a£lala  qa  k'lesesox  k'!Ex£alll5x  lEgwIlaxsos 

60  g'okwaqos,  g'Igame  qag'as  g'okul5tg'5s,  g'Igame  qEiiu£xu  g'axe 
ek' !eqEla  laxos  g'okwaqos,  g'Igame.  La£mEnu£xu  ex'p!asE£wa,  g'I- 
game. Weg'a  a,Em  qiisax  lax  tlExiliisa  g'Igameg'ila,  g'igame  cnE- 
mogwis.  Wit,  gelak'as£la,  g'Igame  qaos  ek'ex  £naqe  qag'as  g'eged- 
g'os,   g'Igame,"  £nek'Exs   lae   gwegEinx'£Id  laxes  £nE£memot.     Wa, 

65  la    £nek'a:    "QEns    £nek'e    g'lg'Egame.     Wa,   wa."     Wii,   g'il£mese 


boas]  SOCIAL   CUSTOMS  Till 

he  has  finished  speaking,  the  speaker  of  the  house  arises,  and  speaks.  |  66 
He  says:  | 

"Indeed,  true  is  the  speeeh  of  the  one  who  is  speaking.  It  is  true 
what  you  said.  I  take  |  notice  of  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  old 
man  to  which  you  refer:  ||  'Keep  on  walking  the  trail  of  the  chief-  70 
maker,  Chief.'  That  j  is  what  my  chief,  £nEmogwis,  is  doing.  He  is 
walking  along  fast,  |  for  indeed  he  walks  on  the  road  of  bis  grand- 
father Henak'  !alasoe,  |  who  knew  how  to  invite  the  great  chiefs,  who 
knew  how  to  give  oil-feasts,  who  knew  |  how  to  break  coppers. 
This  is  the  trail  followed  by  my  chief,  ||  £nEmogwis.  This  is  a  hand-  75 
some  chief.  That  is  what  I  say,  numaym  |  SenL  Ieiu.  Now,  I  will 
press  down  the  food  eaten  by  the  chiefs  invited  |  by  our  chief." 
Thus  he  says,  and  turns  to  the  guests.  |  And  he  speaks  again,  and 
says  as  the  |  guests  finish  eating:  || 

"Go  on,  go  on,  Chief  AwaxElag'ilis;  go  on,  Chief  |  K'imk'EqEwed;  SO 
go  on,  Chief  Ts!Ex£ed;  go  on,  Chief  Hawllkulal;  |  go  on,  Chief 
Llaqwalal;  go  on,  Chief  G'exk'Eiiis;  go  on  |  with  your  people, 
chiefs.  Now  it  is  well  prepared  j  for  what  you  were  invited  by  my 
chief."  Thus  he  says,  and  turns  to  his  ||  numaym,  the  Seni.  Ieiu,  and  s.- 
savs,  "Wa,  numaym!  Now  |  it  has  gone  to  the  floor  what  was 
marked  out  by  our  ancestors,  what  we  should  say  |  when  we  are 
here."     Thus  he  says.     Then  it  is  ended.  | . 

gwal£alll  yaqhsntlaJalae  Lax£ullle  Elkwasa  k!we£lase  qa£s  yaq!Eg"a-le.  (iG 
Wa,  la  £nek'a: — 

"QaLa  waldEmasa  yaq'.Entlala  alases  waldEmos  yixEn  q!5sgEma- 
lIltsE£we  EmEk!ugelilasa  waldEmasa  q'.iilyakwe,  yixs  laaqos  £nek'a: 
'weg'a  axm  qasax  lax  t  !ex  iliisa  g'lgameg'ila,  g'igame.'  Wii,  keEmk'  70 
gwalagEn  g'lgfimek',  yixg'a  £nEmogwisEk-,  ylx'ak'  laxes  qaenakula- 
ena£ye  qiiLaxs  qastaeyaax  t!Ex-iliises  gagEmpe  Henak- !alasE£wexa 
LelElaenoxwe  £walas  g'igama£yaxa  L!e£nag"ilaenoxwexa  q!Elt!e- 
noxwe.  Wa,  yoemes  t  lEX'lla  qaqEseltsg"in  g'Igamek"  laxg'a  £iie- 
mogwisEk*  laxg'ada  ex'stok"  g'Ig;ima£ya,  qEns  £nek'e,  enEememo1  7.", 
Seni-lEm.  Wa  la 'mesEn  LagunsalxEns  g'ig-Egama£yex  Le£lanEma- 
seus  ■;  u:  ma£yex, "  £nek'e.  Wa,  la  gwegEmx"£Id  laxa  klwele,  wa, 
la  ed  .aqwa  yaq  'Eg'  aela.  Wii,  la  -neka  yixs  lae  gwal  £wi£la  ha£mapeda 
k'.wele: — 

"Wiik'as,  wak'as  g'igame  AwaxElag'ilis;  wtik'as  g'igame  Kim-  80 
k'EqEwedt  :  wiik'as  g'igame  Ts'.Ex£ed;  wak'as  g'igame  Hawllkulal; 
wak'as  g'igame  Llaqwalal:  wiik'as  g'igame  G'exk'Eiies.  Wiik'as 
lag'aqo  le£wos  g'lgEdiiqos,  g'Ig'Egame.  La£m5  aek' laakwaxos  g'a- 
xelaqos  LeelanEmsg*En  g'Igamek', "  £nek'Exs  lae  gwegEmx'£ld  laxes 
£nE£memota  SenE'.Eme.  Wa,  lii  £nek'a:  "Wa,  £nE£memot,  la£me  S5 
lag'allla  xiilt  laledzEmasEns  g'alEmg'alise  cjeiis  gwek'Ialas  laxEns 
gg'axexwaelasa,"  £nek'e.     Wii,  laEm  laba. 


792  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE    KWAKIUTL  [etb.  Ann.  is 

1  Now  you  will  see  that  the  names  j  of  the  chiefs  of  the  numaym 
SenLlEin  are  called  out  first  by  the  speaker.  When  he  gives  notice,  | 
all  of  them  listen  to  his  speeches.  First  |  the  head  chief  of  he  chiefs, 
5  £nEinogwis,  is  called.  Then  he  ||  names  the  one  next  to  £nEmogwis, 
HamesElal.  Then  he  names  next  to  |  HamesElal,  Ma£nakula,  for 
that  is  the  order  of  the  three  chiefs  of  the  |  numaym  SenL  !eiu  ;  for 
they  come  down  to  the  younger  brothers  beginning  with  the  |  eldest 
brother,  calling  the  name  of  the  next  one  until  he  calls  the  youngest 
one.     That  is  |  when  the  numaym  SenL  tern  give  a  feast.     And  even 

10  when  a  ||  common  man  gives  a  feast,  the  three  chiefs  are  always 
named.  |  The  name  of  the  host,  who  is  a  common  man,  is  never 
called  by  the  |  speaker  when  he  gives  notice  to  his  numaym  that  he 
will  speak,  |  when  the  guests  of  the  host  first  come  in,  and  when  he 
presses  down  the  food  of  the  |  guests  after  they  have  finished  eating.  || 

15  And  when  the  speech  to  his  numaym  the  SenLlEin  is  at  an  end, 
then  he  |  turns  to  the  guests,  and  he  calls  the  head  chief  of  each 
numaym  by  name.  |  First  he  names  the  head  chief  of  the  |  Maamta- 
g'ila,  AwaxElag  ihs;  and  next,  |  K'imk'EqEwed,  who  is  the  head  chief 

20  of  the  numaym  G'exsEm.  Then  he  names  ||  Ts  !EX£ed,  the  head 
chief  of  the  numaym  Lo£yalalawa.  Then  he  names  |  Hawilkfilal, 
the    head    chief    of    the    numavm    Kiikwaklum.  I  Then    he    names 


1  Wit,  laEms  doqulaqexs  hexsii£mae  g'il  LeLEqalasosa  Elkwe 
g'Ig'Egama£yases  £nE£memota  SenLtem  yixs  lae  q!aq!agEmlaq  qa 
£naxwa£mese  hoLelax  waldEmfflalas.  Wa,  heEin  g"il  Lex£etso£se 
i..iixuma£yas  gIgEgama£yas  ylx  £nEmogwis.  Wii,  la  Lex£edxa  ma- 
5  k"llax  £iiEmogwise  HamesElal.  Wii,  lii  i.ex£edxa  mak'iliix  HamesE- 
lale  Ma£nakula,  qaxs  he£mae  gwiilaatsa  yudukwe  g-Ig'Egamesa 
£nE£memotasa  SenLlEme,  yLxs  ts!a£yaxa£nakulae  giigEi.Ela  laxa 
£nola  la  Lex£edxa  makila,  wii,  lii  Lex£edxa  amayEnxa£ye,  yLx  hae 
k!we£lasa  £nE£memotasa   SenL'.Eme.     Wa,   wax-£mese  he  k!we'"lasa 

10  bEgwanEmqlalame,  lii  hex'siiEm  LeqElasE£weda  yudukwe  g"Ig"Ega- 
ma'ya.  Wa,  la  hewaxaEm  Lex£etsE£weda  k!we£lase  bEgwanEni(| la- 
lama  yisa  Elkwiixs  lae  q!aq!agEmlaxes  £nE£memotaxs  yaq!Ent!aleLe 
laqexs  g'iilae  £wI£laeLe  Le£liinEmasa  k!we£lase  loxs  lae  Lagiinsaxa 
klwelaxs  lae  gwal  ha£mapa. 

15  Wii,  lii  q'.ulbe  waldEmasexes  £nE£memota  SeniJicm  lae  gwegEm- 
x-£id  liixa  Le£lanEnie  qa£s  £n5l£nEmok'OLEle  LeqElax  i.ei.axuma£yasa 
£nal£nE£memase.  Wii,  he£mis  g'il  Lex£etsose  Laxuma£yasa  £nE£me- 
motasa  Maiimtagila,  yix  AwaxElag  ilise.  Wii,  lii  niakile  K'lmk'E- 
qEwede,  yLx  Liixuma£yasa  £nE£memotasa  GexsEm.    Wii, lii  i.ex£edEx 

20  Ts'.Ex£ed,  yix  Laxuma£yasa£nE£memotasa  Lo£yalalawa.  Wii,  lii  Lex- 
£edEx  Hawllkulal,  yix  Laxuma£yasa  £nE£memotasa  Kukwak!um.  Wii, 
lii  Lex£edEx  Llaqwalal,  yix  Laxuma£yasa  £nE£memotasa  Laalax's£En- 


boas]  SOCIAL    CUSTOMS  793 

Llaqwalal,  head  chief  of  the  numaym  Laalax's£Eiidayo.  |  And  last  he 
names  G'exk'Enis,  head  chief  of  the  |  numaym  Elgtinwe£.  That  is 
when  the  speaker  of  the  chief  of  the  ||  numaym  SenLlEin  is  speaking.  25 
He  never  names  the  common  men,  |  even  when  they  give  a  feast.  | 
And  the  speaker  of  the  guests  praises  the  common  man  |  who  gives 
the  feast.  And  this  is  the  way  of  the  speaker  of  the  |  host,  and  of  the 
speaker  of  the  guests.     That  is  the  end.  || 


dayo.     Wa,  lii  ElxLala  Lex£edEx  G'exk'Enis,  yix  Laxumaeyasa  £ue-  23 
£memotasa  Elgunwa£ye,  ylxs  yaqtent  !alae  Elkwasa  g"Igama£yasa  enE- 
£memotasa    SeniJEme.     Wii,   la£me    hewiixa    Lex-edxa  bEgwanEm-  25 
qlalaxs  k!we£lasae. 

Wa,  hetleda  Elkwiisa  k!we£lckwe  tsMwaqaxa  bEgwanEmq!aliixs 
k!we£lasae.  Wa,  g'aEm  gwek'lalatsa  Elkwiisa  k!welase  lo£  Elkwasa 
k!we£lekwe.     Wa,  laEm  laba. 

Swear-Words  (Hankwa) 

1.  HiislElol,  Go   and  die.     Generally  used  by  women  in  friendly 

banter. 

2.  LalE£laa,   you  are  dead  there.     Used  in  friendly  discussion 

when  a  person  feels  that  he  can  no  longer  carry  on  his  argu- 
ment. 
2a.  HanLalEloL,  die  yourself.     Retort   to   the  preceding.     Used, 
however,  not  in  friendly  discussion,  but  after  a  serious  quarrel. 

3.  LEJlwest!a   axa,   you   are   dead   there.     Used  in  a  bantering 

way,  or  at  the  end  of  an  argument. 

4.  LE£ldzewest!a   axa,   you   great  one  are  dead  there.     Used 

often  at  the  end  of  an    argument  between  husband  and  wife, 
or  by  men  after  a  quarrel. 

5.  LE£ldzamasa,   indeed,  you  are  dead  there.     Used  as  a  re- 

proach, for  instance,  when  a  person,  by  his  lack  of  skill,  has 
broken  an  object  or  hmt  another  person. 

6.  X'ist5lil   laqu,    show   your    teeth  and  your    orbits    there 

(meaning  that  the  skull  is  lying  on  the  ground). 
6a.  QJulegKmalaEmlnesLas  laxes  waldEmos  g'axEn.     WawanEmg'i- 
lagas.     I  hope   what  you  wish  will  happen  to  me  will 

HAPPEN    TO    YOLT,    DEATH-BRIXGIXG-WOMAX.       Retort  to  6. 

66.  Wiidzo,  WawanEingilagas,  go  away,  Death-brixging-womax  ' 
Sometimes  used  like  the  preceding. 

7.  Xidzll  lox,  show  your  teeth  on  the  floor  of  the  house. 
la.  Q'.Exstolil  lox,  you  bite  the    floor  of   my   house    at   the 

door.     These  (7  and  7a)  are  used  in  a  quarrel. 

8.  Le£1x'S£51  15X,  DIE  HERE  ON  THE  GROUND. 


794  ETHNOLOGY   OF   THE   KWAKIUTL  [eth.  ann.  as 

Sa.  IIuxeiiIeIol,  I  wish  you  would  die  right  here.  Retort  to  8. 
Used  by  men  only,  particularly  men  of  high  rank,  in  quarrels 
over  social  matters. 

9.    YagWll  l6x,  LIE    DOWN  DEAD  ON  THE  FLOOR  OF  MY  HOUSE. 

9a.  Yaq!Qs  lox,  lie  down  dead  on  the  ground.  Retort  to  9. 
Used  in  a  similar  way  as  the  preceding. 

10.  Yaxstolll  laq",  lie  down  dead  on  the  floor  of  my  house. 
10a.  YaxwElsnesLas  qa£s  lE£la5s  laxs  Ladzasex,  oh,  if  you  would 

DIE    ON   THE    GROUND    WHERE    YOU   ARE    STANDING!       Retort  to 

10.     These  (10  and  10a)  are  never  used  by  women,  but  par- 
ticularly by  chiefs. 

11.  WexEnLas  yaxwEls  qa£s  lE£laos  laq",  I  wish  you  would  lie 

DOWN  ON  THE  GROUND  AND  DIE  HERE. 

11a.  Sol  1e£H  qa£s    q lulegEmalamaos   liixes  waldicmos  g'axEn,  you 

SHALL    DIE,  AND    YOUR    OWN  WORD  SHALL    KILL  YOU  FOR  WHAT 

you  said.     Retort  to  11.     Used  by  men. 

12.  WexEiiLas  lF/lg'aElsa  laxos  Ladzasaqos  qa£s  halax,£idaos  k'!ea- 

gwaElsa,  I  WISH  YOU  would  die  at  the  place  where  you  are 
standing,  and  disappear.     Used  in  quarrels  during  potlatch. 

13.  Hask'la,  die  with  your  teeth  in  your  head. 

13a.  Ladza£mas  lEElLa  q  !aq  laxstalanEmamilg'EnLol  qa£s  halabala- 
miei.os  1e£1l,  die  now,  for  the  death-dealing  point  of  my 
tongue  will  kill  you  quickly.     Retort  to  13.     This  is  con- 
sidered the  worst  insult. 
Following  are  swear-words  of  the  DEnax'da£xu- 

14.  QatsEmakoi.,  your  head  has  been  cut  off. 

14a.  PIoqomakoL,  you  are  a  body  without  head.     Retort  to  14. 
There  is  one  particular  swear-word   of  the  DEiiax"da£xu   against 
the  Anvali.Kla  numnym  K-  !ek'!aenoxu. 

15.  KliniLKinakoL,  your  face   has   been  adzed.     This  refers  to 

the  fact  that   a  member  of  that  numaym  was  killed  by  the 
DEnax'da£xu  by  cutting  his  face  with  an  adz. 


INDEX 


Abalone—  Page. 

blanket  covered  with 701, 777, 778 

hat  covered  with 701, 777,  77S 

Abalone  shells 0S5, 777 

Afterbirth— 

belief  regarding 606 

of  twins 678, 686 

of  twins  used  for  cauterizing 694 

treatment  of 653-655 

Alder-leaves 589 

Alder-tree 57 

Alder-wood,  as  fuel  for  drying  berries 273 

Anchor 511 

Anchor  stones 180 

Animals,  game,  belief  regarding  hearing  of..      637 

Assembly  of  chiefs  and  shamans 733 

assembly  of  numaym 769 

Attendants  at  feast 43S 

Attendants  of  chdxf 762-763 

Attendants  of  host 758 

Back-protector 142 

Bag  of  sea-lion  hide 109 

Bait— 

clams  used  for 162 

cockles  and  clams  (or 178 

for  fishhooks 179 

for  fish  traps 162, 182 

mussels  used  for 182 

sea  eggs  used  for 182 

Barnacles— 

gathering  of 499 

method  of  preparing ;,D1 

steamed  on  beach 501, 505 

Baskets— 

for  cooking  berries 138,284,288 

for  huckleberries 140 

for  steaming 555, 561 

for  viburnum  berries 138 

for  wild  carrots 139 

new,  custom  regarding 607 

of  cedar  bark . .  136, 139, 226, 22S,  235, 240, 252, 254 

open-work,  making  of 134 

rack  for  holding 171 

set  of,  for  berry  picking 204, 

205, 206, 20S,  209, 213, 214, 216, 217, 218, 220, 269 

Beaver  dish 756 

Beddlng,  of  child,  hidden  in  cave 671,673 

Belief  regarding  coffin 687 

Beliefs— 

regarding  birth 651-657 

regarding  cripples 696 

regarding  currants 575 

regarding  fern  roots 524 

regarding  hearing  of  game  animals 637 

regarding  maturing  girl ' 700 

regarding  twins  of  opposite  sexes 713 

relating  to  devilfish 614 

relating  to  first  halibut  of  season 247 


Page. 

Beliefs  and  customs 603-748 

Belt 143 

Berries,  frame  for  drying 107 

Berry  baskets,  set  of 211,216 

Berry-cakes— 

bundles  of 263, 268, 281 

making  of 271  274,279 

storing  of 274,275 

Berry-pickers— 

hiring  of 211, 220 

payment  of 220 

Bird-cherry  bark 1.57 

Birth,  customs  and  beliefs  regarding S4g 

Blanket,  pin  for,  made  of  yew-wood 118 

Blood,  of  seal 450 

Blood-soup 456  i;,; 

Blubber,  of  seal 456,  158,  163 

Blueberries 300 

Boards— 

making  of 61, 82-S3 

sewing  of 77, 93, 98 

Body,  feelings  of,  as  signs 603-605 

Boiling  with  red-hot  stones 545, 546 

Bottle  of  kelp 540 

Boxes— 

bending  side  of 70-76, 90 

boiling  in 459, 460 

bottom  of 7s,  91 

caulking  of 299 

cutting  kerfs  in  side  of 68  ,u 

fitting  bottom  of 91 

for  berry-cakes 263, 268, 274, 2S1 

for  cured  seaweed 294, 2% 

lor  herring-spawn 254-255 

for  mixing  salal  berries 265 

for  picking  salmon-berries 140,211 

for  preserved  salmon 239 

for  soaking  dried  fish 315, 318,319, 324 

made  water-tight 92 

making  of 60-92 

making  side  of 62 

measures  of  side  of 65 

painting  side  of 88 

pegging  side  of 76-77,79  81,90  92 

sewing  side  of 77,88 

squaring  of 70 

squaring  side  of 63  65,84  85 

steaming  side  of 71  74,88-90 

top  of 81 

Bracken-root,  digging  of 1% 

Breakfast— 

codfish  eaten  at 253 

dog  salmon  eaten  at 300, 313 

fat  food  avoided  at so- 
green  salmon  eaten  at 316 

salmon  eaten  for 350 

Bunch-berries    (chamaepericlineum    una- 
laschkense) 596 


Page. 

Buoy  of  fishing  line 180 

Burial— 

burning  of  food  at 709 

of  parts  of  body 743 

of  t  wins 686 

pulling  down  of  roof  at 709 

Butchering — 

of  mountain-goat 174,428,441 

of  porpoise 446 

of  seal 451 

Cannibal  and  shaman,  a  ceremonial 739 

Cannibal  ceremonial 741 , 7 12 

Cannibal-cry 739, 740 

Cannibal  dancers 275,753 

Canoe— 

as  marriage  gift 777 

bottom-boards  of 96 

care  of 94-97 

landing  of 193 

loading  of 192 

protected  against  spirits 615 

runway  for 96, 97 

use  of,  in  picking  berries 206 

2111,211,215,216,218,219 

used  as  feast  dish 

Canoe-builder— 

customs  of 615 

making  a  successful 697 

Capture  of  novice 747 

Carrots— 

boiled  in  kettle 557 

digging  of 200 

preparation  of 

Carvings  in  house 785 

Castorh  m.      weather  charm m6 

Caulking  of  box 299 

[ZING 694 

Cave  for  cedarbark,  used  at  birth  or  ma- 
turity    671, 672,  '172 

Cedar 166,167,171 

for  firewood 7ii3 

stripping  of  bark  of 616 

yellow 163 

Cedar-bark 191 

beater 1 2» 

belief  regarding 131 

breaker - -  109, 127,  [28, 133 

implement  for  peeling 14.; 

implement  for  splitting 117, 124 

packing  of 122, 123, 132 

peeling  off  tree 120, 121, 131 

preparation  of 130 

qualities  of 122, 125 

red 677,735 

red,  for  shaman 721 

shredded 660, 661 

shredding  of 126-129, 132 

splitting  of 125 

yellow,  shredded 062, 668 

Cedar-bark  rope 75, 76, 90, 100, 158 

Cedar-bark  towels 775 

Cedar  mats 125 

Cedar-tree— 

felling  of 60 

prayer  to 619 

Cedar-withe  rope 101 


Cedar-withes ill,  115, 119, 120 

for  sewing  wood 77, 93 

Cedar- wood,  for  boxes 82 

Ceremonial— 

acquisition  of ,  not  belonging  to  family . . .      740 

winter 342, 560, 564 

winter,  food  for 285, 289, 299 

Ceremonial  house 738 

Ceremonial  interval,  four  days  as 709 

Charm— 

against  sea  monsters 608 

blue  hellebore  used  as 175, 608 

chiton 650 

lizard  as 645,646 

octopus  used  as 649-652 

Peuccdanum  seed  used  as 175, 608 

snake  tail  as 649-051 

toad  feet  as 649-651 

used  in  childbirth 649-651 

Chiefs— 

afraid  of  parents  of  twins 689 

marriage  of  daughter  of 777 

order  of  names  in  feast 792 

position  in  feast 766,767 

rival,  in  seal  feasts 460,461 

social  position  of  daughter 776-779 

Chiefs,  food  of — 

blood-soup  of  seal 457 

currants  and  salal-berries 578 

fern-roots 523 

limbs  of  seal 459 

long  cinqucfoil-roots 541, 544 

parts  of  porpoise 750 

parts  of  seal ' 750 

salmon-cheeks 329 

winkles 510 

I'imeftainess 776,779 

duties  of 780 

proper  behavior  of 396 

Child— 

cradling  of 658 

new-burn,  treated  by  mother  of  twins 667 

new-born,  washing  of 652, 656 

Children,  means  of  having 644 

Chiton 293 

as  charm,  used  in  childbirth 650  651 

boiled 483 

eaten  by  poor  people 488 

eaten  raw 485 

gathering  of 480 

large,  baked 4S6 

large,  boiled 487 

large,  gathering  of 484 

names  of 480 

roasted 480, 482 

Chopplng-block 514 

Cinquefoil— 

preparation  of 535 

steamed  in  box 536 

ClNQUEFOIL-FEAST 538-542 

CrNQUEFOIL-GAF.DEN 189-192 

OlNQ  UEFOII -ROOTS— 

bundles  of 191, 192 

cooked  in  kettle 542 

digging  of. 1SS-19J 

long 190, 191 


Ill 


Cinquefoil  roots— Continued.  Page. 

long,  eaten  by  chiefs 541, 544 

short 190,  191 

short  and  long 539 

short,  eaten  by  common  people 541,544 

Clams— 

as  bait 162,178,181, 183 

opening  of 179 

steamed,  with  devilfish 474 

with  seaweed 516 

Clover— 

cooking  of 527, 531 

digging  of 186-188 

preparation  of 528 

Clover-garden 186  187 

Clover-root— 

baked 533 

raw 531 

Cockles,  as  bait 17S 

Codfish— 

black 382, 392 

drying  of 253 

eaten  at  breakfast 253 

eyes  of 388 

fresh 379, 3S2 

heart 3SS 

method  of  cutting 253,379,  180,  182  383 


red. 


392 

roasted 390. 391 

tainted 386 

Coffin,  belief  regarding 6S6 

Copper 655, 684, 685, 770,  772,  775,  777,  i  78,  7S5 

breaking  of 770, 787 

purchase  of 685 

small 777 

used  by  maturing  girl 701 

copper  bracelets 777 

Corpse— 

clothed  in  best  clothing 708 

kicked  by  mother 70S 

Crabappi.es— 

and  water,  price  of 762 

brittle 594 

feast  of 762 

inoil 594 

mashert,  mixed  with  salal- berry  cakes.  . .      594 

mashed,  steamed 594 

picking  of 213 

preserved  in  water 2S6 

Crabs,  as  weather  charms 620,625,628 

Cradles 658-665 

deposited  in  caves 072 ,  692-693 

Cripples,  beliefs  regarding 696 

Cryptochiton— 

baked 508 

preparation  of 500 

Currants 601 

belief  regarding 575 

cakes  of 275-281,572 

custom  concerning 616 

effect  of 576 

mashed,  with  salal-berries 577 

picking  of 208 

raw 575 

Customs  relating  to— 

birth 651-657 

canoe-building 615 

currants 616 


Customs  relating  to  — Continued  Page. 

drinking  before  meais 377 

eating 607, 750 

felling  of  trees 617 

fern-roots 521-522, 616 

fish-cleaning 332 

halibut-spawn 37s 

k<lp-fish 393 

new  berry-baskets 607 

rinsing  mouth 377 

salmon    304, 328, 329, 609 

sea-eggs 4yx,  637 

sea-slugs 476 


607, 


stripping  of  cedar- bark 131,616 

twins 674 

Cutting-board,  for  fish 225,219 

Dance— 

Are 738,739 

of  attendants  of  chief 773,767 

of  chief's  daughter 754.7 "9,766,767,772 

of  chief's  relatives 759-760 

of  women 723 

tamer 738,739 

Death 705-710 

hair  cut  after 799 

signs  of 603-604, 707-708 

DEATH-BRINGER 7J7 

Deer— 

creation  of,  reference  to 398 

tail  of,  as  charm 649 

ulna  of 117, 124, 1.57 

Deformation  of  head— 

among  Koskimo r,7i 

among  KwaguZ 671 

Of  Child 656, 658, 662, 663, 664, 665. 666 

of  twins 675 

DENAX'DA£XU 218 

method  of  cooking  mountain-goat  skin. . .      443 
method  of  cooking  salmon 323 

Dextai.ia,  used  in  weather  charm 624 

Devilfish— 

beliefs  relating  to 614 

boiled 470 

boiled  with  oil 473 

catching  of 1.85,470,474, 475 

female,  not  boiled 472 

hook  for 151-152 

scorched 472 

steamed  with  clams 474 

Digging-stick 118, 186,188, 521 

for  clover 146 

for  cryptochiton 150 

for  roots 149 

Dish— 

beaver 756 

double-headed  serpent 756 

dzo'noqlwa. 756 

for  pounding  salal-berries 59 

grizzly-bear 756 

hair-seal 758 

kiilenv-hale 756 

sea  lion 756 

wolf 756 

Dishes 320, 360 

for  feast 325 

house 766, 764 

making  of 57-59 


Dishes    Continued.  Page. 

measurements  of 57-58 

sizes  of 59 

Dog-fish,  skin  of,  for  polishing 104, 10S 

Dog-salmon— 

backbones  of 226, 229-230 

cheeks  of 231-234 

customs  relating  to 609 

cutting  of 22!),  221,229, 306 

first  of  season 302, 350 

fishing  for 223. 224 

head  of,  roasted 234 

middle  piece  of 225 

pectoral  fins  of 230-231 

quarter-dried 236 

refuse  of 304 

roasting  of 223-225, 305 

spawn  of 235 

split 227-  229 

tail  of 226 

Dogwood-berries,  picking  of 220 


as  omens 642, 643 

explanation  of 725 

meaning  of 707, 70S 

means  of  induciug 707 

sexual,  meaning  of 642,643 

Dress— 

of  women 1  IS,  186, 189, 

195, 197, 19S, 200, 20S, 210, 213, 219, 221 

of  maturing  girl 701 

Driftwood,  for  fuel 181, 256, 281, 287, 296 

Drinking  after  meals 311,314, 

315, 321, 328, 329, 338, 339, 344, 345, 346, 
348,  353,  354,  358,  359,361,362,386,408 

Drinking  before  and  after  meals 377 

Drinking  before  meals 314, 319, 

321,327,328,331,334,317.352.356,367,380 

DRINKING-TUBE 7110 

DRUM 320,  763, 772, 789 

Drying-frame,  for  making  berry-cakes 260, 

271,278 

Drying  rack 233, 238 

for  seaweed 293 

Dzo'NOQlwa  dish 756 

Eagle 781, 784 

collar-bone  of 443 

name  of 785 

use  of  tail-feathers  of. . .  635, 673, 677, 681, 682, 692 

Eagle-down 678, 682, 726, 735 

for  singers 720 

symbolizing  snow 633 

used  by  shaman 721,726 

Ear-ornaments 77S 

Eating,  customs  relating  to 750 

Eel-grass 335, 554 

eating  of '. .      512 

gathering  of .■ 510 

pole  for  gathering 155 

used  in  steaming  food 245 

Elderberries— 

hook  for  picking 155 

mixed  with  salal-berries 267 

picking  of 204, 567 

presenation  of 255-263 

unripe 567 

Elderberry-cakes,  eating  of 564 

Endogamy 781 


Erythronium-- 

boiled 547 

digging  of 197 

preparation  of 544 

raw  and  baked 548 

Eyebrows,  pulling  out  of 701 

Eyes— 

of  codfish 38S 

of  kelp-fish 395 

Face  painting 770 

Family 397 

Family  history 77s 

Feast 320 

attendants  at 43s 

gift  given  in  return  for 766 

of  currants 751 

of  huckleberries 754 

of  mountain-goat  brisket 433-436 

of  mountain-goat  meat 437 

of  qotlxole 775 

of  salal-berries  and  erabapples  mixed . .  767-775 

of  salmon-berries 760 

of  viburnum-berries 755 

oil 755 

promise  of 753, 754 

seal 756 

seats  in 771 

Feast-name 786,  787 

Feast-songs 333, 437, 565, 

753,  757, 759, 763,  764, 766,  769, 772, 788 

Fern,  as  weather  charm 623,628 

Fern-fronds 4S2, 533, 536, 538, 555, 586 

used  in  steaming 257 

Fern-roots— 

belief  regarding 524 

cleaning  of 518 

digging  of 195, 196, 616 

eaten  with  salmon-spawn 343 

eating  of 523 

not  dug  by  young  women 616 

preparation  of 524 

steaming  of 517 

with  salmon-spawn 342 

preparation  of 526 

used  as  medicine 527 

Fire— 

for  heating  stones. ...  72, 87, 105, 164, 265, 276, 282 

produced  by  magic 745-746 

put  out  with  blankets 774 

Fire-dance 738, 739 

Firetongs 335 

Firewood 762 

Fish— 

cutting-board  for 225 

See  also  Codfish;  Devil-fish;  Dog-fish; 
Flounders;  Halibut;  Kelp  fish;  Perch; 
Salmon. 

Fish  bones,  thrown  into  fire 411 

Fish  knives 242 

locked  in  roasting  tongs 306 

Fish  soup,  eaten  after  meat 412 

Fish  trap 182, 183 

success  of 613 

Fisherman,  successful,  how  made 698 

Fishing 178-184 

Fishing  line 179 

Fishing  places,  hereditary 223 

quarrels  over 224 


Page. 

Fishing-tackle  ,  for  flounders 157 

Flounders u  ;  12! 

boiling  whole 115  1 1 7 

catching  of 178,413  in 

cutting  of 415 

eaten  with  spoons 417 

steamed 41S-121 

Fog  ,  gathered  by  mother  of  twins 632 

Food— 

as  marriage  gift 777 

gathering  of 184-222 

of  head-chief 275, 2S9 

of  poor  people 275,488 

preservation  of 223-304 

taken  home  from  feast 370, 

435,480,514,524,642,557 

Food-mat 307,311, 312,318,  321, 326,328,331. 

334, 337, 344, 349, 356, 357, 359, 362, 363, 
369, 371, 379, 3S5, 391, 392, 399, 425, 515 

Fort  Rupert 742 

Four,  the  ceremonial  number 620,623, 

626, 627, 630, 633, 634, 635, 636, 639, 
640,645,646,650,653,66S,>i.;>.i,7.;!l 

cauterizing  in  four  places 696 

circuit  around  four  houses 684 

four  cries 758,765 

four  dancers 767, 772, 77:; 

four  days 499,329,481,679,685,709,735 

four  guests 396 

four  invitations 763,  752 

four  kinds  of  food 705,718 

four  messengers 561, 734, 749, 770 

four  months 670,680 

four  mouthfuls  of  water 7ix> 

four  pieces  of  food 700 

four  persons  bury  twins 687 

four  purifications 701 

four  songs 369, 789 

*  sacrifice  in  four  pieces 703 

taboos  for  four  years 685 

time-beating  four  times 720 

Frame— 

for  drying  berries 167 

for  steaming  cinquefoil-roois..  535,536,539,542 

Fuel,  driftwood  used  for 181,256,281,287,296 

Garden-bed 1S6, 187, 1S9, 190, 191 

Ghost,  child  of 712 

Ghost  country 7H>-713 

Ghost  village 714 

Ghosts 727 

attracted  by  yawning 711 

do  not  hear  shouts 71 1 

materials  used  by 711 

Gift,  given  in  return  for  feast 766 

Girl,  maturing,  belief  regarding 700 

Goat-hunting 173 

Gooseberries— 

picking  of 221 

preparation  of 597 

Gooseberry  jam 598-599 

Great-inventor 622,62 

Grizzly-bear  dish 756 

Guests — 

led  by  hostess 332 

served  according  to  rank 321 

speeches  of 334 


Gwasye—  Page. 

cinquefoil  roots  at 190 

clover  growing  at 188 

crabapples  in 213 

Gwane— 

dog-salmon  in  river  of 223 

salmon  in  river  of 231 

i:\v\mia  (sun-dried  salmon)... 350 

Hair,  child's,  singeing  of (i.n,C7l 

llAM:  .   I  1   I T1XG   OF— 

after  death 7119 

maturing  girl 7111 

mother  of  infant 655 

sign  of  mourning 603 

smybolic  of  throat-cutting 709 

Hair-line 158 

for  fishhooks 179 

Hair-rofe 064 

Halibut— 

apron 21s 

beliefs  concerning 247 

blistered  ball-dried 363 

1 11  tiled  dried 364 

bones  gathered  after  meal 358 

bones  thrown  into  water 246 

cutting  of 240-250 

dried 360 

dried  apron 248 

dried  fins  of 248 

dried  head  of 248 

dried  stomach 248 

dried  tail  of 248 

drying  of 249-251 

eaten  with  seal  blubber 463 

edges,  boiled 368 

edges,  Newettee  name  of 379 

edges,  roasted 370 

fins,  boiled 247 

fins,  soaked  dried 375 

first  of  season 247 

head  dried 371 

heads  and  backbone,  fresh 357 

intestines 245, 247 

middle  piece  of 378 

preserving 241-252 

ribs  of 24S 

rough  edges  of 248 

skin  and  meat 36I 

skin,  poked 367 

skin,  scorched 365 

soaked  in  cam  e 271,272,275 

spawn 377, 378 

stomach,  dried,  boiled,  and  soaked 373 

tips 359 

treatment  of  stomach  when  fresh 245 

Hammer 267, 270 

Ham M  er-STONE 506, 510 

Hat 208 

Head,  of  child,  deformation  of 657 

658,662,663,66-1,665,666 

Head-chief,  food  of 

Head-rings,  of  red  cedar-bark 721 

used  in  twin  ceremonial 6S2, 692 

Head-shaman,  use  of  term 728 

Heart,  of  seal 455,  157 

Hellebore  root,  blue— 

used  as  a  charm 175, 608, 636 

used  for  washing 704 


Page. 

Hi  mi  01  K-BRANCHES 162, 1S4,  4411, 414, 461, 177 

for  purification 74.". 

ring  of.  for  shaman 725-727 

used  in  oven 518 

Hemlock-tree 151,  152,  154,  155, 159, 165 

Herring  spawn 254 

eating  of 425 

fresh,  on  cedar  branches - . .      422 

gathering  of 184, 255 

h  1 1  [-soaked 424 

soaked 422 

with  kelp 126 

with  salmon-berry  shoots 428 

Hook— 

for  devilfish 151-152 

for  picking  elderberries 155 

Horn— 

bending  of 103,  104, 10S 

hardening  of.  with  tallow 108 

polishing  of 104,108 

steaming  of 103, 105, 107 

Horn  spoons 570 

making  of 102  108 

El  ikse-clam,  shell  o( 197,  261,  27 1 .  278, 279, 292 

House  of  root-digger,  prayer  lo 618 

ll.ii  9E-MSHES 756,757,761,762,764,769,771 

Huckleberries- 

boiled 296 

cleaning  of 580, 582 

mashed 581 

mixed  with  salmon  spawn 298 

picking  of 209 

Huckleberrv  feast 754 

Hunter— 

killed  by  grizzly  bear 742-743 

notice  of  departure 637, 642 

taboos  of 639, 641 

taboos  of  wife 637 

Hunting 171  178 

Industries 57-172 

Infant— 

head-cover  for 66". 

treatment  of 656-699 

Initiation 733, 742 

return  from 738 

INTESTINES  OF  SEAL 453,454,455,457 

In  v  ITATION 320, 382, 3S3, 384, 490, 503,  528, 

537, 570, 581,  752,  755, 762, 763, 770 

during  ceremonial  season 752 

during  secular  season 752 

to  breakfast 32S 

to  eat  roasted  salmon 307, 310 

to  feast 329, 330,  427, 561, 565 

to  feast,  return  of 439 

tomeal 356,365 

Jealousy,  lack  of 640 

Jump-line 141,142 

KIai.moi.ki.ana  a 733 

Kelp— 

used  in  weather  charm 629 

with  herring  spawn 426 

Kelp-bottle 310, 574, 657 

for  tallow 431 

Kelp-fish 393-409 

broiled  dry 402 

'      cutting  of 397,403,405 


Kelp-fish    Continued.  Page. 

eyes  of 395 

fishing  for 181 

gills  and  stomach  boiled 405 

roasted 40S 

split 403 

wind-dried 400 

Killerwhale— 

soul  of  hunter  goes  to 727 

dish 750 

village,  home  of  souls  after  death 714 

Kidney-fat,  of  mountain  goat 429 

Kidneys,  of  seal 453, 454, 455, 457 

Knife,  mussel-shell 398 

Knight  Inlet 323,443,509 

cinquefoil  roots  at 190 

clover  growing  in 188 

crabapplesin 213 

lupines  in 198 

olachen  in 299 

qotlxole  berries  at 218 

Viburnum  berries  in 216,586 

Koskimo— 

cradles  of 672 

deformation  of  head  among 071 

manner  of  cooking  perch 411 

manner  of  eating  salmon 310 

means  of  having  children  among. 044 

weather  charm  of 630 

Kwakiutl— 

chitons  not  eaten  by 483 

cradling  of  infant 660 

deformation  of  head  among 670 

manner  of  cooking  perch 411 

shaman  of 728 

weather  charm  of 630 

Ladle 25S.  259, 26J ,  270, 277, 292, 301 , 

333,337,339,340,341,357,362,757 

Land-otter,  as  weather  charm 626,628 

Leaves,  used  in  oven 7.1  S 

Lily-bulbs— 

boiled 563 

digging  of 201 

feast  of 560 

Lives  of  seal 453,454,455,457 

Lizard  as  charm 045, 640 

Long-life  giver 737 

Long  life  maker 706,707 

Lungs  of  seal 455, 457 

Lupine-roots— 

boiled 550 

digging  of 198 

catenraw 199 

effect  of  eating 199, 551 

steamed 552 

MaAmtag-ila— 

names  and  crests  of  the 785 

sea-gull,  ancestor  of 786 

Marriage— 

debt,  payment  of 777, 779 

gifts 432, 777 

out  of  the  tribe 782 

Mast 99, 100 

Mast-dole 101 

Mat— 

cedar-hark 125,405 

for  seat 307 


Mat-maker,  means  of  making  a  chili  a  suc- 
cessful   .      i 

Mats 202,203,221,240,251, 254,256, 264,' 

spread  before  guests : 

Maturity i 

M  ituring  girl,  dress  of 

Medicine,  experts  in i 

Menstruation 521,1 

beliefs  regarding  effect  of....     .  608,719,733,' 

Messengers 427,751,' 

Midwife 050,  i 

pay  of i 

Mortar  box : 

Mosquitoes,  protection  against,  by  tallow... 
Mountain-goat— 

butchering  of 428, 

fat  of < 

kidney  fat  of 

meat,  boiled 437, 

meat,  cooking  of 

meat,  roasted 

meat,  steamed 

plucking  of  wool  of 

stomach-fat  of 

wool  of G    I  561   ■     1,663  I 

Mourning,  hair  cut  as  sign  of I 

Mussels— 

gathering  of 

used  for  bait 

Mussel-shell,  knife  of : 

Nak!wax-da£x" 666,718,733,734,738  739  ' 

Name,  acquisition  of,  not  belonging  to  family.      ' 

change  of 

family ' 

family,  not  given  away 

given  a  fter  feast ■     • 

given  in  marriage 777,' 

given  in  whale-feast 

marriage-names  put  away ; 

of  chief \ 

of  new-born  infant t 

of  ten-months-old  child f 

potlatch ' 

Names  and  crests  of  the  Maamtagila  ..      ' 

Naming  of  twins 684, 1 

Navel-string 652,655.  f 

oftwinsused  for  magical  purposes G97-' 

used  for  magical  purposes 696, ( 

Neck  of  child  sh\ped f 

Neck  rings,  of  red  cedar  bark,  for  shaman . . 

Net,  for  sea-eggs 

Netting-measure 

Netting-needle 

Nettle-bark 

for  cauterizing ( 

Newettee— 

Chiton  eaten  by 

whale  flensing  among . 

Nimkish  River,  cinquefoil  roots  at 

Nimkish  tribe,  preservation  of  dog-salmon 


by. 


salmon  catching  by. 
Nose-ornaments 


75052—21—35  eth— pt  1- 


Novice—  Page. 

brought  back  by  wolves 741,745 

capture  of 738, 717 

N'i'mwm 221,390, 

597,399,  100,  126,437,  159,472,483,  19  I  [92,  193, 
513,528,55  i,5R5,  566  575, 582, 592, GOO, 611 , 680, 
683,  B£9,  718,742,  753,755,  756,757,  758,759  760, 
766,  768,769,770,771,772,778,781,784,  788,  789 

ancestor  of 734 

disli  for 59 

Number,  ceremonial— 

eight  days,  interval  of 670 

sixteen  days,  interval  of 738 

ten  years,  period  of  741 

Sec  also  Four,  the    ceremonial    number; 
eight:  sixteen:  ten. 

Ocher 624, 630, 635 

for  painting  twins 673,674,681,685.1  57,592 

red,  given  to  new-born  child 652 

Octopus,  used  as  charm  to  facilitate  child- 
birth      649  651 

Oil— 

boiled  with  salmon 322 

drunk  from  ladles 7fll 

eaten  with  salmon 310, 311, 314, 316, 323 

feast  of 755,  .  87 

mixed  with  water 301 

of  silver  perch 666,704 

rubbed  on  body 666,704 

oil-box 756 

for  preserved  crabapples 2S9 

for  preserved  qotlxote 292 

for  preserved  viburnum  berries 283,302 

making  of 82-92 

measurements  of 83 

<  >ii,-i. isn 310,311,312,313,315,317,318,319,321, 

123  124  126  127  147  151  360  363  365,379,400, 
125,  128,51  I,  523,  525,532,    13,549       I  571 

Olachen,  fishing  of 198 

i  '  lath  en  net (.77 

Ornaments 77^ 

Oven 144,519,520,521,587  591 

Owls,  souls  of  common  people  become 727 

Paint— 

black 58  94  95 

mixed  with  salmon-spawn 236 

Tainting £    ;i  ■ 

of  twins  and  their  parents 679 

Patient,  arrangement  of  room  for 734 

!  \-,  of  midwife 670 

Pay  of  twins'  mother 670 

Payment— 

dependent  on  rank  of  debtor. 731 

for  cauterizing 696 

Pegs 74  75,88,90 

Perch ti     h  . 

cutting  of 410 

fishing  of 183 

Koskimo  manner  of  cooking 411 

Kwakiutl  manner  of  cooking 411 

ted 413 

trap  for 159 

Perch-oil 633,657,666,070,671,679     4 

for  mixing  paint 94 

polishing  wood  with 14S 


Page. 

Peucedanum  seeds,  used  as  a  charm 175, 608 

Pin,  of  yew-wood,  for  blanket 118 

riNE 143, 181, 398 

PtNEWOOD  TONGS 229 

Polishing  horn 104  jog 

Porpoise— 

butchering  of 446 

distribution  of 750 

head  and  tail  given  to  steersman 447 

intestines  of,  thrown  into  sea 447 

names  of  parts  of  body 4.M1 

preparation  of 445 

POTLATCB 092,784 

after  payment  of  marriage  debt 779 

Prayer— 

to  cedar  tree 019 

t0  chi>d 068-669 

toerab , 

to  dog  salmon 009 

to  house  of  root  digger 618 

to  silver  salmon til  1 

to  Spirit  of  Fire 705,706 

to  stones  used  for  heating  water 656-667 

to  tree  to  be  felled 617  618 

to  twin 

to  weather 636 

Princess 7  -  ; 

Privileges 

Prying-stick 1S1, 

Prororo .-.213,210 

Purification 085  745 

QIa'neqe-'  LAK'i,  creates  deer,  reference  to. . .      398 
Q6t!xole— 

eaten  fresh  with  oil 290 

kept  in  boxes 291 

picking  of 218 

preserved  in  oil 291 

Qi  ahum,,  between  husband  and  wife 742 

Rack— 

for  drying m,23S 

for  holding  baskets • 171 

ItANK .'.'.'.'..      405 

of  tribes 7«;o 

Rattle 72  1,723 

Raven,  cries  of,  as  signs G0t; 

Recipes HI 

Rinsing  of  mouth 311,312,313,314, 

319,321,329,331,347,351,352,350,302, 
364,367,486,487,504,510,51 

Rival  chiefs 4 )(l  — :J 

invited  to  feast '437 

Rivalry 751,768,787 

Roasting  on  hot  stones 345 

Roasting-TONGS 241, 370, 371, 390, 398 

Roof,  pulled  down  after  death 709 

Room,  for  mother  of  twins 076-678 

Roots,  preservation  of lg8 

Rope,  cedar  bark 75,76,90,100,141 

Sacred  room 

,         .  748 

of  novice ~,s 

Sacred  songs 736,737,738,739,740,745 

of  shaman 70S,  722  726 

Sacrifice— 

after  death 70g 

of  clothing 70- 

of  food 705 


Page. 


Sacrifice— Continued. 

to  souls 

t"  ^I'lril  (if  Fire                                            '  -™ 

Sail-                                    '"" 

mat- 100 

wooden „- 

Sai.ai.-derries— 

cooking  of „,. 

dish  for ~59 

inferior  quality 209 

pi;king  cf  . .  ^1. 

preparation  of 7^0  -,  n 

preservation  of 204-2C9 

""' '.'.....'....  571 

wi  I  h  elderberries,  long  strips  of 209 

with  mashed  currants 577 

sai.ai.-berry  cakes 509  594 

Salmon— 

blistered 30q 

b°'M       m 

bones  of,  thrown  into  sea 393 

carried  up  by  women 224 

cheeks 329 

1  old  roasted 312 

eaten  with  seal-blubber : 4Q3 


fins  and  (ails. 


327-329 

fresh  dried 3, - 

^"•':         ?i; 

guts,  boiled 355 

middle  part  of.  soaked 324 

inusli  made  of 322 

old,  dried 3,- 

"Id,  roasted 313 

preserved  brittle '      310 

preserved  in  cellars 217  322 

refuse  of,  thrown  into  river '304 

roasted r>s4 

roasted,  eaten  after  elderberries. 509 

scorched 3og 

c 'id,  dried 52g 

soaked  backbones,  boiled  or  blistered..  325  320 

soaked  green 3Ig _-.,,, 

split  backs 305 

sun-drisdi    wasilc)  35u 

See     aim     Dog-salmon;    Silver-salmon; 
Sockeye- salmon. 
Salmon-berry— 

feast 760 

picking  of 2U 

shoots,  with  herring-spawn 428 

sprouts  with  salmon-spawn 342  343 

-  ilmoni  "UNtry,  souls  of  twins  go  to '727 

-  W  MnN-HEADS— 

boiled oQC 

,      ,  •"6 

fresn 331 

mush  of,  boiled 33g 

1  red 332 

steamed 334 

Salmon-spawn— 

chewed  by  painter 343 

cla-vc>' 340 

fur  restoring  voice : 342 

milk>' '.'.      339 

roasted 3  . , 

sticky 343 

with  fern-roots 342  343 

with  huckleberries '293 

with  paint 236 


I\ 


Salmon-spawn— Continued.  Page. 

with  salmon-berry  sprouts 342,  143 

with  seaweed 516 

Salmon  village,  abode  of  souls 714 

Sandstones— 

for  grinding  berry-cakes 267 

for  rubbing  down  born 103, 109, 127, 1 14, 157 

for  sawing 109 

Sawing  with  sandstone 109 

Scarlet  berries 300 

Sea-eggs— 

blue,  beliefs  regarding I  ■  7 

blue,  gathering  of 498 

boiled 491 

eating  of,  terms  for 489 

flat,  eaten  raw 494 

flat,  gathering  of 494,495 

flat,  males  not  eaten  raw 496 

flat,  males  roasted 196 

flat,  picked  oil"  rocks 

for  bait 182 

gathering  of 488 

males  not  eaten  raw 489 

males  roasted 490 

net  for 163 

protected  against  spirits  by  firebrands. . .  014 

raw 

raw  and  roasted 4S8 

roasted 496 

spear  for 154 

spearing  of 182 

Sea-lion,  hide  of,  used  1"  make  bag 109 

Sea-lion  dish 756 

Sea  milkwort— 

digging  of 194 

effect  of  eating 559 

preparation  of 557 

Sea  monsters,  charms  against "IS 

Sea-slugs— 

baked....: 180 

boiled 175 

catching  of 17",  176 

eaten  in  winter  only 478 

roasted 179 

Seagull,  ancestor  of  Maamtagila 7s0 

Seal-bladder,  for  keeping  spawn 

Seal  blood,  soup  of 450 

Seal  blubber 456,458,460 

Seal  dish -  -  756 

Seal  feast 756 

promise  of 401 

Seal  head— 

cooked 462 

given  to  steersman 462 

Seal  hunter,  protects  implements  against 

contamination 608 

Seal-meat,  steamed 461 

Seal  Society 753 

Sealing 174-178 

Seals— 

boiled 459 

butchering  of 451 

distribution  of 

insides  of,  cooked 455 

singeing 451 

singeing,  custom  regarding 607 

sleeping-rocks  of 17$ 

tongue  of 453,454, 455,457 


Seats—  i>ngc. 

in  front 788 

order  of 7>.:c,  77 1 

Seaweed— 

boiled 514 

curing  of 292-290 

gathering  ul 185 

powdered 290, 515 

treated  with  chiton  soup  293 

used  in  oven 519 

with  clams 516 

witii  salmon-spawn 510 

Secular  season 7"i 

Serpent  dish,  double-headed 756 

Sewing  of  wood 77,88,93 

Sexual  intercourse,  effect  of 719 

Shaman 707,71  1,734 

as  assistant  of  girl 700 

goes  to  meet  Supernatural  Power 707 

payment  of 723,730,731,741 

procedure  of 725 ,729-733 

sacred  song  of 7ns 

sucking  body  of  patient 732 

supernatural  power  of 7_*4 

taboos  of 711 

women  as  assistants  of 71  s 

Shamanism 7 1  8 ,  72s 

Shell  spoon 279 

Sickness— 

signs  of 61  I  604 

urine  protection  against 668 

Spins 603  606 

1  lody  feelings  as 603-605 

cries  of  raven  as 606 

ofdeath 603-604,605,707  708 

of  eating  all 007 

of  recovery  from  sickness 707 

ofsickness 603  604 

of  success  in  hunting 605,642 

of  success  of  fish-trap 613 

of  visitor  coming 005 

of  weather 605 

Silver  perch,  oil  of— 

for  annointing  body 704 

for  head  of  child 

SUV  ER-SALMON 210, 348 

boiled 353 

first  caught,  treatment  of 610 

roasted 24 1 

spawn 237 

spawn  of,  boiled 345 

spawn  of,  with  fern-roots 523 

Sinew,  for  tying 158 

Singeing  of  seal 451 

Singers,  place  in  house  of 72  i 

Singing  before  meals 3-50 

Sdnging-m  asters 342 

Skunk-cabbage 208, 

257,258,260,268  271  275,276,278,444, 
161,  182,  53  I,  "   . 

for  use  in  oven 335 

Sleeping-rocks  of  seals 178 

Snail  as  weather  charm 

Snake  tail  as  charm,  used  in  childbirth 

Snare  for  goat-hunting 173-174 

Snow,  symbolized  by  eagle  down 633 


Page. 

Soaking-box 324, 327, 329, 3 16.352 

Soaking  dried  meat  in  canoe 433 

Social  customs 750  794 

Social  position  and  marriage  laws....  776-787 

s00keyf.-sai.m0n 238,346 

name  of 612 

old 239 

spawn 237 

S MON'S      EiL. BOO 

Son-in-law,  substitute  for 432, 433 

Song-leader 769 

Songs 369,737,741,776 

for  feast 

for  winter-ceremonial 342 

order  of 772 

sacred 73\  737, 738, 739, 7 10, 745 

sacred,  of  shaman 708,722,726 

Soul 70S. 713, 7:tn 

abode  of 727 

abode  of,  alter  death M 

comes  to  sacrifice 722 

invisible 713 

leaves  body -     ■      724 

leaves  bo  I]  af  night   715 

like  shadow 728 

like  smoke 728 

of  sea-hunters 71  ~> 

out  of  place 72"i 

recovered  by  shaman Vis 

restored  to  sick  person 722  723 

seat  of,  nn  tin1  head 717 

similar  to  shadow 717 

size  of 724 

Spade,  for  digging  lily-bulbs 144 

Sparrow  Society 560 

chief  of 72s 

Spawn.    See  Herring;  Salmon:  Dpg-salmon; 
Silver-salmon;  Soekeye-salmon. 

Speaker 753, 757, 765, 77 1 ,  7S7, 78S 

Speaker  of  Chief 400 

Speaker  of  house 342 

Speaking-posts 785 

Spear— 

for  flounders 157 

for  sea-eggs 154 

Speeches  delivered  in  feasts 788  793 

Spirit  of  Fire 70"> 

feeding  of 774 

Spirits— 

cure  by 730 

frightened  by  firebrands 014 

frightened  by  painted  face 615 

Spirits  of  woods 733 

Spits— 

for  eating 492, 503 

for  roasting 482 

Spoon-baskets 238,756 

SPOONS 330, 345, 349, 358,368, 407 

as  marriage  gifts 777 

of  horn 570 

horn,  making  of 102-108 

Spruce-root 107,  111,  116, 118 

Si  \ . ;  1  \'  i ; 

for  drying  roots 166 

for  winter  provisions 194 


Star-fish  as  weather  charm 030 

Steaming —  Page. 

halibut 246 

horn 103, 107 

in  pit 257-259 

on  red-hot  stones 335 

wood 71  71,^  90,94 

STEAMLNG-BOX 255, 283, 288, 291 ,  297,528 

Steersman,  payment  of 463 

Stirring-paddle 298 

Stomach  of  seal 453,454,455 

Stomach-fat  of  mountain-goat 432 

Stone-hammer 578, 5S8, 5^4,595 

Stones— 

hot,  for  cooking  food 244, 

264,277,300,335,418-419,439,481,553 

hot,  for  steaming 258, 501 

hot,  for  steaming  wood  or  horn. . .  71,87,94,  105 

Sck.t  of  mountain-goat 429  ' 

Summer-seat :t  in,  74 1 

Supernatural  power 747 

■•     m:  words 793-794 

Sweat  bath 702 

I    \  Bl  in 

linn  i  for  sick  people 710 

of  canoe-builder 615 

of  hunter 039 

of  hunter's  wife 037 

of  husband  of  pregnant  woman 049 

of  parents  of  twins 673,085 

i  il 521,522,615,639  641,741 

Tallow 035 

>  11.     of 429-430 

lor  hardening  horn  or  wood 108, 

144,146,148,150,151,  156,165 

for  protection  from  cold 431 

for  protection  from  mosquitoes 205 

for  protection  from  sunl  mm 43 1 

Tamer-dance 738, 739 

Time-beating 62S,  090, 720, 722, 723, 720, 739 

Toad  feet  as  charm 049-051 

TONGS 348, 351, 352, 355, 300,  369, 374, 477 

for  cleaning  spruce-roots 113,116,120 

for  holding  cedar-bark 128, 133 

for  hot  stones 73,75,88, 89, 105, 107, 258 

for  lifting  boiled  fish 315,317,318,321 

for  roasting 229, 232, 234,  244, 306 

small  used  for  eating 568 

Towels 129, 531 

white  cedar  bark  used  as 314 

Trade— 

berry  cakes  used  in 269 

herring  spawn  used  in 254 

Trap,  for  perch,  measurements  of 161 

Tree  — 

burial 689 

felling  of,  custom  relating  to 617 

prayer  to 617 

Tribes,  rank  of 758 

Turning  around,  ceremonial  of 030,  708 

Twins 713 

afterbirth  of 678  686 

belief  regarding 713 

burial  of 686 

ceremonial  circuit  of. 682 


Twins— Continued.  Page. 

ceremonial  for 692 

control  of  weather  by 631 ,  633 

cradle  of '. 673 

customs  regarding 674 

lolled 686 

mother  of,  treats  new-born  child 667 

name  of  elder  brother  of 681,694 

names  of 684 

painted  after  death 6S7 

parents  of,  call  wind 631 

parents  of,  feared  by  chiefs 689 

parents  of,  gather  fog 632 

parents  of,  released  from  customs 690-691 

predict  death 717 

room  for  mother  of 676  678 

younger  brother  of 692,  694 

Unifoltum  dilatatum 601 

Urine — 

for  prevention  against  sickness 668 

for  soaking  cedar  withes 77, 120 

for  washing 461 

used  in  steaming  canoes 94 

Viburnum  berries — 

feast  of -  -        755 

picking  of 210 

preserved  in  water 281  285 

preserved  with  oil 300  302 

price  of 762 

ripe  sucked 585 

steamed 586 

with  water  and  oil 583 

Virgin  performs  weather  ceremonial  . .  -      636 

Visitor  coming,  sign  of 605 

Wadanem,  leader  of  Sparrow  society 728 

War  dance 73S,  739 

Washing  hands  after  meals 315, 

322,328,331,334,338,348,358  365 

Water  of  life 74S 

Weather— 

charm,  mythological  explanation  of —  622,625 

charm,  northwest  wind  called  by 629 

charm  of  Koskimo 630 

charm  of  Kwagul 630 

charm,  star  fish  as 630 

charms 620-637 

charms,  crabs  as 620, 625, 628 

controlled  by  twins 631 


Weather— Continued.  Page. 

influenced  by  blue  sea  eggs 637 

signs 605 

Weaving  of  cedar  bark 137,138,142 

Wedge 387,394,  (91,  i24    ■•  I 

for  marking 83 

U  h  \i  I 461 

flensing  of 464 

Whale  blubber,  boiled 467 

Whale  feast 464 

Whale  oil,  trying  out  of 166 

Whale  tail,  boiled 468 

Whetstone 242 

Widow 521 

house  of 604 

u  end,  called  bymother  or  father  of  twins...      ii31 
Winkles— 

gathering  of 509 

preparation  of 509 

Winter  ceremonial 342,560,564,733,756 

clover  eaten  during 188 

food  for 285  289, 299 

Winter  dancers 342 

Winter  name 786 

Witchcraft 572 

Wolf  dish 756 

Wolf  masks 748 

Wolves  bring  back  novice 744-745 

Wolves  restore  dead  hunter  to  life.         748 

Wolves,  souls  of  land  hunters  go  to 727 

Woman— 

as  assistant  of  shaman 721 

follows  husband 783 

married,  visits  father 783 

Wood— 

bending  of 70-76, 90, 164 

hardening  of,  in  fire 144,  lis,  150 

hardening  of,  with  tallow 144, 

146.148,150,151,156,165 

sewing  of 77, 88, 93 

splitting  of 168 

steamingof -  71  7!.^s  90,94 

Wool  of  mountain  goat 600,661,662,663 

plucking  of 443 

Yawning  attracts  goats 711 

Yellow  cedar 163 

preparation  of  bark  of 129-130 

Yew  wood 144,146,149,150,154,181 


O 


v 


^ 
V 


