\\\mwNN^ 


\  ^ 


v\\K\^^;\\\s\\\\\v 


yf///////////////// /////////////// 


I  A.XWW^ 

\\\\\V 

m 

■aWy 

m 

'/////J 

^^\\\ 

m 

7^// 


:///////..  <>//////////W/M////y/^///////('//^ 


'/,     \y 


/    IV 


'««« 


'///////^ 


Wm^ 


f///////f 


THE 

GODS    OF   THE    EGYPTIANS 


lONDON 

PRINTED   BY    GILBEET   AND    EIVINGTON,   LTD. 
ST.    JOHN'S    HOtrSE,    CLEKKENWELL,   E.C. 


THE 

GODS  OF  THE  EGYPTIANS 

OR 

STUDIES  IN 
EGYPTIAN  MYTHOLOGY 


BY 


E.  A.  WALLIS  BUDGE,  M.A.,  Litt.D.,  D.Litt.,  D.Lit. 

KEEPER    OF   THE    EGYPTIAN    AND    ASSYRIAN    ANTIQUITIES 
IN    THE    BRITISH    MUSEUM 


WITH   131   ILLUSTRATIONS 


VOLUME  L 


METHUEN  &  CO. 

36    ESSEX    STREET   W.C. 

LONDON 

1904 


I 

DEDICATE    THIS   BOOK 
ON 

THE  GODS  AND  MYTHOLOGY  OF  EGYPT 

BY  PEKMISSION 
TO   THE    EIGHT    HONOURABLE 

THE     EARL     OF     CROMER 

PRIVY    COUNCILLOR,    G.C.B.,    G.C.M.G.,    K.C.S.L,    CLE. 
THE    EEGENEEx\TOR    OF    EGYPT 

WITH 
SINCERE    GRATITUDE    AND    RESPECT 


PREFACE 

AMONG  the  various  branches  of  Egyptology  which  have  been 
^closely  studied  during  the  last  twenty-five  years,  there  are 
none  which  are  more  interesting  to  inquire  into,  or  more  difficult 
to  understand  fully,  than  the  religion  and  mythology  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.  When  we  consider  the  number 
of  works  on  these  subjects  which  have  been  written  and  published, 
both  by  expert  Egyptologists  and  by  competent  exponents  of  the 
science  of  religion  during  that  period,  such  a  statement  may  appear 
at  first  sight  to  be  paradoxical,  and  many  may  think  when  reading 
it  that  some  excuse  must  certainly  be  made  for  the  philosopher 
who  asked  an  eminent  professor  of  Egyptology  the  somewhat 
caustic  question,  "Is  it  true  that  the  more  the  subjects  of  Egyptian 
religion  and  mythology  are  studied  the  less  is  known  about  them  ?  " 
The  question  is,  however,  thoroughly  justified,  and  every  honest 
worker  will  admit  that  there  are  at  the  present  time  scores  of 
passages,  even  in  such  a  comparatively  well-known  religious  com- 
pilation as  the  Booh  of  the  Bead,  which  are  inexplicable,  and 
scores  of  allusions  of  a  fundamentally  important  mythological 
character  of  which  the  meanings  are  still  unknown.  The  reasons 
for  this  state  of  things  are  many,  and  the  chief  of  them  may  be 
briefly  recalled  here. 

The  custom  of  relying  absolutely  upon  the  information  about 
the  ancient  Egyptian  religion  and  mythology,  which  is  reported  by 
Greek  historians,  was  abandoned  by  Egyptologists  long  ago,  for 
as  soon  as  the  native  Egyptian  religious  texts  could  be  read,  it 


viii  PREFACE 

became  evident  that  no  Greek  or  Latin  writer  had  any  exact 
first-hand  knowledge  of  these  subjects,  and  that  none  of  them 
succeeded  wholly  in  reproducing  accurately  in  their  works  the  facts 
concerning  them  which  they  derived  from  Egyptian  books  or  from 
Egyptian  priests.  This  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at,  for  the 
cultured  Greek  writers  must  have,  and  did,  as  we  know,  look 
with  mingled  pity,  and  contempt,  and  ridicule,  upon  the 
animal  cults  of  the  Egyptians,  and  they  had  no  sympathy  with 
the  materialistic  beliefs  and  with  the  still  more  materialistic 
funeral  customs  and  ceremonies,  which  have  been,  from  time 
immemorial,  so  dear  to  certain  Hamitic  peoples,  and  so  greatly 
prized  by  them.  The  only  beliefs  of  the  Egyptian  religion  which 
the  educated  Greek  or  Roman  truly  understood  were  those  which 
characterized  the  various  forms  of  Aryan  religion,  namely,  the 
polytheistic  and  the  solar ;  for  the  forms  of  the  cults  of  the  dead, 
and  for  all  the  religious  ceremonies  and  observances,  which  pre- 
supposed a  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  in  everlasting 
life,  and  which  had  been  in  existence  among  the  indigenous  inhabi- 
tants of  north-east  Africa  from  predynastic  times,  he  had  no  regard 
whatsoever.  The  evidence  on  the  subject  now  available  indicates 
that  he  was  racially  incapable  of  appreciating  the  importance  of 
such  beliefs  to  those  who  held  them,  and  that  although,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  Ptolemies,  he  was  ready  to  tolerate,  and  even,  for  state 
purposes,  to  adopt  them,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  absorb  them 
into  his  life.  It  is  important  to  remember  this  fact  when  dealing 
with  the  evidence  of  Greek  and  Roman  writers  on  the  Egyptian 
religion  and  mythology,  for  it  shows  the  futility  of  trying  to  prove 
an  absolute  identity  in  the  indigenous  religions  of  the  Aryans  and 
Egyptians. 

Now,  although  a  true  decipherment  of  the  ancient  Egyptian 
hieratic  and  hieroglyphic  texts  has  enabled  us  to  draw  our  in- 


PREFACE  ix 

formation  on  the  religion  and  mythology  of  Egypt  from  native 
sources,  we  have  still  to  contend  against  the  ignorance  of  Egyptian 
scribes  and  the  mistakes  of  careless  copyists,  and  it  must  never  be 
forgotten  that  the  theologians  at  the  court  of  the  Pharaohs  under  the 
XVIIIth  and  XlXth  Dynasties  were  just  as  ignorant  of  many  facts 
connected  with  their  religion  and  mythology  as  we  ourselves  are. 
In  proof  of  this  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  the  different  explanations 
of  certain  passages  which  are  given  along  with  the  text  in  the 
xviith  Chapter  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead,  and  to  the  childish 
punning  etymologies  of  the  names  of  gods  and  of  many  myth- 
ological explanations  which  are  set  down  in  the  texts  inscribed  on 
the  walls  of  some  chambers  in  the  tomb  of  Seti  I.  at  Thebes,  and 
on  the  walls  of  the  temple  of  Horus  of  Behutet  at  Edfu.  It  is 
satisfactory  to  be  able  to  say  that  many  of  the  absurd  etymologies 
and  trivial  explanations  which  are  products  of  the  scribes  of  old 
can  now  be  corrected.  Recent  researches  have  shown  that  the 
royal  scribes  under  the  ISTew  Empire  (b.c.  1700-700)  were  unable 
to  read  correctly  the  hieratic  characters  which  formed  the  names  of 
some  of  the  kings  of  the  early  Archaic  Period,  and  this  being  so, 
little  surprise  need  be  felt  at  the  difficulties  in  religious  texts 
which  are  due  to  their  ignorance  or  blunders.  Apart  from  such 
considerations,  however,  the  subjects  of  Egyptian  religion  and 
mythology  themselves  are  full  of  inherent  difficulties,  which  have, 
unfortunately,  not  been  lessened  by  the  manner  in  which  some 
Egyptologists  have  treated  them. 

The  number  of  the  gods,  even  under  the  IVth  Dynasty,  about 
B.C.  3600,  was  very  great,  and  as  time  went  on  it  multiplied 
greatly.  The  Pyramid  Texts,  which  were  written  under  the  IVth, 
Vth  and  YIth  Dynasties,  supply  the  names  of  about  two  hundred 
gods  and  mythological  beings,  but  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead 
according  to  the   Theban   Eecension   (b.c.   1700-1200)   over  five 


X  PREFACE 

hundred  gods  are  mentioned.  If  to  these  be  added  the  names  of 
all  the  mythological  beings  which  occur  in  the  various  Books  of  the 
Underworld,  we  shall  find  that  the  number  of  the  gods  who  were 
recognized  by  the  theologians  of  the  XlXth  Dynast}?-  at  Thebes 
was  about  twelve  hundred.  If  all  the  religious  texts  of  this  period 
from  all  the  religious  centres  of  Egypt  were  available  for  study, 
we  should  certainly  find  that  the  names  of  hundreds  of  additional 
local  gods,  goddesses,  and  mythological  beings  could  be  collected 
from  them.  With  such  a  number  of  gods  to  consider,  it  was 
impossible  for  confusion  not  to  arise  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptian 
when  dealing  with  them,  and  the  texts  prove  that  he  found  the 
gods  as  difficult  to  group  and  classify  as  the  modern  investigator. 
The  attributes  of  hundreds  of  them  were  vague  and  shadowy,  and 
the  greater  number  of  them  were  merely  provincial  gods,  to  whom 
circumstances  had  given  some  transient  importance,  which  resulted 
in  their  names  being  recorded  in  writing.  In  fact,  the  theologian 
of  ancient  Egypt  found  it  impossible  to  form  a  system  of  gods 
which  should  be  consistent  in  all  its  parts,  and  should  assign  to 
earth  gods,  water  gods,  air  gods,  village  gods,  city  gods,  nome 
gods,  national  gods,  and  foreign  gods,  the  exact  position  and 
attributes  which  were  their  due  in  it.  From  one  point  of  view 
the  modem  investigator  is  more  fortunate  than  the  Egyptian 
theologian,  for  he  has  more  materials  upon  which  to  work,  and,  as 
a  rule,  he  is  better  equipped  for  his  inquiry.  The  Egyptian  knew 
nothing  about  the  study  of  comparative  religion,  and  he  was  sadly 
hampered  by  his  own  methods. 

Modern  scientific  study  of  the  Egyptian  religion  and  myth- 
ology may  be  said  to  have  begun  with  the  publication  in  full  of  the 
texts,  both  hieratic  and  hieroglyphic,  of  the  Heliopolitan,  Theban, 
and  Saite  Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (Per-em-hru),  and  of 
the  cognate  funeral  texts,  such  as  "The  Book  of  what  is  in  the 


PREFACE  xi 

Underworld,"  "The  Book  of  Breathings,"  "The  Book  of  Trans- 
formations," the  "  Lamentations,"  and  the  "  Festival  Songs  of  Isis 
and  Nephthys,"  &c.  The  first  to  attempt  to  build  up  on  a  large 
scale  a  system  of  Egyptian  theology  and  mythology  from  ancient 
native  works  was  the  late  De.  Heineich  Beugsch,  who  collected 
and  published  in  his  Religion  unci  Mythologie  der  alien  ^gypter, 
Leipzig,  1885-1888,  a  mass  of  facts  of  the  greatest  importance,  and 
a  summary  of  the  conclusions  which  he  deduced  from  them.  In 
the  same  year  in  which  the  first  section  of  Dr.  Brugsch's  work 
appeared,  M.  Maspero  published  in  the  Revue  des  Religions  (tom. 
xii.,  p.  123  f.)  a  masterly  article,  entitled  La  Religion  Egyptienne 
d'apres  les  pyramides  de  la  V  et  de  la  FP  dynastie,  in  which  he 
gave  to  the  world  some  of  the  results  of  his  study  of  the  "  Pyramid 
Texts,"  which  contain  the  oldest  known  Recension,  i.e.,  the 
Heliopolitan,  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead.  In  1887,  Signor 
Lanzone  published  the  last  part  of  his  Bizionario  di  Mitologia 
Bgizia,  which  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  contributions  to  the  study 
of  Egyptian  mythology  ever  made,  and  which  contains  the  names 
of  a  large  number  of  gods,  demons,  spirits,  etc.,  arranged  alpha- 
betically, and  a  series  of  drawings  of  many  of  them  printed  in 
outline  in  red  ink.  In  1888  and  1889,  M.  Maspero,  in  two 
admirable  articles  in  the  Revue  des  Religions  (La  Mythologie 
Egyptienne,  tom.  xviii.,  p.  253  f.,  and  tom.  xix.,  p.  1  f.),  discussed 
and  criticized  both  the  works  of  Beugsch  and  Lanzone,  and  shed  a 
great  deal  of  new  light  upon  the  facts  collected  in  both. 

To  M.  Maspero  belongs  the  credit  of  being  the  first  to 
consider  the  Egyptian  religion  and  mythology  from  the  anthropo- 
logical point  of  view,  and  all  the  evidence  on  these  subjects  which 
has  since  become  available  goes  to  prove  the  general  correctness  of 
the  opinion  which  he  stated  some  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  ago. 
Beugsch,  it  must  be  admitted,  regarded  the  origin  of  Egyptian 


xii  PREFACE 

religion  from  too  lofty  a  metaphysical  and  philosophical  standpoint, 
and  appealed  for  proofs  of  his  contentions  to  Egyptian  texts 
belonging  to  too  late  a  period  to  be  entirely  free  from  the  influence 
of  Greek  culture  and  thought;  in  fact,  he  read  into  certain 
Egyptian  texts,  ideas,  doctrines,  and  beliefs  which  the  primitive 
and  indigenous  Egyptians  could  never  have  possessed.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  seems  to  me  that  M.  Maspero  has  somewhat 
underrated  the  character  of  the  spiritual  conceptions  of  the 
dynastic  Egyptians,  and  that  he  has  done  so  because,  when  he 
wrote  his  great  article,  La  Mythologie  Egyjptienne,  Egyptologists 
had  not  thoroughly  realized  the  distinction  which  exists  between 
the  primitive  or  predynastic  element  in  the  Egyptian  religion  and 
the  Asiatic  element.  This  element  was  of  a  solar  character 
undoubtedly,  and  was  introduced  into  Egypt  by  the  "  Followers  of 
Horus,"  or  the  "Blacksmiths,"  who  invaded  the  country,  and 
conquered  the  natives,  and  settling  down  there,  built  up  the  great 
dynastic  civilization  which  we  call  Egyptian.  This  seems  to  be 
the  correct  explanation  of  the  diversity  of  view  of  two  such 
eminent  experts,  and  the  opposite  character  of  their  conclusions 
appears  to  be  due  chiefly  to  the  difference  of  the  standpoints  from 
which  they  viewed  the  subject. 

A  prolonged  study  of  the  religious  and  mythological  texts  of 
ancient  Egypt  has  convinced  me  of  the  futility  of  attempting  to 
reconcile  the  conflicting  beliefs  and  to  harmonize  the  contradictory 
statements  which  are  found  in  them,  so  long  as  we  regard  the 
Egyptian  religion  as  "one  in  its  extension  and  principle."  It 
must  first  of  all  be  resolved  into  its  constituent  elements,  and  when 
this  has  been  done,  it  will  probably  be  possible  to  classify,  and 
arrange,  and  assign  to  their  proper  sources  the  various  material 
and  spiritual  conceptions  and  beliefs  which  the  Egyptians  heaped 
up  in  their  minds  and  flung  together  in  their  religious  writings. 


PREFACE  xiii 

It  must,  moreover,  be  studied  by  the  light  which  the  science  of 
comparative  religion  has  given  us,  and  due  regard  must  be  paid 
to  the  important  evidence  on  the  subject  that  may  be  deduced 
from  the  remains  and  monuments  of  the  Predynastic  and  Archaic 
Periods  which  have  been  unearthed  during  the  last  few  years. 

The  primitive  dwellers  in  Egypt  undoubtedly  belonged  to  a 
large  and  important  section  of  the  inhabitants  of  North-East 
Africa,  and  possessed  physical  and  mental  characteristics  which 
were  peculiar  to  themselves.  In  the  earliest  times  they  were 
savages,  and  lived  and  died  like  savages  in  other  parts  of  the 
world ;  religious  belief  of  any  kind,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the 
term,  they  had  none,  and  they  probably  regarded  the  animate  and 
inanimate  objects  which  they  saw  about  them  as  akin  to  them- 
selves. At  a  much  later  period  they  peopled  the  earth,  air,  sky, 
and  water  with  beings  of  various  kinds,  and  they  paid  a  sort  of 
homage  or  worship  to  certain  stones,  trees,  and  living  creatures,  in 
which  they  assumed  that  they  lived.  Some  beings  were  held  to 
be  friendly  and  others  unfriendly  ;  and  it  was  thought  that  gifts  or 
offerings  would  secure  the  continuance  of  the  friendship  of  the 
former  and  avert  the  hostility  of  the  latter.  Friendly  beings 
gradually  became  gods,  and  unfriendly  ones  were  classed  as  devils, 
and  in  the  ceremonies  which  the  Egyptian  savage  performed  in 
their  honour,  and  in  the  incantations  which  he  recited,  the  magic 
of  Egypt,  the  forerunner  of  her  religion,  had  its  origin.  The  chief 
object  of  the  savage  Egyptian  was  self-preservation,  and  self- 
interest  was  the  mainspring  of  his  actions,  all  of  which  were 
undertaken  with  a  view  to  material  benefits.  When  he  first 
becomes  known  to  us  in  the  late  Neolithic  Period  we  find  that  he 
possessed  a  belief  in  an  existence  beyond  the  grave,  and  that  it  was 
of  a  material  character  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  he  placed  offerings 
of  food  in  the  graves  of  the  dead.     To  prevent  their  return  to  this 


xiv  PREFACE 

world,  and  their  consequent  claim  for  food  and  other  material 
things,  the  heads  of  the  dead  were  often  severed  from  their  bodies, 
and  their  feet  cut  off;  thus  the  living  made  themselves  secure  in 
the  possession  of  their  homes,  and  wives,  and  goods.  Nothing  is 
known  of  the  Egyptian  religion  and  its  ceremonies  at  this  period, 
but  whatever  they  were,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  the  object  of 
them  all  was  to  secure  for  themselves  after  death  a  renewal  of  life 
which  should  be  full  of  carnal  delights  and  pleasures,  and  there  is 
no  doubt  that  the  ideas  of  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  and 
immortality  on  these  lines  were  firmly  implanted  in  the  native 
mind  long  before  the  Dynasty  Period  began. 

The  cult  of  Osiris,  the  dead  man  deified,  and  the  earliest 
forms  of  his  worship,  were,  no  doubt,  wholly  of  African  origin  ; 
these  are  certainly  the  oldest  elements  in  the  religion  of  the 
Dynastic  Period,  and  the  most  persistent,  for  Osiris  maintained  his 
position  as  the  god  and  judge  of  the  dead  from  the  Predynastic 
to  the  Ptolemaic  Period.  The  Followers  of  Horus,  who  brought  a 
solar  religion  with  them  into  Egypt  from  the  East,  never  succeeded 
in  dislodging  Osiris  from  his  exalted  position,  and  his  cult  survived 
undiminished  notwithstanding  the  powerful  influence  which  the 
priests  of  Pa,  and  the  worshippers  of  Amen,  and  the  votaries  of 
Aten  respectively  exercised  throughout  the  country.  The  heaven 
of  Osiris  was  believed  to  exist  in  a  place  where  the  fields  were 
fertile  and  well  stocked  with  cattle,  and  where  meat  and  drink 
were  abundant ;  the  abodes  of  the  blessed  were  thought  to  be 
constructed  after  the  model  of  the  comfortable  Egyptian  home- 
steads in  which  they  had  lived  during  life,  and  the  ordinary 
Egyptian  hoped  to  live  in  one  of  these  with  his  wives  and  parents. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  followers  of  Ra,  the  sun-god,  believed  in  a 
heaven  of  a  more  spiritual  character,  and  their  great  hope  was  to 
occupy  a  seat  in  the  boat  of  the  god,  and,  arrayed  in  light,  to  travel 


PREFACE 


XV 


whithersoever  he  went.  They  wished  to  become  bright  and 
shining  spirits,  and  to  live  upon  the  celestial  meat  and  drink  upon 
which  he  lived  ;  as  he  was  so  they  hoped  to  be  in  every  respect. 
The  materialistic  heaven  of  Osiris  appealed  to  the  masses  in  Egypt, 
and  the  heaven  where  Ra  lived  to  the  priests  of  Ea  and  other  solar 
gods,  and  to  royal  and  aristocratic  families,  and  to  the  members  of 
the  foreign  section  of  the  community  who  were  of  Eastern 
origin. 

The  various  waves  of  religious  thought  and  feeling,  which 
swept  over  Egypt  during  the  five  thousand  years  of  her  history 
which  are  known  to  us,  did  not  seriously  disturb  the  cult  of 
Osiris,  for  it  held  out  to  the  people  hopes  of  resurrection  and 
immortality  of  a  character  which  no  other  form  of  religion  could 
give.  Secure  in  these  hopes  the  people  regarded  the  various 
changes  and  developments  of  religious  ideas  in  their  country  with 
equanimity,  and  modifications  in  the  public  worship  of  the  gods, 
provided  that  the  religious  feasts  and  processions  were  not  inter- 
rupted, moved  them  but  little.  Kings  and  priests  from  time  to 
time  made  attempts  to  absorb  the  cult  of  Osiris  into  religious 
systems  of  a  solar  character,  but  they  failed,  and  Osiris,  the  man- 
god,  always  triumphed,  and  at  the  last,  when  his  cult  disappeared 
before  the  religion  of  the  Man  Christ,  the  Egyptians  who  em- 
braced Christianity  found  that  the  moral  system  of  the  old  cult 
and  that  of  the  new  religion  were  so  similar,  and  the  promises  of 
resurrection  and  immortality  in  each  so  much  alike,  that  they 
transferred  their  allegiance  from  Osiris  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
without  difficulty.  Moreover,  Isis  and  the  child  Horus  were 
straightway  identified  with  Maey  the  Virgin  and  her  Son,  and  in 
the  apocryphal  literature  of  the  first  few  centuries  which  followed 
the  evangelization  of  Egypt,  several  of  the  legends  about  Isis  and 
her  sorrowful  wanderings  were  made  to  centre  round  the  Mother 


xvi  PREFACE 

of  Cheist.  Certain  of  the  attributes  of  the  sister  goddesses  of 
Isis  were  also  ascribed  to  her,  and,  like  the  goddess  Neith  of  Sais, 
she  was  declared  to  possess  perpetual  virginity.  Certain  of  the 
Egyptian  Christian  Fathers  gave  to  the  Virgin  the  title  "Theo- 
tokos,"  or  "Mother  of  God,"  forgetting,  apparently,  that  it  was  an 
exact  translation  of  neter  mut,  |  ^v\ ,  a  very  old  and  common  title 
of  Isis.  Interesting,  however,  as  such  an  investigation  would  be, 
no  attem|)t  has  been  made  in  this  work  to  trace  out  the  influ- 
ence of  ancient  Egyptian  religious  beliefs  and  mythology  on 
Christianity,  for  such  an  undertaking  would  fill  a  comparatively 
large  volume. 

From  what  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  pages  the  plan 
followed  in  the  preparation  of  the  present  volumes  will  be  evident. 
In  the  opening  chapter  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  describe  the 
religious  beliefs  of  the  primitive  Egyptians,  and  to  explain  how 
their  later  ideas  about  the  "  gods  "  and  God  grew  up,  and  how  they 
influenced  the  religious  writings  and  paintings  of  the  Dynastic 
Period.  The  region  which  is  commonly  called  Heaven,  or  the 
"  Underworld,"  and  its  denizens  are  next  considered  at  some  length, 
and  this  section  is  followed  by  chapters  on  the  ancient  myths  of 
Ra,  the  legend  of  Ra  and  Isis,  and  the  legend  of  the  destruction  of 
mankind.  The  hieroglyphic  texts  of  the  myths  and  legends  are 
given  with  interlinear  transliteration  and  translation,  so  that  the 
student  may  verify  my  statements  for  himself.  Of  the  minor  gods 
and  demons,  of  which  nothing  but  the  names  are  known,  lists  only 
are  printed.  The  great  gods  of  Egypt  have  been  grouped  as  far  as 
possible,  and  they  are  discussed  in  connection  with  the  various 
religious  centres  to  which  they  belong,  e.g.,  Ptah,  Sekhet,  and 
I-em-hetep  with  Memphis,  Amen,  Mut,  and  Khensu  with  Thebes, 
and  the  "  Great  Company  "  of  the  gods  with  Heliopolis.  Speaking 
generally,  the  first  volume  of  this  work  treats  of  the  oldest  and 


PREFACE  xvii 

greatest  gods  and  triads  of  gods  of  Egypt,  and  the  second,  of  the 
gods  of  Heliopolis,  among  whom  are  included  Osiris  and  the  deities 
of  his  funeral  cycle.  The  hymns  to  the  gods  have  been  freely 
quoted,  because  they  illustrate  so  clearly  the  views  which  the 
Egyptians  held  concerning  them,  and  the  manner  in  which  they 
sought  to  praise  them.  In  a  chapter  entitled  "Miscellaneous 
Gods"  will  be  found  several  lists  of  gods  of  the  hours,  days, 
months,  winds,  Dekans,  etc.,  which  I  have  collected  from  Dr. 
Brugsch's  Thesaurus  of  astronomical  and  other  texts ;  for  the  main 
facts  given  in  these  volumes  the  authorities,  both  ancient  and 
modern,  will  be  found  at  the  foot  of  the  pages  wherein  they  are 
first  mentioned. 

Most  of  the  portraits  of  the  gods  which  appear  in  the  coloured 
plates  have  been  reproduced  from  papyri,  coffins,  etc.,  but  for  the 
outlines  of  a  few  I  am  indebted  to  Signor  Lanzone's  Dizionario 
Mitologia  Egizia,  the  value  of  which  has  been  already  mentioned. 
It  has  been  thought  advisable  to  print  the  portraits  of  the  gods 
which  are  not  taken  from  papyri  upon  a  papyrus-coloured  ground, 
and  to  enclose  each  within  a  coloured  border,  for  the  effect  is 
better,  and  the  plan  is  consistent  with  that  followed  by  the 
ancient  Egyptian  artists  at  aU  periods. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Reginald  Lake,  Esq.,  of  Messrs. 
Gilbert  &  Rivington,  and  to  Mr.  G.  E.  Hay  and  Mr.  F.  Rainer,  of 
his  staff,  for  the  care  and  attention  which  they  have  taken  in 
printing  this  work. 

E.   A.   WALLIS   BUDGE. 

London,  September  5th,  1903. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP.  PAGE 

I.     The  Gods  of  Egypt 1 

Appendix  :     Unas,    the    Slayer    and    Eater  of  the   Gods — 
Hieroglyphic    text    with    interlinear    transliteration 

AND  translation 45 

II.     Conception  of  God  and  the  "Gods" 57 

III.  Primitive  Gods  and  Nome-Gods  .        .        .        .        .95 

IV.  The  Companions  of  the  Gods  in  Heaven          ....  156 
V.     The  Underworld 170 

VI.     Hell  and  the  Damned 263 

VII.     The  oldest  Company  of  the  Gods  and  the  Creation     .        .  282 

VIII.     History  of  the  Creation  of  the  Gods  and  of  the  World — 

Hieroglyphic    text    with    interlinear    transliteration  t 

and  translation 308 

IX.     Ea,  the  Sun-God,  and  his  forms 322 

X.     The  Myths  of  Ea .        .359 

XI.     The  Legend  of  Ea  and  Isis — Hieroglyphic  text  with  inter- 
linear transliteration  and  translation    ....  372 

XII.     The    Destruction    op    Mankind — Hieroglyphic    text    with 

interlinear  transliteration  and  translation  .        .        .  388 

XIII.  Thoth,    and    Maat    and   the    other    Goddesses    who    were 

associated  with  him .  400 

XIV.  Hathor  and  the  Hathor-Goddesses 428 

XV.    The  Horus  Gods 466 

XVI.    The  Great  Triad  op  Memphis,  Ptah,  Sekhet,  and  I-em-hetep  500 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


1.  Usertsen  II.  receiving  "  life  "  from  the  god  Sept 

2.  The  serekh  of  Barneses  II. 

3.  The  serpent-headed  leopard  Setcha 

4.  The  eagle-headed  lion  Sefer 

5.  The  fabulous  beast  Sak 

6.  A  fabulous  leopard 

7.  The  animal  Sha 

8.  The  First  Hour  of  the  Night 

9.  The  Second  Hour  of  the  Night 

10.  The  Third  Hour  of  the  Night 

11.  The  Fourth  Hour  of  the  Night 

12.  The  Fifth  Hour  of  the  Night 

13.  The  god  on  the  top  of  the  Steps 

14.  The  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night 

15.  The  Ninth  Hour  of  the  Night 

16.  The  Tenth  Hour  of  the  Night 

17.  The  Eleventh  Hour  of  the  Night 

18.  The  gate  of  the  Twelfth  Hour  of  the  Night 

19.  Sunrise       ...... 

20.  Book  of  the  Underworld — First  Hour 

21.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Second  Hour 

22.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Third  Hour 

23.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Fourth  Hour 

24.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Fifth  Hour 

25.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Sixth  Hour 

26.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Seventh  Hour 

27.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Eighth  Hour 

28.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Ninth  Hour 

29.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Tenth  Hour 

30.  Book  of  the  Underworld — Eleventh  Hour 

31.  The  Oldest  Company  of  the  Gods 

32.  The  Cow-goddess  Nut 

33.  Thothmes  IV.  making  offerings  to  the  Sphinx 

34.  Horus  of  Behutet  armed  with  a  bow  and  arrows 

35.  The  double  god  Horus- Set 

36.  Seker-Asar 

37.  Ptolemy  Euergetes  and  the  Hennu-Boat 

38.  Asar-Hapi  (Serapis)    .... 


and 


FAQE 

25 
26 
59 
60 
60 
61 
61 
179 
181 
183 
185 
187 
189 
193 
195 
197 
19^ 
203 
204 
206 
209 
213 
217,  219 
221,  223 
225,  227,  229 
231,  233,  235,  236 
237,  239,  240 
243,  245 
247,  249 
251,  253 
282 
368 
471 

club  .  .  474 
475 
504 
504 
513 


r 


THE 

GODS    OF    THE    EOYPTIANS 

CHAPTER    I 
THE    GODS    OF    EGYPT 

THE  Greek  historian  Herodotus  affirms  ^  that  the  Egyptians 
were  "beyond  measure  scrupulous  in  all  matters  apper- 
"  taining  to  religion,"  and  he  made  this  statement  after  personal 
observation  of  the  care  which  they  displayed  in  the  perform- 
ance of  religious  ceremonies,  the  aim  and  object  of  which 
was  to  do  honour  to  the  gods,  and  of  the  obedience  which  they 
showed  to  the  behests  of  the  priests  who  transmitted  to  them 
commands  which  they  declared  to  be,  and  which  were  accepted 
as,  authentic  revelations  of  the  will  of  the  gods.  From  the 
manner  in  which  this  writer  speaks  it  is  clear  that  he  had  no 
doubt  about  what  he  was  saying,  and  that  he  was  recording  a 
conviction  which  had  become  settled  in  his  mind.  He  was  fully 
conscious  that  the  Egyptians  worshipped  a  large  number  of 
animals,  and  birds,  and  reptiles,  with  a  seriousness  and  earnestness 
which  must  have  filled  the  cultured  Greek  with  astonishment,  yet 
he  was  not  moved  to  give  expression  to  words  of  scorn  as  was 
Juvenal,^  for  Herodotus  perceived  that  beneath  the  acts  of  apparently 

1  ii.  64. 

3  "  Quis  nescit,  Volusi  Bithynice,  qualia  demens 
'  "  Aegyptus  porfcenta  colat  ?  crocodilon  adorat 

"  Pars  liaec,  ilia  pavet  saturam  serpentibus  ibin. 
"  Effigies  sacri  nitet  aurea  cercopitheci, 
"  Dimidio  magicae  resonant  ubi  Memnone  chordae 
"  Atque  vetus  Thebe  centum  jacet  obruta  portis. 
"  lUic  aeluros,  bic  piscem  fluminis,  illic 

B 


2     ANTIQUITY  OF   RELIGIOUS   OBSERVANCES 

foolish  and  infatuated  worship  there  existed  a  sincerity  which 
betokened  a  firm  and  implicit  belief  which  merited  the  respect  of 
thinking  men.  It  would  be  wrong  to  imagine  that  the  Egyptians 
were  the  only  people  of  antiquity  who  were  scrupulous  beyond 
measure  in  religious  matters,  for  we  know  that  the  Babylonians, 
both  Sumerian  and  Semitic,  were  devoted  worshippers  of  their 
gods,  and  that  they  possessed  a  very  old  and  complicated  system  of 
religion ;  but  there  is  good  reason  for  thinking  that  the  Egyptians 
were  more  scrupulous  than  their  neighbours  in  religious  matters, 
and  that  they  always  bore  the  character  of  being  an  extremely 
religious  nation.  The  evidence  of  the  monuments  of  the  Egyptians 
proves  that  from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  period  of  their  history 
the  observance  of  religious  festivals  and  the  performance  of 
religious  duties  in  connexion  Avith  the  worship  of  the  gods  absorbed 
a  very  large  part  of  the  time  and  energies  of  the  nation,  and 
if  we  take  into  consideration  the  funeral  ceremonies  and  services 
commemorative  of  the  dead  which  were  performed  by  them  at  the 
tombs,  a  casual  visitor  to  Egypt  who  did  not  know  how  to  look 
below   the    surface    might   be   pardoned    for   declaring   that   the 

"  Oppida  tota  canem  venerantur,  nemo  Diaiiam. 
"  Porruni  et  caepe  nefas  violare  et  frangere  raorsu  : 
"  0  sanctas  gentes,  quibus  haec  Bascuntur  in  liortis 
"  Numina  !     Lanatis  animalibus  abstinet  omnis 
"  Mensa,  nefas  illic  fetum  ingulare  capellae  : 
"  Carnibus  humanis  vesci  licet." — Satire,  xv.  1 — 13. 

That  the  crocodile,  ibis,  dog-headed  ape,  and  fish  of  vai-ious  kinds  were  venerated 
in  Egypt  is  true  enough ;  they  were  not,  however,  venerated  in  dynastic  times  as 
animals,  but  as  the  abodes  of  gods.  In  certain  localities  peculiar  sanctity  was 
attributed  to  the  leek  and  onion,  as  Juvenal  suggests,  but  neither  vegetable  was  an 
object  of  worship  in  the  country  generally  ;  and  there  is  no  monumental  evidence 
to  show  that  the  eating  of  human  flesh  was  practised,  for  it  is  now  known  that 
even  the  predynastic  Egyptians  did  not  eat  the  flesh  of  the  dead  and  gnaw  their 
bones,  as  was  once  rashly  asserted.  Juvenal's  statements  ai'e  only  partly  true,  and 
some  of  them  are  on  a  par  with  that  of  a  learned  Indian  who  visited  England,  and 
wrote  a  book  on  this  country  after  his  return  to  Bombay.  Speaking  of  the  religion 
of  the  English  he  declared  that  they  were  all  idolaters,  and  to  prove  this  assertion 
he  gave  a  list  of  churches  in  which  he  had  seen  a  figure  of  a  lamb  in  the  sculpture 
work  over  and  about  the  altar,  and  in  prominent  places  elsewhere  in  the  churches. 
The  Indian,  like  Juvenal,  and  Cicero  also,  seems  not  to  have  understood  that 
many  nations  have  regarded  animals  as  symbols  of  gods  and  divine  powers,  and 
still  do  so. 


DIVINE    ORIGIN   OF   KINGS  3 

Egyptians  were  a  nation  of  men  who  were  wholly  given  up  to  the 
worship  of  beasts  and  the  cult  of  the  dead. 

The  Egyptians,  however,  acted  in  a  perfectly  logical  manner, 
for  they  believed  that  they  Avere  a  divine  nation,  and  that  they 
were    ruled    by    kings    who    were    themselves    gods    incarnate ; 
their  earliest  kings,   they  asserted,   were  actually  gods,   who  did 
not  disdain  to  live  upon  earth,  and  to  go  about  and  up  and  down 
through  it,  and  to  mingle  with  men.     Other  ancient  nations  were 
content  to  believe  that  they  had  been  brought  into  being  by  the 
power  of  their  gods  operating   upon  matter,  but  the  Egyptians 
believed  that  they  were  the  issue  of  the  great  God  who  created  the 
universe,  and  that  they  were  of  directly  divine  origin.     When  the 
gods  ceased  to  reign  in  their  proper  persons  upon  earth,  they  were 
succeeded  by  a  series  of  demi-gods,  who  were  in  turn  succeeded 
by  the  Manes,  and  these  were  duly  followed  by  kings  in  whom  was 
enshrined  a  divine  nature  with  characteristic    attributes.     When 
the  physical  or  natural  body  of  a  king  died,  the  divine  portion  of 
his  being,  i.e.,  the  spiritual  body,  returned  to  its  original  abode 
with  the  gods,  and  it  was  duly  worshipped  by  men  upon  earth  as 
a  god  and  with  the  gods.     This  happy  result  was  partly  brought 
about  by  the  performance  of  certain  ceremonies,  which  were  at 
first  wholly  magical,  but  later  partly  magical  and  partly  religious, 
and   by  the   recital    of   appropriate   words    uttered   in   the   duly 
prescribed  tone   and  manner,  and  by  the  keeping  of  festivals  at 
the  tombs  at  stated  seasons  when   the    appointed  offerings  were 
made,   and  the    prayers    for   the   welfare  of  the   dead  were  said. 
From  the  earliest  times  the  worship  of  the  gods  went  hand  in  hand 
with  the  deification  of  dead  kings  and  other  royal  personages,  and 
the  worship    of   departed  monarchs    from   some   aspects   may  be 
regarded  as  meritorious  as  the  worship  of  the  gods.     From  one 
point  of  view  Egypt  was  as  much  a  land  of  gods  as  of  men,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  the  country  wherein  the  gods  lived  and  moved 
naturally  devoted  a  considerable  portion  of  their  time  upon  earth 
to  the  worship   of  divine   beings  and  of  their  ancestors  who  had 
departed  to  the  land  of  the  gods.     In  the  matter  of  religion,  and 
all   that    appertains    thereto,    the    Egyptians   were   a    "  peculiar 
people,"  and  in  all  ages  they  have  exhibited  a  tenacity  of  belief 


4  NUMBER   AND   VAllIETY   OF   GODS 

and   a  conservatism  which   distinguish  them    from  all  the    other 
great  nations  of  antiquity. 

But  the  Egyptians  were  not  only  renowned  for  their  devotion 
to  religious  observances,  they  were  famous  as  much  for  the 
variety  as  for  the  number  of  their  gods.  Animals,  birds,  fishes, 
and  reptiles  were  worshipped  by  them  in  all  ages,  but  in  addi- 
tion to  these  they  adored  the  great  powers  of  nature  as  Avell 
as  a  large  number  of  beings  with  which  they  peopled  the  heavens, 
the  air,  the  earth,  the  sky,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  and 
the  water.  In  the  earliest  times  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  in 
common  with  every  half-savage  peojile,  believed  that  all  the 
various  operations  of  nature  were  the  result  of  the  actions  of  beings 
which  were  for  the  most  part  unfriendly  to  man.  The  inunda- 
tion Avhich  rose  too  high  and  flooded  the  primitive  village,  and 
drowned  their  cattle,  and  destroyed  their  stock  of  grain,  was 
regarded  as  the  result  of  the  working  of  an  unfriendly  and 
unseen  power ;  and  when  the  river  rose  just  high  enough 
to  irrigate  the  land  whicli  had  been  prepared,  they  either  thought 
that  a  friendly  power,  Avhicli  was  stronger  than  that  whicli 
caused  the  destroying  flood,  had  kept  the  hostile  power  in  check, 
or  that  the  spirit  of  the  river  was  on  that  occasion  pleased  with 
them.  They  believed  in  the  existence  of  spirits  of  the  air,  and 
in  spirits  of  mountain,  and  stream,  and  tree,  and  all  these  had 
to  be  propitiated  with  gifts,  or  cajoled  and  wheedled  into  bestow- 
ing their  favour  and  protection  upon  their  suppliants. 

It  is  very  unfortunate  that  the  animals,  and  tlie  spirits  of 
natural  objects,  as  well  as  the  powers  of  nature,  were  all 
grouped  together  by  the  Egyptians  and  were  described  by  the 
word  NETERU,  which,  with  considerable  inexactness,  we  are 
obliged  to  translate  by  "  gods."  There  is  no  doubt  that  at  a 
very  early  period  in  their  predynastic  history  the  Egyptians 
distinguished  between  great  gods  and  little  gods,  just  as  they  did 
between  friendly  gods  and  hostile  gods,  but  either  their  poverty 
of  expression,  or  the  inflexibility  of  their  language,  prevented 
them  from  making  a  distinction  apparent  in  writing,  and  thus 
it  happens  that  in  dynastic  times,  when  a  lofty  conception  of 
monotheism   prevailed    among   the   priesthood,    the   scribe    found 


GOD    AND    ''GODS"    AND   ANGELS  5 

himself  obliged  to  call  both  God  and  the  lowest  of  the  beings  that 
were  supposed  to  possess  some  attribute  of  divinity  by  one  and  the 
same  name,  i.e.,  neter.  Other  nations  of  antiquity  found  a  way 
out  of  the  difficulty  of  grouping  all  classes  of  divine  beings  by  one 
name  by  inventing  series  of  orders  of  angels,  to  each  of  which 
they  gave  names  and  assigned  various  duties  in  connexion  with 
the  service  of  the  Deity.  Thus  in  the  Kur'an  (Sura  xxxv.)  it  is 
said  that  God  maketh  the  angels  His  messengers  and  that  they 
are  furnished  with  two,  or  three,  or  four  pairs  of  wings,  accord- 
ing to  their  rank  and  importance ;  the  archangel  Gabriel  is  said 
to  have  been  seen  by  Muhammad  the  Prophet  with  six  hundred 
pairs  of  wings !  The  duties  of  the  angels,  according  to  the 
Muhammadans,  were  of  various  kinds.  Thus  nineteen  angels  are 
appointed  to  take  charge  of  hell  fire  (Sura  Ixxiv.)  ;  eight  are  set 
apart  to  support  God's  throne  on  the  Day  of  Judgment  (Sura 
Ixix.) :  several  tear  the  souls  of  the  wicked  from  their  bodies 
with  violence,  and  several  take  the  souls  of  the  righteous  from 
their  bodies  with  gentleness  and  kindness  (Sura  Ixxix.) ;  two 
angels  are  ordered  to  accompany  every  man  on  earth,  the  one  to 
write  do^vn  his  good  actions  and  the  other  his  evil  deeds,  and  these 
will  appear  with  him  at  the  Day  of  Judgment,  the  one  to  lead  him 
before  the  Judg-e,  and  the  other  to  bear  witness  either  for  or 
against  him  (Sura  1.).  Muhammadan  theologians  declare  that  the 
angels  are  created  of  a  simple  substance  of  light,  and  that  they 
are  endowed  with  life,  and  speech,  and  reason ;  they  are  in- 
capable of  sin,  they  have  no  carnal  desire,  they  do  not  propagate 
their  species,  and  they  are  not  moved  by  the  passions  of  wrath 
and  anger ;  their  obedience  is  absolute.  Their  meat  is  the 
celebrating  of  the  glory  of  God,  their  drink  is  the  proclaiming  of 
His  holiness,  their  conversation  is  the  commemorating  of  God,  and 
their  pleasure  is  His  worship.  Curiously  enough,  some  are  said 
to  have  the  form  of  animals.  Four  of  the  angels  are  Archangels, 
viz.  Michael,  Gabriel,  Azrael,  and  Israfel,  and  they  possess  special 
powers,  and  special  duties  are  assigned  to  them.  These  four  are 
superior  to  all  the  human  race,  with  the  exception  of  the  Prophets 
and  Apostles,  but  the  angelic  nature  is  held  to  be  inferior  to 
human  nature  because  all  the  angels  were  commanded  to  worship 


6  MUHAMMADAN   AND    SYRIAN   ANGELS 

Adam  {Siira  ii.).  The  above  and  many  other  characteristics 
might  be  cited  in  proof  that  the  angels  of  the  Muliammadans 
possess  much  in  common  with  the  inferior  gods  of  the  Egyptians, 
and  though  many  of  the  conceptions  of  the  Arabs  on  this  point 
were  undoubtedly  borrowed  from  the  Hebrews  and  their  writings, 
a  great  many  must  have  descended  to  them  from  their  own  early 
ancestors. 

Closely  connected  with  these  Muhammadan  theories,  though 
much  older,  is  the  system  of  angels  which  was  invented  by  the 
Syrians.  In  this  we  find  the  angels  divided  into  nine  classes  and 
three  orders,  u|)per,  middle,  and  lower.  The  upper  order  is 
composed  of  Cherabim,  Seraphim,  and  Thrones  ;  the  middle  order 
of  Lords,  Powers,  and  Rulers ;  and  the  lower  order  of  Princi- 
palities, Archangels,  and  Angels.  The  middle  order  receives 
revelations  from  those  above  them,  and  the  lower  order  are  the 
ministers  who  wait  upon  created  things.  The  highest  and  fore- 
most among  the  angels  is  Gabriel,  who  is  the  mediator  between 
God  and  His  creation.  The  Archangels  in  this  system  are 
described  as  a  "  swift  operative  motion,"  which  has  dominion  over 
every  living  thing  except  man ;  and  the  Angels  are  a  motion 
which  has  spiritual  knowledge  of  everything  that  is  on  earth  and 
in  heaven.^  The  Syrians,  like  the  Muliammadans,  borrowed  largely 
from  the  Avritings  of  the  Hebrews,  in  Avhose  theological  system 
angels  played  a  very  prominent  part.  In  the  Syrian  system  also 
the  angels  possess  much  in  common  with  the  inferior  gods  of  the 
Egyptians. 

The  inferior  gods  of  the  Egyptians  were  supposed  to  suffer 
from  many  of  the  defects  of  mortal  beings,  and  they  were  even 
thought  to  grow  old  and  to  die,  and  the  same  ideas  about  the 
angels  were  held  by  Muhammadans  and  Plebrews.  According  to 
the  former,  the  angels  will  perish  when  heaven,  their  abode,  is 
made  to  pass  away  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.  iVccording  to  the 
latter,  one  of  the  two  great  classes  of  angels,  i.e.,  those  which  were 
created  on  the  fifth  day  of  creation,  is  mortal ;  on  the  other  hand, 
the   angels  which  were    created    on    the    second    day   of  creation 

'^  See  my  edition  of  the  Jiook  of  tlic  Bee,  by  Solomon  of  Al-Basra.     Oxford, 
1886,  pp.  9-n. 


HEBREW   ANGELS    OR    ^'GODS"  7 

endure  for  ever,  and  these  may  be  fitly  compared  with  the 
unfailing  and  unvarying  powers  of  nature  which  were  personified 
and  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians  ;  of  the  angels  which  perish, 
some  spring  from  fire,  some  from  water,  and  some  from  wind. 
The  angels  are  grouped  into  ten  classes,  i.e.,  the  Erelim,  the  Ishim, 
the  Bene  Elohim,  the  Malachim,  the  Hashmahm,  the  Tarshishim, 
the  Shishanira,  the  Cherubim,  the  Ophannim,  and  the  Seraphim  ;  ^ 
amono;  these  were  divided  all  the  duties  connected  with  the 
ordering  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  they,  according  to 
their  position  and  importance,  became  the  interpreters  of  the  Will 
of  the  Deity.  A  comparison  of  the  passages  in  Rabbinic  literature 
which  describe  these  and  similar  matters  connected  with  the 
angels,  spirits,  etc.,  of  ancient  Hebrew  mythology  with  Egyptian 
texts  shows  that  both  the  Egyptians  and  Jews  possessed  many 
ideas  in  common,  and  all  the  evidence  goes  to  prove  that  the 
latter  borrowed  from  the  former  in  the  earliest  period. 

In  comparatively  late  historical  times  the  Egyptians  intro- 
duced into  their  company  of  gods  a  few  deities  from  Western 
Asia,  but  these  had  no  effect  in  modifying  the  general  character 
either  of  their  religion  or  of  their  worship.  The  subject  of  com- 
parative Egyptian  and  Semitic  mythology  is  one  which  has  yet 
to  be  worked  thoroughly,  not  because  it  Avould  supply  us  with 
the  original  forms  of  Egyptian  myths  and  legends,  but  because  it 
would  show  what  modifications  such  things  underwent  when 
adopted  by  Semitic  peoples,  or  at  least  by  peoples  who  had 
Semitic  blood  in  their  veins.  Some  would  compare  Egyptian  and 
Semitic  mythologies  on  the  ground  that  the  Egyptians  and 
Semites  were  kinsfolk,  but  it  must  be  quite  clearly  understood 
that  this  is  pure  assumption,  and  is  only  based  on  the  state- 
ments of  those  who  declare  that  the  Egyptian  and  Semitic 
languages  are  akin.  Others  again  have  sought  to  explain 
the  mythology  of  the  Egyptians  by  appeals  to  Aryan  mythology^ 
and  to  illustrate  the  meanings  of  important  Egyptian  words  in 
religious  texts  by  means  of  Aryan  etymologies,  but  the  results 
are  wholly  unsatisfactory,  and  they  only  serve  to  show  the  futility 

1  See  the  chapter  "  Was  die  Judeu  von  den  guten  Engeln  lehren  "  in  Eisen- 
menger,  Entdechten  Judenihums,  vol.  ii.  p.  370  ff. 


8       THE  OLDEST  GODS  OF  EGYPT 

of  comparing  the  mythologies  of  two  peoples  of  different  race 
occupying  quite  different  grades  in  the  ladder  of  civilization.  It 
cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  on  that  all  the  oldest  gods  of  Egypt 
are  of  Egyptian  origin,  and  that  the  fundamental  religious  beliefs 
of  the  Egyptians  also  are  of  Egyptian  origin,  and  that  both  the 
gods  and  the  beliefs  date  from  predynastic  times,  and  have  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  the  Semites  or  Aryans  of  history. 

Of  the  origin  of  the  Egyptian  of  the  Palaeolithic  and  early 

Neolithic  Periods,  we,  of  course,  know  nothing,  but  it  is  tolerably 

certain  that  the  Egyptian  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Neolithic  Period 

was    indigenous   to    North-East   Africa,    and    that    a   very   large 

number  of  the  great  gods  worshipped  by  the  dynastic  Egyptian 

were   Avorshipped   also  by  his   jDredecessor  in  predynastic   times. 

The   conquerors  of  the  Egyptians  of  the   Neolithic   Period  who, 

with  good  reason,  have  been  assumed  to  come  from  the  East  and 

to  have  been  more  or  less   akin  to  the  Proto- Semites,  no   doubt 

brought  about  certain  modifications  in  the  worship  of  those  whom 

they   had   vanquished,    but    they    could   not    have    succeeded   in 

abolishing  the  various  gods  in  animal  and  other  forms  which  were 

worshipped  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  country, 

for  these  continued  to  be  venerated  until  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies. 

We  have  at  present  no  means  of  knoAving  how  far  the  religious 

beliefs    of  the   conquerors    influenced   the    conquered   peoples    of 

Egypt,  but  viewed  in  the  light  of  well-ascertained  facts  it  seems 

tolerably  certain  that   no  great  change  took  place  in   the   views 

which  the  indigenous  peoples  held  concerning  their  gods  as  the 

result  of  the  invasion  of  foreigners,  and  that  if  any  foreign  gods 

were  introduced  into  the  company  of  indigenous,  predynastic  gods, 

they  were  either  quickly  assimilated  to  or  wholly  absorbed  by  them. 

Speaking  generally,  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians  remained  unchanged 

throughout  all  the  various  periods  of  the  history  of  Egypt,  and  the 

minds  of  the  people  seem  always  to  have  had  a  tendency  towards 

the  maintenance  of  old  forms  of  worship,  and  to  the  preservation 

of  the  ancient  texts  in  which  such  forms  were  prescribed  and  old 

beliefs  were  enshrined.     The  Egyptians  never  forgot  the  ancient 

gods  of  the  country,  and  it  is  typical  of  the  spirit  of  conservatism 

which  they  displayed  in   most  things  that   even  in   the  Roman 


INDIGENOUS   BELIEFS  9 

Period  pious  folk  among  them  were  buried  with  the  same  prayers 
and  with  the  same  ceremonies  that  had  been  employed  at  the 
burial  of  Egyptians  nearly  five  thousand  years  before.  The 
Egyptian  of  the  Roman  Period,  like  the  Egyptian  of  the  Early 
Empire,  was  content  to  think  that  his  body  would  be  received  in 
the  tomb  by  the  jackal-headed  Anubis ;  that  the  organs  of  his 
corruptible  body  AYould  be  presided  over  and  guarded  by  animal- 
headed  gods ;  that  the  reading  of  the  pointer  of  the  Great  Scales, 
wherein  his  heart  was  weighed,  would  be  made  known  by  an  ape 
to  the  ibis-headed  scribe  of  the  gods,  whom  we  know  by  the  name 
of  Thoth  ;  and  that  the  beatified  dead  would  be  introduced  to  the 
god  Osiris  by  a  hawk-headed  god  called  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  who  in 
many  respects  was  the  counterpart  of  the  god  Heru-ur,  the  oldest 
of  all  the  gods  of  Egypt,  whose  type  and  symbol  was  the  hawk. 
From  first  to  last  the  indigenous  Egyptian  paid  little  heed  to  the 
events  which  happened  outside  his  own  country,  and  neither 
conquest  nor  invasion  by  foreign  nations  had  any  effect  upon  his 
personal  belief.  He  continued  to  cultivate  his  land  diligently, 
he  worshipped  the  gods  of  his  ancestors  blindly,  like  them  he 
spared  no  pains  in  making  preparations  for  the  preservation  of  his 
mummified  body,  and  the  heaven  which  he  hoped  to  attain  was 
fashioned  according  to  old  ideas  of  a  fertile  homestead,  well 
stocked  with  cattle,  where  he  would  enjoy  the  company  of  his 
parents,  and  be  able  to  worship  the  local  gods  whom  he  had 
adored  upon  earth.  The  priestly  and  upper  classes  certainly  held 
views  on  these  subjects  which  differed  from  those  of  the  husband- 
man, but  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  it  was  not  the  religion  and 
mythology  of  the  dynastic  Egyptian,  but  that  of  the  indigenous, 
predynastic  Egyptian,  with  his  animal  gods  and  fantastic  and 
half-savage  beliefs,  which  strongly  coloured  the  religion  of  the 
country  in  all  periods  of  her  history,  and  gave  to  her  the  charac- 
teristics which  were  regarded  with  astonishment  and  wonder  by 
all  the  peoples  who  came  in  contact  with  the  Egyptians. 

The  predynastic  Egyptians  in  the  earliest  stages  of  their 
existence,  like  most  savage  and  semi-savage  peoples,  believed  that 
the  sea,  the  earth,  the  air,  and  the  sky  were  filled  to  overflowing 
with  spirits,  some  of  whom  were  engaged  in  carrying  on  the  works 


10  BELIEF   IN    SPIRITS 

of  nature,  and  others  in  aiding  or  obstructing  man  in  the  course 
of  his  existence  upon  earth.  Whatsoever  happened  in  nature  was 
attributed  by  them  to  the  operations  of  a  large  number  of  spiritual 
beings,  the  life  of  whom  was  identical  with  the  life  of  the  great 
natural  elements,  and  the  existence  of  whom  terminated  with  the 
destruction  of  the  objects  which  they  were  supposed  to  animate. 
Such  spirits,  although  invisible  to  mental  eyes,  were  very  real 
creatures  in  their  minds,  and  to  them  they  attributed  all  the 
passions  which  belong  to  man,  and  all  his  faculties  and  powers 
also.  Everything  in  nature  was  inhabited  by  a  spirit,  and  it  was 
thought  possible  to  endow  a  representation,  or  model,  or  figure  of 
any  object  with  a  spirit  or  soul,  provided  a  name  was  given  to  it ; 
this  spirit  or  soul  lived  in  the  drawing  or  figure  until  the  object 
which  it  animated  was  broken  or  destroyed.  The  objects,  both 
natural  and  artificial,  which  we  consider  to  be  inanimate  were 
regarded  by  the  predynastic  Egyptians  as  animate,  and  in  many 
respects  they  were  thought  to  resemble  man  himself.  The  spirits 
who  infested  every  part  of  the  visible  world  were  countless  in 
forms,  and  they  differed  from  each  other  in  respect  of  power; 
the  spirit  that  caused  the  Inundation  of  the  Nile  was  greater  than 
the  one  that  lived  in  a  canal,  the  spirit  that  made  the  sun  to 
shine  was  more  powerful  than  the  one  that  governed  the  moon, 
and  the  spirit  of  a  great  tree  was  mightier  than  the  one  that 
animated  an  ear  of  corn  or  a  blade  of  grass.  The  difference 
between  the  supposed  powers  of  such  spirits  must  have  been 
distinguished  at  a  very  early  period,  and  the  half-savage  inhabi- 
tants of  Egypt  must  at  the  same  time  have  made  a  sharp  distinc- 
tion between  those  whose  operations  Avere  beneficial  to  them,  and 
those  whose  actions  brought  upon  them  injury,  loss,  or  death.  It 
is  easy  to  see  how  they  might  imagine  that  certain  great  natural 
objects  were  under  the  dominion  of  spirits  who  Avere  capable  of 
feeling  wrath,  or  displeasure,  and  of  making  it  manifest  to  man. 
Thus  the  spirit  of  the  Nile  would  be  regarded  as  beneficent  and 
friendly  when  the  waters  of  the  river  rose  sufficiently  during  the 
period  of  the  Inundation  to  ensure  an  abundant  crop  throughout 
the  land ;  but  when  their  rise  was  excessive,  and  they  drowned  the 
cattle  and  washed  away  the  houses  of  the  people,  whether  made  of 


ANIMALS   AND    REPTILES  11 

wattles  or  mud,  or  when  they  rose  insufficiently  and  caused  want 
and  famine,  the  spirit  of  the  Nile  Avould  be  considered  unfriendly 
and  evil  to  man.  An  ample  and  sufficient  Inundation  was 
regarded  as  a  sign  that  the  spirit  of  the  Nile  was  not  displeased 
with  man,  but  a  destructive  flood  was  a  sure  token  of  displeasure. 
The  same  feeling  exists  to  this  day  in  Egypt  among  the  peasant- 
farmers,  for  several  natives  told  me  in  1899,  the  year  of  the  lowest 
rise  of  the  Nile  of  the  XlXth  century,^  that  "  Allah  was  angry 
with  them,  and  would  not  let  the  water  come " ;  and  one  man 
added  that  in  all  his  life  he  had  never  before  known  Allah  to  be  so 
angry  with  them. 

The  spirits  which  were  always  hostile  or  unfriendly  towards  man, 
and  were  regarded  by  the  Egyptians  as  evil  spirits,  were  identified 
with  certain  animals  and  reptiles,  and  traditions  of  some  of  these 
seem  to  have  been  preserved  until  the  latest  period  of  dynastic  his- 
tory. Apep,  the  serpent- devil  of  mist,  darkness,  storm,  and  night, 
of  whom  more  will  be  said  later  on,  and  his  fiends,  the  "  children  of 
rebellion,"  were  not  the  result  of  the  imagination  of  the  Egyptians 
in  historic  times,  but  their  existence  dates  from  the  period  when 
Egypt  was  overrun  by  mighty  beasts,  huge  serpents,  and  noxious 
reptiles  of  all  kinds.  The  great  serpent  of  Egyptian  mythology, 
which  was  indeed  a  formidable  opponent  of  the  Sun-god,  had  its 
prototype  in  some  monster  serpent  on  earth,  of  which  tradition  had 
preserved  a  record ;  and  that  this  is  no  mere  theory  is  proved  by 
the  fact  that  the  remains  of  a  serpent,  which  must  have  been  of 
enormous  size,  have  recently  been  found  in  the  FayyCim.  The 
vertebrae  are  said  to  indicate  that  the  creature  to  which  they 
belonged  was  longer  than  the  largest  python  known. ^  The  allies 
of  the  great  serpent-devil  Apep  were  as  hostile  to  man  as 
was  their  master  to  the  Sun-god,  and  they  were  regarded  with 
terror  by  the  minds  of  those  who  had  evolved  them.  On  the  other 
liand,  there  were  numbers  of  s|)irits  whose   actions  were  friendly 

1  In  October,  1899,  the  level  of  tlie  water  of  Lake  Victoria  was  2  ft.  below  the 
normal,  and  in  December  the  level  at  Aswan  was  5  ft.  8  ins.  below  the  average  of 
previous  years. 

"  "If  the  proportions  of  this  snake  were  the  same  as  in  the  existing  Python 
'■'■  seboe  it  probably  reached  a  length  of  thirty  feet."  C.  W.  Andrews,  D.Sc,  in 
Geological  Mag.,  vol.  viii.,  1901,  p,  438. 


12  HEAVEN   AND    HELL 

and  beneficial  to  man,  and  some  of  these  were  supposed  to  do  battle 
on  his  behalf  against  the  evil  spirits. 

Thus  at  a  very  early  period  the  predynastic  Egyptian  must 
have  conceived  the  existence  of  a  great  company  of  spirits  whose 
goodwill,  or  at  all  events  whose  inaction,  could  only  be  obtained  by 
bribes,  i.e.,  offerings,  and  cajolery  and  flattery  ;  and  of  a  second 
large  company  whose  beneficent  deeds  to  man  he  was  wont  to 
acknowledge  and  whose  powerful  help  he  Avas  anxious  to  draw 
towards  himself;  and  of  a  third  company  who  were  supposed  to  be 
occupied  solely  with  making  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  to  shine,  and 
the  rivers  and  streams  to  flow,  and  the  clouds  to  form  and  the  rain 
to  fall,  and  who,  in  i'act,  were  ahvays  engaged  in  carrying  out 
diligently  the  workings  and  evolutions  of  all  natural  things,  both 
small  and  great.  The  spirits  to  whom  in  predynastic  times  the 
Egyptians  ascribed  a  nature  malicious  or  unfriendly  towards  man, 
and  who  were  regarded  much  as  modern  nations  have  regarded 
goblins,  hobgoblins,  gnomes,  trolls,  elves,  etc.,  developed  in  dynastic 
times  into  a  corporate  society,  with  aims,  and  intentions,  and  acts 
wholly  evil,  and  with  a  government  which  was  devised  by  the 
greatest  and  most  evil  of  their  number.  To  these,  in  process  of 
time,  were  joined  the  spirits  of  evil  men  and  women,  and  the 
prototype  of  hell  was  formed  by  assuming  the  existence  of  a  place 
where  evil  spirits  and  their  still  more  evil  chiefs  lived  together. 
By  the  same  process  of  imagination  beneficent  and  friendly  spirits 
were  grouped  together  in  one  abode  under  the  direction  of  rulers 
who  were  well  disposed  towards  man,  and  this  idea  became  the 
nucleus  of  the  later  conception  of  the  heaven  to  which  the  souls  of 
good  men  and  women  were  supposed  by  the  Egyptian  to  depart, 
after  he  had  developed  sufficiently  to  conceive  the  doctrine  of 
immortality.  The  chiefs  of  the  company  of  evil  spirits  subsequently 
became  the  powerful  devils  of  historic  times,  and  the  rulers  of  the 
company  of  beneficent  and  good  spirits  became  the  gods  ;  the  spirits 
of  the  third  company,  i.e.,  the  spirits  of  the  powers  of  Nature, 
became  the  great  cosmic  gods  of  the  dynastic  Egyptians.  The  cult 
of  this  last  class  of  spirits,  or  gods,  differed  in  many  ways  from  that 
of  the  spirits  or  gods  who  were  supposed  to  be  concerned  entirely 
with  the  welfare  of  man,  and  in  dynastic  times  there  are  abundant 


ANTIQUITV   OF   EGYPTIAN   MAGIC  13 

proofs  of  this  in  religious  texts  and  compositions.  In  the  hymns  to 
the  Sun-god,  under  whatsoever  name  he  is  worshipped,  we  find  that 
the  greatest  wonder  is  expressed  at  his  majesty  and  glory,  and  that 
he  is  apostrophised  in  terms  which  show  forth  the  awe  and  fear  of 
his  devout  adorer.  His  triumphant  j)assage  across  the  sky  is 
described,  the  unfailing  regularity  of  his  rising  and  setting  is 
mentioned,  reference  is  made  to  the  vast  distance  over  which  he 
passes  in  a  moment  of  time,  glory  is  duly  ascribed  to  him  for  the 
great  works  which  he  performs  in  nature,  and  full  recognition  is 
given  to  him  as  the  creator  of  men  and  animals,  of  birds  and  fish, 
of  trees  and  plants,  of  reptiles,  and  of  all  created  things  ;  the 
praise  of  the  god  is  full  and  sufficient,  yet  it  is  always  that  of  a 
finite  being  who  appears  to  be  overwhelmed  at  the  thought  of  the 
power  and  might  of  an  apparently  infinite  being.  The  petitions 
lack  the  personal  appeal  which  we  find  in  the  Egyptian's  prayers 
to  the  man-god  Osiris,  and  show  that  he  regarded  the  two  gods 
from  entirely  different  points  of  view.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how 
early  this  distinction  between  the  functions  of  the  two  gods  was 
made,  but  it  is  certain  that  it  is  coeval  with  the  beginnings  of 
dynastic  history,  and  that  it  was  observed  until  very  late  times. 

The  element  of  magic,  which  is  the  oldest  and  most  persistent 
characteristic  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  and  of  the  Egyptian 
religion,  generally  belongs  to  the  period  before  this  distinction  was 
arrived  at,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  dates  from  the  time  when  man 
thought  that  the  good  and  evil  spirits  were  beings  who  Avere  not 
greatly  different  from  himself,  and  who  could  be  propitiated  with 
gifts,  and  controlled  by  means  of  words  of  power  and  by  the  per- 
formance of  ceremonies,  and  moved  to  action  by  hymns  and 
addresses.  This  belief  was  present  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians 
in  all  ages  of  their  history,  and  it  exists  in  a  modified  form  among 
the  Muhammadan  Egyptians  and  Sudani  men  to  this  day.  It  is 
true  that  they  proclaim  vehemently  that  there  is  no  god  but  God, 
and  that  Muhammad  is  His  Prophet,  and  that  God's  power  is 
infinite  and  absolute,  but  they  take  care  to  guard  the  persons  of 
themselves  and  their  children  from  the  Evil  Eye  and  from  the 
assaults  of  malicious  and  evil  spirits,  by  means  of  amulets  of  all 
kinds  as  zealously  now  as  their  ancestors  did  in  the  days  before 


14  EVII.    SPIRITS 

the  existence  of  God  Who  is  One  was  conceived.  The  caravan 
men  protect  their  camels  from  the  Evil  Eye  of  the  spirits  of  the 
desert  by  fastening  bright-coloured  beads  between  the  eyes  of  their 
beasts,  and  by  means  of  long  fringes  Avhich  hang  from  their 
mahlufas,  or  saddles,  and  in  spite  of  their  firm  belief  in  the  infinite 
power  of  God,  they  select  an  auspicious  day  on  which  to  set  out 
on  a  journey,  and  they  never  attempt  to  pass  certain  isolated 
caves,  or  ravines,  or  mountains,  in  the  night  time.  All  the 
members  of  the  great  family  of  the  Jinn  are  to  them  as  real  to-day 
as  their  equivalents  were  to  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and,  from  the 
descriptions  of  desert  spirits  which  are  given  by  those  who  have 
been  fortunate  enough  to  see  them,  it  is  clear  that  traditions  of 
the  form  and  appearance  of  ancient  Egyptian  fiends  and  evil 
spirits  have  been  unconsciously  j)reserved  until  the  present  day. 
The  modern  Egyptians  call  them  by  Arabic  names,  but  the 
descriptions  of  them  agree  well  with  those  which  might  be  made 
of  certain  genii  that  appear  in  ancient  Egyptian  mytliological 
works  treating  of  the  Underworld  and  its  inhabitants. 

The  peoples  of  the  Eastern  Sudan,  who  are  also  Muhammadans, 
have  inherited  many  ideas  and  beliefs  from  the  ancient  Egyptians, 
and  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  when  we  remember  that  the 
civilization  of  Nubia  from  the  beginning  of  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty 
to  the  end  of  the  XXVIth,  i.e.,  from  about  B.C.  1550  to  about 
B.C.  550,  was  nothing  but  a  slavish  copy  of  that  of  Egypt.  A 
stay  of  some  months  in  the  village  at  the  foot  of  Jebel  Barkal, 
which  mai'ks  the  site  of  a  part  of  the  old  Nubian  city  of  Napata, 
convinced  me  of  this  fact,  and  visits  to  other  places  in  the  Eastern 
Sudan  proved  that  these  ideas  and  beliefs  were  widespread.  The 
hills  and  deserts  are,  according  to  native  belief,  peopled  with 
spirits,  which  are  chiefly  of  a  disposition  unfriendly  to  man,  and 
they  are  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  entering  both  human 
beings  and  animals  almost  at  pleasure.  Palm-trees  die  or  become 
unfruitful,  and  cattle  fall  sick  through  the  operations  of  evil  spirits, 
and  any  misfortune  which  comes  upon  the  community  or  upon  the 
individual  is  referred  to  the  same  cause.  The  pyramids,  which 
they  call  tarahll,  on  the  hill,  are  viewed  witli  almost  childish  fear 
by  the  natives  who,  curiously  enough,  speak  of  the  royal  personages 


MODERN   SUDANI    SUPERSTITIONS  15 

buried  therein  as  illdhdt,  or  "gods,"  and  none  of  them,  if  it  can 
possibly  be  avoided,  will  go  up  after  sundown  into  "  the  mountain," 
as  they  call  the  sandstone  ridge  on  which  they  are  built.  Tombs 
and  cemeteries  are  carefully  avoided  at  night  as  a  matter  of  course, 
but  to  approach  the  pyramids  at  night  is  regarded  as  a  wilful  act 
which  is  sure  to  bring  down  upon  the  visitor  the  wrath  of  the 
spirits  of  the  kings,  who  have  by  some  means  acquired  a  divine 
character  in  the  eyes  of  the  natives.  When  I  was  opening  one  of 
the  pyramids  at  Jebel  Barkal  in  1897,  Muhammad  wad  Ibrahim, 
the  shekh  of  the  village,  tried  to  keep  the  workmen  at  work  as 
long  as  daylight  lasted,  but  after  this  had  been  done  for  two  or 
three  evenings,  several  of  the  wives  of  the  men  appeared  and 
carried  off  their  husbands,  fearing  they  should  either  be  bewitched, 
or  suffer  some  penalty  for  intrusion  in  that  place  at  the  time  when, 
in  popular  opinion,  the  spirits  of  the  dead  came  forth  to  enjoy  the 
cool  of  the  evening.  The  same  idea  prevailed  further  south  among 
the  people  who  lived  on  the  river  near  the  pyramids  of  Bakrawiyeh, 
which  mark  the  site  of  the  royal  necropolis  of  the  ancient  city  of 
Berua,  or  Marua,  i.e.,  Meroe.  The  local  shekh  was  appointed  to 
go  with  me  and  to  help  in  taking  measurements  of  some  of  the 
pyramids  at  this  place,  but  when  we  were  about  half  a  mile  from 
them  he  dismounted,  and  said  he  could  go  no  further  because  he 
was  afraid  of  the  spirits  of  the  gods,  illdhdt,  who  were  buried  there. 
After  much  persuasion  he  consented  to  accompany  me,  but  nothing 
would  iaduce  him  to  let  the  donkeys  go  to  the  pyramids ;  having 
hobbled  them  and  tied  them  to  a  large  stone  he  came  on,  but 
seated  himself  on  the  ground  at  the  northern  end  of  the  main 
group  of  pyramids,  and  nothing  would  persuade  him  to  move 
about  among  the  ruins.  The  natives  of  Jebel  Barkal  viewed  the 
work  of  excavation  with  great  disfavour  from  the  very  first,  and 
their  hostile  opinion  was  confirmed  by  the  appearance  at  the 
pyramids  of  great  numbers  of  wasps,  which,  they  declared,  were 
larger  than  any  which  they  had  seen  before  ;  they  were  convinced 
that  they  were  evil  spirits  who  had  taken  the  form  of  wasps,  and 
that  evil  was  coming  upon  their  village.  It  was  useless  to  explain 
to  them  that  the  wasps  only  came  there  to  drink  from  the  water- 
skins,  which  were  kept  full  and  hung  there  on  pegs  driven  into  the 


16  MODERN   SUDANI   SUPERSTITIONS 

masonry  for  the  use  of  the  workmen  ;  and  when  a  harmless  snake, 
about  eight  feet  long,  which  had  also  crawled  there  to  drink,  was 
killed  one  morning  by  the  men,  their  fears  of  impending  evil  were 
confirmed,  for  they  were  certain  that  the  spirit  of  a  king  had  been 
killed,  and  they  expected  that  vengeance  would  be  taken  upon 
them  by  the  divine  spirits  of  his  companions. 

About  halfway  up  Jebel  Barkal  there  lived  four  large  hawks 
which  always  seemed  to  be  following  any  person  who  ascended  the 
mountain,  but  yet  never  came  very  near ;  these  were  always 
regarded  by  the  natives  as  the  embodied  spirits  of  the  gods  whose 
figures  still  remain  sculptured  and  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  rock- 
hewn  sanctuary  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  I  never  heard  of  any 
attempt  being  made  to  shoot  or  snare  them  by  the  people  of  the 
villages  of  Barkal,  Shibba,  or  Marawi.  The  inhabitants  could  not 
know  that  the  hawk  was  probably  the  first  living  creature  which 
was  worshipped  in  the  Nile  Valley,  and  therefore  the  respect  which 
they  paid  to  the  hawks  must  have  been  due  to  a  tradition  which 
had  been  handed  down  to  them  throuo;h  countless  o-enerations  from 
a  past  age.  Their  connecting  the  hawks  with  the  figures  of  the 
gods  sculptured  in  the  sanctuary  of  Amen-Ra  is  worthy  of  note, 
for  it  seems  to  show  that  on  such  matters  they  thought  along  the 
same  lines  as  their  ancestors. 

Concerning  amulets,  the  Sudani  man  is  as  superstitious  as 
were  his  ancestors  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  he  still  believes  that 
stones  of  certain  colours  possess  magical  properties,  especially  when 
inscribed  with  certain  symbols,  of  the  meaning  of  which,  however, 
he  has  no  knowledge,  but  which  are  due,  he  says,  to  the  presence  of 
spirits  in  them.  Women  and  children,  especially  female  children, 
protect  many  parts  of  their  bodies  with  strings  of  beads  made  of 
magical  stones,  and  sometimes  with  plaques  of  metal  or  stone,  which 
are  cut  into  various  shapes  and  ornamented  with  signs  of  magical 
power  ;  the  positions  of  such  plaques  on  the  body  are  frequently 
identical  with  those  whereon  the  dynastic  Egyptians  laid  amulets 
on  the  dead,  and,  if  we  could  learn  from  the  Sudani  folk  the  reasons 
which  prompt  them  to  make  use  of  such  things,  we  should  probably 
find  that  the  beliefs  which  underlie  the  customs  are  also  identical. 
The  above  facts  concerning  the  Sudani  belief  in  spirits  might  be 


IDEAS   ABOUT   THE   BEETLE  17 

greatly  multiplied,  and  they  are  not  so  remotely  connected  with  the 
beliefs  of  the  dynastic,  and  even  predynastic,  Egyptians,  as  may 
appear  to  be  the  case  at  first  sight,  and  the  writer  believes  that  a 
large  amount  of  information  of  a  similar  kind  awaits  the  investigator, 
who  will  devote  the  necessary  time  to  living  in  some  of  the  out-of- 
the-way  villages  of  the  black  (not  negro)  peoples  who  dAvell  on  the 
eastern  bank  of  the  Nile  and  of  the  Blue  Mle. 

In  many  isolated  places  in  Southern  Nubia  and  the  Eastern 
Sudan  are  trees  which  men  regard  with  reverence,  but  this  may 
be  the  result  of  contact  with  the  natives  of  Central  Africa,  where 
people  pray  to  trees  on  certain  occasions,^  believing  that  the  spirits 
which  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  them  can  bestowgifts  upon  those  whom 
they  regard  with  favour,  and  ensure  safety  both  to  themselves  and 
their  animals  when  travelling.  Still  further  to  the  south  certain 
animals,  e.g.,  the  cynocephalus  ape,  which  plays  such  a  prominent 
part  in  dynastic  Egyptian  mythology,  are  supposed  to  be  inhabited 
by  divine  spirits  and  to  possess  extraordinary  powers  of  intelligence 
in  consequence,  and  the  various  kinds  of  scarabaei,  or  beetles,  are 
thought  to  be  animated  by  spirits,  which  the  natives  connect  with 
the  sun.  The  dead  bodies  of  these  insects  were,  in  former  days, 
often  eaten  by  women  who  wished  to  become  mothers  of  large 
families,  and  to  this  day  parts  of  them  are  cooked,  and  treated 
with  oil,  and  made  into  medicines  ^  for  the  cure  of  sore  eyes,  etc. 
The  dynastic  Egyptians  believed  that  the  scarab  was  connected 

1  "  Under  the  wide-spreading  branches  of  an  enormous  heglik-tree,  and  on  a 
"  spot  beautifully  clean  and  sprinkled  with  fine  sand,  the  Bedeyat  beseech  an 
"  unknown  god  to  du^ect  them  in  their  undertakings  and  to  protect  them  from 
"  danger."     Slatin  Pasha,  Fire- and  Sivord  in  the  Sudan,  London,  1896,  p.  114*. 

3  Ibrahim  Rushdi,  Clerk  of  Telegraphs  at  Benha,  in  Lower  Egypt,  told  me  in 
January,  1895,  that  in  many  districts  the  beetles  were  boiled,  and  the  grease 
extracted  from  them  ;  as  they  are  being  boiled  the  shells  come  off.  The  bodies  are 
next  roasted  in  olive  oil,  and  then  steeped  in  myrrh,  and  after  this  they  are 
macerated  in  that  liquid,  and  strained  through  muslin;  the  liquid  which  runs 
through  is  believed  to  cure  the  itching  which  is  caused  by  a  certain  internal  ailment. 
Some  men  drink  a  few  drops  of  it  in  each  cup  of  coffee,  and  women  drink  it  to 
make  them  fat.  The  old  women  have  a  prescription  for  sore  eyes,  which  is  as 
follows : — Stick  a  splinter  of  wood  through  a  series  of  beetles  for  twelve  hours 
when  a  child  is  about  to  be  born  ;  when  the  child  is  born,  pull  the  splinter  out  of 
the  last  beetle,  and  dip  it  in  Tcohl,  and  rub  the  eyes  of  the  child  with  it.  If  this 
be  done  in  the  proper  way  the  child  will  never  suffer  from  sore  eyes. 

C 


18  FORMS    OF   EVIL   SPIRITS 

with  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and  in  religious  texts  of  all  periods  it  is 
said  that  the  beetle  occupied  a  place  in  the  boat  of  this  god. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  dynastic  Egyptians,  and  their 
predecessors,  conceived  the  existence  of  spirits  hostile  towards 
man,  of  spirits  beneficent  towards  man,  and  of  spirits  which  were 
wholly  occupied  with  carrying  out  the  various  operations  of 
Nature,  and  we  must  now  consider  the  manner  and  forms  in  which 
they  became  visible  to  man.  The  commonest  form  in  which  a 
spirit  was  believed  to  make  itself  visible  to  man  was  that  of  some 
beast,  or  bird,  or  fish,  or  reptile,  and  at  a  very  early  period 
adoration,  in  one  form  or  another,  of  the  so-called  inferior  animals 
was  well-nigh  universal  in  Egypt.  At  the  time  when  this  worship 
began  animals,  as  well  as  inanimate  objects,  were  not  considered 
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  Valley  to  be  greatly  removed  from 
themselves  in  intelligence.  Primitive  man  saw  nothing  ridiculous 
in  attributing  speech  to  inanimate  objects  and  animals,  which 
were  supposed  to  think,  and  reason,  and  act  like  human  beings  ; 
and  the  religious  literature  of  many  of  the  most  ancient  nations 
contains  numerous  proofs  of  this  fact.  Among  the  baked  clay 
tablets  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  Royal  Library  of  Nineveh,  which 
contained  copies  of  hundreds  of  documents  preserved  in  the  temples 
of  the  most  ancient  cities  of  Babylonia,  were  fragments  of  a 
dialogue  between  a  horse  and  an  ox,  which  is  now  known  as  the 
"  Fable  of  the  Horse  and  the  Ox,"  ^  and  it  is  tolerably  certain  that 
this  dialogue  did  not  originate  in  the  reign  of  Ashur-bani-pal 
(b.c.  668-626),  although  the  tablet  on  which  it  was  written  is 
not  older  than  his  time.  Again,  in  the  Creation  Legend  the 
dragon-monster  Tiamat,  the  representative  of  the  powers  of  evil 
and  darkness,  is  made  to  conspire  against  the  gods,  and  to  create 
a  serpent  brood  ^  in  order  to  do  effective  battle  with  them ;  and 
other  instances  might  be  quoted  to  show  that  the  Babylonians  and 
Assyrians  attributed  to  the  animals  reason,  passions,  and  language. 

1  See  Guide  to  the  Bahylonum  and  Assyrian  Antiquities,  London,  1900,  p.  48 ; 
the  fragments  are  exhibited  in  the  Biitish  Museum,  Nineveh  Gallery,  Table-case  C. 

~  Ibid,  p.  36.  For  the  cuneiform  tablets  in  the  British  Maseum  see  Nineveh 
Galler  ,  Table-case  A.  See  also  L.  W.  King,  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation,  vol.  i., 
p.  1  ff. 


TALKING   ANIMALS,    TREES,    ETC.  19 

From  the  Bible  we  learn  that  the  Hebrews  held  the  same 
views  as  their  kinsmen  on  this  matter,  and  we  are  told  that  the 
serpent  beguiled  and  seduced  Eve  by  his  speech,  and  made  her 
break  the  command  of  the  Lord  (G-enesis  iii.  1  ff.)?  and  that  the 
she-ass  of  Balaam  remonstrated  with  her  master  and  asked  him 
why  he  had  smitten  her  three  times  (Numbers  xxii.  28).  We  may 
note  in  passing  that  this  animal  is  said  to  have  been  able  to  see  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord  standing  in  the  way,  whilst  her  master  could 
not,  and  we  are  forcibly  reminded  of  the  belief  which  was  current 
among  Jews  and  Muliammadans  to  the  effect  that  dogs  howled 
before  a  death  because  they  were  able  to  see  the  Angel  of  Death 
going  about  on  his  mission,  to  say  nothing  of  our  own  superstition 
to  the  same  effect,  which,  however,  we  seem  to  have  derived  not 
from  the  East,  but  from  cognate  northern  European  nations.  We 
see  also  from  the  Book  of  Judges  (ix.  8  ff.)  that  speech  and  reason 
were  sometimes  attributed  to  objects  which  we  regard  as  inanimate, 
for  we  read  that  the  trees  "  went  forth  on  a  time  to  anoint  a  king 
''  over  them ;  and  they  said  unto  the  olive  tree,  Reign  thou  over  us." 
When  the  olive  tree  refused,  they  went  to  the  fig  tree  with  the 
same  request,  and  when  the  fig  tree  refused,  they  went  to  the  vine, 
which  refused  to  leave  its  wine  "  which  cheereth  Grod  and  man  "  ; 
on  this  they  applied  to  the  bramble,  which  placed  before  them  the 
choice  of  coming  and  putting  their  trust  in  its  shadow,  or  of  being 
burnt  by  the  fire  which  should  come  forth  from  out  of  itself.  In 
connexion  with  this  idea  may,  perhaps,  be  mentioned  the  incident 
recorded  in  Numbers  xxi.  17,  wherein  we  are  told  that  the  princes 
and  nobles  digged  a  well  "  with  their  staves  "  by  the  direction  of 
the  lawgiver,  and  that  the  Children  of  Israel  sang  this  song, 
"Spring  up,  0  well;  sing  ye  unto  it."  Many  other  examples 
might  be  quoted  from  Hebrew  literature  to  show  that  animals  and 
inanimate  objects  were  on  certain  occasions  regarded  as  beings  which 
possessed  thinking  and  reasoning  powers  similar  to  those  of  men. 

Among  the  Egyptians  animals  thought,  and  reasoned,  and 
spoke  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  their  literature  is  full  of  indica- 
tions that  they  believed  them  to  be  moved  by  motives  and  passions 
similar  to  those  of  human  beings.  As  a  typical  example  may  be 
quoted  the  instance  of  the  cow,  in  the  Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers^ 


20  THE   DOG-HEADED   APE 

who  tells  her  herd  that  his  elder  brother  is  standing  behind  the 
door  of  the  byre  with  his  dagger  in  his  hand  waiting  to  slay  him  ; 
the  young  man  having  seen  the  feet  of  his  brother  under  the  door 
took  to  flight,  and  so  saved  his  life.  Here  we  have  another  proof 
that  animals  were  sometimes  credited  with  superhuman  intelligence 
and  discernment,  since  but  for  the  warning  of  the  cow,  who  had 
perceived  what  her  master  had  failed  to  notice,  the  herd  would 
have  been  slain  as  soon  as  he  entered  the  byre.  Here,  too,  must 
be  noted  the  very  important  part  which  is  played  in  the  Judgment 
Scene  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  by  animals.  In  the  Story  of  the 
Shijnvrech  also  we  are  told  concerning  a  huge  serpent  thirty  cubits 
long,  with  a  beard  two  cubits  long,  which  made  a  long  speech  to 
the  unfortunate  man  who  was  wrecked  on  the  island  wherein  it 
lived. 

In  the  pap3rri  of  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  we  have  representa- 
tions of  the  weighing  of  the  heart  of  the  deceased  in  the  Great 
Balance,  which  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  Company 
of  the  gods,  who  act  as  judges,  and  who  pass  the  sentence  of  doom, 
that  must  be  ratified  by  Osiris,  according  to  the  report  of  the  god 
Thoth,  who  acts  as  scribe  and  secretary  to  the  gods.  The  Egyptian 
hoped  that  his  heart  would  exactly  counterbalance  the  feather, 
symbolic  of  Maat  or  the  Law,  and  neither  wished  nor  expected  it 
to  outweigh  it,  for  he  detested  performing  works  of  supererogation. 
The  act  of  weighing  was  carefully  watched  by  Anubis  the  god  of 
the  dead,  whose  duty  was  to  cast  to  the  Eater  of  the  Dead  the 
hearts  which  failed  to  balance  the  feather  exactly ;  and  by  the 
guardian  angel  of  the  deceased,  on  behalf  of  the  deceased ;  and  by 
a  dog-headed  ape,  who  was  seated  on  the  top  of  the  pillar,  and  who 
supported  himself  upon  the  bracket  on  Avhich  was  balanced  the 
beam  of  the  Great  Scales.  This  ape  was  the  associate  and  com- 
panion of  the  god  Thoth,  and  he  was  supposed  to  be  skilled  in  the 
art  of  computation,  and  in  the  science  of  numbers,  and  in  the 
measurement  of  time ;  his  duty  at  the  weighing  of  the  heart  was 
to  scrutinize  the  pointer  of  the  scales,  and,  having  made  sure  that 
the  beam  of  the  scales  was  exactly  level,  i.e.,  that  the  heart  and 
the  feather  exactly  counterbalanced  each  other,  to  report  the  fact 
to  Thoth,  so  that  he  in  turn  might  make  his  report  to  tlie  gods  on 


THE   DOG-HEADED   APE  21 

the  case  under  consideration.  The  ape  seated  on  the  pillar  of  the 
Scales  belongs  to  a  species  which  is  now  only  found  in  the  Sudan, 
but  which  in  late  predynastic  or  in  early  dynastic  times  might 
have  been  found  all  over  Egypt.  The  dog-headed  ape  is  very 
clever,  and  even  in  modern  times  is  regarded  with  much  respect 
by  the  natives,  who  believe  that  its  intelligence  is  of  the  highest 
order,  and  that  its  cunning  is  far  superior  to  that  of  man ;  the 
high  esteem  in  which  it  was  held  by  the  ancient  Egyptians  is 
proved  by  the  fact  that  the  god  Thoth  was  held  to  be  incarnate  in 
him,  and  by  the  important  functions  which  he  performed  in  their 
mythology. 

It  will  also  be  remeriibered  that  in  the  vignette  which 
represents  the  sunrise  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  a  company  of  six 
or  seven  dog-headed  apes  is  depicted  in  the  act  of  adoring  the  god 
of  day,  as  he  rises  on  the  eastern  horizon  of  heaven ;  they  stand 
on  their  hind  legs  and  their  forepaws  are  raised  in  adoration,  and 
they  are  supposed  to  be  singing  hymns  to  the  Sun-god.  In  a 
text  which  describes  this  scene  these  apes  are  said  to  be  the  spirits 
of  the  dawn  who  sing  hymns  of  praise  to  the  Sun-god  whilst  he  is 
rising,  and  who  transform  themselves  into  apes  as  soon  as  he  has 
risen.  It  is  a  well  known  fact  in  natural  history  that  the  apes  and 
the  monkeys  in  the  forests  of  Africa  and  other  countries  chatter 
noisily  at  dawn,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  was  the  matutinal  cries  of 
these  animals  which  suggested  their  connection  with  the  spirits  of 
the  dawn.  It  is  not  stated  in  the  text  whether  the  spirits  of  the 
dawn  were  created  afresh  each  day  or  not,  or  whether  the  monkeys 
transformed  themselves  into  spirits  daily,  and  so  were  able  to 
greet  the  rising  sun  each  morning.  We  may,  however,  connect 
the  idea  concerning  them  with  that  which  is  met  with  in  an 
ancient  Hebrew  description  ^  of  the  angels  of  Hebrew  mythology, 
for  one  group  of  "angels  of  service"  from  the  river  of  fire  were 
supposed  to  be  created  daily  in  order  to  sing  one  hymn  to  Grod 
Almighty  and  then  to  come  to  an  end. 

Passing  now  to  the  consideration  of  the  worship  of  animals  by 
the  Egyptians  of  the  predynastic  and  dynastic  periods,  we  have 

1  Compare   Eisenmenger,    op.   cit.,    vol.   ii.,   p.   371.       'i''^<"1a3  J>^!2VT  >^DV  b2 

yh'^y\  n'vw  noNi  n^n  injD  D-)^r\  ^2i6n 


22  FEAR   THE   MOTIVE    OF   WORSHIP 

to  endeavour  to  find  the  reasons  which  induced  the  early  inhabi- 
tants of  the  Nile  Valley  to  pay  adoration  to  birds,  beasts,  fishes, 
and  other  creatures  of  the  animal  kingdom.  A  careful  examina- 
tion of  the  facts  now  available  shows  that  in  Egypt  primitive  man 
must  have  worshipped  animals  in  the  first  instance  because  they 
possessed  strength,  and  power,  and  cunning  greater  than  his  own, 
or  because  they  were  endowed  with  some  quality  which  enabled 
them  to  do  him  bodily  harm  or  to  cause  his  death.  The  funda- 
mental motive  in  man  for  worshipping  animals  was  probably  fear. 
When  man  first  took  up  his  abode  in  Egypt  the  physical  conditions 
of  the  country  must  have  resembled  those  of  some  parts  of  Central 
Africa  at  the  present  time,  and  the  whole  country  was  probably 
covered  with  forests  and  the  ground  obscured  by  dense  under- 
growth. In  the  forests  great  numbers  of  elephants  and  other 
large  beasts  must  have  lived,  and  the  undergrowth  formed  a  home 
for  huge  serpents  of  various  species  and  for  hosts  of  deadly  reptiles  of 
difi'erent  kinds,  and  the  river  was  filled  with  great  crocodiles  similar 
in  length  and  bulk  to  those  which  have  been  seen  in  recent  years 
in  the  Blue  Nile  and  in  the  rivers  further  to  the  south.  We  have 
no  means  of  knowing  at  what  period  the  elephant  was  exterminated 
in  Egypt,  but  it  was  probably  long  before  dynastic  times,  because 
he  finds  no  place  in  Egyptian  mythology.  The  ivory  objects 
which  have  been  found  in  predynastic  graves  prove  that  this 
substance  was  prized  by  the  primitive  Egyptians,  and  that  it  was, 
comparatively,  largely  used  by  them  for  making  personal  orna- 
ments and  other  small  objects,  but  whether  they  imported 
elephants'  tusks  from  the  Sudan,  or  obtained  them  from  animals 
which  they  hunted  and  killed  in  some  part  of  Egypt  cannot  be 
said.  On  the  top  of  one  of  the  standards  ^  Avhich  are  painted  on 
predynastic  vases  we  find  the  figure  of  an  elephant,  a  fact  which 
seems  to  show  that  this  animal  was  the  symbol  of  the  family  of  the 
man  for  whom  was  made  the  vase  on  which  it  is  found,  or  of  his 
country,  or  of  the  tutelary  deity,  i.e.,  the  god  of  his  town  or  tribe. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  cpite  clear  from  several  passages  in  the 
texts  with  which  the  walls  of  the  chambers  and  corridors  of  the 
pyramid  tombs  of  Unas  and  Teta,  and  other  kings  of  the  Early 

1  See  J.  de  Morgan,  EtlmograpMe  Prehistoriijne,  p.  93. 


ANTIQUITY   OF   SERPENT   WORSHIP  23 

Empire  at  Sakkara  are  inscribed  that  Egypt  was  infested  with 
venomous  snakes  and  noxious  reptiles  of  various  kinds  when  the 
original  forms  of  those  passages  were  written,  and  that  they  were 
sufficiently  formidable  and  numerous  to  cause  the  living  grave 
anxiety  about  the  safety  of  the  bodies  of  their  dead.  Thus  in  the 
text  of  Unas,^  a  king  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  we  find  a  series  of 
short  magical  formulae,  many  of  which  are  directed  against 
serpents  and  fierce  animals,  and  all  are  couched  in  terms  which 
prove  that  they  must  have  been  composed  long  before  they  were 
inscribed  on  the  walls  inside  this  king's  pyramid,  and  M.  Maspero 
is  undoubtedly  correct  in  thinking  that  they  must  have  presented 
serious    difficulties   to   the    king's    literaH.      In    these    formulae 

are  mentioned  the  serpents  Ufa,  ^'^^^^(j'^,  Nai,  ^(|(] 
Heka,  ^  (]  UH ,  Hekret,  ^  "^^  %,  im ,  Setcheh,  [  ^  \ 
Akeneh,    (j  ^  |^,    Amen,    (]  ",    Hau,   FD  (]  ^  lH,    Antaf, 

(]  ^ ^  ^,  Tcheser-tep,  '^  [1  v^  @  Mil ,  Thethu,  ^  ^UR  , 

Hemth,  fD  ^  ^,  Senenahemthet,  |  ^^"^  (]  [Tl  ^  ^  lH,  and 

allusion   is   made   to  a  most   "  terrible   serpent,"  0  m^    aaa^ 

8  g — >  n .     At  the  time  when  these  formulae  were  composed 

each  of  these  serpents  was  probably  the  type  of  a  class  of  venomous 
snakes,  and  their  names  no  doubt  described  their  physical  charac- 
teristics and  their  methods  of  attack.  The  abject  fear  of  the 
Egyptians  for  the  serpent  seems  to  have  been  constant  in  all 
generations,  and  the  texts  of  the  latest  as  well  as  those  of  the  earliest 
period  contain  numerous  prayers  intended  to  deliver  the  deceased 
from  the  "  serpents  which  are  in  the  Underworld,  which  live  upon 
"  the  bodies  of  men  and  women,  and  consume  their  blood."  ^  Long 
after  Egypt  was  cleared  of  snakes  and  when  the  country  was  in 
the  condition  in  which  Ave  now  know  it,  the  tradition  remained  that  a 


1  Ed.  Maspero,  1.  533  ff. 


kv\   1    ^  I  ^     /wwv\  /^''^  A/vwvN         Booh  of  the 
Dead,  Chapter^iB.,  1.  4. 


24        WORSHIP   OF   URAEUS   AND    VULTURE 

mighty  serpent,  some  thirty  cubits,  i.e.,  about  fifty  feet  long,  lived 
on  the  top  of  Bakhau,  fl  "(^  '\\  ^-=  %  ^^ ,  the  Mountain  of 
the  Sunrise,  and  his  name  was  Ami-Hemf,  i.e.,  "Dweller  in  his 

The  worship  of  the  serpent  in  Egypt  is  of  great  antiquity, 
and  shrines  to  certain  members  of  the  species  must  have  existed 
at  a  very  early  date.  In  predynastic  times  the  uraeus  was  held  in 
great  veneration,  and  the  great  centre  of  its  worship  was  in  the 
Delta,  at  a  place  which  the  Egyptians  in  dynastic  times  called 
"  Per-Uatchet,"  and  the  Greeks  "  Buto."  At  the  period  when  the 
uraeus  was  being  worshipped  in  Lower  Egypt,  the  vulture  was  the 
chief  object  of  adoration  in  Upper  Egypt,  its  principal  sanctuary 
being  situated  in  the  city  which  the  Egyptians  called  "  Nekhebet," 
and  the  Greeks  "  Eileithyiaspolis."  The  uraeus  goddess  was  called 
"Uatchet,"  or  "  Uatchit,"  and  the  vulture  goddess  "Nekhebet," 
or  "  Nekhebit,"  and  the  cities  which  A^^ere  the  centres  of  their 
worship  became  so  important,  probably  in  consequence  of  this 
worship,  that  in  the  early  dynastic  period  we  find  it  customary  for 
kings  when   they  wished    to  proclaim   their  sovereignty  over  all 

Egypt   to   give   themselves   the   title    j^£,    which  may  be  freely 

rendered  by  "  Lord  of  the  shrines  of  the  Vulture  and  Uraeus." 
The  equivalents  of  these  signs  are  found  on  the  now  famous  plaque 
inscribed  with  the  name  and  titles  of  Aha,  a  king  who  is  often,  but 
without  sufficient  reason,  assumed  to  be  identical  with  Mena  or 
Menes,  and  thus  it  is  clear  that  the  cities  of  Nekhebet  and  Per- 
Uatchet  were  important  religious  and  administrative  centres  in 
predynastic  times. 

Other  wild  animals  which  were  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians 
about  the  same  period  were  the  lion,  and  the  lynx,  which  they 
called  maftet    ^  ^^     ^^^  ^^^  hijopopotamus,  and  the  quadruped 

which  became  the  symbol  of  the  god  Set ;  among  amphibious 
creatures  the  crocodile  and  the  turtle  were  the  most  important. 
Among  domestic  animals  the  bull  and  the  cow  were  the  principal 
objects   of  worship,    and   proof  is   forthcoming   that    they   were 

1  Hooli  of  the  Dead,  Chapter  cviii.,  1.  5. 


WORSHIP    OF    THE    BULL 


25 


regarded  as  deities  in  predynastic  times.  The  great  strength  of 
the  bull,  and  his  almost  irresistible  attack  in  fighting  and  headlong 
rush,  excited  the  fear  and  admiration  of  primitive  man,  and  his 
fecundating  powers  made  him  at  a  very  early  period  the  type  of 
the  generative  principle  in  nature.  For  thousands  of  years  the 
kings  of  Egypt  delighted  to  call  themselves  "  mighty  bull,"  and 
the  importance  which  they  attached  to  this  title  is  evinced  by  the 
fact  that  many  of  them  inscribed  it  upon  their  serehh,  or  cog- 
nizance, which  displayed  their  name  as  the  descendant  of  Horus  ; 


Usertsen  II.  receiving  "  life  "  from  the  god  Sept.     Behind  him  is  his  serehh 
inscribed  with  his  Horus  name. 

in  fact,  it  formed  their  Horus  name.  The  figure  of  a  bull  is 
found  sculptured  upon  some  of  the  green  slate  objects  which  date 
from  the  predynastic  period,  and  which  have  been  erroneously 
called  palettes,  and  a  flint  model  of  the  head  and  horns  of  the  cow, 
which  in  later  times  became  the  animal  symbolic  of  the  goddess 
Hathor,  was  found  in  a  predynastic  grave  ;  all  these  objects  are 
in  the  British  Museum  (Nos.  20,790,  20,792,  and  32,124).  The 
warrior  kings  of  the  XVIIIth  and  XlXth  Dynasties  were  pleased 
when  the  court  scribes  related  in  commemorative  inscriptions  how 


26 


WORSHIP   OF   THE   BULL 


their   lords  raged  and   roared   like   lions   as  they  mounted  their 
chariots  and  set  out  to    crush    the    foolish    enemy  who   had   the 

temerity  to  defy  them,  but  they  preferred 
to  be  likened  to  the  "mighty  bull,"  who 
trampled  opposition  beneath  his  hoofs,  and 
gored  and  destroyed  with  his  horns  that 
which  his  hoofs  had  failed  to  annihilate. 
Out  of  the  reverence  which  was  paid  to  the 
bull  in  predynastic  times  grew  the  worship 
of  two  special  bulls,  Hap  and  Mer-ur,  which 
names  the   Greeks  modified  into  Apis  and 

1 1      ^ ■^-^  Mnevis,  the  sacred  animals  of  the  ancient 

cities  of  Memphis  and  Heliopolis  respectively. 
The  worship  of  Apis  is  at  least  as  old  as  the 
beginning  of  the  dynastic  period,  and  we 
know  that  the  cult  of  this  bull  continued  in 
Memphis  until  the  close  of  the  rule  of  the 
Ptolemies.  In  some  Avay  the  beliefs  con- 
cerning Apis  were  connected  with  those 
which  the  Egyptians  held  concerning  Osiris, 
the  god  and  judge  of  the  dead,  Avho  is  called 
in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead^  the  "Bull  of 
Amentet,"  i.e.,  the  "Bull  of  the  Under- 
world,"   LJ  tfiTi  ^  "^  "^ :  and  in  the  Ptolemaic 

period  the  two  gods  were  merged  into 
one  and  formed  the  god  Sarapis,  to 
whom  were  ascribed  the  attributes  of  the 
Egyptian  and  Greek  gods  of  the  Under- 
world. 

It  now  seems  to  be  generally  admitted 
by  ethnologists  that  there  are  three  main 
causes  which  have  induced  men  to  worship 
animals,  i.e.,  they  have  worshipped  them 
as  animals,  or  as  the  dwelling-places  of  gods, 
or   as   representatives    of    tribal    ancestors. 


Serekh  of  Rameses  II.,  on 
which  is  inscribed  the  Horns 
name  of  this  king,  i.e.,  Ka- 

NEKHT   -  MERI  -  MaaT.        The 

canopy  of  the  serekh  is  in 
the  form  of  the  sky  F=^^, 
and  from  the  standard  on 
which  it  rests  spring  two 
human  arms  and  hands. 
The  right  grasps  a  standard 
surmounted  by  the  head  of 
the  king,  whicTi  liore  repre 

sents  the  ' ' royal ka ' 


:^j  and 


Li) 

the  left  the  symbol  of  Maat. 


1  Chapter  i.,  1.  4. 


APIS  BULL  AND  RAM  OF  MENDES     27 

There  is  no  reason  whatsoever  for  doubting  that  in  neolithic  times 
the  primitive  Egyptians  worshipped  animals  as  animals  and  as 
nothing  more  ;  the  belief  that  animals  were  the  abodes  of  spirits  or 
deities  grew  up  in  their  minds  later,  and  it  was  this  which  induced 
them  to  mummify  the  dead  bodies  of  birds,  and  beasts,  and  lishes, 
etc.,  in  which  they  thought  deities  to  have  been  incarnate.  We 
have  no  means  of  knowing  exactly  when  this  belief  arose,  but  it 
is  certainly  as  old  as  the  time  when  the  Apis  Bull  began  to  be 
worshipped,  and  when  the  Egyptians  began  to  keep  the  ram  and 
other  animals,  and  birds,  and  reptiles,  and  fishes  in  sanctuaries,  and 
to  worship  them  as  deities  incarnate.  In  connection  with  it  we 
must  notice  that,  in  the  case  of  the  Apis  Bull  and  the  Ram  of 
Mendes,  the  god  Apis  did  not  take  up  his  abode  in  every  bull,  and 
that  the  soul  of  Osiris,  which  was  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  Ram  of 
Mendes,  did  not  make  his  habitation  in  every  ram.  The  Apis  Bull, 
like  the  Ram  of  Mendes,  had  to  be  sought  for  diligently,  and  no 
bull  or  ram  was  made  the  object  of  veneration  in  the  sanctuaries  of 
Memphis  or  Mendes  unless  he  possessed  the  characteristic  marks  by 
which  the  priests  recognized  him.  The  ordinary  bulls  and  rams  of 
the  species  to  which  the  Apis  Bull  and  the  Ram  of  Mendes  belonged 
were  not  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  the  animals  which  by  the 
marks  upon  them  proclaimed  themselves  to  be  the  creatures  to 
which  worship  should  be  offered,  and  they  were,  of  course,  sacrificed 
in  the  performance  of  funeral  ceremonies  and  killed  and  eaten  as 
food  by  the  people,  even  though  somewhat  of  the  deity  may  have 
been  incarnate  in  them.  When  the  Apis  Bull  or  the  Ram  of  Mendes 
died  the  deity  who  had  been  incarnate  in  it  transferred  himself  to 
another  animal,  and  therefore  did  not  leave  the  earth. 

The  question  as  to  whether  the  Egyptians  worshipped  animals 
as  representations  of  tribal  ancestors,  or  "  totems,"  is  one  which  has 
given  rise  to  much  discussion,  and  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at, 
for  the  subject  is  one  of  difficulty.  We  know  that  many  of  the 
standards  which  represent  the  nomes  of  Egypt  are  distinguished  by 
figures  of  birds  and  animals,  e.g.,  the  hawk,  the  bull,  the  hare,  etc., 
but  it  is  not  clear  whether  these  are  intended  to  represent  "totems" 
or  not.  It  is  pretty  certain  that  the  nome-standard  of  dynastic 
times   was    derived   from   the   standards   which    the    predynastic 


28  NOME    GODS 

Egyptians  set  up  in  their  boats,  or  caused  to  be  carried  in  cere- 
monial processions,  or  during  the  performance  of  public  functions, 
and  there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that,  substantially,  the  same 
ideas  and  beliefs  underlie  the  use  of  both  classes  of  standards.  The 
animal  or  bird  standing  on  the  top  of  a  nome-perch  or  standard  is 
not  intended  for  a  fetish  or  a  representation  of  a  tribal  ancestor, 
but  for  a  creature  which  was  regarded  as  the  deity  under  whose 
protection  the  people  of  a  certain  tract  of  territory  were  placed,  and 
we  may  assume  that  within  the  limits  of  that  territory  it  was  un- 
lawful to  injure  or  kill  such  ahimal  or  bird.  Thus  in  the  Nome  of 
the  Black  Bull  a  black  bull  of  a  certain  kind  would  be  regarded  as 
a  sacred  animal,  and  it  is  certain  that  in  predynastic  times  worship 
would  be  offered  to  it  as  a  god ;  similarly  in  the  Nome  of  the  Hare 
the  hare  would  be  worshipped  ;  and  in  the  Nome  of  the  Hawk  the 
hawk  would  be  worshipped.  Outside  these  nomes,  however,  the 
bull  and  the  hare  and  the  hawk  might  be,  and  probably  were, 
killed  and  eaten  for  food,  and  from  this  point  of  view  the  sacred 
creatures  of  the  Egyptians  may  be  thought  to  have  something  in 
common  with  the  totems,  or  deified  representatives  of  tribal 
ancestors,  and  with  the  fetishes  of  the  tribes  of  nations  which  are 
on  the  lowest  levels  of  civilization.  In  connexion  with  this  matter 
it  is  customary  to  quote  the  statements  of  Greek  and  Roman 
writers,  many  of  whom  scoff  at  the  religion  of  the  Egyptians 
because  it  included  the  worship  of  animals,  and  charge  the  nation 
with  fatuity  because  the  animals,  etc.,  which  were  worshipped  and 
preserved  Avith  all  care  in  some  places  were  killed  and  eaten  in 
others.  The  evidence  of  such  writers  cannot  be  regarded  as  wholly 
trustworthy,  first,  because  they  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  under- 
stand the  views  which  the  Egyptians  held  about  sacred  animals, 
and  secondly,  because  they  were  not  in  a  position  to  obtain  trust- 
worthy information.  In  the  passage  from  one  of  Juvenal's  Satires 
already  quoted,  he  declares  that  the  Egyptians  ate  human  flesh, 
and  it  is  possible  that  he  believed  what  he  wrote ;  still  the  fact 
remains  that  there  is  not  a  particle  of  evidence  in  the  Egyptian 
inscriptions  to  show  that  they  ever  did  so,  and  we  have  every 
reason  for  believing  that  they  were  not  cannibals. 

His  other  statements  about  the  religion  of  the  Egyptians  are, 


ANIMAL   WORSHIP   NOT    TOTEMISM  29 

probably,  as  untrustworthy.  Tliere  is  not  enough  ancient  Egyptian 
religious  literature  extant  to  enable  us  to  trace  the  history  of 
religion  in  all  periods  of  dynastic  history,  still  less  are  we  able  to 
follow  it  back  in  the  predynastic  period,  because  of  that  time  we 
have  no  literature  at  all;  such  monuments  and  texts  as  we  have, 
however,  serve  to  show  that  the  Egyptians  first  worshipped  animals 
as  animals,  and  nothing  more,  and  later  as  the  habitations  of  divine 
spirits  or  gods,  but  there  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  the  animal 
worship  of  the  Egyptians  was  descended  from  a  system  of  totems 
or  fetishes,  as  Mr.  J.  F.  M'Lennan  believed.^  It  has  been  assumed 
by  some  ethnologists  that  many  primitive  peoples  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  name  individuals  after  animals,  and  that  such  animal 
names  have  in  certain  cases  become  tribe  names.  These  may  have 
become  family  surnames,  and  at  length  the  myths  may  have  gro^vn  up 
about  them  in  which  it  is  declared  that  the  families  concerned  were 
actually  descended  "  from  the  animals  in  question  as  ancestors, 
"  whence  might  arise  many  other  legends  of  strange  adventures 
"  and  heroic  deeds  of  ancestors,  to  be  attributed  to  the  quasi-human 
"  animals  whose  names  they  bore  ;  at  the  same  time,  popular 
"  mystification  between  the  great  ancestor  and  the  creature  whose 
"  name  he  held  and  handed  down  to  his  race,  might  lead  to  veneration 
"  for  the  creature  itself,  and  thence  to  full  animal- worship."  ^  This 
theory  may  explain  certain  facts  connected  with  the  animal- worship 
of  numbers  of  savage  or  half-savage  tribes  in  some  parts  of  the 
world,  but  it  cannot,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  be  regarded  as 
affording  an  explanation  of  the  animal-worship  of  the  Egyptians. 
In  dynastic  times  kings  were,  it  is  true,  worshipped  as  gods,  and 
divine  honours  were  paid  to  their  statues,  but  the  reason  for  this 
was  that  the  king  was  believed  to  be  of  the  seed  of  the  god  Horus, 
the  oldest  of  all  the  gods  of  Egypt.  There  is  reason  for  believing 
that  to  certain  men  who  were  famous  for  their  knowledo-e  or  for 

o 

some  great  works  which  they  had  accomplished  divine  honours 
were  paid,  but  neither  these  nor  the  kings  were  held  to  be 
gods  who  were  worshipped  throughout  the  land  as  were  the  well- 
known  or  natural  gods  of  the  country.     In  short,  the  Avorship  which 

1  See  the  Fortnightly  Beview,  1869-1870. 

2  See  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii.,  p.  236. 


30  NOME    STANDARDS 

was  paid  to  kings  after  their  death,  or  to  ordinary  men,  who  were 
sometimes  deified,  was  quite  different  from  that  paid  to  the  gods  of 
the  country,  whether  they  were  in  animal  or  human  form  or  whether 
they  represented  the  spirits  which  concerned  themselves  with  the 
welfare  of  men  or  those  which  occupied  themselves  with  the  direc- 
tion of  the  operations  of  Nature. 

We  see,  moreover,  from  the  nome-standards  that  several  objects 
besides  animals  were  worshipped  and  regarded  as  gods,  or  that  they, 
at  all  events,  became  the  symbols  of  the  deities  which  were  wor- 
shipped in  them.  In  predynastic  times  we  know  that  some  standards 
were  surmounted  by  representations  of  two,  three,  four,  or  five 

hills  ^  C:^,  rv-^'^-^,  D£^}i^,  rv/^-^-N-^^^  another  by  two  arrows  (?)  ^ ^, 

another  by  a  fish,  <^<,  another  by  two  arrows  and  a  shield,  y^ , 
etc.  With  the  predynastic  '^y^  is  probably  to  be  compared  the 
dynastic  sign  ^^,  and  with  the  predynastic  ^^  the  dynastic 
sio-n  *Qr.     It  is  not  easy  at  present  to  find  a  dynastic  equivalent 

for  the  two  arrows  (?)  ^r ^,  or  to  find  the  reason  why  the  three 

hills  f^^^  were  connected  Avith  a  god,  but  we  shall  probably  be 
correct  if  we  connect  the  two  arrows  (?)  with  some  aboriginal  god 
of  war,  and  the  three  hills  with  the  abode  of  some,  at  present, 
unknown  god.  The  shield  and  the  crossed  arrows  can,  we  think, 
be  explained  with  more  certainty.  We  know  from  the  Nome- 
Lists  that  the  fifth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,   ^ ,  which  was  called 

Sapi  by  the  Egyptians  and  Saites  by  the  Greeks,  had  for  its 
capital  the  city  Saut  or  Sais,  and  that  the  great  deity  of  this  city 
was  the  goddess  Nit  or  Neith.  The  dynastic  pictures  of  this 
goddess  represent  her  in  the  form  of  a  goddess  who  holds  in  her 
hands  two  arrows  and  a  bow  ;  she  sometimes  wears  upon  her  head 
the  crown  of  the  north  ^,  or  >^^,  which  is  the  sign  for  her  name, 
or  two  crossed  arrows  N<f ;  in  fact,  such  pictures  prove  beyond  a 

doubt  that  Nit,  the  goddess  of  Sais,  was  the  goddess  of  the  chase 
par  excellence.  That  this  goddess  was  worshipped  in  the  earliest 
dynastic  period  is  certain,  for  we  find  that  her  name  forms  part  of 

1  See  my  "  History  of  Egypt  "  {Egypt  in  the  Predynastic  and  Archaic  Periods), 
vol.  i.,  p.  78. 


THE   GODDESS   NIT  31 

the  name  of  Nit-hetep,  who  seems  to  have  been  the  daughter  of 
king  Sma,  and  who  was  probably  the  wife  of  Aha,  and  also  part 
of  that  of  the  early  dynastic  king  Mer-Nit.     That  the  dynastic  sign 

^^  is  the  equivalent  of  the  predynastic  sign  ^^  there  is  no  reason 

to  doubt,  and,  as  the  former  is  known  to  represent  the  crossed 
arrows  and  shield  of  the  hunting  goddess  of  Sais,  we  are  justified 
in  believing  that  its  predynastic  equivalent  was  intended  to  be  a 
picture  of  the  same  objects,  and  to  be  symbolic  of  the  same 
goddess. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  predynastic  standard  sur- 
mounted by  the  figure  of  an  elephant,  which  was,  undoubtedly, 
intended  to  represent  a  god,  and  thus  it  is  clear  that  both  in  pre- 
dynastic and  dynastic  times  the  Egyptians  symbolized  gods  both 
by  means  of  animals  and  by  objects  connected  with  their  worship 
or  with  their  supposed  occupations.     In    dynastic  Nome-Lists  we 

have  for  the  name  of  Matenu  a  knife  C^,  for  the  nome  of  Ten  a 
pair  of  horns  surmounted  by  a  plumed  disk  /^i  ,  for  the  nome 
of  Uas,  or  Us,  a  sceptre  r ,  for  the  nome  of  Sesheshet  a  sistrum  1  , 

etc.  The  first,  third,  and  fourth  of  this  group  of  examples  are 
clearly  objects  which  were  connected  with  the  worship  of  the  gods 
whom  they  symbolize,  and  the  second  is  probably  intended  to  be 
the  headdress  of  the  god  of  the  nome  which  it  symbolizes.  At  this 
period  of  the  world's  history  it  is  impossible  to  fathom  the  reasons 
which  led  men  to  select  such  objects  as  the  symbols  of  their  gods, 
and  we  can  only  accept  the  view  that  they  were  the  product  of 
some  indigenous,  dominant  people  who  succeeded  in  establishing 
their  religious  customs  so  strongly  in  Egypt  that  they  survived 
all  political  commotions,  and  changes,  and  foreign  invasions, 
and  flourished  in  the  country  until  the  third  century  of  our 
era  at  least. 

The  cult  of  Nit,  or  Neith,  must  have  been  very  general  in 
Egypt,  although  in  dynastic  times  the  chief  seat  thereof  was  at  Sais 
in  the  Delta,  and  we  know  that  devotees  of  the  goddess  lived  as  far 
south  as  Nakada,  a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  Thebes,  for  several 
objects  inscribed  with  the  name  of  queen  Nit-hetep  have  been  found 


32  THE   GODDESS   NIT 

in  a  grave  at  that  place.  Of  the  early  worship  of  the  goddess 
nothing  is  known,  but  it  is  most  probable  that  she  was  adored  as 
a  great  hunting  spirit  as  were  adored  spirits  of  like  character  by- 
primitive  peoples  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  crossed  arrows 
and  shield  indicate  that  she  was  a  hunting  spirit  in  the  earliest 
times,  but  a  picture  of  the  dynastic  period  represents  her  with  two 
crocodiles^  sucking  one  at  each  breast,  and  thus  she  appears  in 
later  times  to  have  had  ascribed  to  her  power  over  the  river. 

It  has  already  been  said  that  the  primitive  Egyptians,  though 
believing  that  their  gods  possessed  powers  superior  to  their  own, 
regarded  them  as  beings  who  were  liable  to  grow  old  and  die,  and 
who  were  moved  to  love  and  to  hate,  and  to  take  pleasure  in  meat 
and  drink  like  man  ;  they  were  even  supposed  to  intermarry  with 
human  beings  and  to  have  the  power  of  begetting  offspring  like  the 
*'  sons  of  God,"  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  (vi.  2,  4).  These 
ideas  were  common  in  all  periods  of  Egyptian  history,  and  it  is 
clear  that  the  Egyptians  never  wholly  freed  themselves  from  them ; 
there  is,  in  fact,  abundant  proof  that  even  in  the  times  wdien 
monotheism  had  developed  in  a  remarkable  degree  they  clung  to 
them  with  a  tenacity  which  is  surprising.  The  religious  texts 
contain  numerous  references  to  them,  and  beliefs  which  were 
conceived  by  the  Egyptians  in  their  lowest  states  of  civilization  are 
mingled  with  those  which  reveal  the  existence  of  high  spiritual 
conceptions.  The  great  storehouse  of  religious  thought  is  the  Booh 
of  the  Dead,  and  in  one  of  the  earliest  Recensions  of  that  remark- 
able work  we  may  examine  its  various  layers  with  good  result.  In 
these  are  jDi'^served  many  passages  which  throw  light  upon  the 
views  which  were  held  concerning  the  gods,  and  the  powers  which 
they  possessed,  and  the  place  where  they  dwelt  in  company  Avith 
the  beatified  dead. 

One  of  the  most  instructive  of  these  passages  for  our  purpose 
forms  one  of  the  texts  which  are  inscribed  on  the  walls  and 
corridors  of  the  chambers  in  the  pyramid  tombs  of  Unas,  a  king 
of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  and  of  Teta,  a  king  of  the  Vlth  Dynasty. 


1  In  the  text  of  Unas  (1.  G27)  the  crocodile-god  Sebek  is  cahed  the  son  of  Neith 


nj„  ^.  — >v' 


KING   UNAS   AS   A   GOD  33 

The  paragraphs  in  general  of  the  great  Heliopolitan  Recension 
deal,   as  we  should  expect,  with  the  offerings  which  were  to  be 
made   at   stated   intervals    in   the    little   chapels  attached   to  the 
pyramids,    and    many  were    devoted   to   the    object   of  removing 
enemies  of  every  kind  from  the  paths  of  the  king  in  the  Under- 
world ;  others  contain  hymns,  and  short  prayers  for  his  welfare, 
and  magical  formulae,  and  incantations.     A  few  describe  the  great 
power  which  the  beatified  king  enjoys  in  the  world  beyond  the 
grave,  and,  of  course,  declare  that  the  king  is  as  great  a  lord  in 
heaven  as  he  was  upon  earth.     The  passage  in  question  from  the 
pyramid  of  Unas  is  of  such  interest  and  importance  that  it  ^  is 
given  in  the  Appendix  to  this  Chapter,  with  interlinear  translation 
and  transliteration,  and  with  the  variant  readings  from  the  pyramid 
of  Teta,  but  the  following  general  rendering  of  its  contents  may  be 
useful.     "  The  sky  poureth  down  rain,  the  stars  tremble,  the  bow- 
"  bearers  run  about  with  hasty  steps,  the  bones  of  Aker  tremble, 
"  and  those  who  are  ministrants  unto  them  betake  themselves  to 
"  flight  when  they  see  Unas  rising  [in  the  heavens]  like  a  god  who 
"  liveth  upon  his  fathers  and  feedeth  upon  his  mothers.     Unas  is 
"  the  lord  of  wisdom  whose  name  his  mother  knoweth  not.     The 
"  noble  estate  of  Unas  is  in  heaven,  and  his  strength  in  the  horizon 
"  is  like  unto  that  of  the  god  Tem  his  father,  indeed,  he  is  stronger 
"  than  his  father  who  gave  him  birth.     The  doubles  (kau)  of  Unas 
"  are  behind  him,  and  those  whom  he  hath  conquered  are  beneath 
"  his  feet.     His  gods  are  upon  him,  his  uraei  are  upon  his  brow, 
"  his  serpent-guide  is  before  him,  and  his  soul  looketh  upon  the 
"  spirit  of  flame ;    the  powers  of  Unas  protect  him."     From  this 
paragraph  we  see  that  Unas  is  declared  to  be  the  son  of  Tem,  and 
has  made  himself  stronger  than  his  father,  and  that  when  the  king, 
who  lives  upon  his  fathers  and  mothers,  enters  the  sky  as  a  god, 
all  creation  is  smitten  Avith  terror.     The  sky  dissolves  in  rain,  the 
stars  shake  in  their  places,  and  even  the  bones  of  the  great  double 
lion-headed  earth-god  Aker,  2^::^,  quake,  and  all  the  lesser  powers 
of  heaven  flee  in  fear.     He  is  considered  to  have  been  a  mighty 
conqueror  upon  earth,   for  those  whom   he   has  vanquished    are 

1  The  hieroglypliic  texts  are  given  by  Maspero,  Les  Inscriptions  des  Pyramides 
de  Saqqarah,  Paris,  1894,  p.  67,  1.  496,  and  p.  134,  1.  319. 

D 


34  KING   UNAS    AS   A   GOD 

beneath  his  feet ;  there  is  no  reason  why  this  statement  should  not 
be  taken  literally,  and  not  as  referring  to  the  mere  pictures  of 
enemies  which  were  sometimes  painted  on  the  cartonnage  coverings 
of  mummies  under  the  feet,  and  upon  the  sandals  of  mummies,  and 
upon  the  outside  of  the  feet  of  coffins.  An  ordinary  man  possessed 
one  ha  or  "  double,"  but  a  king  or  a  god  was  believed  to  possess 
many  Icau  or  "  doubles."  Thus  in  one  text  ^  the  god  Ra  is  said  to 
possess  seven  souls  {hau)  and  fourteen  doubles  (Icau),  and  prayers 
were  addressed  to  each  soul  and  double  of  Ra  as  well  as  to  the  god 
himself;  elsewhere^  we  are  told  that  the  fourteen  Jcau  of  Ra, 
1^  "^  Awwv  \    j  AAAA/vv  O  j]    Avcrc  oriveu  to  him  by  Thoth.     Unas 

appears  in  heaven  with  his  "  gods"  upon  him,  the  serpents  are  on 
his  brow,  he  is  led  by  a  serpent-guide,  and  is  endowed  with  his 
powers.  It  is  difficult  to  say  what  the  "  gods "  here  referred  to 
really  are,  for  it  is  unlikely  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  small  figures 
of  gods  which,  in  later  times,  were  laid  upon  the  bodies  of  the 
dead,  and  it  seems  that  we  are  to  understand  that  he,  Unas,  was 
accompanied  by  a  number  of  divine  beings  Avho  had  laid  their 
protecting  strength  upon  him.  The  uraei  on  his  brow  and  his 
serpent-guide  were  the  emblems  of  similar  beings  whose  help  he 
had  bespoken — in  other  words,  they  represented  spirits  of  serpents 
which  were  made  friendly  towards  man. 

The  passage  in  the  text  of  Unas  continues,  "  Unas  is  the  Bull 
^'  of  heaven  which  overcometh  by  his  will,  and  which  feedeth  upon 
^'  that  which  cometh  into  being  from  every  god,  and  he  eateth 
"  of  the  provender  of  those  who  fill  themselves  with  words  of 
"  power  and  come  from  the  Lake  of  Flame.  Unas  is  provided 
"  with  power  sufficient  to  resist  his  spirits  (hJm),  and  he  riseth  [in 
"  heaven]  like  a  mighty  god  who  is  the  lord  of  the  seat  of  the 
*'hand  (i.e.,  power)  [of  the  gods].  He  taketh  his  seat  and  his 
*'  back  is  towards  Seb.  Unas  weigheth  his  speech  with  the  god 
"  whose  name  is  hidden  on  the  day  of  slaughtering  the  oldest 
"  [gods].  Unas  is  the  master  of  the  offering  and  he  tieth  the 
"knot,  and  provideth  meals  for  himself;  he  eateth  men  and  he 

1  Diimiclien,  Tempelinscliriften,  vol.  i.,  pi.  29. 
"  Lepsius,  Denhmdler,  iii.,  Bl.  194. 


KING   UNAS   AS   A   GOD  35 

"  livetli  upon  gods,  he  is  the  lord  of  offerings,  and  he  keepeth 
"  count  of  the  lists  of  the  same."  The  dead  king  is  next  likened 
to  a  young  and  vigorous  bull  which  feeds  upon  what  is  produced 
by  every  god  and  upon  those  that  come  from  the  Fiery  Lake  to 
eat  words  of  jDower.  Here  we  have  a  survival  of  the  old  worship 
of  the  bull,  which  began  in  the  earliest  times  in  Egypt,  and  lasted 
until  the  Roman  period.  His  food  is  that  which  is  produced  by 
every  god,  and  when  we  remember  that  the  Egyptians  believed 
that  every  object,  animate  and  inanimate,  was  the  habitation  of  a 
spirit  or  god,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  allusion  in  these  words  is  to 
the  green  herbage  which  the  bull  ordinarily  eats,  for  from  this 
point  of  view,  every  blade  of  grass  was  the  abode  of  a  god. 
In  connexion  with  this  may  be  quoted  the  words  of  Sankhon- 
yathan,  the  Sanchoniatho  of  the  Greeks,  as  given  by  Eusebius,  who 
says,  "  But  these  first  men  consecrated  the  productions  of  the 
"  earth,  and  judged  them  gods,  and  worshipped  those  things,  upon 
"  which  they  themselves  lived,  and  all  their  posterity,  and  all 
"  before  them ;  to  these  they  made  libations  and  sacrifices."  ^ 

Now  the  food  of  this  bull  Unas  is  also  said  to  be  those  who 
came  from  the  Lake  of  Fire,  or  the  city  of  She-Sasa,  and  who  are 
these  ?  From  Chapter  cviii.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  we  learn  that 
She-Sasa  Avas  situated  in  Sekhet-Sasa,^  i.e.,  a  district  in  heaven, 
and  it  is  clear  from  the  text  of  the  Chapter  that  it  was  one  of  the 
abodes  wherein  the  beatified  dead  obtained  food.  The  deceased  is 
made  to  say,  "  I  have  not  lain  down  in  death ;  I  have  stood  over 
"  thee,^  and  I  have  risen  like  a  god.  I  have  cackled  like  a  goose, 
"  and  I  have  alighted  like  the  hawk  by  the  divine  clouds  and  by 
"  the  great  dew  ....  I  have  come  from  She-Sasa,  which  is  in 
"  Sekhet-Sasa,  i.e.,  the  Lake  of  Fire,  Avhich  is  in  the  Field  of 
"  Fire  "     Towards  the   end  of  the   Chapter   (line  10)  mention  is 

made  of  herbage  or  crops  \\\  \^  "^  "^  J ,  and  it  seems  as  if  these 

1  Eusebius,  Praejp.  Evan.,  lib.  i ,  c.  10  (in  Cory,  Ancient   Fragments,  London, 
1832,  p.  5;. 

^  LL\    ^     yUuh®  .     See    my   Chapters   of  Coming  Forth  by   Day,   Text, 
p.  203. 

3  He  speaks  to  the  Thigh,  ^^,in  heaven. 


36  KING   UNAS   AS   A   GOD 

grew  in  the  Field  of  Fire,  or  in  the  neighbourhood  of  it, 
and  it  is  clear  that  it  must  be  these  which  are  referred  to 
as  the  provender  of  those  who  come  from  the  Lake  of  Fire. 
We  are  next  told  that  Unas  hath  power  sufficient  to  oppose 
or  resist  his  spirits  (kJiu),  but  it  is  not  certain  whether  these  are 
beings  in  the  Underworld  which  are  hostile  to  him,  or  spirits 
which  belong  to  himself;  in  any  case  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
is  not  clear.  Having  risen  in  heaven  Unas  takes  his  seat  with  his 
back  towards  Seb,  the  great  earth-god  who  was  represented  by  the 
mythological  goose  which  was  supposed  to  have  laid  the  great 
cosmic  egg.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  section  of  the  text  of  Unas 
quoted  above  we  have  some  remarkable  ideas  enunciated.  It  is 
asserted  first  of  all  that  he  "  weigheth  his  speech  Avith  the  god 
whose  name  is  hidden,"  which  indicates  that  Unas  was  supposed 
to  be  of  equal  rank  and  power  with  the  god  of  judgment.  From 
the  Theban  Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Bead  ^  we  know  that  the 

expression  "  weighing  of  words,"  ^  ^^  :   pP    11  ,  means  also 

the  "  weighing  of  actions,"  and  that  it  is  applied  to  the  examina- 
tion of  the  deceased  which  is  held  on  the  day  wherein  his  heart  is 
weighed  in  the  Great  Scales.  The  examination  was  conducted  by 
Thoth  on  behalf  of  Osiris,  but  the  words  in  the  text  of  Unas  show 
that  the  dead  king  considers  himself  able  to  judge  his  own  actions, 
and  to  award  himself  happiness.  The  god  of  the  hidden  name  is 
probably  Osiris.  Finally  it  is  said  that  Unas  eats  men  and  feeds 
upon  the  gods.  We  have  already  referred  to  the  passage  in 
Juvenal's  Fifteenth  Satire  in  which  he  declares  that  the  Egyptians 
ate  human  flesh,  and  it  has  been  already  said  that  the  dynastic 
inscriptions  aiford  no  proof  whatsoever  that  the  Egyptians  were 
cannibals. 

The  statement  here  that  Unas  ate  men  is  definite  enough,  and 
it  is  not  easy  to  give  any  other  than  a  literal  meaning  to  the  words  ; 
we  can  only  assume  then  that  this  portion  of  the  text  has  reference 
to  some  acts  of  cannibalism  of  which  a  tradition  had  come  down 
from  predynastic  to  dynastic  times.  We  gather  from  other 
passages  in  the  texts  of  Unas  and  Teta  what  manner  of  treatment 

'  See  my  Chaj)ters  of  Coming  Forth  hi/  Day,  Text,  p.  18, 1.  12  ;  p.  19,  1.  5;  etc. 


KING   UNAS   AS   A   GOD  37 

was  meted  out  to  the  vanquished  in  battle  by  the  victors,  and  it 
seems  to  tind  a  parallel  in  the  atrocious  acts  which  were,  and  in 
some  places  still  are,  perpetrated  by  conquering  tribes  of  Central 
Africa  after  a  battle.  In  predynastic  times  all  the  property  of 
those  who  Avere  defeated  in  war  was  seized  upon  by  the  successful 
warriors,  and  all  the  women  fell  into  their  hands,  and  at  times 
nameless  abominations  were  committed  upon  the  unfortunate  male 
captives.  The  dead  king  in  the  texts  of  Unas  and  Teta  is, 
naturally,  described  as  the  lord  of  heaven  and  of  all  the  beings  and 
things  which  are  therein ;  as  such  he  is  master  of  all  the  women, 
and  it  is  said  plainly  of  him  that  he  is  the  "  fecundator,  and  that 
"  he  carries  off  the  women  from  their  husbands  to  whatsoever  place 
*'  he  pleaseth  whensoever  he  pleaseth."  ^  Thus  one  of  his  attributes 
was  that  of  the  bull,  which,  because  of  his  fecundity  and  strength, 
became  the  object  of  worship  by  the  early  Egyptians,  and  he 
exercised  the  rights  of  a  victorious  tribal  chief.  Upon  the  con- 
quered men  who  were  allowed  to  live  terrible  indignities  were 
perpetrated,  and  in  the  text  of  Teta  the  dead  king  is  exhorted  to 
rise  up,  "  for  Horus  hath  caused  Thoth  to  bring  unto  thee  thine 
"  enemy,  and  he  (i.e.,  Horus)  hath  put  thee  behind  him  in  order 
"  that  he  may  not  do  thee  an  injury,  and  that  thou  mayest  make 
"  thy  place  upon  him,  so  that  when  [thou]  goest  forth  thou  mayest 
"take  thy  place  upon  him,  and  he  may  not  have  union  with 
"  thee."  ^  It  is  possible  then  that  in  predynastic  times  in  addition 
to  the  wanton  destruction  which  the  Egyptians  brought  about  after 
a  victorious  fight  with  their  enemies,  and  the  slaughter,  and  rapine, 
and  nameless  abominations  which  followed,  they  sometimes  imitated 
the  example  of  wild  and  savage  beasts  and  ate  the  foes  they  had 


A/^AAA^ 
1 


^  =^  (±1P]  k  i^^  Z  (Si]  D^l  ^  ^^ 


line  629. 


38  UNAS   EATS   THE    GODS, 

conquered.  The  accounts  of  the  battles  of  dynastic  times  show 
that  the  Egyptians  looted  and  destroyed  the  cities  and  to^vns  of  the 
vanquished,  and  that  they  cut  down  orchards  and  gardens,  and 
carried  off  all  the  flocks  and  herds  which  they  could  find  ;  and 
there  is  abundant  proof  that  they  mutilated  the  bodies  of  their 
dead  foes  after  a  fight,  but  that  they  either  ate  them  or  behaved 
towards  them  in  a  manner  contrary  to  nature  there  is  absolutely  no 
evidence  to  show. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  remaining  paragraphs  of  the 
extract  from  the  text  of  Unas.  The  gods  upon  whose  bodies  Unas 
fed  were  snared  by  Am-kehuu,  and  they  were  examined  as  to  their 
fitness  and  condition  by  Tcheser-tep-f,  a  divine  being  who  was  in 
later  times  one  of  the  Forty-Two  Judges  in  the  Hall  of  Maati,  and 
is  mentioned  in  the  "  Negative  Confession  "  of  the  Booh  of  the 
Dead.  The  gods  were  next  bound  by  Her-thertu,  and  the  god 
Khensu  cut  their  throats  and  took  out  their  intestines ;  a  being 
called  Shesemu  acted  as  butcher  and  cut  them  up  and  cooked  the 
pieces  thereof  in  his  fiery  cauldrons.  Thereupon  Unas  ate  them, 
and  in  eating  them  he  also  ate  their  words  of  power  and  their 
spirits.  The  largest  and  finest  of  the  gods  he  ate  at  daybreak,  and 
the  smaller  sized  ones  for  meals  at  sunset,  and  the  smallest  for  his 
meals  in  the  night ;  the  old  and  worn-out  gods  he  rejected  entirely 
and  used  them  up  as  fuel  in  his  furnace.  The  cauldrons  in  which 
the  bodies  of  the  gods  were  cooked  were  heated  by  the  "  Great  One 
in  heaven,"  who  shot  flame  under  those  which  contained  the  thighs 
of  the  oldest  of  the  gods ;  and  the  "  Perer,  who  is  in  heaven,"  of 
Unas  cast  also  into  cauldrons  the  thighs  of  their  women.  Unas  is 
then  said  to  make  a  journey  about  every  part  of  the  double  sky,  or 

double  heaven,  f=^  ,  i.e.,  the  night  sky  and  the  day  sky,  and  also 

to  travel  about,  presumably  from  one  end  to  the  other,  through  the 

two    at  elm,  (1  ei^ii  j  ^  "^      ' ,    of   Egypt,   i.e.,    the    land  which  lies 

between  the  mountains  and  the  Nile  on  each  side  of  the  river.  As 
a  result  of  eating  of  the  bodies  of  the  gods  Unas  becomes  the  Great 
Sekhem,  the  Sekhem  of  the  Sekhemu ;  he  also  becomes  the  Ashem 
of  Ashem,  the  Great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu.  The  power  which 
protects  Unas  and  which  he  possesses  is  greater  than  that  of  all  the 


ABSORBS   THEIR   POWERS  39 

sdfm  in  the  heavens,  and  he  becomes  the  eldest  of  all  the  firstborn 
gods  and  he  goes  before  thousands  and  makes  offerings  to  hundreds 
[of  them]  ;  indeed,  the  power  which  has  been  given  to  him  as  the 
Great  Sekhem  makes  him  to  become  as  the  star  Sahu,  i.e.,  Orion, 
with  the  gods.  "  Unas  can  repeat  his  rising  in  the  sky,  for  he  is 
''  the  Seben  crown  as  lord  of  the  heavens.  He  taketh  count  of  the 
"  knots  (or,  sinews)  and  of  livers,  and  he  hath  taken  possession  of 
"  the  hearts  of  the  gods.  He  hath  eaten  the  Red  Crown,  he  hath 
"  eaten  the  White  Crown,  and  he  feedeth  upon  fat  entrails ;  the 
"  offerino-s  made  to  him  are  those  in  whose  hearts  live  words  of 
"  power.  What  the  Red  Crown  emitteth  that  he  hath  eaten,  and 
"  he  flourisheth ;  the  words  of  poAver  are  in  his  belly,  and  his  sdfm 
"  is  not  turned  away  from  him.  He  hath  eaten  the  knowledge  of 
"  every  god,  and  his  existence  and  the  duration  of  his  life  are 
"  eternal  and  everlasting  in  any  sdhii  which  he  is  pleased  to 
"  make.  Whatsoever  he  hateth  he  shall  never  do  within  the  limits, 
"or,  inside  the  borders  of  heaven.  Behold  their  soul,  i.e.,  the 
"  soul  of  the  gods,  is  in  Unas,  and  their  spirits  are  with  him ; 
"  his  food  is  more  abundant  than  that  of  the  gods,  in  whose  bones 
"  is  the  flame  of  Unas.  Behold  their  soul  is  with  Unas,  and  their 
"  Shadows  are  with  their  Forms,  or  Attributes.  Unas  is  in,  or 
''  with,  the  doubly  hidden  Kha  gods  (?)  [as]  a  Sekhem,  and  having 
"  performed  [all]  the  ordinances  of  the  (ceremony  of)  ploughing 
"  the  seat  of  the  heart  of  Unas  shall  be  among  the  living  upon  this 
"  earth  for  ever  and  ever." 

The  last  portion  of  the  extract  is  of  peculiar  interest  because 
it  affords  some  insight  into  the  beliefs  which  the  Egyptians  held 
about  the  constituent  parts  of  the  economy  of  the  gods.  We  have 
already  seen  that  a  />a,  or  soul,  has  been  assigned  to  Unas,  and  hau, 
or  "  doubles,"  and  hliu,  or  spirits,  and  a  sdhii,  and  a  sekhem  ;  the 
last  two  words  are  difficult  to  translate,  but  they  are  rendered 
with  approximate  correctness  by  "spiritual  body,"  and  "power." 
The  soul  was  intimately  connected  with  the  heart,  and  was 
supposed  to  be  gratified  by  offerings,  which  it  was  able  to  consume ; 
the  "  double  "  was  an  integral  part  of  a  man,  and  was  connected 
with  his  shadow,  and  came  into  being  when  he  was  born,  and  lived 
in  the  tomb  with  the  body  after  death ;  the  spirit  was  the  seat  of 


40   UNAS,  THE  ASHEM  OF  THE  ASHEMU 

the  spiritual  part  of  man,  and  gods  and  divine  personages  were 
credited  with  the  possession  of  several  spirits ;  the  .syTA^/,  or 
spiritual  body,  was  the  ethereal,  intangible,  transparent  and  trans- 
lucent body,  which  was  supposed,  in  dynastic  times  at  all  events, 
to  grow  from  the  dead  body,  the  form  of  which  it  preserved  ;  the 
seJihem  was  the  "power"  which  seems  to  have  animated  the  s^hu 
and  to  have  made  it  irresistible.  From  the  extract  given  above 
from  the  text  of  Unas  we  learn  that  the  gods  were  composed  of  all 
these  various  parts,  and  that  in  fact  their  economy  resembled  that 
of  man  ;  in  other  words,  the  Egyptians  made  their  gods  in  their 
own  image,  only  they  attributed  to  them  superhuman  powers. 
The   gods,    however,    preserved    their    existence   by   means    of    a 


magical  protection  which  they  enjoyed,  mehet,  %\^  ^  ,  and  also 
by  hrl-au,  $  *j  y  °?  which  is  commonly  translated  "words  of 
power  "  ;  the  aim  of  every  Egyptian  was  to  obtain  possession  of 
both  the  magical  protection  and  the  words  of  power,  for  they 
thought  that  if  they  once  were  masters  of  these  they  would  be  able 
to  live  like  the  gods.  In  the  earliest  times  in  Egypt  men  thought 
that  the  only  way  to  obtain  the  strength  and  immortality  of  the 
gods  was  to  eat  the  gods  themselves,  and  so  we  read  that  Unas, 
having  eaten  parts  of  the  boiled  bodies  of  the  gods,  "  hath  eaten 
"  their  words  of  power  (heJca),  and  swallowed  their  spirits  {IcJm)." 
As  a  result  of  this  he  becomes  the  "  Great  Power,"  the  "  Power  of 
Powers,"  i.e.,  the  greatest  Power  in  heaven.  He  becomes  also  the 
Ashem  of  Ashem,  the  great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu,  that  is  to  say, 
the  very  essence  of  Ashem,  and  the  greatest  powers  of  the  Ashemu 
beings  are  enshrined  within  him  because  he  has  within  him  the 
spirits  and  the  words  of  power  of  the  gods. 

But  what  is  the  meaning  of  Ashem  ?  In  the  text  of  Teta  the 
word  has  for  its  determinative  a  hawk  perched  upon  a  standard, 
_^,  which  shows  that  it  has  some  meaning  connected  with  deity  or 
divinity,  but  it  cannot  be  the  name  of  one  divine  being  only,  for 
we  find  it  in  the  plural  form  Ashemu,  ^^  ^  ^  ^^^.  The 
determinative,  however,  does  not  help  us  very  much,  for  it  proves 
little  more  than  that  some  attribute  of  the  Hawk-god  Ileru  was 
ascribed  to  the  Ashemu ;    the  hawk  was   undoubtedly  the    first 


UNAS,    THE   ASHEM    OF   THE   ASHEMU        41 

creature  worshipped  by  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  and  ^  became 
in  consequence  the  common  determinative  of  all  words  implying  the 
idea  of  deity  or  divinity,  and  of  the  proper  names  of  the  gods  in  a 
very  large  number  of  passages  in  the  hieroglyphic  texts  inscribed 
on  the  walls  of  the  chambers  and  corridors  in  the  pyramids  at 
Sakkara.  The  common  name  for  "god,"  as  we  have  already  seen, 
is  "neter,"    j,  or    |  Jj,  with  the  plural  "neteru,"    |  |  |,  or    |  i,  or 

in  ^  ''  ^^'  A-^  A-?  ^^*  ^^®  fi^^  *^^*  ^^^6  ^^1^  gods  are  some- 
times called  "hawks,"  J  ^  ^^y^^V^^V,  even  when  the  female 
gods  are  called  "  netert,"  |  ^^==^  Pn  PnPri-^  ^^  the  Booh  of  the 
Dead^  the  word  Ashemu  is  written  ^^  ¥\    ^^\^  '  wf  '?  which  may 


be  translated  by  "  divine  Ashemu,"  and  as  the  first  determinative  is 
a  squatting  hawk,  we  may  assume  that  the  word  ashemu  means 
"  hawks."  ^  If  this  assum^Dtion  be  correct,  "Ashem  of  Ashem, 
Great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu,"  means  "  Hawk  of  Hawk,  the  Great 
Hawk  of  the  Hawks,"  and  since  the  hawk  was  not  only  a  god  to 
the  predynastic  Egyptians,  but  their  oldest  and  greatest  god,  being 
in  fact  the  spirit  of  that  which  is  above,  i.e.,  heaven,  the  passage 
"  Ashem  of  Ashem,  Great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu,"'  may  very  well 
be  rendered  "  god  of  god,  great  god  of  the  gods."  Thus  with  the 
words  of  power  and  the  spirits  of  the  gods  in  him  Unas  becomes 
the  habitation  of  the  power  of  God,  and  the  firstborn  of  the  gods. 
He  is  now  able  to  go  round  about  heaven  at  pleasure,  and  as  the 
Great  Sekhem,  or  Power,  his  visible  emblem  is  Sail  or  Orion,  and 
he  is  able  to  repeat  his  rising  [daily]  in  heaven  like  this  constella- 
tion. It  is  not  improbable  that  the  identification  of  Orion  with 
kings  who  had  eaten  the  gods  filtered  doAvn  in  tradition  to  the 
Semitic  people  who  lived  in  the  Delta  in  dynastic  times,  and  so 
became  the  base  of  the  legends  about  Orion  which  are  found  among 
the  Arabs  and  Hebrews. 

1  See  the  text  of  Unas,  line  209  ;   in  the  text  of  Teta,  line  197,  the  gods  are 
described  as  "  male  and  female,"      0        |   I   |    ^\    f°F=^)    V\ 

/WW^A        I      I      I      _h!F^    f'^'^Tj)     _B^     '=^     -^     ^ 

2  See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Bay,  Text,  p.  128,  1.  14, 

2  A  variant  form  of  the  word  is  akhem     %      SN^  '  ^^^  Brugsch  (Worterbuch, 
Suppl.,  p.  279)  renders  it  by  "the  symbol,  or  visible  form  of  a  god." 


42  POWER   OVER   THE    HEART 

Modern  travellers  have  put  on  record  the  fact  that  certain 
savage  and  semi-savage  peoples  were,  even  in  recent  times,  in  the 
habit  of  eating  pieces  of  flesh  of  mighty  wild  animals  or  of  strong 
men,  and  of  drinking  their  blood  with  the  view  of  absorbing  their 
nature,  and  life,  and  strength  into  their  own  bodies.^  This  idea 
also  existed  among  the  Egyptians,  both  predynastic  and  dynastic, 
and  we  find  an  allusion  to  it  in  the  extract  from  Unas  under 
consideration,  for  he  is  said  to  take  possession  of  the  hearts  of  the 
gods,  and  to  reckon  up  the  thesu  and  heqesu,  and  to  feed  upon 
fat  S7nau.  The  importance  which  the  Egyptians  attached  to  the 
possession  of  the  physical  heart,  or  of  having  power  over  it,  is 
proved  by  many  texts,  and  especially  by  several  Chapters  of  the 
Boole  of  the  Dead,  wherein  we  find  many  prayers  which  were 
specially  written  for  the  protection  of  the  heart.  Thus  in 
Chapter  xxvi.  the  deceased  prays,  "may  my  heart  be  to  me  in 
"the  house  of  hearts,  may  my  hdti^  be  to  me  in  the  house  of 
"  hdtu " ;  Chapters  xxvii.,  xxviii.,  and  xxix.  were  written  to 
prevent  the  heart  being  carried  away  by  those  who  steal  hearts 

and  destroy  them,  ^5t^^  11  i  ?  i  !!^  ^^\  iV^i'  Chapter  xxix. a 
was  composed  to  prevent  its  death  in  the  Underworld ;  and 
Chapters  xxx.a  and  xxx.b  were  intended  to  prevent  a  man's 
heart  from  being  driven  away  from  him  there,  especially  at  the 
time  of  the  Judgment,  when  it  was  weighed  in  the  Great  Scales. 
For  the  words  thesu,  heqesu,  and  smau  it  is  not  easy  to  find 
equivalents.  From  the  connexion  in  which  it  occurs  thesu  must 
mean  either  the  vertebra  or  some  internal  organ  of  the  body 
which  resembles  a  tied  or  knotted  cord,  whilst  of  heqesu  the 
determinative  proves  that  it  also  is  an  internal  organ.  In 
Chapter  xxx.a  the  deceased  says,  "  Homage  to  thee,  0  my 
"  heart  {ah)  !  Homage  to  thee,  0  my  hdti  (pericardium  ?) ! 
"  Homage  to  thee,  0  my  heseh,"  which  is  probably  a  variant 
form  of  heqes,  but  curiously  enough  the  determinative  of  hese/c, 
S  fl  ^^  J  is  a  heart.     In  spite  of  this,  however,  it  seems  as  if  the 

1  See  Robertson  Smith,  The  Beliglon  of  the  Semites,  p.  295. 

2  c=^  1^  ^  the  pericardium  (?).     In  the  ancient  texts  the  hat,  or  hdti  of  a  god 
'^^  W 

was  the  seat  of  the  words  of  power  by  means  of  which  he  maintained  his  life. 


THE  HEART  AND  WORDS  OF  POWER   43 

word  actually  means  "  liver."  Mr.  Frazer  has  quoted  in  his 
work^  instances  which  prove  that  savage  tribes  look  upon  the 
liver  as  the  seat  of  the  soul  or  life  of  man,  and  that  portions  of 
it  are  eaten  by  them  with  the  view  of  acquiring  the  qualities  of 
the  former  possessor  of  the  liver.  The  words  of  the  text  of  Unas 
do  not  say  definitely  that  the  king  ate  the  thesu  and  livers  of  the 
gods  who  had  been  killed  for  him,  but  it  is  evident  from  the 
context  that  they  were  supposed  to  form  part  of  his  food.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  said  definitely  that  he  did  eat  their  smau  saau,  or 

"  fat  entrails,"  J  f  J  P  ^  \  ^  ^ .  and  their  hearts,  -f  ^  , 

or  those   portions  of  them  which  were  the  seats  of  the   hekau, 

ft  Li  ^ ,  or  words  of  magical  power,  which  were  the  source  of  their 

life. 

Now  besides  the  spirits,   and  the  words  of  power,   and  the 
internal   organs   of  the   gods,   Unas,    it   is   said,   hath   eaten   the 

"knowledge,"    I  (I  ^^m  '^^  sda,  of  every  god,  and  the  period  of  his 

life  and  his  existence  are  merged  into  eternity  and  everlastingness, 
which  he  may  pass  in  any  way  that  pleaseth  his  spiritual  body 
(sdh),  and  during  this  existence  he  has  no  need  whatsoever  to  do 
anything  which  is  distasteful  to  him.  Moreover,  the  soul[s]  and 
spirits  of  the  gods  are  in  and  with  Unas,  and  their  souls,  and  their 
shadows,  and  their  divine  forms  are  with  him.  Thus  we  see  that 
Unas  has  absorbed  within  his  spiritual  body  all  the  life  and  power 
of  the  gods,  and  his  portion  is  everlasting  life,  and  he  can  do 
anything  and  everything  he  pleases.  Here  we  should  naturally 
expect  the  section  to  come  to  an  end,  but  the  last  sentence  goes  on 
to  say  that  Unas  is  with  the  double  Kha  god,  who  is  invisible,  or 
unknown,  and  that  being  a  Power  (sehhem)  who  hath  performed 
[the  ceremony]  of  ploughing,  "the  seat  of  the  heart"  of  Unas  shall 
"  be  among  those  who  live  upon  this  earth  for  ever  and  for  ever." 
In  this  sentence  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  difficulty  of  under- 
standing and  explaining  the  Egyptian  religion  and  the  doctrine 
of  the  gods.     In  the  early  portion  of  the  passage  from  the  text  of 

1  The  Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii.,  p.  357  (2nd  edition). 

2  The  word  here  used  is  db   v/. 


44  THE   DOUBLE   LIFE   OF   UNAS 

Unas  already  translated  and  analyzed  we  are  told  how  the  dead 
king  became  the  god  of  god,  immortal  and  invisible,  with  supreme 
power  in  heaven,  etc.,  but  at  the  end  of  it  we  read  that  the  seat  of 
the  heart  of  Unas  shall  be  among  those  who  live  upon  this  earth 
for  ever  and  ever,  i.e.,  Unas  shall  enjoy  after  death  a  continuation 
of  the  life  which  he  began  in  this  world  ;  in  fact,  shall  have  a 
double  existence,  the  one  heavenly  and  the  other  earthly. 


(     45     ) 


APPENDIX    TO    CHAPTER    I 


UNAS,   THE  SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 


496.      ^ 


kep 


D   ^ 


■pet 


m 

dhi 


sebii 


J\ 


nem 


Poureth  down  water     heaven,     tremble     the  stars, 


go  about 


petchet  seta 

the  bow-bearers,     quake 


I 


/I\ 


kenemu 


498.  ^|i^^^ 

qes  Aker       ker  -  er  -  sen 

the  bones   of  Aker,    those  beneath 

them 


AA/WNA       I  r\r\r\r\r\f\ 


499.  ("^[)p] 
take  to  flight     [when]  they  see  Unas        rising     [as]  a  soul 


1       f        k     ill-'      \-^l 

em  neter        dnJch  em  ^i  ~  f  usTieh 

like        a  god  [who]  liveth        upon        his  fathers        [and]  feedeth 


500. 


em 


mut      -     f         Unas         pa  neb 


sabut 


upon      his  mothers.  Unas    this  [is]  the  lord  of  wisdom, 

1   The  text  here  given  is  from  the  Pyramid  of  Unas  (Maspero,  Becueil,  torn,  iv., 
p.  59) ;  the  variants  are  from  the  Pyramid  of  Teta  {Becueil,  torn,  v.,  p.  48,  1.  319). 


_s^ 


%      c^         c^        c:^ 


l\ 


46 


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 


501. 


IcheifYi         en 
knoweth  not 


milt  -  f  ren  -  f 

his  mother      his  name. 


ciiL        sliepsu 
Is  the  noble  rank 


feU'l 


D  ^ 


^^1 


502. 


■^^?c^ 


Unas       em      pet  du    nser-f    em  Jchut  md     Tern 

of  Unas  in   heaven,    is  his  strength    in   the  horizon        like   Tern, 


c^      3 


useru        eref 


su 


dt-f  au    mes  -  ne^ 

his  father ;      he  (i.e.,  Tem)  begot  him       [and]    he  became  stronger 

than  he. 


U  '     503.  gj|]  "f 


die    Icau  Unds  ha  -f  du     hemu  set-fi?) 

Are  the  doubles  of  Unas       behind  him,      the  conquered  [are] 


I   I   I 


kher  retui-f  du  neteru-f     tep-f        du      dart      -      t 

beneath   his  two  feet.    His  gods  are    on  him.  His  uraei  are 


em      d])t  -  f  du  semtu  Unds         em    hdt-f 

on     his  brow.      The  serpent  guide  of  Unas  is        before  him. 


3       Ci 


(m 


*  u    u    u 

'  < 

l^l^k^^-TTT(^]< 

Zii 

'U 

:\- 

SLAYEK  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 


47 


D  ^ 


[J  %^!'T  JM«M^  111(111] 

petret         ha  hliut        ent      hes  du    useru     Unas 

Seeth        soul  [his]    the  spirit    of   fiame.  The  powers  of  Unas 


<^ 


her  meJcet  -f 
protect  him. 


db-f 


U 

ka 


D  ^ 


ra 


fe ^  111    °() 

Unds       pd  ha  pet  en     het 

Unas    this  [is]    the  bull  of  heaven  that  thrusteth 


em 


r 

anJih 


em 


Jcheper 


506.  A^A/w\      j 
en   neter 


with     his  will,     living     upon     what  coraeth  into  being     of     god 


"    A 
dm 


neb  dm  em 

QYQTj,     and  eating      of 


,^emu     -     sen 
their  food 


iu  meh 

who  come       to  fill 


khat-sen       em  hehau  em  She      en  Sdsd 

their  belly    with    words  of  power    from    the  lake  of        Flame. 

Unds  pd  apei'-d        er        dab  Jehu     -    f 

Unas        this  [is]        provided  with  power  against        his  spirits. 


^\(±m 


Q 


D 


du       Unds     hhd     em 


neb       dmit  dst-d 


ur      pu 

Unas  riseth         like    a  mighty  one,    the  lord    in    the  seat  of  the 

hand  [of  the  gods]. 


J\ 


f 


A 


u 


ft3 


48 


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 


^p^^      [^^_     J^       ^J  508.  (S||]   d(| 

hems  -f  sa  -f  dr  Seh  Unas  pd 

He  is  seated     [with]  his  back    to  Seb.  Unas         this 


*■      1^    I 


AAAAAA  AAAAAA 


0.3 
I 


utclid  mct-f         liend 

weigheth      his  word      with 


relches 


1^  t 


csu 


D 


Amen      ren  -  f         hru  pu 

Hidden  of  Name      on  day       this 


en  reiiiies  semsu  JJnds        1^['?0  ''^^^ 

of       slaughtering      the  eldest  [gods]      Unas      this  [is]      the  lord 


^  D 


hetep  tes 

of  the  offering,       tying 


dqa 
the  knot, 


^ 


an 


dut  -  f 


making         his  meals 


tchesef  Unas         pd  dm: 

for  himself.  Unas         this      eateth 


111 

em     neteru 


net 


m 


annu 


remth  dnkh 

men       [and]  liveth 


a 


V 


Jihd 


apt 


on   the  gods,    the  lord   of  the  offerings,    who  examineth   the  lists  of 


offerings. 


ra 


o 


dV^ 


D 


A  ^o^o  1 


I      '-^      I      H L 


D 


0  0  0     1 


V 


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 


49 


5    i\ 


1      \/      ''^SX.'ASN. 


an  dJchem  apt  Am-hehuu  sepeh  -  sen 

Beliold,  he  who  maketh  to  bow  Am-kehuu  hath  snared 

foreheads,  them 


i^n]  510.  1     y)%:^  ^' 

V  Av^wtA      1  J\  AAA/V\A  I        \  *t«=fc — 

Unas  an        Tcheser-tep-f 


en  Unas  an        Tcfieser-tep-j  saa-nef-sen 

for        Unas.         Behold,    Tcheser-tep-f  hath  known  them 


I         T  ^.e* —     I  f^Ar\/v^         <^ >    "^ >  —21  _LE^  *t^ —    I 

khesef  -  nef     sen  an      Her  -  thertu  gas    -    nef    sen 

[and]  he  hath  driven    Behold,     Her-thertu  hath  bound  them, 

them  [to  him]. 

metes 


A/VVW\  AAAA/V\ 


tchat     -    /        sell 

Behold,    Khensu      the  slaughterer   of  lords    hath  cut  the  throats  of 

them 


an        Khensu 


nehu 


en  Unas  she t -nef  dmt  hhat  -  sen 

for  Unas,      [and]  he  hath  torn  out     what  is  in     their  belly. 


apt      pu  habu     -    /  ei'  khesef 

[for]  he  is  the  messenger     [whom]  he  sent  to        drive  [them]. 


'1 


%=^ 


® 


-n  "  V  VV 

;  ^  1    ^  I   ^  1 

.     TMs  creature  is  mentioned  in  the  Negative  Confessioa ;  see 


my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  hy  Day,  Text,  p.  259,  1.  41 

1  veJ 


AAAAAA 

D  ^  1J 
E 


7    a. 


8 

i?^-^   wanting. 


50 


SLAYER   AND   EATER   OF   THE    GODS 


Y — Y  1 


£L 


K^p 


AV\AAA  A^^VV\A 


r^» 


m 


an       Sliesemu      rehhes  -  f      sen       en       Unas         feses  -  nef 
Behold,  Shesemu    hath  cut  them  up      for      Unas,    he  hath  boiled 


dlchet  dm  -  sen 


'(j^OO 


o 

em         Jcetdt    -   / 
pieces  of  them      in       his  cauldrons 


meshert  Unas 

blazing.  Unas 


°1     +^     I^P 


P 


pa  dm  heJca  -  sen  dam  Jehu      -      sen 

this   hath  eaten   their  words  of     [he]  hath  eaten      their  spirits, 
power. 


du     uru  -  sen        en     dshet-f  tuat  du  her-dbu  -  sen 

Their  great  ones  are   for  his  meal  of  the  morning,  their  middle  ones 


are 


.^^ 


1-^  ^\m'i^ 


A^VVVV\  A^\^V\ 


IZSZI8 


en  meshert    -   f  du    shereru-sen  en  dsht-f 

for  his  sunset  meal,        their  little  ones  are        for       his  meal 


a[!!]^^  51^-1^  1^'P 


du       da  -  se7i  datu     -     sen 

of  the  night,  their  old  ones  (male)    their  old  ones  (female)  are 


1  i=s: 


rin 


A'^^vV>      AAVvAA 


o  o  o 


luli    m^{] 


o 


7  rm 


^ 


C)&b 


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS    51 


"a'^ 


en 
for 


kapt 
his  furnace. 


an 


0  ^ 


/  an  dda  em      pet 

Behold,     the  great  one     in    heaven 


^^0° 


/n 


P 


^-^z  p"^a  -- 

utu-nef  setchet         er  uhatu  khert-sen 

hath  shot  flame      against      the  cauldrons       beneath  them 


em      khepeshu    nu      semsu    -    sen  du    Perer     -     dmu  -  pet 

with  the  thighs   of    the  eldest  ones.  Perer-amu-pet 


1 


-Ro' 


0 


o 


672,        Z77^<xs  shesert  -  ^le/ 

of        Unas     hath  thro'svn  [into]     the  cauldrons       the  legs        of 


ketdt 


m 

em    retu      nu 


^  ^  ^ 

1^  ^^   c::i 

hemt  -  sen 


A/V\A/V\       AAAWN 


tehen    -    nef 


D   ^ 


tem-thd 


ail         leoen    -    nej  pet 

their  women.  He  hath  gone  round  about  the  double  heaven,  all  of  it, 


D 


du     perer  -  nef  dfebu  Unas         pd 

he  hath  gone  round  about    the  two  halves  of  Egypt.     Unas     this  [isj 


^1        W    fi<^« 

sekhem  ur  sekhem 

the  sekhem    great,     the  sekhem 


515. 


nr  SI 

em  sekhemu         TJnds 

of     the  sekhemu.     Unas 


^PkP^li 


\n 


D   ^ 


;ii 


AAA/WA    \-i*^    ^2^ 

Jl       0   0    0 


52 


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 


r 


°^"  ^^^ 


ur 


qemi  -  / 


jyd         dshem  dshem  asliemu 

this  [is]  the  ashem,  the  ashem  of  the  ashemu  great.  [What]  he  findeth 


SurS 


-I- 


V. 


em 
on 


uat  -f 
his  way 


dm  -  /     nef     su 
he  eateth  it 


em.         umu 
greedily. 


du      meket        Unas  em    hat  sdhu  nebu 

The  protection  of  Unas  [is]      before  [that  of]  the  sahu     all 


Pk^¥ 


dmu  khut  JJnds         pd  semes  er  semsu 

in      the  horizon.     Unas        this     is  the  eldest    of     the  old  ones. 


■c=--j  /www  (3(3(3 

Jvhau  du       uten      -      nef     shdut 

thousands,        he  hath  offered        hundreds. 


du    perer  -  nef 
He  hath  gone  round 

dti       erta  -  nef  d  em        sehhem  ur  dn 

Hath  been  given  to  him    the  hand    as    the  sekhem    great,    behold 


? 


D 


r-vr-i 


D 


(1^^^^ 


/ 

SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS    53 

D     on.     H  III  Li  n;;>  II  ^^^    ^^^^^  i  -^^  u  i  i 

Sahii  dr        neterii        du      7iem     en        TJnds  hJiatu 


^  517.x  nr  \\\%.-(Em 

]ahu  dr        neterii        du      7iem     en        TJnds 

Orion,         with    the  gods.         Hath  repeated  Unas         [his]  rising 


{sic) 


^ 


u 


em        jpet  ....       sehen  em       neh  Miut 

in      heaven.     He  is  the  seben  crown      as       lord     of  the  horizon. 

du        heseh   -   nef    tesu         heqesu  du     thet  -  nef 

He  hath  counted  up    knots  [and]  livers.    He  hath  taken  possession  of 


laQC]  r>    •f\  A  /l       /VNAAAA 


.       O  111  518.(j^+-_  S^o' 

hdtu  neteru  du      dm  -  nef  teshert 

the  hearts         of  the  gods.  He  hath  eaten         the  Red  Crown, 


du        am   -   nef  uatchetu  usheb  TJnds        em 

he  hath  eaten      the  White  Crown.        Feedeth        Unas      upon 

smau  saau  hetepf  em-      dnkh  em  hdtu 

entrails  fat,         his  offering  whereon  live  in  [their]  hearts 

[is  that] 


AA/VW\ 


54    SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 

heJcau   -   se^i         dsth-f     du     Unas       nesb  -  /         sebeshu 


their  words  of  power.    Behold, 


Unas 


eateth     what  is  cast 
out 


1^ 


U 


dmu  teshert      df  uakhha  -/  du      helm  -  sen 

[from]        the  Red  Crown,     he  flourisheth,      their  words  of  power 


-^    520.  _^^^^        ±^l\        (3) 

em         Jchat-f  dn      hem      em  sahu  JJnds 

are  in     his  belly,  not  is  turned  back       the  sahu  of  Unas 


kz!  ^\ 


H 


1 


ma-f  du         dm  -  nej  sda  en     neter      neb 

from  him.        He  hath  eaten       the  intelligence  of     god      every, 

dhdu  pd    neheh  tcher-f  pd  tchetta 

[his]  period  of  life     [is]  eternity,     his  existence  is  everlastingness 


em 
in 


sdh    -  / 
his  sah. 


U 


])e7L        en  merer  -/  dr  -  f 

this     what      he  is  pleased  [to  do]      he  doeth, 


9     AA/VWV 


•  A  o  o  c 


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS    55 

mestchetch  -  f  an      dr-nef        dm  teller  khut 

[what]  he  hateth      not  doeth  he        in      the  limits     of  the  horizon 

tcJietta  er      neheh  seJc  ha  -  sen  dmt  TJnds 

for  ever  and  ever.        Behold,        their  soul  [is]  in        Unas, 


kJiu     -     sen       kher         TJnds  em  ha       kliet    -   f 

spirits  their     [are]  with     Unas,      more     abundant  [is]  his  food 

in    ^-Q,  —  c±tp]  523. 


er  neteru  qerert  en  TJnds  em 

than  [that  of]  the  gods.        The  flame        of  Unas       [is]      in 

CCe  I    AAWV\  I    -v yb  J^^         I   /WWV\  ^  I    .^a    n      "I    I  T     jTci^^        1    AAAAAA 


qesu  -  sen        sek  ha-sen         kher        TJnds  khaibitu-sen 

their  bones,    behold,    their  soul    is  with    Unas,        their  shadows 


.  (l<:=^Vp^  524.11^  fgy]    1^      \\ 


Q      Q 


md  dru    -    sen  dii      TJnds       em      enen      kJia     khd 

are  with    their  forms.  Unas  is  with  these,  rising,  rising, 


(1=  (]='  -^Pt^V     ^"^        \^\ 

\    A/VVW\  1    AA/WV\  I         ]  _£lF^  'I  1  '^  fl 

dmen         dmen  sekhem  dru  '       dritu  .... 

hidden,  hidden,       a  sekhem      having  performed     the  ordinances 

1  -^  111  I    AAAAAA  I    /VAAAAA 


<2>-    V\Qr-^^ 


56    SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS 

525.^    ojp-        J^O       (SI 

em  Tchebes  dst-db  Unas  em 

of      ploughing,     the  seat  of  the  heart     of  Unas    [is]  among 

tv  k  r^  ^  ^--^M 

dnJchu         em  ta  pen     tchetta  er         neheh 

the  living      on        earth       this       for  ever  and  for  ever. 


(     57     ) 


CHAPTER    II 
CONCEPTION   OF   GOD   AND   THE   "GODS" 

T"^HE  texts  in  the  p5rraniids  of  Unas  and  Teta  and  their 
immediate  successors  prove  that  the  religious  literature  of 
the  Egyptians  contains  a  multitude  of  beliefs  and  opinions  which 
belong  to  all  periods  of  their  history,  and  represent  different  stages 
in  the  development  of  their  civilization.  Their  ideas  about  the 
various  parts  which  constitute  their  material,  and  mental,  and 
spiritual  existences  cannot  have  been  conceived  all  at  once,  but  it 
is  very  hard  to  say  in  respect  of  some  of  them  which  came  first. 
We  need  not  trouble  about  the  order  of  the  development  of  their 
ideas  about  the  constituent  parts  of  the  gods,  for  in  the  earliest 
times,  at  least,  the  Egyptians  only  ascribed  to  them  the  attributes 
which  they  had  already  ascribed  to  themselves;  once  having 
believed  that  they  possessed  doubles,  shadows,  souls,  spirits,  hearts, 
(i.e.,  the  seats  of  the  mental  life),  names,  powers,  and  spiritual  bodies, 
they  assigned  the  like  to  the  gods.  But  if  the  gods  possessed 
doubles,  and  shadows,  and  hearts,  none  of  which,  in  the  case  of 
man,  can  exist  without  bodies,  they  too  must  possess  bodies,  and 
thus  the  Egyptians  conceived  the  existence  of  gods  who  could 
eat,  and  drink,  and  love,  and  hate,  and  fight,  and  make  war,  and 
grow  old,  and  die,  and  perish  as  far  as  their  bodies  were  concerned. 
And  although  the  texts  show  that  in  very  early  times  they  began 
to  conceive  monotheistic  ideas,  and  to  develop  beliefs  of  a  highly 
spiritual  character,  the  Egyptians  never  succeeded  in  abandoning 
the  crude  opinion  about  the  gods  which  their  indigenous  ancestors 
had  formed  long  before  the  dynastic  period  of  their  history.  It  is, 
of  course,  impossible  to  assume  that  educated  classes  of  Egypt  held 
such  opinions,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  religious  texts  which 


58  BELIEFS   IN    IMMORTALITY 

were  written  for  their  benefit  contain  as  great  a  mixture  of  views 
and  beliefs  of  all  periods  as  those  which  were  written  for  humbler 
folk. 

The  Book  of  the  Dead  in  all  dynasties  proves  that  the  rich 
and  the  poor,  and  the  educated  and  the  uneducated  alike  prayed 
for  funeral  offerings  in  the  very  Chapters  in  which  they  proclaimed 
their  sure  belief  in  an  existence  in  which  material  things  were 
superfluities.  In  the  texts  of  the  Early  Empire  the  deceased  is 
declared  to  be  a  god,  or  God,  and  the  son  of  god,  or  God,  and  the 
oldest  god  of  all,  Horus,  gives  him  his  eye,  and  he  sits  on  a  great 
throne  by  the  side  of  God  ;  yet  in  the  same  texts  we  read  that  he 
partakes  of  the  figs  and  wine  of  the  gods,  that  he  drinks  beer 
which  lasts  for  ever,  that  he  thirsts  not  like  the  gods  Shu  and 
Tefnut,  and  that  the  throne  of  God  is  made  of  iron,  that  its  legs 
terminate  in  hoofs  like  those  of  bulls,  and  that  its  sides  are 
ornamented  with  the  faces  of  lions. ^  The  great  god  Horus  gives 
him  his  own  "  double  "  (ka)^  and  yet  there  are  in  heaven  enemies 
who  dare  to  oppose  the  deceased ;  and  although  he  is  declared  to 
be  immortal,  "  all  the  gods  give  him  of  their  food  that  he  may  not 
"  die,"  and  he  sits  down,  clothed  in  white  linen  and  wearing  white 
sandals,  with  the  gods  by  the  lake  in  the  Field  of  Peace,  and 
partakes  with  them  of  the  wood  (or,  tree)  of  life  on  which  they 
themselves  live  that  he  also  may  live.  Though  he  is  the  son  of 
God  he  is  also  the  child  of  Sothis,  and  the  brother  of  the  Moon, 
and  the  goddess  Isis  becomes  his  wife ;  though  he  is  the  son  of 
God  we  are  also  told  that  his  flesh  and  his  bones  have  been 
gathered  together,  that  his  material  body  has  been  reconstructed  ; 
that  his  limbs  perform  all  the  functions  of  a  healthy  body  ;  and  as 
he  lives  as  the  gods  live  we  see  that  from  one  point  of  view  he  and 
the  g:ods  are  constituted  alike.  Instances  of  the  mixture  of 
spiritual  with  material  ideas  might  be  multiplied  almost  inde- 
finitely, and  numbers  of  passages  containing  the  most  contradictory 
statements  might  be  adduced  almost  indefinitely  to  prove  that  the 
ideas  of  the  Egyptians  about  the  world  beyond  the  grave,  and 
about  God  and  the  gods  were  of  a  savage,  childish,  and  inconsistent 

1  The  passages  from  the  Pyramid  Texts  are  collected  in  my  Pajiyrzis  of  Ani, 
London,  1894,  pp.  Ixxi.  ff. 


COMPOSITE   ANIMAL-GODS 


59 


character.  What,  however,  we  have  to  remember  in  dealing  with 
Egyptian  religious  texts  is  that  the  innate  conservatism  of  the 
Egyptian  in  all  ages  never  permitted  him  to  relinquish  any  belief 
which  had  once  found  expression  in  Avriting,  and  that  the  written 
word  was  regarded  by  him  as  a  sacred  thing  Avhich,  whether  he 
believed  it  not,  must  be  copied  and  preserved  with  great  care,  and 
if  possible  without  any  omission  or  addition  whatsoever.  Thus 
religious  ideas  and  beliefs  which  had  been  entirely  forgotten  by 
the  people  of  Egypt  generally  were  preserved  and  handed  down 
for  thousands  of  years  by  the  scribes  in  the  temples.  The  matter 
would  have  been  simple  enough  if  they  had  done  this  and  nothing 
more,  but  unfortunately  they  incorporated  new  texts  into  the 
collections  of  old  ones,  and  the  various  attempts  which  the  priests 
and  scribes  made  to  harmonize 
them  resulted  in  the  confusion 
of  beliefs  which  we  now  have 
in  Egyptian  religious  works. 

Before  we  pass  to  the 
consideration  of  the  meaning 
of  the  old  Egyptian  name  for 
god  and  God,  i.e.,  "neter," 
mention  must  be  made  of  a 
class  of  beings  which  were 
supposed  to  possess  bodies 
partly  animal  and  partly  human,  or  were  of  a  composite  character. 
Among  the  latter  class  may  be  mentioned  the  creature  which  has 
the  body  of  a  leopard  and  the  head  and  neck  of  a  serpent,  and  was 

called  "  Setcha,"  M  •  J ;  and  that  which  has  the  body  of  a  lion,  from 

which  grow  a  pair  of  wings,  and  the  head  of  an  eagle,  and  is 

called  "  Sefer,"    I         "';  and  that  which  has  a  body,  the  fore  part 

being  that  of  a  lion,  and  the  hind  part  that  of  a  horse,  and  the 
head  of  a  hawk,  and  an  extended  tail  which  terminates  in  a 
flower  somewhat  resembling  the  lotus.  The  name  of  this  creature 
is  Sak,  — »—  '^^  S ,  and  she  is  represented  with  a  collar  round  her 

1  See  Cliampollion,  Monuments,  torn,  iv.,  Paris,  1845,  pi.  382. 
3  Ibidf     See  also  Newberry,  Beni-Hasan,  ii.,  pi.  iv. 


The  serpent-lieaded  leopard  Setcha. 


60 


COMPOSITE   ANIMAL-GODS 


neck,  and  with  bars  and  stripes  on  her  body,  which  has  eight 
teats/  Among  creatures,  part  animal  part  human,  may  be  men- 
tioned  the   leopard,   with   a   human   head   and   a  pair   of  wings 

growing  out  of  his  back,^  and 
the  human  -  headed  lion  or 
sphinx.  The  winged  human 
head  which  springs  from  the 
back  of  the  leopard^  strongly 
reminds  one  of  the  modern 
conventional  representations  of 
angels  in  religious  pictures, 
but  as  the  name  of  this  fabu- 
lous creature  is  unknown,  it  is 
impossible  even  to  guess  at  the 
reasons  for  which  he  was  fur- 
nished with  a  win2;ed  man's 
head.  In  connexion  with  the  composite  animals  enumerated  above 
must  be  mentioned  the  "Devourer  of  Amenti,"  called  "Am-mit,  the 
Eater  of  the  Dead,"  whose  forequarters  were  those  of  a  crocodile, 
and  hindquarters  those  of  a  hippopotamus,  and  whose  body  was 

that  of  a  lion,  =^ 


The  eagle-headed  lion  Sefer. 


^^P 


at  Beni-hasan,  in  which  the 
figures  of  the  Setcha,  the  Sefer, 
and  the  Sak  are  depicted, 
date  from  the  Xllth  Dynasty, 
about  B.C.  2500,  and  there  is 
no  reason  for  supposing  that 
their  existence  was  not  con- 
ceived of  long  before  that 
time.  Side  by  side  with  these 
is  also  depicted  an  animal 
called  Sha,  M^T,  which  has 
long  square  ears,  and  an  extended  tail  resembling  an  arrow,  and  in 
its  general  appearance  it  much  resembles  the  animal  of  the  god  Set. 

1  See  Rosellini,  Monumcnti  Chili,  pi.  xxiii.,  No.  4. 

"  Ihid.,  pi.  xxiii.,  No.  6.  '^  See  Lepsius,  Denkmdler,  iii.,  pi.  131. 


The  fabulous  beast  Sak. 


COMPOSITE   ANIMAL-GODS 


61 


A  fabulous  leopard. 


Two  explanations  of  the  existence  of  such  composite  creatures 
may  be  given.  They  may  be  due  either  to  the  imagination  of  the 
Egyptians,  which  conceived  of  the  existence  of  quadrupeds  wherein 
were  united  the 
strength  of  one 
animal  and  the 
wisdom  or  cunning 
of  another,  e.g., 
the  Setcha  which 
united  within  itself 
the  strength  of  the 
leopard  with  the 
cunnino;  of  the  ser- 
pent,  and  the  name- 
less leopard  with  a  man's  winged  head,  or  to  the  ignorance  of 
the  ancients  of  natural  history.  The  human  head  on  an  animal 
represented  the  intelligence  of  a  man,  and  the  wings  the  swift 
flight  of  the  bird,  and  the  body  of  the  leopard  the  strength  and 
the  lithe  motions  of  that  animal.  In  conceiving  the  existence  of 
such  creatures  the  imagination  may  have  been  assisted  in  its 
fabrication  of  fabulous  monsters  by  legends  or  stories  of  pre- 
dynastic  animals  which  were  current  in  certain  parts  of  Egypt 
during  the  dynastic  period. 
Thus,  as  we  have  said  before, 
the  monster  serpents  of  Egyp- 
tian mythology  have  their  pro- 
totypes in  the  huge  serpents 
which  lived  in  the  country  in 
primeval  times,  and  there  is 
no  doubt  that  Apep  was, 
originally,  nothing  more  than 
a  huge  serpent  which  lived  in 
some  mountain  on  the  western 

bank  of  the  Nile.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the 
Egyptians  really  believed  in  the  existence  of  composite  animals, 
and  that  they  never  understood  the  impossibility  of  the  head  and 
neck  of  a  serpent  growing  out  of  the  body  of  a  lion,  or  the  head 


The  animal  Sha. 


62  COMPOSITE   ANIMAL-GODS 

of  a  hawk  out  of  the  body  of  a  lion,  or  a  human  head  with  the 
wings  of  a  bird  out  of  the  body  of  a  leopard.  They  were  keen 
enough  observers  of  the  animals  with  which  they  came  in  contact 
daily,  and  their  representations  of  them  are  wonderful  for  the 
accurate  delineation  of  their  forms  and  characteristics ;  but  of 
animals  which  they  had  never  seen,  and  could  only  know  from 
the  reports  of  travellers  and  others,  naturally  they  could  not  give 
accurate  representations.  Man  in  all  ages  seems  prone  to  believe 
in  the  existence  of  composite  animals  and  monsters,  and  the  most 
cultured  of  the  most  ancient  nations,  e.g.,  the  Egyptians  and  the 
Babylonians,  form  no  exception  to  the  rule.  The  early  seal- 
cylinders  of  the  Babylonians  reveal  their  belief  in  the  existence 
of  many  a  fabulous  and  mythical  animal,  aud  the  boundary  stones, 
or  landmarks,  of  a  later  period  prove  that  composite  animals  were 
supposed  to  watch  over  the  boundaries  of  kingdoms  and  estates, 
which  they  preserved  from  invasion,  and  the  winged  man-headed 
bulls,  which  the  Assyrians  set  up  in  the  gates  and  doorways  of 
their  palaces  to  "protect  the  footsteps  of  the  kings  Avho  made 
them,"  indicate  clearly  that  they  duly  followed  the  examples  set 
them  by  their  kinsmen,  the  Babylonians.  From  the  Assyrians 
Ezekiel  probably  borrowed  the  ideas  which  he  developed  in  his 
description  in  the  first  chapter  of  his  book  of  the  four-faced  and 
four-winged  animals.  Later,  even  the  classical  writers  appeared 
to  see  no  absurdity  in  solemnly  describing  animals,  the  existence 
of  which  was  impossible,  and  in  declaring  that  they  possessed 
powers  which  were  contrary  to  all  experience  and  knowledge. 
HorapoUo,  i.  10,  gravely  states  that  the  scarabaeus  represents  an 
only  begotten,  because  the  scarabaeus  is  a  creature  self-produced, 
being  unconceived  by  a  female,  ^jiovoyeve<i  fxev  6tl  avToyeue<;  iart  to 
^wov^  vTTo  ^T^Xetas  jxr]  Kvo(^opovixevov  ;  and  in  one  form  or  another 
this  statement  is  given  by  ^Elian  (De.  Nat.  Animal.,  iv.  49), 
Aristotle  {Hist.  An.,  iv.  7),  Porphyry  {De  Ahstlnentia,  iv.  9),  Pliny 
{Nat.  Hist.,  xi.  20  ff.),  etc.  Of  the  man-headed  lion  at  Gizeh,  i.e., 
the  Sphinx,  Pliny,  Diodorus,  Strabo,  and  other  ancient  writers 
have  given  long  descriptions,  and  all  of  them  seem  to  take  for 
granted  the  existence  of  such  a  creature. 

The  second  explanation,  which  declares  that  composite  animals 


THE    WORD    NETER  63 

are  the  result  of  the  imagination  of  peoples  who  have  no  knowledge, 
or  at  all  events  a  defective  one,  of  the  common  facts  of  natural 
history  is  not  satisfactory,  for  the  simple  reason  that  composite 
animals  which  are  jDartly  animal  and  partly  human  in  their  powers 
and  characteristics  form  the  logical  link  between  animals  and  man, 
and  as  such  they  belong  to  a  certain  period  and  stage  of  develop- 
ment in  the  history  of  every  primitive  people.  If  we  think  for  a 
moment  we  shall  see  that  many  of  the  gods  of  Egypt  are  closely 
connected  with  this  stage  of  development,  and  that  comparatively 
few  of  them  Avere  ever  represented  wholly  in  man's  form. 
The  Egyptians  clung  to  their  representations  of  gods  in  animal 
forms  with  great  tenacity,  and  even  in  times  when  it  is  certain 
they  cannot  have  believed  in  their  existence  they  continued  to 
have  them  sculptured  and  |)ainted  upon  the  walls  of  their  temples ; 
curiously  enough,  they  do  not  seem  to  have  been  sensible  of  the 
ridicule  which  their  conservatism  brought  down  upon  them  from 
strangers. 

We  have  already  said  above  that  the  common  word  given  by 
the  Egyptians  to  God,  and  god,  and  spirits  of  every  kind,  and 
beings  of  all  sorts,  and  kinds,  and  forms,  which  were  supposed  to 

possess  any  superhuman  or  supernatural  power,  was  neter,     ^    , 

and  the  hieroglyph  which  is  used  both  as  the  determinative  of  this 

word  and  also  as  an  ideograph  is     |  .     Thus  we  have    |   or    |  Jj , 

"god,"  and  ^^^,  or  "]  |,  or  ^^l],  or  '^Cl  \>  "gods;"  the  plural  is 
sometimes  written  out  in  full,  e.g.,  ^  v  wj  '  •  ^^^  common  word 
for  "goddess"  is  netert,  which  can  be  written  T'^,  or  1  ^=>, 
or  I  ^=>;  sometimes  the  determinative  of  the  word  is  a  woman, 
J) ,  and  at  other  times  a  serpent,  e.g.  "1  ^=>  J)^  .     The  plural  is 

NETERiT,  I  ^^  ^4  ^  B\  '•  ^®  ^^^®  ^ow  to  cousidcr  what  object  is 
supposed  to  be  represented  by  |  ,  and  what  the  word  neter  means. 
In  Bunsen's  Egypt's  Place  (i.,  Nos.  556,  557,  623)  the  late  Dr.  Birch 
described  I  as  a  hatchet;  in  1872  Dr.  Brugsch  placed ^  T  among 
"objets  tranchants,  armes,"  in  his  classified  list  of  hieroglyphic 

1  Index  des  MeroglyjpJies  pTionetiques,  No.  39 i. 


64  THE   AXE   A   SYMBOL   OF   GOD 

characters  ;  thus  it  is  clear  that  the  two  greatest  masters  of  Egypt- 
ology considered  l  to  be  either  a  weapon  or  a  cutting  tool,  and,  in 
fact,  assumed  that  the  hieroglyphic  represented  an  axe-head  let  into 
and  fastened  in  a  long  wooden  handle.  From  the  texts  wherein 
the  hieroglyphics  are  coloured  it  is  tolerably  clear  that  the  axe-head 
was  fastened  to  its  handle  by  means  of  thongs  of  leather.  The 
earliest  axe-heads  were  made  of  stone,  or  flint  or  chert,  and  later  of 
metal,  and  it  is  certain  that  when  copper,  bronze,  and  iron  took  the 
place  of  stone  or  flint,  the  method  by  which  the  head  was  fastened 
to  the  handle  was  considerably  modified.  Recently  an  attempt  has 
been  made  to  show  that  the  axe,  | ,  resembled  in  outline  "  a  roll  of 
"  yellow  cloth,  the  loAver  part  bound  or  laced  over,  the  upper  part 
"  appearing  as  a  flap  at  the  top  probably  for  unwinding.  It  is 
"  possible,  indeed,  that  the  present  object  represents  a  fetish,  e.g., 
''  a  bone  carefully  wound  round  with  cloth  and  not  the  cloth 
"  alone." -^  But  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  no  evidence  for  the 
correctness  of  these  views  is  forthcoming.  Whether  the  hiero- 
glyphic I  was  copied  from  something  which  was  a  roll  of  cloth  or 
a  fetish  matters  little,  for  the  only  rational  determination  of  the 
character  is  that  which  has  already  been  made  by  Drs.  Birch  and 
Brugsch,  and  the  object  which  is  represented  by  |  is,  in  the 
writer's  opinion,  an  axe  and  nothing  else, 

Mr.  Legge  has  collected^  a  number  of  examples  of  the 
presence  of  the  axe  as  an  emblem  of  divinity  on  the  megaliths  of 
Brittany  and  in  the  prehistoric  remains  of  the  funeral  caves  of  the 
Marne,  of  Scandinavia,  and  of  America,  and,  what  is  very  much  to 
the  point,  he  refers  to  an  agate  cylinder  which  was  published  by 
the  late  Adrien  de  Longperier,  wherein  is  a  representation  of  a 
priest  in  Chaldaean  garb  ofl'ering  sacrifice  to  an  axe  standing 
upright  upon  an  altar.  Mr.  Legge  points  out  "that  the  axe 
"appears  on  these  monuments  not  as  the  representation  of  an 
"  object  in  daily  use,  but  for  religious  or  magical  purposes,"  and 
goes  on  to  say  that  this  is  proved  by  "the  fact  that  it  is  often 
"  found  as  a  pendant  and  of  such  materials  as  gold,  lead,  and  even 
"amber;  while  that  it  is  often  represented  with  the  peculiar 
"  fastenings  of  the  earlier  flint  weapon  shows  that  its  symbolic  use 
1  Griffith,  Hieroglyphs,  p.  46.  2  Proc,  Soc.  Bihl.  Arch.,  1899,  p.  310. 


THE   AXE   A   SYMBOL   OF   GOD  65 

"goes  back  to  the  neolithic  and  perhaps  the  palaeoHthic  age." 
He  is  undoubtedly  correct  in  thinking  that  the  use  of  the  stone  axe 
precedes  that  of  the  flint  arrow-head  or  flint  knife,  and  many  facts 
could  be  adduced  in  support  of  this  view.  The  stone  tied  to  the 
end  of  a  stick  formed  an  effective  club,  which  was  probably  the 
earliest  weapon  known  to  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  and  subse- 
quently man  found  that  this  weapon  could  be  made  more  effective 
still  by  making  the  stone  flat  and  by  rubbing  down  one  end  of  it 
to  form  a  cutting  edge.  The  earliest  axe-head  had  a  cutting  edge 
at  each  end,  and  was  tied  by  leather  thongs  to  the  end  of  a  stick 
by  the  middle,  thus  becoming  a  double  axe ;  examples  of  such  a 
weapon  appear  to  be  given  on  the  green  slate  object  of  the  archaic 
period  which  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum^  (Nos.  20,790, 
20,792),  where,  however,  the  axe-heads  appear  to  be  fixed  in 
forked  wooden  handles.  In  its  next  form  the  axe-head  has  only 
one  cutting  edge,  and  the  back  of  it  is  shaped  for  fastening  to 
a  handle  by  means  of  leather  thongs.  When  we  consider  the 
importance  that  the  axe,  whether  as  a  weapon  or  tool,  was  to 
primitive  man,  we  need  not  wonder  that  it  became  to  him  first 
the  symbol  of  physical  force,  or  strength,  and  then  of  divinity  or 
dominion.  By  means  of  the  axe  the  predynastic  Egyptians  cut 
down  trees  and  slaughtered  animals,  in  other  words,  the  weapon 
was  mightier  than  the  spirits  or  gods  who  dwelt  in  the  trees  and 
the  animals,  and  as  such  became  to  them  at  a  very  early  period 
an  object  of  reverence  and  devotion.  But  besides  this  the  axe 
must  have  been  used  in  sacrificial  ceremonies,  wherein  it  would 
necessarily  acquire  great  importance,  and  would  easily  pass  into 
the  symbol  of  the  ceremonies  themselves.  The  shape  of  the  axe- 
head  as  given  by  the  common  hieroglyphic  |  suggests  that  the 
head  was  made  of  metal  when  the  Egyptians  first  began  to  use  the 
character  as  the  symbol  of  divinity,  and  it  is  clear  that  this  change 
in  the  material  of  which  the  axe -head  was  made  would  make  the 
weapon  more  effective  than  ever. 

Taking  for  granted,  then,  that  the  hieroglyphic  T  represents 
an  axe,  A^e  may  be  sure  that  it  was  used  as  a  symbol  of  power  and 

^  See  my  History  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.,  p.  10,  where  it  is  figured  and  described. 
F 


66  THE   WORD   NETER 

divinity  by  the  predynastic  Egyptians  long  before  the  period  when 
they  were  able  to  write,  but  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  what 
they  called  the  character  or  the  axe  before  that  period.  In 
dynastic  times  they  certainly  called  it  neter  as  we  have  seen,  but 
another  difficulty  presents  itself  to  us  when  we  try  to  find  a  word 
that  will  express  the  meaning  Avhich  they  attached  to  the  word  ;  it 
is  most  important  to  obtain  some  idea  of  this  meaning,  for  at  the 
hase  of  it  lies,  no  doubt,  the  Egyptian  conception  of  divinity  or 
God.  The  word  neter  has  been  discussed  by  many  Egyptologists, 
but  their  conclusions  as  to  its  signification  are  not  identical. 
M.  Pierret  thought  in  1879  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  word  is 
■"  renewal,  because  in  the  mythological  conception,  the  god  assures 
^'himself  everlasting  youth  by  the  renewal  of  himself  in  engender- 
■"  ing  himself  perpetually."  ^  In  the  same  year,  in  one  of  the 
Hibbert  Lectures,  Renouf  declared  that  he  was  "  able  to  affirm 
^'  with  certainty  that  in  this  jDarticular  case  we  can  accurately 
"determine  the  primitive  notion  attached  to  the  word,"  i.e.,  to 
NUTAR  (neter).  Accordiug  to  him,  "  none  of  the  explanations 
"hitherto  given  of  it  can  be  considered  satisfactory,"  but  he 
thought  that  the  explanation  which  he  was  about  to  propose  would 
*'  be  generally  accepted  by  scholars,"  because  it  was  "  arrived  at  as 
"  the  result  of  a  special  study  of  all  the  published  passages  in  which 
^'  the  word  occurs."  ^  Closely  allied  to  nutar  (neter)  is  another 
word  nutra  (netra),  and  the  meaning  of  both  was  said  by  Renouf 
to  be  found  in  the  Coptic  rtoJUtTe  or  rfOJUi+,  which,  as  we  may 
see  from  the  passages  quoted  by  Tatham  in  his  Lexicon  (p.  310),  is 
rendered  by  the  Greek  words  tcr^^vg,  7rapdKkiqcn<^,  and  TrapaKaXelv. 
The  primary  meaning  of  the  word  rfOJUi+  appears  to  be  "  strong," 
and  having  assumed  that  neter  was  equivalent  in  meaning  to 
this  word,  Renouf  stated  boldly  that  neter  signified  "mighty," 
"  might,"  "  strong,"  and  argued  that  it  meant  Power,  "  which  is 
*'also  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  El."     We  may  note  in  passing 

1   "  Le  mot  par  lequel  on  rendait  I'idce  de  Dieu     |  ^   i      nuter,  signifie  au 

*'■  propre,   '  renouvellement,'  parce  que    dans  la  conception    mythologique,  le  dieu 
•'  s'assure  une  eternelle  jeunesse  par  le  renouvellement  de  lui-meme,  en  s'engendrant 
"  lui-meme  perpctuellement."    Essai  sur  la  Mijthologie  lEgypticnne,  Pai'is,  1879,  p.  S. 
~  ReUgioji  of  Ancient  Egypt,  p.  93. 


THE   WORD   NETER  67 

that  the  exact  meaning  of  "El,"  the  Hebrew  name  for  God,  is 
unknown,  and  that  the  word  itself  is  probably  the  name  of  an 
ancient  Semitic  deity. 

The  passages  which  were  quoted  to  prove  that  neter  meant 
"  strong,  strength,  power,"  and  the  like  could,  as  M.  Maspero  has 
said,^  be  explained  differently.  M.  Maspero  combats  rightly  the 
attempt  to  make  "strong"  the  meaning  of  neter  (masc),  or 
NETERiT  (fem.),  in  these  words :  "  In  the  expressions  '  a  town 
"  neterit,'  '  an  arm  neteri,'  ....  is  it  certain  that  '  a  strong  city,' 
"  ^  a  strong  arm,'  gives  us  the  primitive  sense  of  neter  ?  When 
"  among  ourselves  one  says  '  divine  music,'  '  a  piece  of  divine 
"  poetry,'  '  the  divine  taste  of  a  peach,'  '  the  divine  beauty  of  a 
"  woman '  [the  word]  divine  is  a  hyperbole,  but  it  would  be  a 
"  mistake  to  declare  that  it  originally  meant  '  exquisite '  because 
"  in  the  phrases  which  I  have  imagined  one  could  apply  it  as 
"  '  exquisite  music,'  '  a  piece  of  exquisite  poetry,'  '  the  exquisite 
"  taste  of  a  peach,'  '  the  exquisite  beauty  of  a  woman.'  Similarly 
"  in  Egyptian  '  a  town  netevit '  is  a  '  divine  town ' ;  '  an  arm 
"  neteri '  is  '  a  divine  arm,'  and  neteri  is  employed  metaphorically 
"  in  Egyptian  as  is  [the  word]  '  divine '  in  French,  without  its 
"  being  any  more  necessary  to  attribute  to  [the  word]  neteri  the 
"primitive  meaning  of  'strong,'  than  it  is  to  attribute  to  [the 
"  word]  '  divine  '  the  primitive  meaning  of  '  exquisite.'  The 
"  meaning  '  strong '  of  neteri,  if  it  exists,  is  a  derived  and  not  an 
"  original  meaning."  ^ 

The  view  taken  about  the  meaning  of  neter  by  the  late 
Dr.  Brugsch  was  entirely  different,  for  he  thought  that  the 
fundamental  meaning  of  the  word  was  "  the  operative  power  which 
"  created  and  produced  things  by  periodical  recurrence,  and  gave 
"  them  new  life  and  restored  to  them  the  freshness  of  youth  (die 
"  thatige  Kraft,  welche  in  periodischer  Wiederkehr  die  Dinge 
"  erzeugt  und  erschafft,  ihnen  neues  Leben  verleiht  und  die 
"  Jugendfrische  zuriickgiebt."  ^  The  first  part  of  the  work  from 
which  these  words  are  quoted  appeared  in  1885,  but  that  Dr. 
Brugsch   held   much   the    same  views  six  years  later  is    evident 

1  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'Archeologie  Sgyptiennes,  torn,  ii.,  p.  215. 

2  Maspero,  op.  cit.,  p.  215.  ^  Eeligion  und  Mythologie,  p.  93. 


68  THE   WORD   NETER 

from  the  following  extract  from  his  volume  entitled  Die  Aegypto- 
logie  (p.  166),  which  appeared  in  1891.  Referring  to  Renonf's 
contention  that  neter  has  a  meaning  equivalent  to  the  Greek 
Bvpafxt^,  he  says,  "  Es  liegt  auf  der  Hand,  dass  der  Gottesname  in 
*•  Sinne  von  Starker,  Miichtiger,  vieles  fur  sich  hat,  um  so  mehr 
"  als  selbst  leblose  Gegenstande,  wie  z.  B.  ein  Baustein,  adjek- 
"  tivisch  als  nutri  d.  h.  stark,  miichtig,  nicht  selten  bezeichnet 
"  werden.  Aber  so  vieles  diese  ErklUrung  fiir  sich  zu  haben 
"  schient,  so  wenig  stimmt  sie  zu  der  Thatsache,  dass  in  den 
"  Texten  aus  der  besten  Zeit  (XVIII  Dynastie)  das  Wort  nutr  als 
"  ein  Synonym  fiir  die  Vorstellung  der  Verjungung  oder  Erneue- 
"  rung  auftritt.  Es  diente  zum  Ausdruck  der  periodisch  wieder- 
"  kehrenden  Jugendfrische  nach  Alter  und  Tod,  so  dass  selbst  dem 
"  Menschen  in  den  altesten  Sarginschriften  zugerufen  wird,  er  sei 
"  fortan  in  einen  Gott  d.  h.  in  ein  Wesen  mit  jugendlicher  Frische 
"  umgewandelt.  Ich  lasse  es  dahin  gestellt  sein,  nach  welcher 
"  Richtung  hin  die  aufgeworfene  Streitfrage  zu  Gunsten  der  einen 
"  oder  der  anderen  AufFassung  entschieden  werden  wird ;  hier 
"  sei  nur  betont,  dass  das  Wort  |  nuh\  nute,  den  eigentlichen 
"  GottesbegrifF  der  alten  Aegypter  in  sich  schliesst  und  daher  einen 
"  ganz  besonderen  Aufmerksamkeit  werth  ist." 

In  this  passage  Dr.  Brugsch  substantially  agrees  with  Pierrot's 
views  quoted  above,  but  he  appears  to  have  withdrawn  from  the 
position  which  he  took  up  in  his  Religion  und  Mythologie,  wherein 
he  asserted  that  the  essential  meanins;  of  neter  was  identical  with 
that  of  the  Greek  <^vcrt?  and  the  Latin  "  natura."  ^  It  need  hardly 
be  said  that  there  are  no  good  grounds  for  such  an  assertion,  and 
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  eminent  Egyptologist  could  attempt 
to  compare  the  conceptions  of  God  formed  by  a  half-civilized 
African  people  with  those  of  such  cultured  nations  as  the  Greeks 
and  the  Romans. 

The  solution  of  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  meaning  for  neter 
is  not  brought  any  nearer  when  we  consider  the  vioAvs  of  such 
distinguished  Egyptologists  as  E.  de  Rouge,  Lieblein,  and  Maspero. 

1  "  Der  lubegi'iff  dieses  Wortes  deckt  sich  dalier  vollstiiudig  mit  der  ur- 
"  spriinglichen  Bedeutung  des  griechisclien  physis  und  des  lateinisclien  natura." 
(p.  93.) 


THE   WORD   NETER  69 

The  first  of  these  ia  commenting  on  the  passage     |  rjj     |   '^    ^-3 

(variant    |    ^   (jQ  -  )         '^^^  i   y  ^^  ?  which  he  translates  "  Dieu 

"  devenant  dieu  (en)  s'engendrant  lui-meme,"  says  in  his  excellent 
Ghrestomathie  Egijjptienne  (iii.  p.  24),  "  One  knows  not  exactly  the 
"  meaning  of  the  verb  miter,  which  forms  the  radical  of  the  word 
"  nuter,  '  god.'  It  is  an  idea  analagous  to  '  to  become,'  or  '  renew 
"  oneself,'  for  nuteri  is  applied  to  the  resuscitated  soul  which 
"  clothes  itself  in  its  immortal  form."  Thus  we  find  that  one  of 
the  greatest  Egyptologists  thinks  that  the  exact  meaning  of  neter 
is  unknown,  but  he  suggests  that  it  may  have  a  signification  not 
unlike  that  proposed  by  Pierret.  Prof.  Lieblein  goes  a  step 
further  than  E.  de  Rouge,  for  he  is  of  opinion  that  it  is  impossible 
to  show  the  first  origin  of  the  idea  of  God  among  any  people  hitherto 
known  historically.  "  When  we,  for  instance,  take  the  Indo- 
"  Europeans,  what  do  Ave  find  there  ?  The  Sanskrit  word  deva  is 
"  identical  with  the  Latin  deus,  and  the  northern  tivi,  tivar ;  as 
"  now  the  word  in  Latin  and  northern  language  signifies  God  it 
"  must  also  in  Sanskrit  from  the  beginning  have  had  the  same 
"  signification.  That  is  to  say,  the  Arians,  or  Indo-Europeans, 
"  must  have  combined  the  idea  of  God  with  this  word,  as  early  as 
"  when  they  still  lived  together  in  their  original  home.  Because, 
"  if  the  word  in  their  pre-historic  home  had  had  another  more 
"  primitive  signification,  the  wonder  Avould  have  happened,  that 
"  the  word  had  accidentally  gone  through  the  same  development 
"  of  signification  with  all  these  people  after  their  separation.  As 
"  this  is  quite  improbable,  the  word  must  have  had  the  significa- 
"  tion  of  God  in  the  original  Indo-European  language.  One  could 
"  go  even  farther  and  presume  that,  in  this  language  also,  it  was 
"  a  word  derived  from  others,  and  consequently  originated  from  a 
"  still  earlier  pre-historic  language.  All  things  considered  it  is 
"  possible,  even  probable,  that  the  idea  of  God  has  developed  itself 
"  in  an  earlier  period  of  languages,  than  the  Indo-European.  The 
"  future  will  perhaps  be  able  to  supply  evidence  for  this.  The 
"  science  of  languages  has  been  able  partly  to  reconstruct  an  Indo- 
''  European  pre-historic  language.  It  might  be  able  also  to 
"  reconstruct  a  pre-historic  Semitic,  and  a  pre-historic  Hamitic, 


70  THE   WORD   NETER 

"  and  of  these  three  pre-historic  languages,  whose  original  con- 
"  nexion  it  not  only  guesses,  but  even  commences  to  prove 
"  gradually,  it  will,  we  trust  in  time,  be  able  to  extract  a  still 
"  earlier  pre-historic  language,  which  according  to  analogy  might 
"  be  called  Noahitic,  When  we  have  come  so  far,  we  shall  most 
"  likely  in  this  pre-historic  language,  also  find  words  expressing 
"  the  idea  of  God.  But  it  is  even  jDOssible  that  the  idea  of  God 
"  has  not  come  into  existence  in  this  pre-historic  language  either. 
"  It  may  be  that  the  first  dawning  of  the  idea,  and  the  word  God 
"  should  be  ascribed  to  still  earlier  languages,  to  layers  of  languages 
''  so  deeply  buried  that  it  will  be  impossible  even  to  excavate 
"  them.  Between  the  time  of  inhabiting  ca^es  in  the  quaternian 
"  period,  and  the  historical  kingdoms,  there  is  such  a  long  space  of 
"  time,  that  it  is  difficult  to  entertain  the  idea,  that  it  was  quite 
"  devoid  of  any  conception  of  divinity,  so  that  this  should  first 
"  have  sprung  up  in  the  historical  time.  In  any  case  we  shall  not 
"  be  able  to  prove  historically  where  and  when  the  question  first 
"  arose,  who  are  the  superhuman  powers  whose  activity  we  see 
"  daily  in  nature  and  in  human  life.  Although  the  Egyptians  are 
"  the  earliest  civilized  people  known  in  history,  and  just  therefore 
"  especially  important  for  the  science  of  religion,  yet  it  is  even 
"  there  impossible  to  point  out  the  origin  of  the  conception  of  the 
"  deity.  The  oldest  monuments  of  Egypt  bring  before  us  the 
"  gods  of  nature  chiefly,  and  among  these  especially  the  sun. 
"  They  mention,  however,  already  early  (in  the  IVth  and  Vth 
"  Dynasties)  now  and  then  the  great  power,  or  the  great  God,  it 
"  being  uncertain  whether  this  refers  to  the  sun,  or  another  god  of 
"  nature,  or  if  it  was  a  general  appellation  of  the  vague  idea  of  a 
"  supernatural  power,  possibly  inherited  by  the  Egyptians.  It  is 
"  probably  this  great  God  indicated  on  the  monuments,  from  the 
"  the  IVth  Dynasty,  and  later  on,  who  has  given  occasion  to  the 
"  false  belief  that  the  oldest  religion  of  the  Egyptians  was  pure 
"  monotheism.  But  firstly,  it  must  he  observed,  that  he  is  not 
"  mentioned  alone  but  alongside  of  the  other  gods,  secondly,  that 
"  he  is  merely  called  '  The  great  God,'  being  otherwise  without 
"  distinguishing  appellations,  and  a  God  of  whom  nothing  else  is 
"  mentioned,  has,  so  to  speak,  to  use  Hegel's  language,  merely  an 


THE   WORD   NETER  71 

"  abstract   existence,    that   by  closer   examination   dissolves   into 
"  nothing." 

It  is  necessary  to  quote  Professor  Lieblein's  opinion  at  length 
because  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  discuss  the  earliest  idea  of  God  in 
connection  with  its  alleged  similarity  to  that  evolved  by  Aryan 
nations  ;  if,  however,  he  were  to  rewrite  the  passage  given  above  in 
the  light  of  modern  research  he  Avould,  we  think,  modify  many  of 
his  conclusions.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  sufficient  to  note 
that  he  believes  it  is  impossible  to  point  out  the  origin  of  the 
conception  of  the  deity  among  the  Egyptians.  The  last  opinion 
which  we  need  quote  is  that  of  M.  Maspero,  who  not  only  says 
boldly  that  if  the  word  netee  or  netri  really  has  the  meaning  of 
"  strong "  it  is  a  derived  and  not  an  original  meaning,  and  he 
prefers  to  declare  that  the  word  is  so  old  that  its  earliest  significa- 
tion is  unkno^v^l.  In  other  words,  it  has  the  meaning  of  god,  but 
it  teaches  us  nothing  as  to  the  primitive  value  of  this  word.  We 
must  be  careful,  he  says,  not  to  let  it  suggest  the  modern  religious 
or  philosophical  definitions  of  god  which  are  current  to-day,  for  an 
Egyptian  god  is  a  being  who  is  born  and  dies,  like  man,  and  is 
finite,  imperfect,  and  corporeal,  and  is  endowed  with  passions,  and 
virtues,  and  vices. ^  This  statement  is,  of  course,  true  as  regards 
the  gods  of  the  Egyptians  at  several  periods  of  their  history,  but  it 
must  be  distinctly  understood,  and  it  cannot  be  too  plainly  stated, 
that  side  by  side  with  such  conceptions  there  existed,  at  least 
among  the  educated  Egyptians,  ideas  of  monotheism  which  are  not 
far  removed  from  those  of  modern  nations. 

From  what  has  been  said  above  we  see  that  some  scholars  take 
the  view  that  the  word  neter  may  mean  "renewal,"  or  "strength," 
or  "  strong,"  or  "  to  become,"  or  some  idea  which  suggests  "renewal," 
and  that  others  think  its  original  meaning  is  not  only  unknown, 
but  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  it  out.  But  although  we  may  not 
be  able  to  discover  the  exact  meaning  which  the  word  had  in  j)re- 
dynastic  times,  we  may  gain  some  idea  of  the  meaning  which  was 
attached  to  it  in  the  dynastic  period  by  an  examination  of  a  few 
passages  from   the  hymns  and   Chapters  which  are  found  in  the 

1  Egyptian  Beligion,  by  J.  Lieblein,  Leipzig,  1884. 

"  La  Mytliologie  jSgyptienne  (iStudes  cle  Mythologie,  torn,  ii.,  p.  215). 


72 


THE   WORD   NETER 


various  versions  of  the  Book  of  the  Bead.  In  the  text  of  Pepi  1. 
(line  191)  we  have  the  words : — "  Behold  thy  son  Horus,  to  whom 
^'  thou  hast  given  birth.  He  hath  not  placed  this  Pepi  at  the 
'^'  head  of  the  dead,  but  he  hath  set  him  among  the  gods  neteru,'* 

U 


^^_  1  %  ^^mi'^^V*  ^^^  ^^^®  neteru,  "1  <^  "^  » 
must  be  an  adjective,  and  we  are  clearly  intended  to  understand 
that  the  gods  referred  to  are  those  which  have  the  attribute  of 
neteru;  since  the  "gods  neteru,"    |  |  |     |  <^  "vN  ,  are  mentioned  in 

opposition  to  "the  dead"  it  seems  as  if  we  are  to  regard  the 
gods  as  "  living,"  i.e.,  to  possess  the  quality  of  life.     In  the  text  of 

the  same  king  (line  419)  a  bdk  ?ie^er,  J  (1  ^^z:::^  ^^    |  <=:>,  i.e.,  a 

hawk  having  the  quality  of  neter  is  mentioned  ;  and  in  the  text  of 

Unas  (line  569)  we  read  of  Ijaui  netrui,  ^^,<^,^^,  or  the  two 

souls  which  possess  the  quality  of  nete7\  These  examples  belong 
to  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties.  Passing  to  later  dynasties,  i.e., 
the  XVIIIth  and  XlXth,  etc.,  we  find  the  following  examples  of 
the  use  of  the  words  neter  and  netri : — 


i-i±^i^^^ioi  TrZ-i\n\^' 


hun 
Boy 


\\ 
netri 

netri. 


aa 


O 
Iwli 


utet       se-mes     su  tchesef 


h-eir    of  eternity,  begetting  and  giving  birth 

to  himself. 


^  w 


I 


ta-d       til      em     dh-d  dti  halcai 

I  am  devoted  in  my  heart  Avithout       feigning 


111 


w 
netri 

0  thou  netri 


er  neteru 

more  than     the  gods. 

1  See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  J>y  Day,  Text,  p.  11,  1.  10. 

2  lUd.,  p.  43,  1.  4. 


THE   WORD   NETER 


73 


tchel  -  tu        re       pen      her 
Shall  be  said  this  chapter  over 


4. 


1 


neter    -    hid 
I  have  become  neter. 


I        AAAA/V\  ■<j 

I    *~ >     I     I       "^      I 

mahu  en        netrdt 

a  crown        of       netrdt. 


^\ 


e 


^i  ^    J^ 


dit  -  d    hlid     -     hud 
I  have  risen  up 


6. 


n 


AA/VW\ 
AAA/VV\ 


«& 


^t<(i 


1 


w 
em  &(i^  Tze^rz 

in     the  form  of  a  hawk     ^^ei^W. 


1 


Hefe?'  -  hud 


hJiu 


hud 


I  have  become  pure,     I  have  become  7ieter,      I  have  become  a 

spirit  (hhu), 


■user   -    hud  ha    -    hud 

I  have  become  strong,     I  have  become  a  soul  (&«). 


unen-f         neter  md        neteru      em       Neter -hhertet 

His  being      neter        with      the  gods    in  the  Neter-khertet. 
(or,  he  shall  be) 


1 


du  -  / 
He  shall 


netrd 
netrd 


hhat-f 
his  body 


^  6 


temtu 
all. 


1  See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  JDaij,  p.  80,  1.  10. 

2  I6icZ.,  p.  154,  1.  6.  3  IZ/iVI.,  p.  168,  1.  3.  ^  lud.,  p.  174,  1.  15. 
=  J6«VZ.,  p.  417,  1.  12.                                      6  jjj^,^  p^  419^  i,  7, 


74 


'•1 


THE    WORD   NETER 

netri  u         ha    -    h        em  ^;er  Sehut 

They  make  neter      thy  soul        in    the  house  of      Sebut. 


''■  ^^{L 


netri     -    /  })a   -  h         md        neteru 

He  makes  neter         thy  soul       like      the  gods. 


03 

0 


'1-11  l^fl  s-^ 

neter         netri         Icheper  tchesef  paut 

God         netri,        self-produced,    primeval  matter. 


Kow,  in  the  above  examples  it  is  easy  to  see  that  although  the 
words  "  strong  "  or  "  strength,"  when  applied  to  translate  neter  or 
netri,  give  a  tolerably  suitable  sense  in  some  of  them,  it  is  quite 
out  of  place  in  others,  e.g.,  in  No.  6,  where  the  deceased  is  made  to 
say  that  he  has  acquired  the  quality  of  neter,  and  a  spirit,  and  a 
soul,  and  is,  moreover,  strong;  the  word  rendered  "strong"  in 
this  passage  is  user,  and  it  expresses  an  entirely  different  idea  from 
neter.  From  the  fact  that  neter  is  mentioned  in  No.  1  in  connection 
with  eternal  existence,  and  self-begetting,  and  self-production,  and 
in  No.  11  with  self-production  and  primeval  matter,  it  is  almost 
impossible  not  to  think  that  the  word  has  a  meaning  which  is 
closely  allied  to  the  ideas  of  "  self-existence,"  and  the  power  to 
"  renew  life  indefinitely,"  and  "  self-production."  In  other  words, 
neter  appears  to  mean  a  being  who  has  the  power  to  generate  life, 
and  to  maintain  it  when  generated.  It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  ex- 
plain the  word  by  Coptic  etymologies,  for  it  has  passed  over  directly 
into  the  Coptic  language  under  the  forms  nouti  rfovi",  ^^^  noute 
rfOYTe,  the  last  consonant,  r,  having  disappeared  through  phonetic 
decay,  and  the  translators  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  from  that  language 
used  it  to  express  the  words  "  God  "  and  "  Lord."  Meanwhile,  until 
new  light  is  thrown  upon  the  subject  by  the  discovery  of  inscrip- 


1  See  my  Chapters  of  Covniuj  Forth  hij  Day,  Text,  p.  509,  1.  13. 

2  Ibid,  p.  511,  1.  13.  '  ^  Ibid,  p.  49,  1.  1. 


THE   PRIMITIVE   GOD  75 

tions  older  than  any  which  we  now  have,  we  must  be  content  to 
accept  the  approximate  meaning  of  neter  suggested  above. 

The  worship  of  the  gods  (neterii),  which  began  far  away- 
back  in  predynastic  times,  continued  through  the  archaic  and 
dynastic  periods,  and  lasted  until  the  LVth  or  Vth  century  of 
our  era ;  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  in  respect  of  some  of  them  the 
ideas  of  the  Egyptians  never  changed,  but,  as  regards  others,  their 
views  did  not  remain  as  constant  as  some  writers  would  have  us 
imagine.  In  the  earliest  days  every  village  community  in  Egypt 
had  its  local  god,  who  shared  the  good  or  evil  fortune  of  the 
community  to  which  he  belonged.  His  emblem  or  symbol  was 
carried  out  to  war,  and  was,  of  course,  present  at  aU  great  public 
gatherings  when  matters  connected  with  the  welfare  of  his  devotees 
were  discussed.  A  special  habitation  was  set  apart  for  him,  and 
its  upkeep  was  provided  for  out  of  common  funds.  As  the  riches 
of  the  people  of  the  \allage  increased,  the  rank  and  dignity  of  their 
god  kept  pace  with  them,  but  his  revenues  suffered  in  times  of 
scarcity,  and  defeat,  and  war ;  his  emblem  might  even  be  carried 
off  into  captivity  and  burnt,  or  smashed,  when,  of  course,  the  spirit 
which  dwelt  in  his  symbol  was  also  destroyed.  The  number  of 
such  early  gods  was  legion,  for  many  large  communities  possessed 
several  gods,  each  of  which  was  famed  locally  for  some  particular 
attribute.  When  a  man  left  one  villao;e  and  settled  in  another 
he  took  his  god  or  gods  with  him,  but  he  would  be  obliged  to 
acknowledge  the  god  of  the  village  or  city  in  which  he  had  made  his 
new  abode,  and  to  contribute  towards  the  maintenance  of  his  house 
and  its  small  compound.  The  reduction  in  the  number  of  the  gods 
of  Egypt  began  when  man  first  realized  that  certain  gods  were 
mightier  than  others,  for  he  ceased  gradually  to  worship  those 
who  had,  in  his  opinion,  failed  to  justify  his  belief  in  them,  and 
transferred  his  allegiance  to  the  gods  who  were  able  to  give  him 
the  most  help.  In  process  of  time  the  god  or  goddess  of  a  certain 
village  or  town  would  obtain  a  fame  and  reputation  for  power 
which  would  outrival  those  of  the  deities  of  the  neighbouring 
cities,  and  the  growth  of  the  worship  of  such  god  or  goddess  would 
be  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  decline  in  that  of  the  gods  in 
the  towns  round  about.     The  gods,  in  the  first  instance,  grew  by 


76  SELECTION   OF   GODS 

a  process  of  selection  out  of  the  spirits  who  were  well  disposed 
towards  man  and  were  helpful  to  him,  and  the  ''great  gods  "  of  the 
Egyptians  were  evolved,  practically,  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner. 
It  is  at  present  hopeless  to  attempt  to  enumerate  all  the  gods 
who  were,  from  first  to  last,  worshijDped  by  the  Egyptians,  for  it 
will  not  be  possible  to  do  this  until  every  text  extant  has  been 
published.  Meanwhile  an  examination  of  the  earliest  Egyptian 
religious  literature  known  to  us  proves  that  a  number  of  gods  who 
were  of  some  importance  in  the  polytheistic  system  of  the  Early 
Empire  dropped  out  from  it  long  before  the  period  of  the  New 
Empire,  and  thus  it  is  very  doubtful  if  Ave  shall  ever  be  able  to 
collect  the  names  of  all  the  gods  who  have  been  worshipped  in  the 
Valley  of  the  Nile  between  the  Archaic  and  Roman  periods,  whilst 
to  make  a  list  of  all  the  predynastic  gods  is  manifestly  impossible. 

Future  discoveries  in  Egypt  may  produce  texts  that  will  tell 
us  which  were  the  favourite  gods  in  the  archaic  period  and  give  us 
some  idea  as  to  the  pronunciation  of  their  names,  for  we  have 
reason  to  think  that  during  the  greater  part  of  that  period  the 
Egyptians  were  able  to  write.  If  ever  such  texts  are  brought  to 
light  we  shall  probably  find  that  the  gods  who  were  Avorshipped 
during  the  archaic  period  Avere  those  Avho  Avere  popular  in  the 
predynastic  period,  just  as  we  find  that  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians 
of  the  Middle  and  New  Empires  were  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
the  same  as  those  of  the  Egyptians  of  the  Early  Empire.  Speaking 
generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Egyptians  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  dynastic  period  of  their  history  invented  feAv  ncAv  gods,  and 
that  they  were  Avell  content  to  Avorship  such  deities  as  Avere  known 
to  their  ancestors ;  Ave  know  that  they  admitted,  at  times,  foreign 
gods  into  the  assembly  of  the  old  Egyptian  gods,  but  the  religious 
texts  prove  that  they  Avere  never  alloAved  to  usurp  the  functions  of 
the  indigenous  gods.  Political  and  other  reasons  might  secure  for 
them  a  certain  amount  of  recognition  in  the  country  generally,  and 
the  people  of  the  cities  Avhere  their  emblems  and  statues  found 
resting-places  treated  them  Avith  the  easy  toleration  Avhich  is  so 
marked  a  characteristic  of  many  countries  in  the  East ;  but  as  soon 
as  such  reasons  disajDpeared  the  foreign  gods  Avere  quietly  ignored, 
and  in  a  short  time  their  Avorship  Avas  forgotten.     This  statement  is 


GODS    OF   THE   EARLIEST   DYNASTIES         77 

not  intended  to  apply  to  the  gods  who  Avere  introduced  from  one 
city  or  district  of  Egypt  into  another,  for  we  know  that  the 
Egyptian  priesthood  and  people  of  a  given  city  were  ready  to  show 
hospitality  to  almost  any  god  of  any  town,  or  city,  or  district,  pro- 
vided that  he  belonged  to  the  same  comjniny  as  that  of  which  the 
chief  local  god  was  a  member. 

We  have,  unfortunately,  no  long  connected  religious  texts  in 
the  forms  in  which  they  must  have  existed  under  the  first  four 
dynasties,  and  we  cannot  therefore  say  what  gods  were  worshipped 
during  that  period.  There  is,  as  has  been  shown  elsewhere,^  good 
reason  for  believing  that  some  parts  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  were 
revised  or  edited  during  the  early  part  of  the  period  of  the  1st 
Dynasty,  and  if  this  be  so  we  may  assume  that  the  religious  system 
of  the  Egyptians  as  revealed  in  the  texts  of  a  much  later  time  closely 
resembled  that  which  was  in  existence  in  the  later  part  of  the 
archaic  period,  i.e.,  during  the  first  three  dynasties.  Under  the  Vth 
and  VI th  Dynasties  we  touch  firmer  ground,  and  we  find  abundant, 
though  not  complete,  materials  for  the  study  of  the  gods  of  Egypt 
and  their  attributes  in  the  lengthy  hieroglyphic  texts  which  were 
inscribed  inside  the  pyramid  tombs  of  Unas,  Teta,  Pejoi  I.,  Mer-en- 
Ra-Mehti-em-sa-f,  and  Pepi  II.  An  examination  of  these  texts 
reveals  the  existence  of  an  established  theological  system  in  Egypt, 
and  we  find  that  even  at  that  time  the  literature  in  which  it  was, 
more  or  less,  expounded,  contained  innumerable  layers  of  religious 
thought  and  expressions  of  belief  which  belonged  to  periods  many 
of  which  must  have  been  separated  by  long  intervals  of  time.  The 
gods  are  mentioned  in  such  a  way  as  to  prove  that  the  writers  of 
the  texts,  or  at  least  the  copyists,  assumed  that  the  reader  would 
be  well  acquainted  with  the  subject  matter  of  the  compositions,  and 
from  first  to  last  neither  explanation  nor  gloss  is  to  be  found  in 
them.  The  texts  are,  of  course,  sepulchral,  and  the  greater  number 
of  the  gods  mentioned  in  them  are  referred  to  in  their  characters 
as  gods  who  deal  with  the  souls  of  the  dead  in  the  world  beyond 
the  grave. 

The  Sun-god  Ra  and  the  gods  of  his  cycle,  and  Osiris,  the  god 
and  judge  of  the  dead,  and  the  gods  of  his  cycle,  have  definite 

1  See  iny  Boole  of  the  Dead,  London,  1901,  vol.  i.,  p.  xxxiii. 


78  GODS    OF   THE   ARCHAIC   PERIOD 

positions  and  duties  assigned  to  them,  and  it  is  very  clear  that  both 
the  texts  which  describe  these  and  the  ceremonies  which  were 
performed  in  connection  with  the  words  recited  by  the  priests  were, 
even  under  the  Vth  Dynasty,  extremely  ancient.  Moreover,  it  is 
certain  that  the  religious  texts  in  use  for  fimeral  purposes  under 
that  dynasty  are  substantially  those  which  were  compiled  several 
centuries  before.  We  may  note  in  passing  that  the  funeral  books 
were  edited  by  the  priests  of  Annu  or  Ann,  i.e.,  Heliopolis,  and  as 
a  result  they  exhibit  traces  of  the  influence  of  the  theological 
opinions  of  the  great  priestly  college  of  that  city ;  but  at  bottom 
the  views  and  beliefs  which  may  be  deduced  from  them,  and  the 
fundamental  conceptions  to  which  they  give  expression  are  the 
products  of  the  minds  of  the  predynastic,  indigenous  Egyptians. 
To  the  consideration  of  the  Heliopolitan  religious  system  we  shall 
return  later,  and  we  may  therefore  pass  on  to  the  enumeration  of 
the  principal  gods  who  are  made  known  to  us  by  the  Pyramid 
Texts  at  Sakkara.  Among  the  great  gods  who  were  certainly 
worshipped  in  the  early  archaic  period  may  be  mentioned  : — 

Ptah  (Teta  88)  °  |     ^em,^  or  Horus  (Mer-en-Ra  454) 


/WVW\    J 


Nu  (Unas  199) 

Net,  or  Neith  (Unas  67) 

Ra  {passim)  O 

Het-Heru  (Hathor) 


Kheper  j  (Unas  444)  ^z^  g 
Kheprer)  (PepiII.S56)  -crib's ^ 
Khnemu  (Unas  556)  9^ 

Sebek  (Unas  565)  [1  J 


Of  these  gods  Heru,  or  Horus,  was  the  hawk-god,  i.e.,  the 
spirit  and  personification  of  the  "height"  of  heaven ;  Kheper  was 
the  beetle-god ;  Khnemu  the  ram-god ;  and  Sel^ek  the  crocodile- 
god  ;  Net  or  Neith  was  originally  a  wood-spirit,  Ra  and  Ptah  were 
two  forms  of  the  Sun-god,  and  Nu  Avas  the  watery  mass  of  heaven 

1  Or,  OO  (Unas,  399),  or  ^^^  ^  (Teta,  78). 

2  Or,  ^     (Unas,  272). 

3  Or,  ^  ^^  Heru-ur,  "  Horus  the  elder  "  (Unas,  358). 


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS 


79 


in  Avhicli  he  lived.  With  Ra  and  Kheper  the  priests  of  Heliopolis 
associated  the  form  of  the  Sun-god  which  was  specially  worshipped 
in  their  city,  and  thus  we  have  mentioned  the  compound  gods 
Ra-Tem    ©^    (Unas    216,    224,    Mer-en-Ra    458),    and    Tem- 

^^^P^^^'^  ^  S  ^  ^  (^^Pi  II-  ^^2).  In  the  text  of  Unas 
(line  626)  Sebek  is  styled  "  son  of  Net,"  ^  ^  "V^,  and  he  is  also 
called  "lord  of  Barn,"  J  "J^ -<s>- ^  [v^  (line  565);  but  if  the 
XVIIIth  Dynasty  texts  be  correct  the  name  of  this  place  is  mis- 
spelt, and  in  any  case  it  must  be  identical  Avith  the  Bakhau, 
J  ^  m  ^^  ^  S  '  ^^'  ^^C)untain  of  the  Sunrise  of  Chapter  cviii. 
of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead.  The  following  is  a  list  of  the  other 
principal  gods  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts : — 


Ahu  (Pepi  II.  850) 


r^^^-^  t\  1 


Aker  (Unas  498,  614,  Teta  309) 


Api  (Unas  487)         .  I]  D 

Ap-uat  (Unas  187)    V  f^^ 

Amen  (Unas  557) 

Ament  (Unas  557) 
Am-henth-f  (Pepi  I.  666) 


iii)f  mn 


Am-sepa-f  (Pepi  I.  666) 


S'ttttS 


Amsu  or  Min  (Unas  377) 
Amset  (Teta  60,  197)    h  |\ 


Ana  (Unas  272,  275)    H    (j    j^ 

Anpu  (Unas  71,  207,  219)     ^ 
An-mut-f  (Pepi  11.  772) 


An-tcher-f  (Pepi  I.  651) 
Akhet-nen-tha  (Teta  307) 

t\     ^     /WV\AA    "\      n        f\ 

1  ^  /wwv^    0     1   "^ 

Asar,  Osiris  (passim)  A 

Ast,  Isis  (Unas  181)  A 

Asken  (Pepi  II.  1324)  t\  ^ 
xiter-asfet  (Pepi  II.  980) 


f 


1  Ahu   appears  to  be  identical  with 
Pepi  II.,  1.  1320. 


Ankh  (Pepi  I.  672) 


^=^- 


,  who  is  Amsu  or  Min  -aofc-  ;    see 


80 


GODS   OF   THE   PYRAMID   TEXTS 


I-en-lier-pes  (Unas  392) 


Ualm  (Teta  333)    f{lfW 
Ur-sheps-f  (Pepi  I.  671) 


^^.    The 
variants     are      ^^^^  Vi>  (1 1 


Urt  (Unas  272) 
Urt-hekau  (Unas  269) 


V 


Usert  (Unas  229)         ^  "]  P  "T 
Uthes  (Pepi  II.  976) 
Ba  (Mer-en-Ra  784)     o^ 
Baba  (Unas  532)  J  ^  J  1 

Babi  (Unas  644,  647)  J^  J  (]() 
Baabu  (Pepi  I.  568)  J  "^f)  J^ 
Babua  (Pepi  I.  604)  J  "^  J^(]' 

Bastet  (Pepi  L  569)  JP"^^"' 
Ba-ashem-f  (Mer-en-Ra  784) 


^  Ment  (Pepi  11.  849)    =  \ 

°    '  '^     Mentef  (Pepi  II.  1228) 


D 

AA/\AAA 


I    II 
III     -^^ 


Pent  (Unas  280) 
Pesetchet  (Unas  417) 

Maat-Khnemu(PepiI.445)   ^   Q 
Maat  (Unas  220)  ^ 


Menth  (Mer-en-Ra  784)  " 


Meht-urt  (Unas  427,  623) 


Meht-urt  (Unas  427,  623) 

cxzzx:     fwv\/V\  "^^^^^^^ 

A.AAAAA  _JX_~^ 


/VW\AA 


Em-khent-maati  (Pepi  I.  645) 
Em-khent-maati  (Pepi  I.  645) 


^      -C2>- 


<A 


Meskha  (Unas  567)  |  ^  ^  ^ 
Meskhaat  (Pepi  I.  671) 


Metchetat  (Pepi  11.  956) 

Nau  (Unas  557)  ^^-^  (]  ^ 

Nubt  (Unas  479)     f^  J  ^  >^-J 
Nebt-het  (Unas  220) 


Nefer-Tem  (Unas  395)         J 


clinic 


1  This  god  is  said  to  have  a  "  red  ear  "  ^"^  ^.  ~  Var.  ^  p  ^ 


GODS   OF   THE   PYRAMID   TEXTS  81 

Hem  (Pepi  I.  641)  \a^  " 

Hemen  (Pepi  H.  850)  §  '^^^  ^ 

/N    AA/WV\ 


<0        C 1 


Enen   (Unas    557))        -j--j- 
Enenet  (Unas  240))  ;].1|, 

Xekhben  (Unas  459)  XJo 

Nehebkau  (Unas  559) 

Nekhebet  (Mer-en-Ra  762) 
Neht  (Unas  601) 

A/V> 

Nesert  (Unas  269) 

— M '— '         ^ 

Neti  (Unas  279)  cr^lf^ 

Netetthab  (Unas  598)  ^  ^  |fl  'O' 
Renenut  (Unas  441) 

Rurutha  (Pepi  H.  976,  979) 

Hepath  (Pepi  I.  636) 

Henena  (Pepi  I.  636)    ral|.;^(ji 
Hetchhetch  (Pepi  I.  173) 

Hettenuut  (Teta,  332) 

Hu  (Unas  439)  ^  ^  -^ 

Hep  (Unas  187)  |   ^ 

Hep-ur  (Unas  481)  ^    ° 
Hep  (Teta  60,  197) 


Id 


Hen-pesetchti  (Teta  309) 

Hent  (Unas  417)  ^  ^  ^ 
Hunt  (Teta  357)  |  +  ^  ^ 
Heru  (passim)  ^^ 

Heru-aah  (Teta  365)    ^^ 
Heru-am-henu  (Unas  211) 

Heru-khent-peru  (Unas  202) 

^  m  n 

H  eru-kliesbetcb-maat  i(Unas3  69) 
Hem-khuttha  (Unas  471) 

Heru-Sept  (Unas  465)  ^P/\^ 
Heru-tesher-maati  (Unas  369) 

Hem-Tat  (Unas  218) 


Heru-khart  (Teta  301) 
Hra-f-ha-f  (Pepi  I.) 


Her-hepes  (Unas  226)    "^    §    ° 

< — >  A.  — *■ 


82 


GODS    OF   THE   PYRAMID   TEXTS 


Hesat  (Pepi  II.  976) 


Hesmennu  (Mer-en-Ra  670) 


Het-Hert  (Unas  575) 
Heka  (Pepi  I.  583) 
Heqet  (Pepi  I.  570) 


U 

A 


Q  n  '^^ 


Khaata  (Unas  536)  m  ^ 

Khebetch  (Unas  434)     ®  J  ^ 

Khent-Amenti  (Unas  201)  ^  o<&= 
Khent-maati  (Unas  218) 

Khnemu  (Unas  556,  Pepi  I.  455) 
Khensu  (Unas  510)     ®  -^^% 

A/WV\A  ll 

Khensu-Sept  (Unas  588) 

Saa  (Unas  439)     [1  (1  ^  "^  k 

Sathet  (Pepi  I.  297)  [1  (]  ^^^ 

Seb  (Unas  234)  "^  J 

Sephu-urt  (Pepi  II.  976) 

Sept  (Unas  219)  Aft 


Sma-ur  (Unas  280) 


Smentet  (Teta  355)  ^ 

Sunth  (Pepi  II.  854)  — ^ 

Seref-ur  (Teta  309)  p^ 

Serqet  (Pepi  I.  647) 
Serqet-lietu  (Teta  207) 


A  ^ 

Sehepu  (Pepi  I.  685)  ^^  ^  □ 
Sekhemf  (Pepi  II.  978) 

Sekhen-ta-en-ur  (Unas  281) 


Sekhet  (Unas  390) 
Sashsa  (Pepi  II.  975) 


p 


Seker  (Pepi  I.  641) 

Seksen  (Pepi  I.  650) 

Set  (Unas  6) 
Sethasetha  (Pepi  I.  265) 

Seththa  (Pepi  I.  259) 
Shu  (Unas  185) 


1  Var. 


Pepi  I.,  352. 


2  He  is  identified  with  rlU  Ij    °   ^=^  %  I  ^  in  Pepi  II.,  1320. 

3  Var.  [l^^PcO^. 


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS 


83 


Shesmu  (Unas  511) 


rxn 


r-^r-i 


Sheskhentet  (Unas  390)         ^ 


Kenur  (Pepi  II.  979) 


^ 


Kasut  (Pepi  11.  975) 

Qebhsennuf  (Teta  60)  1 1||  k^ 

Tait  (Teta  376)     ^ 

Teba  (Unas  428) 

Tefen  (Unas  453) 

Tefnut  (Unas  453) 

Tern  (Unas  207) 


J^^ 


AAAA/V\ 
A/V\^AA 


Tem-kheprer  (Pepi  II.  662) 

Tatet  (Unas  67)  D 

Tuamutef  (Teta  60) 

Tenanu  (Pepi  I.  269)    ^v^AAAA  q 

Tenten  (Unas  280) 

Telmti  (Unas  228) 

Tchent  (Mer-en-Ra  773)    -^  ^ 
Tchenteru  (Teta  198) 


A^\AAA     A/VWVV 


Tchenttchenter  (Pepi  I.  301) 


^ 


Besides    the    above    gods    are    mentioned    the    "  angel    (or 
messenger)  of  the  two  gods,"  y{    |  |  (Unas  408) ;  and  the  "  Ashem 


that    dwelleth    within    Aru,"    ^ 


^ 


[^£^^    (Teta    351). 


Allusions  are  made  to  the  following  important  stars 

/WV\/iA 

Nekhekh  (Teta  218),  ^^^  □ 


D    ^ 


Septet       (Teta  349),  P  /\  ^  ^,  i.e.,  the  Dog  Star. 
Sah  (Teta  349),  f1  ^  |^  ^ ,  i.e.,  Orion. 

Sehut  (Pepi  11.  857),  [1|^. 

The  Pyramid  Texts  show  that  in  addition  to  the  gods  already- 
enumerated  there  existed  certain  classes  of  beings  to  whom  were 
attributed  the  nature  of  the  gods,  e.g.  : — 

The  Afu  (Pepi  II.  951),  — 
The  Utennu  (Pepi  II.  951), 


AAAAAA 

ODD 


84  OTHER   DIVINE   BEINGS 

The  Urshu  of  Pe  (Pepi  11.  849),  ^  oa  [S 

The  Urshu  of  Nekhen  (Pepi  II.  849),  ^  oo  p 

The  Henmemet  (Unas  211),  |  /ww^  ^^^^  ^^"^  m  '  • 

The    Set    beings,    superior   and    inferior,    (Pepi    II.    951), 


P 


^^^     '^   tk     /I\ 


The  Shemsu  Heru  (Pepi  I.  166),  ^  ^  ^ 


Of  the  functions  of  the  Afu  and  Utennu  nothing  whatever  is 
known.  The  Urshu,  i.e.,  the  Watchers,  of  Pe  and  Nekhen  may 
have  been  groups  of  Avell-known  gods,  who  Avere  supposed  to 
"  watch  over  "  and  specially  protect  these  cities  ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  may  only  have  been  the  messengers,  or  angels,  of  the 
souls  of  Pe  and  Nekhen.  The  Henmemet  beings  are  likewise  a 
class  of  divine  beings  about  whom  we  have  no  exact  information. 
In  certain  texts  they  are  mentioned  in  connection  with  gods  and 
men  in  such  a  manner  that  they  are  supposed  to  represent 
"  unborn  generations,"  but  this  rendering  will  not  suit  many  of  the 
passages  in  which  the  Avord  occurs,  and  in  those  in  which  it  seems 
to  do  so  many  other  hypothetical  meanings  would  fit  the  context 
just  as  well.  The  passage  in  which  the  Set  beings  are  referred  to 
must  belong  to  the  period  when  the  god  Set  was  regarded  as  a 
beneficent  being  and  a  god  who  was,  with  Horus,  a  friend  and  helper 
of  the  dead.  The  text  quoted  above  shows  that,  like  Horus,  Set 
was  supposed  to  be  the  head  of  a  company  of  divine  beings  with 
attributes  and  characteristics  similar  to  those  of  himself,  and  that 
this  company  was  divided  into  two  classes,  the  upper  and  the 
lower,  or  perhaps  even  the  celestial  and  the  terrestrial.  Last  must 
be  mentioned  the  Shemsu  Heru,  or  the  "Followers  of  Horus,"  to 
whom  many  references  are  made  in  funeral  literature ;  their 
primary  duties  were  to  minister  to  the  god  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  but 
they  were  also  supposed  to  help  him  in  the  performance  of  the 
duties  which  he  undertook  for  the  benefit  of  the  dead.  In  the 
religious  literature  of  the  Early  Empire  they  occupy  the  place  of 

the   "Mesniu, '  0  1   .^^   ^  ^f  '  >  ^f  Horus  of  Behutet,   the  modern 


THE    GOD   OF   FOUR   FACES  85 

Edfu,  i.e.,  the  workers  in  metal,  or  blacksmiths,  who  are  supposed 
to  have  accompanied  this  god  into  Egypt,  and  to  have  assisted  him 
by  their  weapons  in  establishing  his  supremacy  at  Behutet,  or  Edfu. 
The  exploits  of  this  god  will  be  described  later  on  in  the  section 
treating  of  Horus  generally. 

In  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line  419)  Ave  have  a  reference  to  a  god 
with  four  faces  in  the  following  words : — "  Homage  to  thee,  0  thou 
"  who  hast  four  faces  which  rest  and  look  in  turn  upon  what  is  in 

"  Kenset,^  and  who  bringest  storm !      Grant  thou  unto  this 

"  Pepi  thy  two  fingers  which  thou  hast  given  to  the  goddess  Nefert, 
"  the  daughter  of  the  great  god,  as  messenger fs]  from  heaven  to 
"  earth  when  the  gods  make  their  appearance  in  heaven.  Thou 
"  art  endowed  with  a  soul,  and  thou  dost  rise  [like  the  sun]  in  thy 
''  boat  of  seven  hundred  and  seventy  cubits.^  Thou  hast  carried  in 
"  thy  boat  the  gods  of  Pe,  and  thou  hast  made  content  the  gods  of 
"  the  East.  Carry  thou  this  Pepi  with  thee  in  the  cabin  of  thy 
''boat,  for  this  Pepi  is  the  son  of  the  Scarab  which  is  born  in 
"  Hetepet  beneath  the  hair  of  the  city  of  lusaas  the  northern,  and 
"he  is  the  offspring  of  Seb.  It  is  he  who  was  between  the  legs  of 
"  Khent-maati  on  the  night  wherein  he  guarded  (?)  bread,  and  on 
"  the  night  wherein  he  fashioned  the  heads  of  arrows.  Thou  hast 
"  taken  thy  spear  which  is  dear  to  thee,  thy  pointed  weapon  which 
"  thrusteth  down  river  banks,  with  a  double  point  like  the  darts  of 
"  Ra,  and  a  double  haft  like  the  claws  of  the  goddess  Maftet." 

Throughout  the  Pyramid  Texts  frequent  mention  is  made  of 
one  group,  or  of  two  or  three  groups,  of  nine  gods.  Thus  in  Unas 
(line  179)  we  read  of  *' bowing  low  to  the  ground  before  the  nine 

gods,"  |p<c=:>  =?^  ^  mniiTi'  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^'^  ^^^  **-*^^ 

that  the  king's  bread  consists  of  "the  word^  of  Seb  which  cometh 

IJ    ~    ~    ^-^       AAA/W\  • 

1        U  — H—    P^-^"^ 

3     ^^  tchet  means  literally  "  word,"  but  it  often  is  used  to  express  "  thing," 
"matter,"  like  the  Hebrew  1^1. 


86        PAUT    OR    SUBSTANCE    OF    THE    GODS 


forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  nine  male  gods,"  ^°^  ^^w^  ^^  J 

''^^^"^  A.WWV  I  I  I  j]  I  II  1  JN^^^^v-  '^^^  o^^  Seshaa,  I  rm  "^^  1] , 
is  said  in  line  382  to  have  been  "  begotten  by  Seb  and  brought  forth 

by  the  nine  gods,"  .>  ]  -\  h^J  1^^11111111,; 
and  in  line  592  Ra  is  said  to  be  the  "chief  of  the  nine  gods," 
n  '^^i^  O  ?  ll  11  M  M T  From  several  passages  (e.g.,  Unas  251) 
we  learn  that  one  company  of  nine  gods  was  called  the  "  Great," 
Tnmi  M  ^"^'  ^^^  ^^^*  another  company  was  called  the  "Little," 
TmniTI  ^^ '  ^^^^  ^^^®  "  ^^^®  »^^^  ^^  Horns "  are  spoken 
of  side  by  side  with  "the   gods,"  i„  p—  IH  0^^  V 

imnni  i  ^  '^  ^^^^^  ^'^^^'  ^^^^*  whether  this  group  is  to 
be  connected  with  the  Great  or  Little  company  of  gods  cannot  be 
said.  A  double  group  of  nine  gods  is  frequently  referred  to,  e.g., 
in  Teta,  line  67,  where  it  is  said,  "  The  eighteen  gods  cense  Teta, 

and  his  .noutl.  is  P-e,"  ^  ^^  ^^^^1^^^=]=1^=]^=]=]=]^T  (fi] 

v:>  J  ;  and  in  Pepi  I.,  line  273,  where  we  read  that  the 

'  two  lips  of  Meri-Ra  are  the  eighteen  gods/'   I     cs::;  f 


©  nn  n  K<N 


mmnmmiin '  ^^^  again  in  Kne  407,  Avhere  Pepi  I.  is 
said  to  be  "  with  the  eighteen  gods  in  Qebhu,"  and  to  be  the 
"  fashioner  of  the  eighteen  gods,"  |  "^  11111111111111lil1 

kdil^(EEI°^1-^±111111111111111111. 

We  may  jDerhaps  assume  that  the  eighteen  gods  include  the  Great 
and  the  Little  companies  of  the  gods,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  as 
"male  and  female  gods"  are  mentioned"-^  in  the  text  of  Teta,  nine 
of  the  eighteen  gods  may  be  feminine  counterparts  of  the  other 
nine,  who  must  therefore  be  held  to  be  masculine.  But  the  texts 
of  Teta  (line  307)  and  Pepi  I.  (line  218)  show  that  there  was  a 
third  company  of  nine  gods  recognized  by  the  priests  of  Helio- 


1  Variant  0^0^;  Teta,  1.  253. 

1  I  ve_i  J  /vwwN  1  I  I  J^  (=2)  _Hi^  ->  ^  ^  ' 


COMPANIES    OF   THE    GODS  87 

polisj    and    Ave     find    all    three     companies     represented     thus : 

minniimnnnnimn- 

The  Egyptian  word  here  rendered  "  company "  is  pauti  or 
pautj  which  may  be  written  either  D  A^  v^  1^  or  ®,  and  the 
meaning  usually  attached  to  it  has  been  "  nine."  It  is  found  in 
texts  subsequent  to  the  period  of  the  pyramids  at  Sakkara  thus 
written: — ^^  yj^f^  |  |  '  i^*^^*^  neteru,  '^ jpciut  of  the  gods";  the 
double  company  of  the  gods  is  expressed  by  A^  '^^  vi>  ^  7^^  X  r^ 

pautti,  or  we  may  have  ^  \\\  ^„  ^  ...T  ^^  ^^,  paut  neteru  dat 
paut  neteru  netcheset,  i.e.,  "the  Great  company  of  gods  and  the 
Little  company  of  the  gods."  The  fact  that  a  company  of  gods  is 
represented  by  nine  axes,  |  ll  ]  ]|  |  ||j  ^^s  led  to  the  common 
belief  that  a  company  of  the  gods  contained  nine  gods,  and  for 
this  reason  the  word  p)C(ut  has  been  explained  to  mean  "  nine."  It 
is  quite  true  that  the  Egyptians  frequently  assigned  nine  gods  to 
the  paut,  as  we  may  see  from  such  passages  as  Unas  235/  and 
especially  from  line  283,  where  it  is  said,  "  Grant  thou  that 
this   Unas   may   rule    the  nine,    and  that   he    may  complete   the 

company  of  the  gods,"  A  ^^^  (]  ^  zl  T  f  ^  []  f]]  °  """§'4^  " 
M  Mil  Mr  But  the  last  quoted  passage  proves  that  a.  paut  of 
the  gods  might  contain  more  than  nine  divine  beings,  for  it  is  clear 
that  if  the  intent  of  the  prayer  was  carried  out  the  jxtut  referred 
to  in  it  would  contain  ten,  king  Unas  being  added  to  the  nine 
gods.  Again,  in  a  litany  to  the  gods  of  the  Great  company  given 
in  the  Unas  text  (line  240  ff.)  we  see  that  the  paiit  contains  Tem, 
Shu,  Tefnutr-Seb,  Nut,  Isis,  Set,  Nephthys,  Thoth,  and  Horus, 
i.e.,  ten  gods,  without  counting  the  deceased,  who  wished  to  be 
added  to  the  number  of  the  gods.  In  the  text  of  Mer-en-Ra 
(line  205)  the  paut  contains  nine  gods,^  and  it  is  described  as  the 


^^  <2>- 


88  COMPANIES   OF   THE   GODS 

"  Great  jja?<^  which  is  in  Annu"  (Heliopolis),  whilst  in  the  text  of 
Pepi  11.  (line  669)  the  same  ]jaut  is  said  to  contain  Tern,  Shu, 
Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Osiris-Khent-Amenti,  Set,  Horus,  Ra, 
Khent-maati,  and  Uatchet,  i.e.,  tivelve  gods.  Similarly  the  gods  of 
the  Little  paut  are  more  than  nine  in  number,  and  in  Unas  (line 
253  f.)  they  are  thus  enumerated  : — Rat,     ,  the  dweller  in  Annu, 

|l-|j-  |£,  the  dweller  in  Antchet,         ^°^7  ^^^^  dweller  in  Het- 

Serqet,        J  ^ ,    the    dweller   in   the    divine    palace,       |     Lj ,    the 

dweller  in  Hetch-pafir,    I  A^         ,  the  dweller  in  Orion,       d,  the 


dweller  in  Tep,     ^,  the  dweller  in  Het-ur-ka,    ^    ^^^  5^  ©>  ttie 


dweller  in  Unnu  of  the  South,  -^^  X ,  the  dweller  in  Unnu  of  the 
North,  ^"^. 

Thus  the  Little  j;(X?t^  contained  eleven  gods,  not  counting  the 
deceased  who  desired  to  be  added  to  their  number.  The  fact  that 
the  2^cint  contained  at  times  more  than  nine  gods  is  thus  explained 
by  M.  Maspero  ^  :  "  The  number  nine  was  the  original  number, 
"  but  each  of  the  nine  gods,  especially  the  first  and  the  last,  could 
"  be  developed."  Thus  if  it  was  desired  to  add  the  god  Amen  of 
the  Theban  triad  to  the  jjaut  of  Heliopolis,  he  could  be  set  at  the 
head  of  it  either  in  the  place  of  Temu,  the  legitimate  chief  of  the 
pant,  or  side  by  side  with  him.  Mut,  the  consort  of  Amen,  might 
be  included  in  the  paut,  but  Amen  and  Mut  would  together  only 
count  as  one  god.  Similarly,  any  one  or  all  of  the  gods  who 
belonged  to  the  shrine  of  Amen  could  be  included  with  that  god 
himself  in  the  p)OAit  of  Heliopolis,  and  yet  the  number  of  that  paut 
was  supposed  to  be  increased  only  by  one.  In  other  words,  the 
admission  of  one  god  into  a  paut  brought  Avith  it  the  admission  of 
all  the  gods  who  were  in  any  way  connected  with  him,  but  their 
names  were  never  included  among  those  of  the  original  members 
of  it.  This  explanation  is  very  good  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  must 
not  be  taken  as  a  proof  that  the  Egyptians  argued  in  this  manner, 
or  that  they  argued  at  all  about  it. 

The  nine  axes  'l'1'l'l'l'l^'l'l  ^'^^^>  beyond  doubt,  intended  to  re- 
1  La  Myihologie  ^gypticnne,  p.  245. 


SUBSTANCE   OF   THE   GODS  89 

present  nine  gods,  i.e.,  a  triad  of  triads,  but  the  signs      IH'I^^II'I 
];)aut   neteru,   must   be    translated    not    "  N^eunheit,"    as   Brugsch 
rendered  tliem,^  but  the  "  stuff  of  the  nine  gods,"  i.e.,  the  substance 
or  matter  out  of  which  the  nine  gods  were  made.     Tlie  word  paut, 

/5^   \\  ^  . ^ ,  means  "  douo;h   cake,"  or  cake   of  bread  which 

formed  part  of  the  offerings  made  to  the  dead ;  similarly  paut  is 
the  name  given  to  the  plastic  substance  out  of  which  the  earth  and 
the  gods  were  formed,  and  later,  when  applied  to  divine  beings  or 
things,  it  means  the  aggregation  or  entirety  of  such  beings  or 
things.  Thus  in  the  PajDyrus  of  Ani  (sheet  i.,  line  6)  the  god 
Tatunen  is  declared  to  be  "  one,  the  maker  of  mankind,  and  of  the 
"  material  of  the  gods  of  the  South  and  the  North,  the  West  and 
"the  East."^  But  there  was  a  primeval  matter  out  of  which 
heaven  was  made,  and  also  a  [primeval]  matter  out  of  which  the 
earth  was  made,  and  hence  Khepera,  the  great  creator  of  all 
things,  is  said  in  Chapter  xvii.  (line  116)  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  to 
possess  a  body^  which  is  formed  of  both  classes  of  matter  (pant). 
And  again  in  Chapter  Ixxxv.  (line  8)  the  deceased,  wishing  to 
identify  himself  with  this  divine  substance,  says,  "  I  am  the  eldest 
"  son  of  the  divine  pautti,  that  is  to  say,  the  soul  of  the  souls  of  the 
"  gods  of  everlasting,  and  my  body  is  everlasting,  and  my  creations  are 
"  eternal,  and  I  am  the  lord  of  years,  and  the  prince  of  everlasting- 
"  ness."  In  the  words  which  are  put  into  the  mouth  of  Khepera, 
who  is  made  to  describe  his  creation  of  the  world,  the  god  says, 
''  I  produced  myself  from  the  [primeval]  matter  [which]  I  made," 

1  "  Der  kosmogonisclie  Lehre  von  der  Ogdoas,  deren  aelteste  Spuren  sich  bis 
"  zu  den  Pyramidentexten  verfolgen  lassen,  scUoss  sick  die  Doctrin  '  der  Neunheit ' 

0  C3 

"  (Enneas)  oder  der  ]  an.     Sie  umfasste  die  genetiscbe  Entstehiing  der  neun 

"  Theile  und  Kriifte,  welche  die  zukiinftige  Wohnung  der  den  Leib  Gottes  bildeten, 
"  dessen  Seele  davon  Besitz  nabm,  um  alles  niit  ihr  zu  erfullen."  Aegyptologie, 
p.  170. 


ir  S^  _ii       v^-B^Jr  ^j  1  ^  Mix 


90  THREE   COMPANIES    OF   THE   GODS 

-<9  ^  -fl  www      p>  -«  ^  ^  P   ft      6?\    I      r^     /w^AA^ 

^_k  I  1^  ^m^^^l  ^  I  ''  tliis  is  the  only  mean- 
iDg  which  can  be  extracted  from  the  Egyptian  words,  and  the 
context,  which  the  reader  will  find  given  in  the  section  on  the 
Creation,  proves  that  it  is  the  correct  one.  The  word  "  primeval," 
which  is  added  in  brackets,  is  suggested  by  the  texts  wherein 
pautti  is  accompanied  by  ^  ^e^;,  i.e.,  "first,"  in  point  of  time, 
compare  ^^  "^  ^  ^  ^  e  ^  I  ^^^  "  first  matter,"  that  is  to  say, 
the  earliest  matter  which  was  created,  and  the  matter  which 
existed  before  anything  else.  From  the  above  facts  it  is  clear 
that  the  meaning  "  Neunheit "  must  not  be  given  to  the  Egyptian 
word  ipaui. 

We  have  now  seen  that,  so  far  back  as  the  Vth  Dynasty,  the 
priests  of  Heliopolis  conceived  the  existence  of  three  companies  of 
gods  ;  the  first  two  they  distinguished  by  the  appellations  "  Great " 
and  "  Little,"  but  to  the  third  they  gave  no  name.  The  gods  of  the 
first  or  "  Great  "  company  are  well  known,  and  their  names  are  : — 

1 .  Tem,  the  form  of  the  Sun-god  which  was  worshipped  at  Heliopolis. 

2.  Shu.  3.  Tefnut.  4.  Seb.  5.  Nut.  6.  Osiris.  7.  Isis.  8.  Set. 
9.  Nephthys.  Sometimes  this  company  is  formed  by  the  addition 
of  Horus  and  the  omission  of  Tem.  The  names  of  gods  of  the  second 
or  "  Little  "  company  appear  to  be  given  in  the  text  of  Unas, 
line  253  fi".,  where  we  have  enumerated  : — 1.   Rat.     2.  Am-Annu. 

3.  Am-Antchet.  4.  Am-Het-Serqet-ka-hetepet.  5.  Am-Neter-liet. 
6.  Am-Hetch-paar.  7.  Am-Sali.  8.  Am-Tep.  9.  Am-Het-ur- 
Ra.  10.  Am-TJnnu-resu.  11.  Am-Unnu-meht.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  noted  that  whereas  in  the  text  the  address  to  the  Great 
company  of  the  gods  as  a  whole  follows  the  separate  addresses  to 
each,  the  address  to  the  Little  company  precedes  the  separate 
addresses  to  each ;  still  there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  the 
second  group  of  names  given  above  are  really  those  of  the  Little 
company  of  the  gods.  The  names  of  the  gods  of  the  third  company 
are  unknown,  and  the  texts  are  silent  as  to  the  functions  which  the 
company  was  supposed  to  perform  ;  the  Great  and  Little  companies 
of  the  gods  are  frequently  referred  to  in  texts  of  all  periods,  but 

1  See  Archaeologia,  vol.  Hi.,  p.  557. 

2  See  my  Chajiters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  Text,  p.  348,  1.  15. 


THREE  COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS     91 

the  third  company  is  rarely  mentioned.  Thus  in  the  text  of 
Pepi  I.  (Hne  43),  the  king  is  said  to  sit  on  an  iron  throne  and  to 
weigh  words  at  the  head  of  the  Great  company  of  gods  in  Annu  ;  the 
two  companies  of  the  gods  lift  up  the  head  of  Pepi  (line  97),  and  he 
takes  the  crown  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  company  (line  117) ; 
he  sits  at  the  head  of  the  two  companies  (line  167),  and  in  their  boat 
(line  169) ;  and  he  stands  between  the  two  companies  (line  186). 
It  has  already  been  suggested  ^  that  the  Great  company  of  gods  was 
a  macrocosm  of  a  primitive  kind,  and  the  Little  company  a  micro- 
cosm ;  this  view  is  very  probably  correct,  and  is  supported  by 
passages  like  the  following  : — "  The  son  of  his  father  is  come  with 
"  the  company  of  the  gods  of  heaven,  .  .  .  the  son  of  his  father  is 
"  come  with  the  company  of  the  gods  of  earth." 

IkI  ^1  ^^  Z  ^  111111111  IT  ^ 
fl^fll^lZ^  111111111  tlT-' 

From  numerous  passages  in  texts  of  all  periods  it  is  clear 
that  the  Egyptians  believed  that  heaven  was  in  many  respects  a 
duplicate  of  earth,  and,  as  it  was  supposed  to  contain  a  celestial 
Nile,  and  sacred  cities  which  were  counterparts  of  those  on  the 
earth  and  which  were  called  by  similar  names,  it  is  only  reasonable 
to  assign  to  it  a  company  of  gods  who  were  the  counterparts  of 
those  on  earth.  And  as  there  were  gods  of  heaven  and  gods  of 
earth,  so  also  were  there  gods  of  the  Tuat,  or  Underworld,  who 


were  either  called  tuat,  ^  Jj  i,  or  ^%.  ^^wj  '»  o^'  neteru 
en  tuat,  "I^T  3  i  /wwvv  ®  .  This  being  so,  we  may  assume  that 
when  the  writers  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  mentioned  three  companies 
of  the  gods,  111111111111111111111111111,  they  referred 
to  the  company  of  the  gods  of  heaven,  the  company  of 
the  gods  of  earth,  and  the  company  of  the  gods  of  the  Under- 
world, meaning  thereby  what  the  writer  of  the  XXIIIrd 
Chapter  of  the  Booh  of  the  Bead  meant  when  he  spoke  of  "the 

^  Maspero,  La  Mythologie  Mgyptienne,  p.  244. 
3  Pepi  I.,  11.  298-300. 


92  THREE   COMPANIES    OF   THE    GODS 

"company  of  all  the  gods,"  ®  ^  ^  j  ^^ '^^  (]()  ^  ^  j-  ^^ 
the  Pyramid  Texts,  however,  and  in  the  later  Recensions  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  which  are  based   upon  them,  the  pautti  neteru, 

111111111111111111' -A  111111'  --  -*-^i-^  *°  - 

present  the  Great  and  Little  companies  of  the  gods,  and  these  only  ; 
the  members  of  each  company  varied  in  different  cities  and  in 
different  periods,  but  the  principle  of  such  variation  is  com- 
paratively simple.  Long  before  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  grouped 
the  gods  of  Egypt  into  companies  certain  very  ancient  cities  had 
their  own  special  gods  whom  they  probably  inherited  from  their 
predecessors,  i.e.,  the  predynastic  Egyptians.  Thus  the  goddess 
of  Sai's  was  Nit,  or  Net,  or  Neith  ;  the  goddess  of  Per-Uatchet  was 
Uatchet ;  the  goddess  of  Dendera  was  Hathor ;  the  goddess  of 
Nekheb  was  Nekhebet ;  the  god  of  Edfii  was  Horus ;  the  god  of 
Heliopolis  was  Tem ;  and  so  on.  When  the  priests  of  these  and 
other  cities  found  that,  for  some  reason,  they  were  obliged  to 
accept  the  theological  system  formulated  by  the  priests  of  Helio- 
polis and  its  Great  company  of  gods,  they  did  so  readily  enough, 
but  they  always  made  the  great  local  god  or  goddess  the  head  or 

chief,   p  W ,  of  the  company. 

At  Heliopolis,  where  the  chief  local  god  was  called  Tem,  the 
priests  joined  their  god  to  Ra,  and  addressed  many  of  their  prayers 
and  hymns  to  Tem-Ra  or  Rii-Tem.  At  Edfu  the  great  local  god 
Horus  of  Behutet  was  either  made  to  take  the  place  of  Tem,  or  was 
added  to  the  Heliopolitan  company  in  one  form  or  another.  The 
same  thing  happened  in  the  case  of  goddesses  like  Neith,  Uatchet, 
Nekhebet,  Hathor,  etc.  It  was  found  to  be  hopeless  to  attempt  to 
substitute  the  Heliopolitan  company  of  gods  for  Neith  in  the  city 
of  Sais,  because  there  the  worship  of  that  goddess  was  extremely 
ancient  and  was  very  important.  The  fact  that  her  name  forms  a 
component  part  of  royal  names  very  early  in  the  1st  Dynasty  proves 
that  her  worship  dates  from  the  first  half  of  the  archaic  period,  and 
that  it  is  much  older  than  the  theological  system  of  Heliopolis. 
But  when  the  priests  of  Sa'is  adopted  that  system  they  associated 
her  with  the  head  of  the  company  of  the  gods,   and   gave   her 


THE   COMPANIES   OF   THE   GODS  93 

suitable  titles  and  ascribed  to  her  proper  attributes,  in  accordance 
with  her  sex,  which  would  make  her  a  feminine  counterpart  to  the 
god  Tern.  The  god  Tern  was  the  Father-god,  and  the  lord  of 
heaven,  and  the  begetter  of  the  gods,  therefore  Neith  became  "  the 
"  great  lady,  the  mother-goddess,  the  lady  of  heaven,  and  queen  of 

''  the  gods,"  ^  1  ^  ^  ^=^  I  ^  ^"j"]-    Elsewhere^  she  is  called 

"mother  of  the  gods,"  and  just  as  Tem  was  declared  to  have  been 
self-produced,  so  we  find  the  same  attribute  ascribed  to  Neith,  and 
she  is  said  to  be  "the  great  lady,  who  gave  birth  to  Ra,  who 
"  brought    forth   in   primeval   time   herself,    never    having    been 


"created,"^  ^  5^(11|I|M-^  fH  M  ^ -^  W  id  I''  ^'^^ 
same  thing  happened  at  the  cities  of  Per-Uatchet  in  the  Delta  and 
Nekhebet  in  Upper  Egypt,  for  at  one  place  Uatchet,  the  ancient 
and  local  goddess,  became  the  head  of  the  company  of  gods, 
and  the  goddess  Nekhebet  at  the  other.  It  is  interesting  to  note 
that  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  themselves  included  Uatchet  in  their 
Great  company  of  the  gods,  as  we  may  see  from  the  text  of 
Pepi  11.,^  where  we  find  that  the  deceased  king  prays  concerning 
the  welfare  of  his  pyramid  "  to  the  great  j;(X?i!^  of  gods  in  Annu," 
i.e.,  Tem,  Shu,  Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Set,  Nephthys,  Khent- 
Maati,  and  Uatchet. 

The  goddess  Hathor  at  Dendera  was  treated  by  the  priests 
there  as  was  Neith  at  Sa'is,  for  every  conceivable  attribute  was 
ascribed  to  her,  and  her  devotees  declared  that  she  was  the  mother 
of  the  gods,  and  the  creator  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  of 
everything  which  is  in  them.  In  fact,  both  Neith  and  Hathor 
were  made  to  assume  all  the  powers  of  the  god  Tem,  and  indeed  of 
every  solar  god. 

The  general  evidence  derived  from  a  study  of  texts  of  all 
periods  shows  that  the  chief  local  gods  of  many  cities  never  lost 
their  exalted  positions  in  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants,  who  clung 
to  their  belief  in  them  with  a  consistency  and  conservatism  which 
are  truly  Egyptian.     In  fact,  the  god  of  a  nome,  or  the  god  of  the 

1  D.  Mallet,  Le  Culte  de  Neit  a  Sais,  Paris,  1888,  p.  47. 
3  Ibid.,  p.  146.  3  See  11.  669  S. 


94  LOCAL   GODS 

capital  city  of  a  nome,  when  once  firmly  established,  seems  to  have 
maintained  his  influence  in  all  periods  of  Egyptian  history,  and 
though  his  shrine  may  have  fallen  into  oblivion  as  the  result  of 
wars  or  invasions,  and  his  worship  have  been  suspended  from  time 
to  time,  the  people  of  his  city  always  took  the  earliest  opportunity 
of  rebuilding  his  sanctuary  and  establishing  his  priests  as  soon  as 
prosperity  returned  to  the  country. 


(     95     ) 


CHAPTER    III 
PRIMITIVE   GODS   AND   NOME-GODS 

DURING-  the  predynastic  period  in  Egypt  every  village  and 
town  or  settlement  possessed  its  god,  whose  worship  and 
the  glory  of  whose  shrine  increased  or  declined  according  to  the 
increase  or  decrease  of  the  prosperity  of  the  community  in  which 
he  lived.     When  the  country  was  divided  into  sections  which  the 

Egyptians  called  hespu,  fi   1  n  ^  |^ ,  or  "  nomes,"  a  certain  god,  or 

group  of  allied  gods,  became  the  representative,  or  representatives, 
of  each  nome,  and  so  obtained  the  pre-eminence  over  all  the  other 
gods  of  the  nome ;  and  sometimes  one  god  would  represent  two 
nomes.  In  this  way  the  whole  country  of  Egypt,  from  the  Medi- 
terranean Sea  to  Elephantine,  was  divided  among  the  gods,  and  it 
became  customary  in  each  nome  to  regard  the  god  of  that  nome  as 
the  "  Great  God,"  or  "  God,"  and  to  endow  him  with  all  the  powers 
and  attributes  possible.  We  have,  unfortunately,  no  means  of 
knowing  when  the  country  was  first  split  up  into  nomes,  but  the 
division  must  have  taken  place  at  a  very  early  period,  and  the  gods 
who  were  chosen  to  represent  the  nomes  were  undoubtedly  those 
who  had  been  worshipped  in  the  large  towns  or  settlements  during 
the  predynastic  period.  Thus  in  the  earliest  dynastic  times  of 
which  we  have  inscriptions  of  any  length  we  find  that  Neith  was  the 
chief  deity  of  Sais,  Osiris  of  Busiris,  Thoth  of  Hermopolis,  Uatchet 
of  Per-Uatchet,  Ptah  of  Memphis,  Sebek  of  Crocodilopolis,  Amen  of 
Thebes,  Nekhebet  of  Nekheb,  and  Khnemu  of  Elephantine.  The 
number  of  the  nomes  seems  to  have  been  different  in  different 
periods,  so  it  is  not  possible  to  say  with  certainty  how  many  the 
early  nome-gods  were  in  number.  The  Egyptian  lists  give  the 
number  of  nomes  as  forty-two  or  forty-four,  but  the  classical  writers, 


96  NOME-GODS 

Strabo,  Diodorus,  and  Pliny,  do  not  agree  in  their  statements  on 
the  subject.  Strabo  says  ^  that  the  Labyrinth  contained  twenty- 
seven  chambers,  and  if  each  one  represented  a  nome  the  nomes 
must  have  been  twenty-seven  in  number,  i.e.,  ten  in  Upper  Egypt, 
ten  in  Lower  Egypt,  and  seven  in  the  Heptanomis.  On  the  other 
hand,  Herodotus  says  ^  that  the  Labyrinth  contained  twelve  halls. 
Pliny  (Bk.  v.,  chap.  9)  enumerates  the  nomes  as  follows: — 
Ombites,  Apollopolites,  Hermonthites,  Thinites,  Phaturites,  Copt- 
iteSjTentyrites,  Diopolites,  Antaeopolites,  Aphroditopolites,  Lycopo- 
lites,  Pharbaethites,  Bubastites,  Sethroites,  Tanites,  the  Arabian 
nome,  the  Hammonian  nome,  Oxyrynchites,  Leontopolites,  Athri- 
bites,  Cynopolites,  Hermopolites,  Xoites,  Mendesium,  Sebennytes, 
Cabasites,  Latopolites,  Heliopolites,  Prosopites,  Panopolites,  Busi- 
rites,  Onuphites,  Saites,  Ptenethu,  Phthemphu,  Naucratites,  Mete- 
lites,  Grynaeopolites,  Menelaites,  Maraeotis,  Heracleopolites,  Arsino- 
ites,  Memphites,  and  the  two  nomes  of  Oasites.  Diodorus  Siculus 
(i.  54)  gives  the  number  of  the  nomes  as  thirty-six ;  ^  Herodotus 
(ii.  164)  tells  us  that  the  country  of  Egypt  was  divided  into 
districts  ^  or  nomes,  but  he  does  not  say  how  many  of  them  there 
were.  These  facts  serve  to  show  that  the  number  of  nomes  when 
the  country  was  first  divided  was  smaller  than  in  later  times,  and 
we  may  assume  that  it  was  the  nomes  of  the  Delta  which  increased 
in  number  rather  than  those  of  Upper  Egypt.  The  following  is  a 
list  of  the  nomes  of  Egypt  according  to  inscriptions  at  EdfCi  and 
elsewhere,  together  with  their  capitals  and  the  gods  who  were 
worshipped  in  them : — 

UPPER  EGYPT. 
Nome.  Capital.  God. 

L     Ta-khent  ^       Abu  ?  O  J  c=£^  Khnemu  Q  %  J 

(Elephantine) 

2.     Thes-        J^®     Teb  ^  J©  Heru-Behutet 

Hertu  "^^ 


mp        (ApollinopolisMagna) 
1  xvii.  1.  §  37.  2  ii.  §  148. 

^  Tryv  Sf  x^^P°^^  uTrao-av  ei's  £t  ^at  rpiaKOVTa  jxeprj  SteXojv,  a  KaXovaiv  AiyvVrtoi  vo/xovs. 
^  Kara  -yap  8r;  voyuovs  AlyvTTTOs  airaaa  SiapaLprjTai. 


Nome. 


NOME-GODS 

Capital. 


97 


God. 


3.     Ten 


M 


Nekheb:].0j;  Nekhebet:|.oJ;^ 

(Eileithyia) 
Senit   ^'^^^^  ©  (Esneh) 


w  ^ 


4.     Uast      f  Uast  f "   (Thebes)         Amen-Ra  h 


i""*^  o 


-T 


5.     Herui 


6.     Aa-ta 


nr 


(Coptos) 


Amsu,  Min  or       ^oa^ 
Khem     T 


Ta-en-     =^??=  =??^  <=>       Het-Heru    no    -q 
tarert  Lv^  I    3s^~©     {i.e.,Hathor)  lilno  q 


(Denderah) 


7.     Seshesh  ^Xr-  ^^^ 


ittth  (Diospolis  Parva) 


Het-Heru  Qn^l 


8.     Abt    TV 


AbtufJ'^'  An-Heij£^i| 

(Abydos) 
Thenit  aaaaaa  ]  ^  (This) 

9.     Amsu  Min   J^    Apu  (1  D  ^  ©  Amsu,  Min  or       ^ 

or  IvHEM  -"^        ^     1     Ji  Khem      r 

(Panopolis) 


10a.  Uatchet  Vp:,     Tebut  g^gl  Het-Heru  [ 


n^o 


(Aphroditopolis) 


10b.  Neteeui  JI  Tu-qat     .  T  ^  Heru  (Horus) 


(Antaeopolis) 


11.     Set  ? 


Shas- 
hetep 


Khnemu 


5 


(Hypsele) 


^  Var.  tfS)  ^^^  Ah-tut,  i.e.,   "the  city  of  the  mountain  of  the  heart's  desire";    see 
^  o  ©         •     '  •' 

Dum.icheii,  Geschichte,  p.  143. 


98  NOME-GODS 

Nome.  Capital.  God 

12      T„.^  ^  Nut-en-    ©  O  -^  K      Hem  ^ 

(Antaeopolis) 
Saiut 


13.    Atee-        Vji     __1^1K  QAtk-    Ap-uat  V-JI 

(Lycopolis) 


?fFFF 

15.  Un  .^.  Khemennu  ' ' ' '  £           Tehuti  (Thoth) 

^^^p  MM©                      •          ^               ^ 

(Hermopolis) 

16.  Meh-           j^  Hebenuuno             Heru  ^ 

MAHETCH    42^  '                      A  ^  ^                                  -He 

TOTF  (Hipponon) 


/\^/v^\ 


17.  Anpu  ^;^  Kasa  ^5^^  Anpu 

nil)  '  ® 

(Cynopolis) 

18.  Sep  ^  «^t-^'it«'iQni  Jl®    '^°P"  i    □ 

^^  (Alabastronpolis) 

.  n.  Per-Matchet 

19-     UabIJI  T^^©    ^^*^ 

(Oxyrynchus) 


20.     Atee-  i)ff^     Henensu  1   ^=  Her-shefi     ^  ™|](1^ 


(Herakleopolis  Magna) 


21  A.  Atef-         0.=^    Ermen 


'-         V^     r.rmen-    <^         ^    Khnemu  fj  ^ 
PEHU   ^7f~  hert  r^^^  .-r-.^.  ^  ©  u  Ji)% 


2lB.  Ta-she  ^=^"  "    Shet  ^^Z  Sebek  fl  ]|  ^=^ 

(Crocodilopolis) 

22.     Maten  ^  Tep-ahet  ^^Z  Het-Hert  [j  ^  ^  | 


'.Hill 


(Apliroditopolis) 


NOME-GODS  99 

LOWER  EGYPT. 
Nome.  Capital.  God. 


1 .     Aneb 


Men-         i"^^^^  t  H-=--  ^ 


HETCH  ^"         neiert   a/wwv  o  <=>  ©  •   -^^  A  iii 

^  (Memphis) 

2.     Khensu^  ^         Sek'hemt  "T  |\   ^    Hem-ur  '^  ^ 

(Letopolis) 

^^  (Apis) 


4.     Sapi-res  <^^l3i^     Tclieqa       1      _  Sebek,  Isis,  Amen 

TFfFF 


5.  Sap-meh  ^¥      Saut  1^  %.  ^  Z  ^'^t  (Neith)       ^ 

™e  (Sais) 

6.  Kaset  '^S        Khasut  T  P  %  @  Amen-Ra  []  ^vw^ 

(aois) 


.  <'> 


TTTTT  neiert  ^  w  56  o  ^  © 


8.     ...xiBT^^^  Theket    ^^"  Temu     " 

(Succoth) 
Per-  cnn  n    ^    ^ 


Atem      1 

(Pitliom) 

9.     Ati^  Per.Asar^JI;^      Osiris  J| 

^  (Busiris) 


'  Perhaps  a  variant  is   ^  =  Q  1  ^  =  ^  '^^^  ^ '  ^^®  ■^^®^^^'''  ^^^-  ^''''• 
).  17  ;  and  D 


1868,  p.  17  ;  and  Diimiclien,  Kalendariiischriftea,  1186,  106'cZ 


100  NOME-GODS 

Nome.  Capital.  God. 

10.  Ka-qem^^  •  her-ab  U  lt^:  ^O  ©     Horns  ^  ^ 

^  (Athribis) 

11.  Ka-heseb  S^  Hebes-ka  y[l5^^     ^^^^  j  ^  I 

^  (Cabasus) 

12.  Theb.^^  ^,^^,^^^^^^^.^«.        A.-he.J^| 

^  (Sebennytus) 

13.  Heq-at    Jj_  Annu  |l  g  Ra 


o 
^  (Heliopolis,  On) 


14.     Khent-abt  ((IhT     Tehaln^-^^  Hi       Hern 


(Tanis) 

15.  Tehut  ^  Per-Tehuti  "^^  Telmti  (Thoth)  ^ 

^  (Hermopolis) 

^  Per-ba-neb-Tettn  Ba-neb- 

16.  Kha(?)       2  "^^^-^^1  Tattu,or.^^^fl 

^  (Mendes)  *    •"   " 


TT  ^ .  Pa-khen-en-iVmen 

17.  Sam-  |^  1^  =  fl  S     Amen-Raft  ™ 

BEHUTET    MT  Uyh  .wwva  ^  ^  ©  1  O     I 

^  (Diospolis) 

18.  Am-khent  J__.  Per-Bast  ""Y^^^©        Bast  ^  ^  i) 

^^  (Bubastis) 


19.  Am-pehu  r-^     Per-Uatcliet'=Y^|^|     Uatcliet|^| 

^  (Bnto) 

20.  SeptA^  Qesem  _6_  |x^  ©  Sept^J^I^' 

™^  (Goshen  ?) 

1  The  authorities  to  be  consulted  on  the  nomes  of  Egypt  are  Brugsch,  Diet.  Gcog. 
(see  the  list  at  the  end  of  vol.  iii.)  ;  Diimichen,  Geographic  des  alt  en  Aegyptens  (in 
Meyer,  GescUclite  des  alien  Aegyptens),  Berlin,  1887  ;  and  J.  de  Rouge,  Gtograpliie 
Ancienne  de  la  Basse-lSgypte,  Paris,  1891. 


NOME-GODS 


101 


Thus  every  nome  of  Egypt  possessed  a  representative  god 
whose  temple  was  situated  in  the  capital  city  of  the  nome,  and 
attached  to  the  service  of  each  nome-god  was  a  body  of  priests  who 
divided  among  themselves  the  various  duties  connected  with  the 
service  of  the  gods,  the  maintenance  of  the  buildings  of  the  temple, 
the  multiplying  of  copies  of  religious  works,  and  the  religious 
education  of  the  community.  In  Upper  Egypt,  where  the  care  of 
the  dead  seems  to  have  been  the  principal  duty  of  the  living,  the 
lower  orders  of  the  priesthood  probably  carried  on  a  lucrative 
business  in  mummifying  the  dead,  and  in  funeral  papyri  and 
amulets,  and  in  conducting  funerals.  The  high-priest  of  each 
great  city,  and  sometimes  even  the  high-priestess,  bore  a  special 
title.  In  Thebes  the  high-priest  was  called  "  first  servant  of  the 
"  god  Ra  in  Thebes  ";  Mn  Heliopolis  the  title  of  the  high-priest  was 
"Great  one  of  visions  of  Ra-Atem"  ;^  in  Memphis,  "Great  chief 
"  of  the  hammer  in  the  temple  of  him  of  the  Southern  Wall,  and 
''  Setem  of  the  god  of  the  Beautiful  Face  (i.e.,  Ptah)  "  ;  ^  in  Sais, 
"  governor  of  the  double  temple  "  ;  ^  and  similarly  the  high-priestess 
of  Memphis  bore  the  title  of  "  Nefer-tutu  "  ;  ^  in  Sekhem  the  title 
of  the  high-priestess  was  "  Divine  mother";^  in  Sai's,  "  Urt,"  i.e., 
"great  one";''  in  Mendes,  "  Utcha-ba-f " ;  ^  and  so  on.  The 
priests  of  every  great  god  were  divided  into  classes,  among 
which  may  be  mentioned  "  those  who  ministered  at  certain  hours," 

-^W  ™  ^  ;  "  the  servants  of  the  gods,"  "]  f  ^  j  ;  the  "  holy 

lathers,     Ml  ^f  '  5    the    "  libationers,      /"^  aaaa/v.  ^  \ .       The 

accounts  of  the  temple  were  kept  by  the  "scribe  of  the  temple," 


'Of 


^ 


1. 


^ 


1 


102  NOME-GODS 


1 


,  and,   in  large  temples,   one  or  more   scribes  kept  a 

register  of  gifts  to  the  temple  and  of  the  property  of  the  god.^ 
It  is  impossible  to  say  how  many  priests  of  all  classes  ministered  to 
any  given  nome-god  ;  it  seems  that  the  highest  permanent  priestly 
officials  were  at  all  times  and  in  all  cities  very  few  in  number,  and 
that  the  "  servants  of  the  god  "  were  very  many.  The  priests  of 
each  nome-god  were  subject  to  no  external  authority,  and  the  high- 
priest  of  a  great  nome  possessed  a  power  which  was  hardly  inferior 
to  that  of  the  nomarch  himself. 

The  worship  of  each  nome-god  contained  elements  peculiar  to 
itself,  and  the  beliefs  which  centred  in  him  represented  all  the 
ancient  and  indigenous  views  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  nome,  and 
these  were  carefully  observed  and  cultivated  from  the  earliest  to 
the  latest  times.  We  may  see  from  the  list  of  nome-gods  given 
above  that  many  nomes  worshipped  the  same  god,  e.g.,  Horus  was 
worshipped  in  three  nomes  of  UpjDer  Egypt  and  two  nomes  of 
Lower  Egypt,  whilst  one  nome  worshipped  him  under  the  special 
form  of  Horus  of  Behutet;  three  nomes  of  Upper  Egypt  worshipped 
Khnemu,  two  worshipped  Amsu  (or  Min  or  Khem  ?),  two  worshipped 
An]Du,  and  Hathor  was  worshipped  in  five  nomes  in  Upper  Egypt 
and  one  in  Lower  Egypt.  The  cults  of  the  ram-headed  god  Khnemu 
at  Elephantine,  of  the  vulture  goddess  Nekhebet  at  Eileithyia,  of  the 
crocodile  god  Sebek  in  the  district  of  Ta-she  (Fayyum),  of  the  dog- 
headed  god  Anpu  at  Cynopolis  and  Alabastronpolis,  of  the  ibis-god 
Thotli  at  Hermopolis,  of  Horus  the  elder  (Heru-ur)  at  Letopolis, 
and  of  Uatchet  at  Buto  (Per-Uatchet),  were  extremely  ancient,  and 
with  them  are  probably  to  be  grouped  in  point  of  antiquity  the 
cults  of  the  wolf  (?) -headed  god  Ap-uat,  the  lioness  goddess  Sekhet, 
the  cat-headed  goddess  Bast,  and  the  god  Set.  The  animal  which 
was  the  type  and  symbol  of  this  last  god  has  not  as  yet  been 
identified ;  it  cannot  have  been  the  ass  as  was  once  thought,  and  it 
is  hardly  likely  to  have  been  the  camel ;  at  2Dresent,  therefore,  we 
can  only  tentatively  assume  that  it  belonged  to  some  class  of  animal 
which  became  extinct  at  a  very  early  period.  The  cults  of  the 
various  forms  of  the  sky-god  Horus,  and  of  the  Sun-god,  and  of  the 

1  For  otlier  temj-tle  officials  see  Brugsch,  Aegiji)tolo<jie,  p.  218. 


OSIRIS  103 

goddess  Hathor,  are  the  oldest  of  all.  The  goddess  Neith,  whose 
symbols  were  two  arrows  and  a  shield,  appears  to  have  been  of 
Libyan  origin,  but,  as  has  already  been  shown,  the  attributes  of 
some  of  the  oldest  indigenous  gods  of  Egypt  were  ascribed  to  her 
in  early  dynastic  times.  The  origin  of  the  god  Osiris  is  obscure, 
but  it  is  difficult,  when  all  the  statements  made  concerning  him  in 
the  relio;ious  texts  are  taken  into  consideration,  not  to  think  that 
the  original  seat  of  his  worship  was  in  the  Delta.  Early  in  the 
dynastic  period  his  most  important  shrine  was  at  Abydos,  which 
became  the  centre  of  his  cult  and  the  sacred  city  to  which  his 
worshippers  flocked  for  countless  generations.  In  spite  of  this, 
however,  the  nome-lists  show  that  the  nome-god  was  An- Her,  or 
Anhur,  and  notwithstanding  the  special  honour  in  which  Osiris 
was  held  throughout  Egypt,  i^n-Her  was  always  regarded  as  the 
official  god  of  the  nome  Abt  and  of  its  capital  of  the  same  name. 

The  Elysian  Fields,  i.e.,  the  Sekhet-hetepet,  were  situated 
in  the  Delta  where  the  country  was  fertile,  and  where  the 
land  was  traversed  by  canals  and  streams  of  water  running  in 
all  directions;  moreover,  the  "House  of  Osiris"  jpar  excellence 
\  rlJl  S  Psr-Asar  ^  =  Busiris  J  was  in  the  Delta,  and  the  shrine 

of  the  god  who  was  worshipped  in  the  form  of  a  ram  which 
was  said  to  contain  the  soul  of  Osiris,  was  also  in  the  Delta. 
Everywhere  in  the  texts  Osiris  is  called  the  "  lord  of  Abydos," 
and  generally  this  title  is  followed  by  another,  i.e.,  "  lord  of 
Tattu."     Now  Tattu  is  the  city,  and  "  The  Ram,  lord  of  Tattu," 

^"^i^^  ^3:7  nf  ^  Ba-neb- Tattu,  was  its  god.     The  name  Tattu  was 

"    y> yj  [All  &  ...     7  o  ... 

corrupted  into  "  Mendes  "  by  the  Greeks,  and  in  this  city  the  great 
local  god  was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a  ram,  which  is  now 
commonly  known  as  the  "  Mendesian  Ram."  The  frequent  use  of 
the  title  "lord  of  Tattu"  suggests  that  the  worship  of  Osiris  was 
grafted  on  to  or  was  made  to  absorb  that  of  the  local  ram-god,  and 
that  in  consequence  Osiris  became  the  lord  of  the  city  in  his  stead. 
It  may  be  urged  that  Tattu  was  merely  the  seat  of  the  shrine  of 
the  god  Osiris  in  the  northern  kingdom,  just  as  Abydos  was  his 

1  The  words  Ba-neb-  Tattu  usually  follow  here,  therefore  the  full  name  of  the 
city  is,  "House  of  Osiris,  the  Ram,  lord  of  Tattu." 


104  AMEN   AND   ATEN 

sanctuary  in  the  southern  kingdom,  but  this  explanation  of  the  use 
of  the  title  is  insufficient.  It  may  further  be  urged  that,  inasmuch 
as  the  titles  "  lord  of  Abydos,"  "  lord  of  Tattu,"  occur  in  connection 
with  others  which  have  reference  to  Osiris  in  his  capacity  as 
governor  of  the  Underworld,  the  Abydos  and  Tattu  here  mentioned 
are  mythological  cities  and  not  cities  upon  earth.  But  even  if 
this  be  so  it  matters  little,  for  we  know  that  the  Egyptians  fashioned 
their  mythological  or  heavenly  cities  after  the  manner  of  their 
earthly  cities,  and  that  their  conceptions  of  things  spiritual  were 
based  upon  things  material. 

Returning  for  a  moment  to  the  adoption  of  gods,  Ave  may  note 
that  from  first  to  last  the  peoj^le  of  one  nome  were  generally  ready 
to  offer  hospitality  to  the  gods  of  another,  and  also  to  the  gods  of 
strangers  who  had  come  to  settle  among  them.  At  times,  however, 
a  new  god,  or  a  new  group  of  gods,  was  forced  upon  the  inhabitants 
of  one  or  more  nomes,  and  even  upon  a  whole  j)rovince,  as  the  result 
of  conquest,  or  by  the  wish  of  the  king,  or  by  the  supremacy  of  the 
priesthood  of  a  given  city.  Thus  the  priesthood  of  Ra  or  Ra-Tem 
at  Heliopolis  succeeded  in  making  their  theological  system  para- 
mount in  the  country,  and  the  whole  of  the  religious  philosophy  of 
the  Theban  Boohs  of  the  Dead  is  based  upon  their  teaching.  Until 
the  conquest  of  the  Hyksos  by  the  Theban  princes  the  god  Amen 
was  a  nome-god  of  no  great  importance,  but  when  they  became 
kings  of  the  south  and  north,  he  immediately  became  the  king  of 
all  the  gods  of  the  south  and  the  north,  and  the  titles  and  powers 
and  attributes  of  the  great  gods  of  the  country  were  ascribed  to 
him  by  his  priests.  As  the  prince  of  Thebes  Avas  greater  than  any 
and  every  prince  in  the  other  nomes  of  Egypt,  so  the  Theban  nome- 
god  Avas  greater  than  any  and  every  other  god  of  Egypt.  The 
extraordinary  dislike  Avhich  Amen-hetep  IV.  exhibited  towards 
this  god,  and  the  foolish  attempt  Avhich  he  made  to  substitute  for 
his  worship  that  of  Aten,  or  the  Disk,  furnishes  us  Avith  an  example 
of  the  imposition  of  a  god  upon  a  priesthood  and  province  ;  the 
attempt  Avas  successful  for  a  time  over  a  limited  area,  but  it  had  no 
chance  of  permanent  success  because  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the 
worship  of  the  god  as  Amen-hetep  interpreted  them  Avere  foreign 
to  the  religious  conceptions  of  the  Egyjotians  generally. 


RA   AND    AMEN  105 

From  what  lias  been  said  above  it  will    be  easy  to  imagine 
the  remarkable  spectacle  which  Egypt  must  have  presented  to  a 
foreigner  who  went  there  and  found  the  country  split  up  into  a 
series  of  nomes,  each  possessing  its  great  god,  who  was  ministered 
to  by  a  body  of  priests  and  servants  who  were  amenable  to  no  general 
authority  outside  the  nome,  and  who  performed  his  worship  when 
and  as  they  jDleased,  and  who  claimed  for  him  powers,  and  rights, 
and  privileges  without  fear  of  opposition.     The  stranger  would  find 
that    each  college  of  priests  in  each  nome  asserted  that  its  god 
was  the  father  of  all  the  other  gods,  and  the  creator  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  and  that,   generally  speaking,   the  priests   of  one 
nome-god   and  his  divine  companions  were  content  to  allow  their 
neighbours  in  other  nomes  to  declare  anything  they  pleased  about 
their  nome-gods  and  their  divine  companions.     As  far  as  can  be 
gathered  from  the  religious  texts,  it  seems  that  the  priests  of  one 
company  of  gods  never  attempted  to  suppress  the  gods  of  another 
company  if  the  fortune  of  war  gave  them  paramount  power  in  the 
nome  wherein  they  were  worshipped.     Thus  when  the  priests  of 
Ra  attained  to  the  great  power  which  they  enjoyed  at  Heliopolis 
under  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties  they  did  not  suppress  the  local 
god  Tem,  but  they  associated  their  god  with  him,  and  produced  the 
compound  god  Ra-Tem.    Similarly,  at  a  later  period,  when  Amen,  as 
the  nome-god  of  the  victorious  princes  and  kings  of  Thebes,  was 
declared  to  be  the  greatest  of  the  gods  of  Egypt,  his  priests  did  not 
declare  that  the  other  gods  of  Egypt  were  not  gods  and   try  to 
suppress  them,  but  they  asserted  that  all  the  powers  of  the  other 
gods  were  assimilated  in  him,  and  that  he  was  in  consequence  the 
greatest  of  the  gods.     In  the  texts  of  Unas  and  the  kings  who  were 
his  immediate  successors  we  read  of  the  Great  and  Little  companies 
of  the  gods,  but  we  also  find  mention  of  the  company  of  gods  of 
Horus  and  of  the  double  company  of  gods  of  Tem ;  ^  the  j)riests  of 
Heliopolis  claimed  supremacy  among  the  gods  for   Ra,   but  they 
took  care  to  include  as  far  as  possible  the  name  of  every  god  and 
goddess  to  whom  worship  had  been  paid  in  past  generations.     The 

°^^^imiinixkmmiimninni 

Unas,  11.  443,  444. 


106  GODS    OF   HELIOPOLIS 

same  characteristic  is  observable  in  the  texts  of  the  Theban  priest- 
hood, and  we  find  that  their  god  Amen  was  even  introduced  into  the 
Booh  of  the  Dead  where,  manifestly,  he  had  little  claim  to  be.  The 
hymns  in  the  chapters  of  that  work  are  addressed  either  to  Ra,  in 
one  form  or  another,  or  to  Osiris,  but  in  Chapter  clxxi.  we  find 
the  following  address :— ''  0  Tem,  0  Shu,  0  Tefnet,  0  Seb,  0  Nut, 
"0  Osiris,  0  Isis,  0  Set,  0  Nephthys,  0  Heru-khuti  (Harmachis), 
"  0  Hathor  of  the  Great  House,  0  Khepera,  0  Menthu,  the  lord  of 
''  Thebes,  0  Amen,  the  lord  of  the  thrones  of  the  two  lands,  0 
"  Great  company  of  the  gods,  0  Little  company  of  the  gods,  0  gods 
"and  goddesses  who  dwell  in  Nu,  0  Sebek  of  the  two  Meht,  0 
"  Sebek  in  all  thy  manifold  names  in  thine  every  j^lace  wherein  thy 
"  Ka  (i.e.,  double)  hath  delight,  0  gods  of  the  south,  0  gods  of  the 
"  north,  0  ye  who  are  in  heaven,  0  ye  who  are  upon  the  earth, 
"  grant  ye  the  garment  of  purity  unto  the  perfect  spirit  of  iVmen- 
"  hetep."  ^  The  greater  number  of  the  gods  Avhose  names  are  given 
in  the  Pyramid  Texts  are  also  mentioned  in  the  religious  literature, 
especially  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  of  later  periods,  and  if  we  pos- 
sessed copies  of  all  the  religious  works  of  the  New  Empire  we  should 
probably  discover  that  the  names  of  all  the  gods,  Avith  perhaps  the 
exception  of  Set,  worshipped  under  the  Early  Empire  were  pre- 
served in  them.  The  Egyptians,  certainly  in  dynastic  times,  rarely 
abandoned  a  god,  and,  speaking  generally,  it  is  remarkable  how 
little  the  character  and  attributes  of  the  gods  vary  in  the  period 
between  the  IVth  and  the  XXVIth  Dynasties.  The  obstinate 
conservatism  of  the  Egyptians,  which  seems  to  have  been  inherited 
in  an  almost  unaltered  state  by  their  descendants  the  Copts,  induced 
the  writers  of  religious  texts  to  introduce  into  their  works  as  many 
of  the  gods  as  possible,  and  they  were  moved  to  do  this  as  much  by 
motives  of  priestly  policy  and  by  self-interest  as  by  feelings  of 
reverence  for  the  gods  of  Egy23t. 

In  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  predominant  gods  are  those  of  the 
company  of  Heliopolis,  but  we  nevertheless  find  that  the  gods 
of  remote  towns  and  cities  had  duties  assigned  to  them,  and  that 
one  and  all  of  them  were  supposed  to  minister  to  the  deceased 
kings  in  the  Underworld.     The  reason  of  this  is  not  far  to  seek. 

1   See  my  Chaj^fers  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Trtinslation),  p.  315. 


SUBDIVISIONS    OF   HEAVEN  107 

The  heaven  which  the  Egyptian  conceived  in  his  mind  closely 
resembled  Egypt  in  respect  of  its  sub-divisions,  and  its  various 
cities  and  districts  were  ruled  by  gods  whom  it  was  necessary  to 
propitiate,  and  whose  friendship  must  be  gained  at  any  cost.  A 
man  hoped  that  in  the  next  life  he  would  be  able  to  wander  about 
at  will  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  heaven,  and  the  only 
way  to  obtain  this  privilege  was  to  secure  the  goodwill  of  the 
gods  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  sky  by  the  recital  of  prayers  of 
various  kinds,  and  by  the  performance  of  certain  ceremonies, 
which  were  always  of  a  more  or  less  magical  character.  To  be 
able  to  pass  at  pleasure  along  the  eastern  Delta  of  heaven  and 
without  opposition  presupposed  the  favour  of  Sept  and  Temu ; 
and  to  have  power  to  drink  of  the  waters  of  the  celestial  Nile 
presupposed  the  favour  of  the  god  Khnemu,  the  lord  of  the  Island 
of  Elephantine,  close  to  which  were  situated,  according  to  Egyp- 
tian belief,  the  sources  of  the  Nile.  The  texts  of  all  periods 
exhibit  an  almost  childish  anxiety  to  prove  that  every  god  of 
Egypt  is  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  beings  in  the  Underworld 
who  were  once  mortal  men,  and  it  was  a  common  belief  also  in  all 
periods  that  the  mere  asserting  in  writing  that  the  gods  would 
minister  to  the  deceased  would  produce  the  assistance  desired.  To 
enjoy  the  power  to  enter  into  certain  cities  in  heaven  the  deceased 
was  obliged  to  know  the  various  gods  or  "  Souls "  who  were 
worshipped  in  them.  Thus  the  Souls  of  the  West  were  Tem,  and 
Sebek,  the  lord  of  the  Mountain  of  Sunrise,  and  Hathor,  the 
lady  of  the  Evening ;  ^  the  Souls  of  the  East  were  Heru-khuti 
(Harmachis),  the  Calf  of  the  goddess  Khera,  and  the  Morning 
Star ; "  the  Souls  of  the  city  of  Pe  were  Horus,  Mestha,  and 
H  api ;  "^  the  Souls  of  the  city  of  Nekhen  were  Horus,  Tuamutef, 
and  Qebhsennuf ;  ^  the  Souls  of  Heliopolis  were  Ra,  Shu,  and 
Tefnet ; '"  and  the  Souls  of  the  city  of  Hermopolis  were  Thoth, 
Sa,  and  Tem.*'  Similarly  every  great  heavenly  city  was  held  to 
contain  a  company  of  gods,  and  the  beatified  soul  was  thought 
to  enjoy  the  duty  of  paying  visits  to  their  shrines  just  as,  when 
in  the  body,  it  made  offerings  to  their  earthly  counterparts. 

1  Booh  of  the  Dead,  Chap,  cviii.         ^  IMd,^  Chap.  cix.  s  J^^V?.,  Chap.  cxii. 

*  Ibid.,  Chap,  cxiii.  ^  Ibid.,  Chap.  cxv.  ^  Ibid.,  Chap.  cxvi. 


108  DEIFICATION   OF   THE   DEAD 

In  the  observations  already  made  concerning  the  difficulty  of 
assigning  an  exact  meaning  to  the  word  for  God  and  "  god,"  neter, 
^  |,  we  have  seen  that  in  dynastic  times  the  chief  attribute 
which  was  assigned  to  a  god  was  the  power  to  renew  his  life 
indefinitely,  and  to  live  for  ever,  and  the  text  of  Unas  has  shown 
us  that  in  very  early  times  the  Egyptian  thought  he  could  obtain 
this  power  by  eating  his  god  or  gods.  Closely  connected  with  this 
belief  is  another  which  finds  expression  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,  and 
also  in  the  later  Recensions  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  which  are 
based  upon  them.  In  many  passages  scattered  throughout  the 
religious  texts  of  all  periods  we  find  it  stated  that  the  deceased 
has  acquired  the  powers  of  such  and  such  a  god,  and  that  as  a 
result  he  has  become  the  counterpart  or  fellow  of  several  gods,  and 
that  he  takes  his  place  among  the  company  of  gods  in  the  proper 
persons  of  several  of  their  number.  A  still  further  development 
of  the  idea  makes  every  member  of  the  body  of  the  deceased  to  be, 
first,  under  the  protection  of  a  god,  and  secondly,  to  become  that 
same  member  of  the  god  its  protector ;  hence  his  whole  body 
becomes  the  "double  company  of  the  gods,"  and  the  "two  great 
"  gods  watch,  each  in  his  place,  and  they  find  him  in  the  form  of 
"  the  double  company  of  the  gods  weighing  the  words  of  every 
"  chief  like  a  chief,  and  they  bow  down  before  him,  and  they  make 
"offerings  to  him  as  to  the  double  company  of  the  gods."  ^  More- 
over, the  deceased  is  made  in  the  texts  to  stand  up  at  the  head  of 
the  company  of  the  gods  as  Seb,  the  "  erpa,"  or  hereditary  chief, 
of  the  gods,  and  as  Osiris,  the  governor  of  the  divine  powers,  and 
as  Horus,  the  lord  of  men  and  of  gods.^     His  bones  are  the  gods 

1  See  Pepi  I.,  11.  317,  318.      <z=>  H  )    "11    ^-^  '^  %\    ^   """^^   fl  /www 

'^k  [>-  ^^  k  innnmminii'  t's  ii 

niiniiiinnnii. 

=  ^-ininmwiP2inj-qpi^ 
^ip^  -^niT  p«Fi-.i-i«6. 


IJEIFICATION    OF   THE   DEAD  109 

and  goddesses  of  heaven  ;  ^  his  right  side  belongs  to  Horus,  and 
his  left  side  to  Set;  he  becomes  the  actual  son  of  Tern,  or  Tem-Ra, 
and  Shu,  Tefnet,  Seb,  and  Nut,  and  he  is  the  brother  of  Isis, 
Nephthys,  Set,  and  Thoth,  and  the  father  of  Horus.^  The  god 
Horus  taketh  his  own  Eye  and  giveth  it  to  him,^  and  he  bestoweth 
upon  him  his  own  ha  or  double,^  and  never  leaveth  him,  and 
the  Bull  of  the  JSTine  ^  maketh  wide  his  dominions  among 
the  gods. 

The  oldest  copy  of  the  prayer  for  the  deification  of  the 
members  of  the  body  is  found  in  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line  565  ff.), 
and  as  it  is  very  important  from  several  points  of  view  a  version 
of  it  is  here  given :  — "  The  head  of  this  Ra-meri  is  in  the  form 
of  [that  of]  the  hawk  ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in 

heaven.     The  skull,    ■^    v^  @ ,  of  this  Pepi  is  that  of  the  divine 

Goose  ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.     The 

[hair]  of  this  Pepi  is  the  ....   ^"^^^   of  Nu  ;  he  cometh  forth 

and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.     The  face  of  this  Pepi  is  the 

face  of  Ap-uat,  \/  £^  ^^  £^  v^ ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth 

himself  up  in  heaven.  The  two  eyes  of  Ra-meri  are  the  great 
goddess  (Hathor  ?)  at  the  head  of  the  Souls  of  Annu  ;  he  cometh 
forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.     The  mouth  of  this  Pepi 

is    Khens-ur,  I  ^^^    ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up 

in  heaven.  The  tongue  of  this  Pepi  is  the  steering-pole  (?)  of  the 
boat  of  Maat ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven. 
The  teeth  of  this  Pepi  are  the  Souls  [of  Annu]  ;  he  cometh  forth 
and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  lips  of  this  Pepi  are 
the  .   .  .  .   ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven. 

1  See  Teta,  1.  209.  3  See  Unas  {Becueil),  torn,  iii ,  pp.  209-211. 


3 

4 

1.  265. 

5 


^5P  ^.    -^^^  .      _  A  —  n  rCTnl    □ 


a:^p— crm]^-  p'p=i->-«'- 


110 


DEIFICATION   OF   THE   DEAD 


The  CHIN  of  this  Pepi  is  Khert-Khent-Sekhem,  ^  r|Tj|  ^  ^  ;  he 
Cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  backbone  of 
this  Pepi  is  [the  Bull]  Sma,  1  ^  ^■Sv  .  \q  cometh  forth  and 
raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  shoulders  and  arms  of  this 
Pepi  are  Set ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven. 
The  [breast]  of  this  Pepi  is  Baabu,  J  ^^  fl  J  y  5  ^^®  cometh 
forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  heart  of  this 
Ra-meri  is  Bastefc ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up 
in  heaven.  The  belly  of  this  Ra-meri  is  Xut ;  he  cometh 
forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  [loins  of 
this  Pepi  are]  the  Great  and  Little  companies  of  the  gods ; 
he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The 
BACK  of  this  Pepi  is  Heqet ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth 
himself  up  in  heaven.     The  buttocks,  ®  ^"^^^  of  this  Ra-meri  are 

D    'C?  '3'' 

the  Semket  and  Mat  boats  ;  ^  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself 
up  in  heaven.  The  phallus  of  this  Pepi  is  Hap  ;  ^  he  cometh 
forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  two  thighs^  of 
Ra-meri  are  Nit  and  Serqet ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself 
up  in  heaven.  The  two  legs  *  of  this  Ra-meri  are  the  twin  soul- 
gods  at  the  head  of  Sekhet-tcher ;  ^  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth 
himself  up  in  heaven.  The  soles  of  the  two  eeet  ^  of  this  Ra- 
meri  are  the  double  Maati  boat ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth 
himself  up  in  heaven.  The  heels  (?),  "^  ^,  of  this  Pepi  are  the 
Souls  of  Annu ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in 
heaven." 

In  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  versions  of  this  interesting  text  were 
Avritten  in  papyri  containing  the  TJooJo  of  the  Dead,  and  of  these 
the  following  exhibit  variant  readings  which  appear  to  indicate 
changes  of  belief. 


AAAAAA 


D 

A,WVNA 

5 


XA  ^ 


minim 


(i 


o 


DEIFICATION    OF   THE   DEAD 


111 


Fkom  the  Papyrus  of  Nu. 

(Brit.  Mus.,  No.  10,477,  sheet  6.) 

"  My  hair  is  the  hair  of  Nu. 
"  My  face  is  the  face  of  the  Disk. 
"  My  eyes  are  the  eyes  of  Hathor. 
"  My  ears  are  the  ears  of  Ap-uat. 
"  My  nose  is  the  nose  of  Khenti- 

"  khas. 
*'My  lips  are  the  lips  of  Anpu. 
"My    teeth    are    the    teeth    of 

''  Serqet. 
"  My  neck    is   the   neck  of  the 

"  divine  goddess  Isis. 
"  My   hands    are   the    hands   of 

"  Ba-neb-Tattu. 
"  My  fore-arms  are  the  fore-arms 
"  of  Neith,  the  Lady  of  Sai's. 
"My  backbone  is  the  backbone 

"  of  Suti. 
"  My  phallus  is  the  phallus   of 

"  Osiris. 
"  My  reins  are  the  reins  of  the 

"  Lords  of  Kher-aha. 
"  My  chest  is  the  chest  of  Aa- 

"  sheht. 
"  My   belly   and    back    are   the 
"  belly  and  back  of  Sekhet. 
"  My  buttocks  are  the  buttocks 

"  of  the  Eye  of  Horus. 
"  My  hips  and  legs  are  the  hips 

"  and  legs  of  Nut. 

"  My  feet  are  the  feet  of  Ptali. 

"  [My  fingers]  and  my  leg-bones 

"  are  the  fino-ers    and   leo;- 

"  bones  of  the  Living  Gods. 

"There   is   no   member   of    my 


From  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 
(Brit.  Mus.,  No.  10,470,  sheet  32.) 

"The  hair  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the 

"  hair  of  JSTu. 
"  The  face  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the 

"  face  of  Ra. 
"  The  eyes  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the 

"  eyes  of  Hathor. 
"  The  ears  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the 

"  ears  of  Ap-uat. 
"  The  lips  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the 

"  lips  of  Anpu. 
"The  teeth  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the 

"teeth  of  Serqet. 
"The  neck  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the 

"  neck  of  Isis. 
"  The  hands   of  Osiris   Ani  are 
"  the  hands  of  Ba-neb-Tattu. 
"  The  shoulder  of  Osiris  Ani  is 

"  the  shoulder  of  Uatchet. 
"  The  throat  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the 

"  throat  of  Mert. 
"  The   fore-arms    of    Osiris   Ani 
"  are  the  fore-arms  of  the 
"  Lady  of  Sais. 
"The  backbone  of  Osiris  Ani  is 

"  the  backbone  of  Set. 
"  The  chest  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the 
"  chest    of    the     Lords     of 
"  Kher-Aha. 
"  The  flesh  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the 

"  flesh  of  Aa-shefit. 
"The  reins  and  back    of  Osiris 
"  Ani    are    the    reins     and 
"  back  of  Sekhet. 
"  The  buttocks  of  Osiris  Ani  are 


112 


DEIFICATION   OF   THE    DEAD 


body  which  is  not  the 
member  of  a  god.  The 
god  Thoth  shieldeth  my 
body  wholly,  and  I  am 
Ra  day  by  day."  ^ 


"the  buttocks  of  the  Eye 

"  of  Horus. 
"The  phallus  of  Osiris  Ani  is 

"  the  phallus  of  Osiris. 
"  The  legs  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the 

"  legs  of  Nut. 
"  The  feet  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the 

"  feet  of  Ptah. 
"The  fino:ers  of  Osiris  Ani  are 

"  the  fingers  of  Orion. 
"  The   leg-bones   of    Osiris   Ani 

"  are  the  leg-bones  of  the 

"  Living  Uraei." 

The  text  which  follows  that  describing  the  deification  of  the 
members  in  the  inscription  of  Pepi  I.^  is  perhaps  of  even  greater 
interest,  for  it  declares  that : — 

"  This  Pepi  is  god,  the  son  of  god  ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth 
"  himself  up  to  heaven.  This  Ra-meri  is  the  son  of  Ra,  who  loveth 
"him ;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  Ra  hath 
"  sent  forth  this  Ra-meri,  who  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up 
"  to  heaven.  Ra  hath  conceived  this  Pepi,  who  cometh  forth  and 
"  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  Ra  hath  given  birth  to  this  Pepi, 
"  who  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  This  [is]  the 
"  word  of  power  which  is  in  the  body  of  Ra-meri,  and  he  cometh 
"forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  This  Ra-meri  is  the 
"  Great  Power  among  the  great  company  of  sovereign  chiefs  who 
"  are  in  Annu,  and  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to 
"heaven." 

In  the  previous  pages  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Great 
company  of  the  Gods  of  Heliopolis  contained  nine  or  more  gods, 
and  that  whenever  these  Avere  adopted  by  other  cities  and  towns 
the  attributes  of  tlie  chief  of  the  Heliopolitan  gods  were  transferred 
to  the  local  nome-god,  and  the  identities  of  both  gods  were  merged 
in  each  other.     It  will,  however,  be  evident  at  a  glance  that  there 


^  See  my  CJiaj)ter$  of  Coming  Forth  hi/  Daij  (Translation),  p.  94. 
2  Line  574, 


THE   GODS    OF   HERMOPOLIS  113 

were  very  few  localities  which  could  afford  to  maintain  in  a  proper 
state  the  worship  of  nine  or  more  great  gods  in  addition  to  that  of 
the  nome-god,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  we  find  that  very  few  even 
of  the  great  towns  and  cities  adopted  all  the  gods  of  the  companies 
of  Heliopolis,  and  that  very  few  possessed  companies  of  gods  which 
contained  as  many  members  as  nine.  The  city  of  Khemennu 
(Hermopolis)  was  famous  as  the  sanctuary  of  the  company  of  Eight 

Gods,  indeed  the  name  "Khemennu,"         5,  means ''the  city  of  the 

Eight  Gods."     The  names  of  these  gods  Avere  : — 1.  Nu, 


AAAAAA 


2-N-.°^=:i.  3.H.,.,||^|.  ,.m,..,ii^ii. 

5.  Kekdi,   ^W^-T"^-     6.    Kekuit,   ^W^-j^'^.      7. 
Kereh,    ^    I  .^^s.  3  .     8.  Kerehet,    ^   |  2~~^  J)  ?  ^^^1  with  their 

leader  Tehuti,  or  Thoth,  they  formed  one  of  the  oldest  of  the 
companies  of  gods  in  all  Egypt.  The  names  of  the  members  of  the 
pant,  or  company,  of  Hermopolis  as  here  given  are  taken  from  the 
texts  inscribed  on  the  walls  of  the  temple  which  Darius  11.  built  at 
Hebet  in  the  Oasis  of  Kharga/  and  which  is  a  comparatively  late 
building,  but  there  is  reason  for  believing  that  they  are  copied  from 
very  ancient  documents,  and  that  taken  together  this  group  of  gods 
represents  the  oldest  form  of  the  Hermopolitan  jj«2iL  In  some  lists  of 
the  gods  Amen  and  Ament  are  made  to  take  the  places  of  Nu  and 
Nut,  and  those  of  Kereh  and  Kerehet  are  filled  by  Nenu  and  ISTenut; 
in  others  Amen  and  Anient  are  substituted  for  Kereh  and  Kerehet.^ 
Throughout  Egypt  generally  the  company  of  gods  of  a  to"\vn 
or  city  were  three  in  number,  and  they  were  formed  by  the  local 
deity  and  two  gods  who  were  associated  with  him,  and  who  shared 
with  him,  but  in  a  very  much  less  degree,  the  honour  and 
reverence  which  were  paid  to  him.  Speaking  generally,  two 
members  of  such  a  triad  were  gods,  one  old  and  one  young,  and 
the  third  was  a  goddess,  who  Avas,  naturally,  the  wife,  or  female 
counterpart,  of  the  older  god.  The  younger  god  was  the  son  of 
the  older  god  and  goddess,  and  he  was  supposed  to  possess  all  the 

1  See  Brngsch,  Beise  nach  der  grossen  Oase  el-Khargeh,  Leipzig,  1878,  pi.  14. 

2  For  the  lists  of  the  ])ciiit  of  Thoth  at  Edfii,  Dendera,  Karnak,  Philae,  etc., 
see  Bragsch,  Beligionimd  Mythologie,  p.  127. 

I 


114  THE   CONCEPTION    OF   THE   TRIAD 

attributes  and  powers  which  belonged  to  his  father.  The  head  of 
the  triad  was  sometimes  Ra,  and  sometimes  a  god  of  compara- 
tively limited  reputation,  to  whom  were  ascribed  the  power  and 
might  of  the  great  Sun-god,  which  his  devotees  assumed  that  he 
had  absorbed.  The  feminine  counterpart  or  wife  of  the  chief  god 
was  usually  a  local  goddess  of  little  or  no  importance  ;  on  the  other 
hand,  her  son  by  the  chief  god  was  nearly  as  important  as  his  father, 
because  it  was  assumed  that  he  would  succeed  to  his  rank  and 
throne  when  the  older  god  had  passed  away.  The  conception  of 
the  triad  or  trinity  is,  in  Egypt,  probably  as  old  as  the  belief  in 
the  gods,  and  it  seems  to  be  based  upon  the  anthropomorphic 
views  which  were  current  in  the  earliest  times  about  them.  The 
Egyptian  provided  the  god  with  a  wife,  just  as  he  took  care  to 
provide  himself  with  one,  in  order  that  he  might  have  a  son  to 
succeed  him,  and  he  assumed  that  the  god  would  have  as  issue  a 
son,  even  as  he  himself  wished  and  expected  to  have  a  son.  In 
later  times,  the  group  of  nine  gods  took  the  place  of  the  triad, 
but  we  are  not  justified  in  assuming  that  the  ennead  was  a  simple 
development  of  the  triad.  The  triad  contains  two  gods  and  one 
goddess,  but  the  ennead  contains  five  gods  and  four  goddesses, 
being  made  up  of  four  pairs  of  deities,  and  one  supreme  god.  The 
ennead  is,  however,  often  regarded  as  a  triad  of  triads,  and  the 

three  enneads  of  Heliopolis,  111111111111111111111111111 , 
as  a  triad  of  a  triad  of  triads.  The  conception  of  the  ennead  is 
probably  very  much  later  than  that  of  the  triad.^  Examples 
of  triads  are : — At  Mendes,  Ba-neb-Tattu  "^  ^:z^  M  ^'  ^^*"^®^^^* 
^  c^  I  (|(|  ^  |l,  and  Heru-pa-khart  ^  D  ^  ^  ^;  a*  Tcheqa, 
Sebek  [l  J  ^,  Isis  jj  ^  ^,  and  Amen  (]  "  ^;  at  Memphis,  Ptali 

III  ^'^"^'^  P  t  ^^^  5'  '"^^  I-^^"l^^t^P  5  k:^  ^  -^*  ^^''^''^ 
Amen-R.  ()  ^  ?  ^ ,  Mut  ^  ^  ^^nd  Khensu^^j  ^  ^ ;  and 

triads  like  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus  J^,  j  ^,  ^^jj  ^  ^?  ^^^  ^®*' 
Nephthys,  and   Anubis  P^^,  'O'o^'  IT^S^  ^^^^^"^  ^^°^" 

^  An  exactly  opposite  view  is  taken  by  M.  Maspero  (La  Mythologie  :Egy])tienne, 
p.  270). 


POLYTHEISM   AND   MONOTHEISM  115 

shipped  in  several  places  in  Egypt.  The  members  of  many  triads 
in  Egypt  varied  at  different  times  and  in  different  places,  but 
variations  were  caused  chiefly  by  assimilating  local  gods  and 
goddesses  with  the  well-known  members  of  the  companies  of  the 
gods  of  Heliopolis. 

The  facts  recorded  in  the  preceding  pages  show  that  the  great 
gods  of  the  dynastic  period  in  Egypt  were  selected  from  a  large 
number  of  local  gods,  who  were  in  turn  chosen  from  among  the 
representatives  of  the  gods  of  the  desert,  and  mountain,  and  earth, 
and  water,  and  air,  and  sky,  who  had  been  worshipped  in 
predynastic  times.  Thus  in  the  great  company  of  the  gods  of 
Heliopolis  we  have  Shu,  a  form  of  An-her  hi^^=^J|>  the  local 
god  of  Sebennytus  ;  Osiris,  the  local  god  both  of  Busiris  and 
Mendes ;  Isis,  a  form  of  the  still  more  ancient  goddess  "  Uatchit, 
lady  of  Pe,"  |  If]  ^  L,^^^^  ,  ^  "p,  i.e.,  Buto  ;  Tefnet,  the  goddess 
of  a  district  in  the  fifteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt ;  etc.  The  gods 
of  the  later  jDredynastic  period  were,  of  course,  developed  out  of 
the  multitude  of  spirits,  good  and  bad,  in  whom  the  most  primitive 
Egyptians  believed,  and  it  is  clear  that  in  general  characteristics 
the  gods  of  the  dynastic  period  were  identical  with  those  of  the 
predynastic  period,  and  that  the  Egyptians  rarely  abandoned  any 
god  whose  priests  in  the  earliest  times  had  succeeded  in  establishing 
for  him  a  recognized  position.  The  form  of  the  worship  of  the 
gods  must  have  changed  greatly,  but  this  was  due  rather  to  the 
increase  in  the  general  prosperity  of  the  country  than  to  any 
fundamental  change  in  the  views  and  beliefs  of  the  Egyptians  as  to 
their  gods ;  the  houses  of  the  gods,  or  temples,  became  larger  and 
larger  and  more  magnificent  as  increased  wealth  flowed  into  the 
country  as  the  result  of  foreign  conquest,  but  the  gods  remained 
the  same,  and  the  processions  and  ceremonies,  though  more  mag- 
nificent under  the  New  Empire,  preserved  the  essentials  of  the 
early  period.  But  if  we  examine  the  religious  texts  carefully  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  Egyptians  were  always  trying  to  reduce  the 
number  of  their  gods,  or,  in  other  words,  were  always  advancing 
from  polytheism  to  monotheism.  The  priesthood  and  the  educated 
classes  must  have  held  religious  views  which  were  not  absolutely 
identical  with  those  of  the  peasant  who  cultivated  the  fields,  but 


116  ABSORPTION    OF   ANCIENT    GODS 

such,  I  believe,  were  concerned  chiefly  with  the  popular  forms  of 
worship  of  the  gods  and  with  conceptions  as  to  their  nature.  The 
uneducated  people  of  the  country  clung  with  great  tenacity  to  the 
ordinary  methods  of  celebrating  their  worship,  principally  because 
the  frequent  festivals  and  the  imposing  ceremonies,  which  formed  a 
large  and  imjDortant  part  of  it,  were  regarded  as  essential  for  their 
general  well-being ;  the  priests  and  the  educated,  on  the  other 
hand,  clung  to  them  because  their  influence  was  not  sufficiently 
powerful  to  establish  a  j^ojiular  form  of  religion  and  worship  which 
would  be  consistent  with  their  own  private  views. 

Every  change  which  can  be  traced  in  the  religion  of  the 
country  proves  that  the  priesthoods  of  the  various  great  religious 
centres  absorbed  into  the  new  systems  whenever  possible  the 
ancient  gods  and  the  ancient  beliefs  in  them  ;  hence  during  the 
period  of  the  highest  culture  in  Egyj^t  we  find  ideas  of  the  grossest 
kind  jostling  ideas  which  were  the  product  of  great  intellectuality 
and  much  thinking.  Expressions  which  are  the  result  of  a  series 
of  beliefs  in  tree  gods,  desert  gods,  water  gods,  earth  gods,  and  gods 
with  human  passions,  abound,  and  it  is  these  which  have  drawn  down 
upon  the  Egyptians  the  contempt  of  the  Hebrews,  the  Greeks,  and 
the  Romans,  and  even  of  modern  skilled  investigators  of  Egyptian 
religion  and  mythology.  It  has  not  been  sufiiciently  realized  that 
the  polytheism  of  the  Egyptians  had  aspects  which  Avere  peculiar 
to  itself,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  one  jDhase  of  the  beliefs 
of  this  people  which  appears  to  be,  and  which,  the  Avriter  thinks, 
undoubtedly  is,  monotheistic.  When  the  j^i'iests  of  Heliopolis 
formulated  their  system  of  theogony  they  asserted  that  the  god 
Tem  produced  the  two  gods  that  issued  from  himself,  i.e.,  Shu  and 
Tefnut,  by  masturbation,^  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  in  making 
this  declaration  they  were  repeating  what  the  half  savage  and 
primitive  Egyptians  may  really  have  believed;  but  it  would  be 


1 

11.  465,  466 


P^  Q       AA/Vv'^  ^2i  AAA/V\A 


NOTION   OF   DIVINE   UNITY  117 

utterly  wrong  to  declare  that  the  priests  themselves  believed  these 
things,  or  that  such  a  statement  represented  the  views  of  any 
educated  person  in  Egypt  on  the  subject  of  the  origin  of  the  gods. 
In  Chapter  xvii.  of  the  Booh  of  the  Deacl'^  is  an  allusion  to  the 
fight  which  took  place  between  Horus  and  Set,  but  no  Egyptian 
who  accepted  the  refined  beliefs  which  are  found  even  in  the  same 
chapter  could  have  regarded  this  allusion  as  anything  more  than 
the  record  of  an  act  of  savagery  which  had  crept  into  religious 
texts  at  a  time  when  acts  of  the  kind  were  common. 

The  same  might  be  said  of  dozens  of  expressions  and  allusions 
which  are  scattered  throughout  the  texts  of  all  periods,  and  no 
just  investigator  will  judge  the  Egyptians,  and  their  religion, 
and  their  beliefs  by  the  phases  of  thought  and  expressions  which 
reflect  the  manners  and  customs  and  ideas  of  the  primitive  dwellers 
in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.  But  yet  it  is  precisely  by  such  things  that 
the  Egyi^tian  religion  is  judged  by  many  modern  writers.  The 
eminent  Egyptologist,  M.  Maspero,  says  that  before  he  began  to 
decipher  Egyptian  texts  for  himself,  and  so  long  as  he  was  content 
to  reproduce  the  teaching  of  the  great  masters  of  the  science  of 
Egyptology,  he  believed  that  the  Egyptians  had  in  the  earliest 
times  arrived  at  the  notion  of  divine  unity,  and  that  they  had 
fashioned  an  entire  system  of  religion  and  of  symbolic  mythology 
with  an  incomparable  surety  of  hand.  When,  however,  he  began 
to  study  the  religious  texts  he  found  that  they  did  not  breathe  out 
the  profound  wisdom  Avhich  others  had  found.  ^'  Certainly,"  he 
says,  "no  one  will  accuse  me  of  wishing  to  belittle  the  Egyptians  ; 
"  the  more  I  familiarize  myself  with  them,  the  more  I  am  persuaded 
"  that  they  were  one  of  the  great  nations  of  the  human  race,  and 
"  one  of  the  most  original  and  most  creative,  but  at  the  same 
"  time  that  they  always  remained  half  savage."  ^     In  other  words, 


X 


PnT^I^"^^^^"     ^J-^^ "^  J  (11.67,68). 

"  •'  J'ai  era,  au  debout  de  ma  carriere,  il  y  a  bientot  viugt-cinq  ans  de  cela,  et 
"  j'ai  soutenii  pendant  longtemps,  comme  M.  Brugsch,  que  les  Egyptians  etaient 
"  parvenus,  des  lear  enfance,  a  la  notion  de  I'unite  divine  et  qu'ils  en  avaient  tire 
"  un  systems  entier  de  religion  et  de  mytbologie  symbolique,  agence  d'un  bout  a 


118  NOTION    OF   DIVINE   UNITY 

the  Egyptians,  according  to  M.  Maspero,  never  attained  to  the  idea 
of  the  unity  of  God,  and  Avere  at  the  best  of  times  nothing  but  a 
half  savage  nation.  It  is  easy  to  bring  a  charge  of  being  half 
savafje  ao;ainst  a  ffreat  nation,  but  in  this  case  the  charo-e  is  ill- 
founded,  and  is,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  contradicted  by  every 
discovery  which  is  made  in  Egypt ;  for  the  more  we  learn  of  the 
ancient  Egyptians  the  more  complete  and  far-reaching  we  find 
their  civilization  to  have  been.  The  evidence  of  the  monuments  of 
the  Egyptians  will,  however,  be  sufficient  to  exhibit  the  character 
of  this  civilization  in  its  true  light,  and,  as  the  expression  "  half 
savage  "  is  at  best  very  vague,  and  must  vary  in  meaning  according 
to  the  standpoint  of  him  who  uses  it,  we  pass  on  to  consider  the 
question  whether  the  Egyptians  attained  to  a  conception  of  the 
unity  of  God  or  whether  they  did  not. 

.We  have  seen  that  M.  Maspero  believes  that  they  did  not,  but 
on  the  other  hand  some  of  the  greatest  Egytologists  that  have 
ever  lived  thought  that  they  did.  He  thinks  that  the  Egyptians 
possessed  the  greater  number  of  their  myths  in  common  with  the 
most  savage  of  the  tribes  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds,  that  their 
practices  preserved  the  stamp  of  primitive  barbarism,  that  their 
religion  exhibits  the  same  mixture  of  grossness  and  refinement 
which  is  found  in  their  arts  and  crafts,  that  it  Avas  cast  in  a  mould 
by  barbarians,  and  that  from  them  it  received  an  impression  so 
deep  that  a  hundred  generations  have  not  been  able  to  eftace  it, 
nor  even  to  smooth  its  roughnesses  or  to  soften  its  outlines.^     No 

"  I'autre  avec  une  siirete  de  main  incomparable.  C'ctait  le  temps  ou  je  n'avais  pas 
"  essaye  par  moi-meme  le  dcchiffrement  des  textes  religieux  et  ou  je  me  bornais 
"  Ji  reproduire    I'enseignement  de  nos   grands  maitres.     Quand  j'ai  ete  contraint 

"  de  les  aborder, j'ai  du  m'avoiier  <\  moi-mume  qu'ils  ne  respiraient  point 

"  cefcte  sagesse  profonde  que  d'autres  y  avaient  sentie.  Certes  on  ne  m'accusera  pas 
"  de  vouloir  deprecier  les  Egyptiens  :  plus  je  me  familiarise  avec  eux,  et  plus  je  me 
"  persuade  qu'ils  ont  etc  un  des  grands  peuples  de  I'humanite,  I'un  des  plus  originaux 
"  et  des  plus  croateurs,  mais  aussi  qu'ils  sont  toujours  demeures  des  demi-barbares." 
L(i  MytholcKjie,  p.  277. 

1  "  En  art,  en  science,  en  industrie,  ils  ont  beaucoup  invente,  beaucoup 
"  produit,  beaucoup  promis  surtout ;  leur  religion  presente  le  meme  melange  de 
"  grossicrete  et  de  raffincment  qu'on  retrouve  dans  tout  le  reste.  La  plupart  de 
"  ses  mythes  lui  sont  communs  avec  les  tribus  les  plus  sauvages  de  I'Aucien  et  du 
"  Nouveau-Monde  ;  ses  pratiques  gardent  le  cachet  de  la  barbarie  primitive,  et  je 
"crois  que  les  sacrifices  humains  n'en  avaient  pas  diaparu  dans  certaines  circon- 


EGYPTIAN    MONOTHEISM  119 

one  will  attempt  to  deny  that  traces  of  half  savage  ideas  and 
customs  are  to  be  found  in  Egyptian  religious  literature,  but  the 
real  question  is  whether  such  traces  render  it  impossible  for  the 
Egyptians  ever  to  have  attained  to  the  concejDtion  of  monotheism, 
whether  the  existence  of  such  half  savage  ideas  and  customs  is 
incompatible  with  it  or  not.  Every  one  who  is  familiar  with  the 
literatures  of  oriental  religions  knows  that  the  sublime  and  the 
ridiculous,  spiritual  ideas  and  material  views,  intellectuality  and 
grossness,  and  belief  and  superstition,  occur  frequently  in  close 
juxtaposition,  and  illustrations  of  these  statements  may  be  found 
in  the  writings  of  the  Arabs,  and  even  in  certain  parts  of  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures.  Yet  no  one  will  deny  that  the  Arabs  as  a 
people  have  been  monotheists  since  the  time  of  Muhammad  the 
Prophet,  and  no  one  will  refuse  to  admit  that  the  Hebrews,  after 
a  certain  date  in  their  history,  became  monotheists  and  have 
remained  so.  The  literatures  of  both  the  Hebrews  and  the  Arabs 
are  full  of  extravagances  of  every  kind,  but  no  competent  person 
has  denied  to  these  nations  the  right  to  be  called  monotheistic,  and 
no  one  in  the  light  of  modern  research  will  attempt  to  judge  them 
by  the  coarsest  expressions  and  materialistic  thoughts  which  are 
found  in  their  Scriptures.  On  the  other  hand,  no  one  expects  to 
find  either  in  Hebrew  or  in  Arabic  literature  the  lofty  spiritual 
and  philosophical  conceptions  which  modern  highly  educated 
thinkers  associate  with  the  idea  of  monotheism,  and  the  same  is, 
of  course,  to  be  said  for  the  literature  of  the  Egyptians ;  but  it  is 
not  difficult  to  show  that  the  idea  of  monotheism  which  existed  in 
Egypt  at  a  very  early  period  is  at  least  of  the  same  character 
as  that  which  grew  up  among  both  Hebrews  and  Arabs  many 
centuries  later. 

To  prove  this  statement  recourse  must  be  had  to  a  number  of 
extracts  ^  from  religious  texts,  and  among  such  may  be  quoted  the 
following': — To  the  dead  king  Unas  it  is  said,  "Thou  existest  at 

"  stances,  meme  sous  les  grands  Pharaons  tliebains.  Elle  a  ete  jetee  au  moule 
"  par  des  Barbares,  et  elle  a  regu  d'eus  une  empreinte  si  forte  que  cent  generations 
"  n'ont  pu,  je  ne  dirai  pas  I'effacer,  mais  en  amollir  les  asperites  et  en  adoucir  les 
"contours."     La  Mythologie,  p.  277. 

^   See  tlie  group  given  in  my  Papyrus  of  Ant,  London,  1895,  p.  Ixxxiii.  ff. 


120  EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM 

"  the  side  of  God,"   ^^  ^^=^  t\  <=>  S  P  ^=  1 ;    of  Teta  it  is  said, 
"  He  weighetli  words,  and  behold,  God  hearkeneth  unto  the  words," 

king  it  is  said,  ''  God  hath  called  Teta  (in  his  name,  etc.)," 
/wwNA  n  1  ^ww^  r^  (j  J  |;  to  Pepi  I.  it  is  said,  "Thou  hast  received  the 
"  attribute  (or,  form)  of  God,  thou  hast  become  great  therewith 
''  before  the  gods,"  ^  D  ^_^  []  <2>-  ^  ]  __^  ^^^  1 1^  <^ 
I  I  I ;  and  "  Thy  mother  Nut  hath  set  thee  to  be  as  God  to  thine 

^'  enemy  in  thy  name  of  God,"  A  aaaa/v^  '\\    "^     ^  ^^  V\     "1 

j ;    and   of  the    same   king  it   is 


■*Vi     ww\^ 


said,  "This  Pepi  is,  therefore,  God,  the  son  of  God,"  [gi]^]  D^ 
(J  <=>  1 1  ^^  Hi.  It  may  be  argued  that  we  should  render  neter,  T  , 
in  these  passages  by  "a  god"  or  "the  god,"  but  this  would  make 
nonsense  of  the  passages  in  most  cases.  There  is  no  point  in 
telling  a  dead  king  that  he  will  live  "by  the  side  of  a  god,"  or 
that  "  a  god  "  will  listen  to  his  words  when  he  is  weighing  words, 
i.e.,  giving  judgment  upon  matters  in  the  next  world ;  Avhat  the 
writer  said  and  what  he  meant  his  readers  to  understand  was  that 
Unas  will  live  with  the  God,  or  God,  and  that  he  will  have  such  an 
exalted  position  there  that  he  will  be  appointed  by  God  to  act  as 
judge,  an  offic^e  which  belonged  to  God  himself,  and  that  God  will 
listen  to,  i.e.,  obey  his  rulings.  The  above  passages  are  taken  from 
texts  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties,  but  they  are  only  copies  of 
older  documents,  for  there  are  good  reasons  for  thinking  that  even 
so  far  back  as  the  time  when  they  Avere  made,  about  B.C.  3300,  the 
texts  had  already  been  revised  two  or  three  times,  and  changes 
and  additions  made  in  them  as  the  result  of  modified  beliefs  and 
ideas. 

The  value  of  such  passages,  however,  consists  in  the  fact  that 
they  prove  conclusively  that  so  far  back  as  B.C.  3300  some  one 
god  had  become  so  great  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptians  that 
he  stood  out  from  among  the  "gods,"  111  i,  and  was  different 
from    the    First,    Second,    and   Third   companies    of    the    gods, 


OSIRIS   AS   GOD  121 

immimninninnmi-  Anoti...  view  whic. 

may  be  urged  is  that  the  neter,     |,  here  referred  to  is  either  the 

god  Osiris  or  the  god  Ra,  but  even  so  it  must  be  admitted  that 
Osiris  or  Ra  occupied  a  position  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptian 
theologian  which  was  far  superior  to  that  of  any  of  the  "  gods." 
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the  Pyramid 
Texts  are  full  of  passages  in  which  we  are  told  what  great  things 
Ra  will  do  for  the  deceased  in  the  next  world,  and  the  honour 
which  he  will  ^Day  to  him,  and  we  must  therefore  conclude  that 
the  God  referred  to  in  the  passages  which  we  have  quoted  is  not 
Ra,  although  he  may  be  Osiris.  But  if  we  arrive  at  this  conclu- 
sion we  must  admit  that  ia  the  relatively  remote  period  about 
B.C.  3300  Osiris  was  considered  to  be  such  a  great  god,  and  to 
occupy  such  an  exalted  position  at  the  head  of  the  "  gods,"  that 
he  could  be  spoken  of  and  referred  to  simply  as  "  God."  We  have 
already  seen  it  implied  that  Osiris  was  the  judge  of  those  who 
were  in  the  Underworld,  and  we  know  from  the  text  of  Unas 
(line  494)  that  he  sat  on  a  throne  in  heaven ;  ^  as  the  king  is  said 
to  have  become  "  god,  and  the  messenger  (or,  angel)  of  God "  ^ 
(line  175),  and  to  "  enter  into  the  place  which  was  more  holy  than 
any  other  place  "  ^  (line  178),  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  God  of 
the  Pyramid  Texts  was  an  entirely  different  being  from  the  "  gods  " 
and  the  "  companies  of  the  gods."  The  deceased  is  actually  called 
"  Osiris  Pepi,"  ^  and  as  he  is  said  to  have  become  an  angel  of  God, 
if  Osiris  be  that  God  and  judge,  he  must  have  held  a  similar 
position  to  that  of  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  who  is  said  to  "judge 
among  the  gods,"  ^  and  must  have  been  ministered  to  by  "gods' 

„     I  csz:  n  J 

^  ra^   <^jj   (gjj]-     Pepi  I.,  1.60. 
■'  Psalm  Ixxxii.  1,  IDJ3^>    WJlbii  21^3.. 


122  CONCEPTION   OF   GOD 

of  a  rank  inferior  to  his  o-s\ti.  We  may  assume,  then,  that  the 
God  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  was  Osiris,  the  god  and  judge  of  the 
dead,  but  it  is  clear  that  the  only  aspects  of  the  God  which  are 
referred  to  are  those  which  he  bears  as  the  god  and  judge  of 
the  dead.  We  have,  unfortunately,  no  means  of  knowing  how 
he  was  described  by  his  earliest  worshippers,  for  the  priests 
of  Heliopolis,  when  they  absorbed  him  into  their  theological 
system,  took  care  to  give  him  only  such  characteristics  as  suited 
their  own  views ;  they  have,  however,  shown  us  that  he  was 
the  judge  of  the  dead,  and  that  he  occuj^ied  a  unique  position 
among  the  gods,  and  enjoyed  some  of  the  powers  possessed  by 
the  God  of  the  nations  which  are  on  all  hands  admitted  to  be 
monotheistic. 

But  Ave  may  obtain  further  information  about  the  conception 
of  God  among  the  Egyptians  by  an  examination  of  certain  passages 
in  the  famous  Precepts  of  Kaqemna  and  the  Precepts  of  Ptah- 
hetep.  The  first  of  these  works  was  composed  ia  the  reign  of 
Seneferu,  a  king  of  the  IVth  Dynasty,  and  the  second  in  the  reign 
of  Assa,  a  king  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  but  we  only  know  them  from 
the  copies  contained  in  the  papyrus  which  was  given  to  the 
Bibliotheque  Royale  in  Paris  by  E.  Prisse  d'Avennes  in  1847.^ 
This  document  was  probably  written  about  the  period  of  the 
XVIIth  Dynasty,  and  may,  of  course,  contain  readings  and  addi- 
tions reflecting  the  opinions  of  the  Egyptians  on  religion  and 
morals  which  were  then  current ;  but  the  foundations  of  both 
works  belong  to  an  earlier  time,  though  whether  that  time  fell 
under  the  Xllth  Dynasty,  as  some  think,  or  under  the  IVth  and 
Vth  Dynasties  as  the  works  themselves  declare,  matters  little  for 
our  present  purpose.  In  both  sets  of  Precepts  we  have  a  series  of 
moral  aphorisms  similar  to  those  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the 
Book  of  Wisdom,  and  Ecclesiasticus,  and  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 
and  they  are  given  as  the  outcome  of  the  experience  of  men  of  the 
world  ;  neither  the  work  of  Kaqemna  nor  that  of  Ptah-lietep  can 
be  said  to  have  been  drawn  up  from  a  religious  point  of  view, 
and   neither  author  supports   his  advice  by  appeals  to   religious 

1  See   Facsimile    tViin    papyrus    ^gyptien  en    airacUres    hieraiiques,    Paris, 
1847,  folio. 


CONCEPTION   OF   GOD 


123 


authority.     In  these  works  we  find  the  following  admonitions  and 
reflections : — 


1. 


1'' 


an  rehlientu        Miepert  drit  neter 

"  Not  [are]      known       the  things      which  maketh      Grod," 

i.e.,  the  things  which  will  come  to  pass  by  God's  agency  cannot  be 
known,  that  is  to  say,  God's  ways  are  inscrutable. 


2. 


/I\ 


I   I  I 


1 


du      dm  tail  Jcher  sehher  neter 

The  eating        of  bread      is  according  to      the  plan  of      God, 

i.e.,  a  man's  food  comes  to  him  through  the  providence  of  God. 


'■I 


dm     -      h 
Thou  shalt  not 


dri         her 
put      terror 


em 
into 


reth 
men  and  women 


Jihesef  neter 

is  opposed  [thereto]       God. 


4. 


HP 


ter        em     selchet  td      set 

labour      in     the  field   (which)  hath  given 


dr       seka  -  nek 

If  thou  hast  land 
for  ploughing 

1' 

neter 
God. 


"•^ .  The    author   of   this   observation   was   Kaqemna ;    the  other   ones   are  by 
Ptah-hetep. 


124 


CONCEPTION    OF   GOD 


5. 


A 


dr     un  -  nek         em        sa      dqer  dri  -  h  f^a 

If  thou  wouldst  be  a  man  perfect     make  thou    [thy]  son 


eih     smam  neter 

to  be  pleasing  unto      God. 


I  ^  d1 


A 


sehet&p      dqu        -         h       em        Ihepert-neh  l-Jiejyert 

Satisfy     thy  dependants      by       thy  actions  ;    it  should  be  done 


1 


(5??.         //esesu  neter 

by  him  that  is  favoured  by  God. 


7. 


mertu 
What  is  loved 


1' 

neter 
of  God 


D 


is 


setem 
obedience ; 


an  setem 
disobedience 


en  mestetu 
hateth 


1' 

neter 
God. 


=^  A 0 

mdk  sa  nefer        en  tat  a 

Verily       a  son      good  [is]      of      the  gifts 


1' 

neter 
of  God. 


And  finally  from  the  Prisse  Papyrus  may  be  quoted  the  exhorta- 
tation,  "  If  having  been  of  no  account,  thou  hast  become  great,  and 
"  if,    having   been   poor,  thou   hast   become   rich,  when  thou  art 


IDEA   OF   DIVINE   PROVIDENCE  125 

"  governor  of  the  city  be  not  hard-hearted  on  account  of  thy 
"  advancement,  because  thou  hast  [only]  become 

mer  se'ptu  neter 

"  the  guardian       of  the  provisions       of  God." 

From  this  group  of  extracts  we  learn  that  the  ways  of  the  god 
referred  to  in  the  "  Precepts  "  were  inscrutable,  that  it  was  he  who 
was  supposed  to  give  a  man  children,  and  property,  and  food,  that 
he  was  ojDposed  to  any  man  tyrannizing  over  his  fellow  creatures ; 
that  he  loved  to  be  obeyed  and  hated  disobedience,  i.e.,  those  who 
would  not  hearken  unto  him ;  that  the  perfect  man  was  he  who 
brought  up  his  son  in  ways  pleasing  to  God  ;  that  God  expected  the 
man  who  had  been  favoured  by  him  to  do  good  to  those  who  were 
dependent  upon  him  ;  and  the  writer  of  the  "  Precepts  "  urged  the 
governor  of  a  city  to  remember  that  he  was  only  the  guardian  of 
goods  and  provisions  which  belonged  to  God.  In  all  these  extracts 
it  is  clear  that  the  allusion  is  to  some  great  and  j)owerful  being  who 
rules  and  governs  the  world  and  provides  according  to  his  will  for 
those  who  are  in  it.     In  the  second  extract  we  have  the  words 

si'hlier  neter,  i.e.,  the  seJcher  of  God.     The  word  sehlier  1  )  ,  has 

many  meanings,  among  them  being  "  thought,  plan,  intention, 
scheme,  design,"  and  the  like,  and  when  Ptah-hetep  said  that  "  the 
eating  of  bread  is  according  to  the  seJcher  of  God,"  there  is  no 
doubt  that  he  intended  his  readers  to  understand  that  a  man 
obtained  bread,  or  food,  to  eat  according  to  the  plan  or  design 
which  God  had  made,  or  decreed  beforehand.  A  rendering  which 
would  very  well  represent  the  words  sehlier  neter  is  "  Divine  provi- 
dence ;  "  but  they  do  not  justify  the  translation  "  fate  "  which  has 
been  proposed  for  them. 

Now  we  know  that  both  the  writers  Kaqemna  and  Ptah-hetep 
lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis,  because  their  tombs  are  at 
vSakkara,  and  if  they  lived  at  Memphis  their  great  local  god  would 
be  Ptah  of  the  Beautiful  Face,  or  Ptali  of  the  White  Wall,  whose 


126  PRECEPTS    OF   KHENSU-HETEP 

feminine  counterpart  was  Sekliet  and  whose  son  was  I-em-hetep. 
But  in  the  group  of  extracts  just  given  there  is  no  mention  of  any 
of  these  gods,  and  the  God  referred  to  cannot  be  Osiris,  first, 
because  the  texts  are  not  funereal,  and  secondly,  because  the 
attributes  ascribed  to  this  God  are  not  of  those  which  we  know 
from  later  texts  belonged  to  the  god  of  the  dead.  Who  then  is  the 
God  whose  j)ower,  and  providence,  and  government  of  the  world 
are  here  proclaimed  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  is  that  the  God 
referred  to  is  God,  Whose  power  men  of  the  stamp  of  Ptah-hetep 
discerned  even  at  the  remote  period  in  which  he  lived,  and  Whose 
attributes  they  clearly  distinguished ;  He  was  in  their  opinion  too 
great  to  be  called  anything  else  but  God,  and  though,  no  doubt, 
they  offered  sacrifices  to  the  gods  in  the  temple  at  Memphis,  after 
the  manner  of  their  countrymen,  they  knew  that  God  was  an 
entirely  different  Being  from  those  "  gods." 

Passing  now  to  the  period  of  the  New  Empire  we  have  to 
consider  a  few  extracts  from  the  famous  work  commonly  known  as 
the  "Maxims  of  Ani,"  or  the  "Precepts  of  Khensu-hetep,"  which 
was  first  described^  by  E.  de  Rouge  in  1861,  and  was  published  in 
full  fifteen  years  later  by  Chabas.^  The  text  ^  is  written  upon  a 
papyrus  which  was  found  in  a  box  lying  upon  the  floor  of  the  tomb 
of  a  Christian  monk  at  Der  al-Medinet,  and  from  considerations  of 
palaeography  it  must  probably  be  assigned  to  the  period  of  the 
XXIInd  Dynasty,  but  the  original  composition  must  be  a  great 
deal  older,  and  it  may  well  date  from  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty.  The 
following  extracts  will  illustrate  the  conception  of  God  in  the  mind 
of  the  author  of  the  "  Maxims  " : — 


1^  -  p:^^^ 

jpa  neter      en  saaud  ren   -  f 

The  God     is  for  making  great  his  name. 


1  See    Moniteur,    15    Aout,    1861 ;    and    Comptes    Eendus,    Paris,    1871,    pp. 
340-350. 

2  See  L':Egyptolo(jie,  Chalons-sur-Saone  and  Paris,  4to,  1876-1878. 

3  A  facsimile  was  published   by  Mariette  in  Papyrus  ^gyptiens  du  Musee  de 
£oulaq. 


PRECEPTS    OF   KHENSU-HETEP 


127 


pa 
The 


1 

netei 


V 

D 


dput  pa 

God  [is]  the  judge  of      the 


J) 


ma  a 
right. 


or,  the  God  is  the  judge,  the  righteous  one,  i.e.,  the  judge  who 
passes  sentence  according  to  what  is  straight,  mad,  i.e.,  the  law 
the  canon. 


3. 


du     tdii 
Giveth 


1 


neter-hu 
thy  God 


'J 
unu 

the  means  of  subsistence. 


4.  "  I  have  given  thee  thy  mother,"  the  writer  says  to  his  son, 
and  she  carried  thee  even  as  she  carried  thee,  and  took  upon 
herself  a  heavy  burden  for  thy  sake,  and  did  not  lean  upon  me. 
When  at  length  thou  wast  born  after  having  been  carried  by  her 
for  months,  she  laid  herself  under  thy  yoke,  and  she  nourished 
thee  for  three  years, -^  and  was  never  weary  of  thee.  .  .  .  When 
thou  wast  sent  to  school  to  be  taught,  she  came  every  day 
without  fail  to  thy  master  [bringing]  bread  and  beer  [for  thee] 
from  her  house.  Now  thou  hast  become  a  man  and  hast  married 
a  wife  and  hast  a  house,  set  thine  eye  upon  thy  child,  and  bring 
him  up  as  thy  mother  brought  thee  up.  Wrong  not  thy  mother 
lest  she  lift  up 


ddui-set      en 
"her hands  to 

[and  punish  thee]. 


^    (3 


^ 


u 


pa 
the 


1 

neter    emtuf  setemu  sebhu-set 

God  [and]  he  hearken  unto   her  prayers  " 


I 


amma  sic  en 

Let  [a  man]     give  himself       to 


pa 
the 


1 

neter 
God, 


■^  Literally,  "  lier  breasts  were  in  thy  mouth  for  three  years." 


128 


PRECEPTS    OF   KHENSU-HETEP 


I 


^   O 


1 

saim         -         Jc       sn        em-ment       en  pa  neter 

"  keep  thou  thyself  daily  for  the  God, 


w 


tuaiiu  ond-qeti  iki 


ra 


o 


au  tuami  ma-qeii  va  haru 

' to-morrow  (?)     being  like         the         day  (to-day?)." 


(3  AAAAA^     I  I 


Ichennu  en    neter  hetu-tuf 

"  The  sanctuary     of     God     its  abomination 


pu         sehebii 
is  much  speaking. 


-^    l2i'  1 


senemehii-neh 


em 


ah 


mert 


"  Make  thou  thy  prayers    with    a  heart    of  love 


du       metet  -  f 
all  the  petitions 


A/VV\Aft 


fll  ,  ,  , 

??,eZ>^  dmeiinu  dri-f 

"  of  which  are  in  secret.        He  will  perform 


I   ^  (^ 


kheru-fuk 
thy  affairs, 


^  ¥^^- 


V^   \\\V- 


U  I    I    I   1  ^'       ^  (^  I  '^^'"'^      -21  ^i— a  L'    ' 

setemu-f         d       tcJieteiu-h  seslieiyn-\_f'\ 

"  he  will  hear  what  thou  say  est,      he  will  accept 


AA/VW\ 

0  e 


^  (3  I 


utemm-tuh 
thine  offerings. 


1 


e 


T  v\     /WVNAA        v\ 

iitennii  neter-lcu  sau-tu  <>   er 

"  In  making  offerings  to     thy  God        guard  thou  thyself  against 


lifX 


Jd  _m  Jf^ 
betau-tuf 


O 


.^^ 


a 


ennii 


maat-h         er 


"  the  things  which  he  0      observe  [with]  thine  eye 

abominateth. 


PRECEPTS    OF   KHENSU-HETEP 


129 


A 


£S 


c^     (^ 


AAAAA^ 

N\r\fsi\r\  \\ 


'paif 
"his 


selilieru 
plans. 


qenteb         emtuh  senenti-tu 

Devote       thyself    to  the  adoration 


1 


[^ a 


lit  I 


6771 

"of 

AAA/W\ 

en 
"of 


ren  -  f 
his  name. 


su       tat 
It  is  he  who  giveth 


W^\\\    fi 


^^1 


haiu 
souls 


hell 
to  millions 


aaru 
forms, 


p:^^^ 


^daua 
"  magnifieth  him. 


O 
Shim 


f 


^ 


^  w 
sdaud  pa        enti 

and  [he]  magnifieth  whosoever 

I     i — I  I  \>      AA^AAA 

ar  7iefer  ta     pen         en 

Now      the  god      of  this  earth      is 


hliid      du         naif         mdtui 


pa  btiuu  her 

"  the  god  Shu,    he  who  is  over  the  horizons.     His  similitudes 


^^ 


A a 

tdtd-thd 


senterd 


her  tep  ta  laia-itia  sentera  em 

"  [are]  upon    earth,    are  given  [to  them]    offerings  of  incense     with 


V^s,,, 


^  o 


Icai-set  em-ment. 

"  their  food  offerings       daily." 


The  group  of  passages  given  above  supplies  a  new  set  of 
attributes  ascribed  by  the  Egyptians  to  God,  and  they  show  that 
they  believed  this  Being  to  be  one  who  judged  according  to  right, 
who  was  jealous  for  the  honour  of  his  name,  who  received  prayers 

K 


130   CONCEPTION  OF  GOD  AND  THE  GODS 

and  offerings,  and  who  granted  to  the  suppliant  all  his  petitions, 
and  performed  all  his  desires,  when  such  petitions  were  made  to 
him  in  secret  and  with  a  "  loving  heart."  The  seventh  extract  is 
peculiarly  instructive,  for  in  it  we  have  a  sharp  distinction  drawn 
between  this  God  and  the  solar  god  Shu,  who  is  here,  clearly, 
identiiied  with  the  Sun-god.     The  worshipper  of  God  is  exhorted 

to  consider  His  plans,  or  designs,  fl  ^^  \  '  \^  which  are  manifest 

upon  earth,  to  pay  good  heed  to  the  manner  in  which  he  makes 
oiferings  to  Him,  and  to  dedicate  himself  to  the  adoration  of  His 
name,  for  it  is  He  Avho  giveth  souls,  i.e.,  life,  to  millions  of  beings, 
and  those  who  exalt  Him  He  will  exalt.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
similitudes  of  the  god  Shu,  the  lord  of  the  horizons,  i.e.,  the  skies 
of  the  South  and  the  North,  the  East  and  the  West,  and  the  god 
of  this  earth,  are  upon  the  earth,  and  to  them  offerings  of  incense 
and  meat  are  made  daily.  There  is  no  need  here  to  dwell  upon 
the  lofty  conception  of  what  is  meet  for  the  worship  of  God  ;  nor 
upon  the  fact  that  many  of  the  phrases  in  the  extract  are  identical 
in  meaning,  and  almost  in  words,  with  passages  in  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures,  for  they  Avill  be  familiar  to  all,  and  extracts  like  the 
following  will  occur  to  every  reader : — "  Consider  the  wondrous 
works  of  God "  (Job  xxxvii.  14)  ;  "  them  that  honour  me  I  will 
honour"  (1  Samuel  ii.  30),  etc.  The  word  rendered  "similitudes," 
Q  ^  H  n  i__fl  ^   .^    difficult   to    explain   in   detail  though  its  general 

meaning  is  clear  enough,  and  we  must  understand  by  it  "  things 
which  are  in  the  likeness  [of  Shu]  "  ;  these  can,  apparently,  only 
refer  to  the  gods  to  whom  incense  and  offerings  were  brought 
daily.  The  great  importance  of  .the  second  group  of  extracts 
consists  in  the  fact  that  they  emphasize  and  develop  the  difference 
between  the  Egyptian  conception  of  God  and  the  gods.  The 
author  of  the  "Maxims,"  like  Kaqemna  and  Ptah-hetep,  set  out 
to  write  a  book  of  moral  precepts  by  which  he  intended  his  son  to 
mould  his  course  of  life  and  to  be  guided.  This  work  is  not  of  a 
funereal  character,  therefore  the  God  who  is  referred  to  throughout 
cannot  be  Osiris,  and  the  context  proves  beyond  all  doubt  that  the 
writer  is  alluding  to  the  same  Being  as  were  the  earlier  writers 
of  moral   aphorisms   already   mentioned.      In    the    case   of    the 


ONENESS    OF   THE   GODS 


131 


"  Maxims,"    however,    the  word   for  God,   neter  "1  J|,    is   usually 

qualified  by  the  emphatic  article  pa  A^  ^^, 

But  in  all  the  passages  quoted  above  there  is  no  distinct 
statement  that  the  God  alluded  to  therein  is  God  alone,  and  that 
there  is  no  other  God  besides  Him,  although  this  is  clearly  implied  ; 
we  must  therefore  turn  to  another  class  of  texts  in  which  the 
attribute  of  oneness  or  unity  is  ascribed  to  one  or  more  "great 
gods,"  and  see  how  it  is  applied.  The  god  Ta-tunen  is  called, 
"  One,  maker  of  mortals,  and  of  the  company  of  the  gods  "  ;  ^  the 
god  Ea-Tem  is  called,  "  lord  of  heaven,  lord  of  earth,  maker  of 
"  beings  celestial  and  of  beings  terrestrial,  God  One,  who  came 
"  into  being  in  primeval  time,  maker  of  the  world,  creator  of 
"  rational  beings,  maker  of  Nu  (the  sky),  creator  of  the  Nile, 
"  maker  of  whatsoever  is  in  the  waters,  and  giver  of  life  to  the 
"  same,  knitter  together  of  the  mountains,  making  to  come  into 
"  being  men  and  women,  and  beasts  and  cattle,  and  creator  of  the 
"heavens  and  the  earth"  ;^  the  great  Khu  (Spirit)  whom  Tem 
created  is  described  as  the  "only  One  in  Nu"  ;  ^  Osiris  is  said  to 
be  "lord  of  the  gods,  god  One"  ;*  and  in  a  remarkable  passage, 
in  which  the  whole  of  the  attributes  of  the  Sun-a-od  Ra  have  been 
transferred  to  Amen-Ra,  we  have  the  following  statement  wherein 
this  god  is  said  to  be  "  the  holy  (or,  venerable)  Soul  which  came 


1     -    ^%  W 

-,-r  If       AAA/VV\ 

I  A\  _Zi.       AAAA/V^ 

of  Ani,  sheet  1,  line  6. 

n      □      ^      


AAftAAA 


□     ®  I 


H 


\\     /VWWK 


I         I         I 


Pfli 


(9 


Papyrus  of  Hunefer,  sheet  1,  line  5  ff . 

3  JBook  of  the  .Dead,  Chap.  Ixxviii.  16. 
*  Ibid.,  Chap,  clxxiii. 


I         j"lll'nil        iiiiitnii  I 


/VVVV^A     /wwv\ 


132 


ONENESS   OF   THE   GODS 


'  into  being  aforetime,  the  great  god  who  liveth  in  (or  by)  Maat 
'  (i.e.,  unfailing  and  unvarying  order  and  regularity), 


pautti 
the  paut 


^ 


W 


P^ 


G 


D 

fepi  7U£S  pautti 

primeval  [which]  gave     the  two  companies  of 

gods, 


Icheper 


"  came  into  being 


1 

nete7 
ofod 


birth  to 

7ieb  dm     -    f 

every      through  him, 


I        I 

^ a a  w 

ud      uoui 
one  alone, 


n 


am 


f 


linen 


shad 


ta 


em 


sep  tepi 


"  he  made    what  exists    when  the  earth  began    in    primeval  time, 


sheta.u 
"  hidden 


^fl 


\ 


^^ 


viesi  aslit 

of  births,     manifold 


hlieperiu 
of  forms, 


(2 

an     rekhtu 
not  is  known 


im 


bes      -     f 


"his  growth."  ^ 

The  text  goes  on  to  say  that  Amen-Ra,  is  the  "holy  Sekhem  (i.e., 
"  Power),  the  god  who  is  beloved,  and  is  terrible  and  mighty  in 
"his  risings,  lord  of  space,  the  Power,  Khepera,  the  creator  of 
"  every  evolution  (or,  thing)  which  belongeth  to  his  existence,^ 
"  except  whom  at  the  beginning  none  other  existed."  Here  then 
we  have  Ta-tunen,  Ra-Tem,  and  the  god  Osiris  all  called  "  God 

One,"    neter   iid,  "1  Jj      i     ,  and  in  the  last   extract  we  have  the 

remarkable  expression  "  God  One  alone,"      i       ^T        3,    applied 

to  Amen-Ra.     If  we  consider  for  a  moment  we  shall  see  that  the 


See  Maspero,  Mem.  Miss.  Arch.,  torn  i.,  p.  594. 


ONENESS   OF   THE   GODS  133 

gods  Tern  and  Khepera  are  only  forms  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and  as 
Tatunen  was  concerned  in  the  production  of  the  Sun-god  he  also  is 
a  solar  god ;  at  the  time  when  the  above  extracts  were  written, 
i.e.,  under  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty,  we  have  abundant  proof  that  the 
Egyptians  were  continually  adding  to  the  attributes  which  they 
ascribed  to  Osiris,  and  that  such  attributes  were  those  which 
belonged  to  some  form  of  Ra  or  to  Ra  himself.  The  word  "  One  " 
then  is  applied  in  these  cases  to  Ra,  and  to  the  forms  of  Ra,  and 
to  a  god  who  had  come  to  be  regarded  in  one  aspect  at  least  as  a 
solar  god,  and  it  will  be  found  on  examination  of  the  texts  that 
whenever  a  god  or  goddess  is  described  as  "  One  "  it  is  because 
that  deity  has  been  endowed  by  the  writer,  whether  rightly  or 
wrongly  is  another  matter,  with  some  of  the  attributes  of  Ra. 

It  is  easy  to  see  from  the  hieroglyphic  extract  given  above 
that  to  the  god  there  described  are  attributed  many  of  the  creative 
qualities  which  we  assign  to  Grod  Almighty.  Thus  he  is  said  to 
be  the  primeval  Paut  or  divine  substance  who  gave  birth  to  the 
two  companies  of  the  gods  (in  this  case  we  must  understand  the 
company  of  the  gods  of  heaven  and  the  company  of  the  gods  of 
earth,  and  not  the  Great  and  Little  Companies  of  the  gods  of 
Heliopolis),  and  every  god  came  into  being  by  him  or  through  him. 
Here  it  is  quite  clear  that  "every  god  "  means  only  every  inferior 
being  who  possessed  something  of  the  quality  of  a  neter  or  "  god," 
and  every  being  who  ministered  to  the  great  Paut,  and  who  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  would  be  grouped  under  the  name  "  Elohlm," 
D\l'72;J,  or  among  the  "  angels,"  and  in  Arabic  literature  among  the 
good  Jinn.  The  text  goes  on  to  say  not  only  in  primeval  times, 
i.e.,  "in  the  beginning,"  he  created  whatever  exists  upon  the 
earth,  but  also  that  in  primeval  time  no  other  being  existed  with 
him.  This  is  a  definite  statement  of  the  unity  or  oneness  of  God 
which  cannot  be  gainsaid,  and  it  Avas  this  attribute  of  unity  or 
oneness  which  the  priests  of  various  cities  ascribed  to  their  local 
god  whenever  they  could.  We  have  no  means  of  saying  whether 
this  idea  of  oneness  or  unity  was  first  applied  to  Ra  or  to  some 
more  ancient  god  such  as  Horus,  but  it  is,  in  the  writer's  opinion, 
quite  certain  that  it  existed  in  the  minds  of  the  educated  classes  of 
Egypt  in  the  earliest  times,   and  that  in  all  periods  it  was  the 


134 


THE  GREAT  SELF-CREATED  GOD 


central  point  of  their  conceptions  of  God.  But  the  text  goes  on  to 
say  that  the  great  Paut  who  created  the  companies  of  the  gods  is 
"  hidden  of  births  and  manifold  of  forms,"  and  that  "  his  growth 
(or  development)  is  unknown."  This  is  only  another  way  of  saying 
that  the  manner  in  which  the  beings  and  things  produced  by  the 
Paut  came  into  being  is  unknown,  and  that  he  appears  under  many 
forms.  We  may  here  refer  to  the  passage  in  the  XVIIth  Chapter 
of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (line  9),  wherein  it  is  said  : — 


0 


1 


ODD 


nuk  neter  da         hheper  tchesef 

"  I  am     the  great  god      self-created, 


/ 


^    AAAAAA 

Nu 
Nu, 

© 


D 


that  is  to  say, 


qemam  renu 

"  who  made  his  names 


m 

paid  neteru 

the  company        of  the  gods 


neter 
Sfod." 


em 


as 


Concerning  this  being  the  question  is  asked,  "  Who  then  is  this  ?  " 


and  the  following  answer  is  given : — 


Bd    pu 
"  It  is  Ra 


qemam 
who  created 


AAAAV\      d—M 

renu 
names 


en 
for 


at     -     f 
his  members 


kheper 


U 


eneii 


D 


"  and  these  came  into  being 


w 


ami 


hhet 


Rd 


em 
in  the  form  of 


"  who  are  in  the  following     of  Ra." 


m 

neteru 
the  gods 


On  the  creative  power  of  the  great  Paut  special  emphasis  is  laid  in 
the  extract  on  p.  132,  for,  after  declaring  that  he  created  in  the  begin- 


HENOTHETSM  135 

ning  whatsoever  exists,  the  text  adds  that  he  created  everything 
that  had  to  do  with  his  own  coming  into  being  ;  and  in  the  passages 
from  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  it  is  taught,  according  to  one  dogma, 
that  the  names  of  the  great,  self-produced  god  Nu  became  the 
company  of  gods  under  the  form  of  God,  and  according  to  another 
that  the  gods  who  were  in  the  train  of  Ra  were  the  members  or 
limbs  of  Ra,  and  that  these  limbs  were,  in  turn,  the  names  of  Ra. 
The  last  text  quoted  is  of  considerable  importance,  for  it  gives  us  a 
direct  proof  that  the  attributes  of  the  god  Nu  were  transferred  to 
Ra,  and  that  Ra  was  identified  absolutely  with  Nu,  and  the  last 
text  but  one  quoted  shows  how  the  attributes  of  Ra  were  transferred 
to  Amen,  who  was  originally  only  the  local  god  of  Thebes,  by 
means  of  the  fusion  of  the  two  gods  into  Amen-Ra.  We  know 
that  to  many  gods  were  ascribed  the  attributes  of  Ra,  and  that  all 
solar  gods  were,  in  the  dynastic  period  at  least,  held  to  be  forms  of 
him ;  if  we  could  identify  them  all  we  should  be  able  to  reduce  the 
number  of  Egyptian  gods  considerably. 

The  attribute  or  quality  of  oneness  or  unity,  which  is  ascribed 
first  to  the  great  God  who  was  the  creator  of  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  and  all  therein,  and  secondly  to  the  Sun-god  who  was 
regarded  as  the  visible  type  and  symbol  of  God  and  his  various 
forms,  and  thirdly,  at  a  later  period  to  the  god  Osiris,  has  been 
termed  "henotheism"  by  many  writers  who  asserted  that  it 
was  a  "phase  of  religious  thought"^  which  was  difi'erent  from 
monotheism.  According  to  the  late  Right  Honourable  Prof.  Max 
Miiller  we  have  become  acquainted  with  this  phase  of  religious 
thought  "  for  the  first  time  through  the  Veda,"  and  he  goes  on  to 
say  that  "when  these  individual  gods  are  invoked  they  are  not 
conceived  as  limited  by  the  power  of  others,  as  superior  or 
inferior  in  rank.  Each  god  is  to  the  mind  of  the  suppliant  as 
good  as  all  the  gods.  He  is  felt  at  the  time  as  a  real  divinity, 
as  supreme  and  absolute,  in  spite  of  the  necessary  limitations 
which,  to  our  mind,  a  plurality  of  gods  must  entail  on  every 
single  god.  All  the  rest  disappear  from  the  vision  of  the  poet, 
and  he  only  who  is  to  fulfil  their  desires  stands  in  full  light 
before  the  eyes  of  the  worshippers."  It  is  quite  true  that  the 
^  Max  Miiller,  Hibhert  Lectures,  p.  285. 


136  HENOTHEISM 

Egyptian  religion  passed  through  a  phase  which  has  been  identified 
as  henotheism,  but,  assuming  for  a  moment  that  we  should  be 
correct  in  calling  that  phase  henotheism,  the  Egyptian  religious 
texts  prove  that  it  was  "  not  the  henotheism  of  Max  Miiller  or  of 
"  Hartmann,  or  of  Asmus,  but  a  practical  henotheism,  i.e.,  the 
"  adoration  of  one  God  above  all  others  as  the  specific  tribal  god  or 
"  as  the  lord  over  a  particular  people,  a  national  or  relative 
''  monotheism,  like  that  of  the  ancient  Israelites,  the  worship  of  an 
^'  absolute  sovereign  who  exacts  passive  obedience.  This  practical 
^'  monotheism  is  totally  different  from  the  theoretical  monotheism, 
^'  to  which  the  Aryans,  with  their  monistic  speculative  idea  of  the 
^'  godhead,  are  much  nearer."  ^ 

These  words  by  the  late  Professor  Tiele  here  quoted  were  not 
applied  by  him  to  the  Egyptian  religion,  but  they  so  well  express 
the  present  writer's  views  about  the  monotheism  of  the  Egyptians 
that  they  are  adopted  for  that  purpose.  Professor  Tiele  was, 
undoubtedly,  the  greatest  authority  on  comparative  religion  of  his 
day,  and  although  he  was  not  an  Egyptologist  at  first  hand,  he 
had  discussed  Egyptian  religious  texts  with  great  experts  like 
Chabas,  Birch,  de  Rouge,  and  others,  to  such  good  purpose  that 
his  opinion  on  the  subject  is  of  peculiar  value.  According  to  him 
the  Egyptian  religion  presents  two  apparently  contradictory  and 
irreconcilable  phenomena :  — 1.  A  lively  sentiment  of  the  spirituality 
of  God  united  to  the  coarsest  materialistic  representations  of 
different  divinities ;  and  2.  A  sentiment,  not  less  lively,  of  the 
unity  of  God,  united  to  an  extremely  great  multiplicity  of  divine 
persons.^  The  best  educated  priests,  he  thinks,  who  were  the 
most  vigorous  promoters  of  religious  progress,  Avere  as  much 
attached  to  forms  and  traditional  symbols  as  the  people  themselves, 
and  they  were  most  unwilling  to  give  up  any  part  of  them.  The 
symbolism,  being  misunderstood  by  the  ignorant  folk,  produced 
serious  errors,  and  the  forms  under  which  the  Egyptians  repre- 
sented their  gods,  and  which  are  repellent  to  our  refined  taste, 
answered  in  their  minds  to  the  idea  of  divinity  which  was  purer 
and  more  spiritual  than  the  noble  and  beautiful  forms  of  the  gods  of 

^  C.  P.  Tiele,  in  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  vol.  xx.,  p.  367. 
2  Histoire  Comparee  des  Anciennes  Religions,  Paris,  1882. 


POLYTHEISM   AND   MONOTHEISM  137 

Hellas.  The  ignorant  felt  no  repugnance  to  monstrous  representa- 
tions because  they  appeared  as  representations  having  a  profound 
and  mysterious  meaning ;  the  learned  understood  the  meanings  of 
the  symbols,  and  paid  their  adoration  through  them  to  the  truth 
of  which  they  were  the  coverings.  In  other  words,  the  uneducated 
loved  a  plurality  of  gods,  while  the  priests  and  educated  classes 
who  could  read  and  understand  books  adopted  the  idea  of  One 
God,  the  creator  of  all  the  beings  in  heaven  and  on  earth  who,  for 
want  of  a  better  word,  were  called  "  gods." 

The  priests  and  theologians  saw  nothing  incompatible  in 
believing  that  God  was  One,  and  that  he  existed  under  innumer- 
able forms.  We  may  note  the  existence  of  the  same  view  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  where,  in  spite  of  the  commandments,  "  Thou 
"  shalt  have  no  other  o-ods  before  me.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto 
"  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  likeness  [of  anything]  that  [is] 
"  in  heaven  above,  ....  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to 
"  them,  nor  serve  them  .  .  .  ."  (Exodus  xx.  3-5),  the  Israelites 
felt  no  scruple  in  representing  God  in  the  midst  of  His  sons,  and 
for  a  very  long  time  they  continued  to  adore  a  number  of  divine 
beings  side  by  side  with  Yahweh.^  Thus  in  Joshua  xxii.  22,  we 
read,  "  The  Lord  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he  knoweth  and 
"  Israel  shall  know;  "  in  Exodus  xxii.  28  is  given  the  commandment, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  revile  the  gods  nor  curse  the  ruler  of  thy  people  ;  " 
in  Psalm  cxxxvi.  2,  Israel  is  exhorted  to  "  give  thanks  unto  the 
"  God  of  gods  ;  "  the  "  sons  of  God  "  we  know  from  Genesis  vi.  2  ; 
Job  ii.  1  ;  xxxviii.  7;^  and  that  "gods"  in  some  passages  mean 
nothing  but  beings  possessing  some  characteristic  of  God  is  clear 
from  1  Samuel  xxviii.  13,  wherein  we  read  that  the  witch  of 
Endor  told  Saul  that  she  "  saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth." 
The  allusion  in  this  last  passage  is  clearly  to  some  kind  of 
supernatural  being  or  beings.  Returning  for  a  moment  to  the 
views  of  Professor  Tiele,  we  admit  that,  judging  from  certain 
texts  of  the  Dynastic  Period,  he  is  justified  in  asserting  that 
in  Egypt  monotheism  is  anterior  to  polytheism;  but  judging 
from  the  evidence  of  the  recently   discovered   monuments  of  the 

^  Tiele,  Hist.  Comjmree,  p.  138. 

2  C£.  also  Dent.  x.  17  ;  Psalms  xiv.  3  ;  Ixxxii.  1,  6;  Job  i.  6. 


138  EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM 

predynastic  and  archaic  periods,  we  must  admit  that  polytheism 
appears  to  be  older  than  monotheism.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
monotheistic  ideas  which  appear  in  the  works  of  Kaqemna  and 
Ptah-hetep  were  certainly  not  invented  during  the  jDeriod  in 
which  they  lived,  and  there  is  every  reason  for  believing  that  they 
originated  at  a  much  earlier  date.  If  literary  compositions 
belonging  to  the  first  three  dynasties  are  ever  brought  to  light 
from  the  tombs  of  Egypt,  we  shall  probably  find  that  the  idea  of 
the  oneness  of  God  is  expressed  with  just  as  much  force  and 
certainty  as  it  is  under  the  following  dynasties,  and  in  the  same 
works  we  shall  also  find  mention  of  the  various  gods  who  were 
created  by  the  great  God  who  was  proclaimed  to  be  One,  and 
expected  to  be  worshipped  Avith  obedience. 

The  final  opinion  of  Professor  Tiele  on  the  Egyptian  religion 
was  that  from  the  beginning  it  was  polytheistic,  but  that  it 
developed  in  two  opposite  directions ;  in  the  one  direction  gods 
were  multiplied  by  the  addition  of  local  gods,  and  in  the  other  the 
Egyptian  drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  monotheism.^ 

We  may  now  consider  the  opinions  of  some  of  the  greatest 
Egyptologists  on  the  monotheism  of  the  Egyptians.  Writing  in 
the  Bevue  Arclieologique  (1860,  p.  73)  E.  de  Rouge  says,  "The 
*'  unity  of  a  supreme  and  self-existent  being,  his  eternity,  his 
"  almightiness,  and  eternal  reproduction  thereby  as  God ;  the 
"  attributing  of  the  creation  of  the  world  and  of  all  living  beings 
"to  the  supreme  God;  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  completed  by 
"  the   dogma  of  punishments  and  rewards ;    such  is  the  sublime 

^  "  Een  Yoorliistorisch.  monotheisme  onderstelt  een  graad  van  ontwikkeling 
"  en  een  vordering-  in  liet  wijsgeerig  nadenken,  die  bij  een  nog  barbaarscli  volk 
"  niet  denkbaar  zijn.  Ook  de  egyptische  godsdienst  is  van  animisnie  en  magisch 
'•  polydaemonisme  uitgegaan  en  zoo  eerst  tot  poljtheisme  opgeklommen.  Dit 
"  polytliei'sme  ontwikkelt  zicli  dan  in  twee  gelieel  tegen  o  vergestelde  richtingen. 
"  Aan  den  eenen  kant  wordt  de  godenwereld,  door  bijeenvoeging  van  plaatselijke 
"  godsdiensten ,  een  gevolg  van  de  ondervverping  der  verschillende  gewesten  met 
"  hun  godsdienstige  middelpunten  aan  liet  gezag  van  een  koning,  en  door  over- 
"  neming  van  vreemde  godlieden,  steeds  rijker.  Aan  den  anderen  kant  nadert 
"  men  het  monotheisme  meer  en  meer,  zonder  het  ooithelder  en  ondubbelzinnig  nit 
"  te  spreken.  De  geleerden  traclitten  beide  mit  elkander  overeen  te  breugen,  onder 
"  anderen  door  de  vele  goden  voor  te  stellen  als  de  openbaringen  van  den  eenen» 
"ongesehapen,  verborgen  God,  zijn  leben,  door  hem  zelnengeschapen."  See 
Geschiedenis  van  den  Godsdienst  in  de  Oudheid,  Amsterdam,  1893,  p.  25. 


EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM  139 

"  and  persistent  base  which,  notwithstanding  all  deviations  and  all 
"  mythological  embellishments,  must  secure  for  the  beliefs  of  the 
"  ancient  Egyptians  a  most  honourable  place  among  the  religions 
"  of  antiquity."  ^  In  an  article  on  the  "  Religion  of  the  Ancient 
Egyptians,"  written  nine  years  later  as  a  result  of  a  close  study  of 
many  of  the  great  religious  texts,  he  asserted  that  more  than  five 
thousand  years  before  there  existed  in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  the 
hymn  to  the  unity  of  God,  and  the  belief  in  the  unity  of  a  supreme 
God  with  the  attributes  of  Creator  of  men,  and  Legislator  of  man, 
whom  he  has  endowed  with  an  immortal  soul.  In  his  description 
of  the  principal  monuments  at  the  Egyptian  Museum  at  Biilak  in 
Cairo,  Mariette  Bey  said,  "  At  the  head  of  the  Egyptian  pantheon 
"  soars  a  God  who  is  one,  immortal,  uncreated,  invisible  and  hidden 
''  in  the  inaccessible  depths  of  his  essence ;  he  is  the  creator  of  the 
"  heavens  and  of  the  earth ;  he  has  made  everything  which  exists 
"  and  nothing  has  been  made  without  him ;  such  is  the  God  who 
"  is  reserved  for  the  initiated  of  the  sanctuary."  ^  A  similar  view 
was  held  by  Chabas,^  who  said,  "  The  One  God,  who  existed  before 
"  all  things,  who  represents  the  pure  and  abstract  idea  of  divinity, 
"  is  not  clearly  specialized  by  [any]  one  single  personage  of  the  vast 
"  Egyptian  pantheon.     Neither  Ptali,  nor  Seb,  nor  Thoth,  nor  Ra, 

^  "  L'unite  d'un  etre  suprerae  existant  par  lui-meme,  son  eternite,  sa  toute- 
"  puissance  et  la  generation  eternelle  en  Dien ;  la  creation  du  monde  et  de  tons 
"  les  etres  vivants  attribuee  a  ce  Dien  supreme  ;  rimmortalite  de  ITime,  completee 
"  par  le  dogme  des  peines  et  des  recompenses  ;  tel  est  le  fond  sublime  et  persistant 
"  qui,  malgre  toutes  les  deviations  et  toutes  les  broderies  mytbologiqnes,  doit 
"  assurer  aux  croyances  des  anciens   Egyptiens  un  rang  tres  honorable  parmi  les 

"  religions  de  I'antiquite." "  II  y  a  plus  de  5000  ans  qu'a  commence,  dans 

"la  vallee  du  l^i\,  Vliymne  a  VTJnite  de  Dieu  et  a  V Immortalite  de  Vdme;  et  nous 
"  voyons  dans  les  derniers  temps  I'Egypte  arrivee  au  Polytlieisme  le  plus  effrene. 
"  La  croyance  d  V  Unite  du  Dieu  supreme,  a  ses  attributs  de  Createur  et  de  Legislateur 
"  de  Vhomme,  qu'il  a  doue  d'une  dme  immortelle ;  voila  les  notions  primitives 
"  encliassees  comme  des  diamants  indestructibles  au  milieu  des  superfetations  mytho- 
"  logiques  accumulees  par  les  siecles  qui  ont  passe  sur  cette  vieille  civilisation." 
Annules  de  Philosophie  Chretienne,  Paris,  1869,  p.  336. 

2  "  iVu  sommet  du  pantheon  Egyptien  plane  un  Dieu  unique,  immortel,  incree, 
"  invisible  et  cacbe  dans  les  profondeurs  inaccessibles  de  son  essence ;  il  est  le 
"  createur  du  ciel  et  de  la  terre ;  il  a  fait  tout  ce  qui  existe,  et  rien  n'a  ete  fait  sans 
"  lui ;  c'est  le  Dieu  reserve  ;i  I'initie  du  sanctuaire."  Mariette,  Notice,  Cairo, 
1876,  p.  17. 

^  Ccdendriev  des  jours  fastes  et  nefastes,  p.  107. 


140  EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM 

''  nor  Osiris,  nor  any  other  god  is  a  personification  of  him  at  all 
"  times ;  but  of  these  sometimes  one  and  at  other  times  another  is 
"invoked  in  terms  which  assimilate  these  intimately  with  the 
"  supreme  type;  the  innumerable  gods  of  Egypt  are  only  attributes 
"  and  different  aspects  of  this  unique  type." 

M.  Pierret,  in  discussing  the  matter,  holds  the  view  that  the 
texts  prove  that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  a  God  who  was  One, 
and  was  without  a  second,  and  Avas  infinite  and  eternal.     At  the 
very  time,  however,  when  the  scribes  were  writing  upon  papyrus 
or  cutting  upon  stone  the  inscriptions  Avhich  affirmed  this  belief, 
the  artists  were  making  sculptures  of  the  gods  with  heads  of  hawks, 
or  rams,  or  crocodiles,  or  goddesses  with  the  heads  of  lionesses, 
cats,  or  coAvs.     Nevertheless  the  One  God,  who  is  without  a  second, 
is  One  even  among  the  company  of  the  gods,  for  he  has  numerous 
names  and  forms,  and   he   appears  under  sacred   and   mysterious 
forms  in  the  temples,  that  is  to  say  under  the  figures  ^  which  were 
painted  on  the  walls,  and  in  the  statues  of  the  gods  which  were 
set  up  in  the  temples.     The  greatest  supporter  of  the  doctrine  of 
ancient   Egyptian   monotheism   was   the    late    Dr.    Brugsch,   who 
assigned  to  the  word  for  God,  neter  T  Jj,  the  highly  philosophical 
meaning   which   has    been    quoted    above.      Accepting   the   view, 
which  the  Egyptians  themselves  held,   that  the  gods  were  only 
names    of  the  various    attributes   of  the    One    God,   he    searched 
through  the  religious   literature   and  collected   from  the  hymns, 
prayers,    etc.,    which    were    addressed   to   the    various    gods    and 
goddesses  in  various  periods,  a  number  of  epithets  and  attributes  ^ 
which  were   bestowed  upon  them   by  their  worshippers.      These 
extracts  he  classified,  and  when  they  were  grouped  and  arranged 
they  formed  a  description  of  God  such  as  it  would  be  difficult  to 
find   a   parallel   for   outside   the    Holy  Scriptures.      It   has   been 
contended  that  as  these  scattered  epithets  are  never  found  together 
the  ancient  Egyptians  had  no  conception  of  a  God  who  was  One, 
and  was  self-produced,  and  had  existed,  and  would  exist,  always, 
and  was  hidden  and   unknown  of  form  and  name,  and  was  the 
Creator  of  heaven   and   the  gods,  and   earth,  and    man,  and    all 

'   Pierret,  Le  Pdiithi'on  l^]gy2)tien,  Paris,  1881. 

~  They  will  be  found  in  Brugsch,  Religion  uiid  MytJiologie,  p.  96  ff. 


EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM  141 

things,  and  was  at  the  same  time  merciful,  and  compassionate,  and 
loving,  and  the  protector  of  the  weak  against  the  strong,  and  the 
re  warder  and  protector  of  those  who  served  him. 

But  this  contention  is  not  well  founded,  because,  although 
these  attributes  were  ascribed  to  a  miscellaneous  number  of  deities, 
we  must  remember  that  they  would  not  have  been  thus  associated 
unless  the  writers  recognized  such  gods  as  phases  or  aspects  of  the 
Great  God.  The  fact  remains  that  such  attributes  were  ascribed  to 
gods  who  were  created  by  God,  and  that  the  Egyptians  arrived  at 
such  ideas  as  those  described  above  is  a  lasting  proof  of  the  exalted 
character  of  their  religion  and  of  their  conception  of  monotheism. 
The  main  point  to  keep  in  view  is  that  the  gods  of  Egypt  were 
regarded  by  the  Egyptians  generally  as  inferior  beings  to  the  great 
God  who  made  them,  and  that  they  were  not  held  to  be  equal  to 
him  in  all  respects.  Further,  we  must  repeat  that  the  God  referred 
to  in  the  moral  precepts  of  the  Early  Empire  holds  a  position 
similar  to  that  held  by  Yahweh  among  the  Hebrews  and  A-llah 
among  the  Arabs,  and  that  the  gods  and  goddesses  who  were 
ministers  of  his  will  and  pleasure  find  their  counterparts  in  the 
angels,  and  archangels,  and  spirits  of  all  kinds,  both  good  and  bad, 
of  whom  the  Hebrew  and  Arabic  literatures  are  full.  No  surer 
proof  of  this  can  be  given  than  the  well-known  passage  in 
Deuteronomy  vi.  4,  where  it  is  said,  "  Hear,  0  Israel,  Yahweh  our 
"  God  (literally,  gods),  is  YahAveh  One,"  ^  and  the  Egyptian  nete7-  ud 

I  rfl     I  ^,  "One  God,"  as  far  as  the  application  and  meaning  of  ud 

is  concerned,  is  identical  with  that  of  the  Hebrew  word  "rnx  in  the 

IT   V 

text  quoted.  We  may  note,  too,  the  words,  "  Yahweh  our  gods," 
which  show  that  Yahweh  was  identified  with  the  gods,  wrib^^ ,  of  the 
polytheistic  period  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  religion ;  it  is,  however, 
possible  that  when  the  verse  in  Deuteronomy  was  written  the  word 
Elohtm  had  come  to  mean  the  great  God  of  the  Hebrews,  although 
originally  it  had  meant  a  collection  of  sacred  or  divine  beings.  In 
the  Kur'an,  Sura  cxii.,  the  God  of  the  Arabs  is  declared  to  be 
One,  and  from  the  commentaries  on  the  Sura  we  know  that  this 
declaration  was  revealed  to  Muhammad  in  answer  to  the  people  of 

1  Compare  St.  Mark  xii.  29. 


142  EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM 

the  Kuresh,  who  asked  him  concerning  the  distinguishing  attributes 
of  the  God  he  invited  them  to  worship.  If  we  had  all  the  litera- 
ture of  the  early  Hebrews,  and  of  the  Arabs  at  the  period  of  the 
propaganda  of  Muhammad  we  should  probably  find  that  many 
local  gods  in  Palestine  and  Arabia  were  called  One,  but  that  only 
the  God  who  had  the  moral  aspects  which  were  attributed  to  the 
great  God  of  the  Egyptians  by  the  philosophers  of  the  Early 
Empire  succeeded  in  retaining  it  permanently. 

The  religion   of  the  Egyptians   has,   however,    always   been 

regarded  from  two  distinct  and  opposite  points  of  view ;  a  number 

of  scholars,  among  whom  may  be  mentioned  Champollion-Figeac, 

de  Rouge,  Chabas,  Mariette,  Deveria,  Birch,  and  Brugsch,  have 

considered  it  to  have  been  monotheistic,  but  others  have  declared 

unhesitatingly  that  it  was  polytheistic  ;  this  result  is  due  probably 

to  the  way  in  which  it  is  regarded.     Speaking  of  the  difference  of 

opinion  which  existed  on  the  subject  between  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch 

and  himself,  M.  Maspero  says  that  he  and  Brugsch  considered  the 

Egyptian  religion  in  two  different  Avays.     Time,  he  says,  which  has 

done  so  much  harm  to  other  nations,  has  shown  itself  favourable 

to  the  Egyptians.     It  has  spared  their  tombs,  their  temples,  their 

statues,  and  the  thousand  small  objects  which  were  the  pride  of 

their  domestic  life,  and  it  has  led  us  in  such  a  way  that  we  judge 

them  by  the  most  beautiful  and  the  prettiest  of  the  things  which 

they  made,  and  has  at  length  caused  us  to  place  their  civilization 

on  the  same  footing  as  that  of  the  Romans  or  the  Greeks.     But  if 

it  be  looked  at  more  nearly  the  point  of  view  changes ;  to  speak 

quite  shortly,  Thothmes  III.  and  Rameses  11.  resemble  Mtesa  of 

Central  Africa  more  closely  than  they  do  Alexander  or  Caesar. 

It  is  not  their  fault,  but  they  arrived  too  soon  in  a  period  which 

was  too  early,  and  they  must  bear  the  penalty  of  their  precocious- 

ness.     In  art,  in  science,  in  trade,  they  have  invented  much  and 

produced  much,  and  have,  above  all,  promised  much  ;  their  religion 

presents  the  same  mixture  of  coarseness  and  refinement  which  is 

found  in  all  else.     Most  of  its  myths  it  holds  in  common  with  the 

most  savage  tribes  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Worlds.     The  Egyptian 

possessed  the  spirit  of  the  metaphysician,  a  fact  which  he  proved 

when   Christianity  furnished  him  with   a  subject  worthy  of  his 


EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM  143 

subtle  powers.  But,  M.  Maspero  asks,  what  kind  of  metaphysics 
could  proceed  from  so  naive  a  conception  of  the  universe  and  of 
things  which  he  has  revealed?  He  thinks  it  must  be  true,  at 
least  in  the  main,  because  Brugsch  depicted  the  Egyptian  world  in 
a  manner  very  similar  to  his  own,  and  deeming  it  true  he  cannot 
any  longer  admit  the  notion  of  the  Egyptian  Deity  and  his  unity 
which  several  scholars  have  adopted.  He  takes  the  Egyptian 
religion  for  what  it  shows  that  it  is,  viz.,  a  polytheism  Avith  its 
contradictions,  and  its  repetitions,  with  its  dogmas  indecent  some- 
times, cruel  sometimes,  and  ridiculous  sometimes,  according  to 
modern  ideas,  and  with  its  families  of  half-human  gods  which  the 
worshipper  cherished  the  more  or  understood  the  better  the  more 
closely  they  resembled  himself.^  The  opinion  thus  expressed, 
though  unfavourable  to  the  character  of  the  Egyptian,  and  directly 
opposed  to  the  views  of  some  of  the  greatest  Egyptologists  of  the 
last  century,  is  evidently  honest,  and  coming  from  such  a  quarter 
is  entitled  to  the  greatest  respect ;  but  it  seems  that  M.  Maspero 
has  judged  the  Egyptians  of  all  periods  according  to  the  standard 
of  religion  which  was  in  vogue  in  Egypt  in  predynastic  times, 
when  the  primitive  Egyptians  were,  no  doubt,  half  savage. 

The  Egyptians,  being  fundamentally  an  African  people, 
possessed  all  the  virtues  and  vices  which  characterized  the  IS'orth 
African  races  generally,  and  it  is  not  to  be  held  for  a  moment  that 
any  African  people  could  ever  become  metaphysicians  in  the 
modern  sense  of  the  word.  In  the  first  place,  no  African  language 
is  suitable  for  giving  expression  to  theological  and  philosophical 
speculations,  and  even  an  Egyptian  priest  of  the  highest  intellectual 
attainments  would  have  been  unable  to  render  a  treatise  of 
Aristotle  into  language  which  his  brother  priests  without  teaching 
could  understand.  The  mere  construction  of  the  language  would 
make  such  a  thing  an  impossibility,  to  say  nothing  of  the  ideas  of 
the  great  Greek  philosopher,  which  belong  to  a  domain  of  thought 
and  culture  wholly  foreign  to  the  Egyptian.  The  allusion  to 
the  Christian  metaphysics  of  the  Egyptian  is  understandable,  as 
everyone  knows  who  has  taken  the  trouble  to  read  the  literature  of 
the  Copts,  who  transferred  much  of  the  base  and  degraded  Egyptian 
^  La  Mythologie  ^gyptienne,  p.  278. 


144  EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM 

mythology  which  was  current  during  the  first  few  centuries  of  the 
Christian  era  into  their  newly  acquired  belief  in  Jesus  Christ. 
The  lives  of  the  Coptic  martyrs  show  the  use  which  the  Egyptian 
made  of  his  metaphysical  spirit,  and  the  history  of  the  early 
Church  in  Egypt  illustrates  what  happened  when  he  tried  to  apply 
it  to  the  consideration  of  the  common  theological  terms  in  Greek 
and  in  Latin.  Incidentally  we  may  note  that  in  order  to  express 
the  various  ideas  connected  with  the  Christian  Deity  and  the 
Persons  of  the  Trinity  he  was  obliged  to  take  over  the  actual 
Greek  words  into  his  language,  which  was  poor  in  abstract  ideas. 
In  the  picture  which  M.  Maspero  has  given  of  the  Egyptian's 
conception  of  the  universe  and  of  the  origin  of  gods  and  things  he 
has  only  dwelt  upon  the  mythological  side  of  the  question,  and  has 
not  set  forth  all  the  passages  upon  which  other  Egyptologists  have 
based  their  views  about  Egyptian  monotheism ;  moreover,  no 
allowance  appears  to  have  been  made  for  the  peculiar  religious  and 
mental  characteristics  of  the  race.  But  when  all  is  said  against 
the  Egyptian  religion  which  can  be  said,  the  fact  remains  that 
it  is  not  the  religion  itself  which  has  cruel,  ridiculous,  and 
indecent  dogmas,  but  the  myths  wherewith  generations  of  foolish 
priests  obscured  the  pure  beliefs  in  monotheism  and  immortality 
which  seem  to  have  existed  in  Egypt  from  the  earliest  times.  If 
modern  oriental  religions  were  judged  in  the  adverse  manner  in 
which  the  religion  of  ancient  Egypt  has  been  judged,  none  would 
escape  similar  condemnation ;  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of  some 
of  the  religions  of  the  Western  nations. 

The  superstitions  which  exist  among  many  Eastern  nations 
professing  monotheism  and  even  Christianity  are  as  gross  as  those 
found  among  so-called  Pagan  nations  ;  as  examples  may  be  quoted 
the  Christians  of  St.  John  in  Southern  Mesopotamia,  and  many  of 
the  Arabic-speaking  peoples  of  the  Eastern  Sudan,  yet  among  the 
former  no  one  attempts  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  sort  of 
Christianity,  though  he  would  indeed  be  bold  who  would  dare  to 
compare  it  with  the  Christianity  of  such  men  as  Canon  Liddon  or 
Cardinal  Newman ;  similarly,  the  monotheism  of  the  peoples  of  the 
Eastern  Sudan  is  universally  admitted,  but  it  does  not  prevent  their 
indulging  in  the  coarsest  and  most  fantastic  beliefs  and  practices, 


EGYPTIAN   MONOTHEISM  145 

many  of  which,  however,  it  must  be  admitted  have  descended  to 
them  from  their  pagan  ancestors.  Fortunately,  however,  the 
monotheistic  character  of  the  Egyptian  religion  rests  on  too  firm  a 
foundation  to  be  easily  overthrown,  and  notwithstanding  the 
elaborate  system  of  symbolic  ceremonials  which  was  so  prominent  a 
feature  of  Egyptian  worship,  Egyptian  monotheism  always  main- 
tained its  place  in  the  minds  of  those  who  were  sufficiently  educated 
to  understand  the  ideas  which  the  symbols  thereof  represented. 
The  Egyptian  never  confounded  God  with  the  gods,  and  it  would 
seem  that  he  even  discriminated  between  God  and  "  the  god  of  the 
"  city,"  for  in  the  Negative  Confession  (No.  38)  the  deceased  says, 
"  0  Utu-rekhit,  who  comest  forth  from  thy  house,  I  have  not  cursed 
"  God  "  ;  and  in  No.  42  he  says,  "  Hail,  An-a-f,  who  comest  forth 
"from  Aukert  (the  Underworld),  I  have  not  thought  scorn  of  (or, 
"  belittled)  the  god  who  is  in  my  city."  Whence  came  the  Egyptian 
conception  of  monotheism,  or  when  it  first  sprang  up,  cannot  be 
said,  but  in  its  oldest  form  it  is  coeval  with  the  dynastic  civilization 
of  Egypt  at  least,  and  it  may  well  date  from  far  earlier  times.  The 
monotheistic  idea  is  not  the  peculiar  attribute  of  any  one  people 
or  period.  It  may  seem  unnecessary  to  discuss  Egyptian  mono- 
theism at  such  length,  but  the  matter  is  one  of  great  interest  and 
importance  because  the  literature  of  Egypt  proves  it  to  have  been 
in  existence  in  that  country  for  more  than  three  thousand  five 
hundred  years  before  Christ ;  in  fact,  Egyptian  monotheism  is  the 
oldest  form  of  monotheism  known  to  us.  It  is  easy  enough  to 
understand  how  anxious  the  priesthoods  of  the  various  cities  would 
be  to  persuade  the  people  who  worshipped  the  local  gods  that  this 
or  that  god  was  the  being  who  united  in  himself  the  attributes  of 
the  original  god  of  the  city  with  those  of  the  great  cosmic  god  with 
physical  aspects  who  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  with 
those  of  the  ethical  god  who  was  proclaimed  by  Kaqemna,  Ptah- 
lietep,  Ani,  and  other  writers  of  moral  precepts. 

In  the  earliest  times  it  was  the  god  Horus  who  was  chosen  in 
this  manner,  for  under  the  form  of  a  hawk  he  appears  to  have  been 
the  first  god  who  was  worshipped  throughout  the  country  generally, 
and  the  numerous  forms  of  this  god,  and  the  fact  that  his  attributes 
were  at  a  later  period  ascribed  to  Horus  the  son  of  Isis,  attest  the 

L 


146  HORUS   AND   RA 

antiquity  and  importance  of  his  cult.  The  next  god  chosen  to 
represent  the  great  ethical  God  of  the  Egyptians  was  not  a  personi- 
fication of  the  sky  as  was  Horus,  but  the  Sun-god  Ril,  on  whom 
was  bestowed  every  epithet  of  power  and  might  which  was  known 
to  the  Egyptians,  as  well  as  the  epithets  and  forms  of  the  god 
Horus.  But  although  his  worship  was  common  throughout  Egypt, 
and  his  sanctuaries  were  for  many  centuries  the  most  important 
in  the  land,  there  is  abundant  proof  that  the  Egyptians  never 
merged  their  conceptions  of  their  great  ethical  God  in  their  concep- 
tions of  Ra. 

There  seem  to  be  traces  of  a  belief  that  Ra  as  the  spirit  or 
god  of  the  sun  may  have  been  a  form  or  representative  of  him,  but 
they  are  not  very  definite,  and  the  worship  of  Ra's  visible  symbol, 
the  sun,  as  the  source  of  heat  and  light,  and  therefore  of  life — as 
the  Egyptians  recognized  at  an  early  period — was  commoner  than 
any  abstract  conception  of  his  nature  or  existence.  In  a  hymn  to 
Hapi,  the  Nile-god,  we  find  a  remarkable  passage  in  which  some 
of  the  chief  attributes  of  God  are  ascribed  to  the  power  which 
causes  the  Inundation  and  who  is  addressed  under  the  names  of  the 
gods  Ptah  and  Khnemu.     To  this  Being  it  is  said  by  the  author  of 


m 


the  hymn,  ''  If  thou  wert  overcome  in  heaven  the  gods, 
"would  fall  upon  their  faces  and  mankind  would  j)erish."  The 
context  shows  that  the  author  first  pays  a  tribute  of  reverence  to 
the  local  god  of  Memphis,  Ptah,  Avhom  he  styles  the  "  lord  of  fish," 
and  the  "  creator  of  wheat  and  barley,"  and  of  whom  he  says  with 
reference  to  the  well-known  attribute  of  Ptah  as  the  great  artificer, 
"  inactivity  is  the  abomination  of  his  fingers,"  i.e.,  the  fingers  of  the 
god  hate  idleness.  He  then  goes  on  to  mention  Khnemu,  the  local 
god  of  the  First  Cataract,  wherein  the  sources  of  the  Nile  were  at 
one  time  believed  to  be  situated,  and  styles  him  "  the  bringer  of 
"  food  and  provisions,  the  creator  of  all  good  things,  the  lord  of  all 
"  choice  and  pleasant  meats,  who  maketh  the  herb  to  grow  for  the 
"  use  of  the  cattle,  who  filleth  the  storehouses  and  heapeth  up  high 
"  [corn]  in  the  granaries,  who  payeth  heed  to  the  poor  and  needy, 
"  who  maketh  to  grow  crops  which  are  sufficient  for  the  desires  of 
"  all  men  and  yet  is  not  diminished  thereby,  and  whose  strength  is 
"  a  shield."     Now  the  author  of  the  hymn  goes  on  to  declare  that 


THE   ATTRIBUTES   OF   HAPI  147 

the  true  Ha]3i,  or  god  of  the  Nile,  "  cannot  be  figured  in  stone,  he 
is  not  to  be  seen  in  the  images  on  which  are  set  the  crowns  of  the 
south  and  the  north  with  their  uraei,  offerings  cannot  be  made  to 
him,  he  cannot  be  brought  forth  from  his  secret  places,  his  dwell- 
ing-place is  not  to  be  found  out,  he  is  not  to  be  found  in  the 
shrines  which  are  inscribed  with  texts,  there  is  no  habitation 
which  is  sufficiently  large  for  him  to  dwell  in,  and  the  heart  [of 
man]  is  unable  to  depict  him."  ^ 

The  being  here  referred  to  is  a  physical  and  not  an  ethical 
god,  and  the  simplest  and,  from  this  point  of  view,  most  natural 
explanation  of  these  remarkable  statements  is  that  they  are  intended 
to  describe  the  inaccessibility  both  of  the  Nile-god  and  of  his  shrine. 
The  fact,  however,  remains  that  the  declaration  of  the  almighty 
strength  and  inscrutability,  and  invisibility,  and  the  impossibility 
of  a  description  of  the  power  which  moves  the  Nile-god  being 
made  by  man  in  writing,  or  in  drawing,  or  in  sculpture,  proves  the 
existence  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptian  writers  of  a  lofty  conception 
of  the  attributes  of  God. 

But  side  by  side  with  the  fundamental  ideas  of  Horus  and  Ra 
and  the  conceptions  which  were  at  the  root  of  the  worship  of  these 
gods,  there  existed  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians  a  firm  and 
continuous  belief  in  the  god  Osiris,  who  held  a  position  in  the 
Egyptian  religion  which  was  quite  distinct  from  that  held  by 
any  other  god.  About  his  origin  nothing  can  be  said,  but  there 
is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  he  was  a  god  of  the  indigenous 
inhabitants  of  Egypt,  and  that  his  worship  was  firmly  established 
in  the  country  before  the  dynastic  period.  He  was  from  the 
earliest  times  associated  with  the  doctrine  of  immortality,  and  was, 
the  writer  believes,  the  symbol  of  monotheism  in  Egypt.  It  is 
impossible  to  say,  or  even  to  suggest,  what  was  the  original  form 
of  his  worship,  but  we  know  that  in  the  archaic  period  one  great 
centre  of  his  cult  was  at  Abydos,  and  from  the  fact  that  he  was 
included  in  the  ixLut^  or  company  of  gods  of  Heliopolis,  we  may 
conclude  that  he  was  a  very  important  god  of  Tattu,  or  of  Busiris, 
in  the  Delta,  and  that  his  sanctuary  was  much  visited  by  the 
peoples   thereof.     Under  the  Vth    Dynasty,   as  we  have    already 

^  A  transcript  of  tMs  text  will  be  found  in  my  First  Steps  in  Egyptian,  p.  208. 


148  OSIRIS,    LORD   OF    TATTU 

seen,  he  was  regarded  as  the  judge  of  the  dead,  and  it  is  clear  that 
he  was  also  the  god  of  the  dead  par  excellence ;  but  it  must  be 
noted  that  the  priests  of  Ra  formed  at  that  time  the  predominant 
priesthood  of  Egypt,  and  therefore  care  was  taken  to  assign  to 
Osiris  a  position  inferior  to  that  of  Ra  in  heaven.  When  the  Vlth 
Dynasty  of  kings  came  to  an  end  the  power  of  the  priesthood  of 
Ra  was  greatly  diminished,  and  the  worship  of  Osiris  grew  and 
prospered.  It  is  unnecessary  to  trace  here  step  by  step  the 
growth  of  the  cult  of  the  god  until  the  period  of  the  XVIIIth 
Dynasty,  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  between  the  Vlth  and 
the  end  of  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  nearly  all  the  attributes  of  the 
Sun-god  Ra  were  transferred  to  Osiris,  and  the  name  of  Ra  is 
joined  to  that  of  Osiris,  just  as  in  much  earlier  times  it  was  joined 
to  Tem  and  Heru-khuti  to  indicate  the  compound  gods  Ra-Tem 
and  Ra-Heru-khuti.  Thus  in  Chapter  cxxx.  of  the  Booh  of  the 
Dead  ^  the  deceased  says,  "  I  shall  not  be  turned  back  in  the 
"horizon,  for  I  am  Ra-Osiris,"  and  this  passage  is  a  proof  that 
quite  early  in  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  Osiris  was  considered  to  be 
a  solar  god.  In  Chapter  xvii.  (1.  110  ff.)  the  deceased  is  made 
to  say,  "  I  am  the  God-Soul  which  dwelleth  in  the  Twin-gods, 
On  this  the  question  follows,  "  What  does  this 


"  mean  ? "  to  which  we  have  the  answer,  ''  It  hath  reference  to 
"  Osiris  when  he  goeth  into  Tattu  ^  and  findeth  there  the  soul  of 
'•  Ra ;  there  one  god  embraceth  the  other,  and  the  divine  Souls 
"  spring  into  being  within  the  Twin-gods."  These  lines  of  text  are 
illustrated  by  a  very  interesting  vignette  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani 
(see  sheets  7-10),  wherein  we  see  a  pylon-shaped  building  between 
the  double  ^  ft ,  which  represents  Tattu,  and  upon  it  stand  the  god 
Ra,  in  the  form  of  a  hawk  with  a  solar  disk  upon  his  head,  and 
Osiris  in  the  form  of  a  human-headed  hawk,  wearing  the  White 
Crown.  The  two  gods  face  each  other  in  Tattu,  and,  according  to 
the  text,  were  absorbed  or  merged  each  in  the  other ;  thus  Osiris 
obtained  the  attributes  and  characteristics  of  the  Snn-god  Ra,  but 
was  supposed  at  the  same  time  to  retain  all  his  own  peculiar 
attributes. 

^  Papyrus  of  Nu,  Chap,  cxxx.,  1.  18. 

-  Either  Mendes  in  the  Delta,  or  the  heavenly  Mendes. 


IDENTITY   OF   OSIRIS   AND   RA  149 

The  view  here  given  is  that  which  Avas  favoured  by  the  priests 
of  Thebes  who,  however,  only  reproduced  that  which  they  had 
borrowed  from  the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  and  having  gained 
currency  in  the  theological  colleges  of  the  South,  it  spread 
among  the  people  to  such  an  extent  that  almost  every  great  city 
possessed  a  sanctuary  dedicated  to  Osiris.  A  very  important 
hymn  to  Osiris,  which  is  certainly  as  old  as  the  period  of  the 
XVIIIth  Dynasty,  shows  us  how  this  god  assimilated  to  himself 
the  old  solar  gods,  and  how  he  became  Ra.  His  holy  double  {^  ka) 
was  said  to  live  in  Mendes,  he  was  the  god  who  dwelt  in  Sekhem 
(i.e.,  Horus),  the  lord  of  Qerert  (i.e.,  the  Underworld),  the  holy 
one  in  Memphis,  the  lord  of  the  temple  of  Hermopolis,  the  local 
gods  of  which  were  Thoth  and  his  j^ciut,  or  company,  and  he  was 
declared  to  be  the  "  soul  of  Ra "  and  the  very  body  of  this  god, 

A„^^^  ^5  °^  2^^=:^  -il .     His  essence  was  that  of  the  primeval 

god  Nu,  and  he  was  the  great  spirit  and  divine  body  in  heaven. 
He  was  supposed  to  iight  and  to  vanquish  the  traditional  fiend 
Seba,  who  dared  to  wage  war  against  Ra,  and  he  was  the  stablisher 
of  rio:ht  and  truth,  madt,  throus-hout  the  world.     He  made 

the  earth  with  his  own  hands,  and  its  winds,  and  its  vegetation, 
and  feathered  fowl,  and  fish,  and  cattle  and  other  quadrupeds,  and 
to  him  belonged  by  right  the  mountains  and  the  desert  land 
throughout  the  world.  The  lands  of  Egypt  rejoiced^  to  crown 
him  upon  his  throne  like  his  father  Ra.  The  Great  and  the  Little 
Companies  of  the  gods  loved  him,  he  was  the  leader  of  every  god, 
and  the  brother  of  the  stars.  Finally,  as  a  proof  of  the  absolute 
identity  of  Ra  and  Osiris  may  be  quoted  the  opening  lines  of 
Chapter  clxxxi.  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead,  which  read : — "  Homage 
"  to  thee,  0  governor  of  Amentet,  Un-nefer,  the  lord  of  Ta-tchesert, 
"  0  thou  who  risest  like  Ra !  Verily  I  come  to  see  thee  and  to 
"  rejoice  at  thy  beauties.  His  disk  is  thy  disk ;  his  rays  are  thy 
"rays;  his  crown  is  thy  crown;  his  majesty  is  thy  majesty;. his 
"  risings  are  thy  risings  :  his  beauty  is  thy  beauty  ;  the  awe  which 
"  is  his  is  the  awe  which  is  thine  ;  his  odour  is  thy  odour  ;  his  hall 

^  See  tlie  text,   with  a  transliteration   and  translation,  in  my  First  Steps  in 
Egyptian,  p.  179  ff. 


150  OSIRIS   AND    IMMORTALITY 

"  is  thy  hall ;  his  seat  is  thy  seat ;  his  throne  is  thy  ^throne  ;  his 
"  heir  is  thy  heir  ;  his  ornaments  are  thy  omaments  ;  his  command 
"  is  thy  command ;  his  mystery  is  thy  mystery ;  his  things  are 
"  thy  things ;  his  knowledge  is  thy  knowledge ;  his  attributes  of 
"  majesty  are  thy  attributes  of  majesty ;  his  magical  powers  are 
"  thy  magical  powers  ;  he  died  not  and  thou  shalt  not  die  ;  he  was 
"  not  vanquished  by  his  enemies  and  thou  shalt  not  be  vanquished 
''  by  thine  enemies ;  no  evil  thing  befell  him,  and  no  evil  thing 
"  shall  befall  thee  for  ever  and  for  ever." 

In  such  terms  did  the  Egyptians    extol   the   greatness    and 
power  of  Osiris,  but  they  make  no  mention  of  the  aspect  of  the 
god  which  endeared  him  to  countless  generations  of  Egyptians. 
From  hundreds  of  funeral  and  other  texts  we  learn  that  Osiris  was 
held  to  be  partly  divine  and  partly  human,  that  is  to  say,  unlike 
any  other  Egyptian  god  he  possessed  two  natures,  and  two  bodies, 
the  one  divine  and  the  other  human,  and  two   doubles,  the  one 
divine  and  the  other  human,  and  two  souls,  the  one  divine  and  the 
other  human,  and  two  spirits,  the  one  divine  and  the  other  human. 
The  human  body,  according  to  the  Egyptian  tradition  recorded  by 
Plutarch,^  once  lived  upon  earth  and  was  put  to  death  in  a  cruel 
manner,    and  was  mutilated   by   his    brother ;    but   his    feminine 
counterpart,  Isis,  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  Thoth  the  knowledge 
of  certain  words  and  ceremonies,  and  having  learnt  from  him  the 
proper  manner  of  reciting  these  words,  and  how  to  perform  these 
ceremonies,  by  means  of  them  she  raised  up  to  life  the  dead  body 
of  Osiris.    The  god  Thoth  was  the  personification  of  the  intelligence 
of  the  whole  company  of  the  gods,  and  thus  the  words  Avhich  he 
taught  Isis  were  divine,  and  they  were,  presumably,  names  by  the 
utterance  of  which  the  gods  themselves  maintained  their  existence. 
Now  when  Osiris  had  been  raised  from  the  dead  he  did  not  con- 
tinue his  life  upon  earth,  but  passed  into  the  region  of  the  Under- 
world, where  he  became  the  judge  and  god  of  the  dead  and,  as  we 
have  seen,  was  made  the  possessor  of  all  the  attributes  of  the  Sun- 
god  Ra  and  of  the  great  One  God.     But,  the  Egyptians  in  the 
early  ages  thought.  Since  Osiris  was  raised  to  life  by  the  words  and 
ceremonies  which  Thoth  taught  Isis,  and  since  Osiris  has  gained 
^  De  Iside  et  Osiride,  ed.  Didot  (Scripta  Moralia,  t.  iii.,  pp.  429-469),  §  xii.  fE. 


OSmiS   AND   IMMORTALITY  151 

immortality  by  means  of  them,  these  same  words  and  ceremonies 
will  raise  us  to  life  and  give  us  immortality  also.  Their  priests 
therefore  invented  a  number  of  magical  ceremonies,  which  they 
led  the  people  to  believe  were  identical  with  those  which  Isis  had 
performed  at  the  bidding  of  Thoth,  and  they  strung  together 
magical  words  which  they  declared  to  be  those  which  had  raised 
Osiris  to  life,  and  the  words  were  recited  and  the  ceremonies 
performed  by  priests  who  appear  to  have  dressed  themselves  in 
such  a  way  as  to  resemble  the  divine  beings  who  were  concerned 
with  the  resurrection  of  Osiris. 

At  a  later  period,  however,  the  Egyptians  put  their  trust  in 
Osiris  himself,  and  addressed  their  prayers  directly  to  him  as  the 
Being,  partly  divine  and  partly  human,  who  had  raised  himself 
from  the  dead  without  having  seen  corruption,  and  who  had 
bestowed  upon  his  own  earthly  body,  by  means  of  his  divine 
nature,  the  gift  of  an  everlasting  life  which  it  enjoyed  in  an  incor- 
ruptible and  glorified  form  in  heaven.  The  Egyptians  "  loved  life 
"  and  hated  death,"  and  they  worshipped  Osiris  as  the  Great  God 
who  not  only  possessed  the  power  of  maintaining  his  own  life 
indefinitely — which  was  supposed  to  be  the  chief  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  a  god — but  also  of  giving  mortals  the  power  to 
live  after  death  in  this  world.  What  Osiris  had  effected  for 
himself  he  could  efiect  for  man ;  hence  Thothmes  III.  is  made  to 
address  the  god  in  these  words,  "  Homage  to  thee,  0  my  divine 
"  father  Osiris,  thou  hast  thy  being  with  thy  members.  Thou 
"  didst  not  decay,  thou  didst  not  turn  into  worms,  thou  didst  not 
"  rot  away,  thou  didst  not  become  corruption,  thou  didst  not 
"  putrefy.  ...  I  shall  not  decay,  I  shall  not  rot,  I  shall  not 
"  putrefy.  ...  I  shall  have  my  being,  I  shall  live,  I  shall  germinate, 
"  I  shall  wake  up  in  joeace.  .  .  .  My  body  shall  be  stablished,  and 
"  it  shall  neither  fall  into  ruin  nor  be  destroyed  off  this  earth." 
Because  the  human  body  of  Osiris  rose  from  the  dead,  the  body  of 
every  man  could  rise  from  the  dead  also,  but  man  lacked  what 
Osiris  possessed,  i.e.,  the  divine  body,  soul,  spirit,  and  nature, 
which  had  brought  about  the  resurrection  of  his  human  body,  soul, 
spirit,  and  nature.  In  the  earliest  times  of  the  worship  of  the 
^  Booh  of  the  Dead,  Cliap.  cliv. 


152  OSIRIS   AND   IMMORTALITY 

god  the  Egyptians,  as  we  have  seen,  invented  magical  words  and 
ceremonies  with  the  object  of  supplying  the  human  body  with  the 
power  necessary  to  raise  itself  from  the  dead,  but  as  time  went  on 
they  realized  that  both  words  and  ceremonies  were  incapable  of 
giving  eternal  life  to  the  dead,  and  that  only  Osiris  himself  could 
give  them  that  which  they  so  earnestly  desired,  i.e.,  everlasting 
life,  by  supplying  to  their  dead  earthly  bodies  the  power  to  rise 
again,  a  power  which  he  himself  possessed.  Beyond  all  doubt  the 
Egyptians  realized  that  Osiris  was  the  only  God  who  could  make 
them  to  inherit  life  everlasting,  and  that  he  alone  had  the  power 
of  making  "  men  and  women  to  be  born  again."  ^ 

We  have  already  seen  how  the  attributes  of  the  great  God 
who  created  all  things  were  ascribed  to  him,  and  we  now  see  that 
he  was  regarded  as  the  god  who  had  the  power  to  vanquish  death 
by  raising  up  the  bodies  of  the  dead  in  glorified  forms,  and  to 
reunite  to  them  their  souls  and  their  spirits,  and  to  give  them 
eternal  life  in  his  dominions.  These  things  were  declared  of  no 
other  god,  and  no  other  god  united  in  his  person  the  attributes  of 
an  ethical  god,  and  an  almighty,  creative  god,  and  a  god  who  was 
the  vivifier  of  the  dead.  The  conception  of  Osiris  included  the 
conceptions  of  every  other  god,  but  the  conception  of  no  other  god 
included  that  of  Osiris  during  the  period  of  the  highest  thought 
and  civilization  of  Egypt.  The  Sun-god  Ra,  was  called  "  One," 
a  few  other  gods  who  were  made  to  usurp  his  attributes  were  also 
each  called  "  One  ;  "  this  in  the  earliest  times  was  natural  enough, 
because  the  Egyptians  were  only  acquainted  with  one  Sun,  and 
whether  the  physical  body  of  the  sun  as  a  symbol  of  the  power 
which  moved  it  or  that  power  itself  is  referred  to  in  the  hymns 
matters  little,  for  "  One  "  was  a  suitable  epithet  both  for  the  sun 
and  its  god.  In  connexion  with  this  matter  it  is  important  to 
remember  the  unique  position  which  Osiris  occupies  in  the  Booh 
of  the  Dead  and  in  funeral  texts  generally.  In  the  texts  of  the 
Vth  Dynasty  we  find  that  Osiris  was  believed  "  to  weigh  words," 
i.e.,  to  inquire  into  the  various  words  and  deeds  of  the  lives  of 

1.  15. 


OSIRIS   AND   IMMORTALITY  153 

men  when  their  souls  left  their  bodies,  in  order  that  he  might 
reward  them  according  to  their  merits. 

In  later  times  this  idea  was  illustrated  by  the  vignette  in 
which  the  heart  of  the  deceased  was  seen  being  weighed  in  the 
Great  Scales  against  the  symbol  of  Maat,  or  the  Law  and  right 
and  truth ;  at  a  still  later  period,  when  the  heart  was  the  symbol 
of  the  conscience,  this  scene  became  associated  with  the  examina- 
tion of  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  dead  which  took  place  in  the 
Hall  of  Maati.  In  the  large  scenes  of  the  weighing  of  the  heart 
which  were  prefixed  to  the  finest  papyri  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  of 
the  XVIIIth  and  XlXth  Dynasties,  and  which  were  accompanied 
by  suitable  hymns  and  texts,  the  ceremony  takes  place  in  the 
presence  of  the  gods  of  the  Great  and  Little  companies,  but  in  the 
Hall  of  Maati  the  Forty-Two  Assessors  are  substituted  for  the 
gods.  In  both  cases,  however,  the  great  judge  of  all  is  Osiris,  and 
it  was  to  him  that  all  Egyptians  returned  after  death.  Why  the 
Assessors  were  forty-two  in  number  cannot  be  said,  but  it  is  very 
probable,  as  has  been  before  suggested,  that  each  of  them  repre- 
sented a  district  in  Egypt  in  the  earliest  dynastic  times,  and  that 
the  Hall  of  Maati  thus  became  a  meeting  place  for  the  Assessors  of 
the  whole  country  when  Osiris  sat  to  judge  the  dead.  It  is, 
moreover,  impossible  to  say  why  certain  assessors  were  supposed 
to  hear  confessions  about  the  non-committal  of  certain  sins,  and  we 
have  no  knowledge  of  the  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  their 
selection  and  to  their  admission  into  the  Hall  of  Judgment.  Some 
of  them  appear  to  have  been  originally  the  gods  of  cities,  and 
others  gods  of  nomes,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  a  few  of  them  are 
deities  who,  in  the  earliest  times,  were  apparently  hostile  to  the 
dead.  Failing  full  information  on  the  subject,  the  chief  interest 
which  attaches  to  the  Assessors  and  the  Hall  of  Maati,  in  which 
they  sit,  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  vignette  proves  how  com- 
pletely Osiris  had  gained  the  ascendancy  over  all  the  gods  of 
Egypt. 

In  the  preceding  pages  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  trace  the 
development  of  the  conception  of  a  supreme  being  in  Egypt,  from 
the  earliest  times  to  the  period  when  Osiris  became  endowed  with 
many  of  the  attributes  now  ascribed  to  God  Almighty.     There  is 


154  DEVELOPMENT   OF   MONOTHEISM 

no  doubt  that  in  predynastic  times  the  Egyptians  worshipped 
stocks,  and  stones,  and  animals,  and  plants,  and  trees,  and  that 
they  only  arrived  at  the  idea  of  gods  which  were  partly  animal  and 
partly  man  at  the  end  of  a  long  period  of  what  is  called  in  modem 
times  "  gross  idolatry."  From  the  idea  of  animal-man  gods  they 
advanced  to  the  idea  of  a  man-god,  and  finally  their  minds 
developed  the  conception  of  monotheism.  When  we  first  gain  any 
definite  knowledge  of  them  we  find  that  as  a  people  they  had  put 
away  the  worship  of  stocks  and  stones,  and  most  of  the  things 
which  that  worship  implies,  but  that  certain  animals  were  held  to  be 
sacred  in  certain  cities,  and  that  the  literature  contained  allusions 
to  savage  habits  and  practices,  as  we  have  already  seen.  As  time 
went  on,  many  changes  took  place  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians 
concerning  their  gods,  but  little  variation  was  made  in  their 
worship  and  ceremonial  in  the  temples  ;  in  other  words,  the  spirit 
of  the  religion  changed  whilst  the  observance  of  the  letter  remained 
unchanged.  Thus  the  forms  of  worship  and  the  literature  pre- 
served a  great  deal  which  no  one  believed  in  except  the  commonest 
folk,  and  in  this  way  traces  of  the  lowest  forms  of  religion  were 
preserved  and  handed  down  to  posterity.  The  Egyptians,  after 
the  period  of  the  IVth  Dynasty,  were  the  victims  of  conservatism 
and  conventionality,  and,  we  might  almost  add,  of  the  priesthoods 
of  Heliopolis  and  Thebes ;  but  for  these  powerful  and  wealthy 
confraternities  the  history  of  the  religion  of  Egypt  would  have 
been  very  difi'erent.  The  conception  of  monotheism,  which  is  so 
clearly  expressed  in  the  moral  precepts  of  the  Early  Empire,  would 
have  developed  rapidly,  and  in  its  growth  it  would  have  obliterated 
the  remains  of  the  old  and  obsolete  faiths  which  had  crystallized, 
and  which  existed  in  layers  side  by  side  with  the  higher  doctrine. 
But  the  decay  which  set  in  after  the  IVth  Dynasty,  and  which 
stifled  the  development  of  painting  and  sculpture,  also  attacked 
the  religion  of  the  country,  and  the  noble  conception  of  mono- 
theism, with  its  cult  of  the  unseen,  was  unable  to  compete  with  the 
worship  of  symbols,  which  could  be  seen  and  handled,  until  the 
time  when  Osiris  was  recognized  as  the  One  God,  who  was  also  the 
giver  of  eternal  life.  The  Egyptians  were  unlike  other  nations, 
and  similarly  their  religion  and  their  gods  were  unlike  the  religion 


EGYPTIAN   RELIGION  155 

and  the  gods  of  other  nations  ;  and  as  they  must  not  be  judged  by 
the  standard  of  any  one  foreign  nation  belonging  to  any  one  period, 
so  their  religion  and  their  gods  must  not  be  judged  by  the  standard 
of  the  religion  and  gods  of  any  later  civilized  nation.  We  can 
only  know  what  the  Egyptians  thought  and  believed  by  reading 
and  studying  the  texts  which  they  wrote,  and  a  final  opinion  on 
their  beliefs  cannot  be  obtained  until  all  their  religious  literature 
has  been  published  ;  the  general  outline,  however,  of  their  religion 
is  clear  enough,  and  it  shows  us  that  they  possessed  a  good, 
practical  form  of  monotheism  and  a  belief  in  immortality  which 
were  already  extremely  ancient  even  in  the  days  when  the 
Pyramids  were  built.* 


(     156     ) 


CHAPTER   IV 
THE  COMPANIONS  OF  THE  GODS  IN  HEAVEN 

IN  the  preceding  chapters,  Avhich  are  devoted  to  the  considera- 
tion of  general  questions  concerning  God  and  the  gods,  no 
mention  is  made  of  the  habitation  of  these  divine  beings  or  of  their 
companions.  The  texts  of  all  periods  are  silent  as  to  the  exact 
position  of  heaven,  but  it  is  certain  that  the  Egyptians  assigned  to 

it  a  place  above  the  sky,  and  that  they  called  it  2^ei  ^__^ ;  we  must 

distinguish  between  the  meanings  oi  ijet  ^ and  nut  ,  for  the 

former  means  "  heaven,"   and  the  latter   "  sky."     We  may  also 

note  that  two  skies  are  mentioned  in  the  texts,  i.e.,  ,  the  day 

sky,   and  ,  the  night  sky.     The  hieroglyphic  for  heaven  and 

sky  represents  a  slab,  each  end  of  which  rests  on  a  support,  and 
we  may  assume  that  the  primitive  Egyptians  believed  that  each 
end  of  heaven  rested  upon  a  support  (i.e.,  two  mountains) ;  out 
of  one  mountain  came  the  sun  every  morning,  and  into  the  other 
he  entered  every  night.     The    mountain   of   Sunrise  was   called 

Bakhau,  J  ^^^  '^^  o-=»  v\         ,  and  the  mountain  of  Sunset  Manu, 

«===^  c^Cb:0.     In   the  earliest   times   the  sky  was   divided   into  two 

ODD  ^ 

parts  only,  the  East  and  the  West,  but  later  another  division  was 
made,  and  heaven  was  split  up  into  four  parts,  and  each  was 
placed  under  the  care  of  a  god.  The  latter  division  was  made 
long  before  the  Pyramid  Texts  were  written,  for  in  them  it  is 
always  assumed  that  the  flat  slab  of  iron  which  formed  the  sky, 
and  therefore  the  floor  of  the  abode  of  the  gods,  was  rectangular, 
and  that  each  corner  of  it  rested  upon  a  pillar,  | .  That  this  is  a 
very  ancient  view  concerning  the  sky  is  proved  by  the  hieroglyphic 


THE   FOUR  PILLARS    OF   HEAVEN  157 

'jjjy',  which  is  used  in  texts  to  determine  words  for  rain,  storm,  and 
the  like;  here  we  have  a  picture  of  the  sky  falling  and  being 
pierced  by  the  four  pillars  of  heaven. 

At  a  later  period,  the  four  quarters  of  heaven  were  believed 
to  be  under  the  direction  of  four  gods,  and  the  four  pillars  of  the 
sky  were  poetically  described  as  the  four  sceptres  which  they  held 
in  their  hands.  Thus  in  the  text  of  Teta  (1.  233)  it  is  said,  "  As 
"  Teta  goeth  towards  them  they  bring  unto  him  the  four  gods 
"  who  stand  with  the  sceptres  of  heaven,  and  they  repeat  the  name 
"  of  Teta  to  Ra,  and  they  take  up  his  name  to  Horus  of  the  two 
"  horizons."  ^     In  several  texts  ^  allusion  is  made  to  the  lifting  up  of 

heaven  upon  its  four  pillars,  e.g.,  ^  -^  ^  ^_^  <^  ^  SH^IlII  "**"  ' 
and  in  one  place  the  four  pillars  are  said  to  support  that  on  which 
the  four  heavens  rest,  IT||  ^  -^  ^^;  at  a  comparatively  late 
period  the  idea  arose  that  the  sky  needed  support  in  the  middle  as 
well  as  at  the  corners,  and  the  god  who  acted  as  the  prop  was 
called  Hell,  MM-     According  to  one  myth  which  represented  the 

heavens  in  the  form  of  the  head  of  a  man,  and  which  made  the  sun 
and  the  moon  to  be  his  eyes,  the  supports  of  heaven  were  supposed 
to  be  formed  of  his  long  flowing  hair,  and  thus  we  have  in  the  text 
of  Unas  (1.  473)  an  allusion  to  the  "  four  elder  spirits  who  dwell 
"  in  the  locks  of  hair  of  Horus,  who  stand  in  the  eastern  part  of 
"  heaven  grasping  their  sceptres."  ^  The  gods  Avho  grasped  as 
sceptres  the  four  pillars  of  heaven,  which  eventually  became  the 


/^wvv\  /wwv\   AA/ww      V .y\       I    J  J        '— ^         A^A/V\^   >.  ^       II       1  1        I  _ti  I      I      I       U  -U. 

^m^m  F=^'J^f'  —  ^ —  Clj] — ^  il^-^JL 

-  See  Brugsch,  Worterbuch,  p,  1351. 


I  I  I 


158  THE   FOLLOAVERS   OF   HORUS 

four  cardinal  points,  were  Amset,  n  ^^^  U^,  god  of  the  southern 
point,  Hap,  |  D  A'^='^=»  the  god  of  the  northern  point,  Tua- 
mutef,  >ic  ^\    '^   ,  the  god  of  the  eastern  point,  and  Qebhsennuf, 

jy  y  II  y  2^.=^,  the  god  of  the  western  point.     These  four  gods  played 

a  prominent  part  in  connexion  with  the  deceased  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts,  where  they  are  called  the  "  children  of  Horus,"  ^  for  at  one 
time  they  are  called  upon  to  bring  him  the  boat  of  the  Eye  of 

Tem,  ^.  ^^,  which  is  on  the  Lake  of  Kha,  and  at  another 

they  are  exhorted  to  protect  his  life  by  their  magical  power  and 
amulets,  I  '^  J> — .  ■=im-'  ^  and  finally  the  deceased  is  said  to  become 
one  of  these  four  gods  (Pepi  I.  1.  672),  ^  ^  ^  1 1  1  °  ^  111  ' 
The  duties  which  are  assigned  to  them  as  funereal  gods  in  the  Book 
of  the  Dead  will  be  described  later  on. 

Chief  among  the  dwellers  in  heaven  was  the  god  Ra,  who  is 
said  to  sit  upon  an  iron  throne  [the  sides  of  which  were  orna- 
mented] with  the  faces  of  lions  and  feet  which  resembled  the  hoofs 
of  bulls.^  Round  about  Ra,  whether  walking  or  sitting,  were  the 
gods  who  were  "  in  his  train,"  and  these  formed  the  nucleus  of  the 
inhabitants  of  heaven.  Next  to  these  came  certain  companies  of 
the  gods,  and  as  the  whole  universe  was  divided  into  three  portions, 
namely,  heaven,  earth,  and  the  Tuat,  or  Underworld,  and  each 
portion  had  its  own  gods,  we  may  assume  that  a  place  was  reserved 
for  them  in  the  heaven  of  the  Egyptians.  But  this  heaven  also 
contained  several  classes  of  beings,  first  and  foremost  among  whom 
may  be  mentioned   the   Shesu-Heru,  or  Shemsu-Heru,   a  name 

whicli  appears  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  under  the  form  fl  ^^  -%■  -%•  _% 
(Pepi  L,  1.  166),  and  may  be  translated  "Followers  of  Horus." 
They  are,  in  fact,  beings  who  followed  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  in 
heaven,  where  they  waited  upon  him,   and  performed  his  behests, 

|||o^=^,  Pepi  I.,  1.593. 

2  Pepi  I.,  1.  444.  3  lud,^  11.  309,  310. 


THE   ASHEMU   AND   HENMEMET  159 

and  when  necessary  defended  and  protected  him.  They  occupied 
a  position  of  great  importance  among  the  celestial  hosts,  and  are 
mentioned  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  that^they  were  almost  equal 
to  the  gods  ;  thus  Pepi  I.  (1.  166)  is  said  to  "  pacify  them,"  but  on 
the  other  hand  it  was  they  who  "  washed  him,  and  who  recited  on 
"  his  behalf  the  Chapter  of  those  who  come  forth,  and  [the  Chapter 
"  of  those  who]  rise  up."  ^     Next  may  be  mentioned  the  Ashemu, 

i-Tv-i  ^v  V  'A'^'^'  ^  class  of  beings  whose  characteristics  are 
not  known,  and  who  in  the  text  of  Teta  (1.  327)  are  referred  to  in 
connexion  with  the  sehliemu.  The  word  dsliem  is  usually  supposed 
to  mean  the  "  form  in  which  a  god  is  visible,"  but  it  must  have 

another  and  an  older  meaning.     The  Henmemet,  \  ^   ^^  ^v"^  m?^ 

or  HAMEMET,  appear  to  have  been  a  class  of  beings  who  either  were 
to  become,  or  had  already  been,  human  beings,  but  the  Egyptians 
themselves  seem  to  have  had  no  very  clear  idea  about  their 
attributes,  and  the  passages  in  the  Theban  Booh  of  the  Dead  in 
which  they  are  mentioned  have  been  understood  in  different  ways 
by  different  scholars. 

In  a  hymn  it  is  said  of  Ra,  "  when  he  riseth  the  rehliit  (i.e., 

"rational  beings)  live,  and  the  hamemet,  ffl  ^ ^  Jj  i,   exult   in 

"  him  "  :  Osiris  is  called  "fiord  of]  the  hamemet,  m  1\  1\  "^  ,  in 
"  Kher-aha  "  ;  and  the  deceased  says  in  Chapter  xlii.  of  the  Booh  of 
the  Dead,  "  And  shall  do  me  hurt  neither  men,  nor  gods,  | 
"nor  spirits, '^^  0  ^  ^  i,  nor  the  dead  (or  damned),  o  V\   ^ 


I   I   r 

'■  ^  %\' 

"  nor  the  pdt,  -^ — a  ^  J)  ''  ^^^  ^^®  rehhit  (i.e.,  rational  beings),  nor 

"the  hamemet."  Elsewhere  the  deceased  prays  "that  the  com- 
"  pany  of  the  gods  may  hold  their  peace  whilst  the  hamemet  talk 
"  with  me  " ;  ^  and  it  seems  from  a  passage  in  an  inscription  of 


^  Compare  tlie  variant  i   'v^   i    '  □    Yr^   "W^  —  — y 


I2, 


2  Teta,  1.  95. 

2  See  the  list  of  passages  given  in  my  Vocabulary  to  the  Booh  of  the  Dead, 
p.  205. 


160  THE   AFAU,    UTENNU,    AND    SETU 

Hatshepset  ^  as  if  in  the  latter  part  of  the  dynastic  period  the  word 
had  come  to  mean  a  class  of  men  and  women,  especially  as  it  is 

determined  by  the  signs  ^  3,  which  usually  indicate  a  number  of 

human  beings.  Thus  Rameses  III.  speaks  of  "  all  the  gods  and 
"  goddesses  of  the  South  and  the  North,  and  all  men,  and  all  the 
'^  pat,  and  all  the  rekhit,  and  all  the  hamemet"  ;  finally,  that  the 
hamemet  were  believed  to  live  upon  grain  is  proved  by  the  passage 
in  a  hymn  to  Amen-Ra  wherein  this  god  is  said  to  be  the  "  maker 
"  of  the  green  herb  which  giveth  life  to  the  beasts  and  cattle,  and 

*' of  the  plant  of  life,  vww^  i^    _      ^il  ,  of  the  hamemeV  ^    Of  the 

^  ^1  1     #    I   I   I 

characteristics  of  the  classes  of  beings  called  Aea,         ^^  ^^^  , 


and  Utennu,    v\  av^^aa  Vi.  ^^^,  who  are  mentioned  in  the  text 

of  Pepi  IL  (1.  951),  we  know  nothing,  and  the  same  must  be  said 

of  the  Set  beings,  H  ^  ^^^,  who  were,  however,  divided  into 

two    classes,    the   Upper   and   the  Lower,      ^    %    ^    Y^.       The 

following  extract  will  show  how  these  beings  are  mentioned : — 
"  0  great  heaven,  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  Pepi  Nefer-ka-Ra ! 
"  0  mighty  heaven,  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  Pepi  Nefer-ka-Ra,  for 

"Pepi  is  thy  divine  hawk,  8(1^=^^  1  TT*  ^^V^  ^^^*^  come 
"  having  come  forth  into  heaven,  and  he  hath  penetrated  Qebhu ; 
"  Pepi  hath  paid  homage  to  his  father,  and  he  riseth  like  Horus. 
"  Pepi  hath  come  to  the  place  where  he  is,  and  he  (his  father) 
"  granteth  to  him  to  rise  like  the  sun,  and  he  stablisheth  for  him  his 

"  two  divine  utchats,  T  ^^^^  ^S^S?  ^^^  when  Pepi  cometh  forth 
''  with  him,  great  like  Horus,  son  of  Nut,  and  like  the  child  with 
"  the  lock  of  hair  (i.e.,  Harpocrates),  and  smiting  the  crowns,  and 
"  giving  orders  to  the  gods  Utennu,  the  Aea  gods  follow  Pepi,  and 
"  those  who  are  in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth  come  to  him  pay- 
"  ing  homage,  together  with  the  two  uraei  guides,  '  U  ^  '='  i^  le,,  > 
"  and  the  jackals,  and  the   spirits,  and  the  Set  beings,  both  the 


■AJkt-lkk-^li^Tr::-! 


AA/V\AA 

^  w 


£5^ 

%5 


I     jCtj    n    AAAAAA  --      |llllllllH|  |— I 

/wvws   r>^\    1^1  ^  ^  w^N     '-I    ,  2  E(J,  Grebaut,  section  vi. 

■    1    I    I    I    I  O  j^  ODD  />A/vw 


THE  WATCHERS  OF  PE  AND  NEKHEN  161 

''  Upper  and  the  Lower."  It  is  possible  that  the  Set  beings  may- 
have  been  of  like  nature  to  the  god  Set,  who  was  the  brother  and 
associate  of  Horns  in  the  earliest  times,  but  who  in  later  times  lost 
his  position  as  a  god  and  became  the  type  and  symbol  of  all  evil. 

In  addition  to  these  the  text  of  Pepi  11.  (line  849)  mentions 
the  "  Watchers  of  the  city  of  Pe,"  and  the  "  Watchers  of  the  city  of 

Nekhen,"  ^^  C3a  R  ^   D  ©  ^^  c^iz:  fi  ^  o  ®  ©,  from  which  we 

may  assume  that  certain  cities  were  supposed  to  enjoy  the  protec- 
tion of  a  number  of  gods  whose  duty  it  was  to  look  after  their 
interests  in  heaven.  We  know  from  several  passages  in  the  Booh 
of  the  Dead  that  groups  of  gods  were  called  the  "  souls "  of  such 
and  such  cities,  and  it  is  clear  from  the  inscriptions  that  each  city 
and  town  possessed  a  soul  which  had,  like  the  soul  of  a  man  after 
death,  the  power  to  wander  about  at  will.  Thus  on  a  wall  in  the 
temple  Avhich  Cleopatra  VII.  built  at  Erment  (now  destroyed), 
was  a  scene  in  Avhich  the  great  queen  was  depicted  in  the  act  of 
giving  birth  to  her  son  Caesarion.     The  goddess  Neith  holds  up 

the  queen's  arms,  and  the  midwife  Netchemtchemt,  |  f  ^  III  ?  receives 

the  boy  in  the  presence  of  several  gods  and  goddesses.  Now  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  relief  were  two  groups  of  souls  of  cities,  seven  on 
the  right  hand  and  seven  on  the  left,  who  were  supposed  to  have 
been  present  at  the  birth  of  the  child,  and  to  have  taken  him  under 
their  protection.     Among  the  cities  represented  are  Thebes,  Ant, 

I    g  ,  Het,  ra@,   Qeset,  Unt,  xlhet,   Hetep,  Uauaa,  -^j^|    ^    , 

etc.^  Each  soul  is  in  the  form  of  a  human-headed  hawk,  and  each 
has  on  its  head  horns  and  a  disk,  X^,  in  the  front  of  Avhich  is  a 
uraeus. 

Want  of  space  does  not  allow  of  the  mention  of  many  obscure 
beings  who  are  called  gods,  and  who  are  practically  innumerable, 
and  we  therefore  pass  on  to  refer  to  the  spirits  and  souls,  etc.,  of 
the  righteous  men  and  women  who  once  lived  upon  this  earth.  To 
these,  as  well  as  to  the  divine  beings,  was  given  the  name  "  living 

ones,"  ■¥■■¥■■?■  ^,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  passage  in  Unas  (line  206), 

which  reads,  "  Hail,  Unas,  behold  thou  hast  not   departed  dead 

1  See  Lepsius,  DenJcmdIer,  iv.  pi.  60. 
M 


162  THE   LIVING   ONES 

"  ("^^^o  ^1  (|\     but   as    one  living   ("T  J)    thou   hast   gone    to 
"  take    thy    seat    upon    the    throne    of  Osiris.       Thy   sceptre    ah 

"  (^ fl  J  Y)    ^^  "^  ^^y  hand,  and  thou  givest  commands  unto  the 

"living  ones;  thy  sceptre  mehes  \^^^^^^y\)y  ^^^  ^hy  sceptre 
^^  Nehehet    ^/^vaaaO   jL=.j   are  in  thy  hands,  and  thou  givest  thine 

"  orders  to  those  whose  habitations  are  hidden."     When  king  Teta 
is  in  heaven  the  seat  of  his  heart  is  declared  to  "be  among  the 

"  living  ones  on  this  earth  for  ever,"  ^^^  TTi  V  ^v  "^^^  '"'  2! " 
We  have  in  this  latter  passage  a  proof  that  the  Egyptians  con- 
ceived it  possible  for  a  man  to  attain  to  all  the  attributes  of  a 
divine  being,  or,  let  us  say,  of  an  angel,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
enjoy  an  existence  upon  earth  as  well  as  in  heaven.  This  idea 
probably  arose  because  they  wished  to  provide  a  future  for  the 
dead  body  just  as  they  provided  a  habitation  in  heaven  for  the 
spirits  and  souls  of  the  righteous.  Heaven  and  earth  were  comple- 
ments each  of  the  other,  the  gods  of  heaven  were  the  complements 
of  the  gods  of  earth,  and  vice  versa,  and  the  existence  of  the 
spiritual  and  mental  attributes  of  man  with  the  gods  in  heaven 
was  a  complement  of  his  continued  life  after  death  in  some  region 
on  this  earth.  The  Pyramid  Texts  show  that  the  opinion  of  the 
Egyptians  about  the  number  and  functions  of  the  constituent  parts 
of  his  economy,  both  physical  and  spiritual,  changed  as  time  went 
on  and  as  they  ascended  the  various  grades  which  led  up  to  the 
high  platform  of  their  civilization,  and  the  result  of  the  change,  or 
rather  changes,  made  itself  manifest  in  their  religious  compositions. 
In  the  early  predynastic  period  they  thought  that  the  life  after 
death  was  a  mere  continuation  of  the  life  in  this  world,  and  when 
they  had  placed  some  food  in  or  on  the  graves  of  their  dead  they 
were  satisfied. 

But  they  knew  that  the  body  of  a  man  in  the  new  life  could 

■¥"?"?-,  Pepil.,  11.  545,  54G. 


cinn^     D 


THE  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  THE  DEAD    163 

not  be  like  that  which  he  possessed  on  earth,  although  its  form 
might  be  similar,  and  they  therefore  assumed  the  existence  of 
another  body.  In  his  dreams  the  Egyptian  saw  a  figure  of  himself 
or  a  duplicate,  engaged  in  various  occupations,  and  to  this  figure 
he  gave  the  name  ha,  ^ ;  it  was  born  with  a  man,  it  remained 
within  him,  usually  inoperative,  and  survived  him  at  death.  It 
never  left  the  body  in  the  grave  or  tomb,  and  the  offerings  which 
were  made  in  the  halls  of  the  tombs  in  all  periods  were  intended 

to  maintain  its  existence.     Nevertheless  the  ha  of  Horus,  J=^  ^  , 

is  in  heaven  (Teta,  line  88),  and  also  the  ha  of  Teta  (line  94),  which 
is  adjured  to  bring  that  which  the  king  might  eat  with  it ;  and  as 
the  hau  of  men  and  gods  lived  in  heaven  so  there  lived  there  also  the 

hau  of  cities,  e.g.,  of  the  city  of  Pe,  vi^Jz^J:^       (Teta,  line  88), 

and  the  "  lords  of  hau  praised  Ra  both  in  the  dominions  of  Horus 
"  and  in  the  dominions  of  Set."  ^     King  Unas  is  declared  to  be  the 

"  chief  of  the  doubles,"     "^   ^^ ,  and  he  is  said  to  ''  gather  together 

"hearts  for  the  great  wise  chief"  (Unas,  line  395).  Men  and  gods 
alike  possessed  shadows,  and  they  also  had  an  existence  in  heaven 
after  the  death  of  the  bodies  to  which  they  belonged.  When  Unas 
had  eaten  the  bodies  of  the  gods,  and  had  absorbed  all  their  souls 
and  spirits,  it  is  said  that  the  "  flame  of  Unas  is  in  their  bones,  for 
"their  soul  is  with  Unas,  and  their  shadows  are  with  their  forms" 
(Unas,  line  523,  Teta,  line  330).  The  souls  and  the  spirits  of  men 
had  their  abode  in  heaven  with  the  gods,  and  the  religious  texts  of 
all  periods  are  so  full  of  allusions  to  this  fact  that  it  is  unnecessary  to 

quote    examples;    the   soul,   ha,  '^^,  is   usually  depicted   in   the 

form  of  a  hawk  with  a  human  head,  and  the  spirit,  hhic,  '^^j  9,s  9 

heron.      Related    intimately   to    the    body,    but   with    undefined 

functions,  so  far  as  we  can  discover,  was  the  sehJiem,    I  ^  ^,^^  Yj  ^ 

word  which  has  been  translated  "power,"  and  "form,"  and  even 
"  vital  force  ;  "  and  finally  the  glorified  body,  to  which  had  been 


[1  ^   l\    SI  o  n    '^    ,  Teta,  1.  192. 


164  THE    SAHU   OR   SPIRITUAL   BODY 

united  the  soul,  and  spirit,  and  power,  and  name  of  the  deceased, 
had  its  abode  in  heaven.     This  new  body  of  the  deceased  in  heaven 

was  called  sdim,  u a  |  v^  g ,  and  may  for  all  practical  purposes 

be  termed  the  spiritual  body ;  it  grew  out  of  the  dead  body  and 
was  called  into  existence  by  the  ceremonies  which  were  performed, 
and  the  AYords  which  were  recited  by  the  priests  on  the  day  when 
the  mummified  body  was  laid  in  the  tomb. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  denizens  of  heaven  consisted  of  the 
Great,  and  the  Little,  and  the  other  companies  of  the  gods  ;  and  of 
a  large  number  of  beings,  who  may  for  convenience  be  called  the 
"inferior  gods,"  and  of  several  orders  of  beings  who  possessed 
some  characteristic  which  caused  the  Egyptians  to  assume  that 
they  were  divine ;  and  of  the  shadows,  doubles,  souls,  spirits, 
powers,  hearts,  and  spiritual  bodies  of  those  who  had  lived  upon 
this  earth.  In  Chapter  Ixiv.  of  the  Boole  of  the  Bead  (line  21)  is  a 
curious  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  "  spirits  are  four  million, 

"six   hundred   and  one  thousand,   two  hundred,"    ''^^  ®   y  ^  ' 

^r      D  ^  ^^      T  ^ ,  in  number,  but  Avhether  this  is  intended  to 

be  an  enumeration  of  the  spirits  of  heaven,  or  of  the  spirits  which 
once  inhabited  human  bodies,  cannot  be  said.  Of  the  occupations 
of  the  denizens  of  heaven  little  is  known,  but  to  some  of  them  was 
assigned  the  task  of  directing  the  affairs  of  this  world,  others 
directed  the  operations  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  others  were 
attached  to  the  trains  of  the  great  gods,  and  accompanied  them  in 
their  triumphant  courses  through  the  heavens.  All  these  sang 
praises  to  Ra  as  the  king  and  chief  of  the  gods,  and  they  sang 
hymns  to  him  describing  his  greatness  and  glory  just  as  men  sang 
songs  of  joy  to  the  sun  when  he  rose  and  set.  The  gods  nourished 
themselves  with  celestial  food  which  was  supplied  to  them  by  the 
Eye  of  Horus,  that  is  to  say,  they  supported  their  existence  on  the 
rays  of  light  which  fell  from  the  sun  which  lit  up  heaven,  and  they 
became  beings  whose  bodies  were  Avholly  of  light.  According  to 
one  myth  the  gods  themselves  lived  upon  a  "  wood,  or  plant  of 

life,"  AA/w^^  -Y-  (I'epi  I.,  line  4o0),  which  seems  to  have  grown 

near  the  great  lake  in  Sekhet-hetep,  round  which  they  were  wont 


THE   ABODE   OF   THE   BLESSED  165 

to  sit/  but  this  idea  belongs  to  the  group  of  views  which  held  that 
the  beatified  dead  lived  in  a  beautiful,  fertile  region,  where  white 
wheat  and  red  barley  grew  luxuriantly  to  a  great  height,  and  where 
canals  were  numerous  and  full  of  water,  and  where  material  enjoy- 
ments of  every  kind  could  be  found.  In  other  places  we  read  of 
"bread  of  eternity,"  and  "beer  of  eternity,"  i.e.,  bread  and  beer 
which  was  supposed  never  to  grow  stale  or  to  become  spoiled,^  and 

we  also  have  mention  of  a  heavenly  fig-tree   (^^^^  '^.    J  I),  and  a 

heavenly   vine    (u  W^)?  ^^®  fruit  of  which  is  eaten  by  the 

beatified.  The  bread  upon  which  the  blessed  fed  themselves  was 
that  bread  which  the  Eye  of  Horus  shed  upon  the  branches  of  the 

olive-tree,  '=^^=^         ^"^'^'^  71)V  (Unas,  line  200). 


0 

Finally,  the  blessed  were  arrayed  in  apparel  similar  to  that  which 
was  worn  by  the  gods,  but  they  also  had  white  linen  garments  on 
their  bodies,  and  white  sandals  on  their  feet. 

All  these  details  show  the  simple  character  of  the  heaven 
which  the  primitive  Egyptian  imagined,  and  prove  that  it  was  at 
first  intended  to  be  nothing  but  the  celestial  complement  of  a 
terrestrial  farm  or  estate.  He  wished  for  a  vine,  and  a  fig-tree, 
and  an  olive  tree,  for  wheat  wherewith  to  make  bread,  and  for 
barley  Avherewith  to  brew  beer ;  he  also  desired  clean  white 
garments  and  white  sandals.  His  celestial  homestead  he  expected 
to  be  intersected  with  numerous  canals,  which  would  do  away  with 
the  necessity  of  laboriously  drawing  water  from  the  celestial  Nile 
by  means  of  some  mechanical  contrivance  similar  to  the  modern 
shaduf ;  the  tillage  would,  of  course,  be  provided  for  in  the  next 
world  by  the  gods,  who  would  take  care  that  the  crops  did  not 
fail.       This  simple    material    heaven   is   very    different   from    the 


3  Teta,  1.  288,  Pepi  I.,  1.  442  and  1.  390. 


166  THE   ABODE   OF   THE   BLESSED 

heaven  of  the  Hebrew  and  Muhammadan  writers,  with  its  sensual 
and  sensuous  joys  of  every  kind,  and  its  luxurious  meats,  and 
drinks,  and  delights.  We  know  from  one  or  two  passages  in  the 
Pyramid  Texts  that  there  were  women  in  heaven  just  as  there 
were  goddesses,  but  they  are  not  spoken  of  as  are  the  Hur  al-hiyun 
(houris),  i.e.,  the  women  with  large,  black  pupils  of  the  eye  set  in 
large  whites,  who  are  mentioned  in  Arabic  descriptions  of  Paradise, 
and  they  are  not  made  to  be  one  of  the  chief  attractions  of  heaven. 
As  far  as  can  be  seen,  the  heaven  of  the  Egyptians  had  no  musical 
instrument  in  it,  and  the  only  sounds  heard  in  it  must  have 
been  the  songs  of  the  ministering  gods  and  of  the  beatified  when 
they  hymned  the  Great  God.  What  the  Egyj^tian  gentleman  who 
lives  on  his  own  land  in  places  remote  from  towns  is  now,  the 
Egyptian  gentleman  everywhere  was  then ;  he  loved  to  wash  and 
anoint  himself,  and  having  put  on  clean  linen  to  sit  in  the  sun  in 
the  morning,  and  to  bear  himself  with  dignity,  and  to  be  treated 
with  respect  by  his  neighbours  and  inferiors.  He  loved  to  have 
corn,  and  wine,  and  oil  in  abundance,  and  a  sufS.cient  number  of 
slaves  to  minister  to  his  wants  and  to  maintain  his  dignity  when  he 
moved  about  from  villaofe  to  villaoje.  He  honoured  his  mother, 
and  usually  married  a  very  limited  number  of  wives,  among  whom 
might  be  a  sister,  or  half-sister,  or  cousin,  and  he  took  great 
interest  in  his  male  offspring  ;  we  note  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  that 
the  families  of  the  deceased  kings  are  never  mentioned,  and  that 
nothing  is  said  about  their  wives,  although  Unas  (lines  Q)2S,  629)  is 

said  to  carry  off  women  from  their  husbands,  v_7  v-?  vl7  ^^^  ..     n  pg 

1  Awwv^  wheresoever  he  pleaseth,  whensoever  he  pleaseth.     On  the 

other  hand,  Isis  is  said  to  come  to  king  Teta,  who  unites  with 
her,  and  the  goddess  having  conceived  like  the  star  Sept  gives 
birth  to  Horus  Sept,^  and  in  another  passage  Unas  is  said  to  have 


H 


^    ,  Teta,  1.  276. 


THE   ABODE   OF   THE   BLESSED  167 

become  the  husband  of  the  goddess  Mauit,  and  also  of  the  young 
woman  who  brought  bread  to  him.^ 

But  these  beings  were,  after  all,  only  the  celestial  waters 
described  under  the  forms  of  a  goddess  and  a  woman,  and  the 
sensual  idea  conveyed  by  a  literal  interpretation  of  the  text  there- 
fore disappears.  The  life  of  the  primitive  Egyptians  in  heaven 
was  as  simple  as  their  life  upon  earth,  and  their  chief  Avish  was 
to  enjoy  a  state  of  comfortable  and  dignified  peace,  without  war 
and  without  tumult  or  strife.  We  hear  nothing  of  a  heaven  with 
a  floor  of  white  flour  or  musk,  with  pearls  for  stones,  and  trees 
with  trunks  of  gold,  and  houses  covered  with  gold  and  silver,  and 
rivers  of  milk,  and  honey,  and  wine,  and  innumerable  maidens 
with  bodies  made  of  pure  musk,  Avho  live  in  pavilions  made  of 
hollow  pearls  and  are  free  from  all  defects  of  their  sex.  The  idea 
of  the  means  to  be  employed  for  reaching  the  heaven  of  the 
Egyptians  was  as  primitive  as  that  of  the  heaven  itself,  for  the 
Egyptians  thought  that  they  could  climb  on  to  the  iron  floor  of 
heaven  by  going  to  the  mountains,  the  tops  of  which  it  touched 
in  some  places.  At  a  later  period  it  was  thought  that  a  ladder 
was  necessary,  certainly  for  those  who  did  not  live  near  the 
mountains  whose  tops  touched  heaven's  floor,  and  in  many  tombs 
models  of  ladders  were  placed  so  that  the  deceased  might  make 
use  of  them  at  the  proper  time.  The  god  Osiris  even  was  believed 
to  have  needed  a  ladder,  and  to  have  been  helped  to  ascend  it  by 
Ra  and  Horus,  or  by  Horus  and  Set.  The  idea  of  the  need  of  a 
ladder  was  deeply  seated  in  the  Egyptian  mind,  for  when  the 
custom  of  placing  models  of  ladders  in  the  tombs  ceased,  they  drew 


AAAAAA 


r=^ 


(SI  ^  A  P  0  ^  (SI  ^  P  J^ 


rO    %  0     "^    ,  Unas,  1.  181. 


168  THE   SEKHET-HETEP 

pictures  of  them  in  the  papyri  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  which  Avere 

placed  in  tombs/     The  model  of  the  ladder,     y  'vv       B  ,  inaqet, 

could  be  made  as  long  as  the  deceased  wished  by  reciting  certain 
words  of  power  over  it,  and  by  similar  means  the  picture  of  the 
ladders  given  in  the  papyri  could  be  turned  into  real  ladders. 

The  above  mentioned  facts  will  show  that  in  his  conception 
of  heaven  the  Egyptian  never  succeeded  in  freeing  himself  wholly 
from  material  ideas  and  the  wish  to  make  sure  of  eternal  life  and 
happiness  by  means  of  his  own  acts.  In  the  latter  part  of  the 
dynastic  period  the  conception  of  heaven  became  more  material, 
and  at  length,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  texts,  the  belief  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  actual  physical  body  prevailed,  and  the  life 
after  death  was  regarded  as  nothing  but  a  continuation  of  the  life 
upon  earth.  Thus  the  title  of  Chapter  ex.  of  the  Boole  of  the  Dead 
declares  that  the  text  which  follows  will  give  a  man  the  power  of 
"  doing  everything  even  as  a  man  doeth  upon  earth."  As  a  result 
of  this  view  the  deceased  prays  thus : — "  May  I  become  a  Ichu 
"  (spirit)  therein,  i.e.,  in  the  Sekhet-hetep  or  Elysian  Fields,  may  I 
"  eat  therein,  may  I  drink  therein,  may  I  plough  therein,  may  I 
"  reap  therein,  may  I  fight  therein,  may  I  make  love  therein,  may 
"  my  words  be  mighty  therein,  may  I  never  be  in  a  state  of 
"  servitude  therein,  but  may  I  be  in  authority  therein."  He  also 
wishes  ttat  he  may  have  with  him  in  Sekhet-hetep  his  father  and 
mother,  and  presumably  his  wife  and  children,  and  also  tlie  god 
or  gods  of  his  city,  but  in  these  materialistic  passages  we  find  no 
mention  of  his  desire  to  worship  and  praise  the  gods  of  heaven, 
or  even  the  Great  God  who  is  said  to  '^grow"  therein.  Thus  in 
another  place  in  the  same  chapter  he  says,  "  0  ITakh,  I  have 
"  entered  into  thee,  I  have  eaten  my  bread,  I  have  gotten  the 
"  mastery  over  choice  pieces  of  the  flesh  of  oxen  and  of  feathered 
"  fowl,  and  the  birds  of  Shu  have  been  given  to  me.  I  have 
"  plunged  into  the  lakes  of  Tchesert ;  behold  me,  for  all  filth  hath 
"  departed  from  me.  The  Great  God  groweth  therein,  and  behold, 
"  I  have  found  [food  therein]  ;  I  have  snared  feathered  fowl  and 
"  I  feed  upon  the  best  of  them.   ...  I  have  seen  the  Osiris  [my 

^  See  the  Papyrus  of  Ani^  2nd  edition,  pi.  22. 


THE   SEKHET-HETEP  169 

"  father],  and  I  have  gazed  upon  my  mother,  and  I  have  made 
'•  love."  In  every  division  of  the  Elysian  Fields  the  deceased,  in 
the  later  period  of  dynastic  history,  found  some  fresh  material 
pleasure,  but,  in  spite  of  all  its  inconsistencies  and  his  materialism, 
the  heaven  of  the  Egyptians  was  better  and  purer  than  that  of 
many  more  modern  nations  which  are  credited  with  higher  intelli- 
gence and  better  civilization. 


(     170     ) 


CHAPTER  V 
THE   UNDERWORLD 

IN  the  chapters  on  God  and  the  gods  it  has  already  been  said 
that  the  Egyptians  in  the  earliest  times  believed  that  the 
gods  were  moved  by  the  same  passions  as  men  and  grew  old  and 
died  like  men ;  later,  however,  they  believed  that  it  was  only  the 
bodies  of  the  gods  which  died,  and  they  therefore  provided  in 
their  religious  system  a  place  for  the  souls  of  dead  gods,  just  as 
they  provided  a  place  for  the  souls  of  dead  men  and  women.  The 
writers  of  the  relio:ious  texts  were  not  all  ao-reed  as  to  the  exact 
position  of  this  place,  but  from  first  to  last,  whatever  might  be  the 

conceptions  entertained  about  it,  it  Avas  called  Tuat,  i<:  ^^  • 

This  word  is  commonly  rendered  ''  underworld,"  but  it  must  be 
distinctly  understood  that  the  Egyptian  word  does  not  imply  that 
it  was  situated  under  our  world,  and  that  this  rendering  is  only 
adopted  because  the  exact  signification  of  the  name  Tuat  is 
unknown.  The  word  is  a  very  old  one,  and  expresses  a  conception 
which  was  originated  by  the  primitive  Egyptians,  and  was  probably 
unknown  to  their  later  descendants,  who  used  the  word  without 
troubling  to  define  its  exact  meaning.  To  render  Tuat  by  "  hell  " 
is  also  incorrect,  because  "  hell "  conveys  to  modern  peoples  ideas 
Avhich  Avere  foreign  to  the  Egyptians  of  most  schools  of  religious 
thought.  Whatever  may  be  the  moral  ideas  of  the  Tuat  as  a  place 
of  punishment  for  the  wicked  in  later  times,  it  is  clear  that  at  the 
outset  it  was  regarded  as  the  place  through  which  the  dead  Sun- 
god  Ra  passed  after  his  setting  or  death  each  evening  on  his 
journey  to  that  portion  of  the  sky  in  which  he  rose  anew  each 
morning.  In  the  XlXth  Dynasty  we  know  that  the  Tuat  was 
believed  to  be  situated  not  below  our  earth,  but  away  beyond  the 


THE   TUAT  171 

earth,  probably  in  the  sky,  and  certainly  near  the  heaven  wherein 
the  gods  dwelt ;  it  was  the  realm  of  Osiris  who,  according  to  many 
texts,  judged  the  dead  there,  and  reigned  over  the  gods  of  the 
dead  as  well  as  over  the  dead  themselves. 

The  Tuat  was  separated  from  this  world  by  a  chain  or  range 
of  mountains,  and  consisted  of  a  great  valley,  which  was  shut 
in  closely  on  each  side  by  mountains;  the  mountains  on  one 
side  divided  the  valley  from  this  earth,  and  those  on  the  other 
divided  it  from  heaven.  We  may  note  in  passing  that  the 
Hebrews  separated  the  blessed  from  the  damned  by  a  wall,^  and 
that  Lazarus  was  separated  from  Dives  in  hell  by  a  "  great  gulf,"  ^ 
and  that  the  Muhammadans  divide  heaven  from  hell  by  the 
mountain  i\-l-A'raf,  «-j>1^c-^l,^  which,  however,  cannot  be  of  any 
great  breadth  because  those  who  stand  upon  it  are  supposed  to  be 
able  to  hold  converse  both  with  the  blessed  and  the  damned.  It 
is  pretty  certain  that  both  Hebrews  and  Muhammadans  borrowed 
their  ideas  of  the  partition  between  heaven  and  hell  from  the 
Egyptian  Tuat,  but  there  is  no  authority  in  the  texts  for  the 
Muhammadan  view  that  it  is  a  sort  of  limbo  or  purgatory  for 
those  who  are  too  o-ood  for  earth  but  not  o-ood  enouoj'h  for  heaven. 
Those  who  stand  on  Al-A'raf  are  said  to  be  angels  in  the  form  of 
men,  23atriarchs,  prophets,  and  saints,  and  those  whose  good  deeds 
on  earth  were  exactly  counterbalanced  by  their  evil  deeds,  and 
who  therefore  merit  neither  heaven  nor  hell.  Through  the  valley 
of  the  Tuat  runs  a  river,  which  is  the  counterpart  of  the  Nile  in 
Egypt  and  of  the  celestial  Nile  in  heaven,  and  on  each  bank  of 
this  river  lived  a  vast  number  of  monstrous  beasts,  and  devils,  and 
fiends  of  every  imaginable  kind  and  size,  and  among  them  were 
large  numbers  of  evil  spirits  which  were  hostile  to  any  being  that 
invaded  the  valley. 

On  the  sarcophagus  of  Seti  I.  is  a  representation  of  the 
Creation,  which  is  reproduced  on  p.  204,  and  from  it  we  see  that  the 
Tuat  is  likened  to  the  body  of  Osiris,  which  is  bent  round  like 
a  hoop  in  such  a  Avay  that  his  toes  touch  the  back  of  his  head, 

^  See  Eiseumenger,    "  Was  die  Juden  von    der   Hollen    lelireii "    (Entdecktes 
Judenthum,  torn,  ii.,  p.  322  if. 

-  St.  Luke  xvi.  26.  ^  See  Kur'an,  Siu'a  vii. 


172  THE   TUAT   AND   AMENTET 

On  the  top  of  his  head  stands  the  goddess  Nut,  who  supports  with 
both  hands  the  disk  of  the  sun.  From  this  we  may  conchide  both 
that  Osiris  is  the  personification  of  the  Tuat,  and  that  the  Tuat 
is  a  narrow  circular  valley  Avhich  begins  where  the  sun  sets  in  the 
west,  and  ends  where  he  rises  in  the  east.  The  Tuat  was  a  terrible 
place  by  reason  of  the  monsters  and  devils  with  which  it  was  filled, 
and  its  horrors  Avere  increased  by  the  entire  absence  of  light  from 
it,  and  the  l3eings  therein  groped  about  in  the  darkness  of  deep 
night.  That  the  Tuat  should  be  a  place  of  blackness  and  gloom 
is  quite  natural  when  once  we  have  realized  that  it  was  the  path 
of  the  dead  sun  between  the  sunset  of  one  day  and  the  sunrise  of 
the  following  day.  The  ideas  about  this  region,  which  we  find 
reproduced  in  papyri  of  the  New  Empire,  belong  to  different 
periods,  and  we  can  see  that  the  Theban  wi'iters  who  described  it 
and  drew  pictures  of  the  beings  which  lived  in  it,  collected  a  mass 
of  legends  and  myths  from  every  great  religious  centre  of  Egypt, 
wishing  to  make  them  all  form  part  of  their  doctrine  concerning 
the  great  god  of  Thebes,  Amen-Rri.  As  the  j)riests  of  Heliopolis 
succeeded  in  promulgating  their  theological  system  throughout  the 
length  and  breadth  of  Egypt  by  identifying  the  older  gods  with 
their  gods,  and  by  proving  that  their  views  included  those  of  all 
the  priesthoods  of  the  great  cities  of  Egypt,  so  the  priests  of 
Thebes  endeavoured  to  convince  the  priests  of  other  great  cities 
of  the  superiority  and  greatness  of  their  God  Amen-Ra,  and 
probably  succeeded  in  so  doing.  The  Theban  writers  and  scribes 
knew  perfectly  well  that  originally  every  nome  or  great  city 
possessed  its  OAvn  underworld  just  as  it  possessed  its  own  company 
of  gods,  and  that  each  underworld  was  designated  by  a  special 
name ;  they,  therefore,  made  the  Tuat  to  include  all  these  under- 
worlds and  all  the  various  gods  Avith  whom  they  Avere  peopled, 
and  they  gave  it  the  most  important  of  the  names  of  the  local 
underworlds.  The  best  knoAvn  of  these  Avas  Amentet,  ft'^  "^^  i-e., 
the  "  hidden  place,"  Avhich  appears  to  have  been  originally  the 
place  where  An-her,  the  local  god  of  Abydos,  ruled  as  god  of  the 
dead,  under  the  title  of  "  Khenti  Amentet,"  that  is  to  say,  "  he 
Avho  is  the  chief  of  the  unseen  land."  When  the  importance  of 
An-her  Avas  eclipsed  by  the  neAv-comer  Osiris,  the  title  of  the  former 


THE   TUAT   AND    ITS    INHAIUTANTS         173 

was  assigned  to  Osiris,  who,  henceforth,  was  always  called  "  Khenti 
Amentet."  But  this  usurpation  of  An-her's  title  as  god  of  the 
dead  by  Osiris  must  have  taken  place  in  very  early  times,  for 
Amentet  was  a  common  name  for  the  underworld  throughout 
Egypt,  and  is  found  in  texts  of  all  periods,  even  in  those  of  the 
Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties. 

Yet  long  before  even  this  remote  period  the  priesthoods  of 
certain  nomes  or  cities  must  have  developed  the  idea  that  the  life 
of  a  man  resembled  the  course  of  the  sun  during  the  day,  and  that 
setting  was  to  the  sun  Avhat  death  was  to  a  man  ;  the  sun,  how- 
ever, reappeared  each  morning  in  apparently  a  neAV  body,  and  as 
man  wished  to  live  again  in  a  renewed,  or  new,  body,  the  Egyptian 
theologians  set  to  work  to  form  a  system  of  theology  in  which  the 
souls  of  the  blessed  dead,  i.e.,  those  who  had  been  buried  with  all 
the  ceremonies  prescribed  by  the  religion  of  the  period,  were  made 
to  accompany  the  sun  in  his  boat  as  he  passed  through  the  portion 
of  the  Tuat  which  had  been  assigned  to  them.  As  the  sun  passed 
through  the  Tuat  large  numbers  of  souls  made  their  way  into  his 
boat,  and  although  it  was  only  the  dead  sun  that  was  their  guide 
and  protector,  and  his  passage  was  through  the  realms  of  the  dead 
which  were  under  the  sovereignty  of  Osiris,  the  god  of  the  dead, 
they  were  brought  forth  at  length  to  renewed  life  and  light  as 
soon  as  the  boat  passed  out  from  the  eastern  end  of  the  Tuat  into 
the  day.  This  view  was  a  very  popular  and  widespread  one, 
especially  as  it  made  Ra  and  Osiris  work  together,  each  after  his 
own  method,  to  secure  eternal  life  and  happiness  for  the  souls  of 
the  dead.  As  soon  as  the  priests  had  made  up  their  minds  that 
the  Tuat  existed,  they  began  to  people  it  with  imaginary  beings 
which  were  supposed  to  be  hostile  to  the  souls  of  the  dead,  and  to 
invent  descriptions  of  the  various  regions  into  which  they  declared 
it  was  divided ;  such  descriptions  were  at  length  committed  to 
writing,  at  first  in  a  very  simple  form,  and  after  the  manner  of 
every  group  of  texts  Avhich  were  composed  for  the  benefit  of  the 
dead,  but  finally  they  became  more  elaborate,  and  attempts  Avere 
made  to  represent  pictorially  the  creatures  which  were  found  in 
the  Tuat.  In  fact,  it  was  intended  to  compile  a  book  which  should 
contain  such   accurate   descriptions  of  the  Tuat,  and    such    true 


174  THE    SHAT   AM   TUAT 

pictures  of  the  foes  which  the  dead  soul  would  have  to  meet  there, 
together  with  lists  of  their  names,  that  when  a  soul  was  once 
provided  with  a  copy  of  it  he  would  find  it  impossible  to  lose  his 
way,  or  to  be  overcome  by  any  monster  which  attempted  to  bar 
his  way  or  to  prevent  his  access  to  the  boat  of  Ra. 

The  great  work  which  the  Egyptians  called  "  Coming  Fortli 
ra  Ik  o 


by  Day,"  <=:>  ^^^^  v\     ,  supplied  the  soul  with  a  great  many 

words  of  power,  and  prayers,  and  incantations,  as  well  as  hymns, 
but  even  in  the  Early  Empire,  about  B.C.  3500,  many  of  its 
doctrines  were  antiquated,  and  the  priests  found  it  necessary  to 
add  new  chapters  and  to  modify  old  ones  in  order  to  make  it  a 
funeral  work  suitable  for  the  requirements  of  newer  generations  of 
men.  Owing  to  the  extreme  antiquity  of  the  "  Book  of  Coming 
Forth  by  Day,"  the  views  expressed  in  many  of  its  chapters  were 
contrary  to  those  held  by  Theban  priests  of  the  New  Empire,  about 
B.C.  1050,  and  as  a  result,  whilst  preserving,  and  holding  in  great 
reverence  this  work  which  they  had  borrowed  from  the  ancient 
priesthood  of  Heliopolis,  they  compiled  two  works,  which  may  be 
called  "The  Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Tuat,"  and  the 
"  Book  of  the  Pylons."     In  the  first  of  these,  the  Shat  am  Tuat," 

*^^^  ]  _  _  1\    u^  '^     ^      were  o:athered  too:ether  all  the  views  held 

by  the  Heliopolitan  priesthood  on  the  life  of  man's  soul  after  death, 
and  though  it  contained  all  the  doctrines  as  to  the  supremacy  of 
Ra,  their  great  Sun-god,  these  were  so  skilfully  manipulated  by 
the  Theban  priests,  that  the  compilation  actually  became  a  work 
which  magnified  the  grade  and  influence  of  Amen-Ra,  the  great 
god  of  Thebes,  and  raised  him  to  the  position  which  the  Thebans 
claimed  for  him,  namely,  "king  of  the  gods,  and  lord  of  the 
thrones  of  the  two  lands."  The  thrones  here  referred  to  are  not 
those  of  kings,  but  the  shrines  of  all  the  gods  on  all  the  land  on 
each  side  of  the  river  Nile.  In  the  Heliopolitan  system  of  theology 
the  god  Osiris  held  a  comparatively  subordinate  position  in  the 
"pauti  or  company  of  the  gods,  and  was  in  fact  only  the  greatest  of 
the  gods  of  the  dead  who  were  worshipped  in  the  Delta ;  in  the 
"  Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Underworld  "  he  also  holds  a  position 
subordinate  to  Ra,  and  his  underworld  is  made  to  be  a  portion  of 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PYLONS  175 

the  Tuat  through  which  the  dead  sun  passed  nightly.    In  the  Shat 

EN  Sbau,  ^^^^  "^"^^  -^^wv.  n  ^   1)  '^  %  "^^  '--',  or  "  Book  of  the 

Pylons,"  the  greatest  god  of  all  is  the  god  Osiris,  and  the  whole 
work  is  devoted  to  a  description  of  the  various  sections  of  the 
region  over  which  he  presides,  and  is  intended  to  form  a  guide  to 
it  whereby  the  souls  of  the  dead  may  be  enabled  to  make  their 
way  through  it  successfully  and  in  comfort.  The  Shat  am  Tuat 
and  the  Shat  en  sbau  were,  in  fact,  the  outcome  of  two  distinct 
schools  of  theology ;  the  latter,  in  its  most  primitive  form,  was  the 
older  of  the  two,  and  described  the  life  of  man  after  death  more 
as  a  continuation  of  his  existence  on  this  earth  than  as  an  entirely 
new  life,  while  the  former  made  the  future  life  to  be  passed  entirely 
with  the  Sun-god.  The  latter  maintained  the  views  about  the 
Elysian  Fields  and  their  material  delights,  which  found  utterance 
in  the  "  Book  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,"  and  was  to  all  intents 
and  purposes  an  amplification  of,  and  a  companion  volume  to  it,  but 
it  also  contained  doctrines  which  were  inserted  in  it  with  the  view 
of  making  it  harmonize  with  the  theories  in  the  former  which 
related  to  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Ra.  The  Theban  priests  had 
no  wish,  when  once  they  had  established  the  mastery  of  Amen-Ra, 
but  to  bring  all  the  doctrines  of  the  various  schools  of  religious 
thought  into  harmony  with  their  own,  for  such  a  course  could  do 
nothing  but  contribute  to  the  material  prosperity  of  the  great 
brotherhood  of  Amen-Ra.  They  were  tolerably  sure  of  the 
offerings  of  the  faithful  of  Thebes,  but  they  were  anxious  to 
obtain  a  share  of  those  of  the  devotees  of  Osiris  who  flocked  to 
Abydos,  which  was,  rightly  or  wrongly,  celebrated  as  the  burial- 
place  of  the  god.  The  history  of  Egypt  shows  that  the  fight 
between  the  kings  of  the  South  and  the  kings  of  the  North  for  the 
supremacy  of  the  whole  country  was  always  going  on,  but  as  the 
fortunes  of  war  had  given  victory  to  the  kings  of  the  South,  who 
were  the  lords  of  all  Egypt  under  the  New  Empire,  the  priests  of 
the  god  of  these  kings  determined  that  Amen-Ra  should  be  the 
king  of  the  gods.  Religious  ambition  was  helped  by  the  success 
of  the  great  warrior  kings  of  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty,  and  thus 
Amen-Ra  became  the  overlord  of  Osiris. 


176 


DIVISIONS   OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 


Both  the  "  Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Underworld  "  and  the 
"  Book  of  the  Pylons  "  divide  the  Tuat  into  twelve  parts,  each  of 
which  corresponds  to  one  of  the  hours  of  the  night,  and  the 
divisions  are  called  ^'  Field,"  LjJjQ  "^ ,  selcliet,  or  "  City,"  ,  nut,  or 
"  Hall,"  ^^  ^_^  arret,  or  "  Circle,"  ^^  ^^  qerert.  In  Chapter 
cxliv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  according  to  the  Papyrus  of  Nu 
(Brit.  Mus.,No.  10,477),  the  Arrets  are  seven  in  number,  and  each 
is  guarded  by  a  doorkeeper,  a  watcher,  and  a  herald  with  the 
following  names : — 


Arret  I.     1.  Sekhet-hra-ilsht-aru, 


2.   Semetu,  P '^  ^  ^  ^  J  •      3.  Hu-kheru,  rn 


Areet  II.     1.  Tun.pehti,^  ^  ^  |.     2.  Seqet-hm.p  ^  ^  f . 


3.  Sabes, 


JP- 


Arret  III.     1.    Am-huat-ent-peh-fi 
2.   Res-hra,  <= 


A 


J  ^  #  J  .     3.  Uaau,  ^ 


I      AA/WV\  ^ 

:^  W 


Arret  IV.      1.    Khesef-hra-ash-kheru,  ^  U=/l  ^  ^^  j  %^  ^A  . 
2.    Ptes  -  ab,    <:=^  P  J  "^  •      ^-    ^eteqa  -  hra  -  khesef  -  atu, 


^  A 


Arret    V.       1.    Ankh  -  em  -  fentu. 


f 


/www  v\  OOL  .      2. 
I    I    I 


Ashebii, 


ra 


rm 


O 


J  ^  .      3.  Teb  -  her  -  kehaat,  -=^  J  f 


Arret  VI.      1.    Aken-tau-k-ha-kheru, 


2.  An-her, 


I 


D 


^ 


1  ra 

3.    Metes-lira-ari-she, 


w 


s 


"'^^ 


DIVISIONS    OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 


177 


Arret   VII.      1.    Metes-sen, 


'^^ 


1 1 1 

3.    Khesef-hra-khemiu 


2.    Aa-kheru, 


In  Chapter  cxlv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  according  to  the 
Theban  and  Saite  Recensions  the  domain  of  Osiris,  i.e.,  Sekhet- 


Aarrn, 


V 


I   I   I 


or    Sekhet-Aanre, 


.V 


I'M  oUt  ^U,   contains  Twenty-one    pylons,  each    of  which 

has   a   name,  generally  a  very  long    one,   and    each  of  which   is 
guarded  by  a  god.     The  names  of  the  gods  who  guard  the  first  ten 

of  these  pylons  are: — 1.  Neri,  ^^  (|fl '^  ^=^  J-    2.   Mes-Peh, 
n|_^J|.     3.  Ertat-Sebanqa,   ^ 

4.  Nekau,    TV    ^  v^^wl-     ^-  Henti-requ, 
6.  Semamti,  [1^'^^^J^.     7.  Akenti, 


^ 


l^i- 


AAA/V\A 

^  w 


TCHET-F 


9.    TCHESEF, 


.     8.  Khu- 
Sekhen-ur, 


These   names    are  taken  from  the  Papyrus  of 

Nu  already  quoted  (sheet  25),  but  the  following  come  from 
the  Turin  Papyrus,  which  was  edited  by  Lepsius  so  far  back  as 
1842,  and  they  illustrate  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  in 

the  names.     1.   Nerau,  ""^[l^^N  J.     2.  Mes-Ptah, 


3.  Beq,  J  ^  II .      4.   Hu-tepa,   f  ^  ^^ 


1 .      5.  Erta- 


HEN-ER-REQAr, 


7.  Am-Nit, 


A 


e 


6.  Samti, 


w 


TCHET-F, 


h^ 


(9 


=.  ^  I 


8.  Netchses,  '^     ^^ 
^'^^ .      10.   Sekhen-ur, 


9.  Khau- 


The  names  of  all  the  pylons  are  given  in  both  the  Theban  and 
Sa'ite  Recensions,^  but  the  names  of  the  gods  who  guard  pylons 
XL — XXI.  are  given  in  neither.  The  domain  of  Osiris,  or  Sekhet- 
Aarru,  was,  according  to  Chapters  cxlix.  and  cl.,  divided  into  fifteen 

Aats,  which  are  thus  enumerated  : — Aat   (         )    I.  Sekhet  Aarru  ; 

^  See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Text),  p.  334  S. 


178  DIVISIONS    OF   SEKHET-AARRU 

its  ffod  was  Ra-Heru-khuti.    Aat  II.  Apt-ent-khet,    %J 

its  god  was  Fa-akli,  k^^  V^  ^  ~^  "^  i .     Aat  III.  Tu-qa-aat, 

^  ^  I  "^  '^    "   •     ^^'^  ^^'  "  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  *^^^  spirits," 
"^  ^  I .     Aat  V.  Ammehet,  n  t —  ^^^  |  ^ ;   the  god  in  it 

is   called    Sekher-remu,  P^^^^^-^^IY^,^-     -^^t   VI. 
Asset,    ()PP@-      -^^t  VII.    Ha-sert,    [TI^-AP^^©;    the 


.    A 


god   in  it   is   Fa-jDet,    ^/  •     Aat  VIII.    Apt-ent-qahu,  ^_ 

^  ^  i  ^  ^  •  ^^^  ^^'  ^'^^'  1  "^^  ^  ® '  *^^®  Sot^  in  it  is  Sept, 
A^P^.  Aat  X.  Unt,  ■^^^;  the  god  in  it  is  Hetemet-baiu, 
Q  n  -^^     ::  A  <*^  I .     Aat  XI.  Apt-net,    V*  'wvw.  ;  the  god  in 

it   is    Aa-sekhemu,    ^^IP^^^©,"^,  ^-      ^^t    XII. 
Kher-aha,  J^  Q^  "^  ^ ;  the  god  in  it  is  Hap,  \  ~^  ^  J 
i.e.,    the    Nile.      Aat   XIII.    Atru-she- en-nesert-f-em-shet, 

I'^^^P^'  *^®  ^^^  ^^  '^*  ^^  Maa-thet-f,  ^ '^  ^^  ^  ^  • 
Aat  XV.  Amentet-nefert,  "  Beautiful  Amentet,  \  ^^^^  T  <c==>  ," 
wherein  the  gods  live  upon  cakes  and  ale. 

In  connexion  with  these  various  divisions  of  the  realm  of 
Osiris  here  will  follow  naturally  a  brief  description  of  the  Book 
OF  Pylons.  An  excellent  copy  of  its  text,  with  illustrations,  is  to 
be  found  on  the  famous  alabaster  sarcophagus  ^  of  Seti  I.,  now 
preserved  in  Sir  John  Soane's  Museum  in  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields, 
and  variants  of  several  of  the  passages  are  given  on  the  walls  of 
the  tombs  of  several  kings  of  the  XXth  Dynasty,  Avho  were  buried 
in  the  Valley  of  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings  at  Thebes.  Curiously 
enough,  the  work,  as  M.  Jequier  has  remarked,^  seems  never  to 
have  become  popular,  and  copies  of  it  are  only  found  in  royal 
tombs ;  it  is  generally  admitted  that  it  represents  an  attempt  on 

1  See  Bonomi  and  Shai'pe,  The  alabaster  Sarcopliagus  of  Oimenepldah  I.,  King 
of  Egypt,  London,  1864. 

3  Le  Livre  de  ce  qu'il  y  a  dans  VHades,  Paris,  1894,  p.  13. 


DIVISIONS    OF   THE   TUAT 


179 


the  part  of  the  Theban  priests  to  adjust  the  cult  of  Ra  to  that  of 
Osiris,  and  if  this  be  so  there  is  little  to  wonder  at  if  it  failed. 
According  to  the  Book  of  Pylons  the  Tuat  is  a  long,  narrow 
valley,  with  sandy  slopes,  and  is  divided  into  two  equal  strips  by 
the  river  on  which  the  boat  of  the  sun  sails ;  it  is  made  to  contain 


1^1-^ 


M^^MU^Uli 


The  First  Hour  of  the  Night. 

twelve  nomes  or  divisions,  which  correspond  to  the  twelve  hours 
of  the  night. 

In  the  First  Division,  i.e.,  the  First  Hour,  we  have  the 
Mountain  of  the  West,  i^^,  divided  into  two  portions,  and  along 
its  lowest  part  is  a  path  which  forms  the  entrance  from  this  world 
to  the  Tuat.     On  the  right-hand  side  is  a  jackal-headed  standard, 


180  FIRST   DIVISION   OF   THE    THAT 

"^ ,  and  on  the  left  a  ram-headed   standard,  V  f   ^ach  of  these  is 

adored  by  the  god  of  the  mountain,  Set,    '=^  ,  and  the  god  of  the 

Tuat,  c=^i:  '^g\  '=^ .      On    the    right   are   the    twelve    gods   of  the 

mountain,    and    on   the   left    the    twelve   gods    of    Set-Amentet, 

j  I  I  J|  I     ^    (1  ^/w^A^.     In  the  centre  is  the  boat  of  the  sun,  and  we 

see  in  it  a  disk  containing  a  beetle ;  the  disk  is  encircled  by  a 
huge  serpent  in  folds,  which  holds  its  tail  in  its  mouth.  In  the 
bows  of  the  boat  stands  the  god  Sa,  ^mi,  and  in  the  stern,  Heka, 
m,  the  god  of  magical  words.  The  boat,  having  moved  on, 
approaches  a  pylon  Avith  closed  doors,  guarded  by  a  huge  serpent 

which  stands  on  his  tail  and  bears  the  name  Saa-Set,  ^^  \\ 

This  pylon  forms  the  entrance  to  the  Second  Division,  or  Second 
Hour,  and  when  the  god  has  passed  through  it  "  those  who  dwell  in 


"their  Set,    ^    i ,  cry  out."^     On  the  right  are  twenty-four  human 

—  •         -  "Tk    n  — ** — 

forms,  which  represent  those  who  praised  Ra  upon  earth,  i<:  ^^ )   "'■''^^ 

O  ^  "^"^  g^jjj  ^i;^Q  directed  their  words  of  power  ao;ainst  the  arch- 
fiend  Apep,  '^"^  ^iM^.  In  the  centre  is  the  boat  of  the  sun,  in 
which  the  god  stands  in  a  shrine ;  he  is  ram-headed,  and  holds  in 
his  hand  a  sceptre.  The  shrine  is  protected  by  the  serpent 
Mehen,  °^ ,  and  a  serpent  stands  upright  on  its  tail  before  him ; 
the  boat  is  being  towed  along  by  four  beings  of  the  Tuat, 
>ic  VN  cr^]  J|  I ,  and  is  met  by  the  seven  gods  called  Nepmeli,  □  , 
Nenha,  ^,  Ba  (?),  Horus,  Ua-ab,  ^^O,  Khnemu,  and  Setchet, 
n  ^^  I ,  and  by  six  gods  of  the  aqet,  £  ^  ,  and  a  god  with  a 
iStafF.  On  the  left  hand  of  the  divine  boat  ai'e  : — (1)  The  god  Tem, 
leaning  on  a  staff,  /^,  (2)  four  dead  men  lying  on  their  backs, 

and  twenty  men  standing  with  their  arms  tied  together  behind 
their  backs.  These  last  are,  according  to  M.  Lefebure's  rendering^ 
of  the  text,  "  the  criminals  in  Ra's  great  hall  (the  world),  those 
"  who  have  insulted  Ra  on  the  earth,  those  who  have  cursed  that 

1  Bonomi  and  Sliarpe,  op.  cit.,  pU.  5  and  4. 

2  See  Becords  of  the  Past,  vol.  x.,  p.  85  ff. 


182  THIRD   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

"  whicli  is  in  the  Egg,  those  who  have  frustrated  justice,  those  who 
"have  uttered  blasphemies  against  Khuti."  The  pylon  which  the 
god  now  approaches  is  quite  different  from  the  first,  but  it 
resembles  all  the  others  which  have  to  be  passed  through.  The 
opening  is  protected  like  a  fortress  by  some  advanced  work,  and 
through  the  wall  is  an  entrance  to  a  corridor  which  runs  between 
two  walls  crowned  with  a  series  of  spear  heads.  This  corridor 
bends  at  right  angles,  and  in  each  angle  is  a  uraeus,  from  the 
mouth  of  which  drop  balls  of  fire  that  fill  the  whole  length  of  it ; 
at  each  end  of  the  corridor  is  a  god  in  the  form  of  a  mummy,  one 
is  called  Am-aua-qah-f,  &i  V^  '     ^    §   I  ^^-=-,  and  the  other, 

Sekhabsenfunen,  ^  J  ^  ™  ^  ZI-  The  pylon  itself  is  called 
Septet-uauau,  I  ^-^-^(11,  and  the  name  of  the  snake 
which  guards  it  and  stands  upon  its  tail  is  Aqebi,  'k\  ^  J  flfl  ^m  ' 
The  entrance  to  the  pylon  is  also  protected  by  nine  gods,  in 
mummied   form,  who  represent   the  "  Second   Company "   of  the 

ffods,  ^  1 1 1  y 

»      '  ^  III  ^  ^ 

The  door  of  the  pylon  is  opened  towards  the  Third  Division 
OF  THE  TuAT,  or  the  Third  Hour.  The  gate  is  called  Septet 
UAUAu  setet-sen-Ra,   n    °    ^   X^jQ  n  I  n^  |1  ^wCvAA  %^     Qji   the 

right  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are  twelve  holy  gods  of  the  Tuat, 
each  in  his  shrine,  with  the  doors  open,  and  twelve  gods  of  the 
lakes  of  fire  ;  a  huge  snake  lies  along  the  tops  of  all  the  shrines, 
and  before  each  god  of  the  basins  of  fire  is  an  ear  of  corn.  On  the 
left  hand  are: — 1.  The  god  Tem  ;  2.  the  serpent  xipep ;  o.  the 
nine  gods  who   are  called   the  "  chiefs  who  drive  back  Apepi," 

things,    ^37  v\  I    ^      "^    c^  '  •      The    boat   of   the    sun    is    towed 


through  this  division  by  eight  gods  of  the  Tuat,  and  the  middle  of 
the  rope  is  fastened  to  a  long  pole  or  beam,  each  end  of  which 
terminates  in  the  head  of  a  bull.  This  pole  is  supported  by  eight 
gods  in  mummied  form,  and  upon  it  are  seated  seven  gods ;  in 
front  and  behind  these  stands  a  bull,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
division  stand  four  shrouded  mummy  forms.     The  gods  who  are 


184  FOURTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

on  the  left  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  sun,  and  are  under  the  direction 
of  Tern,  form  two  companies,  whose  special  duty  it  was  to  carry- 
out  the  commands  of  this  god  in  respect  of  the  slaughter  of  the 
arch-fiend  Apepi.  This  monster  was  first  of  all  to  be  enchanted 
by  the  incantations  which  were  recited  over  him,  and  then  his 
head  was  to  be  cut  off,  and  his  body  to  be  hacked  in  pieces  at  the 
joints.  As  the  god  passes  out  of  the  Third  Division  and  the  door 
closes,  all  the  beings  who  are  fated  to  remain  in  it  lift  up  their 
voices  and  weep. 

The  pylon  of  the  Foukth  Division  or  Fouhth  Hour  is  called 

Nebt-s-tchefau,     ^    "i^  i ,  and    the   name   of  the   serpent  which 

'  — H—  c=3  I  r  ^ 

guards  it  and  stands  upon  its  tail  is  Tchetbi,  ^^  J Nv  ^^^  S^^^ 
in  mummied  forms  who  stand  one  at  the  beginning  and  one  at  the 
end   of  the   corridor  are   called  ISFenuerbesta,  ,    and 


Seta-ta,  ^.  ^^         ,  respectively.     The  nine  gods  Avho  guard 

the  wall  are  the  "  the  third  company  of  the  great  god,"  ^  in  i 

I  3  nK^  •  .     On  the  right  side  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are 

twelve  gods,  who  are  described  as  the  "bringers  of  their  doubles," 
^  V  AA.WW  Lj  1  A^A^AA  ^  and  twelve  jackal-headed  figures,  who  are 

walking  on  the  Lake  of  Life,^  and  ten  uraei,  who  rise  out  of  the 
Lake  of  uraei ;  ^  to  all  these  the  Sun-god  addresses  words  of 
comfort,  and    they  respond  suitably.     The  uraei,  Avho  are  called 

"  those  Avho  live,"  i\  V  ^  (/A  i  T    ®    in'  ^^^^  oi'clered  to  preserve 

their  flames  and  fire  for  use  against  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  they 
answer  the  god,  saying,  "  Come  to  us,  unite  thyself  to   Tanen," 

__a  ^_^  ^^  ^  J\  <=^  4-  T  ^  '  ^^  ^^^®  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  *^®  ^*^^*  ^^ 
the  god  is  Horus  the  Aged,  who  follows  eleven  human  forms  as 

A/W\AA 

they  march  behind  the  uraeus  called  Flame,  ^^  ^,  to  a  shrine  in 
which  the  god  Osiris,  wearing  the  crown  of  the  South,  stands  upon 
a  serpent.  Behind  Osiris  are  the  twelve  gods,  ''who  are  behind 
the  shrine,"  and  four  gods,  who  preside  over  pits  in  the  earth, 
and  the  "prince  of  destruction,"   who  holds  a  sceptre  in  his  left 


^^^mmmmmmmmmmm 


186  FIFTH   DIVISION    OF   THE   TUAT 

hand  and  ■¥■  in  his  right.     In  the  middle  is  the  boat  of  the  sun 

being  towed  along  the  river  of  the  Tuat  by  four  gods  as  usual,  and 
it  is  made  to  approach  a  long  low  sepulchral  building  in  which  are 
nine  chapels,  each  containing  a  mummied  god  lying  flat  on  his 
back ;  these  are  called  "  the  gods  who  are  in  the  train  of  Osiris  in 

their  caves,"  111  s..^  "^  I     i     -||-  %  '  "^  \,    ^    '^^,     At  the 

end  of  this  building  are  two  groups,  each  containing  six  women, 
who  are  the  personifications  of  the  twelve  hours   in   the  Tuat ; 

between  them  is  the  serpent  Herert,  |  <=>,  with  multitudinous 

coils  and  windings,  and  he  is  said  to  give  birth  to  twelve  young 
ones  to  devour  the  hours.  In  this  division,  as  in  the  others,  Ra 
addresses  the  beings  who  are  in  it,  and  makes  arrangements  for 
their  supply  of  food,  and  reminds  them  of  their  duties  to  him  their 
creator. 

The  pylon  of  the  Fifth  Division  or  Fifth  Hour  is  called 

Arit,  (1  •<2>-  (1(1  ^  •  ,  and  the  serpent  who  guards  it  bears  the  name 
of  Teka-hra,  i^a  "^ ;  the  jackal-headed  mummy  at  one  end  of  the 

corridor   is  Aau,  □  '^i^  V:^ ,    and   he   at   the    other  is  Tekemi, 

j\ .     Along  the  front  of  the  wall  are  nine  gods  in  mummied 


forms  who  represent  the  fourth  company  of  the  gods.  On  the 
right  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are  : — 1.  The  twelve  worshippers 

in  the  Tuat ;  2.  Twelve  bearers  of  cord,     ^    %^  i  O  %  §  ^  ; 

and  3.  Four  gods  Avith  sceptres.  These  beings  are  said  to  be 
those  who  knew  Ra  upon  earth,  and  who  made  offerings  to  him, 
and  in  return  for  this  Ra  awarded  them  meat  and  drink  in  the 
most  holy  place  in  Amentet,  and  said  to  them,  "I  am  satisfied 
"  with  what  you  did  for  me,  whether  I  was  shining  in  the  Eastern 

"  heaven,  or  whether  I  was  in  the  temple,  M    "^  ,  of  my  eye." 

Therefore  they  feed  upon  the  food  which  Ra  eats,  and  offerings  are 
made  to  them  upon  earth  on  account  of  the  praise  which  they 
ascribe  to   Ra  in  Amenti.     The  beings  who  carry  the  cords  are 

supposed  to  measure  the  "  fields  of  the  spirits,"  "^^  |  "^  i  'wwva  "^j, 

and  their  cords  are  supposed  to  represent   the  cord  of  law,  i.e., 


■iM-^i^^S^ite^Ui^ 


»i»ia»eta»g»-MM 


i^ 


^ 


•e=: 


liil 


S2 


<^ 


•^=:! 


iin>c 


iin>o 


anx) 

in>o 


188  FIFTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

the  measuring  cord  by  which  law  and  justice  are  represented, 
and    "  Ra   says   to   them,    Their   law   is   the    cord   in   Amentet," 

u  AAA/w.  AAAAA^  '^^-wv  O  ^^     "  g  (s  / M    ^   .     Qu  thc   Icft  side 

^  i   I   I    I    - a  ^'^^^     O    A  ^  1  r^y^] 

of  the  boat  of  the  sun  are: — 1.  Horus  the  Elder  leaning  upon  a 
stick;  2.  Sixteen  men,  four  of  whom  are  ^^  ^  Jj  ',  i.e.,  Egyp- 
tians, four  are  Aamu,  |  ^\  "v^  i ,  four  are  Negroes,  '/\  §  '  _v  '  ^ 
and  four  are  Libyans,  |  V  ''  ^-  Twelve  men,  called  "those 

A7ho    bear     ladders  (?)     in    Ament,     ^  "V  ^  '  f °  ^  °  ^ 

[1  ,  and  who   are  holding  a  long  serpent ;    and  4.  Eight 

divine  sovereign  chiefs  in  Ament.  To  these  four  classes  of  men, 
whom  Horus  describes  as  being  in  the  Tuat  of  Egypt  and  the  Red 

Land,  ^  ^ — i  ^  r^^v~i  ^,  it  is  said  by  the  o'od,  "Ye  are  the 
"  tears    from   my    Eye," 


^111 

I 


"  in  your  name  of  '  men,'  "         _  ^  m  '  •     ^^  fhen  tells  the  Aamu, 

k(c)  ^ —  VQi  I ,  and  the  Negroes  and  the  Libyans  that  he  has 
created  them,  and  that  it  is  the  goddess  Sekhet,  Y  ^  Jl'  ^^^^ 
redeems  *  their  souls,  c^  'j'  ^  A  <^^:  i  '"'■'"^ .  Finally,  the  srod 
addresses  those  who  hold  the  ladder  (?),  and  bids  them  take 
measurements  of  the  souls  that  are  appointed  for  destruction, 
and  destroy  the  souls  that  have  to  be  destroyed  ;  in  the  hands 
of  these  beings  was  the  power  of  determining  the  length  of  the 
period  which  had  to  be  passed  by  souls  in  Amentet,  and  it  is 
undoubtedly  passages  like  these  which  have  given  rise  to  the  idea 
that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  purgatory.  In  the  centre  of  this 
Division  the  boat  of  the  sun  is  being  drawn  along  by  four  gods 
belonging  to  it  as  before.  Before  these  are  nine  gods  with  pro- 
jecting elbows  and  covered  shoulders  called  "  holders  of  Ennutchi," 
<^  ^^1  ^lo^'^ljjj  i>_;  they  are  joined  together  by  a 

rope ;  these  gods  follow  tAvelve  men  who  are  described  as  the 
"souls  of  the  men  who  are  in  the  Tuat,"  and  both  groups  of 
beings  proceed  towards  a  god  who  holds  a  sceptre,  and  is  called 

Her-qenbet-f,  f=^    '^      11    "^    '^-=— •     The  duty  of  this  god  was  to 

/www    <iU    l_ I 


SIXTH   DIVISION    OF   THE   TUAT 


189 


call  the  souls  of  the  i4ghteous  and  put  them  in  their  dwellings, 
by  the  corner  of  those  who  lived  near  him.  Ra,  addresses  the 
gods  who  tow  his  boat  along,  and  bids  them  to  pull  with  vigour, 
and  to  be  strong  of  arm  and  firm  of  limb,  and  swift  of  foot,  and 
bold  of  soul  to  make  a  prosperous  way  for  him  to  the  hidden 
circles,  ^  i  |~^^  •  i .  ISText  he  addresses  the  figures  with  draped 
shoulders  who  bear  the  serpent  Ennutchi,  ^ 
and  bids  them  to  draw  him  along ;  and 
then  praises  those  who  have  spoken  truth, 

c^>(  I    I    I 
magnified 


the    forms    of    God, 


I      I      I 


(S 


upon    earth,    and    have 

^\\ 

1    I  I,    and    decrees    for 

them  cakes  for  their  souls,  wind  for  their 
uostrils,  green  herbs  from  Sekhet-Aaru, 
and  a  place  among  the  gods  of  right  and 
truth,  S^  "^  Jj ,  in  the  corner  of  the  abode 
of  Ra  where  the  companions  of  the  god 
pass  sentences  of  doom.  The  doctrine  here 
preached  is  essentially  that  of  Osiris,  and 
there  is  no  wonder  that  the  Book  of  Pylons 
was  not  popular  with  the  priests  of  Amen. 

The  name  of  the  pylon  of  the  Sixth 
Division  ^  or  the  Sixth  Hour  is  Nebt-aha, 

?  ^ ,  the  guardian  at  the  entrance  to 


the  corridor  is  Maa-ab, 


"Right  of 


heart,"  and  he  who  is  at  the  end  is  Sheta-ab, 


"  Secret    Heart." 


guarded 


The    wall    is 

by  twelve  gods  in  mummied 
forms,  who  are  called  "  the  gods  and 
"  goddesses  who  are  in  this  Pylon,"     |  |  | 


© 


Behind  the  wall  is  a  chamber,  the  wall  of  which 


has  upon  it  a  row  of  spear  heads,  and  inside  we  see  the  god  Osiris 

^  The  scene  of  the  Sixth  Division  is  so  mutilated  on  the  sarcophagus  of  Seti  I. 
that  it  is  not  reproduced  here. 


190  SIXTH   DIVISION    OF   THE   TUAT 

seated  upon  the  top  of  a  flight  of  nine  steps,  on  each  of  which 
stands  a  god  ;  thus  the  whole  company  of  the  gods  of  Osiris  are 
here  represented.      Osiris  wears  a  double  crown,  Vi  ,  and  holds  in 

his  hands  the  sceptre,  j,  and  the  emblem  of  "life."      Before  him 

stands  a  mummied  figure  who  forms  the  pillar  of  a  pair  of  scales, 
and  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  personification  of  the  Great 
Balance  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the  Judgment  Scene  as 
depicted  in  papyri.  In  the  pan  of  the  scales  is  the  bird  of  evil,  ^^  . 
Near  the  scales  is  a  boat  in  which  are  an  ape  and  a  pig  ;  the  ape 
is  urging  the  pig  along  with  a  stick.  In  the  upper  part  of  the 
scene  are  the  heads  of  four  oryxes  and  a  figure  of  the  god  Anubis. 
The  difficult  texts  which  accompany  this  scene  tell  us  that  the 
"  enemies  of  Osiris  are  beneath  his  feet,  the  gods  and  the  spirits 
"  are  before  him ;  he  is  the  foe  of  the  damned,  he  repulses  the 
"  enemies,  and  he  destroys  them,  and  eftects  their  slaughter. 
"  The  bearer  of  the  hatchet,  and  the  supporter  of  the  scales 
"  protect  him  who  is  in  Amenti,  who  resteth  in  the  Tuat,  and  who 
"  passeth  through  darkness  and  shadow.     Above  is  Joy,  and  below 

"  are  Right  and  Truth  (        J .     The  god  resteth  and  giveth  forth 

"the  light  of  Maat  which  he  hath  made."  The  ape  in  the  boat  is 
said  to  hand  over  the  pig  to  punishment  "  when  the  god  riseth," 
and  Anubis  says,  "  0  ye  who  bring  words  true  or  false  to  me 
"  [remember]  that  it  is  Thoth  who  weigheth  them."  Concerning 
Osiris  we  read,  "  When  the  weighing  of  words  taketh  place  he 
"  smiteth  evil ;  he  hath  a  right  heart,  and  he  holdeth  the  words  in 
"  the  Scales  in  the  holy  place  wherein  the  trial  of  the  secret  things 
"  of  the  secrets  of  the  spirits  taketh  place.  It  is  the  god  who  riseth 
"  who  hath  made  all  the  beings  who  are  in  the  Tuat."  The  text 
which  relates  to  the  four  inverted  heads  of  oryxes  is  not  clear  in 
its  meaning,  but  it  says  that  their  dwelling-place  is  the  Amehet, 
a  district  in  the  Elysian  Fields,  and  that  they  hide  or  protect 
the  spirits.  We  must  note  in  passing  the  position  of  the  Sixth 
Division  of  the  Tuat.  Assuming  that  the  Tuat  was  regarded  as 
a  nearly  circular  valley  which  curved  round  from  the  West,  where 
the  sun  set,  to  the  North,  and  curved  round  from  the  North  to  the 
East,  where  the  sun  rose,  it  follows  if  all  the  twelve  divisions  of 


SEVENTH   DIVISION    OF   THE   TUAT        191 

the  Tuat  be  equal  in  length,  that  the  Sixth  Division  Avould  be  very- 
near  the  most  northerly  part  of  the  Tuat.  And  this  is  exactly 
where  it  was  intended  to  be,  for  the  most  northerly  part  of  the 
Tuat  would  include  the  greater  pai't  of  the  Delta,  where  the 
principal  shrines  of  Osiris,  i.e.,  Mendes  and  Busiris,  were  situated, 
and  it  was  ouly  right  to  make  the  position  of  the  kingdom  of 
Osiris  on  earth  to  correspond  with  that  of  his  domain  in  the  Tuat. 
Unlike  the  other  divisions  of  the  Tuat,  the  Sixth  Division  contains 
no  representation  of  the  god  Ra,  and  the  texts  belonging  to  it  do 
not  even  mention  his  name  ;  the  Book  of  Pylons  made  Osiris 
absolutely  supreme  in  his  own  dominions,  and  the  exclusion  of  Ril, 
or  Amen-Ra,  from  them  was  clearly  the  cause  which  made  the 
work  unpopular  with  all  the  worshippers  of  the  great  god  of 
Thebes.  The  position  of  Osiris  on  the  top  of  a  flight  of  steps 
explains  the  allusions  to  the  "god  who  is  on  his  staircase"  in 
the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  it  proves  that  it  is  this  god 
who  is  represented  on  the  wooden  plaque  of  Semti,^  and  before 
whom  the  king  is  dancing.  The  Sun-god  Ra,  having  arrived 
at  the  north  of  the  Tuat,  must  now  make  his  way  towards  the 
East. 

The  serpent  who  guards  the  pylon  of  the  Seventh  Division 
or  the  Seventh  Hour  ^  is  called  Akhan-maati,  ^-=.        ,  and  the 

guardian  at  the  end  of  the  corridor  is  called  Shepi,  |-,  (1(1  "^^  ; 
but  the  mutilated  state  of  the  scene  renders  it  impossible  to  give 
the  name  of  the  pylon  or  of  the  guardian  of  the  entrance  to  the 
corridor.  On  the  right  side  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are  a  number 
of  beings  bearing  a  rope,  which  is  usually  made  to  resemble  a 
serpent,  and  on  the  left  side  are  : — 1 .  A  god  bending  over  a  staff ; 

■  111  mil  t       rt      I _ 1 

his  name  is  Men-sheta,  •    ,  "  Stablisher  of  what  is  secret." 

2.  A  number  of  mummied  forms  extended  on  couches,  who  are 
described  as  the  "  mighty  spirits."  These  beings  are  commanded 
by  Ra  to  uncover  themselves  and  to  drive  away  darkness.  In  the 
centre  is  the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  being  towed  along,  presumably 

^  See  British  Museum,  No.  32,650. 

^  The  scene  of  the  Seventh  Division  is  so  mutilated  on  the  sarcophagus  of 
Seti  I.  that  it  is  not  reproduced  here. 


192  EIGHTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

by  four  gods  of  the  Tuat  as  before.  Marching  in  front  of  those 
Avho  tow  the  boat  are  twelve  gods  with  sceptres,  and  four 
mummied  forms  who  cry  out  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  Division 
of  the  Tuat  to  praise  Ra,  for  he  will  weigh  words  and  will  destroy 
their  enemy. 

The  pylon  of  the  Eighth  Division  or  the  Eighth  Hour  is 

called    Bekhkhi,  j  J  (1  (1  1 1  cnn ,  and  the  name  of  the  snake-god, 


its    guardian,    is    Set- bra,      ^    llTUHtJ    *^^    guardian    of    the 

"^5  and  the  guardian 
at  its  end  is  Hept-ta,  |      ^  '^i^ .     The  wall  is  protected  by  nine 

2:ods  in  mummied  forms,  ^  1 1 1  c^ .     On  the  riorht  side  of  the  boat  of 

the  god  are  : — 1.  Twelve  beings  in  human  form,  who  are  described 
as  the  "  sovereign  chiefs  who  give  bread,  Maat,  and  green  herbs  to 

"  the  souls  of  Ta-neserser,"  h  A  a — d  \j     i  ^^^'^^  -Oi  ^^— ^  ^  "^ 

-^  I  ,  ■      AAAAAA      H /^ 

^""^^  "b  '^^^  '  ^ —  —*—  \\.     2.  Nine   souls,  in  the  form  of 

bearded  human-headed  hawks,  with  their  hands  raised  in  adora- 
tion ;  these  are  the  "  souls  of  Ta-neserser,"  which  are  fed  with 
bread  and  green  herbs  by  the  command  of  the  god  Ra.  On  the 
left  hand  side  of  the  boat  of  Ra  are  : — 1.  Horus  leaning  on  a  staff. 
2.  Twelve  men,  who  represent  the  enemies  of  Osiris  that  have 
been  burnt  in  the  fire,  with  their  arms  tied  together  behind  their 
backs,  each  group  of  four  in  a  different  way.     Opposite  the  first 

of  these  is  a  huge  serpent  called  Kheti,  ^®    |1 ,  which  belches  forth 

a  stream  of  fire  into  his  face  ;  on  the  back  of  the  serpent  stand 
seven  gods.  The  twelve  beings  are  those  on  whom  punishment 
has  been  inflicted  by  Horus  at  the  command  of  Ra,  who  has 
decreed  the  death  both  of  their  bodies  and  of  their  souls  because 
of  what  they  did  against  Osiris,  whose  mysteries  they  despised, 
and  whose  image  they  tore  from  the  sanctuary.  The  serpent 
Kheti,  which  is  commanded  by  Horus  to  consume  the  foes  of  his 
father  Osiris,  is  adjured  to  burn  up  both  the  souls  and  the  bodies 
of  these  wicked  ones.  In  the  centre  of  this  division  are: — 1.  The 
boat  of  the  sun  being  towed  by  four  gods  as  before.  2.  "The 
dweller  in  Nu"  leaning  on  a  staff.     3.  A  rectangular  lake  in  which 


194  NINTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

are  sixteen  men,  four  of  whom  bathe,  ["Q  r-.  QQ  V  ''  ^°^^'  float, 
()  D  (](j  ^  1 ,  four  swim,  f^  J  ()(]  ^  | ,  and  four  dive,  ^  "^  ^.T".- 
The  gods  who  tow  the  boat  say,  "  Let  there  be  praise  to  the  soul  of 
"  Ra  in  heaven,  and  adoration  to  his  body  upon  earth ;  for  heaven 
"  is  made  new  by  his  soul,  and  earth  is  made  new  by  his  body. 
"  Hail !  We  open  for  thee  heaven,  we  make  straight  for  thee  the 
"  ways  of  Akert.  Rest  thyself,  0  Ra,  upon  thy  hidden  things ; 
"  the  hidden  ones  are  adored  in  thy  forms."  He  who  dwelleth  in 
Nu  also  addresses  those  who  are  in  the  lake. 

The  pylon  of  the  Ninth  Division  or  Ninth  Hour,  is  called 

Aat-shefsheft,  o  ■  ''^-=— ;    the   serpent   which   guards    it    is 

Ab-ta,  X  ^^^^ ;  and  the  guardians  of  the  corridor  are  Anhefta, 
[1 AAAAAA  0         ,    and  Ermen-ta,  "    .     The  wall  is  guarded  by 

nine  o-ods  in  mummied  forms,  ^  in  ^ .  On  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  are  : — 1.  Four  gods  of  the  South,  |  '  i  y? 
each  wearing  the  white  crown,  and  grasping  a  rope  which  is  also 
held  by  a  man  who  is  called  "  the  master  of  the  front,"  v= 


between  the  man  and  these  four  gods  is  a  pillar  surmounted  by  a 
bearded  head,  with  a  white  cro^\^l  on  it,  which  is  being  raised  by 
means  of  the  rope.  2.  A  hawk-headed  sphinx  with  the  white 
crown  on  his  head,  and  a  bearded  head,  with  a  white  crown  on  it, 
resting  on  his  hind  quarters.  Standing  on  his  back  is  a  human 
figure   which   is   surmounted   by   the   heads   of  Horus   and    Set. 

3.  Four  gods  of  the  North,    |  i  ^\_^  each  wearing  the  red  crown, 

and  grasping  a  rope  which  is  also  held  by  a  man  who  is  called  "the 

master  of  the  back,"  f=^  ..^ ;  between  the  man  and  these  four  gods 

is  a  pillar,  surmounted  by  a  bearded  head  with  a  red  crown  on  it, 
which  is  being  raised  by  means  of  the  rope.     4.  A  personage  called 

Apu,  ^g^^  J  holding  the  serpent  Shemti,  ciszi  ^^^,  which  has  four 

heads  at  each  end  of  his  body.    5.  A  personage  holding  the  serpent 

Bath,  J  \\  s=r=> ,  with  a  head  at  each  end  of  his  body ;  on  his  back 

stands  a  serpent  which  is  called  Tepi,    ^  flfl  ?  and  which  is  provided 


rr--'^ 


^< 


^^^ 


^mmmmuimmmmu 


mmmmmmam 


be 


196  TENTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

at  each  end  of  his  body  with  four  human  heads,  breasts,  and  arms, 
and  four  pairs  of  human  legs.  6.  Two  men  holding  a  rope  (?). 
On  the  left  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are : — Sixteen  human 
forms  Avhich  represent  the  (a)  souls  of  Amentet,  (h)  the  followers  of 
Thoth,  (c)  the  followers  of  Horus,  (d)  the  followers  of  Osiris ;  the 
first  four  have  the  heads  of  men,  the  second  four  the  heads  of 
ibises,  the  third  four  the  heads  of  hawks,  and  the  fourth  four  the 
heads  of  rams.  These  sixteen  beings  draw  a  rope  to  which  is 
attached  a  double  serpent  with  four  heads,  two  at  each  end  of 
his  body,  and  one  pair  of  legs  at  each  end  which  support  the 
larger  serpent.  The  serpent  is  called  Khepri,  ^  UO?  ^^d  on  one 
of  his  folds  is  perched  the  hawk  Heru-tuati,  2^  ^  At  the 
other  end  of  the  rope  are  eight  human  forms  called  Akhmiu, 
h  ^  ^k.  ^Q  ^  ^  ^  v^  •  ^^^  ^^^^  centre  of  this  Division  the  boat  of 
the  god  is  being  towed  along  as  before.  Before  him  march : — 
1.  Six  human  forms,  four  apes,  and  four  women,  each  holding  a 
rope  (?) ;  and  2.  Three  men  holding  a  ro^DC  which  is  thrown  over 
the  head  and  held  in  the  hands  by  a  prostrate  man  Avho  has  the 
ears  of  an  ass,  and  who  is  called  Aai,  (j  "^  M  ,  i.e.,  "  Ass."  Each 
man  holds  a  pike  which  he  is  about  to  drive  into  the  prostrate 
body.  In  front  of  the  man  are  : — 1.  The  serpent  Apep,  and  2.  The 
crocodile,  with  a  tail  which  terminates  in  a  serpent's  head,  called 
Shesshes,  r-vri  fl  r^\-i  1 .  The  beings  here  described  are  those  who 
work  magic  for  Ra  on  the  arch-fiend  Apep,  and  they  bid  him  come 
to  the  place  of  slaughter  that  he  may  be  slain ;  they  say,  "  the 
"  slaughterino-   places   are    against   thee,    and    the    Aai  gods   are 

"agai„stthee,"^^^^f,;,^|[l^U.q^(l_yj^. 
The  three  beings  with  pikes  drive  their  weapons  into  Apep,  and 
destroy  utterly  the  serpent  Sesi,  ||  U  (1  Hm^ ;  and  they  keep  fast 
hold  of  the  rope  of  Ai,  "^  ^1^1  9^'  ^"^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^  *^^^*  serpent  rise 
up  towards  the  boat  of  the  god. 

The  pylon  of  the  Tentpi  Division  or  the  Tenth  Hour  is  called 
Tcheserit,  \=^  (1(1  ^  ;  the  serpent-god  who  guards  it  is  Sethu, 
^ v\  mn^ ;  and  the  guardians  of  the  corridor  are  Nemi,  ( 


•^ 


t^^ 


^— i 


<»nutwt»ww>|mtiimmi  j   <^=;i 


tt»tuiitutu>iut»mumnu>m 


TiiinnRyimr 


.?»-- 


•I  ^ 


198  TENTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

and  Kefi,   ^~^  l\ [I .     The  wall  is  guarded  by  sixteen  uraei.     On  the 

right  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are: — 1.  Four  beings,  each 
holding  a  knife  and  a  rope  (?).  2.  Four  beings,  similarly  armed, 
but  each  having  four  serpents'    heads ;  these   are   called   Antiu, 

H         ^         '  ^^^   Hentiu,   |  /wSa  (111    ^  ,  respectively.      3.  The 

serpent   Apep,   "whose   voice   goeth   round  about   in  the  Tuat," 

— »- 
held  by  a  chain  which  is  grasped  by  four  beings,  Stefiu,  «=^ 


and  twelve  gods,  and  a  mighty  hand  called  the  "hidden  body," 
[1  :  il.  On  the  chain,  near  Apep's  head,  is  stretched  out 
the  scorpion-goddess  Serqet.  Behind  the  hand,  and  growing  out 
of  the  chain  are : —  {a)  Seb,  "^^  J  ,  who  grasps  a  small  chain  to 
which  is  attached  the  serpent  Uamemti,  X]  / 1 1-     (b)  Mest, 

^p,  Hapi,  ^  flu  ,  Tuamutef,  ^  ^^,  and  Qebhsennuf,  jv  111  '^'^• 
At  the  end  stands  Khenti-Amenti,  or  Osiris.  The  beings  on  this 
side  of  the  Tuat  are  engaged  in  destroying  Apep  and  the  foes  of 
the  sun-god  so  that  they  may  not  attack  the  boat  of  the  sun  when 
it  comes  to  a  narrow  passage.  On  the  left  hand  side  of  the  boat 
of  Ra  are: — 1.  The   twelve    Akhmu-seku   gods,    fl  ^  ^^  %    ^ 

I  ^~^,  holding   paddles.     2.   Twelve   women,    who  represent   the 

'  ^  '"  ,  _  n a  1 

hours.      3.    Four   gods   with    sceptres.    Bant,    J  'wwv,  i  ^    Seshsha, 

fi  1"^^  (1 ,  Ka-Ament,  LJ  If ,  and  Renen-sebu,  /wwvv  :  ^  .  4.  A 
monkey  on  a  standard,  ^-^{t,  with  a  star  over  his  head,  described  as 
the    "god    of    Rethenu"    (Syria),     |  ^  .      5.    An    eye 

(utchat)  on  a  standard,  ^^.  6.  A  god  with  a  sceptre.  Along 
the  middle  of  this  division  the  boat  of  the  o-od  is  towed  as  usual 


ft' 


by  four  gods.     Before  it   are: — 1.  The   star  god  Unti,  ^^ 


AA^/WN 


2.  Four  deities,   Sekhet,  Abesh,  ^ — a  J  cisz],  Serq,  ,  and 

Horus.     3.  Three  star  gods,  who  tow  a  small  boat  in  which  are 
the  "  face  of  the  disk,"  y  {\  ^^ ,    and    a   uraeus.     4.    A   winged 


uraeus   called    Semi,    ^"s^^iOO,  standing  upon  its  tail.     5.  A  god 
called  Besi,  J    I  [In,  pouring  flame  upon  a  standard  surmounted 


1 


i 


^ 


^ 


)^ 


P^ 


^ 


S 


■■■■■■■«■■■■■■ 


i^sc 


•^^i 
.^:ii 


,^fc^';: 


^tui»imi»uummm»ut: 


Ni^ 

-•^c at 


200       ELEVENTH   DIVISION    OF   THE   TUAT 

by  the  head   of  a   horned  animal.     6.    A   serpent   caled   Ankhi, 

^    l\l\,  with  a  bearded  god  in  mummied  form  growing  out  from 

each   side    of  its   body.     7.  Four  women,   with  hands   raised   in 

adoration,    who    are    called    "the   adorers,"    [^:£i  (1  (1  c=S=, .      8.  The 

double  god  Horus-Set,  with  two  heads  and  two  pairs  of  arms  and 
hands  on  one  body,  standing  upon  a  platform  which  rests  on  two 
bows ;  from  each  end  of  the  platform  spring  three  uraei.  All 
these  beings  are  supposed  to  be  employed  in  helping  Ra  to  con- 
tinue his  course  through  the  Tenth  Division,  and  to  make  his  way 
to  the  region  of  the  sunrise ;  it  is  evident  that  most  of  them  are 
personifications  of  the  stars  which  herald  the  approach  of  the 
da^yn. 

The  pylon  of  the  Eleventh  Division  or  the  Eleventh  Hour 

is  called  Shetat-besu,  ^  ^  J  1  _^  i ,  and  the  serpent  which 
guards  it  is  called  xVm-net-f,  ij  -^  ^  (^  "^-^^  UHt ;  the  guardians 
of  the  corridor  are  Metes,  ^^^         ,  and  Shetau,  ^^^  %^ .     Before 


the  wall  are  two  large  scejDtres  surmounted  by  the  white  crown ; 
one  of  these  is  called  Sar,  ^  ,  i.e.,  Osiris,  and  the  other  Horus. 
On  the  right  hand  of  the  boat  of  Ra  are: — 1.  Four  gods,  called 

"bearers  of  light,"  ^  Iji 'V^  "^  ' '  ^"^^^^^^o  ^^^^^  ^^  *^^®i^ 
right  hands.  2.  Four  gods,  called  "bearers  of  stars,"  ^  ^  ^  '' 
holding  stars  in  their  right  hands.  3.  Four  gods  "  who  go  out," 
■^^  M  y^i  % .  4.  The  gods  Ba,  ^,  Khnemu,  fj,  Tenter,  ^  "^^  , 
and  Tent,  'ww^^^  ram-headed.     5.  Four  gods,   Horus,   Horus-Sept, 

Sept,  and  "  he  who  is  in  his  double  boat,"  [1  -  -  \\  ^^^^  ^<— ,  hawk- 
headed.  6.  Eight  women,  the  Hours,  seated  on  coiled  up  serpents 
and  each  holding  a  star  in  her  hand ;  these  are  the  "  protecting 

hours,"  ^mTo'^^.      7.  The   god    Sebek-Ra,    crocodile-headed. 


All  these  are  personifications  of  stars  which  bear  along  the  boat  of 
Ra  towards  the  day-break,  for  they  wish  to  see  it  floating  once 


more  on  the  bosom  of  Nut,  ;  and  when  "the  arms  of  the 


ELEVENTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT        201 

"  sky-god  Nu  receive  Ra  they  shout  praises  with  the  stars  which 
''  they  carry,  and  go  to  him  in  the  heights  of  heaven  in  the  bosom 
of  Nut."^  In  connexion  with  the  idea  of  the  stars  praising  Ra 
at  sunrise  we  may  note  its  similarity  to  that  expressed  in  Job 
xxxviii.  7,  "  When  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the 
"sons  of  God   shouted  for  joy."     On  the  left  of  the  boat  of  Ra 

are: — 1.  Four  beings,  Setheniu-tep,  s=i  v>  ^  i  7,  wearing  white 

'  /www  —21      u   I       I 

croAvns.  2.  Four  bearded  gods  called  Akebiu,  i.e.,  "  wallers," 
h  -^n^  J  Qfl  '  •  3-  ^our  beings,  Khnemiu,  <^  ^=  %  1 ,  wearing  red 
crowns.       4.  Four    bearded    gods    called    Renniu,    ^AAAAA  0  (1   v  '  • 

AAAAAA         I     I     —11        I 

5.  Twelve  goddesses,  the  female  counterparts  of  the  first  three 
groups  of  gods.     6.  Four   gods,  with  bowed  bodies,  and  7.  The 

cat-headed  goddess  Mati,  x  U  xv  '  These  beings  were  supposed  to 
place  white  crowns  on  the  heads  of  the  gods  in  the  train  of  Ra, 
and  though  their  souls  rose  up,  they  were  never  able  to  leave  this 
Division  of  the  Tuat  or  pass  out  of  the  pylon.  Their  duty  was  to 
weep  for  Osiris  after  Ra  had  passed  out  of  Ament,^  and  to  be  with 
him,  as  far  as  their  souls  were  concerned,  but  their  bodies  had  to 
stay  in  their  places ;  they  also  had  to  raise  up  Maat  and  to  stablish 
it  in  the  shrine  of  Ra.^  It  was  they  who  "  fixed  the  period  of  the 
"  years  which  those  who  were  decreed  for  the  Tuat  should  pass 
"  there,  and  the  period  of  those  who  were  to  live  in  heaven  ;  "  * 
but  they  "  tore  their  hair  in  grief  before  the  great  god  in  Amentet, 
"  for  although  they  drove  away  Set  from  the  pylon  they  themselves 


n      AAAAAA  /^  'WV     n  I  ^-^       X      AAAAAA       ^^AAAA       ^X  \  /^  AA^^Wi 

I     I     I    1     I     I    ^^  ^    _fl   F=^      1      X  c^^   I     I     I   _M^    I     I     I   I     I     I 

Q  — H —       ^  "Q"  ^    ,    ft    ,    — » —     ^— ==>    O    ^ 

A   ^■^"-^^      ^     ^.-^.  <cr>  ^"•'''^    / ,    Bonomi    and 

Sharpe,  op.  cit.,  pi.  10. 


r- -I  \  TT\  AAAAAA 


2      l\     V ^         I)  UX         ^'VVAAA       -l^^      / ^      ^      <C^r>      ^      / (J     AA/WW     rV/Ayi. 


H \\  /  I         H—    AAAAAA    H ^        4         H       /^ 

3      — Q    ^ -  /Ci  /  ' — '        'I      ^ 


4 

AAA/V^A 


/v^A 


AAAAAA      /I  tk  I       g 

111  1^1  Ji?^  JI      1        I        I 


>X-      ^-^  n       AAAAAA     f\  I  n       -Ci 

-^  V      AAAAAA      ^Ov         !  '-' 

AA/W^^ 


202       ELEVENTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 

"  were  not  allowed  to  enter  into  the  heights  of  heaven."  ^  In  the 
centre  of  this  division  we  have  the  boat  of  Ra  being  drawn  along 
by  four  of  its  gods  as  usual.  Preceding  these  are  : — 1.  A  group  of 
nine  gods,  each  of  whom  holds  a  knife,  ^=^~,  in  the  right  hand,  and 
a  sceptre,  [,  in  the  left;  the  first  four  are  jackal-headed.  They 
are  described  as  the  "  nine  gods  who  annihilate  Apep,"  ^  1 1 1  ^  i 
/wwv^  n  "^^  '^"^^.  2.  The  serpent  Apep  chained  to  the  earth  by  five 
chains  which  are  called  the  "gods  who  produce  winds,"  |Tj  i  -^C-^  JJ  i. 

3.  Four  apes,  (l  aaaaaa  ^  Jj  i  ,  each  holding  before  him  a  large  hand. 

4.  The   god    of    Amenti,    ft,  wearing   the   crown   of  the    South. 

5.  The  goddess  of  the  North,  Herit  (?),  ^.(-^  (Ifl  "^  r  wearing  the 
crown  of  the  North.     6.  The   god    Sebekhti,    I J  ^   "^   .      These 

gods  of  the  Tuat  say,  "  [This  is]  the  exit  from  Ament,  and  the 
"  place  for  rest  in  the  two  divisions  of  Nu,  and  [the  god]  maketh 
"  his  transformations  in  the  hands  of  Nu.     This  god  doth  not  enter 

"  heaven   ( ^)  ,  but  he  openeth  the  Tuat  upwards  in  his  trans- 

*'  formations  [which  take  place]  in  Nu.  What  openeth  the  Tuat 
"  into  heaven  are  the  two  hands  of  the  god  whose  name  is  hidden. 

He  existeth  in  the  darkness  which  is  a  solid  thing, 

|!|,  and   Ra    cometh   forth   [in]    it  from  the  night, 

'  )f  ' .     Those  who  are  in  this  portion  take  their  knives  in 
III  ^ 

"  their  hands,  and  grasp  their  weapons,  and  smite  Apep,  and  effect 
"his  slaughter,  and  smash  his  joints  which  are  in  heaven.  The 
"  chains  of  this  fiend  are  in  the  hands  of  the  children  of  Horus, 
"  they  advance  to  the  god  with  their  fetters  in  their  fingers.  The 
"  god  counteth  his  members  after  the  hidden  one  hath  opened  his 
"  [arms]  to  the  Eye  of  Horus.     The  Worm   (|  ^m^  i^'j    who  is 

"  in  this  scene  is  fettered  by  the  children  of  Horus."  The  other 
gods  "  acclaim  Ka  in  the  Eastern  horizon  of  heaven,  and  the  four 


i 


^il 


i» 


A  I    I    I  I    I    I  I    t    I     I       U    I  AAA^wv  a  I 

I         I         I  <=>  I        -J      ^        U       [Zm      A/WVAA  ^     A      I         I         I  P^=^ 


aZ^  C:^       AAAAAA       AAAAAA 


TWELFTH   DIVISION   OF   THE   TUAT 


203 


"  apes  guide  liim  who  created  them,  two  on  the  right  hand,  and 

"  two  on  the  left,  to  the  double  dtert  (u  <^  nru  nr^)  of  this  god." 

The  pylon  of  the  Twelfth    Division  or  Twelfth    Hour  is 

called  Tesert-baiu,  '^m'>  ^'^">  "  I^sd-Souls,"  and  its  serpent 


god  is  Sebi 


and  Akhekhi, 

poles,  each  of  which  is  surmounted 
by  a  bearded  head ;  on  one  head  is 
the  disk  of  the  god  Tem,  and  on  the 
other  the  beetle  of  the  god  Khepera, 
i.e.,  two  forms  of  the  Sun-god.  Close 
to  the  pylon  "  Red-Souls "  was  the 
pylon     of    the     serpent     god     Reri, 

11(|,     each     side    of     which    was 

guarded  by  the  two  uraei  of  Isis  and 
Nephthys,  one  on  each  side.  When 
Ra  had  passed  through  these  doors  he 
emerged  triumphantly  from  the  Tuat, 
and  his  boat  floated  on  the  waters  of 
Nu,  i.e.,  in  the  sky.  In  the  scene  in 
which  this  is  depicted  we  see  the  boat 
containing  the  beetle  of  Khepera  and 
the  disk  of  Ra,  with  the  five  gods  Seb, 
Shu,  Hek  (for  Heka),  Hu,  and  Sa,  and 
the  two  goddesses  Isis  and  Nephthys, 
and  three  gods  of  pylons.    The  god  Nu, 

,  is  seen  holding  up  the  boat  with 

hands,  which  "  come    forth   from 
water,    and   bear    up    this   god." 


the  two  guardians  of  the  corridor  are  Pai, 


In  front  of  the  wall  are  two 


his 
the 


A  little  distance  away  from  the  boat  is  a  sort  of  island  which  is 
formed  by  Osiris,  the  body  of  the  god  being  bent  round  in  such  a 
way  as  to  cause  the  tips  of  his  toes  to  touch  the  back  of  his  head ; 
the  text  says  that  it  is  Osiris  himself  who  forms  the  encircling 
border  of  the  Tuat.     On  the  head  of  the  god  stands  the  goddess 


204  BOOK   OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 

Nut,   ,  with  arms  outstretched  ready  to  receive  E,a.     Thus  the 

god  reaches  the  end  of  the  Tuat  and  passes  by  an  opening  through 
its  border,  which  is  painted  black,  dotted  everywhere  Avith  red 
spots.  We  have  seen  that  Ra  was  omnipotent  in  all  divisions  of 
the  underworld,  except  one,  which  was  sacred  to  Osiris ;  in  this 
neitlier  Efi  nor  his  name  appears. 


We  may  now  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  the  contents  of 
the  "Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Underworld."  The 
authorities  for  the  text  and  viijnettes  of  this  work  are  numerous/ 
and  from  the  copies  of  both  which  have  come  down  to  us  it  is 

1  See  Sharpe,  Egyptian  Iii^criidioiis,  1st  series,  pll.  28-32  ;  2nd  series,  pU.  1-21 ; 
Pierret,  Eecueil,  torn,  v.,  pp.  103  if;  Lanzono,  Domicile  des  Esprits,  Paris,  1879; 
Birch,  Papyrus  of  NasMem,  London,  1863  ;  Mariette,  Papi/rns  ^gyptiens,  torn,  ii., 
Cairo,  1878. 


FIRST   HOUR   OF   THE    NIGHT  205 

clear  that  the  book  was  one  of  considerable  leno;th.  But  Ions; 
before  the  end  of  the  XXIst  Dynasty  (about  B.C.  1100)  the 
Egyptians  found  it  impossible  to  obtain  or  to  pay  for  complete 
copies  with  all  the  vignettes,  and  a  shortened  form  of  it  conse- 
quently came  into  general  use.  This  shortened  form,  which  is 
called  an  " Abrege  "  by  M.  Maspero,  and  a  ''Resume"  by  M. 
Lefebure,  was  supposed  to  contain  all  that  was  absolutely  necessary 
for  the  dead,  and  it  became  very  popular  throughout  Egypt.  In 
the  tomb  of  Seti  I.-^  we  find  a  copy  of  the  full  text,  with  vignettes, 
of  the  first  eleven  hours,  and  also  a  copy  of  the  "  Abridgment." 
The  space  at  our  disposal  will  not  admit  of  a  detailed  description 
of  the  longer  work,  and  therefore  a  notice  of  the  "Abridgment" 
only  is  given  here.  The  complete  work  is  entitled,  "  The  beginning 
"  of  the  horn  of  the  West,  the  remote  boundary  of  thick  darkness," 

^MTf^^^-^^-I^T,-  The  "horn  of 
the  West"  means  the  most  westerly  point  where  the  sun  sets,  and 
kehu  saimi,  i.e.,  "  thick  darkness,"  or  "  solid  darkness,"  refers  to 
the  extreme  end  of  the  Tuat,  which  is  painted  to  resemble  a  black 
wall,  dotted  everywhere  with  red  spots,  and  which  contains  an 
opening  through  which  the  boat  of  Ra  emerges  every  morning. 
The    shorter    work    is    entitled    "Abridgment    of    this    book," 

A  .Jl  U  7TH    U   I  ci:^>   _a  /ww^ 

The  EiRST  Hour  of  the  night  is  called  Ushemet  hatu  khefti 
Ra,'^  i.e.,  "  Crusher  of  the  forehead  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,"  and  the 
place  through  which  the  god  passes  in  it  is  described  as  an  mi'it, 
<=>  (1(1  ,  i.e.,  a  hall,  or  a  sort  of  ante-chamber  of  the  Tuat.  It 
is  quite  unlike  any  part  of  the  Tuat,  for  when  Ra  is  in  this  hall  he 

1  See  "  Le  Tombeau  de  Seti  I"',"  in  Memoires  de  la  Miss.  Arch.  Franqaise, 
Paris,  1886 ;  First  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  24-26 :  Second  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll  29-32  ; 
Third  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  32-35  ;  Fourth  Hour,  part  i.,  pll.  23-25  ;  Fifth  Hour, 
part  i.,  pll,  26-29  ;  Sixth  Hour,  part  iv. ,  pll.  39-42  ;  Seventh  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  43-46  ; 
Eighth  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  47-49  ;  Ninth  Hour,  part  ii.,  pll.  15-18;  Tenth  Hour, 
part  ii.,  pll.  19-22  ;  Eleventh  Hour,  part  ii.,  pll.  23-26 ;  and  see  Maspero,  Les 
Hypogees  Boy  mix  de  Thebes,  p.  29. 

3  See  the  edition  of  the  hieroglyphic  text,  with  a  French  translation,  by 
Jequier,  op.  cit.,  pp.  37  ff. 

@x       ^     _S)  1     ®    ^    /^  '   <== 


206 


BOOK   OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 


has  not  yet  arrived  in  that  dismal  valley.  But  even  when  here 
he  is  an  entirely  different  being  from  what  he  was  in  the  day-time, 
for  instead  of  being  the  sun  of  day,  he  is  the  sun  of  night,  i.e.,  a 
dead  god,  in  fact  a  mere  dead  body  Avhich  is  called  Af,  1]  ooo^  i-e., 
"  Flesh,"  and  is  represented  with  the  head  of  a  ram  surmounted 
by  a  solar  disk.     In  the  day  time  he  travelled  in  the  Atet  boat, 


The  First  Hour  of  the  Night. 

^nJ,  but  at  night  he  made  his  journey  along  the  river  of  the 
Tuat  in  the  Sektet  boat,    1  ^    ^  < 


^4tl5  ,  in  fact,  in  the  same  boat  in 
which  he  sailed  over  the  sky  from  noon  to  sunset.  In  the  boat 
with  the  dead  Sun-god  Af  are  AjD-uat,   \/ ^^,  "The  Opener  of 

the  ways,"  S a,  .•^m  ^\  ,  Heru-Hekenu,  ^^  R    -^   ,  ISTehes,     |— ,     I, 
Hu,   fi   v\ ,    the    double   of   Shu,  \_j  n ,  the   captain   of  the    boat, 


FIRST   HOUR   OF   THE    NIGHT  207 


<=>%,U],  and  the  "kdy  of  the  boat,"  ^  ^^.  The  last-named 
celestial  personage  changed  every  hour,  for  she  represented  the 
local  goddess  of  one  hour  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  appointed 
guide  of  the  god  through  one  portion  of  the  Tuat  only ;  knowing 
the  way  through  her  own  district,  she  was  able  to  instruct  the 
captain  of  the  boat  how  and  where  to  sail  over  difficult  reaches  of 
the  river. 

The  dwellers  in  the  First  Hour  of  the  night  appear  to 
have  been  the  apes  who  opened  the  doors  of  the  drrit  to  the  god, 
and  the  beings  who  were  necessary  for  the  singing  of  songs  of 
praise  to  Ra,  and  for  piloting  his  boat  through  this  hall  to  the 
Tuat,  and  a  large  number  of  celestial  beings  who  are  mentioned  in 
the  text,  but  who  are  otherwise  unknown,  and  the  souls  of  the 
dead  who  had  passed  from  the  earth  to  this  intermediate  place  and 
who  were  waiting  for  the  opportunity  of  entering  into  the  boat 
of  Ra,  wherein  they  would  fain  continue  their  journey.  Why  the 
last-named  were  here  cannot  be  said,  but  it  is  probable  that  such 
souls  belonged  to  men  and  women  who,  when  living  upon  earth, 
were  unable  to  avail  themselves  of  all  the  costly  and  complicated 
ceremonies  prescribed  by  the  priests,  and  the  numerous  amulets 
which  were  thought  to  be  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the  soul  in 
the  Tuat.  The  descriptive  text  of  the  First  Hour  reads : — "  This 
"god  entereth  from  the  earth  into  the  drrit  of  the  horizon  of 
"the  West,  and  he  must  travel  one  hundred  and  twenty  dtru 
"  (J\  ^^  "^  c=z)  )  in  this  drrit  before  he  arriveth  at  the  gods 
"  of  the  Tuat.     Net-Ra  ^-^^  -_fl  jj )  is  the  name  of  this  first 

\        ^  AA^yv\A     O  I     ill/ 

"  country  of  the  Tuat.  Ra  giveth  fields  to  the  gods  who  are  in  his 
"  following,  and  he  beginneth  to  pass  decrees  and  to  give  commands 
"  concerning  the  things  which  are  done  in  the  Tuat  by  the  gods  of 
"  this  country.  Whosoever  shall  do  these  things  according  to  this 
"  similitude  of  the  hidden  things  of  the  Tuat,  and  shall  recognize 
"  that  they  are  similitudes  of  the  great  god  himself,  shall  find  them 
"  of  benefit  to  him  on  the  earth,  and  they  shall  do  him  good  in  the 
"  great  Tuat."  The  fact  that  this  region  is  called  "  country " 
shows  that  it  was  regarded  almost  as  a  part  of  this  world,  and  it 
is  definitely  stated  that  it  is  120  dtru  in  length;  now,  the  dtric  is 


208  BOOK   OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 

said  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the  Greek  ct)(oivo%,  i.e.,  about  an 
English  furlong,  and  thus  the  region  of  the  sunset  traversed  by 
Ra  in  his  first  hour  would  be  fifteen  miles  in  length.  It  is  probable, 
however,  that  120  dtru  were  intended  to  be  a  greater  distance 
than  fifteen  miles,  for  the  second  hour  brought  Ra  into  the  domain 
of  Osiris,  which  is  more  than  fifteen  miles  from  Thebes. 

The  name  of  the  Second  Hour  is  Shesat  maket  neb-s,  i.e., 
"  She  who   knoweth    how  to    protect    her    lord."  ^     The    country 

passed    through   is   called    Ur-nes,    ^^^  — *— ,  Avhich  the   late    Dr. 

Birch  compared  with,  and  believed  to  be  equivalent  to,  the  Greek 

ovpav6<; ;  this  name,  however,  seems  to  be  that  of  the  Nile  in  the 

second  region  of  the  Tuat,  and  in  any  case  it  is  not  applied  to  any 

other  division  or  hour  except  by  accident.^     The  descriptive  text 

says,  "This  great  god  next  arriveth   in   Ur-nes,  which    is   three 

'  hundred  and  nine  dtru  in  length,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty 

'  dtru  in  width  (i.e.,  this  division  measures  about  50  miles  by  15 

'  miles).     The  name  of  the  gods  who  are  in  this  country  is  '  Souls 


'  of  the  Tuat,'    '^^  i  i<:  *^ Ji  i ,  and  he  who  knoweth  their 

'  name  shall  be  with  them.  This  great  god  will  give  to  him  fields, 
'  the  situation  of  which  shall  be  in  the  country  of  Ur-nes ;  he  shall 
'  stand  up  with  the  gods  who  stand  up,  and  he  shall  follow  after 
'  this  great  god.  He  shall  make  his  way  through  the  Tuat,  he 
'  shall  see  the  tresses  of  the  gods  who  wear  long  flowing  hair,  he 

'  shall  trample  upon  the  Eater  of  the  Ass   ( a  ^^  "^  ^  ^^T  3), 

'  and  after  the  division  of  the  unoccupied  land  hath  been  made, 

'  he  shall  eat  bread  in  the  Boat  of  the  Earth   (%  I]  '^v  UnS         ), 

'  and  there  shall  be  given  to  him  of  the  first  things  of  Tatuba 

'  (     ■    ^  v\  J  [1  r^)."     The  text  adds  that  those  who  draw  pictures 

of  these  Souls  of  the  Tuat  and  make  ofterings  to  them  upon 
earth  will  gain  benefit  therefrom  a  million  fold  after  death; 
moreover,  it  will  be  extremely  useful  to  them  in  the  Tuat  if  they 
know  what  words  are   addressed   by  the  gods  to  the  great  god. 


^ 


>k 


2  See  Jequier,  op.  cit. ,  p.  49,  note  2. 


210  BOOK    OF   THE   UNDERWORT.D 

The  gods  with  long  flowing  hair  are  the  four  children  of  Horus, 
Mestha,  Hapi,  Tuamutef  and  Qebhsennuf,  each  of  whom  wore  a 
lock  or  tress  of  hair,  which  became  a  pillar-sceptre,  and  supported 
one  of  the  four  corners  of  heaven ;  these  four  gods  became  at  a 
later  period  the  gods  of  the  cardinal  points  and  the  lords  of  the 
four  quarters  of  heaven.  The  Eater  of  the  Ass  is,  of  course,  the 
great  serpent  of  darkness,  probably  Apepi,  and  the  Ass  is  a  form 
of  the  Sun-god,  between  whom  and  the  serpent  was  continual  war  ; 
the  Ass  was  connected  with  the  Sun-god  by  reason  of  his  great 
virile  powers.  According  to  M.  Maspero,^  the  Boat  of  the  Earth 
is  a  name  given  to  the  Boat  of  Ra  when  it  reaches  the  earth ; 
Tatuba  was  probably  an  earth  god. 

The  illustrated  version  of  the  Second  Hour  shows  that  the 
boat  of  Ra  was  preceded  by  four  boats.  The  first  of  these  had  a 
human  head  on  each  end,  and  on  its  side  were  the  picture  of 
heaven,  f=^,  and  the  Utchat,  '^J-  ^^  *^®  ^^^*  rests  the  moon  on 
a  pedestal,  and  behind  it  is  the  god  who  sets  up  the  feather  of 
Maat.  This  is  the  boat  of  Osiris  as  the  Moon,  who  is  one  of 
the  Souls  of  the  Tuat.  The  second  boat  has  a  ]mman  head  sur- 
mounted by  the  plumes  of  x\men,  [jl ,  on  each  end,  and  in  it  is  a 
huge  sistrum,  the  emblem  of  Hathor ;  on  each  side  of  it  is  a 
ooddess.     In  the  bows  is  a  beetle,  S.     This  is  the  boat  of  Isis  as 

Hathor,  who  is  one  of  the  Souls  of  the  Tuat.  The  third  boat  has 
the  white  crown  at  the  bows,  and  the  red  crown  at  the  stern ;  in 
it,  between  the  two  standards,  which  are  the  symbols  of  the  gods 
Anpu  (Anubis)  and  Apuat,  is  a  huge  lizard,'  out  of  the  back  of 
which  spring  a  human  head  and  the  Avhite  crown.  This  is  the 
boat  of  the  god  who  opens  the  ways,  and  who  is  one  of  the  Souls 
of  the  Tuat.  The  fourth  boat  has  a  uraeus  at  the  bows  and 
stern.  In  the  centre  is  a  kneeling  woman  Avithout  arms,  and 
on  each  side  of  her  stands  a  woman  also  armless ;  at  each  end  of 

the  boat  is  a  plant,  or  shrub.  This  is  the  boat  of  Nepr,  □  |  J] , 
the  god  of  grain  and  of  vegetation,  and  a  form  of  Osiris,  and  he  is 
also  one    of  the  Souls  of  the  Tuat.     The   "^ods  who  minister  to 


C)^ 


^  Les  llypogecs,  p.  46. 


SECOND    HOUR   OF   THE   NIGHT  211 

Osiris  in  the  Second  Hour  are : — Isis  who  avengeth,  J]  ^  '"°'  ^^  , 
Seb  of  the  two  corners,  "^^                «     ^^^  ^  Khnemu  of  the  two 
corners,  fj  \\           1            ,  Thoth  on  his  stairs,  .'^  ^^ /wwvs  /I  2^.^=^ 
Afu     on     his     stairs,     n  ^^^-^  %  ^^  aaa/wv  ^  ^^^^^     Ketuit-ten-ba, 
^^5^  ^  ^^  y     Kherp  -  hu  -  khefti,    ^  i /i 


^  (^  11  i I  /wvw\  ^     jr''  ---r     V--        "v..>,.,       I    T5=^    j^  ^'"xx  III' 

Heru-Tuat,    ^^  >ic ,    Seben-hesq-khaibit,     1   fl  wwv.  o  ^^""^^ 

T  ^,  the  two  ape-gods  Benth,  J  a^^wna  \    and  Aana,  h  ;^^^,  the  god 
with  two  faces,  2^-=^ ,  Horus-Set,  Mest-en-Asar,  ^^^  A^^AA^    jj    ^ 

Met-en-Asar,    11  a^^na    J]   ,  the   term   of  Osiris,    and  a  lion-headed 


ffoddess  Sesenet-khu,  '^^::^  ^^  i .      Behind  all   these   come    seven 
goddesses,  Mest-tcheses,  |T|         -^1 ,  Amam-mitu,  


j^^^,  Her-tuaiu,  ^^^^j,  Sekhet  of  Thebes,  ^^f'=^, 
Amet-tcheru,  /=:  ^  Vi. ,  Ament-nefert,  (I  /vaaaaa  rv^-vn  T  <ci:=> ,  and 
Nit-tep- Ament,  >/  ^  ^  (1  /ww^ .  On  the  other  side  of  the  boat  of 
the   god   are   Nebui,  aaaaaa  J  (1  f  ]\ ,    Besabes-uaa,     J  — «—  "^^    u  — *— 

^-^^,  Nepr,     □    I,  Tepu,    ^^@,    Hetch-a,    Y^  a,   Ab, 

a  Jl  Y  ,    Nepen,      D   ,    Ar-ast-neter,    (1  <=^  jj    "^    T  I ,    Amu-aa, 

Heru-khabit,  ^.  ^—  J  (](]  ^  df)?  Anubis,  Osiris- 


r=vi 


Unnefer,  Khui,  '^^^  Ol],  Horus  of  the  two  faces,  i.e.,  Horus  and 
Set,  Hen-Heru,  0  ^.  ,  Hun,  «  ^^  Qn  ?  Hatchetchu,  fi  .^l  ^^ , 
Nehr,    ~^^|^|j,    Makhi,    yi\!\,    Renpti,   ^ ^^°;  f f , 

Afau,  °  "^  % ,    and    Fa-trau,    ^^^  ^\  %\     "^    ^  {  '  •      All 

these  gods  worship  the  great  god,  and  guide  him  on  his  way,  and 
weep  when  he  has  left  them ;  some  of  them  bear  to  him  the 
prayers  of  those  who  are  upon  earth,  and  also  lead  disembodied 
souls  to  the  forms  which  belong  to  them ;  others  apparently 
mark  the  seasons  of  the  year.  When  Ra  addressed  the  beings 
there,  they  came  to  life  at  the  sound  of  his  voice,  and  they  breathed 


212  BOOK    OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 

again ;  he  gave  them  food  in  abundance,  and  the  gods  gave  water 
to  the  spirits  to  drink  at  his  command,  and  the  hearts  of  the  rebels 
of  Ra  were  burnt  in  the  fire.  It  is,  however,  clear  from  the 
texts  that  although  Osiris  was  the  Lord  of  the  Second  Hour  Ra 
was  the  overlord  of  Osiris,  and  that  it  was  he  who,  like  Osiris,  made 
gifts  to  the  dead.  On  the  other  hand,  the  followers  of  Osiris  had 
to  perform  service  for  Ra,  and  one  of  their  chief  duties  consisted  in 
keeping  in  check  his  enemies,  who  were  always  attempting  to 
prevent  the  progress  of  his  boat ;  in  a  way  the  service  of  these 
followers  was  unrewarded,  for  they  were  condemned  to  remain 
always  in  the  same  place,  and  to  perform  the  same  duty. 

From  the  above  paragraph  the  reader  will  gain  some  idea  of 
the  difference  between  the  illustrated  version  of  the  Second  Hour 
and  the  abstract  of  it  which  is  found  in  the  ''  Abridgment."  As 
the  short  version  makes  no  attempt  to  supply  the  souls  which  were 
supposed  to  make  use  of  it  Avith  the  names  of  the  various  gods  and 
beings  in  it,  we  can  only  assume  that  they  learnt  them  when  on 
earth  in  the  body.  The  larger  version  of  the  Second  Hour  is 
extremely  interesting  in  showing  Avhat  a  subordinate  place  the 
priests  of  Amen-Ra  made  Osiris  occupy  in  respect  of  Ra  when 
passing  through  the  Tuat. 

The  descriptive  text  of  the  Third  Hour,  which  is  called 
Tent-baiu,^  says : — "  This  great  god  next  arrives  in  the  Country 

"  of  those  who  slay  ( jjjjj]  "^  '^'^'^^  ^      vfl  '  )'  ^^^^  ^^®  roweth  over 

'  the  Stream  of  Osiris  (  aaaaaa  H  j]  I,  a  space  three  hundred  and 
"nine  dtru  long,^  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  dtru  wide  (i.e., 
"this  portion  of  the  Tuat  measured  about  SS^  miles  long  by  15 
"miles  wide).  This  great  god  giveth  commands  to  the  gods  who 
"  are  in  the  following  of  Osiris  concerning  this  city,  and  he  assigns 
"  to  them  estates  from  this  country.  The  name  of  the  gods  who 
"are  in  this  field  is  'Hidden  Souls'  (^^  ^^  :1  I),  and  whosoever 
"knoweth  their  name  shall  ascend  to  the  place  where  Osiris  is, 

~  A  variant  given  by  Jcquier  gives  480  dtru  as  the  lengtl),  i.e.,  about  sixty 
miles. 


•214  BOOK   OF   THE    UNDERWORLD 

"and  Avater  shall  be  given  unto  him   for  ihis  Field.     The  name 

(/VWAAA      A^\AAAA  \l— 1/  C\ 

"^  AAAAA^  1^    i — 1 

e^^~^  o\  x\  ^  I  I J .  Whosoever  shall  make  drawino-s  of  these 
'^  Hidden  Souls  together  with  a  representation  of  the  hidden 
"  things  of  the  Tuat — beginning  the  same  from  the  West — it  shall 
"be  of  great  benefit  not  only  to  him  upon  earth,  but  in  the  Under- 
"  world,  and  indeed  always.  Whosoever  knoweth  them  shall  pass 
"  [unhurt]  by  them  as  they  roar,  and  shall  not  fall  into  their 
"  cauldrons.  Whosoever  knoweth  these  things,  being  attached  to 
"his  place,  shall  have  his  bread  with  Ra.  Whosoever,  being  a 
"  soul  and  a  spirit,  knoweth  these  things  shall  have  the  mastery 
"  over  his  legs,  and  he  shall  never  enter  into  the  place  of  destruc- 
"  tion,  and  he  shall  come  forth  in  his  forms  and  smell  the  air  at  his 
"  appointed  hour."  The  illustrated  version  of  the  Third  Hour 
represents  the  boat  of  Ra  sailing  over  the  "Stream  of  Osiris" 
preceded  by  three  boats,  each  of  which  is  moved  onwards  by  two 
men  with  paddles ;  the  beings  in  these  boats  are  all  forms  of  the 
god  Osiris,  and  the  gods  who  stand  on  each  side  of  the  stream 
belong  to  his  cycle,  or  company.  These  latter  had  their  bodies  of 
flesh,  to  which  their  shadows  had  been  re-united,  and  their  souls 
talked  in  them,  as  soon  as  Ra  had  spoken  to  them ;  they  made 
answer  to  the  god,  and  sang  his  praise  whilst  he  was  with  them, 
but  their  cries  of  joy  changed  to  lamentations  when  he  left  them. 
They  could  not  go  with  him,  because  it  was  their  duty  to  guard 
their  district,  and  to  destroy  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  to  support  the 
life  of  Ra,  and  to  make  the  Nile  to  flow. 

Amons;  the  o-ods  in  this  Hour  were  the  nine  forms  of  the  o-od 

Osiris  : — Osiris,  lord  of  Ament,  ^  ^^z^  ft ;  Osiris  Khenti-Ament, 
i  ftltll?  Osiris  the  Throne,  I]  jl^-!!;  Osiris,  conqueror  of 
millions,  f\  ^5y^  ^ ;  Osiris  the  double  of  Ament,  11  LJ  ft ' 
Osiris  on  his  staircase,  \\  f==^  ^  dzLJ  ;  Osiris  prince  of  the  gods, 
i  Y  1  il,;  Osiris  kino-  of  Lower  Esjypt,  J]  \pS-ApS^\  and 
Osiris-Sahu,  Jj  1_1-  The  duties  of  the  beings  who  are  grouped 
with  these  are  clear  from  their  names,  for  these  refer  to  destruction 


THIRD    HOUR   OF   THE   NIGHT  215 

in  one  form  or  another,  and  the  explanatory  text  tells  us  that  they 
are  employed  in  "hacking  and  cutting  souls,  in  shutting  up  the 
"  shadows  of  the  dead,  and  in  dragging  the  occupants  of  tombs  to 
"  their  place  of  slaughter ;  "  moreover,  they  shoot  out  flames,  they 
cause  fires  to  come  into  being,  and  the  heads  of  the  enemies  of  Ra 
are  cut  off  by  their  swords.     The  master  of  the  region  traversed 

in  the  Third  Hour  is  called  Khatra,     ^    [1 ,  and  we  learn  from  the 

speech  of  Ra  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  mythological  district  over 
which  he  presides  were  created  by  Ra  specially  to  follow  and  to 
protect  Osiris.  To  these  he  says,  "  0  ye  whom  I  have  hidden, 
whose  souls  I  have  put  in  a  secret  place,  Avhom  I  have  set  in  the 
following  of  Osiris  to  defend  him  ;  to  accompany  his  images,  to 
make  an  end  of  those  who  attack  him  (even  as  the  god  Hu  is 
behind  thee,  0  Osiris,  to  defend  thee,  to  accompany  thy  images, 
to  destroy  those  who  attack  thee,  even  as  Hu  is  to  thee,  0  Osiris, 
and  even  as  Sa  is  to  thee,  0  Khenti  Amentet),  ye  souls  whose 
forms  are  stablished,  ye  souls  whose  magical  powers  make 
certain  your  coming  into  being,  who  breathe  the  air  [through 
your  nostrils,  who  look]  with  your  faces,  who  listen  with  your 
ears,  who  are  apparelled  in  your  raiment,  who  are  clothed  with 
your  swathings,  who  have  ofl^erings  made  to  you  at  stated  seasons 
by  the  priests  of  God,  who  have  estates  set  apart  for  your  own 
behoof  and  benefit,  whose  souls  are  not  cast  down,  whose  bodies 
are  not  overthrown :  [0  Hidden  Souls,  I  say]  open  ye  your 
circles,  and  set  ye  yourselves  in  your  own  places,  for  I  have 
come  to  see  my  bodies,  and  to  look  upon  the  similitudes  of  myself 
which  are  in  the  Tuat,  and  it  is  you  who  have  brought  me  along 
and  have  given  me  the  opportunity  of  coming  to  them.  And 
now  I  lead  thy  soul  to  heaven,  0  Osiris,  and  thy  soul  to  earth,  0 
Khenti  Aukert,  with  thy  gods  behind  thee,  and  thy  spirits  before 
thee,  and  thy  being  and  thy  forms  [about  thee].  And  thy  spirit 
hath  its  word  of  power,  0  Osiris,  and  you,  ye  spirits  who  are  in 
the  following  of  Osiris,  have  your  Avords  of  power.  I  go  up  on 
the  earth  and  the  day  is  behind  me ;  I  pass  through  the  night, 
and  my  soul  rejoins  itself  to  your  forms  during  the  day,  and  I 
fulfil  the  ceremonies  of  the  night  which  are  needful  for  you.     I 


216  BOOK   OF   THE    UNDERWORLD 

"  have  created  your  souls  for  mine  own  use,  so  that  they  may  be 
"  behind  me,  and  what  I  have  done  for  them  will  preserve  you 
"  from  falling  down  to  the  place  of  destruction."  ^ 

The  Fourth  Hour  of  the  night,  which  is  called  Sekhemus," 
conducts  the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  through  a  region  of  a  very 
different  character  froin  the  earlier  divisions.  The  descriptive  text 
says,  "  The  majesty  of  this  great  god  next  arriveth  in  the  hidden 
"  Circle  of  Amentet,  and  he  performeth  the  designs  of  the  gods 
"who  are   therein  by  means  of  his  voice  without   seeing  them. 

"The  name  of  this  Circle  is  Ankhet-kheperu  (■¥■  S    \>    \M  ')' 

"and    the    name   of    the    pylon    of    this    Circle    is   Ament-sthau 

"  (h  ^  Vv    v\  "^  crzn] .     Whosoever  knoweth  this  plan 

\1 /www  c=^^  s=  _^  Jr  y^  111         /  i 

"  of  the   hidden    paths    of    Ee-stau    (         ~^~  f^-^^j  ,    and    of  the 

"winding  roads  of  the  Ammeliet   (l\  /=z  ^t\    |    "^  J  ,  and  of  the 

"  hidden  pylons  which  are  in  the  Land  of  Seker,  he  who  is  on  his 
"  sand  shall  eat  the  bread  which  hath  been  prepared  for  the  mouth 
"  of  the  living  gods  who  are  in  the  temple  of  Tem.  He  who 
"knoweth  these  things  shall  [know]  the  paths  rightly,  and  shall 
"have  power  to  journey  along  the  roads  of  Re-stau,  and  to  see 
"the  forms  (or  guides)  in  the  Ammehet."  The  Circle  Ammehet 
is,  as  we  learn  from  Chapter  cxlix  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  the 
Sixth  Aat,  or  district  of  the  domain  of  Osiris  which  is  presided 
over  by  the  god  Seker ;  the  deceased  addresses  it  thus :— "  Hail, 
"thou  Ammeliet  which  art  holy  unto  the  gods,  and  art  hidden 
"  for  the  spirits,  and  art  baleful  unto  the  dead ;  the  name  of  the 
"  god  who  dwelleth  in  thee  is  Sekher-At  (?)  [or  Sekher-remu]. 
"  Homage  to  thee,  0  Ammehet,  I  have  come  to  see  the  gods  who 
"  dwell  in  thee.  Uncover  your  faces  and  put  off  your  head-dresses 
"  when  ye  meet  me,  for,  behold,  I  am  a  mighty  god  among  you, 
"  and  I  have  come  to  prejDare  provisions  for  you.  Let  not  Sekher- 
"  At  (?)  have  dominion  over  me,  let  not  the  divine  slaughterers 

1  See  Maspero,  Les  Hiqjogees,  p.  64. 


FOURTH   HOUR   OF   THE   NIGHT 


217 


"  come  after  me,  let  not  the  murderous  fiends  come  after  me,  but 
"  let  me  live  upon  sepulchral  offerings  among  you."  ^ 

The  illustrated  edition  of  the  Fourth  Hour  shows  us  the  boat 
of  Ra  passing  through  an  entirely  new  country,  in  fact  a  region 


Avhich  is  filled  with  huge  and  fearsome  snakes,  and  represents  the 
region  over  which  the  god  Seker  presides.  Here  there  is  no  river 
with  banks  lined  with  the  gods  and  the  souls  of  the  dead,  and  here 


See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  hy  Day  (Translation),  p.  267. 


^^>^ 


218  BOOK   OF   THE   UNDERAVORLD 

there  are  no  fields  to  be  distributed  by  Ra  among  the  faithful 
followers  of  himself  and  of  Osiris ;  indeed  there  are  so  few  beings 
to  render  him  service  that  he  is  obliged  to  betake  himself  to 
another  kind  of  boat,  and  the  god  of  day  is  compelled  to  glide 
through  the  passages  of  the  dark  and  gloomy  land  almost  without 
a  following  of  gods.  Ra  stands  within  a  shrine  in  his  boat  as 
before,  but  the  boat  itself  is  formed  of  a  serpent  with  a  head  at 
each  end  of  his  body  ;  this  boat  is  hauled  over  the  sandy  ground  of 
the  god  "  who  is  upon  his  sand  "  by  gods  of  the  company  of  Osiris, 
with  whom,  however,  are  mingled  the  gods  of  the  company  of  Ptali 
of  Memphis,  and  Osiris  himself  is  merged  in  Seker  and  becomes 
Osiris  Seker.     The  narrow  way,  or  road,  of  Re-stau  has  three  doors, 

which    are    called    Mates-sma-ta,    ^^  c-=-^  ''=^,      z,   ^^  Y 
Metes-mau-at,  ¥\  ^==;>,.  .==^  i  ,  and  Metes-neheh,  ^|\  ^ 

AAAAAA     Q     0 

1k    0  0  O  5  ^^^  ^y  these  it  is  divided  into  three  parts.     Into  one 

part  the  god  Ra  neither  enters  nor  travels,  but  the  door  thereof 
obeys  his  voice ;  in  another  part  is  the  body  of  Seker,  who  is  on 
his  sand,  the  hidden  form  which  can  be  neither  looked  at  nor  seen ; 
another  part  is  that  through  which  Seker  passeth,  but  neither  the 
gods,  nor  the  spirits,  nor  the  dead  go  through  it,  and  it  is  filled 
with  the  souls  which  have  been  consumed  by  the  fire  that  comes 
forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  goddess  Am-mit.  The  region  through 
which  the  boat  of  Ra  travels  is  full  of  thick  darkness,  and  the  light 
which  the  god  usually  emits  is  unable  to  penetrate  it ;  in  this 
difficulty  he  is  helped  upon  his  way  by  the  light  of  the  flames  of 
fire  which  issue  from  the  mouth  of  the  serpent  which  forms  the 
body  of  his  boat.  Among  the  gods  who  march  in  front  of  the  boat 
are  Thoth  and  Horus,  who  stand  facing  each  other  with  outstretched 
hands  in  which  they  hold  an  Utchat,  '^J,  which  is  here  to  be 
identified  with  the  god  Seker.  The  serpents  which  are  passed  by 
the   god  are  of  various  kinds   and  of  diiFerent  sizes.     The  first, 

called  Hetch-nau,  (ii  ?  ^H*  V'  ^^^^  ^*  ^^^^  length  in  a  boat, 

each  end  of  which  terminates  in  a  human  head,  and  is  the 
guardian  of  Seker ;  the  second  is  three-headed,  and  he  moves  over 
the  ground  on  four  human  legs  and  feet ;  the  third  is  called  Amen, 


220  BOOK    OF   THE    UNDERWORLD 

n  ;  the  fourth  is  Hekent,  ?  ^^^.  and  has  a  human  head 
growing  out  of  its  body  just  above  the  tail ;  and  the  fifth  is 
Menmenu,  O  v\  UHt ,  which  has  three  heads,  and  bears  on 


AWAAA  AftAAAA 


its  back  fourteen  stars  and  fourteen  human  heads  surmounted  by 
disks.     Next  we  have  three  huge  serpents  near  the  great  scorpion 

Ankhet,  -V-  ^ ,  and  a  huge   uraeus,  to  which  Hbations  are  being 

poured  out  by  a  man ;  and  a  three-headed  serpent,  with  wings, 
which  moves  along  on  four  human  feet  and  legs ;  and  the  serpent 
Neheb-kau,  ^'ww\  o   J  LJ  ,  ^  which  has  two  heads  at  one  end  of  its 

body,  and  one  head  at  the  other.  All  these  monsters  are  said  to 
make  their  journey  daily  round  about  tlie  region  of  the  Fourth 
Hour,  and  they  live  upon  what  they  find  on  their  way. 

The  last  hour,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  part  of  the  dominions  of 
Seker,  but  the  Fifth  Hour,  which  is  called  Semit-her-abt-uaa-s,^ 
contains  his  capital  city.  The  descriptive  text  says,  "This  great 
"  god  is  drawn  along  over  the  actual  roads  of  the  Tuat,  and  over 
"  the  hidden  Circle  of  Seker,  the  god  who  is  on  his  sand,  and  he 
"neither  seetli  nor  looketh  upon  the  hidden  figure  of  the  land 
"  which  containeth  the  flesh  of  this  god.  The  gods  who  are  with 
"  this  god  hear  the  voice  of  Ra-Heru  (?),  and  they  adore  him  at 
"  the  seasons  of  this  god.     The  name  of  the  pylon  of  this  city  is 

"  Aha-neteru,    a  f a    |  " '     and    the    name    of   this    Circle    is 

"  Ament,  (1  .     [Here  are]  the  secret  ways  of  Anient,  and 

"  the  doors  of  the  house  of  Ament,  and  the  habitable  house 
"( JMK— »—  in  of  the  earth  of  Seker,  and  his  flesh,  and  his 
"  members,  and  his  body,  in  their  primeval  forms.  The  name  of 
"  those  who  are  in  this  Circle  is  '  Baiu  amu  Tuat '  (i.e..  Souls  in  the 
"  Tuat).  The  forms  who  are  in  their  hours  and  their  hidden  beings 
"  neither  see  nor  look  upon  this  form  of  Seker  himself.  Whosoever 
"  maketh  a  picture  of  these  things  which  are  in  Ament  in  the  Tuat, 
"  to  the  south  of  the  hidden  house,  and  whosoever  knoweth  these 
"things,  his    soul   shall   be    at    peace,   and   he    shall    be    satisfied 


222  BOOK   OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 

*' with  the  offerings  of  Seker.     And  Khemit  (^  ^^  (](j  ^  J|^  shall 

"not  hack  his. body  in  pieces,  and  he  shall  go  to  her  in  peace. 
"  Whosoever  shall  make  offerings  to  these  gods  upon  earth  shall 
"  [find]  them  of  benefit  to  him  in  the  Tuat." 

The  illustrated  version  of  the  Fifth  Hour  shows  us  Ra 
travelling  in  his  serpent  boat  and  being  towed  along  by  seven  gods 
and  seven  goddesses,  who  represent  the  gods  of  fourteen  days  of 
the  month ;  before  these  are  the  divine  sovereign  chiefs,  i.e., 
Her-khu,  p=^  ®  ^  )  |,  An-hetep,  ^  =^^  Her-liequi,  ^^  TT, 
and  H  etch-met  ?  II .  Half  way  through  the  hour  Ra  comes  to  a 
mound  of  sand,  the  top  of  which  is  surmounted  by  the  head  of  a 
woman,  whereon  rests  the  forepart  of  a  beetle,  only  one  half  of 
which  is  visible,  symbol  of  the  god  Khepera ;  this  head  indicates 
the  position  of  the  hidden  abode  wherein  is  Seker,  and  when  the 
beetle  alights  upon  it  the  god  Khepera  holds  converse  with  that 
god.  Immediately  beneath  the  head  is  the  "  Land  of  Seker," 
which  has  the  shape'czzD,  and  is  described  as  the  "  hidden  land  of 
"  Seker  which  guardeth  the  hidden  flesh ;  "  it  is  surrounded  by  a 
wall  of  sand,  and  at  each  end,  outside  the  wall,  is  a  sphinx  with 
the  head  of  a  man  and  the  body  of  a  lion.  Inside  this  land  is 
a  two-headed,  winged  serpent,  with  a  tail  which  terminates  in  a 
human  head ;  between  the  wings  stands  a  figure  of  the  hawk- 
headed  god  Seker ;  this  serpent  monster  represents  the  god 
watching  over  his  own  image.     The  two  sphinxes  are  Avatched  by 

two  serpents,  Tepan,  i\  -^m^ ,  and  Ankh-aapau,  ^  (I  ^  ^^  (©  ; 

the  first  serpent  enters  into  the  presence  of  this  god,  and  carries 
to  him  daily  the  offerings  which  are  made  by  the  living,  but  the 
second  never  leaves  his  place,  and  lives  upon  the  flames  which 
proceed  from  his  own  mouth.  Before  the  second  serpent  are  four 
seated  gods,  who  bear  on  their  knees  the  emblems  of  "hidden 
symbols"  of  Seker,  i.e.,  /J,  W ,  S^ ,  and  \u,  and  rest  by  the  side 
of  a  lake  of  water  called  Nut,  \,^^^~^-  lor  those  who  are  ni 

_-Zl  /VywXA 

this  lake  its  waters  are  like  fire,  and  each  of  the  heads  of  the  four 
gods  v.'-hich  rise  above  them  bears  upon  it  the  symbol  of  fire.  The 
lake  is  watched  over  by  the  company  of  gods  of  Ra,  represented 


FIFTH   HOUR    OF   THE    NIGHT 


223 


by  nine  axes,  and  five  gods.     But  before  Ra  has  jD^ssed  through 
the  Fifth  Hour  he  arrives  at  a  large  vaulted  chamber,  filled  with 


sand,  and  called  ^^^,  i.e.,  "Night,"  and  on  each  side,  clinging  by- 
its  claws,  is  a  hawk ;  from  the  lower  part  of  it  goes    forth  the 


224  BOOK   OF   THE   UNDERWORLD 

beetle,  only  one  half  of  which  is  visible.  This  beetle,  or  Khepera, 
typified  the  germ  of  life,  and  when  the  boat  of  Ra  was  drawn  on 
to  the  top  of  the  mound  of  sand  already  described,  it  Avas  supposed 
to  stop  on  it  as  it  passed,  and  having  done  so,  it  went  to  the  dead 
god  and  raised  him  up  to  life.     This  chamber  Avas  guarded  by  a 

two-headed    serpent   called    Ter,    ^^^^^  •  |  HHt ,    and   it   had   to    be 

jealously  watched  in  order  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  any  one  who 
would  disturb  or  destroy  the  germ  of  life.  A  little  beyond  the 
chamber  of  sand  is  a  group  of  seven  gods,  whose  duty  it  was  to 
inspect  the  slaughter  of  the  dead  in  the  Tuat,  and  to  consume 
their  bodies  by  the  flames  of  their  mouths  in  the  course  of  each 
day;  and  a  little  further  on  is  the  goddess  who  "lives  upon  the 
blood  of  the  dead,"  and  who  is  occupied  in  slaying  a  man  doomed 
to  die  by  the  gods.  When  the  boat  of  Rri  arrived  at  the  end  of 
the  Fifth  Hour  he  saw  the  star  of  the  "  living  god,  who  journeyeth, 

"  and  journeyeth  and  passeth,"  T  ^  (]  ^^^^'^^.  Dr.  Brugsch, 
and  following  him  M.  Maspero,  and  others,  have  identified  this 
star  with  the  planet  Venus,  the  star  of  the  morning,  and  the 
identification  is  undoubtedly  correct.  This  is  an  important  fact, 
for,  as  M.  Jequier  has  pointed  out,^  coupled  with  the  representa- 
tion of  the  beetle  going  forth  from  the  night  to  23lace  itself  in  the 
boat  of  Ra,  it  shows  us  that  the  domain  of  Seker,  although  reduced 
to  two  hours  which  have  been  inserted  in  their  proper  geographical 
position  in  the  Tuat,  certainly  at  one  time  formed  a  complete  hell, 
and  that  the  rising  of  the  sun  was  the  final  event  which  took  place 
in  it. 

The  Sixth  Hour,  which  is  called  Mesperit-arat-maatu,^ 
brings  us  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  shrines  of  Osiris  in  the 
Delta.  The  descriptive  text  says,  "  When  this  great  god  arriveth 
"  at  the  abyss  of  water,  which  is  the  lady  of  the  gods  of  the  Tuat, 
"  he  holdeth  discourse  with  the  gods  who  are  there,  and  he  giveth 
"  the  command  for  them  to  obtain  the  mastery  over  their  oiFerings 
)  in  this  city.     He   saileth  in  this  [Field]  being 


"(1 


I    I    r 


'  Le  Livre  de  ce  qn'il  y  a  dans  I'Hades,  p.  7C). 


^  %\      u     nil  ^  II     ~j]  ■:^^  <=>  "^    ^-^   i< . 


THE   PITS   OF   THE   TUAT 


225 


"  provided  with  his  boat,  and  he  commandeth  them  [to  have]  their 
"fields  for  their  offerings,  and  he  giveth  them  water  for  their 
"  streams  as  they  go  about  the  Tuat  each  day.     The  name  of  the 


).     The 


/ — ** —  A    r 
"pylon  of  this   city  is    Sept-metu  (   °    A  ^ 

"  hidden  path  of  Amentet,  on  the  stream  of  whicli  this  great  god 
Q 


226  THE    SIXTH   HOUR 

'  journeyeth  in  his  boat  to  perform  the  affairs  of  the  gods  of  the 
"  Tuat,  and  the  collecting  of  their  names,  and  the  manner  in  which 
"  their  forms  rest,  and  all  that  appertaineth  to  their  hidden  hours, 
"  and  the  hidden  similitude  of  the  Tuat,  are  unknown  ....  The 
"  majesty  of  this  god  uttereth  words,  and  he  giveth  divine  offerings 
"  to  the  gods  who  are  in  the  Tuat,  and  he  standeth  near  them ; 
"  they  see  him,  and  they  have  the  mastery  over  their  fields  and 
''over  the  gifts  which  are  made  to  them,  and  they  have  their 
"beings  through  the  command  which  this  great  god,  who  is 
"  mighty  of  words,  giveth  unto  them.     The  name  of  this  district 

is     Metchet-nebt-Tuatiu     (°^  ^  ^  ^  ^    ^    ^')-"       ^^® 


/WW\A 


third  paragraph  of  the  text  promises  to  those  who  make  pictures 
of  the  Sixth  Hour  a  participation  in  the  offerings  which  have 
been  made  to  the  gods  in  the  train  of  Osiris,  and  also  that 
offerings  shall  be  made  to  them  by  their  kinsfolk  on  earth. 

The  illustrated  edition  of  the  Sixth  Hour  shows  us  that  Ea 
has  no  longer  any  need  of  the  boat  which  was  made  of  the  body  of 
a  serpent  wherein  he  passed  through  the  realm  of  Seker,  and  that 
he  is  once  again  in  his  old  boat  and  sailing  over  the  waters  of  the 
stream  in  the  Tuat.  In  front  of  his  boat  are: — 1.  Thoth,  who  is 
called  Khenti-Tuat,  and  who  is  represented  by  a  dog-headed  god 
holding  an  ibis  on  his  out-stretched  right  hand  ;  and  2.  the  goddess 

.  A    ,""""",     H —      n     I      M 

Ament-semu-set,  [j  /^  -^  '  '  ^  •  Beyond  these  is  a  large 
house  with  sixteen  divisions,  in  each  of  which  is  a  god  in  mummied 
form;  these  represent  the  mansions  of  Osiris,  and  four  contain 
kings  of  the  South,  four  contain  kings  of  the  North,  four  contain 
Heteptiu,  ^  ^  ^  i ,  and  four  contain  Spirits.     All  these  form  the 

guardians  of  a  huge  five-headed  serpent  called  Ash-hrau,  "^^  '^  I , 

.  "^  I   I   I 

the  body  of  which  is  bent  round  into  an  irregular  oval  in  such  a 
way  that  his  tail  almost  touches  one  of  his  heads.  Lying  on  his 
back  within  this  oval  is  a  god  who  is  called  7Vfu,  o:,  i.e.,  "Flesh," 
and  as  he  is  touching  with  his  right  hand  the  leg  of  a  beetle  which 
he  holds  on  his  head,  we  may  assume  that  he  represents  the  dead 
body  of  Khepera,  and  is  the  opposite  of  the  Sun-god  in  his  boat, 
who  is  called  "Flesh  of  Ra,"  Iq,     The  sixteen  gods  mentioned 


228  THE   SIXTH   HOUR 

above  are  addressed  by  Ra,  who  commands  them  to  be  happy  with 
their  offerings,  and  to  protect  him,  and  to  slay  the  serpent  Apepi ; 
they  hearken  to  his  voice,  and  the  text  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is 
the  voice  of  Ra  which  will  make  the  god  within  the  folds  of  the 
serpent  Ash-hrau  and  the  beetle  upon  his  head  to  move.  With 
these  must  be  mentioned  the  double  company  of  the  gods  of  Osiris, 
one  company  being  de|)icted  in  human  form  sitting  on  invisible 
thrones;    these    are: — Hetep-Henti-Tuat,  ^,  Ast-amhit,  ji 

(j  ^  I  f)^  "^^    Asar-am-ab-neteru,       jj     "[}-  "^  "]  ,1,5    Heru-khenti- 

Ahet-f.  ^  (Ull  ^  J  I  ^,  ^!f  ■^""■*"^'  J  -  ^^  i>  ^  i  ■^' 
Maa-ab-khenti-aht-f,  ^^  "^  fd]]  ^  ^  i  '^  '  ^^^  t^^i'ee  gods  whose 
names  are  not  given.  The  second  company  of  nine  gods  is  repre- 
sented by  nine  sceptres,  each  of  which  has  a  knife  fixed  at  its  base, 
^==>^  I ;  the  first  three  are  surmounted  by  the  white  crowns,  Q , 
the  second  three  by  the  red  crowns,  \J ,  and  the  third  three  by 
uraei,  Tjr. .     Next  we  have  the  lion  god  Ka-hemhem,  \_\  ^       ^       , 

with  Isis,  and  Horus,  and  the  mummied  figure,  £=  ^^^'^  ^^^^  \  •> 
armed  with  [,  and,  ^^:;>^,  who  keep  guard  over  the  three  houses 
of  Ra,  each  of  which  is  protected  by  a  serpent  god  standing  upon 
its  tail  and  emitting  fire  from  its  mouth.     The  first  house  is  called 

Het-tua-Ra  O  [J  ^ ,  and  has  for  its  symbol  "3^,  and  the  sign  ^SSii ; 
the  second  is  called  Het-stau-Kher-aha-Rii,  O  J  ~^^ /I\  Ck2l  ?  and 
has  for  its  symbol,  ^^ ;  and  the  third  is  called  Het-temtet-Ra, 
n  cr^ij  c=^^  z^  ^  ^^^  ^^g  £^^  -^g  symbol,  ^,  the  head  of  a  man.     On 

the  left  hand  side  of  the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  are  two  gods 
whose  names  are  wanting,  Alii,  (]  |^  UQ?  Netch-atef,  °^  |  u  "^  , 
Ankh-hra,  ^'^,  Met-lira,  | '^  (Sept-hra  ^'^p),  Netch-pautti, 
^^  "^  O  .  the  goddesses  Antheth,  n  /wwsa  ,  Henhenith, 
\i^  (](]  =.,  Hemt,  ^  ^_^,  and   Sehith,  p  |  (j(j  s=;  and  the 

monster  serpent  Am-khu,  o  ^^  ®  ^  |  | '  which   bears  on  its 

back   the   heads  of  the   four  Children  of  Horus,   Mestha,  Hapi, 


230  THE    SEVENTH   HOUR 

Tuamutef,  and  Qebhsennuf.  The  duty  of  this  serpent  is  to  devour 
the  shadows  and  the  spirits  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,  who  are  over- 
thrown in  the  Tuat.     The  monster  is  followed  by  the  four  earthly 

forms  of  Osiris,  Kai,   S'^flfl,  Meni-ret,  r^^  fl[]  |,  Enen-retui, 


^^^  ^^,  and  Urt,  <=>,  and  nine  fire-spitting  serpents  armed 

with  knives,  which  are  Ta-thenen,  ^_  "^^^ ,  Tem,  Khepera,  Shu, 
Seb,  Osiris,  Horus,  Apu,  \/\,  and  Hetepui,  ^^.  The  duty 
of  these  gods  consisted  in  destroying  the  enemies  of  Khepera, 
and  in  cutting  up  their  shadows;  they  lived  in  Nu  and  in  the 
water  of  Ta-thenen,  and  Khepera  by  means  of  his  magical  power 
daily  made  them  to  breathe  through  the  word  of  Ra. 

The  Seventh  Houe,  which  is  called  Khesef-haa-heseq-Neha- 
HRA,^  takes  us  into  the  region  of  the  Tuat  which  contains  the 
hidden  abode  of  the  god  Osiris.  The  descriptive  text  says, 
"  When  the  majesty  of  this  great  god  arriveth  in  the  hidden  abode 
"  (Tephet  ^  |  "^  )  of  Osiris,  he  addresseth  to  the  gods  who  are 
"  there  [suitable]  words.  This  god  maketh  to  himself  other  forms 
"for  this  hidden  abode,  so  that  he  may  turn  back  the  way  for 
"Apep  by  means  of  the  magical  words  of  Isis,  and  the  magical 

"  words  of  Ser,  1^  3 .  The  name  of  the  pylon  of  this  city  through 
"  Avhich  the  god  journeyeth  is  '  Gate  of  Osiris  '  (<:>  ^  ^  IJ  j]  ^) ' 

"and  the  name  of  the   city  is  Tephet-shetat  ((-,  8^  ^ J. 

"  This  great  god  passeth  over  the  hidden  way  of  Amentet  in  his 
"  boat  which  is  endowed  with  magical  powers,  and  he  journeyeth 
"  over  it  when  there  is  no  stream  in  it,  and  when  there  are  none  to 
"  tow  him.  He  per  forme  th  this  by  means  of  the  words  of  power 
"  of  Isis  and  of  Ser,  and  by  means  of  the  mighty  words  of  power 
"  which  proceed  from  his  own  mouth,  and  in  this  region  of  the 
"Tuat  he  inflicteth  with  the  knife  wounds  upon  Apep,  whose 
"  place  is  in  heaven."  The  man  who  shall  make  a  picture  of  the 
things  which  are  to  the  north  of  the  hidden  house  of  the  Tuat  shall 
find  it  of  great  benefit  to  him  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth ;  and 


^'^^ 


THE   SEVENTH   HOUR 


231 


he  who  knows  it  shall  be  among  the  spirits  near  Ra,  and  he  who 
recites  the  words  of  Isis  and  Ser  shall  repulse  Apep  in  Amentet, 
and  he  shall  have  a  place  on  the  boat  of  Ra  both  in  heaven  and 


upon  earth.     The  man  who  knows  not  this  picture  shall  never  be 
able  to  repulse  the  serpent  Neha-hra. 

The  text  continues,  "  The  shallows  of  the  land  of  Neha-hra  are 


232  THE  SEVENTH   HOUR 

"450  cubits  long,  and  it  is  filled  with  his  folds,  but  over  one 
"  portion  thereof  this  great  god  joumeyeth  not  when  he  travelleth 
"  to  the  hidden  abode  of  Osiris,  for  he  journey eth  through  this  city 
"  under  the  form  of  the  god  Mehen,  (°^  iMi)  •  Neha-hra  shall 
"never  drink  the  water  of  him  that  knoweth  this,  and  the 
"  soul  which  knoweth  it  shall  never  be  given  over  to  the  violence 
"  of  the  gods  who  are  in  this  Circle ;    and  the  crocodile  Ab-she 

"  ( Q  I  "X  (zszi)  shall  never  eat  the  soul  of  him  that  knoweth  it." 

From  what  is  said  above  we  see  that  the  boat  of  Ra  has  arrived  at 
a  shallow  place  in  the  celestial  stream  where  there  is  not  enough 
water  to  float  the  boat,  or  even  to  allow  it  to  be  towed ;  moreover, 
the  serpent  Neha-hra  opposes  the  advance  of  the  god.  In  this 
difficulty  Isis,  the  great  enchantress,  enters  the  boat,  and  standing 
in  the  bows  utters  the  words  which  make  it  proceed  on  its  way. 
Neha-hra,  as  we  see  from  the  illustrated  edition  of  the  hour,  is 

seized  bv  Serqet  and  Her-tesu-f,     "^  ^""^  '^"==-?  and  held  in 

bonds,  and  is  transfixed  to  the  ground  by  six  knives ;  thus  Ra, 
with  the  serpent  Mehen  over  him  in  the  form  of  a  canopy,  moves 
on  without  let  or  hindrance.  Behind  the  monster  serpent  stand 
four  goddesses,  each  armed  with  a  huge  knife,  whose  duty  it  is  to 
guard  the  tombs  of  the  four  forms  of  Osiris ;    the  names  of  the 


four  goddesses  are  : — Temtith,    / —  [I l\  s=3 ,    Tenith, 

Nakith, ^  (]  -^3^  (j  ()  s= ,  and  Hetemitet,  |  jj  fjl)  ^-    Their  duty 

was  to  drive  away  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  to  hack  in  pieces  with 
their  awful  knives  the  fiend  Apep  every  day.  The  four  tombs  of 
Osiris  are  rectangular  buildings,  and  inside  each  is  a  bed  or  small 
mound  of  sand  Avhereunder  lie  the  dead  souls  of  the  god,  which  are 
known  by  the  names  Tem,  Khepera,  Ra,  and  Osiris.  At  each  end 
of  each  tomb  is  a  human  head,  which  is  said  to  come  forth  from 
the  tombs  whenever  it  hears  the  voice  of  Ra,  and  after  he  has 
passed  "  they  eat  their  own  forms,"  i.e.,  the  heads  disappear  from 
sight.  It  was,  no  doubt,  a  custom  in  predynastic  times  to  slay 
slaves  at  the  graves  of  kings  and  nobles,  just  as  in  many  parts  of 
the  world  it  has  been  the  custom  to  kill  human  beings  and  to  lay 
their  bodies  beneath  the  foundations  of  buildings  which  were  to 


THE   SEVENTH   HOUR 


233 


234  THE    SEVENTH   HOUR 

be  erected  in  order  that  the  souls  of  the  slaughtered  might  protect 
them  and  keep  away  evil  spirits.  The  human  heads  on  the  tombs 
of  Osiris  probably  represent  a  tradition  that,  when  Osiris  was 
buried,  human  sacrifices  were  offered  at  his  tomb  for  this  or 
for  some  similar  purpose/  This  view  has  been  well  discussed  by 
M.  Lefebure,  who  has  done  so  much  to  illustrate  the  religious 
and  funeral  customs  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,^  and  some  allusion 
to  it  is  probably  made  by  Horapollo,^  who  says  that  when  they 
wanted  to  represent  (jivXaKTtjpLou  they  were  wont  to  draw  two 
human  heads,  one  male  and  the  other  female,  that  of  the  male 
looking  inwards,  and  that  of  the  female  outwards.  These  heads 
would  keep  away  the  attack  of  any  evil  spirit,  even  if  no  inscription 
was  placed  with  them. 

The  other  illustrations  of  this  hour  show  us  the  god  Af-Asar, 

(^(^(^<^(^(^(^  (1  ^.^  ^  J ,    i.e.,    ''Flesh   of  Osiris,"   seated  under  a 

canopy  made  by  the  body  of  a  form  of  the  serpent  Mehen  called 

Ankh-aru-tchefau,   •?■  ^^^^  ,  with   the   human-headed   serpent 

1    (2   111  I    I    I 

Ankhtith,  ■?■■?■  ^  ^\  and  the  lion-headed  goddess  Hekenth,  ^  s=5 , 
behind  him ;  a  little  further  behind  is  the  god  Shepes,  —*— , 

a  form  of  Thoth.  Before  the  god  kneel  three  figures,  whose  heads 
have  been  cut  off  by  a  cat-headed  god,  and  lying  on  the  ground 
are    three   beings   who   have   been    fettered   by   the   god   Anku, 

[1   v\ ,  these  represent  the  enemies  of  Osiris  whose  souls  have 

been  plucked  out,  and  whose  shadows  have  been  hacked  in  pieces 
because  they  rebelled  against  the  lord  of  the  Tuat.  Before  these 
are  three  human-headed  hawks  wearing  double  crowns,  and  they 
represent  the  souls  of  the  "living;"  and  on  a  serpent  near  is  seated 

on  a  throne  the  god  Af-Tem,  tl  "^  |  n^^='  i-®-'  "Flesh  of 
Tem."  Among  the  other  gods  in  this  hour  is  "Horus  on  his 
throne,"  and  before  him  are  a  company  of  gods  who  have  been 

1  See  Maspero,  Les  Hypogees,  p.  104 ;  Jequier,  op.  cit.,  p.  94, 

"  Bites  J^ayptiens,  pp.  4  ff.,  18  ff. 

^  ^vXaKTrjpiov  8k  ypacf>eLV  jioyXofxtvoi,  Zvo  Kc^aAas  avdpioirwv  t,(oypa<f>ov(n,  Tr]V  fxev 
Tov  apcrevos  tcro)  (3k€irovcrav,  Tr]v  Be  6rjKvKr]v  'e$oi.  ourco  yap  (^acnv  ovhlv  T^^iv  Sai/xovLiov 
icfyaxj/eTai,  eTretSr/  kol  ^wpis  ypafxixaTOiV,  k.t.X.      Ilteroglyplnca,  i.  24. 


236 


THE   EIGHTH   HOUR 


joined  to  their  stars,  and  the  goddesses  of  the  twelve  hours. 
Facing    these    companies    is    the    crocodile    "  Ab-sha-am-Tuat," 

^ a  I  X  ^^^  -Ij-    ^  ,  who  acts  as  guardian  of  the  tomb  of  Osiris 

and  of  what  is  in  it.  When  Ra  passes  by  the  crocodile,  which  is 
described  as  "  Osiris,  the  Eye  of  Ra,"  this  beast  is  fascinated  and 
made  helpless  by  the  words  so  long  as  the  god  is  speaking  to  him, 
and  the  dead  Osiris,  who  is  in  the  ground  under  the  crocodile, 
puts   up   his    head   that   he  also  may  look  at  the  Sun-god ;  the 


^        V 


•-•-' — - ....•.•■••■•.. ». •.•/.■•...« •.\.....ij....  .■^..•> ■•■  ..J 


The  Seventh  Hour  of  the  Night. 

followers  of  Osiris  also  seize  the  opportunity  of  gazing  upon  Ra, 
and  do  so  without  risk  of  being  devoured  by  the  monster  which 
is  temporarily  enchanted. 

The  Eighth  Houk,  which  is  called  Nebt  Ushau,^  brings  us 
into  a  very  interesting  division  of  the  Tuat ;  the  name  of  its  pylon 


^M^'^^l- 


238  THE   CIRCLES    OF   THE    TUAT 

is  Aha-en-urt-nef,   - — o  f  ^^  ^^^         ,'  and  the  name  of  the 

city  is  Tebat-neteru-s,  c^?    11  "J^  f  1  ,!,Il^-     Ra  passes  through 

this  division  in  his  boat  under  the  protection  of  Mehen,  and  its 
gods  tow  him  at  the  command  of  this  mighty  snake  ;  he  sees  all 
the  gods  in  their  various  Circles,  and  those  "  who  are  on  their 
sand,"  and  he  addresses  words  to  them.  They  come  out  of  their 
secret  abodes  when  the  god  passes  by,  and  the  doors  thereof  open 
of  their  own  accord.  In  this  Hour  only  gods  and  spirits  who 
have  been  mummified  and  buried  with  appropriate  rites  are  to 
be  found,  and,  though  dead,  they  quickly  come  to  life  again  at 
the  words  of  Ra,  who  exhorts  them  to  put  an  end  to  all  the 
enemies  of  his  who  are  to  be  found  in  that  region.  The  illustrated 
edition  of  the  Hour  shows  us  the  boat  of  the  god  being  towed 
along,  and  in  front  of  it  are  nine  large  signs,  the  forms  of  which 
are  based  upon  the  hieroglyphic  character  n  shesu  or  shemsuy  i,e., 

"  follower "  or  "  servant."  From  the  top  of  seven  of  these  is 
suspended  a  human  head,  which  shows  that  we  are  actually 
dealing  with  beings  who  are  in  the  following  of  Osiris,  and  before 

each  is  the  hieroglyphic  for  "  linen,"  JJ^.     These  nine  remarkable 

objects  represent  beings  who  have  been  mummified  in  the  manner 
prescribed  by  Horus,  and  who  are  suitably  provided  with  funeral 
bandages ;  they  are  described  as  beings  whose  whole  life  is  in 
their  heads,  and  when  Ra  calls  to  them  by  their  names  they  imme- 
diately seize  his  enemies  everywhere  and  cut  off  their  heads 
with  their  knives.  Before  these  are  the  four  forms  of  the 
o^od   Ta-thenen,  ^\  '''''^ ,  which   are    depicted   as   rams   and   are 

described  as  "  form  one,"  O,  "form  two,"  S^?   "form  three," 

QQ^,  and  "  form  four,"  ^S^M-     On  each  side  of  the  way 

by  which  Ra  journeys  are  five  Circles. 

The  door  of  the  first  Circle,  Sesheta,  is  called  Tes-neb-terer. 

.  .  .  ^^  ^^37  ^^  li,  and  shuts  in  the  images  of  Tem,  Khepera, 

and  Shu ;  Avlien  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  which 
resembles  the  hummins;  of  bees.     The  door  of  the  second  Circle, 


240 


THE   CIRCLES   OF   THE   THAT 


Tuat,  ^,  is  called  Tes-aha-Ta-thenen, 
and  shuts  in  the  images  of  Tefnut,  Seb,  and  Nut ;  when  Ra  sjDeaks 
to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  Avhich  resembles  that  of  weeping 
women.  The  door  of  the  third  Circle,  As-neteru,  (]  ^  p  crz:  |  i , 
is  called  Tes-khem-baiu, 


,^     ,  and  shuts  in  the  images 

of  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus  ;  when  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer 
in  a  voice  which  resembles  that  of  men  who  moan.     The  door  of 


•.'•■•■r  ■••■':•'.••■■•»•.•.'•:  •■'•'••i :;/--v;<:";.'Al-.'::;>i--v:\.'.-./.v.-;.v'.--v.-..-.-.t'.vu-;. 


The  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night. 


the  fourth  Circle,  Aakebi,  (jl 
em-thehen-neteru, ' 


i~vr-i 


S  J  (1(1  "H^  ,  is  called  Tes-sheta- 
i^T  ,  and  shuts  in  the  images 


of  Ka-Amentet,  \J  | ,  Ba-neteru,  ^  "J^  ^"^ ,  and  Rem-neteru, 
^  111 '  ^^^^  ^^  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  which 
is  like  that  of  bulls  and  men  when  they  make  lamentation.     The 

—   "  ■      .^L_e    III 


door    of    the   fifth    Circle,   Nebt-semu-nefu,     ^    ^^  |]  j  "^ 


THE   CIRCLES    OF   THE   TUAT  241 

is  called  Tes-sma-kekui,  ^  P  ^  T  '1  ^  ^  ^^  "^^^  ^^^  ^^^*^ 
in  the  images  of  Khatri,  ^  (](j,  Affi,  (]  ^  M  <©<«,  and  Aranbfi, 

I] fl  j    \I  \\ ;  when  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice 

which  is  like  unto  that  of  him  that  maketh  suppHcation  in  terror. 
These  five  Circles  are  shut  in  by  a  door  called  Tes-khaibit-tuatiu, 

^  TTT  i  ^  ^  ^^^  ^  i  •  ^^®  ^^*^^  ^^  *^®  ^^^*^  ^^^^1^  i^  ^^^®^ 
Tes-ermen-ta    ^^  ^^^^  '^^'^  "^^    ^iid  shuts  in  some  divine  beinors 

'    ^'5?:^  t^^^^  ,^_Z]  I     33:' 

whose  attributes  are  not  yet  all  clearly  defined ;  when  Ea  speaks 
to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  which  is  like  that  of  male  cats  when 
they  mew.     The   door  of  the   seventh    Circle,   Hetemet-khemiu, 

li'^^^^^ll  ^1^'    ^^    ^^^^®^    Tes  -  Ra  -  khefti  -  f, 
o 


^'^^-.O      I     ^ 


1 1 1  ^^^=- ,  and    shuts   in  Nut,  Ta,  and   Sebeq-hra, 

I  J  A  V.  '^;  when  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  which 
is   like  the  roar  of  the  living.      The   door  of  the  eighth   Circle, 


D 


Hap  -  semu  -  s,  "w  ^^ ^  ^'^    ^^    i  ,  is  called  Tes  -  sekhem  -  aru, 

;^;—  1 Y  ^  ^w  '  -^^^>-  y>  -  ■)  ^^^  shuts  in  four  gods ;  ^  when  Ra 
speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  which  is  like  the  shouts  of 
war  heard   in  the  battle  of  Nu.     The  door  of  the  ninth  Circle, 

Sehert-baiu-s,  — »—  S    "^   <,>%  ^^, '        cz3i ,  is  called  Tes-sept-nestu, 

;^^  A  -^  "^   V  Qq  ' '  ^^^   shuts   in   four   gods  ;  ^    when   Ra 

speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a  voice  which  is  like  that  of  the 
cry   of  the   divine    hawk   of    Horus.      The    door   of    the    tenth 

Circle,  Aat-setekau,   '^^  \\    '^    "^^  V^  (1  ^ ,  is   called  Tes-khu, 

^—  '^^  ®  ^  ;  I  jj  1 ,  and  shuts  in  four  gods  in  the  form  of  uraei 

>  SJ  n  ^  ^Tp,  Hebset     ^^^^^  ^  Senket;   c=^i3  J  "J^  ^  :],  Tebat;   and 
Temtet,  t^    ^    , 

"'  ^^^^  \  F=^,  Keku;    ^^^^^  §   M,  Menhi;    ^    '  '^  i,  Tcher-kliu;    aud 

^ -"^    -21  AAAAAA    All  ■< >      _/ J        I 


,  Khebs-ta. 


242  THE   NINTH   HOUR 

who  rest  upon  1  1  ;  when  Ka  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a 
voice  which  is  like  the  twittering  and  chattering  of  water-fowl  on 
a  lake.     The  last  five  Circles  are  shut  in  by  a  door  called  Tes-am- 


mit-em-sheta-f,    ;^^^||.^(]i|^,=^ 

The    Ninth    Hour,   which   is    called    Tdatet-maket-neb-s/ 
brings  us  into  a   country  which  is  called  the  "hidden  Circle  of 

"  Amentet " ;     the    name    of    the    city    is    Bes-aru,    J  — «—  "^y^ 

n  <si- v^  IN  I  ^ J'   and    the    name     of     its    pylon    is    Sa-Akeb, 

-^*-  ^  ^  ffl    y^^.     "When  the   srreat    orod    arriveth   in   this 

JSr     _M^        ^   lliiillll'  ^ 

*'  Circle  he  addresseth  from  his  boat  the  gods  who  are  therein,  and 
^'  the  sailors  who  are  in  his  boat  are  content  with  this  city."  The 
man  who  shall  make  a  copy  of  the  scenes  of  this  Hour,  and  shall 
know  the  names  of  the  gods  and  their  places  in  Amentet  shall 
attain  to  a  position  in  Amentet,  and  he  shall  stand  up  in  the 
presence  of  the  lord  of  affairs  and  shall  enjoy  the  power  of  making 

what  he  says  to  come  to  pass  with  the  divine  assessors,  J  |  p  "^  3  i , 

on  the  day  of  reckoning  up  accounts  by  Per-aa  (Pharaoh).  The 
illustrated  edition  of  this  Hour  shows  us  the  boat  of  the  god 
travelling  on  as  before,  and  in  front  of  it  are  twelve  divine  rowers, 

each  with  his  paddle  ;  among  these  are  Khenu,  N^  „  ,  Akhem- 
sek-f,  (]  ®  ^  ^,  Akhem-urt-f,  [j  e  ^|^  ^,  Akhem-hemi-f, 
\\  ®  ^^  ^  (]()  '^^=-,  Akhem-khemes-f,  \\  ®  ^^  ®  "~T  "^^^^  Khen- 
unnut-f,  \^  '  .^-Q,^^^^-,  Hapti-ta-f,  A  ^^^  Hetep-uaa, 
--^^  XinS  1  Neter-neteru,   ]    |  i  -  Tcha-Tuat,  j    ^  ,  and  Tepi, 


The  duty  of  these  sailors  is  not  only  to  row,  but  also  to  throw  water 
with  their  paddles  upon  the  spirits  who  stand  on  each  bank  of  the 
river  whereon  the  god  sails,  and  they  have  to  lead  the  soul  of  Ra 
to  the  place  where  he  will  reanimate  the  disk.  Before  these 
sailors,  resting  on  baskets,  are  the  three  gods  who  give  abundant 

m  ^  i^        Jr  U  1 


244  THE  NINTH   HOUR 

offerings,  Muti-khenti-Tuat,  ^  Jg^  ^^  ffdl  ^  vv  ^  n'  ^^sti-khenti- 
Tuat  ^  M^^^  ^  ^  "^  ,  and  Nebt-riu-khent-Tuat,  ^^"^  tf^ 
l]TK  ^  .  On  the  right  the  boat  of  Ra  passes  twelve  gods,  each 
seated  on  j  1^ ,  and  twelve  goddesses ;  these  last  are  said  to  breathe 
after  he  has  saluted  them,  and  after  they  have  heard  his  voice, 
and  their  duty  is  to  utter  words  of  power  Avherewith  they  are 
to  surround  the  hidden  soul,  and  thereby  to  cause  life  and 
streno-th  to  rise  up  in  Osiris.     The  names  of  these  are : — Nehata 

-j:^  ^  ^,  Teba,  ===  J  %.  |,  Ariti,  ^  ^  (](|'^,  Menkhet 
'^H,  Hebs,  y  —  T,  Nebti,  ^,  Asti-neter,  jj  ^  c^  ^ 
Asti-paut,     fj^cr^®,    Hetemet-khu,    l^j^^"^'    Neb-pat 
^  I ,  Temtu,  c^  ^  ^  ,  Men-a,  =^  ll  _.,  Perit,  ^ 


^    O  I 


Shemat-khu,    ™  ^  '^  j ,    Nebt-shat,      ^    -— a  ^   ^   ^ ,    Nebt-shef- 

shefet,  Y™™-^'    Aat-aatet,    ^^  ^|- ()  ^T  ttff  j , 
Nebt-setau,  ^^  "^  1^  %  j ,  Hent-nut-s,  l'^^^  ®  — ,  Nebt- 


1  Av   /Wy>^rsA 

mat,  yU      I,    Tesert-ant,    -n  U^^.)    Aat-khu,     o -^^ 

'^  ^  ii  ^ '    Sekhet-metu,      ^  ^  |  ^  |.     Netert-en-khentet-Ra, 

"i  <:^  AAA^  A/^  ^  O  ^     Qj2  the  left  are  twelve  uraei,  each  of  whom 

rests  on  I!  1  ,  and  sends  out  fire  through  his  mouth  ;  they  are  said 
to  kindle  the  fire  for  the  god  who  is  in  the  Tuat  with  the  fire 
which  is  in  their  mouths,  and  when  the  god  has  passed  on  his  way 
they  eat  up  the  fire  which  they  poured  forth  before  Ra  went 
by.  The  object  of  the  fire  was,  of  course,  to  show  light  on  his 
path.  Before  these  uraei  come  the  nine  gods  of  cultivation  and  of 
husbandry,  who  are  under  the  direction  of  a  god  in  mummified 
form ;  these  nine  are  the  sekhtiu,  jl^tlfl  ^  ^  i ,  or  "  field-labourers," 

of  the  god  Her-she-tuati,  ^^  lttd  ^^  ^^^,^'  *^^®^^'  leader, 
and  they  perform  all  the  works  connected  Avith  the  ploughing  and 
watering  of  the  fields. 


246  THE   TENTH    HOUR 

The  Tenth  Houe,  which  is  called  Tentit-uhesqet-khat-ab/ 
brings   Ra   in   his   boat    to    the    city   called    Metchet-qat-utebu, 

"ftx  =^  =  ^  ^^°  II J  ^  I'll'T  •  '"* ''"  py'"''  "*^'"*  ^^- 

kheperu-mes-aru,  ^"^  J]  S  '^''^  fl-  '  ffl  r  ®  s'^^^'v  1 1  '  '™™"' 
The  boat  of  the  sun  travels  on  as  before,  but  Ra  again  holds  a 
serpent  in  his  hand  after  the  manner  of  a  staff.     Immediately  in 

front  is  the  serpent  Thes-hrau,    ^^'^'^^  '^  i ,  with  a  head  at  each  end 

H—        1         I 

of  his  body ;  on  one  head  is  the  white  crown,  and  on  the  other 
the  red  crown ;  he  has  two  pairs  of  human  legs,  one  pair  turned 
towards  the  right,  and  the  other  pair  towards  the  left.  His 
body  is  bent  in  the  form  of  a  pair  of  horns,  and  in  the  curve  stands 
Khent-Heru,   ^  p==^,  in  the  form  of  a  black  hawk ;  on  the  left  is 

the  goddess  of  the  north,  Neith,  with  her  two  bows,  |  |,  and  on 

the  rio;ht  is  the  sroddess  Hert-ermen,  .     Next  comes  a  boat 

containing  the  serpent  Ankh-ta,  and  before  it  are  three  groups, 
each  containing  four  gods.  The  gods  of  the  first  group  have  solar 
disks   for   heads,    and    are    armed   with   arrows,    and   are   called 

Tepthera,    ^  n ,    Shesera,    — «—  (1 ,  Temau,         <^  ^ ,  and  Utu, 

v:^  cis^  v^.     The  gods  of  the  second  group  carry  each  a  javelin, 

and  are  called  Setu,  ^  ,  Rau,  v\ ,  Khesfu,   — «—  ^ ,  and 

Nekenu,    ^^z::::^^  Q ;  and  the  gods  of  the  third  group  carry  each  a 

bow,  and  are  called  Pesthi,  ,  Shemerthi,     ^  w ,  Thesu, 

^^°*^  v\  ;  ,  and  Kha-a,  :  | a .     All  these  gods  accompany  Ra 

as  he  goes  towards  the  east,  and  they  slay  all  his  enemies  who 
live  in  the  darkness,  and  wreak  special  vengeance  on  the  serpent 
Neha-hra  ;  they  escort  the  god  to  the  very  limits  of  the  Hour,  and 
form  part  of  his  train  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  sky.     The  name 

of  the  region  traversed  by  Ra  in  this  Hour  is  Akert,  u    ^      '^  '. 

As  the  boat  of  Ra  passes  the  god  sees  the  "living  beetle,"  ■¥•, 

born  in  the  presence  of  the  god  P-ankhi,  n  aaaw.  M  ,  and  sees  how  he 


IPCn^-^?l>* 


w 


248  THE   TENTH   HOUR 

pushes  before  him  his  zone,  .      Next  Ave  have  the   two 

serpents,    Menenui,    ^^  J.  J.  v::.  w,    standing  on   their  tails,  and 

holding  on  their  bent  necks  a  solar  disk ;  and  two  seated  personifi- 
cations of  the  South  and  North ;  and  the  two  goddesses,  Netheth, 

s==> ,   and    Kenat,  l\  ^ ,  one  of  whom   supports  the   hatchet, 

and  the  other  the  solar  disk,  which  rests  upon  it,  h  .  From  the 
serpents  go  forth  two  goddesses,  those  of  the  East  and  West ;  and 
from  the  axe,  called  Seftit,  "^^-^^  fjl]  "^  | '  S^  forth  the  goddesses  of 
the  East  and  West  also  ;  i.e.,  these  goddesses  are  the  souls  of  the 
serpents  and  of  the  axe,  which  come  forth  to  look  upon  the  Sun- 
god,  and  as  soon  as  he  has  passed  they  return  into  their  material 
bodies. 

Next  Ra  sees  eight  ^  goddesses  advancing  to  a  seated  dog- 
headed  god,  who  presents  to  them  the  Eye  of  Horus,  ^^,  and 
their  duty  is  to  see  that  it  is  in  good  condition,  and  to  take  care  of 
it  and  ^^rotect  it,  so  that  it  may  shine  daily.     Besides  these  there 

come  the  eight  gods  called  Ermenui,  ,    Neb-aqet,    ^^37         , 


Tua-khu,   1  ^^  ®  i,  Her-she-taiu,    '=^^,  Sem-Heru,  ^''^  v^, 

Tua-Heru,  ji  ^^^ ,  Khenti-ast-f,  ^B?  jj  '^'^^ '  ^^^  Khenti-ment, 
"^^         1 ;  the  duty  of  these  gods,  who  lived  by  the  breath  of  the 

great  god,  was  to  wreck  the  bodies  and  scatter  the  swathings  of 
the  enemies  of  Ra.  On  his  left  hand  Ra  passed  in  his  journey 
through  this  Hour  Horus,  and  twelve  beings  who  dive  and  swim 
and  perform  evolutions  in  tanks  of  water.  These  are  said  to 
beat  the  water  in  their  attempts  to  recover  their  breath,  and  Ra 
calls  upon  them  to  fill  themselves  with  the  water  of  the  celestial 
Nile,  and  promises  that  their  members  shall  not  suffer  corruption, 
and  that  their  bodies  shall  not  perish ;  he  decrees  that  they  shall 

1  I.e.,    Sekhet,   V  ^ ,    Menkert,  <z^ ,    Huntheth,    Q  JL  ,   Usit, 

I  (J  0^5  Abet-neteru-s,   \    j  i  — *— ^  Aritatheth,  g-^,  Ahat, o  §  y 

and  Themath, 


^T~~^ 


THE   TENTH   HOUR 


249 


be  masters  of  their  own  arms  in  their  water  because  they  are  the 
denizens  of  Nu,  and  that  their  souls  shall  live.     Beyond  these  are 


four  goddesses,  each  with  a  serpent  hanging  down  her  back  with 
its  head  above  her  own,  and  with  them  is  a  standard  surmounted 


250  THE   ELEVENTH   HOUR 

by  the  head  of  Set,  If.     This  god  was  the  guardian  of  the  Tenth 

Hour,  and  when  Ra  was  about  to  pass  from  it  into  the  eastern  part 
of  the  sky,  Set  was  believed  to  rouse  himself  and  to  make  the 
journey  with  him.  The  four  goddesses  "  who  lived  by  their 
heads,"  shed  light  on  the  path  of  Ra. 

The    Eleventh    Hour,    which    is    called    Sebuit-nebt-uaa- 
KHESFET-SEBAU-EM-PERT-F,^  brings  US  to  a  city  called  Re-qerert-apt- 

khat,      ,      <=>      n  il  ^fc\     O  ^,  with  a  pylon  bearino^  the 


/VW^/V'^ 


name  of  Sekhen-tuatiu,      ^  'k  '^  cr:zi  J\  i  niiiinr;  the  object  of 


the  texts  and  the  illustrations  which  accompany  it  was  to  enable 
the  spirits  of  the  dead  to  become  participators  with  the  gods,  and 
to  provide  them  witli  such  things  as  were  necessary  for  their 
equipment  both  in  heaven  and  upon  earth.  Ra  stands  as  usual  in 
his  boat,  but  he  has  changed  the  serpent  which  he  held  in  his  hand 

as  a  sceptre  for  the  ordinary  sceptre,  1 ,  and  on  the  bows  of  the 
boat  we  see  a  solar  disk,  surrounded  by  a  serpent ;  the  name  of  this 

disk  is      ,,        ,     I   or  — *-  -^g^^  ,  Pestu  or  Pestet,  and  it  is  probably 

connected  with  some  well-known  star  Avhicli  rose  heliacally  at 
certain  seasons  of  the  year.  The  duty  of  the  disk  was  to  guide 
the  boat  of  the  great  god  along  the  paths  which  led  to  that  part 
of  the  Tuat,  at  the  end  of  the  Eleventh  Hour,  where  the  darkness 
faded  away  ;  the  texts  call  the  darkness  at  this  point  keku  keskesu, 

V  *~^  '    '     ^•®''  ^^^®    opposite    of    the    l-ehii    samui^ 

\\  "TT^    Y   ^         ^  I .  or  the   thick,    solid    darkness    which 


filled  the  greater  part  of  the  Tuat.     Before  the  boat  of  Ra  are 
twelve  gods,  who  carry  upon  their  heads  the  serpent  Mehen  to  the 

eastern   part  of  the   sky ;    their   names   are  : — Fa,  %\ ,   Ermenu, 


0,  Athpi,    <^   ^     [j[],Netru,  ^^,Shepu,    :^  D 


[zrzD  I  I  I  -ji^^ 


252  THE   ELEVENTH   HOUR 

I       II 1    ^  H /■■AA^JV'.  —M ^        C>CZ>C 


Sekhenu,     ^      ^  ,  Semsem,  ^^  ^^ ,  and  Mehni, 

Before  these  are  : — 1.  A  uraeus  wearing  the  crown  of  the  North 
and  a  human  head  ;  and,  2.  A  uraeus  from  the  back  of  which 
emero^es  the  white  crown,  with  a  human  head  on  each  side  of  it. 


The  first  of  these  is  called  Sem-shet,  '^  ,  and  the  second 
Sem-Nebt-het,  "^]T;  the  human  heads  on  the  white  crown  only- 
come  forth  when  Ra  is  passing  by,  and  when  he  has  departed  they 
disappear.  Next  we  have  figures  of  the  four  forms  of  the  goddess 
Neith,   two  of  them  wearing  the  white  crown,  and  two  the  red  ; 

they  are  called  Neith  the  fecundator,     ^    ,  in  allusion  to  the  belief 
that  this  goddess  begat  herself,  Neith  of  the  red  crown,     ^    >/, 

Neith  of  the  white  crown,  r),  and  Neith  the  child,  ; 

these  goddesses  came  into  being  as  soon  as  they  heard  the  voice  of 
Ra,  and  their  duty  was  to  guard  the  gate  of  Sai's,  "^^  fl  (]  ^  ?  *^® 


unknown,  the  unseen,  the  invisible,  ^       ^    '^i-^-         O  O  — fu.  <=> 

This  Circle  of  the  Tuat  through  which  the  god  travels  to  appear  in 
the  mountain  of  the  sunrise  contains  many  wonderful  beings,  and 
it  is  said  to  ''  swallow  always  the  forms  therein  in  the  presence  of 

"  the  god  who  knoweth,     ^    Jj,  who  is  in  this  city,  and  afterwards 

"  it  giveth  them  for  the  births  of  those  who  are  to  come  into  being 
"on  this  earth."     Among  these  are: — A  god  with  the  solar  disk 

for  a  head  ;  from  it  project  two  human  heads,  one  wearing  >/,  and 

the  other  Q.     He  is  called  Aper-hra-neb-tchetta,    d     "^    ^1 ,  and 

stands  facing  a  god  having  two  heads,  but  without  crowns,  whose 
name  is  Tepui,  @@.  In  the  space  between  we  see  a  serpent 
provided  with  a  pair  of  wings  and  four  human  legs  and  feet,  facing 

the   serpent  Shetu,  ^,  upon  the  back  of  which  is  seated  a 

god ;  the  heads  of  both  serpents  are  among  a  number  of  stars. 
Standing   by   the   side   of    the    winged    serpent,    which    is   called 

Tchet-s,    oTTl ,  is  a  god  called  Petra,        "^  [1  ^^^^  ,  with  his  arms 

stretched  out  in  such  a  way  as  to  keep  the  wings  wide  apart ;  he 
has  on  his  head  a  disk,  and  his  neck  is  between  the  double  iitchat, 


m 


254  THE   ELEVENTH   HOUR 

^?^S'     ^^^  descriptive  text  says  that  the  god  with  a  disk  and 

two  heads  is  "he    who    stands,  of    p^  ,  by  Ra,"  ^  and  that  he 

never  leaves  his  place  in  the  Tuat.  The  god  who  stands  by  the 
Avinged  serpent  is  Temu,  who  springs  out  of  the  reptile's  back 
when  Rii  addresses  it;  but  as  soon  as  the  words  cease  Temu 
disappears  into  the  serpent.  The  second  serpent  is  the  con- 
stellation Shetu,  i.e.,  the  Tortoise,  and  its  soul  appears  in  human 
form  on  its  back  as  soon  as  Ra  addresses  it,  but  when  the  words 
have  ceased  like  Temu  it  disappears  into  its  body.  The  duty  of 
Shetu  was  to  ^'  emit  life  for  Ra  every  day." 

Before  these  march  Khnemu  and  ten  gods,  five  of  whom  have 
no  arms ;  from  the  neck  of  one  of  these  project  the  heads  of  two 
serpents.^  From  the  descriptive  text  we  learn  that  the  souls  of 
these  gods  lived  on  the  hidden  light  of  Ra  ;  that  the  breath  of  his 
mouth  gave  them  life,  and  that  their  souls  fed  upon  the  provisions 
which  were  stored  in  his  boat ;  their  chief  duty  was  to  be  with  and 
in  attendance  upon  the  god.  Besides  these  gods  we  also  have  in 
this  Hour  four  goddesses,  each  of  whom  sits  upon  the  bodies  of 
two  uraei,  which  are  bent  upwards  in  such  a  way  as  to  form  a 
seat ;  the  heads  of  each  pair  of  uraei  are  reared  up  in  front  of  the 
knees  of  the  goddess,  who  is  sitting  on  their  backs,  and  whose  feet 
rest  upon  their  necks.  Each  goddess  has  her  right  hand  raised  as 
if  to  hide  her  face,  and  with  her  left  she  grasps  the  body  of  one 
of  the  uraei.  It  is  possible  that  the  uraei  are  only  four  in  number, 
and  that   they  are  two-headed ;    the  goddesses  are  called  Nebt- 

ankhiu,  ^  ■¥• '  •  Nebt-khu,  ^  ^  i ,  Nert,  <^  W^  ^^^ 
Hent  (?)-neteru,  AA^~v^  |  .  The  descriptive  text  says  that  the 
arms  of  these  beings    are  on  earth,  and  their  feet  in  the   thick 

^  M.  Maspero  speaks  of  him  as  the  "  agathodemon  "  of  Ra. 

-  The   names   are: — Khnem-renit,    R  i^l^  '^?   Nerta,    <^^ ,   Aaiu-f-em- 


A/wysA 


kha-nef , a  ,  Apt-taui,  %J     """    ,  Mer-en-aaui-f,  o ,  Aunaauif, 

(1  %^ g  ^^^— ,    Rest-f,   3^  ^    '^j   Tua-Heru,    -^  ^ ,    Maa,    -^ ,    Meskhti, 

and  Hepa,  fi 


THE    PITS   OF   THE    TUAT  255 

darkness,  and  as  long  as  tlie  god  is  speaking  to  them  they  utter 
cries  and  acclaim  him  ;  they  never  move  from  their  places,  and 
their  souls  live  upon  the  voices  of  the  uraei  which  go  forth  from 
their  feet  daily.  When  the  shadows  depart  the  winds  which  arise 
in  the  Tuat  are  diverted  from  the  faces  of  the  four  goddesses  by 
their  hands,  Avhicli  they  hold  up.  In  this  statement  we  seem  to 
have  an  allusion  to  the  keen,  fresh  wind  of  dawn  with  which  all 
travellers  in  the  desert  are  well  acquainted,  and  which  usually 
blows  about  one  hour  before  sunrise. 

In  the  region  on  the  left  hand  side  of  Ra  we  see  how 
punishment  is  inflicted  upon  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  in  it  we  have 
a  country  of  blazing  fire.  At  one  end  stands  Horus  with  a  disk, 
surrounded  by  a  uraeus,  upon  his  head,  holding  in  his  left  hand  a 
boomerang,  one  end  of  which  terminates  in  the  head  of  a  serpent ; 
the  idea  here  suggested  is  that  the  weapon  held  by  the  god  is  a 
real  serpent,  which  when  thrown  at  an  enemy  will  suddenly  attach 
itself  to  his  body  after  the  manner  of  the  vicious  uraeus.  The 
right  arm  of  Horus  rests  on  a  staff  wherewith  the  god  usually 
supports  himself,  and  before  him  rears  itself  a  huge  serpent  called 


^'  Set  of  millions  of  years,"  ^ ,    the  duty  of  which  was   to 

devour  any  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,  i.e.,  the  dead,  who  succeeded 
in  making  their  escape  from  the  fires  of  the  country  of  the 
Eleventh  Hour.  In  front  of  these  were  the  five  awful  chambers, 
or  pits  in  the  sky,  which  were  filled  with  the  red-hot  materials  of 
blazing  fires,  and  employed  to  consume  the  enemies  of  Ra. 

The  first  chamber  or  pit,  Hatet,  "w  e^:^,  was  fiUed  Avith  the 
bodies  of  fiends  who  were  dashing  out  their  own  brains  with  axes, 
^^^^  k"'  ^^^  ^^^  under  the  charge  of  a  lion-headed  goddess, 
called   Hert-Ketit-s,  ^^  H^^r'  ^^^   stood  by  its   side  and 

belched  fire  into  it  through  her  mouth  ;  when  the  fire  had  done  its 
work  on  the  wretched  creatures  they  were  hacked  to  pieces  by  the 
hu2:e  knife  which  she  held  in  both  her  hands.  The  second 
chamber  or  pit  was  also  filled  with  the  bodies  of  fiends,  and  was 

under  the  charge  of  a  woman  called  Hert-Hantua,  uP  ^^^  i  (j, 

who  spat  fire  upon  them  and  who  was  armed  with  a  monster  knife. 


256  THE  ELEVENTH   HOUR 

The  third  chamber  or  pit  was  filled  with  the  souls,  ^^^^'^' 
of  the  fiends,  and  was  under  the  charge  of  a  woman  called  Hert- 


Nekenit,  ^^:=:^  (1(1  "^>-  ^,  who  spat  fire  upon  them  and  who  was 

similarly  armed.  The  fourth  and  fifth  chambers,  which  were  under 
the  charge  of  similar  women,  called  H  ert-Nemmat-set,    ^    [^  m        ' 

and    Hert-sefu-s,    ^^^^  [1,  contained    the    shadows,  TT T , 

and  heads,  @®@,  of  the  damned.  Passing  by  these  chambers  we 
come  to  the  "  Valley  of  those  who  are  cast  down  headlong," 
u  ^  ^  ^=^^  Y>  1 1  which  is  represented  by  a  large  hollow  wherein 
four  men  are  standing  on  their  heads,  'ii'i'i;  next  to  this  are 
four  goddesses  of  the  desert,  each  of  whom  has  upon  her  head 
the  emblem  of  desert;    their  names    are   Pesi,  (1(1,    Rekhit, 


Her-sha-s,   f=^  a—*-,   and  Sait,    ^00^.     Each 


I   I   I 


name  has  a  meaning  something  like  "  fiery,"  and  refers  to  the 
goddesses  in  their  character  of  mistresses  of  the  blazing  desert. 
Finally,  behind  these  comes  the  god  Her-ut-f,  p=q  J^         ,  who 

was  in  some  way  connected  with  the  embalming  of  the  dead.  The 
descriptive  text  which  accompanies  these  scenes  makes  the  great 
god  Ra  command  "  his  father  Osiris  to  hack  in  pieces  the  bodies  of 
"  the  enemies  and  of  the  dead  who  are  cast  down  headlong." 

Then,  addressing  the  enemies  themselves,  he  tells  them  that 
when  his  father  Osiris  hath  smitten  them  for  destruction,  and  hath 
cut  in  pieces  their  spirits  and  souls,  and  hath  rent  asunder  their 
shadows,  and  hath  cut  off  their  heads  in  such  a  way  that  existence 
in  the  future  will  be  impossible  for  them,  they  will  be  cast  down 
headlong  into  burning  furnaces  from  which  there  is  neither  escape 
nor  deliverance,  and  Set  the  everlasting  snake  will  drive  his  flames 
against  them,  and  the  Lady  of  furnaces,  and  the  Lady  of  fiery  pits, 
and  the  Lady  of  slaughtering  blocks,  and  the  Lady  of  swords,  will 
drive  against  them  the  flames  which  come  forth  from  their  mouths, 
that  they  will  hack  them  in  pieces  in  such  wise  that  the  wretched 
beings  will  never  again  see  those  who  live  upon  the  earth.  The 
slaughter  of  the  enemies  is  ordered  to  be  performed  by  Horus,  the 
god  of  those  who  are  in  the  Tuat,  and  it  is  curious  to  note  that  the 


THE   TWELFTH   HOUR  257 

gods  his  companions  are  said  to  live  upon  the  voices  of  the  enemies 
who  are  slain,  and  on  the  shrieks  and  cries  of  the  souls  and 
shadows  which  are  cast  down  into  the  blazing,  fiery  pits. 

The  Twelfth  Hour,  Maa-nefert-Ra,^  brings  the  god  Ra  into 
the  Circle  which  is  on  the  confines  of  thick  darkness,  and  to  a  city 

called  Khepert-kekui-khaat-mest,  v^  i  ^    i  (f|  "^ , 

^  '    <^=>  c^=f=,  ^:z:^  Jl    I  ac==f=  I  111  111' 

with  its  pylon  called  Then-neteru,  i\\     .      In  this  region  the 

god  is  born  under  the  form  of  Khepera,     ^^^^  ffl  <=>  \>]\  ^  ^^^^ 

^  <==>  y,  and  Nu,  ^  |,  and  Nut,  O  ^  -  ^,  Hehu,  ||^^, 

and  Hehut,  O  y  '^  rlj  ?  come  into  the  Circle  when  he  is  born, 
and  when  he  goeth  forth  from  the  Tuat  and  resteth  in  the  Mantit, 
^^^  A.WVVA  Mo  ^n^,  boat,  and  when  he  riseth  on  the  body  ^  of  Nut. 

Ra  journeys  in  his  boat,  as  before,  but  the  solar  disk  which  was  at 
the  bows  in  the  Eleventh  Hour  is  no  longer  there,  and  its  place  is 
occupied  by  the  beetle  of  Khepera,  the  forerunner  of  the  rising 
sun.^  Twelve  gods  tow  the  boat,  not  over  a  river  or  over  the 
back  of  a  serpent  or  serpents,  but  completely  through  a  serpent ;  in 
front  the  tow-rope  is  held  by  the  hands  of  twelve  women.  This 
serpent  is  called  Ka-en-Ankh-neteru,  IwLi  ■¥•  T  ,  i.e.,  "  the  life 
of  the  gods,"  and  the  gods  who  draw  Af,  that  is  to  say,  Ra, 
through  it  are  his  "  loyal  servants,"  -^,  I ,  Amhhiu.  The  boat 
enters  the  serpent  at  his  tail  in  deep  darkness,  and  passing 
through  his  body  emerges  through  the  mouth  into  the  light  of 
day ;  the  god  in  his  boat  enters  the  snake  in  the  form  of  a  dead, 
old  Sun-god,  and  he  comes  forth  not  only  alive,  but  made  young 
again,  and  appears  in  the  sky  under  the  form  of  Khepera.  The 
"  loyal  servants "  of  Ra  are  the  souls  of  the  blessed  which  have 
been  so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  admission  into  his  boat  ;„  they  were 
his  devout  adorers  when  upon  earth,  and  the  reward  which  they 


->  '^    t^  o>^ 

i  0* 


I 

2  IJ  fi   >>  :  ^  word  sometimes  rendered  by  vulva,  pubis,  andflanJi 
^  See  Lanzone,  Domicile  des  Esprits,  pi.  v. 


258  THE   TWELFTH   HOUR 

obtain  for  their  fidelity  is  renewed  youth  and  a  new  birth  upon 
the  earth.  What  they  are  to  do  upon  earth  is  not  made  clear,  but 
it  is  evident  that  they  cannot  remain  there  for  an  indefinite 
period,  for  since  their  master  needs  to  be  re-born  daily  they  also 
must  need  re-birth  each  day.  It  is  doubtful,  if  we  judge  by  some 
passages,  if  they  came  to  the  earth  at  all,  and  it  is  far  more  likely 
that  their  enjoyment  consisted  in  journeying  about  at  will  through 
the  sky  and  looking  down  from  some  portion  of  it  upon  the  scenes 
of  their  old  life  than  in  making  hurried  visits  to  the  earth  daily. 

When  the  boat  of  Ra  has  passed  through  the  serpent  the 
twelve  women  or  goddesses,  mentioned  above,  take  the  rope  from 
the  gods  and  haul  it  on  to  the  paths  of  the  sky.  The  god  is 
accompanied  through  the  Twelfth  Hour  by: — 1.  Twelve  goddesses, 
each  bearing  a  serpent  on  her  head  and  shoulders,  and  2.  Twelve 
gods,  or  men,  with  their  hands  raised  in  adoration ;  all  these  are 
on  the  right  hand  side.  Each  deity  has  a  name,  which  is  Avritten 
in  front  of  his  or  her  figure.  The  uraei  of  the  goddesses  are  said 
to  proceed  from  them,  and  the  flames  which  drive  away  Apep 
come  forth  from  their  mouths.  The  goddesses  travel  with  the 
god  until  he  rises  on  this  earth,  but  after  this  they  return  to  their 
places.     The  duty  of  the  twelve  gods  is  to  praise  Ra.     On  the  left 

of  the   boat   we   have   the   gods  Nu,    000,  Nuth,  ,    Hehu, 

II  v^,  Hehut,  II   y^j  these   gods  are  "in  their  o^vn  bodies," 

\^^^    ^  AA,wvx    ^1         ,  and  they  go  to  Ra  in  heaven,  to  receive 

this  great  god  as  he  cometh  forth  to  them  in  the  eastern  part  of 
heaven  daily.     They  live  in  their  drrit,  i.e.,  hall  of  the  horizon, 

but  their  forms,  ^^  vj\  )  ""^^^ ,  of  the  Tuat  belong  to  this  Circle. 
Next  we  have  two  human-headed  gods,  a  bird-headed  god  called 
Nehui,  ppi  ^  IJiJ,  a  god  with  two  birds  heads  called  Ni,  (j  [j  , 
the  serpent  Nesmekhef,  "^  ^^  ®  'Wi^  and  four  human-headed 
gods ;  all  these  carry  paddles  on  their  right  shoulders.  The 
duty  of  the  gods  is  to  raise  up,  £=»  "I ,  the  disk  of  the  sun  daily, 
but  the  serjDent  Nesmekhef  slaughters  the  enemies  of  Ra ;  they 
travel  with  Ra  and  receive  their  spirits,  '^^  ©  s=5  ^^-^^^^  in   this 


OSIRIS,    GOVERNOR  OF   AMENTl  259 

Circle.  Before  these  are  ten  gods,  with  hands  raised  in  adoration/ 
Avho  are  described  as  the  kentiu,  ^  ^  ^  g  i ,  of  the  forms  of 
Osiris,  the  Governor  of  the  thick  darkness,  ^^^~~"^  w  v\  ^^^ 
Tw^"!^,  and  they  say  to  him,  "Live,  thou  Governor  of  thy 
"  darkness !  Live,  0  thou  who  art  great  in  all  things  !  Live,  0 
"  thou  Prince  of  Amentet,  Osiris,  thou  Governor  of  those  who  are 
"  in  Amenti !  Mayest  thou  live,  mayest  thou  live,  0  thou  who 
"  art  Governor  of  the  Tuat,  the  wind  of  Ra  is  to  thy  nostrils, 
"  the  breath  of  Khepera  is  with  thee,  thou  livest  and  they  live. 
"  Hail,  Osiris,  lord  of  the  living  ones  ;  the  gods  who  are  with 
"  Osiris  are  those  who  were  with  him  at  the  first  time,"  etc. 

The  allusion  here  is  to  the  death  and  burial  of  Osiris,  when 
Horus  carried  out  the  arrangements  which  had  to  be  made  for  the 
performance  of  the  general  ceremonies,  and  when  every  detail 
connected  with  mummification,  etc.,  was  thought  out  by  the  loving 
care  of  the  son  of  Osiris.  In  the  illustrated  version  of  the  Twelfth 
Hour,  published  by  Signor  Lanzone  (tav.  vii.),  we  have  represented 
the  semi-circular  wall  of  thick  darkness  which  forms  the  end  of  the 
Tuat  and  the  division  between  it  and  this  world.  Against  this 
wall,  in  the  lower  part  of  it,  lies  a  mummied  form,  representing 
Osiris,  and  called  Sem-Af,  ^^  Q^,  i.e.,  the  "Image  (or  Form)  of 
"  Af  "  ;  this  is  the  object  of  the  praises  which  the  last  two  groups 
of  gods  lavish  upon  him.  The  descriptive  text  says  concerning  the 
mummy,  "  He  who  is  in  this  picture  in  the  hidden  form  of  Horus  of 
"  thick  darkness  is  the  secret  image  which  Shu  makes  to  be  under 
"  Nut,  and  which  cometh  forth  from  Keb-ur  on  earth  in  this  form."^ 

'  Tuati,    J^    CTzn ,    Tes-kliu,    "'^:^  ''^^ ,    Themaru,         /  ,    Aakhbu, 

U     ^      J    V'  Sekhenu,     ^       ^    ,  Ermenii,      „    ,  Klienmi,     ^       ^    ,  Bunau, 
^_fl,  Aura,  £;n     ^     ,  Atliep,  (J     ^    ,  and  Am ,  -[J-. 


260  THE    SUN  S   NEW   BIRTH 

In  the  middle  of  the  wall  of  thick  darkness  is  a  red  disk,  from 
which  proceeds  a  human  head ;  this  is  the  "  image  of  Shu," 
"^>^  R ,  who  extends  his  arms  along  the  vaulted  wall,  and  of 
whose  body  one  part  is  in  the  Tuat  and  the  other  in  this  world. 
Immediately  above  the  head  of  the  god  is  the  beetle  of  Khepera, 

here  spelt    ®  Q,  which  makes  its  way  into  this  world  through  the 

opening  which  the  head  and  shoulders  of  Shu  have  made  in  the 
wall  of  thick  darkness.  Through  this  opening  the  boat  of  Ra  also 
was  enabled  to  pass  into  this  world,  and  the  god  continued  his 
journey  with  the  help  of  the  deities  who  towed  him  along ;  there 
is  no  doubt  about  this  because  the  tow-line  is  prolonged  to  the 
wall  of  thick  darkness.  As  Af,  the  dead  body  of  Ra,  passes  into 
our  world,  his  new  life  begins,  and  for  men  and  women  the  night 
passes  away,  and  a  new  day  is  born. 

We  have  now  traced  the  passage  of  the  Sun-god  through  the 

Tuat  as  it  was  imagined  by  those  who  believed  in  the  absolute 

supremacy  of  Osiris,  and  as  it  was  described  by  the  author  of  the 

Book  of  Pylons,  and  we  have  briefly  passed  through  its  divisions 

ag   described   in   the    Book    of   that    which    is    in   the   Tuat, 

throughout  which  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Ra  is  maintained.     It 

is   now  easy  to  see  that  these  two  works  represent  two  opposite 

and  conflicting  theories  as  to  the  future  life.     The  heaven  of  the 

devotees  of  Osiris  was  originally  most  materialistic,  and  the  life 

which   was   led   in  it   by   the   beatified   was,    to  all   intents   and 

purposes,  merely  a  continuation  of  the  life  led  by  men  and  women 

upon  earth  ;  the  heaven  of  the  priests  of  Ra  was  of  a  more  refined 

character,  and  it  lacked  the  grosser  characteristics  of  the  dwellers 

in  the  Elysian  Fields  of  Osiris.     Some  have  argued  from  the  facts 

about  the  Tuat  given  above  that  the  Egyptians  beheved  in  the 

existence  of  purgatory,  and  in  the  everlasting  punishment  of  the 

wicked  in  a  hell  of  fire,  and  in  the  reincarnation  of  souls,  and  in 

many  other  things  which  would  presuppose  the  holding  by  them 

of  doctrines  which  are  commonly  thought  to  be  the  products  of 

the  minds  of  modern  nations ;  but  the  facts  do  not  support  these 

beliefs.     Whichever  doctrine  of  the  future  life  we  take,  whether 

that  of  Osiris  or  that  of  Ra,  we  find  no  room  in  it  for  a  purgatory. 


DESTRUCTION   OF    THE    WICKED  261 

In  the  Judgment  which  took  place  before  Osiris  only  the  righteous 
were  permitted  to  enter  into  the  Elysian  Fields,  and  the  wicked 
were  destroyed  immediately  ;  in  other  words,  annihilation  was  the 
punishment  for  sin.  The  Egyptians  believed  largely  in  the 
efficacy  of  works,  and  in  addition  to  the  deeds  of  love  and  charity 
which  they  performed  in  all  periods,  strict  care  concerning  the 
ceremonies  of  religion,  worship,  and  of  the  funeral,  and  a  proper 
respect  and  reverence  for  words  of  power,  and  amulets,  and  sacred 
writings,  and  figures  were  demanded  from  them  by  priests  and 
religious  teachers  at  all  times.  There  was,  of  course,  a  large  class 
of  people  who  could  not  afford  costly  burials,  and  who  were  too 
poor  to  buy  even  cheap  amulets,  but  they  Avere  not  condemned  in 
the  Judgment  because  of  their  poverty ;  on  the  contrary,  they 
escaped  annihilation  and  were  admitted  by  Osiris  into  the  first 
division  of  the  Tuat,  where,  however,  they  were  compelled  to  stay 
because  they  did  not  know  the  words  of  power  which  would  enable 
them  to  continue  their  journey  through  the  remaining  divisions  of 
the  Underworld.  But  there  was  no  punishment  inflicted  upon 
them  because  they  had  been  both  poor  and  ignorant  in  this  world  ; 
they  merely  remained  in  the  place  to  which  their  religious  qualifi- 
cations enabled  them  to  attain,  and  each  evening,  or  each  night, 
they  were  made  glad  by  the  sight  of  the  great  god  Ra  as  he  sailed 
through  the  Tuat  in  his  boat,  and  they  rejoiced  in  his  daily  visit. 

The  beings  in  the  Tuat  of  Osiris  upon  whom  punishment  was 
inflicted  were  the  "  enemies  of  Osiris,"  and  these  were  usually  the 
"  enemies  of  Ra  "  ;  but  in  no  text  is  it  said  that  the  punishment 
which  they  had  to  endure  there  ever  obliterated  their  guilt, 
whatever  it  might  be,  or  that  when  the  proper  time  had  arrived 
they  would  be  allowed  to  proceed  into  another  division  of  the  Tuat 
where  their  punishment  would  be  lighter,  or  where  they  would 
undergo  none  at  all.  Though  a  man  could  earn  happiness  in  the 
realm  of  Osiris  or  in  that  of  Ra  by  his  good  works  on  earth,  and 
by  ceremonies  performed  at  his  funeral  by  duly  qualified  priests, 
and  by  the  presence  of  copies  of  religious  texts  which  were  buried 
with  him,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  when  once  his  soul 
reached  the  Underworld  it  could  ever  better  its  position  there 
either   by  suffering  punishment  or  by  the  performance  of  good 


262  OFFERINGS   TO   THE   DEAD 

works.  The  offerings  made  at  the  tombs  of  the  dead  were  for  the 
benefit  of  the  ha  or  double,  and  perhaps  for  the  animal  soul  which 
was  at  one  time  believed  to  exist  in  the  human  body,  but  neither 
the  offerings  nor  the  prayers  which  accompanied  them  seem  to 
have  been  able  to  remove  the  spirits  and  souls  of  the  dead  from  one 
division  of  the  Tuat  into  another,  or  to  modify  the  state  or 
condition  which  had  been  decreed  for  them.  Similarly,  there  is  no 
evidence  that  prayers  for  the  dead  or  offerings  would  ameliorate 
the  condition  of  those  who  had  successfully  passed  the  ordeal  of 
the  Judgment,  and  had  been  sent  by  Osiris  into  one  or  other  of  the 
habitations  of  his  kingdom. 


(     263     ) 


CHAPTER     VI 
HELL   AND    THE   DAMNED 


F  we  examine  the  doctrine  concerning  the  future  life  according 


I  to  the  priesthoods  of  Ra  we  find  still  less  room  for  a  purga- 
tory in  their  theological  system.  According  to  this  the  souls  of 
the  dead  assembled  in  Amentet,  i.e.,  the  "hidden"  region,  the 
Egyptian  Hades,  where  they  waited  for  the  boat  of  Ra  to  pass  by. 
When  the  god  appeared  those  who  had  been  his  worshippers  and 
adorers  on  earth,  and  who  were  fortunate  enough  to  have  secured 
the  words  of  power  which  would  enable  them  to  enter  the  boat  did 
so,  and  they  made  their  journey  with  him  through  the  Tuat. 
Under  his  protection  they  passed  through  all  the  dangers  which 
threatened  to  destroy  them,  and  continued  their  journey  through 
the  realms  of  Osiris  and  Seker,  and  at  length  appeared  with  Ra  in 
the  eastern  horizon  of  heaven  at  daybreak.  Once  there  they  were 
able  to  wander  about  heaven  at  will,  and  they  did  so,  presumably, 
until  the  time  of  sunset,  when  they  rejoined  the  god  in  his  boat, 
and  again  made  the  journey  through  the  Tuat  with  him.  Each 
division  of  the  Tuat,  apparently,  contained  a  host  of  beings  who 
wished  to  enter  the  boat  of  Ra,  but  could  not  do  so,  either  for 
want  of  the  necessary  words  of  power,  or  because  they  had  reached 
the  place  to  which  their  qualifications  entitled  them  ;  these  all, 
however,  received  great  benefit  from  the  nightly  visit  of  Ra,  and 
as  he  left  each  division  to  enter  the  next  they  were  filled  with 
great  sorrow,  and  many  of  them  ceased  to  exist  until  the  following 
night,  when  they  renewed  their  life  for  a  brief  period.  Many 
divisions  of  the  Tuat  contained  enemies  of  Ra,  who  were,  of  course, 
destroyed  without  mercy  by  the  followers  of  the  god ;  but  there  is 
no  reason  whatsoever  for  the  view  that  these  enemies  were  the 


264  HELL   AND   THE   DAMNED 

damned,  or  that  they  were  doomed  to  eternal  punishment.  At  the 
end  of  the  Tuat  was  a  region  where  certain  goddesses  presided  over 
pits  of  fire  and  superintended  the  destruction  of  the  bodies,  and 
spirits,  and  shadows,  and  heads  of  numbers  of  such  enemies,  and 
it  would  seem,  judging  by  the  knives  in  their  hands,  that  they 
hacked  the  bodies  to  pieces  before  they  were  burnt.  But  even 
these  were  not  punished  eternally,  for  as  soon  as  the  god  had 
passed  through  their  region  the  fires  went  out,  and  the  mere  fact 
that  he  was  able  to  appear  in  the  eastern  sky  proved  that  all  his 
enemies  were  destroyed.  Each  night  and  morning  Ra  destroyed 
the  hosts  of  enemies  who  attempted  to  bar  his  progress,  for  such 
enemies  perished  instantly  by  the  flames  which  went  forth  from 
the  divine  beings  whom  he  had  created. 

Originally,  too,  such  enemies  were  only  the  personifications  of 
the  powers  of  nature,  such  as  twilight,  darkness,  night,  gloom,  the 
blackness  of  eclipses,  fog,  mist,  vapour,  rain,  cloud,  storm,  wind, 
tempest,  hurricane,  and  the  like,  which  were  destroyed  daily  by 
Ra  and  his  fiery  beams.  Many,  in  fact  the  greater  number  of  such 
personifications,  were  endowed  by  Egyptian  artists  with  human 
forms,  and  the  pictures  of  the  scenes  of  their  destruction  by  fire 
were  supposed  by  many  to  represent  the  burning  of  the  souls  of 
the  damned.  The  ignorant  and  the  superstitious  did  not  under- 
stand that  the  Sun-god  slew  and  burned  with  fire  the  enemies  of 
each  night  and  morning  during  that  same  night  and  morning; 
each  rising  of  the  sun  was  the  result  of  the  annihilation  of  his 
foes  of  that  day.  It  may  be  urged  that  these  foes  were  always 
the  same  because  they  were  always  of  the  same  kind,  but  the 
Egyptians  did  not  think  so,  and  they  believed  that  a  new  host  of 
foes  appeared  to  attack  Ra  each  night  and  morning.  But  even 
had  they  thought  so,  the  punishment  was  only  intermittent, 
and  it  was  only  renewed  during  that  part  of  each  night  which 
immediately  preceded  the  dawn,  and  during  the  interval  between 
dawn  and  sunrise.  The  souls  of  the  damned  could  have  done 
nothing  to  hinder  the  progress  of  Ra,  and  the  Egyptians  never 
imagined  that  they  did,  but  it  is  possible  that  in  late  dynastic 
times  certain  schools  of  theological  thought  in  Egypt,  being 
dissatisfied  Avith  and  unconvinced  of  the  accuracy  of  the  theory  of 


HELL   AND   THE   DAMNED  265 

the  annihilation  of  the  wicked,  assigned  to  evil  souls  dwelling- 
places  with  the  personifications  of  the  powers  of  nature  already- 
mentioned  in  the  Tuat.  The  spears  which  pierced  the  enemies  of 
Ra  were  the  fiery  rays  of  the  sun,  and  the  knives  which  hacked 
their  bodies  in  pieces  were  his  flames  of  fire ;  and  the  lakes  and 
pits  of  fire  were  suggested  to  the  minds  of  the  primitive  Egyptians 
by  the  fiery  splendour  which  filled  the  eastern  heavens  at  sunrise. 
They  certainly  did  not  believe  in  everlasting  punishment,  and 
there  is  nothing  in  the  texts  which  will  support  the  view  that  they 
did ;  in  fact,  the  doctrines  of  purgatory  and  hell  which  were 
promulgated  during  the  Middle  Ages  in  Europe  with  such  success 
find  no  equivalents  in  the  ancient  Egyptian  religion.  Apart  from 
the  general  characteristics  of  their  religion  the  Egyptians  were 
too  practical  to  entertain  the  idea  of  repeated  destructions  or 
consumings  by  fire  of  the  same  body,  but  had  they  done  so  we 
should  certainly  have  found  some  texts  which  had  been  composed 
to  avert  such  an  awful  doom.  They  mummified  the  bodies  of 
their  dead  in  the  earliest  times  because  they  expected  them  to  rise 
again,  and  they  did  so  in  later  times  because  they  believed  that 
a  spiritual  body  would  grow  out  of  them ;  they  never  expected 
to  obtain  a  second  physical  body  in  the  Underworld,  and  therefore 
they  took  the  greatest  care  to  preserve,  by  means  of  magical 
ceremonies  and  words,  the  bodies  in  which  they  lived  in  as 
complete  a  form  as  possible.  The  destruction  of  the  body  involved 
the  ruin  of  the  ha,  or  double,  and  of  the  shadow,  and  of  many  of 
the  mental  and  spiritual  constituents  of  man  ;  and  the  Egyptians 
regarded  the  death  of  the  body  with  such  dismay  that,  fearing  lest 
the  spiritual  body  which  sprang  from  it  after  death  might  be  in 
danger  of  dying,  they  caused  prayers  to  be  composed  for  the 
purpose  of  averting  from  it  the  "  second  death  "  and  the  possibility 
of  its  dying  a  second  time. 

We  may  see,  however,  that  although  the  Egyptians  had  no 
hell  for  souls  in  the  mediaeval  acceptance  of  the  term,  their  fiery 
pits,  and  fiends,  and  devils,  and  enemies  of  Ra  formed  the 
foundations  of  the  hells  of  later  peoples  like  the  Hebrews,  and 
even  of  the  descendants  of  the  Egyptians  who  became  Christians 
i.e.,  the  Copts.     Many  proofs  of  this  fact  may  be  found  in  Coptic 


266  OUTER   DARKNESS 

literature  as  the  following  instances  will  show.  In  "  Pistis 
Sophia,"  ^  we  have  the  Virgin  Mary  asking  Jesus,  her  Lord,  to  give 
her  a  description  of  "  outer  darkness,"  ^  and  to  tell  her  how  many- 
places  of  punishment  there  are  in  it.  Our  Lord  replies,  "  The 
"  outer  darkness  is  a  great  serpent,  the  tail  of  which  is  in  its 
"  mouth,  and  it  is  outside  the  whole  world,  and  surroundeth  the 
"  whole  world  ;  in  it  there  are  many  places  of  punishment,  and  it 
"  containeth  twelve  halls  wherein  severe  punishment  is  inflicted. 
"  In  each  hall  is  a  governor,  but  the  face  of  each  governor  difFereth 
"  from  that  of  his  neighbour.  The  governor  of  the  first  hall  hath 
"  the  face  of  a  crocodile,  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth.  From  the 
"  mouth  of  the  serpent  proceed  all  ice,  and  all  dust,  and  all  cold, 
*'  and  every  kind  of  disease  and  sickness ;  and  the  true  name  by 
"  which  they  call  him  in  his  place  is  Enkhthonin.  And  the 
"  governor  of  the  second  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  cat, 
"  and  they  call  him  in  his  place  Kharakhae.  And  the  governor 
"  of  the  third  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  dog,  and 
"  they  call  him  in  his  place  Arkharokh.  And  the  governor  of  the 
"  fourth  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  serpent,  and  they 
"  call  him  in  his  place  Akhrokhar.  And  the  governor  of  the  fifth 
"  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  black  ox,^  and  they  call 
"  him  in  his  place  Markhour.  And  the  governor  of  the  sixth  hall 
"  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  goat,  and  they  call  him  in  his 
"  place  Lamkhamor.  And  the  governor  of  the  seventh  hall  hath 
"  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  bear,  and  they  call  him  as  his  true 
"  name  Lonkhar.  And  the  governor  of  the  eighth  hall  hath  as 
"  his  true  face  the  face  of  a  vulture,  and  they  call  him  in  his  place 
"  Laraokh.  And  the  governor  of  the  ninth  hall  hath  as  his  true 
"  face  the  face  of  a  basilisk,  and  they  call  him  in  his  place 
"  Arkheokh.  And  in  the  tenth  hall  there  are  many  governors, 
"  and  there  is  there  a  serpent  with  seven  heads,  each  head  having 
"  its  [own]  true  face,  and  he  who  is  over  them  all  in  his  place  they 
"  call  Xarmarokh.     And  in  the    eleventh   hall   there    are   many 

^  See   Pistis  Sophia.     Opus   Gnosticum   Valentino  atljucli cation,  ed.   Schwartze, 
Berlin,  1851. 

3  OYg,0  SJ.3J.A.C£  H  K^^JLIG. 


THE   HELL   OF   THE   GNOSTICS  267 

*'  governors,  and  there  are  there  seven  heads,  each  of  them  having 
"  as  its  true  face  the  face  of  a  cat,  and  the  greatest  of  them,  who  is 
"  over  them,  they  call  in  his  place  Rhokhar.  And  in  the  twelfth 
"  hall  there  are  many  great  governors,  and  there  are  there  seven 
"  heads,  each  of  them  having  as  its  true  face  the  face  of  a  dog,  and 
"  the  greatest,  who  is  over  them,  they  call  in  his  place  Khremaor. 
"  These  twelve  governors  are  in  the  serpent  of  outer  darkness,  and 
"  each  of  them  hath  a  name  according  to  the  hour,  and  each  of 
"  them  changeth  his  face  according  to  the  hour."  ^ 

It  is  quite  clear  that  in  the  above  extract  from  the  famous 
Gnostic  work  we  have  a  series  of  chambers  in  the  outer  darkness 
which  has  been  borrowed  from  the  twelve  divisions  of  the  Egyptian 
Tuat  already  described,  and  the  reader  has  only  to  compare  the 
vignettes  to  Chapters  cxliv.  and  cxlv.  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  with 
the  extract  from  "  Pistis  Sophia"  to  see  how  close  the  borrowing 
has  been.  An  examination  of  another  great  Gnostic  work, 
generally  known  as  the  "Book  of  leu,"^  proves  that  the  Under- 
world of  the  Gnostics  was  nothing  but  a  modified  form  of  the 
Amentet  or  Amenti  of  the  Egyptians,  to  which  were  added 
characteristics  derived  from  the  religious  systems  of  the  Hebrews 
and  Greeks.  The  Gnostic  rivers  and  seas  of  fire  are  nothing  but 
equivalents  of  those  mentioned  in  the  Booh  of  the  Bead,  and  the 
beings  in  Amenti,  and  Chaos,  and  Outer  Darkness  are  derived,  in 
respect  of  form,  from  ancient  Egyptian  models.  The  great  dragon 
of  Outer  Darkness  and  his  twelve  halls,  and  their  twelve  guardians 
or  governors  who  change  their  names  and  forms  every  hour  are, 
after  all,  only  modifications  of  the  old  Egyptian  system  of  the 
Twelve  Pylons  or  Twelve  Hours  which  formed  the  Underworld- 
The  seven-headed  serpent  of  the  Gnostic  system  has  his  prototype 
in  the  great  serpent  Nau,  v\  Um^,  which  is  called  the  "  bull  of 

"the    gods,"    and    has    "seven   serpents   on    his    seven    necks," 


[ 


^  nil 


R  X\    JpK  ^  ^^y^/  f  the  seven-headed  serpent,  I^au-shesma, 

^  Pistis  Sophia,  Coptic  text,  p.  319  ff. 

^  See  Schmidt,  Gnostische  Scliriften  in  Koiitisclier  SpracJie,  Leipzig,  1892. 

3  Teta,  1.  307. 


268  AMENTET  AND    THE   TUAT 

v\  IM.  '"^^^  P  8   ^  7  ^Iso  had   seven   uraei  for  heads,  and  he 
had   authority   over   seven  archers,   or  seven  bows,    |  ^  1 


Of  Amentet  and  the  Tuat  in  general  we  find  many  traces  in 
the  martyrdoms  of  Coptic  saints,  but,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the 
writers  have  made  the  demons  and  the  pits  of  fire  of  the  Egyptian 
Underworld  instruments  of  punishment  for  the  souls  of  those  who 
did  not  embrace  Christianity  when  upon  this  earth.  Thus  the 
writer  of  the  Martyrdom  of  George  ^  of  Cappadocia  makes  the  saint 
to  raise  up  from  the  dead  a  pagan  called  Boes,  who  had  been  dead 
two  hundred  years,  and  who  told  Dadianus,  the  governor,  that  he 
had  been  on  earth  a  worshipper  of  the  "  stupid,  dumb,  deaf,  and 
"  blind  Apollo,"  and  that  when  he  departed  this  life  he  went  to 
live  in  "  a  place  in  the  river  of  fire  until  such  time  as  I  went  to 
"  the  place  where  the  worm  dieth  not."  According  to  another 
writer,  Macarius  of  Antioch  restored  to  life  a  man  who  had  been 
dead  for  six  hours,  and  who  stated  that  his  miseries  during  that 
short  time  had  been  greater  than  those  which  he  had  endured 
throughout  all  his  life  upon  earth.  He  confessed  that  he  had  been 
a  worshipper  of  idols,  and  then  went  on  to  say  that  when  he  was 
dying  the  fiends  crowded  upon  him,  and  that  these  had  the  faces 
of  serpents,  lions,  crocodiles,  and,  curiously  enough,  of  bears. 
They  tore  his  soul  from  his  body  with  great  violence,  and  fled 
with  it  to  a  great  river  of  fire  wherein  they  plunged  it  to  a  depth 
of  four  hundred  cubits ;  then  they  drew  it  out  and  set  it  before 
the  Judge  of  Truth,^  who  passed  sentence  upon  it.  After  this  was 
done  they  took  it  to  a  "  place  of  darkness,  wherein  there  was  no 
"  light  whatsoever,  and  they  cast  it  down  into  the  cold  where 
"  there  was  gnashing  of  teeth.  Here,"  said  the  wretched  man,  "  I 
"  saw  the  worm  which  never  slumbereth,  and  his  head  was  like 
"  unto  that  of  a  crocodile.  He  was  surrounded  by  serpents  of 
"  every  kind  which  cast  souls  before  him,  and  wlien  his  own  mouth 

'  Teta,  1.  306. 

•  See  my  St.  George  of  Cappadocia,  p.  20. 

'  niKpiTHC    JUIJUIHI.      The  word   JUIHI  is  the  old  Egyptian    ^^,  mad, 

which  is  commonly  rendei'ed  by  "  law,  right,  ti'uth,  true,  just,"  and  the  like. 


RA   AND   APEP  269 

"  was  full  he  allowed  the  other  creatures  to  eat ;  in  that  place 
"  they  tore  us  to  pieces,  but  we  could  not  die.  After  that  they 
"  took  me  out  of  the  place  and  carried  me  into  Amenti,  where  I 
"  was  to  stay  for  ever."  ^  In  another  work  ^  a  nameless  mummy  is 
made  to  tell  how  before  he  died  the  avenging  angels  came  about 
him  with  iron  knives  and  pointed  goads,  which  they  thrust  into 
his  sides,  and  how  other  angels  came  and  tore  his  soul  from  his 
body,  and  having  tied  it  to  the  similitude  of  a  black  horse  they 
carried  it  off  to  Amentet.  Here  he  was  tortured  in  a  place  filled 
with  noxious  reptiles,  and  having  been  cast  into  the  outer  darkness 
he  saw  a  pit  more  than  two  hundred  feet  deep,  which  was  filled 
with  reptiles,  each  of  which  had  seven  heads,  and  had  its  body 
covered  with  objects  like  scorpions.  In  this  place  were  several 
other  terrible  serpents,  and  to  one  of  these,  which  had  teeth  like 
iron  stakes,  the  poor  soul  was  given  to  be  devoured  ;  this  monster 
crushed  the  soul  for  five  days  of  each  week,  but  on  Saturday  and 
Sunday  it  had  respite.  This  last  sentence  seems  to  suggest  that 
the  serpent  respected  the  Sabbath  of  the  Jews  and  the  Sunday  of 
the  Christians. 

In  all  these  examples,  and  even  in  the  words  of  Isaiah, 
who  says  (Ixvi.  24),  ''  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall 
"  their  fire  be  quenched,"  we  have  a  direct  allusion  to  the  great 
serpent  of  the  Egyptian  Underworld,  which  was,  in  all  periods 
of  history,  the  terror  of  the  worshippers  of  the  Sun-god,  and 
which  was  known  by  many  names.  The  allies  and  companions 
of  this  serpent  were  serpents  like  itself,  and  to  nearly  every 
power  which  was  hostile  to  the  dead  or  the  living  the  form  of 
a  snake  or  serpent  was  attributed.  The  type  and  symbol  of  all 
enmity  to  Ra,  whether  of  a  physical  or  moral  character,  was  the 
arch-serpent  Apep  or  Apepi,  which  attacked  him  daily,  and  was 
overcome  daily.  To  this  monster  we  have  several  allusions  in  the 
Boole  of  the  Bead,  but  these  do  not  adequately  convey  an  idea  of 
the  terror  with  which  he  was  regarded,  at  all  events  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  dynastic  period. 

^  Hyvemat,  Les  Actes  des  Martyrs  de  I'jSgypte,  p.  56  f. 

^  Amelineau,  Monuments  pour  servir  a  VHistoire  de  VEgypte  Chretienne,  p.  167. 


270  RA   AND   APEP 

From  a  papyrus  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  ^  we  learn 

that  a  special  service  was  in  use  in  Upper  Egypt  for  the  purpose 

of  destroying  the  power  of  Apepi  and  of  making  his  attacks  on  the 

sun  to  have  no  effect.     This  service  consisted  of  a  series  of  chapters 

which  were  to  be  recited  at  certain  times  of  the  day  during  the 

performance   of  a   number   of   curious   ceremonies   of  a   magical 

character.     Thus  one  rubric  orders  that  the  name  of  Apepi  shall 

be  written  in  green   colour  upon  a  piece  of  new  papyrus,  and 

that  a  wax  fiorure  of  the  fiend  shall  be  made  and  his  name  inlaid 

upon  it  with  green  colour.     Both  papyrus  and  wax  figure  were  to 

be  burnt  in  the  fire,  the  belief  being  that  as  the  wax  figure  melted 

and  as  the   sheet   of  papyrus  burnt,  the  fiend  Apepi  would  also 

decay  and  fall  to  pieces.     Whilst  the  wax  figure  was  melting  in 

the  fire  it  was  to  be  spit  upon  several  times  each  hour,  and  when  it 

was  melted  the  refuse  of  it  was  to  be  mixed  with  dung  and  again 

burnt.     It  was  imperative  to  do  this  at  midnight,  when  Ra  began 

his  return  journey  in  the  Tuat,  towards  the  east,  and  at  dawn,  and 

at  noon,  and  at  eventide,  and  in  fact  at  any  and  every  hour  of  the 

day.     This  might  also  be   done  with  advantage  whenever  storm 

clouds   appeared   in   the    sky,   or   whenever  the  clouds  gathered 

together  for  rain.     The  following  extract  will  give  an  idea  of  the 

general  import  of  the  service  for  the  destruction  of  Apepi.     The 

deceased  says :  "  Apepi  hath  fallen  into  the  flame,  a  knife  is  stuck 

'  into  his  head,  his  name  no  longer  existeth  upon  this  earth.     It  is 

'  decreed  for  me  to  inflict  blows  upon  him,  I  drive  darts  into  his 

'  bones,  I  destroy  his  soul  in  the  course  of  every  day,  I  sever  his 

'  vertebrae  from  his  neck,  cutting  into  his  flesh  with  a  knife  and 

'  stabbing  through  his  skin.     He  is  given  over  to  the  fire  which 

'  obtains  the  mastery  over  him  in  its  name  of  '  Sekhet,'  and  it 

'  hath  power  over  him  in  its  name  of  '  Eye  burning  the  enemy.' 

'  Darts  are  driven  into  his  soul,  his  bones  are  burnt  with  fire,  and 

'  his  limbs  are  placed  therein.     Horus,  mighty  of  strength,  hath 

'  decreed  that  he  shall  come  in  front  of  the  boat  of  Ra  ;  his  fetter 

'  of  steel  tieth  him  up  and  maketh  his  limbs  so  that  they  cannot 

'  move ;  Horus  repulseth  his  moment  of  luck  during  his  eclipse, 

'  and  he  maketh  him  to  vomit  that  which  is  inside  him.     Horus 

^  See  Archaeologia,  vol.  lii. 


RA  AND   APEP  271 

"  fettereth,  bindeth,  and  tieth  up,  and  Aker  taketh  away  his 
"  strength  so  that  I  may  separate  his  flesh  from  his  bones ;  that  I 
"  may  fetter  his  feet  and  cut  off  his  two  hands  and  arms ;  that  I 
"  may  shut  up  his  mouth  and  lips,  and  break  in  his  teeth  ;  that  I 
"  may  cut  out  his  tongue  from  his  throat,  and  carry  away  his 
"  words  ;  that  I  may  block  up  his  two  eyes,  and  carry  off  his  ears  ; 
"  that  I  may  tear  out  his  heart  from  its  seat  and  throne  ;  and  that 
"  I  may  make  him  so  that  he  existeth  not.  May  his  name  never 
"  exist,  and  may  what  is  born  to  him  never  live ;  may  he  never 
"  exist,  and  may  his  kinsfolk  never  exist ;  may  he  never  exist,  and 
"  may  his  relatives  never  exist ;  may  he  never  exist,  and  may  his 
"  heir  never  exist ;  may  his  offspring  never  grow  to  maturity ; 
"  may  his  seed  never  be  established ;  moreover,  may  his  soul,  and 
"  body,  and  spirit,  and  shade,  and  words  of  power,  and  his  bones, 
"  and  his  skin,  never  more  exist." 

The  Rubric  runs :  "  This  Chapter  is  to  be  said  over  a  figure 
"  of  Apepi,  inscribed  upon  new  papyrus  with  green  ink,  and 
"  placed  inside  a  covering  on  which  his  name  hath  been  written, 
"  and  thou  shalt  tie  these  round  tightly  with  cord,  and  put  such  a 
"  figure  and  covering  into  the  fire  every  day.  Thou  shalt  stamp 
"  upon  it  and  defile  it  with  thy  left  foot,  and  thou  shalt  spit  upon 
"  it  four  times  during  the  course  of  every  day,  and  when  thou 
"  hast  placed  it  upon  the  fire  thou  shalt  say,  '  Ra  triumpheth  over 
'' '  thee,  Apepi,  and  Horus  triumpheth  over  his  enemies,  and  P-aa 
"  '  (i.e.,  the  deceased)  triumpheth  over  his  enemies.'  Next  thou 
"  shalt  write  down  the  names  of  all  the  male  and  female  devils  of 
"  which  thy  heart  is  afraid,  the  names  of  all  the  enemies  of  P-aa, 
"  in  death,  and  in  life,  and  the  names  of  their  father,  mother,  and 
"  children,  [and  place  the  papyrus]  inside  the  covering,  together 
"  with  a  wax  figure  of  Apepi.  These  shall  then  be  placed  in  the 
"  fire  in  the  name  of  Apepi,  and  shall  be  burnt  when  Ra  riseth  in 
"  the  morning ;  this  thou  shalt  repeat  at  noon  and  at  evening 
"  when  Ra  setteth  in  the  land  of  life,  whilst  there  is  light  at  the 
"  foot  of  the  mountain.  Over  each  figure  of  Apepi  thou  shalt  recite 
"  the  above  chapter,  in  very  truth,  for  the  doing  of  this  shall  be 
"  of  great  benefit  [for  thee]  upon  earth  and  in  the  Underworld."  ^ 

^   On  the  Hieratic  Papyrus  of  Nesi-Arnsu,  p.  52  (Arcliaeologia,  vol.  Hi.). 


272  SERPENTS   AND    SNAKES 

To  destroy  the  fiends  which  were  associated  with  Apepi  it 
was  necessary  to  make  figures  of  them  in  wax,  and  having 
inscribed  their  names  upon  them  to  tie  them  round  with  black 
hair,  and  then  to  cast  them  on  the  ground,  and  kick  them  with  the 
left  foot,  and  pierce  them  with  a  stone  spear.  To  obtain  the  full 
benefit  of  all  the  names  of  Apepi  a  man  had  to  make  the  figure  of 
a  serpent  with  his  tail  in  his  mouth,  and  having  stuck  a  knife  in 
its  back,  and  cast  it  down  upon  the  ground,  to  say,  "  Apep,  Fiend, 
"Betet."  The  faithful  follower  of  Ra  is  also  bidden  to  "make 
"  another  serpent  with  the  face  of  a  cat,  and  with  a  knife  stuck  in 
"  his  back,  and  call  it  Hemhem.  Make  another  with  the  face  of 
"  a  crocodile,  and  with  a  knife  stuck  in  his  back,  and  call  it 
"  Hauna-aru-her-hea  ;  make  another  with  the  face  of  a  duck, 
"  and  with  a  knife  stuck  in  his  back,  and  call  it  Aluti.  Make 
"  another  with  the  face  of  a  white  cat,  and  with  a  knife  stuck  in 
"  his  back,  and  tie  it  up  and  bind  it  tightly,  and  call  it  '  Apep 
"  the  Enemy.' "  The  papyrus  which  contains  these  interesting 
passages  was  written  about  B.C.  312-311,  though  the  compositions 
in  it  are  very  much  older,  but  it  shows  that,  even  at  that  period, 
when  the  Macedonians  had  begun  to  reign  over  Egypt,  and  Greek 
influence  was  making  itself  supreme  in  the  country,  the  old  beliefs 
still  held  sway  over  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians.  In^fact,  in  this 
matter  as  in  nearly  all  others,  they  clung  most  tenaciously  to  the 
views  and  opinions  of  their  forefathers. 

The  primitive  Egyptians  feared  snakes  and  propitiated  them, 
and  the  earliest  dynastic  people  of  the  country  employed  charms, 
and  incantations,  and  magical  formulae  to  keep  snakes,  and  serpents, 
and  reptiles  of  every  kind  from  their  dead ;  the  priests  of 
Heliopolis  respected  the  prevailing  views  of  their  countrymen,  and 
ancient  formulae  against  snakes  were  copied  into  their  funeral 
texts.  Every  Recension  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  contained 
Chapters  which  were  written  to  preserve  the  dead  from  the  attacks 
of  snakes  ;  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  some  of  them  contain 
formulae  which  are  not  older  than  dynastic  times,  and  these  show 
that  the  fear  of  serpents  was  as  great  as  ever,  although  these 
reptiles  cannot  have  been  so  numerous  as  formerly.  The  priests 
of  Amen  made  snakes  to  play  very  prominent  parts  in  the  Under- 


TUAT   AND   GEHENNA  273 

world,  and,  curiously  enough,  they  thought  that  the  dead  Sun- 
god,  or  the  "  Flesh  of  Ra,"  was  re-born  into  the  life  of  a  new  day, 
only  after  he  had  been  drawn  in  his  boat  through  the  body  of  a 
serpent.  The  Egyptians  usually  had  some  reason  for  the  things 
they  said,  and  wrote,  and  depicted,  and  although  it  is  not  easy  to 
find  the  reason  in  every  case,  there  is,  fortunately,  little  doubt 
about  it  here.  They  observed  that  snakes  sloughed  their  skins 
from  time  to  time,  and  that  their  bodies  were  much  improved  in 
appearance  as  the  result,  and  it  is  pretty  certain  that  they  had  this 
habit  of  snakes  in  their  minds,  when  they  made  their  god  Ra  as  a 
new  being  to  emerge  in  his  boat  out  of  the  great  serpent  which  lay 
in  deep  undulations  between  the  end  of  the  Tuat  and  this  world. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  influence  upon  the 
hell  of  the  Copts  of  the  old  Egyptian  mythology  about  the  Tuat, 
and  it  is  right  here  to  point  out  that  the  Hebrews  appear  to  have 
borrowed  from  it  many  of  their  ideas  concerning  the  abodes  of  the 
dead  in  the  Underworld.  It  is  quite  certain  that  the  hell  of  which 
they  conceived  the  existence  was  not  derived  from  the  Babylonians, 
for  we  know  from  the  story  of  Ishtar's  descent  into  the  "  land  of 
no  return  "  that,  although  it  had  Seven  Gates,  it  contained  no  pits 
of  fire  or  monster  serpents.  Ishtar,  we  are  told,  found  it  to  be  a 
place  of  darkness,  and  she  saw  that  the  beings  in  it  were  dressed 
in  garments  of  feathers,  and  that  dust  and  mud  were  their  food.^ 
The  commonest  of  the  names  which  the  Hebrews  gave  to  the 
abode  of  the  damned  is  Ge  Hinnom,^  or  Gehenna,  which  was 
originally  the  Valley  of  Hinnom,  that  lay  quite  near  to  Jerusalem,^ 
where  children  were  sacrificed  to  the  god  Moloch ;  *  this  name 
passed  into  the  New  Testament  under  the  form  Feewa,  and  into 
Arabic  literature  as  "  Jahannam."  ^  The  portion  of  the  Valley  of 
Hinnom  where  the  sacrifices  were  burnt  was  called  "  Topheth." 
According  to  the  Rabbis  "  Gehenna "  was  created  on  the  second 
day  of  creation,  with  the  firmament  and  the  angels,  and  just  as 
there  were  an  Upper  and  a  Lower  Paradise  so  there  were  also  two 

^  See  L.  W.  King,  Bahijlonian  BeUgion,  p.  179  f. 

2  DJnnil  3  ]sI"q^  generally  ideatified  with  the  Wadi  er-Rababi, 

*  See  2  Kings  xxiii.  10.  "  ^^j;^ 

T 


274  HALLS    OF   GEHENNA 

Gehennas,  one  in  the  heavens  and  one  on  the  earth.  As  to  the 
size  of  Gehenna  we  read  that  Egypt  was  400  parassangs  ^  long  and 
400  parassangs  wide,  i.e.,  about  1,200  miles  long  by  1,200  miles 
wide ;  that  Nubia  (w\d)  was  sixty  times  as  large  as  Egypt ;  that 
the  world  was  sixty  times  as  large  as  Nubia,  and  that  it  would 
require  500  years  to  travel  across  either  its  length  or  its  breadth ; 
that  Gehenna  was  sixty  times  as  large  as  the  world ;  and  that  it 
would  take  a  man  2,100  years  to  reach  it.^ 

In  Gehenna,  as  in  Paradise,  there  were  seven  "  palaces " 
(D^byn),  and  the  punishments  which  were  meted  out  to  their 
inhabitants  varied  both  in  kind  and  in  intensity.  In  each  palace 
there  are  6,000  houses,  or  chambers,  and  in  each  house  are  6,000 
boxes,  and  in  each  box  are  6,000  vessels  fitted  with  gall.  Gehenna 
is  so  deep  that  it  would  take  300  years  to  reach  -the  bottom  of  it ; 
according  to  another  opinion  it  is  300  miles  long,  300  miles  wide, 
1,000  miles  thick,  and  100  miles  deep.  The  fire  in  each  palace  is 
fiercer  and  more  destructive  than  that  in  the  palace  preceding, 
and  the  flames  of  the  deepest  portion  of  it  are  able  to  consume 
human  souls  utterly,  which  fire  upon  earth  can  never  do.  Each 
palace  is,  according  to  one  view,  under  the  command  of  an  angel, 
who  is  subservient  to  Dumah,  the  prince  of  Gehenna,  and  who  has 
with  him  tens  of  thousands  of  angels  who  are  occupied  in  judging 
sinners  and  sealing  their  doom ;  but  according  to  another  the 
seven  mansions  are  ruled,  under  Dumah,  hdm,  by  three  angels 
called  Mashkhith,  Af,  and  Khema.  The  voices  of  the  beings  in 
Gehenna  rise  up  to  heaven  mingled  with  the  cries  of  the  wicked. 
Dumah,  the  prince  of  Gehenna,  seems  to  have  been  of  Egyptian 
origin,  for  we  read,  "  At  the  time  when  Moses  said,  'I  will  perform 
"'judgments  on  all  the  gods  of  Egypt,'  Dumah,  the  prince  of 
"  Egypt,  went  400  miles  and  God  said  unto  him,  '  This  decree  is 
"  '  decreed  by  me,  even  as  it  is  written,  I  will  visit  the  host  of  the 
"  '  height  in  the  height ;  '  ^  and  in  that  same  hour  sovereignty  was 
"  taken  away  from  him,  and  he  was  appointed  prince  over 
"  Gehenna,  and  some  say  that  he  was  set  over  the  dead." 

^  The  parassaBg  =  30  stadia,  and  the  stadion  =  202  yards, 
"  Eisenmeiiger,  EntdecTctes  Jiidenthum,  part  ii.,  p.  328. 
'*  Isaiah  xxiv.  21. 


HALLS   OF   GEHENNA  275 

Another  prince  of  Gehenna  was  called  Arsiel,  and  his  duty 
was  to  stand  before  the  souls  of  the  righteous  to  prevent  them 
from  praying  to  God  on  behalf  of  the  wicked.  Opinions  vary  as 
to  the  number  of  gates  or  doors  which  are  in  Gehenna,  some  saying 
there  are  50,  others  8,000,  and  others  40,000 ;  but  the  writers 
who  followed  the  best  traditions  fixed  the  number  at  seven,  and 
this  agrees  with  the  best  Muhammadan  tradition  also.  Finally,  as 
a  river  runs  through  the  Tuat  so  a  river  or  canal  flows  through 
Gehenna.  The  first  division  of  Gehenna  is  100  miles  long  and  50 
miles  wide,  and  it  contains  several  pits  wherein  fiery  lions  dwell ; 
when  men  fall  into  the  pits  the  lions  consume  parts  of  them  and  the 
fire  devours  the  remainder,  but  soon  afterwards  they  come  into  being 
again  and  have  to  pass  through  the  fire  which  is  in  the  second 
division,  when  they  are  again  consumed  and  again  come  to  life. 
In  this  way  they  have  to  pass  through  the  fire  of  all  the  seven 
divisions.  According  to  another  opinion  one  half  of  Gehenna 
is  fire  and  the  other  half  hail,  and  the  ang-el  who  is  in  charg-e 
drives  the  souls  of  the  damned  from  the  fire  into  the  hail  and  from 
the  hail  into  the  fire  without  ceasing.  Another  writer  says  that 
each  of  the  seven  divisions  of  hell  contains  seven  streams  of  fire 
and  seven  streams  of  hail,  and  that  each  division  is  sixty  times  as 
large  as  that  which  is  immediately  above  it.  In  each  division  are 
7,000  small  chambers,  and  in  each  chamber  7,000  clefts,  and  in 
each  cleft  7,000  scorpions,  and  in  each'  scorpion  seven  joints,  and 
in  each  joint  1,000  vessels  of  gall;  through  it  flow  seven  rivers 
filled  with  deadly  poison,  and  the  damned  have  to  pass  one  half 
of  the  year  in  the  fire,  and  the  other  half  in  the  hail  and  snow, 
which  are  far  more  terrible  than  the  fire.  Moreover,  from 
under  the  throne  of  God  Almighty  there  goes  forth  a  river 
of  fire  which  empties  itself  upon  the  heads  of  the  wicked,  but 
most  of  these  have  a  rest  from  their  punishment  for  one  hour 
and  a  half  three  times  a  day,  i.e.,  at  the  times  of  morning, 
mid-day,  and  evening  prayer,  and  they  have  rest  the  whole  of 
each  Sabbath  and  of  each  festival  of  the  new  moon.  Some  of 
the  Rabbis  believed  that  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  would 
last  for  ever,  but  others  thought  that  a  period  of  punishment  six 
or  twelve  months  in  length  would  suffice  for  their  purification. 


276  TUAT   AND    GEHENNA 

Those  who  are  damned  shall  not  remember  the  names  which 
they  bore  upon  earth,  and  although  the  angels  beat  them  and  call 
upon  them  to  declare  their  names,  they  shall  not  be  able  to  do  so  ; 
this  view  was  clearly  held  by  the  Egyptians,  for  we  are  specially 
told  in  the  text  of  Pepi   I.   (line  169),  "  Pepi  is  happy  with  his 

"name,"  I '''^  —  fSii  1  °  §  '  '^^'^-^.  From  the  facts 
recorded  above  it  is  easy  to  see  how  much  the  Hebrews  were 
indebted  to  the  Egyptians  in  the  construction  of  their  Gehenna, 
and  how  closely  they  fitted  native  beliefs  into  a  framcAvork  of 
foreign  conceptions.  Some  of  their  writers  seem  to  have  possessed 
a  better  insight  into  such  matters  than  others,  whilst  a  few  of  them 
unconsciously  reproduced  the  original  conception  of  the  Tuat  as 
the  place  of  destruction  for  the  enemies  of  the  god,  and  believed 
that  Gehenna,  or  hell,  would  be  abolished.  These  thought  that  at 
some  future  time  God  would  remove  the  sun  from  its  place  and 
would  place  it  in  the  second  firmament,  in  a  hollow  place  or 
chamber  specially  prepared  for  it,  and  that  having  judged  and 
condemned  the  wicked  He  would  send  them  into  this  chamber, 
where  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun  would  consume  them.^  The 
Kabbis  generally  took  no  pains  to  say  either  how  the  fires  of 
Gehenna  were  started,  or  how  they  were  maintained,  but  Rabbi 
Yannai  and  Rabbi  Shim'on  ben-Lakish  evidently  thought  it  out, 
and  so  reduced  Gehenna,  unintentionally,  to  the  place  where  a 
physical  sun  supplied  the  consuming  fire,  and  did  for  the  damned 
among  the  Hebrews  exactly  what  it  did  for  the  enemies  of  Ra 
among  the  Egyptians. 

It  must  be  noted  that  the  Gehenna  of  the  Hebrew  lacked 
the  serpents  of  the  Egyptian  Tuat,  but  when  we  consider  the 
difference  between  the  physical  characteristics  of  Egypt  and  those 
of  Syria  and  Palestine  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  In 
predynastic  times  Egypt  was  filled  with  ser^^ents  of  every  kind, 
and  the  terror  which  they  inspired  lived  in  the  minds  of  the 
people  of  dynastic  times  long  after  the  country  had  been 
practically  cleared  from  these  reptiles.  In  Palestine  and  Syria 
snakes  were  never  very  plentiful,  but  in  the  region  of  Southern 

*  Eisenmenger,  op.  cit.,  p.  366. 


APEP   AND   TIAMAT  277 

Babylonia,  whence  came  Abraham  and  his  companions,  they  must 
have  existed  in  large  numbers.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  the 
Hebrews,  who  borrowed  so  largely  in  their  cosmogony  from 
Babylonian  sources,  did  not  also  borrow  in  some  form  or  other 
the  monster  Tiamat,  which  played  in  their  mythology  the  same 
part  that  Apep  or  Apepi  played  among  the  Egyptian  gods.  The 
Babylonian  Tiamat  waged  war  against  Marduk,  the  champion 
chosen  by  the  gods,  and  was  held  to  be  the  incarnation  of  all  evil, 
both  physical  and  moral ;  and  although  the  Hebrews  assigned  to 
the  serpent  cunning  and  guile,  and  declared  that  he  was  "  more 
^'  subtle  than  any  beast "  (Gen.  iii.  1),  they  hardly  considered  him  to 
be  a  great  physical  power  which  waged  war  against  the  sun  daily. 
Tiamat,  as  we  learn  from  a  cuneiform  text,^  was  50  kashu  long, 
and  the  height  of  its  undulations  was  1  haslm ;  its  mouth  was  one- 
half  a  gar,  or  six  cubits  wide,  and  it  moved  in  water  9  cubits 
deep.  Three  other  measurements  are  given,  viz.,  1  gar,  1  gar,  and 
5  gar,  but  as  the  text  following  them  is  broken  it  cannot  be  said  to 
what  they  refer.  Now,  the  hashu  was  the  distance  usually  passed 
over  in  a  journey  of  two  hours,  and  the  cubit  may  be  considered 
to  be  about  20  inches.  Reckoning  the  hashu  at  six  miles  we  thus 
have  a  monster  300  miles  long,  which  had  a  mouth  10  feet  wide, 
and  which  moved  in  undulations  six  miles  high !  The  measure- 
ments of  5  gar  probably  refers  to  its  girth,  and  if  this  be  so  the 
creature  was  100  feet  round  its  body. 

When  Tiamat  had  been  slain  we  are  told  that  its  blood  flowed 
from  its  body  for  three  years,  three  months,  and  one  day,  and  we 
are  able  to  obtain  an  idea  of  its  huge  size  from  the  statement  that 
when  Marduk  had  smashed  in  its  skull  with  his  club,  and  had  slit 
the  channels  of  its  blood,  he  split  it,  like  a  flat  fish,  into  two 
halves,  one  of  which  he  made  use  of  to  form  the  "  covering  of  the 
'^  heavens."  ^  There  is  no  doubt  that  originally  the  Babylonian 
Tiamat  was  nothing  but  the  rain  clouds,  and  the  mist  and  fog 
which  lie  over  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  in  the  early  morning  at 
certain  seasons  of  the  year,  and  which  when  j  looked  at  from  the 

^  See  King,  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  from  Babylonian   Tablets,  etc.,  pai't  xiii., 
pi.  33  f.,  London,  1901 ;  and  King,  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation,  vol.  i.,  p.  119. 
^  King,  Babylonian  Religion,  p.  77. 


278  APEP,    TIAMAT,    LEVIATHAN 

desert  appear  like  a  huge  serpent  stretched  along  the  length  of  the 
stream,  both  up  and  down  the  river.  The  Hebrew  Scriptures 
contain  several  allusions  to  a  great  nature  serpent,^  though  he 
finds  no  place  among  the  Seven  Mansions  of  their  hell.  Thus  the 
prophet  Amos  (ix.  3)  refers  to  the  serpent  at  the  bottom  of  the 
sea,  which  Yahweh  would  command  to  bite  the  wicked  if  they 
attempted  to  hide  there  ;  in  Psalm  Ixxiv.  13  f.  God  is  referred  to 
as  the  breaker  of  the  heads  of  Leviathan  and  of  the  dragons  in  the 
waters  ;  in  Isaiah  (li.  9).we  have,  "  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength, 
''  0  arm  of  Yahweh !  Awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the 
"  generations  of  old  !  Art  thou  not  it  that  did  slay  the  monster 
"  Rahabh,  and  wound  the  serpent  (tannin)  ?  "  Rahabh  may  here, 
as  some  have  argued,  refer  to  Egypt,  but  if  so,  it  is  to  Egypt  as  the 
home  of  the  great  serpent  monster  which  we  now  know  as  Apepi, 
and  which  was  to  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  type  and  symbol  of  the 
country,  and  not  to  the  judgments  which  Yahweh  meted  out  to 
that  land. 

The  Hebrew  writers  refer  to  the  nature  serpent  under  several 
names,  e.g.,  tannin,  7id]chdsh,  rdhdbh,  but  the  monster  referred 
to  under  them  is,  in  reality,  one  and  the  same,  i.e..  Leviathan 
{]D'^'h  livydthdn),  "  the  serpent  of  many  twistings  or  folds,"  and 
both  Nebuchadnezzar  II.  and  the  "  King  of  Assyria"  are  identified 
with  him  (see  Jeremiah  li.  34  ;  Isaiah  xiv.  29).  According  to  the 
Rabbis  he  was  created  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  week  of  creation,^ 
and  was  hunted  for  slaughter  by  Gabriel,  and  with  the  assistance 
of  Yahweh  was  slain  by  him  ;  here  we  have  a  series  of  close 
resemblances  to  the  history  of  Tiamat,  for  Gabriel  is  in  every  way 
the  counterpart  of  Marduk,  and  Yahweh  takes  the  place  of  Anshar 
as  the  head  of  the  gods.  Finally,  Leviathan  was  slain  by  Gabriel, 
just  as  Tiamat  was  killed  by  Marduk,  and  out  of  the  skin  of 
Leviathan  Gabriel  made  a  tent  wherein  the  righteous  might  dwell,^ 
and   a   covering   for   the    walls   of  the    city  of  Jerusalem.     This 

'  See  Goldziher,  Mythology  of  the  Hehreu-s,  pp.  27,  28;  King,  Bahylonian 
Religion,  p.  115. 

-  Eisenmenger,  op.  cit.,  p.  877. 

=*  in^l"?  b^  "DV^  Wpn^b  HDID  nwyh  ^^T^  linn  t^^npn  l^np:  Eisen- 
menger, op.  cit.,  p.  888. 


SEVEN-HEADED    SERPENT  279 

covering  was  bright  and  shining,  and  it  emitted  light  which  was  so 
strong  that  it  coukl  be  seen  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the  other. 
The  last  statement  recalls  the  words  of  the  Fourth  Tablet  of  the 
Creation  Series,  which  tell  how  Marduk  made  a  canopy  in  the 
heavens  of  one-half  of  the  body  or  skin  of  Tiamat.  In  the  Hebrew 
version  of  the  story  it  is  said  that  the  righteous  feed  upon  the  body 
of  Leviathan,  but  there  is  no  equivalent  passage  in  the  cuneiform 
texts  at  present  known.  From  the  passage  in  the  Psalm  already 
quoted  (Ixxiv.  13)  it  would  appear  that  Leviathan  had  many 
heads,  but  this  view  is  not  supported  by  any  known  description  of 
Tiamat,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  on  the  subject  we  must 
assume  that  the  idea  of  a  plurality  of  heads  came  from  Egypt. 
In  the  Book  of  Revelation  (xii.  3  ;  xiii.  1)  mention  is  made  of  a 
"  great  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  seven 
"  crowns  upon  his  heads,"  which  appeared  in  heaven,  and  of  a 
beast  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  with  ten  crowns  upon  his 
horns,  which  came  up  out  of  the  sea,  but  the  idea  of  these  also  was 
not  derived  from  Babylonia.  All  the  available  evidence  goes 
to  show  that  whilst  the  Hebrew  conception  of  Leviathan  was 
of  Babylonian  origin  that  of  a  hell  of  fire  was  borrowed  from 
Egypt. 

Similarly,  the  seven-headed  dragon  and  beast  of  the  Book  of 
Revelation,  like  the  seven-headed  basilisk  serpent  mentioned  in 
"  Pistis  Sophia,"  ^  have  their  origin  in  the  seven-headed  serpent 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts.  In  Revelations  ix.  19, 
horses  are  referred  to  which  had  tails  "  like  unto  serpents,  and  had 
heads,"  and  here  again  we  have  an  idea  suggested  by  a  monster 
which  inhabited  one  of  the  Pylons  of  the  Tuat,  and  which  had  the 
body  of  a  crocodile  and  a  tail  formed  of  a  writhing  serpent's  body 
with  a  serpent's  head  for  the  tip  of  it. 

But  although  the  Hebrews  borrowed  the  framework  of  their 
hell  from  Egypt  they  appear  to  have  made  no  use  of  the  means  by 
which  the  Egyptians  hoped  to  escape  from  Amentet  and  the  Tuat, 
that  is  to  say,  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  they  had  in  early 

ciT  ft  goq  epe  c<^cyqe  rt  <s.ne  epoq ;  ed.  Schwartze,  pp.  136, 

140,  147. 


280  GNOSTIC   MAGICAL   NAMES 

times  any  equivalent  for  the  system  of  words  of  power  which 
played  such  an  important  part  in  the  magical  side  of  the  Egyptian 
religion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Copts,  at  least  those  of  them  who 
belonged  to  Gnostic  sects,  retained  the  beliefs  concerning  the 
efficacy  of  magical  words  and  names,  and  they  introduced  them 
into  their  writings  in  a  remarkable  manner.  Thus  in  "  Pistis 
Sophia "  we  are  told  ^  that  after  His  resurrection  Jesus  stood  up 
with  His  disciples  by  the  sea,  and  prayed  to  His  Father,  whom  He 
addressed  by  a  series  of  magical  names,  thus : — Aeeiouo,  Iao,  Aoi, 
OiAPSiNOTHEK,  Thernops,  Nopsitek,  Zagoure,  Pagoure,  Neth- 
MOMAOTH,  Nepsiomaoth,  Marakhakhtha,  Thobarrabau,  Thar- 
NAKHAKHAN,  ZoROKOTHORA,  Ieou,  Sabaoth.^  Whilst  He  was  say- 
ing these  names  Thomas,  Andrew,  James,  and  Simon  the  Canaanite 
stood  in  the  west  with  their  faces  towards  the  east;  and  Philip 
and  Bartholomew  stood  in  the  south  with  their  faces  towards  the 
north.  In  another  passage  '^  Jesus  addresses  His  Father  in  these 
words  and  by  these  names : — Iao  Iouo,  Iao,  Aoi,  Or  a,  Psinother, 
Theropsin,  Opsither,  Nephthomaoth,  Nephiomaoth  Marakhakh- 
tha, Marmarakhtha,  Ieana  menaman,  Amanei  tou  ouranou, 
IsRAi  Hamen  Hamen,  Soubaibai  appaap  Hamen  Hamen,  deraarai 
Hapahou  Hamen  Hamen,  Sarsarsartou Hamen Ham£n,  Koukiamin 
MiAi  Hamen  Hamen,  Iat,  Iai,  Toua  Hamen  Hamen  Hamen,  Main- 
MARi,  Mari^:,  Marei  Hamen  Hamen  Hamen.^     In  another  place  ■' 

Ed.  Scliwartze,  p.  357. 

'  ^.eHioYo)"  i<s.uj"  A.ujr  uji<s.\l/irf(ju0ep'  oeprfcxj\|/'  rrcju-vJ/iTep* 
X^X^^'     ^ujR<s.pp<\RA.v     ^^<pm^x^X^"'    ^opoKoeop^Sc- 

■'  Ed.  Schwartze,  p.  375. 

*  i^ui)  lOYuj'  iXcju*  <3s.cjur  cjui*^  vl/muueep'  0Gpuj\I/irf  uj\(/i- 
eep  rf6cl>eoJui4S.aje-  rtecI>iojui<5»cUue-  stx^p^^x^X^^'  ^^p^^- 
p^X^^'  'H<^rf<s.  JuierfAJuiAff  ^x».^<^tHi^  toy  oYp^^rroY*  icp*^! 
^^^xjLHti   g,<\JuiHrf   coYR<J^iR<^r   A.nn^3<n-  g,<MJiHff    2,AAjiHrf 

^6p<S.<^p<M       g<5cn<S.gOY      ^^^kJLHti      g^^JUHfi'     CiS.pCApCAp'TOY 

i^^i'  TOY^n  ^^^sjLHti  ^^^xxHn  ^^<xxHti'  xid^m  JutApr  jui<\piH' 
juiA.per  g,<^JuiHrf  g<\juiHrf  ^^xxHtt  (p.  375). 

'  Ihid.,  p.  375. 


GNOSTIC   MAGICAL   NAMES  281 

He  addresses  those  Avho  forgive  sins  by  their  names  thus : — 
SiPHiREPSNiKHiEu,  Zenei,  Berimou,  Sokhabeikh£ie,  Euthari, 
Nanai  Dieisbalm^rikh,  Meunifos,  Khirie,  Entair,  Mouthiour, 
Smour,  Peukher,  Oouskhous,  Minionor,  Isokhobortha  ;  ^  and 
immediately  afterwards  He  calls  upon  the  Powers  of  His  Father  by 
these  names  : — Auer,  Bebro,  Athroni,  Eoureph,  Eone,  Souphen, 
Knitousokhreoph,  Mauonbi,  Mneuor,  Souoni,  Khokheteoph, 
Khoehe,  Eteoph,  Memokh,  and  Anemph.^  An  examination  of 
the  books  of  "  Pistis  Sophia"  will  show  that  many  of  the  details  of 
the  "mysteries"  which  are  there  described  are  based  upon  ancient 
Egyptian  beliefs,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  doctrine  of  spiritual 
light  which  is  expounded  therein  only  represents  a  spiritualized 
conception  of  the  far-reaching  character  of  the  powers  of  the  light 
of  the  sun  upon  both  the  living  and  the  dead,  which  the  dynastic 
Egyptians  recognized  and  described  centuries  before  the  Christian 
era.  This  was  expressed  in  the  terms  of  a  highly  artificial  system 
wherein  words  of  power,  magical  names,  emanations,  ranks  of 
angels,  gates,  watchers,  and  purely  Christian  conceptions  were 
mixed  up  together,  with  the  Lord  Christ  as  the  central  Figure. 
Much  has  yet  to  be  done  before  all  the  comparisons  and  connections 
between  the  Eg^^ptian  and  Christian  systems  can  be  fully  worked 
out,  but  the  facts  quoted  above  will,  perhaps,  suggest  the  import- 
ance of  the  study. 

^  ci4>ip6\j/rfi^i6Y'   ^errer    Repumov    cox4S.RpixHp'    ev- 
e<^pr  ti^tt^i'  2s.ieicR<^2\JuiHpix'  JuteYftmoc-  x^P^^'  eitT^Mp" 
jLioYeioYp*  cjuioYP"  neY^Hp"  ooYc^oYc*  jumiortop'  icoxo 
Rope-s.  (p.  376). 

^  AYHp'  RERpcju'  Aoponr  HOYffecl>*  Hcjuite"  coYc|>erf  Krfi- 
'T0YC0^p6ajcJ>-  jui<^YcjurrRr  JuirfeYujp'  coYcum  ^cjux6T"ecxjcl>- 
X^X^'  £T"eujcj>'  xi^xjLUJX'  <^rfHJuicI>  (p.  376). 


(     282     ) 


CHAFPER     VII 

THE  OLDEST  COMPANY  OF  THE  GODS  AND 

THE  CREATION 


IN  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  work  mention  has  been  made 
of  three  companies  of  gods,  the  existence  of  which  was 
formulated  by  the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  and  it  has  been  shown  that 
a  company  of  gods  usually  consisted  of  four  pairs  of  deities,  four 
gods  and  four  goddesses,  and  a  president  or  chief  of  the  same. 
We  have  also  shown  that  a  jmiit  or  company  of  gods  did  not 
necessarily  contain  nine  deities  only,  and  that  it  as  often  as  not 
was  supposed  to  include  more  than  nine  gods.  Originally,  how- 
ever, the  Helio- 
politan  priests,  or 
the  authors  of  the 
theological  system 
exhibited  in  the 
Pyramid  Texts,  in- 
tended the  2)(^ut  to 

The  Oldest  Compauy  of  the  Gods.  COUsist  of  uiue  gods, 

and  it  seems  that  they  arrived  at  this  decision  as  the  result 
of  the  addition  of  their  own  local  god  Tem  to  a  group  of  four 
pairs  of  deities,  four  gods  and  four  goddesses,  whom  they  had 
grouped  together  according  to  the  plan  followed  by  an  older  school 
of  theologians  in  forming  an  older  company  of  the  gods.  The 
company  of  the  gods  last  mentioned  is  probably  the  oldest  of  all 
the  companies  in  Egypt,  although  for  various  reasons  it  never 
seems  to  have  attained  to  the  popularity  of  the  "  great  j>a-?it  of  the 
gods  of  Annu,"  or  to  have  enjoyed  such  a  prominent  position  in 
the  minds  of  the  religious  philosophers  of  Egypt.  This  is  not  to 
be  wondered  at,  for  whilst  the  Heliopolitan  company  of  the  gods 
included  the  Sun-god  Ra-Tem,  or  Rc'i-Tem-Khepera,  and  Osiris, 


THE   FIRST   EIGHT   GODS  283 

the  god  of  the  dead,  the  older  company  consisted  of  pairs  of  deities 
who  represented  religious  conceptions,  and  faiths,  and  beliefs, 
which  even  at  that  remote  period  had  been  long  dead,  and  the 
meaning  of  which  had  been  forgotten.  The  very  gods  of  the  older 
company  had  been  superseded,  and  their  worship  abolished,  and 
the  knowledge  of  their  history  and  attributes  was  preserved  only 
in  the  minds  of  priests  and  religious  experts,  who  probably 
regarded  the  ancient  views  about  these  gods  which  had  come  down 
to  them  as  the  product  of  men  belonging  to  a  lower  stage  of 
civilization  than  their  own.  The  older  company  of  the  gods  here 
referred  to  have  been  described  as  personifications  of  aspects,  or 
phases,  or  properties  of  primeval  matter,  and  may  be  thus 
enumerated : — 


000  ^""""^     S\  AT  coo 


AA/V\/\A 


AA/WW 


Kekui,  ^  w  ^  "T^  ^ .        Kekuit,  ^\\\'=W^ 
Kerh,  ^l^i-  Keehet,  ^IZti' 


o 


The  character  of  the  first  pair  of  gods  can  be  readily  deter- 
mined by  the   hieroglyphics  which   form  their  names  ;  thus  the 

TTTTJT     AA/WV\         K\ 

name  Nu,  '^'ww.  /H  ^^  is  expressed  by  three  vases  of  water  which 


indicate  the  sound,  and  the  outstretched  heaven,  p=^,  and  the 
determinative  for  water,  aaaaaa  ,  and  the  sign  for  "  god,"  all  of  which 
show  that  this  deity  was  the  god  of  the  watery  mass  of  the  sky. 
The  goddess  Nut,   ^^^^^^  ^  J) ,  was  merely  his  female   counter- 


part,  as  the  signs,      3,  indicate.     From  various  passages  found 

in  the  religious,  mythological,  and  funereal  texts  of  all  periods  it 
is  abundantly  clear  that  in  primeval  times  at  least  the  Egyptians 
believed  in  the  existence  of  a  deep  and  boundless  watery  mass  out 
of  which  had  come  into  being  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and 
everything  that  is  in  them.  The  germs  of  all  and  every  kind  of 
life  were  in  this  watery  mass,   and  they  were  supposed  to  have 


AW^/^A 


'  The  old  form  is  ODD,  or  (Unas  199,  399),  or  ^  (Teta  78). 


284  NU   AND   NUT 

been  there  from  the  beginning.  They  do  not  seem  to  have 
formulated  any  exact  ideas  about  the  position  of  this  watery  mass 
in  the  sky  or  heaven,  and  they  certainly  did  not  attempt  to  assign 
to  it  dimensions  which  could  be  expressed  by  the  ordinary  methods 
of  measurements ;  in    later   times,   however,   Nu  was   frequently 

identified  with  the  sky,  jpet  ^,  and  with  the  heaven  above  it, 

nnt^   .  though,  strictly  speaking,   he    represented   the  watery 

mass  which  was  supposed  to  exist  between  the  two.  It  must  also 
be  noted  that  the  ocean  and  also  the  Nile  ^  were  identified  with 
Nu,  whose  characteristics  appear  to  have  changed  during  the  latter 
part  of  the  dynastic  period.  The  name  of  this  god  has  been 
compared  with  the  Coptic  word  rfOYft  "  abyss,"  "  deep,"  and  the 
like,  and  it  is  possible  that  it  may  have  some  connection  with  it, 
but  it  is  difiicult  to  see  how  in  that  case  it  can  mean  '^  young," 
as  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch  suggested.^  The  true  meaning  is  much 
more  likely  to  be  suggested  by  the  play  on  the  words  Nu  and  nen 
which  we  have  on  p.  309  in  the  passage,  "  I  raised  them  up  from 
out  of  the  watery  mass  {nu)  out  of  inactivity"  {nen),  i.e.,  Nu  was 
the  inert  mass  of  watery  matter  from  which  the  world  was 
created.  Of  Nut,  the  female  counterpart  of  Nu,  little  need  be  said 
here,  except  that  she  was  regarded  as  the  primeval  mother,  with 
whom  in  later  dynastic  times  were  identified  several  goddesses, 
e.g.,  Hathor,  Mut,  Nit,  or  Neith,  and  whose  attributes  were 
assigned  to  them.  The  forms  in  which  Nu  is  depicted  vary. 
Thus  he  is  represented  in  human  form  holding  a  sceptre  when  he 
forms  one  of  the  company  of  the  gods  of  Amen,  but  he  is  also 
represented  with  the  head  of  a  frog,  which  is  surmounted  by  a 
beetle,^  and  even  with  the  head  of  a  snake.  The  goddess  Nut  is 
also  represented  in  human  form,  but  sometimes  she  has  the  head 
of  a  uraeus,  surmounted  by  a  disk,^  and  at  other  times  she  has 
the  head  of  a  cat.^ 

'  Compare  Horapollo  I.  21  (ed.  Leemans ;  p.  28): — NctAow  Se  avajSacrtv 
o-rjju,atvovT€s,  ov  KaXovaiv  AlyvTTTKTTi  Now ;  attention  was  first  drawn  to  this  passage 
by  Tattam. 

■  Beligion  unci  Mytliologk,  p.  129. 

^  Lanzone,  Dizionario,  ])1.  1G7,  No.  2. 

'  Ibid.,  No  3.  '  Jhid.,  pi.  170,  No.  2. 


KEKUI   AND   KEKUIT  285 

The  characteristics  of  the  second  pair  of  gods,  Hehu,  §  §  y  r^  ? 
and  Hehut,  ||  >>  ^  J)  ?  ^i'<3  not  easy  to  determine.  According 
to  Signor  Lanzone  they  are  personifications  of  male  and  female 
elements  of  fire/  and  from  the  ancient  pictures  of  them  Ave  see  that 
the  Egyptian  artists  regarded  them  from  different  points  of  view. 
Thus  in  one  group  of  the  eight  primeval  gods  Hehu  is  represented 
in  one  of  the  forms  of  Nu,  i.e.,  frog-headed,  already  described,  and 
Hehut  in  the  form  of  Nut ;  ^  and  in  another  group  Hehu  has  the 
head  of  a  serpent,  and  Hehut  that  of  a  cat.  According  to  the 
late  Dr.  Brug^sch  ^  the  name  Heh  is  connected  with  the  word 
which  indicates  an  undefined  and  unlimited  number,  i.e.,  heh,  Mm  ; 
when  applied  to  time  the  idea  suggested  is  "millions  of  years," 
and  Heh  is  equivalent  to  the  Greek  alayv.  In  several  passages 
quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch  mention  is  made  of  a  god  Heh, 
who  seems  to  be  a  personification  of  the  atmosphere  which 
exists  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  to  be  identical  with 
Shu,  and  that  distinguished  Egyptologist  went  so  far  as  to 
compare  his  functions  with  those  which  were  exercised  by 
xlion,  Eros,  and  Pneuma  in  Greek  systems  of  philosophy. 
In   a   small   scene  reproduced   by    Signor   Lanzone*  we    see   the 

god  Harpocrates  in  his  usual  attitude,  ^,  just  above  what  appears 

to  be  a  smaU  tree.  On  the  right  kneels  the  goddess  Hehut,  who 
is  making  her  outstretched  hand  and  arm  a  support  for  the  left 
hand  of  the  young  god  which  rests  upon  it ;  on  the  other  side 
kneels  Hehu,  who  is  represented  in  the  act  of  raising  or  supporting 
the  feet  of  the  god,  above  whose  head  are  the  beetle  and  disk. 

The  characteristics  of  the  third  pair  of  gods,  Kekui, 
^^^  w  %  ^T^  J ,  and  Kekuit,  ^^  w  %  ^^  ^  ^ ,  are  easier  to 
determine,  and  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  these  deities  represent 
the  male  and  female  powers  of  the  darkness  which  was  supposed  to 
cover  over  the  primeval  abyss  of  water ;  they  have  been  compared 
by  Dr.  Brugsch  with  the  Erebos  of  the  Greeks.  In  some  aspects 
they  appear  to  represent  both  the  night  and  the  day,  that  is  to 

^  Lanzone,  Bizionario,  page  685.  ^  Ihid.,  pi.  168  ff. 

=*  Beligion,  p.  132.  "  Op.  cit.,  p.  685. 


286  KERH   AND    KERHET 

say,  Kekui  is  called  "  the  raiser  up  of  the  light,"  and  Kekuit  "  the 
"  raiser  up  of  the  night."  It  is  not  difl&cult  to  see  how  these 
deities  obtained  these  names,  for  Kekui  represents  that  period  of 
the  night  which  immediately  precedes  the  day,  and  Kekuit  is 
that  period  of  the  night  which  immediately  follows  the  day.  At 
one  period  Kekui  and  Kekuit  were  considered  to  be  gods  of 
Elephantine,  and  their  attributes  were  identified  Avith  those  of  the 
Nubian  god  Khnemu  and  his  female  counterpart  Sati ;  but  this,  no 
doubt,  was  a  result  of  regarding  Kekui  and  Kekuit  as  personi- 
fications of  the  Nile-god  Hapi,  whose  hidden  fountains  lay  beneath 
the  rocks  at  some  part  of  the  Island  of  Elephantine.  According  to 
another  view  the  crocodile-god  Sebek,  one  of  whose  chief  seats  of 
worship  was  at  Kom  Ombo,  was  a  personification  of  the  old 
primeval  god  Kekui,  and  in  any  case  Sebek  was  certainly  con- 
sidered to  be  one  of  the  principal  forms  in  which  the  soul  of  the 
primeval  darkness  loved  to  array  itself.^  In  the  scenes  in  which 
the  forms  of  the  oldest  paut  or  company  of  the  gods  are  repre- 
sented Kekui  is  usually  given  the  head  of  a  serpent,  but  Kekuit 
has  the  head  either  of  a  frog  or  a  cat.^  In  one  scene  Kekui  and 
Kekuit  are  identified  with  Ka  and  Kait,  LJr^,  U  (]()  ^j  *^® 
former  being  called  the  "  grandfather  of  all  the  gods,"  and  the  latter 
the  "  grandmother  of  the  divine  company,"  ^  \\  ^  \^  '•'''^^  ^  P  '  -^^ 
this  scene  Ka  or  Kekui  has  the  head  of  a  frog  surmounted  by  a  beetle, 
and  Kait  or  Kekuit  the  head  of  a  serpent  surmounted  by  a  disk. 
The    characteristics    of    the    fourth    pair    of    gods,    Kekh, 

S  I  .-r-^Si  Jj,  and  Kerhet,  ^  8  ^~^  J),  are  not  easy  to  define, 
and  the  texts  in  some  places  give  quite  different  names  where  we 
should  expect  to  find  theirs ;  thus  we  have  Ni,  ()  [)  Jj  HHL ,  or 
Nenu,    '^'^'^^  (9  Jj ,  or  Nut,     ^^  ^  ^ ,  or  Amen,  (I         Jj ,  instead 


AAAAAA 


of   Kerb,    and   Ennit.  (1(1     ,    or   Nenuit,    '^^^    ^   ,    or   Nut, 


/V>AAAA 


^Q,     or  Nit,  01^^,     or     l\         ^  J},    instead  of  Kerhet. 

The  common  meaning  of  the  word  kerh  is  "  night,"  and  according 

Brugsch,  Beliylon,  p.  142.  '  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  168  ff. 


THE   FIRST   EIGHT   GODS  287 

to  this  the  deities  Kerh  and  Kerhet  would  represent  the  male  and 
female  powers  of  night;  on  the  other  hand,  the  determinative  <t-~-2^, 
which  occurs  in  each  name,  shows  that  these  gods  were  regarded 
as  personifications  of  some  apparently  inactive  powers  of  the 
primeval  watery  abyss,  and  we  may,  therefore,  regard  them  as 
types  of  powers  of  nature  in  a  state  of  repose  either  before  or  after 
a  state  of  activity.  In  the  scenes  in  which  the  forms  of  the  oldest 
company  of  the  gods  are  represented,  Ni,  that  is  to  say,  Kerh,  has 
the  head  of  a  frog,  with  or  without  a  beetle  upon  it,  or  the  head  of 
a  snake,  and  Ennit,  that  is  to  say,  Kerhet,  has  either  the  head  of  a 
frog  or  that  of  a  cat. 

It  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  the  various  views  which 
Egyptologists  have  held  about  the  above  four  pairs  of  deities,  and 
it  certainly  appears  as  if  the  ancient  Egyptians  themselves  had  no 
very  clear  ideas  as  to  their  functions.  As  to  their  antiquity  there 
is  no  room  for  doubt,  for  although  the  oldest  pictures  of  their 
forms  do  not  date  from  a  period  anterior  to  the  reign  of  Seti  I.,  it 
is  quite  clear,  from  the  way  in  which  they  are  mentioned,  that 
they  represent  traditional  ideas  of  an  extremely  ancient  character. 
One  proof  of  this  is  the  careful  mention  of  the  female  counterparts 
of  the  four  great  primeval  gods,  for  it  was  usual  in  the  case  of  gods 
who  were  the  product  of  the  purely  dynastic  period  to  pay  small 
attention   to   the   goddesses  who  were   regarded    as   their  wives. 

Thus  Ra  and  Amen  possessed  female  counterparts  called  Eat,    ®  J) , 

and   Ament,     [1  a/wwn  JO  ^     but   they  play   no   prominent   parts   in 

Egyptian  mythology,  and  are  rarely  mentioned  in  the  texts.  Man 
always  has  fashioned,  and  probably  always  will,  fashion  his  god, 
or  gods,  in  his  own  image,  and  he  has  always,  having  reached 
a  certain  stage  in  development,  given  to  his  gods  wives  and 
offspring  ;  but  the  nature  of  the  position  taken  by  the  wives  of 
the  gods  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  position  of  women  in  the 
households  of  those  who  write  the  legends  and  traditions  of  the  gods. 
The  gods  of  the  oldest  companv  in  Egypt  were,  the  writer 
believes,  invented  by  people  in  whose  households  women  held  a 
high  position,  and  among  whom  they  possessed  more  power  than  is 
usually  the  case  with  Oriental  peoples.     Nut,  Hehut,  Kekuit,  and 


288  APZU-RISHTU,    MUMJNIU-TIAJMAT 

Kerhet  are  the  equals  of  the  gods  Nu,  Heh,  Kekui,  and  Kerh,  and 
not  merely  the  bearers  of  offspring  as  were  the  later  goddesses. 
The  general  drift  of  the  texts  wherein  the  four  pairs  of  gods 
are  mentioned  indicates  that  three  pairs  were  qualities,  or 
characteristics,  or  attributes  of  the  fourth  pair  personified,  although 
some  would  make  the  four  pairs  represent  the  male  and  female 
elements  of  the  Four  Elements,  Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and  Water,  and 
others  would  make  them  stand  for  the  primeval  Matter  out  of 
which  all  things  have  been  made,  and  primeval  Space,  and 
primeval  Time,  and  primeval  Power.  To  say  definitely  and 
exactly  what  they  represent  is  in  the  present  state  of  Egyptological 
knowledge  impossible,  for  the  evidence  which  would  enable  us  to 
arrive  at  a  final  decision  in  the  matter  is  not  forthcoming. 

Before  we  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  the  events  which 
resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  sun  and  later  of  the  world,  it  will  be 
interesting  to  compare  with  the  above  four  pairs  of  gods  the  group 
of  gods  that  we  meet  with  in  the  "  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation,"  ^ 
which  are  Avritten  in  cuneiform,  and  contain  the  views  and  beliefs 
of  the  Assyrians  as  to  the  origin  of  the  gods,  and  of  the  world, 
and  of  mankind.  The  old  company  of  primeval  gods  mentioned 
in  these  Tablets  are  also  eight  in  number,  and  they  fall  readily 
into  four  pairs.  The  first  pair  consisted  of  Apzu  -  EiSHTtr, 
>-^Ty  ^^y  *^TIt^  *"^T  ^TII^'  ^•®"'  *^^  "primeval  abyss,"  and 
MuMMU-TiAMAT,  ►^  t^^yyy  *^  *^]<  ^X^-  '^^^  meaning  of  the 
word  mummii  is  unknown,^  but  Tiamat  is  the  name  of  the  female 
counterpart  of  Apzu-rishtii,  and  she  became  the  mother  of  offspring 
by  him.  These  two  deities,  then,  represent  the  male  and  female 
powers  of  the  watery  mass  which  contained  the  germs  of  all  life, 
and  of  every  kind  of  life,  and  they  existed  at  a  time  "  when  of  the 
"  gods  none  had  been  called  into  being,  and  none  bore  a  name,  and 
"  no   destinies    [were    ordained]."      When    "  their    waters    were 

^  The  best  copies  of  the  cuneiform  texts  hitherto  issued  will  be  found  in  the 
publication  of  the  Ti'ustees  of  the  British  Museum,  entitled  Cimeiform  Texts  from 
Babylonian  Tablets,  part  xiii.,  Loudon,  ]901.  These,  with  many  additional  texts, 
are  given  in  Mr.  L.  W.  King's  Seren  Tablets  of  Creation  with  transliterations, 
translations,  notes,  etc.,  London,  1902.     (Vol.  I.) 

-  Mummu  =  the  Mwv/xis  of  Damascus,  and  probably  means  "  chaos." 


LAKHMU   AND   LAKHAMU  289 

"  mingled  together  "  then  the  work  of  creation  began.  We  thus 
see  that  Apzu-rishtu  and  Mummu-Tiamat  are  the  exact  equivalents 
in  the  Babylonian  cosmogony  of  Nu  and  Nut  in  the  Egyptian,  and 
that  they  are  the  originals  of  the  Greek  forms  'Airaacjv  and  TavOe, 
which  are  given  in  the  scheme  of  Damascius.  ^ 

The  next  pair  of  gods  in  the  Assyrian  texts  are  Lakhmu, 
►^y  ::yyy<  »^,  and  Lakhamu,  ^^]  >-^y  {^<  >^,  but  of  their 
functions  we  know  nothing,  any  more  than  we  do  of  the  Egyptian 
primeval  gods  Heh  and  Hehut.  The  names  of  the  third  and 
fourth  deities  in  the  list  of  Damascius  (ed.  Kopp,  p.  125)  are  Jaxos 
and  ^ocxTJ,  but  these  are  clearly  mistakes  for  Aaxos  and  AaxQ,  i.e., 
Lakhmu  and  Lakhamu. 

According  to  the  First  Tablet  of  the  Creation  Series  "  ages 
increased,"^  and  then  two  more  gods  came  into  being,  viz., 
Anshak,  ^  i^,  and  Kishar,  >->-y  <]^  i^,  i.e.,  the  'Ja-acopos 
and  Ki(T(TapYi  of  Damascius.  Now  up  to  this  point  the  three  pairs 
of  gods  of  the  Assyrians  agree  exactly  with  the  first  three  pairs  of 
gods  of  the  oldest  Egyptian  company  of  the  gods,  and  the  points 
of  resemblance  are  striking.  We  see  from  the  table  printed  by 
Brugsch^  that  the  Egyptian  authorities  differed  as  to  the  names  of 
the  god  and  goddess  of  the  fourth  pair  of  gods,  some  giving  Kerh 
and  Kerhet,  others  giving  Amen  and  Ament,  and  others  giving 
Enen  and  Enenet-hemset,  and  others  Ni  and  Ennit ;  all,  however, 
agreed  that  a  fourth  pair  of  deities  were  necessary  to  complete  the 
company,  and  that  one  must  be  a  god  and  the  other  a  goddess. 

The  First  Tablet  of  the  Creation  Series  mentions  a  seventh 
deity  called  Anu,  ►^y  yf  *:/-,  who  is  clearly  to  be  identified  with 
the  "Avoq  of  Damascius,  and  an  eighth  deity  called  Nudimmud, 
'^y  »/-  ^ly  *^II4i.,  which  is  a  title  of  the  god  Ea  ;  the  context 
which  would  probably  have  supplied  us  with  the  name  of  a  ninth 
god  is  broken  away,  and  at  present  there  is  no  means  of  restoring 

^  He  was  born  in  Syria,  probably  at  Damascus,  in  tbe  last  quarter  of  the  Vth 
century  of  our  era.  He  studied  at  Alexandria  and  at  Athens,  and  was  a  pupil  of 
Marinus  and  Zenodotus,  and  when  Justinian  closed  the  schools  at  Athens  he  went 
to  the  court  of  the  Persian  king  Khusrau  (Chosroes).  The  best  edition  of  his  work 
on  "  Fii'st  Principles"  is  that  of  Kopp,  published  in  1828. 

"  King,  Bahrjlonian  Religion,  p.  61.  ^  Religion,  p.  127. 

U 


290  ANU,    EA,    BEL 

the  passage.  Both  these  deities  are  masculine,  whereas  one  should 
be  masculine  and  one  feminine.  In  the  list  of  the  primeval  gods 
given  by  Damascius  following  Kicrcrapr)  we  have  "Avo^;,  'IXXti^o?, 
and  '^ds ;  the  first  of  these  is,  as  we  have  said,  Anu  ;  the  second 
is  the  god  Enlil,  >^]][  t^]] ;  and  the  third  is  Ea,  ^  tjiyj  ]}. 
But  all  these  are  gods,  and  there  is  no  goddess  among  them,  and  it 
is  difficult  not  to  think  that  in  making  the  recension  of  the  story 
which  is  preserved  in  cuneiform  the  Assyrian  editors  substituted 
the  three  gods  Anu,  Bel,  and  Ea,  who  represented  heaven,  and 
earth,  and  the  abyss  respectively,  for  those  who  were  in  the  older 
recension.  The  Assyrian  copy  which  we  now  have  was  made 
during  the  reign  of  Ashur-bani-pal,  king  of  Assyria  from  B.C.  668 
to  B.C.  626,  presumably  from  a  Babylonian  archetype,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  say  to  what  period  the  actual  version  which  it 
represents  is  to  be  assigned.  The  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation 
contain  several  Assyrianized  forms  of  ancient  Sumerian  words,  a 
fact  which  proves  that  the  original  traditions  incorporated  in  the 
work  must  be  of  Sumerian  origin,  and  must  have  been  formulated 
in  remote  antiquity.  It  is  surprising  therefore  to  find  so  much 
similarity  existing  between  the  primeval  gods  of  Sumer  and  those 
of  Egypt,  especially  as  the  resemblance  cannot  be  the  result  of 
borrowing.  It  is  out  of  the  question  to  assume  that  Ashur-bani- 
pal's  editors  borrowed  the  system  from  Egypt,  or  that  the  literary 
men  of  the  time  of  Seti  I.  borrowed  their  ideas  from  the  literati  of 
Babylonia  or  Assyria,  and  we  are  therefore  driven  to  the  conclusion 
that  both  the  Sumerians  and  the  early  Egyptians  derived  their 
primeval  gods  from  some  common  but  exceedingly  ancient  source. 
The  similarity  between  the  two  companies  of  gods  seems  to  be  too 
close  to  be  accidental,  especially  as  there  is  every  possibility  that 
the  Sumerian  system  was  taken  into  Egypt  by  the  same  people 
who  carried  into  the  country  the  art  of  making  bricks,  the  use 
of  the  cylinder  seal,  and  the  like.^  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is 
certain  that  the  company  of  primeval  gods,  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  was  common  to  the  Sumerians  and  Egyptians,  was  quite 
different  from  the  companies  of  gods  of  which  Osiris  and  Ra-Tem 
were  the  heads  in  Egypt,  and  also  from  those  which  Avere  formed 

1  Sec  my  E(jiji>t  in  the  Fredynastic  and  Archaic  Periods,  p.  41. 


THE   PRIMEVAL   SPIRIT  291 

in  Babylonia  and  Assyria  when  these  countries  were  inhabited  by 
Semitic  populations. 

Now  the  First  Tablet  of  Creation  gives  us  to  understand 
clearly  that  the  work  of  creation  began  when  the  waters,  or 
essences,  of  the  first  pair  of  primeval  gods,  Apzu  and  Tiamat, 
were  mingled  together,  and  that  the  offspring  of  this  union  were 
Lakhmu  and  Lakhamu,  Anshar  and  Kishar,  etc.  What  the  views 
of  the  ancient  Egyptians  on  this  subject  were  we  do  not  know,  but 
it  is  quite  clear  from  the  allusions  in  many  texts  that  the  second, 
third,  and  fourth  pairs  of  the  gods  already  mentioned  were  the 
offspring  of  the  union  of  the  first  pair  Nu  and  Nut,  i.e.,  that  they 
were  their  attributes.  We  may  also  conclude  that  Nu  and  Nut 
were  the  male  and  female  powers  of  the  vast  and  inert  watery 
mass,  with  its  male  and  female  counterparts  Ni  and  Ennit,  and 
that  the  second  pair  of  gods,  Heh  and  Hehut,  represented  their 
eternal  nature.  The  third  pair  of  deities  are  nothing  but  the  male 
and  female  counterparts  of  Darkness  personified,  and  thus  we  have 
as  the  primeval  material  from  which  everything  was  made  an  eternal, 
boundless,  watery  mass  wherein  are  the  germs  of  life,  male  and 
female  ;  this  watery  mass  is,  however,  enveloped  in  thick  darkness. 
The  late  Dr.  Brugsch,  basing  his  opinion  upon  certain  statements 
made  in  the  Egyptian  texts,  declared  that  the  primeval  spirit  (Urgeist) 
felt  the  desire  for  creative  activity,  and  that  his  word  awoke  the 
world  to  life  in  a  form  in  which  it  had  already  been  mirrored  in  his 
mind,  and  that  the  first  act  of  creation  began  with  the  formation  out 
of  the  primeval  watery  mass  of  an  egg,  wherefrom  issued  the  light  of 
day,  i.e.,  Ra,  which  was  the  immediate  cause  of  all  life  in  the  earthly 
world.  In  this  light,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  Rising  Sun,  the  almighty 
power  of  the  divine  spirit  incorporated  itself  in  a  brilliant  form.^ 

1  "Der  gottliche  Urgeist,  unzertrennlich  von  dem  Urstoff  des  Urwassers, 
"  f iiKlte  das  Verlang-en  Bach  schopferisclier  Thatigkeit  und  sein  Wort  erweckte  die 
"  Welt  zum  Leben,  deren  Gestalt  nnd  formenreiclie  Gebilde  sich  in  seinem  Auge 
"  vorher  abgespiegelt  batten,  Ibre  korperlicben  Umrisse  und  Farben  entspracben 
"  nack  ibrer  Entstehnng  der  Wabrbeit  d.b.  der  Urvorstellungen  des  gottlichen 
"  Geistes  iiber  sein  kiinftiges  Werk.  Der  erste  Scbopfungsact  begann  mit  der 
"  Bildung  eines  Eies  aus  dem  Urgewasser,  aus  dem  das  Tageslicht  (Ra),  die  un- 
"mittelbare  Ursacbe  (ra)  des  Lebens  in  dem  Bereiche  der  irdiscben  Welt  beii-aus- 
"  bracb.  In  der  aufgebenden  Sonne  verkorperte  sicb  die  Allmacbt  des  gottlicben 
"  Geistes  in  ibrer  glanzvollsten  Gestalt"  (Beligion,  p,  101), 


292  THOTH   AND   HIS   PAUT 

The  opinion  of  the  great  Egyptologist  is  of  great  weight  on 
all  matters  of  this  kind,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  have 
no  authority  in  the  texts  for  all  the  details  of  his  narrative  of  the 
events  which  are  supposed  to  have  taken  place  before  the  appear- 
ance of  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  and  that  for  many  of  the  ancient 
Egyptian  views  on  the  subject  of  the  Creation  our  only  authorities 
are  compositions  which,  in  the  forms  in  which  we  know  them,  are 
not  older  than  the  period  of  the  end  of  the  Middle  Empire  and 
that  of  the  beginning  of  the  New  Empire,  and  many  of  the  views 
and  opinions  expressed  in  them  date  from  the  same  periods.     That 
the  sun  was  the  product  of  the  primeval  watery  mass  of  Nu  the 
Egyptians  believed  beyond  doubt,  because  they  declared  repeatedly 
that  Ra  came  forth  from  Nu,  but  they  did  not,  as  far  as  we  know% 
make  it  to  be   the   dwelling-place  of  a  primeval  spirit  (Urgeist) 
which  designed  and  planned  the  future  world  in  its  mind  before 
it  beo:an  to  create  it,  and  which  carried  out  the  various  works  of 
creation  on  the  lines  which  it  had  evolved  in  its  consciousness  long 
before  the  darkness  which  lay  on  the  watery  mass  was  pierced  by 
the  light  of  the  sun.     We  know  that  the  priesthood  of  Hermopolis, 
the  Khemennu  of  the  Egyptian  texts,  i.e.,  the  "  city  of  the  Eight 
Gods,"  where  Nu,  Nut,  Hehu,  Hehut,  Kekui,  Kekuit,  Kerh,  and 
Kerhet   were   worshipped,    placed    at   the   head   of    their   divine 
company  the  god  Thoth,  to  whom  certainly  in  later  times  were 
ascribed  many  of  the  attributes  which  Dr.  Brugsch's  "Urgeist" 
possessed.     But  J;here  is  no  proof  whatsoever  that  Thoth  was  the 
original  leader  of  this  company  of  gods ;  on  the  contrary,  there  is 
reason  for  thinking  that  if  the  Eight  ever  had  a  leader  in  the 
beginning  of  their  existence  he  must  have  been  a  form  of  the 
Sun-god.     The  fact  is  that   as  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  formed 
their  companies  of  gods  from  systems  already  in  existence,  and 
placed  their  own  local  gods  at  the  head  of  them,  so  the  priests 
of  Hermopolis    for    some    reason    unknown   to   us   adopted   the 
primeval  company  of  Eight,  and  appointed  their  own  local  god 
Thoth  to  be  their  head.     The  attempt  to  find  any  equivalent  of 
the  "  spirit  of  Elohim,"  which,  according  to  the  Book  of  Genesis, 
moved,  or  brooded,  on  the  face  of  the  waters  before  the  creation  of 
light,  has  nothing  to  support  it  in  the  Egyptian  texts. 


PAPYRUS    OF   NES-AMSU  293 

But  although  we  do  not  know  what  the  primitive  Egyptians 
imagined  to  be  the  means  by  which  the  Sun  came  into  being,  we 
have  a  very  good  idea  of  what  they  thought  about  the  creation  of 
the  gods,  and  of  the  world,  and  of  the  animals,  birds,  trees,  fish, 
reptiles,  etc.,  which  are  in  it,  and  by  wliose  agency  it  was  brought 
about.  We  owe  our  knowledge  of  these  things  to  a  papyrus 
preserved  in  the  British  Museum  (No.  10,188),  which  was  written 
for  a  priest  of  Panopolis  (the  modern  Akhmim),  of  high  rank  and 
lineage,  called  Nes-Amsu,  or  Nes-Min,  during  the  thirteenth  year 
of  the  reign  of  "  Alexander,  the  son  of  Alexander,"  i.e.,  about 
B.C.  312.  This  remarkable  document  contains,  among  other 
valuable  compositions,  a  series  of  Chapters  of  a  long  magical  work 
which  was  written  with  the  object  of  effecting  the  destruction  of 
the  arch-fiend  Apepi  and  his  fiends  and  devils  of  darkness,  and  of 
keeping  storms  and  hurricanes  out  of  the  sky ;  many  of  the 
Chapters  are  followed  by  rubrics  which,  as  we  have  already  shown 
in  the  description  of  the  Tuat  given  above,  contain  directions  for 
the  performance  of  the  ceremonies  which  were  to  accompany  the 
recital  of  the  words.  Where  the  Chapters  were  to  be  recited  is 
not  clear,  but  as  two  out  of  three  works  in  the  papyrus  were 
chanted  in  the  temple  of  Amen-Ra,  the  king  of  the  gods,  at  Thebes, 
we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  assume  that  the  third  was  a  service 
which  was  performed  in  the  temple  from  time  to  time.  The  first 
work,  the  "  Festival  Songs  of  Isis  and  Nephthys,"  was  a  very 
important  service,  and  the  second,  the  "  Lamentations  of  Isis,"  was 
probably  a  supplement  to  it ;  two  priestesses,  who  dressed  in  the 
characters  of  Isis  and  Nephthys,  and  personified  these  goddesses, 
sang  the  sections,  or  "houses,"  of  the  Festival  Songs  in  turn  on 
the  great  commemorative  festivals  of  Osiris,  and  as  the  "Lamenta- 
tions" were  rhythmical  they  were  probably  sung  at  the  same 
service. 

The  rubric  of  the  "Festival  Songs  "  orders  that  they  be  sung 
in  the  temple  of  Amen-Ra,  and  as  the  third  work,  the  "Book 
of  Overthrowing  Apepi,"  was  devoted  to  the  protection  of  the  Sun- 
god  Ra,  the  great  lord  of  the  temple,  provision  must  have  been 
made  for  reciting  it  there.  Be  this  as  it  may,  our  present  interest 
in  the  papyrus  centres  in  the  fact  that  it  contains  two  copies  of 


294  THE   CREATION 

the  story  ^  of  the  Creation  which  are  of  the  greatest  interest. 
Curiously  enough,  each  copy  is  inserted  among  the  Chapters  in  the 
main  body  of  the  work,  and  it  seems  as  if  they  represent  two 
distinct  versions,  although  in  many  places  the  text  in  each  is 
identical.  Each  copy  is  entitled,  "  The  Book  of  knowing  the 
Evolutions  of  Ra,  and  of  Overthrowing  Apepi."  The  word  here 
rendered  by  "Evolutions"  is  Jche2)eru,  ^  "^T^  U^^,  being  derived 
from  the  root  hheioer^  )||,  which  means  "to  make,  to  fashion, 

"  to  produce,  to  form,  to  become,"  and  in  a  derived  sense  "  to  roll," 
so  that  the  title  might  be  translated  the  "  Book  of  knowing  the 
"  Becomings  of  Ra,"  i.e.,  the  things  which  were  made,  or  created, 
or  came  into  being  through  Ra.  In  the  text  the  words  are  placed 
in  the  mouth  of  the  god  Neb-er-tcher,  ^   3 ,  the  lord  of  the 

universe  and  a  form  of  the  Sun-god  Ril,  who  says,  "  I  am  he  who 
"  came  into  being  in  the  form  of  the  god  Khepera,  S  ^^  (I  ^ , 
"  and  I  was  the  creator  of  that  which  came  into  being,  that  is  to 
"  say,  I  was  the  creator  of  everything  which  came  into  being ;  now 
''  when  I  had  come  into  being  myself,  the  things  which  I  created 
"  and  which  came  forth  from  out  of  my  mouth  were  very  many." 
In  these  words  Neb-er-tcher,  or  Ra,  says  that  he  took  upon  himself 
the  form  of  Khepera,  i.e.,  that  he  was  the  god  who  was  most 
intimately  connected  with  the  creation  of  things  of  every  kind. 
Khepera  was  symbolized  by  a  beetle  which  belonged  to  the  class 
of  "  Coprophagi,"  or  "  dung- eaters,"  which  having  laid  its  eggs  in 
masses  of  dung  rolled  them  about  until  they  became  circular  in 
form.  These  balls,  though  made  of  dead,  inert  matter,  contained 
the  germs  of  life,  which,  under  the  influence  of  warmth  and  heat, 
grew,  and  in  due  course  developed  into  living  creatures  which 
could  move  about  and  seek  their  food.  At  a  very  early  period  in 
their  history  the  Egyptians  associated  the  sun's  disk  with  the  dung 
ball  of  the  beetle,  partly  on  account  of  its  shape,  and  partly  because 
it  was  the  source  of  heat,  and  light,  and  life  to  man,  even  as  the 
dung  ball  was  to  the  young  beetles.  Having  once  got  the  idea 
that  the  disk  of  the  sun  was  like  the  ball  of  the  beetle,  they  went  a 
step  farther,  and  imagined  that  it  must  be  pushed  across  the  sky 

^  The  first  copy  is  in  column  xxvi.  and  the  second  in  column  xxviii. 


THE   CREATION  295 

by  a  gigantic  beetle  just  as  the  dung  ball  was  rolled  over  the 
ground  by  a  beetle  on  earth,  and  in  pictures  of  the  sunrise  we 
actually  see  the  disk  being  pushed  up  or  forward  into  the  sky  by  a 
beetle.  Gradually  the  ideas  of  new  life,  resurrection,  life  in  a 
new  form,  and  the  like,  became  attached  to  the  beetle,  and  the 
god  with  the  attributes  of  the  beetle,  among  which  in  later  days 
was  included  the  idea  of  self-production,  became  one  of  the  most 
important  of  the  forms  of  Ra,  and  the  creator  of  heaven,  and  earth, 
and  the  Tuat  and  all  that  is  in  them. 

Having  declared  under  what  form  he  had  come  into  being 
Khepera  goes  on  to  say  that  his  power  was  not  exhausted  by  one 
creative  act,  but  that  he  continued  to  create  new  things  out  of 
those  which  he  had  already  made,  and  he  says  that  they  went  forth 
from  his  mouth.  The  word  "mouth"  may  be  here  a  figurative 
expression,  but  judging  from  other  parts  of  the  text  we  are 
probably  intended  to  understand  it  literally.  The  god  continues 
his  narrative  thus  : — "  Heaven  did  not  exist,  and  earth  had  not 
"  come  into  being,  and  the  things  of  the  earth  (plants  ?)  and 
"  creeping  things  had  not  come  into  existence  in  that  place  (or,  at 
"  that  time),  and  I  raised  (or,  built  up)  them  from  out  of  Nu  from 
"  a  state  of  inactivity."  Thus  it  is  clear  that  Khepera  himself  was 
the  one  thing  besides  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu  which  was  then  in 
existence,  and  it  is  evident  that  we  are  to  understand  that  he 
performed  the  various  acts  of  creation  without  the  help  of  any 
female  principle,  and  that  Nu  had  nothing  to  do  with  them 
except  to  supply  the  primeval  matter,  the  "Urstoff "  of  Brugsch, 
from  which  all  things  were  made.     The  word  rendered  above  by 

inactivity  is  enen.     II  AH'^^"  ,  and  it  ought  to  refer  to  the 

things  which  Khepera  says  he  raised  up  out  of  Nu,  in  which  case 
we  must  understand  that  everything  in  heaven  and  in  earth  was  at 
that  time  existing  in  a  quiescent  state  in  the  watery  mass  of  Ku. 

The  narrative  continues :  "I  found  no  place  there  whereon  I 
"  could  stand.  I  worked  a  charm  upon  my  own  heart  (or,  will), 
"  [and]  I  laid  a  foundation  in  Maa,  [and]  I  made  every  form  (or, 
"  attribute).  I  was  one  by  myself,  [for]  I  had  not  emitted  from 
"  myself  the  god  Shu,  and  I  had  not  spit  out  from  myself  the  goddess 


296  MAAT   AND   HOKHINIAH 

"  Tefnut ;  there  was  no  other  being  who  worked  with  me."  The 
things  made  clear  by  this  passage  are  that  Khepera  alone  was  the 
creator,  and  that  he  had  no  place  to  stand  upon  in  performing  the 
various  acts  of  creation.  The  words,  Khut-nd  em  dh-d,  here 
rendered  "  I  worked  a  charm  upon  my  heart,"  present  difficulty, 
but  this  or  something  very  like  must  be  their  meaning. 
The  word 


in  texts  of  the  kind  generally  means  "  to 
"  perform  a  magical  rite  or  ceremony,"  and  the  author  of  the 
story  of  the  creation  before  us  found  himself  obliged  to  make  the 
god  resort  to  magical  powers  to  get  himself  out  of  a  difficulty ; 
that  Khepera  worked  in  some  way  and  by  some  means  upon  his 
heart  or  will  is  clear,  and  as  a  result  he  laid  a  foundation  for 
himself  and  the  work  which  he  was  about  to  do  in  Maa.  The 
name  f)  Jj  may  be  read  either  as  Maa  or  Shu,  but  Shu  cannot  be 
the  reading  here  because  in  the  next  sentence  Khepera  tells  us 
that  he  had  not  at  that  time  emitted  Shu  from  himself.  From  the 
texts  of  all  periods  we  learn  much  about  the  conceptions  which  the 
Egyptians  had  arrived  at  concerning  Maa,  and  it  is  clear  that  the 
word  primarily  meant  ''what  is  straight,"  and  that  it  also  came  to 
mean  "  straightness,  rectitude,  uprightness,  right,  law,  order, 
"  regularity,  justice,"  and  other  significations  of  like  character ;  the 

goddess   Maat,     ^^  '=^  ^S) ,    was    the    personification    of    "  Truth." 


The  idea  which  the  text  is  intended  to  convey  here  is  that  Khepera 
laid  the  foundation  of  the  future  world  according  to  a  clear,  well- 
defined,  and  unalterable  plan,  wherein  there  was  no  error ;  Mad 
was  with  Khepera  exactly  what  Hokhmah,  riDDn  (a  word  somewhat 
inadequately  rendered  "wisdom"  in  Proverbs  viii.  2  fF.),  was  to 
Yahweh.  Wisdom  says  that  she  was  set  up  from  everlasting, 
from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was,  when  there  were  no 
depths,  before  the  mountains  were  settled,  and  before  the  hills 
was  she  brought  forth  when  as  yet  Yahweh  had  made  neither  the 
earth,  nor  the  fields,  nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  earth, 
and  that  she  was  there  when  he  prepared  the  heavens  and  placed  a 
circle  upon  the  face  of  the  depth  (Proverbs  viii.  23  ff.). 

The  narrative  continues :   "I  made  a  foundation  in  (or,  by) 
"  my  own  heart,  and  there  came  into  being  multitudes  of  things, 


TEM,    SHE,    TEFNUT  297 

"  of  things  from  the  things  of  what  was  produced  from  the  things 
"  which  they  produced."  This  sentence  is  both  involved  and 
redundant,  but  about  its  meaning  there  is  fortunately  no  difficulty, 
for  the  writer  only  makes  the  god  assert  in  an  emphatic  manner 
that  everything  that  is  came  into  being  as  a  result  of  the  act  of 
the  god  in  laying  a  foundation  in  his  own  heart,  and  that  when 
once  the  creative  processes  had  been  set  in  motion  they  continued 
their  operation  of  their  own  accord,  apparently  without  any  direct 
interference  from  the  original  creative  power.  In  the  next 
sentence  we  have  a  reference  to  a  curious  belief  which  was  already 
current  in  the  Vlth  Dynasty,  but  at  that  period  it  had  reference  to 
the  god  Tem  and  not  to  Khepera,  and  occurs  with  the  following  con- 
text : — "  This  Pepi  washeth  himself  in  the  Lake  of  Aaru  wherein 
"  Ra  washeth  himself;  Horus  hath  brought  the  back  of  this  Pepi, 
''  and  Thoth  hath  brought  his  legs,  and  Shu  hath  lifted  him  up 
''  to  heaven ;  0  Nut,  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  Pepi.  Tem  hath 
"  departed  to  Annu  to  satisfy  his  love  of  pleasure  ;  he  hath  thrust 
"  his  member  into  his  hand,  and  hath  performed  his  desire,  and 
"  hath  produced  the  two  children  Shu  and  Tefnut,^  and  these  two 
"  children  put  Pepi  between  them,  and  they  set  him  among  the 
"  gods  which  are  in  Sekhet-hetepet."  In  the  story  of  the  creation 
Khepera  is  made  to  say,  "  I  had  union  with  my  hand,  and  I 
"  embraced  my  shadow  in  a  love  embrace ;  I  poured  seed  into  my 
"  own  mouth,  and  I  sent  forth  from  myself  issue  in  the  form  of 
"  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut."  Now  a  myth  of  this  character  can 
only  be  the  product  of  a  people  at  a  low  level  of  civilization,  and 
it  is  difficult  to  understand  the  character  of  the  mind  of  an  author 
who  in  one  sentence  helps  Khepera  out  of  a  difficulty  by  ascribing 
to  him  the  possession  and  use  of  magical  powers,  and  in  another 
reduces  him  to  the  necessity  of  committing  an  act  of  masturbation 
in  order  to  begin  the  generations  of  the  gods,  and  yet  assigns  to 

I  AAA/W\       Q         V-A  Vv\  I 


AWV\A 


\   \     ^^ 


298  APPEARANCE   OF   RA 

him  at  the  same  time  many  of  the  powers  which  are  assigned  by 
Christian  nations  to  God.  The  only  possible  way  of  accounting 
for  this  gross  passage  is  to  assume  either  that  it  was  copied  into 
the  papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu,  or  Nesi-Min,  by  the  scribe  simply 
because  he  found  it  in  the  archetype  from  which  he  was  working, 
or  that  the  author,  knowing  that  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  held  to  be 
the  children  of  Khepeni,  and  that  this  god  was  unaccompanied  by 
any  female  counterpart,  explained  the  origin  of  his  children  in  the 
manner  described  above.  But  in  any  case  this  brutal  example  of 
naturalism  was  not  intended  to  be  obscene,  and  it  must  be  regarded 
as  a  survival  in  literature  of  the  dynastic  period  of  one  of  the 
coarse  habits  of  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  that  is  to  say,  of  one  of 
the  indigenous  African  tribes  from  which  dynastic  Egyptians  were 
partly  descended. 

The  next  section  of  the  narrative  is  diflScult  to  translate  and 
explain,  for  it  contains  words  which  Khepera  puts  into  the  mouth 
of  his  "father"  Nu,  who  says  that  his  eye,  i.e.,  the  Sun,  was 
covered  up  behind  Shu  and  Tefnut,  but  that  after  henti  periods, 

P    \5    \5    =*='^S,    had    passed^    that    he    had    become    three 

gods  instead  of  one,  and  after  he  had  come  into  being  in  this 
earth,  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  raised  up  from  out  of  the  watery 
mass  wherein  they  were,  and  they  brought  his  eye  in  their 
train.  The  general  meaning  of  these  words  seems  to  be  that  when 
Khepera  was  existing  in  Nu  by  himself  the  sun,  in  which  he 
afterwards  incorporated  himself,  was  hidden  in  the  watery  deep ; 
but  as  soon  as  Khepera  had  produced  Shu  and  Tefnut  the  sun 
emerged  from  the  deep   and   followed   in   their  train.     In  other 

words,  we  learn  that  the  Eye,  3 ,  of  Nu  was  unable  to  make 

itself  seen  until  after  Shu  and  Tefnut  had  come  into  being.  We 
need  not  tarry  to  consider  all  the  various  attributes  of  these  twin 
gods,  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  here  that  Shu  represents  the 
daylight  and,  in  some  cases,  the  atmosphere  which  supports  the 
heavens  and  keeps  them  above  the  earth,  whilst  Tefnut,  the  female 

1  The  hea  period  =  60  years,  but  when  two  such  periods  are  referred  to  the 
writer  does  not  mean  necessarily  120  years,  but  some  long,  indefinite  period  of 
time. 


CREATION   OF   MAN  299 

counterpart  of  Shu,  represents  rain,  dew,  and  moisture.  We  have 
akeady  seen  that  these  twin  gods  proceeded  from  Khepera,  and 
the  words  which  are  used  to  express  the  idea  of  emission,  i.e., 

dsliesh  \\  ^^  -^^"'^ ,  and  tef  "^  #^''^ ,  indicate  the  processes  by 
which  they  came  into  being  as  separate  entities.  The  creation  of 
Shu  made  a  space  between  the  heavens  and  the  earth  into  which 
the  Eye  of  Nu  could  rise  from  out  of  the  waters  and  shine,  and 
because  the  sunlight  immediately  followed  the  creation  of  Shu  that 
god  is  sometimes  identified  with  light,  and  is  regarded  as  its 
personification.  The  general  sense  of  the  passage  under  discussion 
makes  it  necessary  to  assume  that  Nu  is  identified  with  Khepera, 
and  vice  versa. 

The  next  passage  refers  to  the  creation  of  man,  and  the  god, 
presumably  Khepera,  says,  "  Now  after  these  things,  I  united  my 
"  members,  and  I  wept  over  them,  and  men  and  women  came  into 
"  being  from  the  tears  which  came  forth  from  my  eye."  Of  this 
passage  there  are  two  interpretations  possible.  We  may  either 
assume  that  the  tears  which  fell  from  the  Eye  of  Nu,  or  Khepera, 
are  the  rays  of  light  which  fell  from  the  sun,  and  that  men  and 
women  are  the  offspring  of  the  light,  or  what  is  far  more  probable, 
that  men  and  women  are  the  product  of  the  tears  of  water  which 
fell  from  the  eye  of  the  god  upon  his  members,^  and  that  they 
turned  into  human  beings  straightway.  Meanwhile  the  god  Nu  or 
Khepera  had  made  another  Eye,  by  which  we  are,  no  doubt,  to 
understand  the  Moon,  and  it  is  said  that  when  the  first  Eye  found 
that  a  second  had  been  made  it  raged  at  the  god ;  now  when  the 
god  saw  this  he  endowed  the  second  Eye  with  some  of  the  power 
(or,  splendour)  which  he  had  made,  and  having  made  it  take  up 
its  position  in  his  face  it  henceforth  ruled  the  whole  earth.  After 
this  the  god  brought  about  the  creation  of  plants,  and  herbs,  and 
reptiles,  and  creeping  things.  Finally,  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut 
produced  the  gods  and  goddesses  Seb  and  Nut,  Osiris  and  Isis,  Set 
and  Nephthys,  and  Heru-khent-an-maati,  i.e.,  the  "  Blind  Horus," 
one   after   the   other   at   one   birth,  and  these  deities  multiplied 


J  I 

1 

Q.  I 


300  KHEPERA   AND    OSIRIS 

offspring  in  this  earth.  Thus  we  have  a  complete  account  of  how 
a  male  god  who  existed  alone  in  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu  produced 
from  himself  by  unnatural  means  a  pair  of  deities,  one  male  and 
one  female,  and  how  this  pair  produced  three  other  pairs,  i.e., 
three  gods  and  three  goddesses,  and  one  male  deity  in  addition,  in 
fact  the  ])aut  or  company  of  the  great  gods  of  Heliopolis,  which  in 
this  instance  was  made  to  include  ten  gods.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  the  order  in  which  the  acts  of  creation  took  place.  The  self- 
existent  god  who  had  lived  for  ever  created  :  1.  The  light.  2.  The 
firmament,  or  home  of  moisture,  i.e.,  clouds  and  rain.  3.  Man- 
kind. 4.  The  second  (?)  Eye,  i.e.,  the  Moon  (?).  5.  Plants,  and 
herbs,  and  reptiles,  and  creeping  things.  6.  Seven  deities,  four 
being  male  and  three  female. 

In  the  second  version  of  the  story  of  creation  which  we  shall 
now  describe  some  interesting  variants  will  be  found,  and  we  shall 
see  that  the  god  Osiris  is  made  to  usurp  the  position  which  in  the 
first  version  is  occupied  by  the  god  Khepeni.  The  ojDening  words 
are  : — Neb-er-tcher  saith,  "  I  am  the  creator  of  what  hath  come 
"  into  being,  and  I  myself  came  into  being  under  the  form  of  the 
"  god  Khepera,  and  I  came  into  being  in  primeval  time.  I  came 
"  into  being  in  the  form  of  Khepera,  and  I  was  the  creator  of  what 
"  came  into  being,  that  is  to  say,  I  formed  myself  out  of  the 
"  primeval  matter,  and  I  formed  myself  in  the  primeval  matter. 

"  My  name  is  Ausares,  1]  (®  [I  ^^^  Jj  (i.e.,  Osiris),  [who]  is  the 
"  primeval  matter  of  primeval  matter.  I  have  done  all  my  will  in 
"  this  earth,  I  have  spread  abroad  therein,  and  I  have  made  strong 
"  (or,  lifted  up)  my  hand."  In  this  passage  we  have  Neb-er-tcher, 
who  came  into  being  in  the  form  of  Khepera,  identifying  himself 

with  Osiris,  who  is  described  as  the  pautet  pautti  1^  \\ 
^S.  _^  ^  'm^  ^  '  5  i-6.j  the  very  essence  of  primeval  matter,  and 
the  source  of  all  created  things.  This  is  a  remarkable  attribute  to 
ascribe  to  the  god  of  the  dead,  and  it  is  only  understandable  when 
we  remember  that  it  was  a  common  belief  of  the  Egyptians  that 
life  rose  out  of  death.  The  narrative  continues,  "  I  was  alone,  for 
"they  (i.e.,  the  gods)  were  not  born,  and  I  had  emitted  from 
"  myself  neither  Shu  nor  Tefnut.     I  brought  my  name  into  my 


POWER   OF   THE    NAME  301 

"  own  mouth,  that  is  to  say  [I  uttered  it  as]  a  word  of  power, 
'   0    ■     Mv  ^  Sh  '   'f'^fi/^rt^,  and  I  forthwith  came  into  being  under 


"  the  form  of  things  which  were  created  and  under  the  form  of 
"  Khepera." 

Here  we  have  an  interesting  statement,  for  the  god  tells  us 
how  he  came  into  being,  and  he  is  not  content  with  merely  saying 
that  he  existed.  We  know  from  the  literature  of  Egypt  how 
great  a  part  words  of  power  played  in  its  magical  and  religious 
systems,  and  how  the  believer  hoped  to  obtain  all  his  desires  by  the 
utterance  of  special  names,  or  words,  or  formulae.  Here,  however, 
we  have  the  god  Osiris  transforming  himself  from  the  essence  of 
primeval  matter  into  the  active  principle  of  creation  by  merely 
uttering  his  own  name.  The  belief  in  the  potency  of  certain 
names  is  very  old  in  Egypt,  and  rests  upon  a  still  older  idea  that 
no  creature,  animate  or  inanimate,  could  be  said  to  have  an 
existence  until  it  possessed  a  name,  an  idea  with  which  every  one 
is  familiar  from  Genesis  ii.  19  f.,  where  we  read  that  Adam  gave 
names  to  every  beast  of  the  field  and  to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and 
to  all  cattle.  Every  god  and  goddess  and  supernatural  being  were 
believed  to  possess  a  hidden  name  by,  and  through,  and  in  which 
he  and  she  lived.  The  man  who  could  find  out  these  names  was 
able  to  command  the  help  of  the  gods  who  bore  them,  and  the 
man  who  could  obtain  by  any  means  a  hidden  name  for  himself 
thought  he  would  be  the  equal  of  the  gods.  On  the  other  hand,  to 
destroy  or  "  blot  out "  a  name  was  to  wipe  out  of  existence  the 
being  who  bore  it,  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that  in  the  earliest 
days  of  civilization  in  Egypt  services  in  which  the  name,  or 
names,  of  the  dead  were  commemorated,  and  were  mentioned  with 
laudatory  epithets,  were  established.  We  may  note  in  passing 
that  one  of  the  greatest  gifts  which  was  to  be  given  to  the  true 
believers  of  the  Church  of  Pergamos  was  "  a  white  stone,  and  in 
"  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving;  he 
"  that  receiveth  it"  (Revelation  ii.  17).  Here  is  a  direct  allusion 
to  the  old  belief  in  the  ef6.cacy  of  an  amulet  which  was  made  of  a 
certain  stone,  and  inscribed  with  a  name,  by  and  through  and  in 
which  its  owner  would  enjoy  life  and  happiness. 


302  THE   CREATION 

Returning  to  our  narrative  we  find  that  the  god  continues, 
"  I  came  into  being  from  primeval  matter,  and  I  appeared  under 
"  the  form  of  multitudes  of  things  from  the  beginning.  Nothing 
"  existed  at  that  time,  and  it  was  I  who  made  whatsoever  was 
"  made.  I  was  alone,  and  there  was  no  other  being  who  worked 
"  with  me  in  that  place.  I  made  all  the  forms  under  which  I 
"  appeared  by  means  (or,  out  of)  the  god-soul  which  I  raised  up 
"  out  of  Nu,    p^  J|,  out  of  a  state  of  inertness  (or,  out  of  the 


"  inert  mass)."     In  this  passage  we  have  a  new  element  introduced, 
that  is,  a  "  god-Soul,"   ^^^  Jj,    or,  in  other  words,  the  Soul  which 

possessed  the  quality  of  neter,  and  was  existent   in  a  quiescent 

state  in  the  inactive  watery  mass  of  Nu.     When  we  consider  the 

general  ideas  of  the  Egyptians  about  the  soul  this  statement  need 

not  surprise  us,  for  we  know  that  they  endowed  every  object  in 

nature  with  a  soul,  and  if  they  assumed  the  existence  of  a  mass  of 

primeval  matter  they  were  bound,    logically,    to   give  it  a  soul. 

Thus  we  have  in  the  second  version  of  the  story  of  the  creation  an 

idea  which  is  wholly  wanting  in  the  first.     We  next  read,   "  I 

'  found  there  (i.e.,  in  Nu)   no  place  wherein   I   could   stand.     I 

'  worked  a  spell  on  my  heart,  and  I  laid  a  foundation  before  me, 

'  and   I   made   whatsoever   was   made.     I   was    alone.     I   laid  a 

'  foundation  in  (or,  by)  my  heart,  and  I  made  the  other  things 

'  which  came  into  being,  and  the  things  of  Khepera  which  were 

'  made  were  manifold,  and   their  ofi'spring   came  into  existence 

'  from  the  things  to  which  they  gave  birth.     It  was  I  who  emitted 

'  Shu,  and  it  was  I  who  emitted  Tefnut,  and  from  being  one  god 

'  (or,  the  one  god)  I  became  three,  that  is  to  say,  the  two  other 

'  gods  who  came  into  being  on  this  earth  came  from  myself,  and 

'  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  raised  up  from  out  of  Nu  wherein  they  had 

'  been.     Now,  behold,  my  Eye,    ^^  3    (i.e.,  the  Sun),  did  they 

'  bring  to  me  (or,  I  brought  to  them)  after  a  double  hen  period 
'  [had  passed  since]  they  went  forth  from  me.  I  gathered 
'  together  my  members  which  came  forth  from  my  own  person 
'  after  I  had  union  with  my  hand,  and  my  heart  (or  will)  came 
'  unto  me  from  out  of  my  hand.  The  seed  fell  into  my  mouth, 
'  and  I  sent  forth  from  myself  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut,  and  from 


THE   CREATION  303 

''  being  one  god  (or,  the  one  god)  I  became  three,  that  is  to  say, 
"  the  two  other  gods  who  came  into  being,  m 


"  on  this  earth  came  from  myself,  and  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  raised 
"  up  from  out  of  Nu  wherein  they  had  been.  " 

The  repetitions  in  the  above  passage  are  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  scribes  possessed  many  variant  readings  of  portions  of  it,  these 
representing,  no  doubt,  the  opinions  of  different  schools,  and  the 
scribe  of  the  papyrus  of  Nes-Amsu,  with  characteristic  reverence 
for  what  was  written,  incorporated  them  all  into  his  text. 

The  next  passage  contains  a  very  interesting  addition  and 
variant  reading,  which  makes  "  father  "  Nu  declare  that  his  Eye, 
i.e.,  the  sun,  was  covered  over  with  large  numbers  of  "  bushes " 
for  an  indefinite  number  of  periods,  each  containing  sixty  years ; 
now  "bushes,"  otherwise  called  "hair,"  is  the  name  given  to  the 
clouds  which  hang  round  the  sun  at  sunrise,  and  obscure  his  rays, 
and  it  seems  as  if  the  god  intends  to  complain  that  his  sight  was 
impeded  by  them  for  centuries.  The  words  following  seem  to 
indicate  that  vegetation  and  reptiles,  including  worms  or  serpents, 
proceeded  from  the  god  Rem,  and  that  they  were  the  product  of 
the  tears  which  fell  from  Khepera,  but  this  rendering  is  not  wholly 
certain.  The  vegetation  and  worms  here  mentioned  are  forms  of 
mist  and  cloud  which  wholly  or  partially  hide  the  sun,  and  the  line 
is  probably  added  to  the  text  to  account  for  the  "  bushes  "  of  which 

"  father "  Nu   spoke   above.      Of  the   god  Rem,  <=>  ^.^  ^^=  jj , 

we  know  nothing,  but  as  the  word  rem  means  "  to  weep,"  and  an 

allusion  to  "crying  or  weeping,"  <=>  ^<^^^  L  is   contained  in 

the  line  in  which  the  name  of  the  god  occurs,  we  may  assume 
that  he  was  the  personification  of  Ra's  tears.  Mention  is  made 
in   the   Booh   of    the   Dead    (Ixxxiii.    4)   of  a   god   called    Remi, 

<=:>  ^^^  |](1  <o<  jj,  who  seems  to  have  been  the  Fish-god,  and  to 

have  been  identified  in  some  way  with  Sebek,  the  personification  of 
Nu,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  Rem  and  Remi  are  one  and  the  same  god. 
We  next  arrive  at  the  description  of  the  making  of  man,  and 
each  version  of  the  story  of  the  creation  gives  a  different  account. 
According  to  the  first,  Khepera  joined,  or  united,  his  members  and 


304  FOUR   RACES    OF   MEN 

wept  upon  them,  and  men  and  women  came  into  being  from  these 
tears ;  according  to  the  second,  Khepera  wept  with  his  Eye,  and 
men  and  women  came  into  being  forthwith.  It  is  impossible  to 
say  decidedly  which  is  the  older  view,  but  it  is  probably  the 
former.  The  difference  between  the  methods  employed  in  creating 
gods  and  men  must  be  noted ;  the  gods  are  the  seed  of  Khepera, 
and  they  came  forth  from  his  mouth,  whilst  men  are  only  the  tears 
of  the  god,  and  they  came  forth  from  his  Eye.  The  older  version 
makes  the  tears  of  Khepera  to  fall  upon  his  genital  organs,  and  it 
is  only  after  they  have  been  in  contact  with  the  god's  virility 
that  they  turn  into  human  beings.  In  late  dynastic  times  the 
Egyptians  divided  mankind  into  four  classes,  namely,  the 
Egyptians,  the  Aamu,  the  Nehesu,  and  the  Themehu.  Thus  in 
the  Book  of  Pylons  ^  Horus  says  to  the  "  chiefs  of  Ra,"  |  <=>  v^  i  ^  ^ 
who  are  in  the  Tuat  of  the  Black  Land  and  the  Red  Land  (i.e., 
Egypt  and  the  deserts  to  the  South),  ''  Ye  are  the  tears  made  by 
my  Eye  in  your  name  of  '  Men.'""     The  Aamu,  v\  tQ  / — M?^i , 

(i.e.,  the  Semitic  nomad  tribes  of  the  Eastern  Desert),  were  created 
by  Horus  and  Sekhet,  Y  jj ,  and  this  goddess  protected  their 
souls  ;  the  Themehu,  or  Libyans,  i  V  ^  ' '  "^®^®  ^^^^  created 

by  Horus  and  Sekhet,  and  the  goddess  protected  their  souls.  Of 
the  Nehesu,  1\  I  n^  ^  '  (^•®-'  *^®  Negroes),  Horus  says,  "  I 
"  masturbated  for  you,  and  I  have  been  content  at  the  millions 
"  who  have  come  forth  from  me  in  your  name  of  Nehesu  ;  Horus 
"  hath  created  you,  and  it  is  he  who  hath  protected  their  souls."  ^ 
This  last  statement  is  of  interest,  for  it  connects  the  idea  of 
masturbation  with  the  Negroes,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  dark  or 
black-skinned  races  of  Nubia  who  lived  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile 

1  See  Bonomi  and  Sharpe,  Sarcophagus  of  Oimeuejjthah,  pll.  7  and  6d. 


Ul^^¥-mf^q-f 


/WWSA      /WW\A      i!^^     Q     I'    ^   VdT    !     (^^^^^^   lG-20). 


THE    CREATION  305 

so  far  south  as  the  Sixth  Cataract,  and,  as  we  have  ah-eady  said, 
the  legend  as  to  the  origin  of  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut  is  far  more 
likely  to  have  been  the  product  of  some  indigenous  dark-skinned 
race  than  of  the  group  of  mixed  peoples  whom  we  call  Egyptians. 
It  will  be  noticed  that  only  the  EgyjDtians,  or  offspring  of  Ra,  are 
said  to  have  been  produced  by  the  tears  of  Ra,  which  are  the  same 
as  the  tears  of  the  Eye  of  Horus,  i.e.,  the  sun. 

According  to  one  version  of  the  story  of  the  creation,  men  and 
women  were  created  after  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut,  and  before  the 
plants  and  reptiles,  but  according  to  the  other,  they  were  created 
after  the  plants  and  reptiles  ;  neither  version  mentions  the  creation 
of  beasts  and  cattle.  A  point  of  interest  is  that  men  and  women 
were  not  fashioned  by  Khepera,  or  Neb-er-tcher,  himself,  and  that 
they  seem  to  have  come  into  being  almost,  as  it  were,  by  accident ; 
in  making  the  gods  Khepera  showed  both  will  and  design,  but  men 
and  women  were  only  the  tears  which  fell,  apparently  without 
volition,  from  his  Eye.  But  it  must  also  be  noted  that  in  both 
versions  of  the  Egyptian  creation  legends  it  is  Ra  the  Sun-god,  the 
Eye  of  Temu,  who  is  in  reality  the  creator  of  man,  and  this  is 
exactly  what  we  find  in  the  Mesopotamian  creation  legends. 
After  Marduk  had  defeated  Tiamat  and  her  eleven  fiends,  and  had 
split  up  her  body,  like  a  fish,  and  made  heaven  out  of  one  half  of 
her  skin,  he  conversed  with  Ea,  the  lord  of  the  great  deep,  and 
declared  his  intention  of  making  man,  in  the  following  words : — 
"  My  blood  will  I  take,  and  bone  will  I  build  up,  and  I  will  make 
' '  man,  that  man  may  .  .  .  . ;  and  I  will  build  up  man  who 
"  shall  inhabit  [the  earth]."  This  very  important  passage  proves 
that  the  statement  of  Berosus  to  the  effect  that  man  was  made  out 
of  the  blood  of  Bel,  i.e.,  Marduk,  was  based  upon  a  genuine 
Assyrian  tradition;  unfortunately  the  cuneiform  text,^  which  was 


1  The  tablet  is  No.  92,629  (obv.  11.  5-7).     The  text  reads :— ^yy<^t 

^K  « ET  !=T  s=Eii  A4f  tm  m  [^^  i^vm'^]-< 

ET  ESS  -fclTTl  M  I{  ®  TH-  gU  [    ]  M  -^  :?F  ET  E3S 

►-t^TTYT  T^yy  TJ  T|  T^-  r^T^T  ^V*^  I  da-mi  lu-uJc-sur-ma  is-si-im-hmi  lu-\iib-ni\ 
lu-ush-ziz-maa  amelal^al  lu  a-me-lu  [....]  lu-tib-ni-ma  amelaTa']  a-shib  trsitim.     See 
L.  W.  King,  The  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation,  vol.  i.,  pp.  86  ff,,  and  vol.  ii.,  pi.  xxxv. 
X 


306  THE    CREATION   OF   MAN 

first  identified  by  Mr.  L.  W.  King,  is  incomplete,  but  when 
the  inevitable  duplicate  is  found  we  shall  probably  find  the 
equivalent  of  the  rest  of  the  story  according  to  Berosus,  who  says 
that  the  blood  of  which  man  was  made  was  obtained  from  Bel 
himself  after  his  head  had  been  cut  off. 

The  passage  which  follows  the  mention  of  the  creation  of  man 
in  the  Egyptian  story  refers  to  the  Eye  of  Nu.  which,  Khepera 
says,  he  endowed  with  power  or  splendour,  or  with  the  serpent 

hhut,  '^^     P^ ,  which  possessed  both  these  attributes.     The  Eye 

raged  at  him  when  it  found  "  another  growth "  in  its  place,  by 
which,  apparently,  the  moon  is  referred  to,  and  it  made  an 
onslaught  upon  the  "  bushes,"  i.e.,  the  light  clouds,  which  Khepera 
had  placed  over  it  to  adorn  it,  or  to  keep  order  in  it ;  but  finally 
it  took  up  its  position  in  the  god's  face,  and  henceforth  ruled  the 
whole  earth.  The  text  concludes  with  the  statement  that  Shu  and 
Tefnut  gave  birth  to  Seb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Heru-khenti-an-maati,  Set, 
Isis,  and  Nephthys,  and  that  their  ofi'spring  increase  and  multiply 
in  the  earth,  and  that  they  invoke  the  name  of  Khepera  and  so 
overthrow  their  enemies,  and  that  they  create  words  of  power, 

\  ^^  ^  §0  ' '  ^^<3^6^y  they  overthrow  Apepi.  We  may  now 
summarize  briefly  the  results  of  the  two  versions,  and  Ave  shall 
find  that  the  Egyptians  thought  that  a  self-begotten  and  self- 
existent  god  lived  alone  in  a  primeval  watery  mass,  which  was 
itself  part  male  and  part  female.,  and  which  was  the  abode  of  two 
living  powers,  the  one  male  and  the  other  female,  and  also  of  a 
soul,  and  that  this  mass  was  of  unlimited  extent,  and  was  eternal, 
and  was  enveloped  in  thick  darkness.  The  self-existent  god,  at 
some  unknown  time  and  for  some  unknown  reason,  uttered  his 
own  name  as  a  word  of  power,  and  he  straightway  came  into  being 
under  the  form  of  the  god  Khepera.  He  next  roused  the  soul  of 
the  watery  abyss  out  of  inactivity,  and  then  having  brought  some 
influence,  probably  by  the  utterance  of  certain  words,  to  bear  upon 
his  heart,  he  produced  some  material  place,  probably  the  earth, 
whereon  he  could  stand.  From  this  place  he  produced  the  gods 
Shu  and  Tefnut,  which  act  resulted  in  the  immediate  creation  of 
light  and  in  the  dispersion  of  darkness,  and  in  the  formation  of  the 


THE    CREATION   OF   MAN  307 

sky  or  firmament.  These  acts  were  followed  either  by  the  creation 
of  men  and  women,  or  by  the  creation  of  vegetation  and  creeping 
things  and  reptiles  of  every  kind ;  of  the  creation  of  stars  and  of 
birds  and  beasts  nothing  is  said.  The  above  statement  represents 
one  of  the  earliest  of  the  opinions  of  the  Egyptians  about  the 
creation  in  its  simplest  form,  the  one  in  fact  which  was  first 
adopted  by  the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  and  was  then  modified  to  suit 
the  theological  system  which  they  formulated.  The  texts  on 
which  it  was  based  are  transcribed  into  hieroglyphics  with 
interlinear  transliterations  and  translations  in  the  following 
chapter. 


(     308     ) 


CHAPTER    VIII 

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CREATION  OF  THE 
GODS  AND  OF  THE  WORLD.  VERSION  A. 


xxvi.  21. 


Shed 
The  Book 


enti 
of 


(^ 


a 


rehh 


O 


hheperiL  nu 


knowing    the  evolutions      of 


oi 

Bd 
Ra, 


sekher 


[and]  of  over- 
throwing 


em-khet 


D   D 
Apep 


tchettu 
The  words  of 


Neh-er-tcher 
Neb-er-tcher 


tchet  -f 

[which]  he 
spake 


kheper    -   /  nuk  ])u  kheper 

after     he  had  come  into  being.     I  am     he  who     came  into  being 


22. 


^r^   I 


em      Kheperd  kheper-nd  kheper  kheperu 

in  the  form  of    I  was  (or,  became)    the  creator    of  what  came  into 
Khepera,  being, 


ji        W  ^-^-^  ^  ^11 

kheper  kheperu  neh    em-khet         kheper-d  dsht 

the  creator    of  what  came  into    all;  after     my  coming  into  many 
being                                            being 


THE   CREATION 


309 


(3 


j\ 


hheperu  em    ])er  em  re-d  an 

[were]  the  things  which     coming  forth     from      my  mouth.     Not 
came  into  being 


.^-fu.       zl 


s: 


1 


hhe'per    pet  an  Ichejper     ta  an  qemam 

existed  heaven,       not       existed  earth,       not       had  been  created 


^111 


J 


satat 


tchetfet 

the  things  of  the  earth,    and  creeping 
(i.e.,  plants)  things 


bet 


I        I        I 


em 
in  place 


pui 
that 


thes  -  nd       dm   -    sen 


em 


Nu 


I  raised  up  them         from  out  of    Nu  (i.e.,  the  primeval  abyss 

of  water) 


<v^  n  ran  /vvvwx         n 


J\ 


A/VW 


em  enen  dn  qem-nd  bet  dhd-nd 

from  a  state  of         Not  found  I  a  place     I  could  stand 


inactivity. 


w 


I 


ami 
wherein. 


Jchut-nd 
I  worked  a  charm 


em 
upon  (or,  with) 


I  ^ 
dbt-d 
my  heart. 


A/VSAAA 


I 


^ 


senti-nd  em     Mad  dri-nd  dru  nebt 

I  laid  a  foundation      in     Maa     [and]  I  made      attribute     every. 


'f^^ 


a 


r^:r-i 


P^l 


ud-Jcludl  dn  dshesh-nd  em     Shu 

I  was  alone,      [for]  not      had  I  spit      in  the  form  of  Shu, 


an 
not 


310 


THE   CREATION 


tef-nd 
had  I  emitted 


em     Tefiiut 
Tefnut,^ 


an 
not 


Jcheper 
existed 


hi 
another 


24. 


AA/WV\ 


/vwv 


senti-nd 


em 


dht-d       tches-d 


dri-nef      liend-d 

who  worked  with  me.    I  made  a  foundation   in  my  heart  my  own, 

(or,  by  means  of  my  own  will) 


hheper 


^  III 
dsht 


hheperu 


D 


mi 


Til 

hheperu 


[and]  there  came    the  multitudes   which  came   of  the  things  which 
into  being  of  things         into  being         came  into  being 


e 


II 


em 
from  out  of 


hheperu 

the  things  which  came 
into  being 


I 

nu 

of 


M 


mesu 


births, 


5,       (3 

hheperu 


O 


nu 


I  r\      AAAAAA 

I     I     I     I     I 

mesu-sen 


(1    0 

dnuJi 


0 


ra 


the  things  which   of    their  births.      I,  even  I, 


em 
from  out  of 


hat-d 
had  union 


came  into  being 


em 


hhefd-d 


tatadt-nd 


I 


Col.  xxvii.  1. 


with   my  clenched  hand,     I  joined  myself  in  an 

embrace 


^^<^<^^D 


em 
with 


hhaihit-d 
my  shadow 


il 


hher-nd 
I  poured  seed 


em 


re- a 


into  my  mouth 


tches-d 
my  own, 


1  I.e.,  I  had  not  sent  forth  from  my  body  the  emanation  which  took  the  form 
of  Shu,  nor  the  moisture  which  took  the  form  of  Tefnut. 


THE   CREATION 


311 


i 


dshesh-nd 
I  sent  forth  issue 


(3 


^^   ^  'i 


7^  ^       /Vvft/VV\ 


em     /S/m  tefnet-nd 

in  the  form  of  Shu,         I  sent  forth  moisture 


e?7z-     T  of  nut         an 

in  the  form  of    Saith      my  father 
Tefnut. 


dtef-d 


Nu 
Nu, 


satet-se7i 

"  They  make  to 
be  weak 


■^ 


^ 


I  I  I   I   I 


/N  /W\AAA  AAAAAA     I |    1 I  i^  0       \ 


maat-d      em-sa-sen      tcher 


henhenti 


uaii-sen 


I   I   I 


my  eye   behind  them,  because  for  double  henti         they  proceeded 

periods 


1 


2. 


er-d        em-hhet        Jcheper-d       em      neter  ud      neter   hhemt 

from  me       after         I  became     from     god  one    gods    three, 


D 


^ 


D 


I     s 


Izll 


er-a 


Ichejper-nd        em     ta      pen 


had 


that  is  from  out  of  [and  after]  I  came  in  earth  this.  Were  raised  up 


myself, 


dref 
therefore 


hi 

Shu 
Shu 


into  being 


Tdfnut 
[and]  Tefnut 


(^ 


AAAAAA 
fJW'.AA 


em 
in 


enenu 
the  inert  watery  mass 


I   I    I    I    1 


w 


l\     A/^NAAA  I 


A^vVvAA  ^-AAA/VA 


^  I 


un-sen  dmi     -    f 

wherein  they  were, 


an- sen  na 

brought  they  to  me 


maat-d 
my  eye 


i  ^   I    I    I 
em      hhet-sen 

in  their  train. 


em-hhet 
After 


I    ^ 


dref  sam-nd  dt-d 

therefore     I  had  united     my  members 


312  THE   CREATION 


^AAAA/^A 


/  I  I    I   sT                I       I     I     I     I                          ^   ^^-^  S=    ^   I  (3 

rem-nd                her-sen                l-heper  reth  ]}u  em 

I  wept             over  them,     [and]  came  into  men  and  from 

being  women 


-^  I  <=>  ^  .  Jf  .^ 


Q 


re77??t  per  em     maat-d  khdru-s 

the  tears      [which]  came  forth  from  my  eye,       [and]  it  raged 


er-d       em  Jchet        is  qemi-s  dri-nd  het 

against  me    after      it  came    [and]  found  [that]  I  had  made  another 


rvV-AAA 


em         dst-s  tebi-s  em  hliut  dru-nd 

in      its  place.      [I]  endowed  it     with      the  power      I  had  made. 

(or,  splendour)  which 


AAAA/VN 


?l 


selchenti  dref         dst-s      em,   hrd-d       em-hhet 

Having  made  to  approach  therefore  its  place  in  my  face,  afterwards 


A 


4.  —        D 


'^i 


dref  heq-s  ta       pen      er  tcher  -  f  hher 

therefore    it  ruleth       earth     this      to     its  whole  extent.     Fall 


o  ■  I  I 


en  at-sen  du  uahu-sen  tehui-nd 

their  moments  (or,  seasons)     upon  their  plants,  I  endowed  it 

^-P  ^kJLP  ¥T     k  iWKV\ 

thet-s  dmi-s  per-nd  em  ucibu 

with  what  it  hath     in  it.      I  came  forth   from  (or,  in    the  plants, 
taken  possession  of  the  form  of) 


THE    CREATION  313 


^kP 


<^    I  I  I         ^^                 »c^  ,  w  ,  Ck  ^  _hf^  I  I  I  I 

tchetfet             neht                hheper  nebt  dm-sen 

creeping  things      all,       [and]  things  which  all  [are]  in  them. 

came  into  being 


m±  hit^.M  '■  rz  t:zi 


I      AV^^A/\ 

mes2i  an  Shu  Tdfnut  lienci  Nut        mesu  an 

Give  birth      Shu  [and]  Tefnut         [Seb]  and       Nut.      Give  birth 


Seh  Nut  Asdr         Her  Khent-dn-maa  Set  Ast 

Seb  and  Nut     to  Osiris,   Horus-Khent-an-maati,     Set,  Isis, 


I  I 

Nebt-het         em  khat  ud     em-sa     ud  dm-sen 

Nephthys      from      the  womb,     one  after  the  other  of  them, 

III  c       1    I      I     I      I     I  _M^         I       S  /WVWV 

meS'Sen  dshtsen  em       ta         pen 

they  give  birth     [and]  they  multiply     in     earth     this. 


THE     HISTORY     OF     THE     CREATION     OF     THE 
GODS   AND    OF   THE   WORLD.      VERSION   B. 


xxviii.  20. 


a 


i\    ?   o 


^        (0 

Shdt  ent  rekh  kheperu  nu      R 


The  Book       of      knowing    the  evolutions       of      Ra 


<^ 


sekher  Apep         tchettu  Neb-er-icher  tchet-f 

[and]  of  over-     Apep.     The  words     of  Neb-er-tcher.     He  says  : — 
throwing 


314 


THE   CREATION 


kheper-d  hheper  kheperu 

"  I  was  (or,    the  creator   of  what  came 
became) 


(^ 


into  being. 


e 


kheperii-]c\j.i]d  em 

I  came  into  being       in 


D 


kheperu  en     EJieperd  klieper  em         sep  tepi 

the  forms  of     Khepera    coming  into  being   in   primeval  time. 


(S 


kheper-kud      em        kliepem  en        Kheperd         kheper-d 

I  came  into      in        the  forms  of        Khepera.        I  was  (or, 

became) 


being 


D 


I 


kheper  kheperu  pu  en  pa-nd 

the  creator  of  what  came  into  being,  that  is  to  say,  I  produced  myself 


du 


(E0 
pautet 


dru-nd 


I 


p)a-na 


from  the  primeval  matter        [which]  I  made.       I  produced  myself 


em  pautet 

from        primeval  matter. 


©0 


j:>ft  ren-d  Ausdres 

My  name  is  Osiris, 


e 


61  22. 

pcLutet  pautit  dri-d        mertu-d    nebt 

the  primeval  matter  of  primeval  matter.    I  have  done  my  will     all 


^     a 

^  AA/V\AA 


usekht-nd 


I  c=co«a  /wwv 

em      /5a      pen  usekht-nd  dm     -    /  thes-nd 

in   earth  this,  [and]  I  have  spread  abroad    in  it ;  I  raised  up 


THE   CREATION  315 


^§?s3       _1^^    a  ^       ™^         Hil'l  I',  ,  ,         ^ 

tet-d  udu-hud  an  mes-sen  an 

my  hand.  I  was  alone ;  not     born  [were]  they.      Not 


dshesh-nd  em  Shu  dn  tdf-nd  em  Tdfnut 

had  I  spit    in  the  form  of  Shu,    not     had  I  emitted         Tefnut 

dn-nd  re-d  tches-d      ren-d  pit 

I  brought  [into]      my  mouth     my  own  my  name,      that  is  to  say, 

hehau  dnuh  'pu     Mieper    -    nd  em 

a  word  of  power,        and  I,  even  I,  came  into  being        in  the  form 


^    i  iH  I      V^         ^  "^     ^    M  ([  Jt  I    ^-^ 


hheperu  hhe^per-hud      em         kheperu  en        Kheperd 

of  things  which   and  I  came      in        the  forms        of       Khepera. 
came  into  being,  into  being 


'®l?i 


ir^  £:i 


hheper-nd  em  pautti  Icheper 

I  came  into  being     from     the  primeval  matter,     coming  into  bein^ 


dsht  Jcheperu        em  tep-a  dn         klieper 

[in]  multitudes     of  forms     from     the  beginning.       Not       existed 


(3 


I  ^  _Mi^      I  S  AAAAAA  i!  W  1    1 

hheperu         neht   em     ta      pen      dri-nd  dri 

created  things   any   in   land  this ;     I  made      whatsoever  was  made 


316 


THE    CREATION 


1  „%^-' . 


24. 


M 


P6  ^ 

(2 


Tie^^  udu-Tcl^id^       an      Jiheper  hi      en  dru-nef 

everything.     I  was  alone,     not    existed     [any  other]  who  worked 


hend-d 
with  me 


J 


em 
in 


bet 
place 


w 


put 
that ; 


art- a 
I  made 


Jcheperu-d 
what  I  made 


w 


w 


I 


dmi  em  ha  piii  thes-nd 

therein     by  means  of    divine  soul         that      [which]  I  raised  up 


w 


AAAAAA 
AA/VUVN 


ami 


em 


Nu 


em 


enen  an 


therein       out  of  Nu  (i.e.,  the  primeval   from       a  state  of      not 

abyss  of  water)  inertness, 


^ 


2=1    J 


J\ 


^ 


w 


/WW 

I 


qemi-na 
found  I 


bet 


dhd-nd 


ami 


hhut-nd 


a  place   whereon  I  could  stand.  I  worked  with  the 

spirit  [which]  was 


^  w 


25. 


^ 


<^ 


w 


W 


em       db-d 


senti 


nd      em  hrd-d      dri-nd 


an 


in  my  heart,  I  laid  a  foundation  before  me,    I  made      whatsoever 

was  made 


I 

0 


^  w 


nebt     udu-k\_ud']  senti-nd  em      db-d 

all.    I  was  alone,  I  laid  a  foundation  in  my  heart, 


I 


(jemam-na 
I  made 


^^. 


0 


Jci         Jiheperu  dsht       hlieperu  nu 

other  things  which    and  manifold  were  the  things     of 


came  into  being, 


Klteperd. 
Khepera 


which  came  into  being 


THE   CREATION  317 


rtiPiP.T, k  ^TMi  ?  m^ 


I    I    I 


hheper        an     mesu-sen       em  Jcheperu        nu         mesu-sen 

Came  into   what  they  gave  out  of  the  creations  of    their  offspring, 
beinsr  birth  to 


AA/WV\ 


dnuk  pu     dshesh-iid  em    Shu  tdf-nd 

1,  even  I,  spat  in  the  form  of  Shu,     [and]  I  emitted 


.0^    w^  I     k  II  !!^  Isil    ■" 

em  Tdfnut  kheper-nd  em      neter     ud      neter      hhemt 

Tefnut,  [and]  I  became     from      god     one     gods      three, 

jpu  er-d  hheperiut  em      ta       fen 

that  is  to  say,  from  myself   two  gods  came  into  being  on  earth   this. 


Iz^l     ir  P 


(.^fi^^    ^     ^    ^  ^^^ 


had  dref        Shu       Tdfnut       em  Nu 

Were  raised  up  therefore    Shu   and  Tefnut    in    Ku  (i.e.,  the 

primeval  watery  abyss) 


T^CCC^  I  I   I  I   1  _S%  r-^-^       ,w3ws         o    I  ill        j\  'n  I  I   I  I 

unen-sen  dmi  dn  maat-d  dn-nd  sefi 

wherein  they  were.     Behold,     my  eye     brought  to  me  they 


[js^      ^C^^  ^  I'.  I  1 
em-hhet  henti  uau-sen  er-d 

in  the  train  of      a  henti  period,  they  proceeded         from  me. 


sam-nd  em      dt-d  per-sen  dmi      tches-d         em-hhet 

I  collected  my  members,   they  came  forth     from  myself  after 


318 


THE   CREATION 


ra 


hat-nd 
I  had  union 


t:^ 


^\ 


w 


em  hliejd-d 

with       my  clenched  hand, 


i-nd 
came  to  me  (?) 


fet-d 


® 


=u) 


db-d  em  fet-d  dada  Jcher  em 

my  heart  (or,  will)    out  of  my  hand.      The  seed      [which]  fell   into 


n  I  \v  I  ^-/^ 


r-rr-il 

7'e-d  dshesh-nd 

my  mouth,  I  spat 


0 


Col.  xxix.  1.  ^  R  (3 

em    Shu 


tdf-nd 


in  the  form  of  Shu,  I  emitted  water 


1 


<^=^ 


1 


e??i       Tdfnut  hhefer-nd         em  neter  ud      neteru 

intheformofTefnut,     I  became      from    [being]  god    one     gods 


I   I 


(2 


t'm 


hhemt  pu  er-d  kheperiut 

three,     that  is  to  say,     from  myself    two  gods  came  into  being     on 


1  3S  AA/>AA^ 

ta  pen 

earth      this. 


-HI 

had 
Were  raised  up 


Mr 

dref 
therefore 


Shu        Tdfnut 
Shu  and  Tefnut 


em 


(^ 


A/\AAAA 
AAA/W\ 
AAAA/NA 


A"'W 


I  I  I  I  4 


W     1 


unen-sen 


ami 


from  out  of       Nu  (i.e.,  the  inert         wherein  they  were, 
primeval  watery  abyss) 


an 
Saith 


1  The    paragraph    beginning       (]     ^^^  J)    and    ending    with    ;^fe    I 

/VAA/Wl    "^  I    i I  AA/V\A\    I 

is  repeated,  apparently  by  inadvertence,  in  the  papyrus. 


I    I    I 


THE   CREATION 


319 


3. 

dtef-d 
my  father 

uahu 


(3    AAAAAA 

Nu 


^  ktP 


W  fJCiii    I    I     I     I       c^      \YJ.      _B^     I      I    I     I     I 

ati-sen  maat-d    em-sa       sen 


Nu,         ''They  covered  up  my  eye     after  them 
[or,  made  weak] 

A  /www  U  U   ^5=^0  0   1    J^  Jl       III 

Sep  sen  lientiu  uabu 


[with]  bushes,        twice,         for  hen  periods. 


Vegetation 


Will  _Hi^  .B?^  /  I  \    iL{      _B^  _B^  0 

hefi  em  Rem  em  rem-th 

and  reptiles      [came]  from     the  god  Rem,      from         the  tears 


O 

er-d  ha  en     maat-d         hheper  ret 

[falling]  from  me.  Cried  my  eye,        came  into  being  mankind. 


D 


pu         fehu-nd         sii        em  khut  hhdru-nes  er-d 

I  endowed  it      with       power.  It  raged  at  me 


w 


^ 


0 


ic^P 


em-Jchet 
after 

Jcher 
Fell 


crz2 
em  khennu  en  dst-s 


i-s  Jcet  ret 

it  came  [finding]  another  growth        within  its  place. 


^P  ^^  f]^J^^,P    ? 


>WWAA  AAAAAA 

en  ten-ten-s  du  uahu-s  her 

its  vigorous  power       upon         its  bushes,  upon 


uahu  tehui-nd  dm 

the  bushes       [which]  I  placed  there  to  make  adornment     in  it. 


se-ndd  dm-s 


320 


THE   CREATION 


§\ 


^  w 


S' 


ic^P 


Tl 


Zl 


hlienti        dref  dst-s  hrd-d       heq-nes        ta    tcher  -  / 

Ruling  therefore  [on]  its  seat  in  my  face  it  ruleth  the  whole  earth. 

mes  en    Shu      Tdfnut  Nut         Asdr   Heru-lchenti-dn-maati 

Gave  birth  Shu  [and]  Tefnut   to  Nut,  Osiris,  Heru-khenti-an-maati, 


n 


I 1 


i^i    T.l 


flNP 


I  I 


Set  Ast  Neht-het  dn  mesu-sen 

Set,  Isis,         Nephthys,        [and]  behold,        their  children 


^ 

^ 


I   I 


6. 


^=K 


s 


qemam-sen 
they  create 


hheperu 
beings 


dsht        em         ta 
manifold     in       earth 


D 


© 


I       1 


pen       em  kheperii         nu      mesu         em 

this     from      the  heinous       of    children,  from 


INP 


I  I 


fi 


I  I  I 


mesu-sen 
their  children. 

®    ^  I   n  ''''^^^ 

Icheft-sen 
their  enemies. 


shent-sen 
They  invoke 


ren-a 
my  name. 


0 


4>,        (3 

hheperu         nu 
the  beings        of 

seJcher-sen 
they  overthrow 


I   I  I 


U 


e 


I  A^AAAA 


qemam-sen 
they  create 


hehau  en 

words  of  power     for 


7. 


sehher  Apep      du-f      her 


i 


e 


^ 


© 


X— /I 


«§» 


J] 


I 
ddui 


sau  her 

the  overthrow  of  Apep,        who  is  to  be  bound        by  the  two  hands 


THE   CREATION 


321 


/VV\A/VN  I  \\  /v/V\AAA  AVS/SAA 

671        AJcer  an       un  ddui  -  f       an       im        retui  -/ 

of       Aker,        not  may  be  his  two  hands,  not  may  be  his  two  feet, 


i 


^    l^oJl' 


I     I     I 


satet     -    f         en        dst     ud      md  Jm       Rd      setchebu-f 

may  he  be  chained    to      one  place  even  as  inflicteth  Ra      his  blows 


(2  ^ 


sekhev'tuf       her       sati-f 


W        Cr£l 
til 


utu-nef  du       sefcfiev'tuf       tier       sati-J  pui 

decreed  for  him.      He  is  overthrown      on     his  back        wicked, 


^^>^ 


<^    1 


I 


w 


I 


Q. 


senpu         hrd-f      her  dri-nef  meni    sib 

slit  is      his  face     for     what  he  hath  done,      and  he  remaineth 


q^ 

1  w 

^^M 

1            (^£1 
1           ^ 

du 

sati  -  f 

pui 

fu 

upon 

his  back 

evil 

(     322     ) 


CHAPTER    IX 


RA,  THE   SUN-GOD,    ""^Oi),    AND  HIS  FORMS 


RA  is  the  name  which  was  given  by  the  Egyptians  of  the 
dynastic  period  to  the  god  of  the  sun,  Avho  was  regarded 
as  the  maker  and  creator  of  everything  which  we  see  in  the 
visible  world  around  us,  and  of  the  gods  in  heaven,  as  well  as  of 
heaven  itself,  and  of  the  Tuat  or  underworld  and  the  beings 
therein  ;  the  original  meaning  of  his  name  is  unknown,  but  at  one 
period  of  Egyptian  history  it  seems  to  have  been  thought  that  the 
word  rd  indicated  "  operative  and  creative  power,"  and  that  as  a 
proper  name  it  represented  in  meaning  something  like  "  Creator," 
this  epithet  being  used  much  in  the  same  way  and  with  the  same 
idea  as  we  use  the  term  when  applied  to  God  Almighty,  the 
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  and  of  all  things  therein.  The 
worship  of  the  sun  in  Egypt  is  extremely  ancient  and  appears  to 
have  been  universal ;  at  a  very  early  period  adoration  of  him  was 
associated  with  that  of  the  hawk-god  Heru,  who  was  the  personi- 
fication of  the  "  height "  of  heaven,  and  who  appears  to  have  been 
a  type  and  symbol  of  the  sun.     The  worship  of   the  hawk-god 

Heru,  §  "^  %  ^?  is  the  oldest  in  Egypt,  and,  strictly  speaking, 
he  should  have  been  discussed  before  Ra,  but  as  Ra  and  the 
personifications  of  his  various  forms  are  the  greatest  of  the  gods  of 
the  Egyptians,  he  must  be  regarded  as  the  true  "  father  of  the 
gods,"  and  his  attributes,  and  the  myths  which  grew  up  round 
him  must  be  considered  before  those  of  Horus.  The  god  Ra  is 
usually  depicted  with  the  body  of  a  man  and  the  head  of  a  hawk, 
but  sometimes  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a  hawk ;  on  his 
head  he  wears  his  symbol,  ^,  i.e.,  the  disk  of  the  sun  encircled  by 


BOATS    OF   THE   SUN  323 

the  serpent  Ichut,  '^^     P^,  of  which  mention  has  already  been 

made.     When  he  has  a  human  body  he  holds  the  emblem  of  life,  ■¥", 

in  his  right  hand,  and  a  sceptre,  |,  in  his  left,  and  from  the  belt  of 

his  tunic  hangs  down  the  tail,  which  is  a  survival  of  the  dress  of 
men  in  predynastic  times,  and  probably  later.  Viewed  from  a 
practical  point  of  view  Ra  was  the  oldest  of  all  the  gods  of  Egypt, 
and  the  first  act  of  creation  was  the  appearance  of  his  disk  above 
the  waters  of  the  world-ocean  ;  with  his  first  rising  time  began, 
but  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to  say  when,  i.e.,  how  long  ago,  his 
first  rising  took  place.  When  the  Egyptians  said  that  a  certain 
thino-   had   been   in   existence  "  since  the  time    of   Ra "  ^  it 


was 


equivalent  to  saying  that  it  had  existed  for  ever. 

The  Egyptians,  knowing  that  the  sun  was  a  fire,  found  a 
difficulty  in  assuming  that  it  rose  directly  into  the  sky  from  out  of 
the  watery  mass  wherein  it  was  brought  forth,  and  they,  therefore, 
assumed  that  it  must  make  its  journey  over  the  waters  in  a  boat, 
or  boats,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  believed  that  it  passed 
over  the  first  half  of  its  course  in  one  boat,  and  over  the  second 
half  in  another.     The  morning  boat  of  the  sun  was  called  Matet, 

^.   :> — c  Q^lj^,  i.e.,  "becoming  strong,"  and  the  name  of 

the  eveninff  boat  was  Semktet,   1  v\  ^1^^  ,  i.e.,  "becoming: 

weak";  these  are  appropriate  names  for  the  rising  and  the 
setting  sun.^  The  course  which  Ra  followed  in  his  journey  across 
the  sky  was  thought  to  have  been  defined  at  creation  by  the 
goddess  called  Maat,  who  was  the  personification  of  the  conceptions 
of  rectitude,  straightness,  law,  order,  unfailing  regularity,  and  the 
like,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  the  regular  and  unfailing 
appearance  of  the  sun  each  morning,  as  much  as  its  light  and  heat, 
which  struck  wonder  into  primitive  man,  and  made  him  worship 
the  sun.  In  passing  through  the  Tuat,  or  underworld,  at  night 
Ra  was  supposed  to  be  obliged  to  leave  his  boat  at  certain  places, 
and  to  make  use  of  others,  including  even  one  which  was  formed 
by  the  body  of  a  serpent ;  according  to  one  opinion  he  changed  his 


O   .^ a  ^.  2  See  Unas,  1.  292. 


324  MYTHOLOGICAL   FISH 

boat  every  hour  during  the  day  and  night,  but  the  oldest  belief  of 
all  assigned  to  him  two  boats  only.  Ra  was  accompanied  on  his 
journey  by  a  number  of  gods,  whose  duties  consisted  in  navigating 
the  boat,  and  in  helping  it  to  make  a  successful  passage  from  the 
eastern  part  of  the  sky  to  the  place  where  the  god  entered  the 
Tuat;  the  course  was  set  by  Thoth  and  his  female  counterpart 
Maat,  and  these  stood  one  on  each  side  of  Horus,  who  acted  as  the 
steersman  and  apparently  as  captain  also.  Before  the  boat  of  Ra,  one 
on  each  side,  swam  the  two  pilot  fishes  called  Abtu,  ^  J  ^^,  and 
Ant,  (]^^<&<,  respectively.^  But,  judging  from  the  religious 
and  mythological  texts  which  have  come  down  to  us,  not  all  the 
power  of  Ra  himself,  nor  that  of  the  gods  Avho  were  with  him, 
could  ward  off  the  attacks  of  certain  fiends  and  monsters  which 
endeavoured  to  obstruct  the  passage  of  his  boat. 

Chief  among   such   were   the   serpent   Apep,        g-^^,    and 

Sebau,  p  JH^mh,  and   Nak,  I] -^3:^  »h,  and    of  these  the 

greatest  and  most  wicked  was  Apep.  In  dynastic  times  Apep  was 
a  personification  of  the  darkness  of  the  darkest  hour  of  the  night, 
against  which  Ra  must  not  only  fight,  but  fight  successfully  before 
he  could  rise  in  the  east  in  the  morning  ;  but  originally  he  was 
the  thick  darkness  which  enveloped  the  watery  abyss  of  Ku,  and 
which  formed  such  a  serious  obstacle  to  the  sun  when  he  was 
making  his  way  out  of  the  inert  mass  from  which  he  proceeded  to 
rise  the  first  time.  In  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  he  is  frequently 
mentioned,^  but  rather  from  a  moral  than  a  physical  point  of  view. 
Thus  in  the  xxxixth  Chapter  the  deceased  says  :  "  Get  thee  back, 
"  Fiend  before  the  darts  of  his  beams.  Ra  hath  overthrown 
"  thy  words,  the  gods  have  turned  thy  face  backwards,  the  Lynx 
"  (Maftet,  ^'^^^O),  hath  torn  open  thy  breast,  the 
'*  Scorpion  goddess,  §  ^  W^ ,  hath  cast  fetters  upon  thee,  and 
"  Maat  hath  sent  forth  thy  destruction.  Those  who  are  in  the 
"ways   have  overthrown  thee;    fall  down  and  depart,   0  Apep, 

1  Boole  of  flic  Dead.     {Papyrus  of  Ami,  pi.  1,  line  15.) 

2  See  the  Vocabulary  to  my  Chaiyters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  under  Apep  (p.  61). 


RA   AND   APEP  325 

"  thou  Enemy  of  Ra."  A  little  further  on  the  deceased  says  :  "  I 
"  have  brought  fetters  to  thee,  0  Ra,  and  Apep  hath  fallen  because 
"  thou  hast  drawn  them  tight.  The  gods  of  the  South,  and  of  the 
"  North,  of  the  West  and  of  the  East  have  fastened  chains  upon 
"  him,  and  they  have  fastened  him  with  fetters ;  the  god 
"  Rekes   (^^rVf)   liath   overthrown    him,    and    the    god    Hertit 

"  (I^  ^^ '^  ffil '^)  ^^*^  P^*  ^^^  ^^  chains.  0  Apep,  thou 
"  Enemy  of  Ra,  thou  shalt  never  partake  of  the  delights  of  love, 
"  thou  shalt  never  fulfil  thy  desire  !  He  maketh  thee  to  go  back, 
''  0  thou  who  art  hateful  to  Ra ;  he  looketh  upon  thee,  get  thee 
"  back.  He  pierceth  thy  head,  he  slitteth  up  thy  face,  he  divideth 
"  thy  head  where  its  bones  join  and  it  is  crushed  in  thy  land,  thy 
"bones  are  smashed  in  pieces,  thy  members  are  hacked  off  thee, 

"  and  the  god  Aker  (    "^^  3)  hath  passed  sentence  of  doom 

"  upon  thee." 

From  the  ''  Books  of  Overthrowing  Apep,"  ^  we  obtain 
further  information  as  to  the  destruction  of  the  monster,  and  we 
find,  that  this  work  was  recited  daily  in  the  temple  of  Amen-Ra 
at  Thebes.  The  first  Book  was  divided  into  Chapters,  which  were 
entitled: — 1.  Chapter  of  spitting  upon  Apep.  2.  Chapter  of 
defiling  Apep  with  the  left  foot.  3.  Chapter  of  taking  a  lance  to 
smite  Apep.  4.  Chapter  of  fettering  Apep.  5.  Chapter  of  taking 
a  knife  to  smite  Apep.  6.  Chapter  of  putting  fire  upon  Apep. 
The  following  Books  describe  with  great  minuteness  the  details  of 
the  destruction  which  was  to  fall  upon  Apep,  and  they  are  insisted 
on  to  a  wearisome  degree ;  according  to  these  the  monster,  which 
is  referred  to  at  one  time  as  a  crocodile  and  at  another  as  a 
serpent,  is  first  to  be  speared,  then  gashed  with  knives,  and  every 
bone  of  his  body  having  been  separated  by  red-hot  knives,  and  his 
head,  and  legs,  and  tail,  etc.,  having  been  cut  ofi',  his  remains  were 
to  be  scorched,  and  singed,  and  roasted,  and  finally  shrivelled  up 
and  consumed  by  fire.  The  same  fate  was  to  come  upon  Apep's 
confederates,  and  everything  which  formed  parts  of  him  and  of 
them,  i.e.,  their  shadows,  souls,   doubles,  and  spirits,  were  to  be 

1  See  Archaeologia,  vol.  Hi.  {The  Papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu). 


326  NAMES    OF   APEP 

wiped  out  of  existence,  including  any  offspring  which  they  might 
possess.  Not  content  with  reciting  the  words  of  power  which 
would  have  the  effect  of  destroying  Apep  and  his  fiends,  great  care 
was  taken  to  perform  various  ceremonies  of  a  magical  character, 
which  were  supposed  to  benefit  not  only  Ra,  but  those  who 
worshipped  him  on  earth.  Apep  was  both  crafty  and  evil-doing, 
and  like  Ra,  he  possessed  many  names  ;  to  destroy  him  it  was 
necessary  to  curse  him  by  each  and  every  name  by  which  he  was 
known.  To  make  quite  sure  that  this  should  be  done  effectively 
the  Papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu  adds  a  list  of  such  names,  and  as  they 
are  the  foundation  of  many  of  the  magical  names  met  with  in  later 
papyri  they  are  here  enumerated: — 1.  Nesht.  2.  Tutu.  3. 
Hau-hra.  4.  Hemhemti.  5.  Qettu.  6.  Qerneru.  7.  Iubani. 
8.  Amam.  9.  Hem-taiu.  10.  Saatet-ta.  11.  Khermuti.  12. 
Kenememti.  13.  Sheta.  14,  Serem-taui.  15.  Sekhem-hra.  16. 
Unti.  17.  Karau-anememti.  18.  Khesef-hra.  19.  Seba-ent- 
SEBA.  20.  Khak-ab.  21.  Khan-ru  ....  UAA.  22.  Nil.  23. 
Am.    24.  Turrupa(?)     25.  Iubau.     26.  Uai.    27.  Kharubu,  the 

FOUR    TIMES    WICKED.       28.    SaU.       29.    BeTESHU.^ 

In  the  Egyptian  texts  we  have  at  present  no  account  of  the 


.  .-  MT^-  «-^T^-  M^^-T*^-  «■ 


9.   t  WV.     10.  |11J  '^     _     >^  ,    ,,.     11. 


^^-     12-  '^tk^'^^-     13.  "«#^.     14- 


W 


20.     "^,'^^.      til.  t'^  '^~^WB^  ^-     22. 


wm 


Aj\rv\r^ 


23.   _^^^.      24.^^-^.      25.   (j(je-;^<2?|.      26. 
29.    AA  (2  ^^.     See  my  paper  in  ArchaeoJoyla,  vol.  lii.,  pp.  202-204. 


RA    AND   APEP  327 

first  fight  which  took  place  between  Ra  and  Apep,  but  it  is  clear  from 
several  passages  in  the  "  Books  of  Overthrowing  Apep  "  that  such 
a  thing  must  have  occurred,  and  that  the  means  employed  by  the 
Sun-god  for  destroying  his  foe  resembled  those  made  use  of  by 
Marduk  in  slaying  Tiamat.     The  original  of  the  Assyrian  story  is 
undoubtedly  of  Sumerian  origin,  and  must  be  very  old,  and  it  is 
probable  that  both  the  Egyptians  and  the  Sumerians  derived  their 
versions  from  a  common  source.     In  the  Assyrian  version^  Marduk 
is  armed  with  the  invincible  club  which  the  gods  gave  him,  and 
with  a  bow,  spear,  net,  and  dagger  ;  the  lightning  was  before  him, 
and  fierce   fire   filled   his  body,   and  the  four-fold  wind  and  the 
seven-fold  wind  went  with  him.     Marduk  grasped  the  thunderbolt 
and  then  mounted  his  chariot,  drawn  by  four  swift  and  fiery  horses 
which  had  been  trained  to  beat  down  under  their  feet  everything 
which  came  in  their  way.     "When  he  came  to  the   place  where 
Tiamat  was,  Kingu,  whom  she  had  set  over  her  forces,  trembled 
and   was   afraid,   but   Tiamat    "stood   firm   with    unbent   neck." 
After  an  exchange  of  words  of  abuse  the  fight  began,  and  Tiamat 
pronounced  her  spell,  which,  however,  had  no  effect,  for  Marduk 
caught  her  in  his  net,  and  drove  the  winds  which  he  had  with  him 
into  her  body,  and  whilst  her  belly  was  thus  distended  he  thrust 
his  spear  into  her,  and  stabbed  her  to  the  heart,  and  cut  through 
her  bowels,  and  crushed  her  skull  with  his  club.     On  her  body  he 
took  his  stand,  and  with  his  knife  he  split  it  "  like  a  flat  fish  into 
two  halves,"  and   of  one   of  these   he   made  a  covering  for  the 
heavens.      With   the    exception   of  the   last,   every  detail  of  the 
Assyrian  account  of  the  fight  has  its  equivalent  in  the  Egyptian 
texts  which  concern  Ra  and  Apepi.     An  allusion  to  the  fight  is 
found  in  the  apocryphal  work  of  "  Bel  and  the  Dragon,"  wherein 
we  are  told  that  both  the  god  and  the  monster  were  worshipped  in 
Babylon  ;  but  the  narrative  says  that  the  dragon  was  destroyed  by 
means  of  lumps  of  pitch,  and  fat,  and  hair  seethed  together,  and 
that  these  having  been  pushed  into  the  creature's  mouth  he  burst 
asunder.     In  Egyptian  papyri  Apep  is  always  represented  in  the 
form  of  a  serpent,  in  each  undulation  of  which  a  knife  is  stuck, 

1  See  King,  Babylonian  Beligion,  p.  71  fE. 


328  THE    CITY   OF   THE    SUN 

•^^;  in  the  "Book  of  the  Gates"  (see  above  p.  197)  we  see  him 
fastened  by  the  neck  with  a  chain  (along  which  is  stretched  the 
scorpion  goddess  Serqet},  the  end  of  which  is  in  the  hands  of  a 
god,  and  also  chained  to  the  ground  by  five  chains. 

It  has  already  been  said  that  Ra  was  the  "  father  of  the  gods," 
and  we  find  that  as  early  as  the  Vth  Dynasty  a  female  counterpart, 
who  was   the  mother  of  the  gods,   was   assigned   to   him.     This 

goddess  is  called  in  the  text  of  Unas  (1.  253)  Rat,   ® ,  and  in  later 

times  her  title  appears  to  have  been  "  Rat  of  the  two  lands,  the 

"  lady  of  heaven,  mistress  of  the  gods,"  — n    '"    ^         f=^        111' 

she  is  also  called  "  Mistress  of  Heliopolis."     Her  full  name  was, 

perhaps,  Rat-taiut,        <=?='  ^  JJ,  i.e.,  "Rat  of  the  world."     She  is 

depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman  who  wears  on  her  head  a  disk 
with  horns  and  a  uraeus,  and  sometimes  there  are  two  feathers 
above  the  disk  ;  ^  the  attributes  of  the  goddess  are  unknown,  but  it 
is  not  likely  that  she  was  considered  to  be  more  important  than 
any  other  great  goddess. 

The  home  and  centre  of  the  worship  of  Ra  in  Egypt  during 

dynastic  times  was   the    city  called  Annu,    [1^,  or   An    by   the 

Egyptians,  On  by  the  Hebrews,  and  Heliopolis  by  the  Greeks ;  its 
site  is  marked  by  the  village  of  Matariyeh,  which  lies  about  five 
miles  to  the  north-east  of  Cairo.  It  was  generally  known  as  Annu 
meht,  i.e.,  Annu  of  the  North,  to  distinguish  it  from  Annu  Qemau, 
i.e.,  Annu  of  the  South,"  or  Hermonthis.  Among  the  early 
Christians  great  store  was  set  upon  the  oil  made  from  the  trees 
which  grew  there,  and  in  the  famous  "  Fountain  of  the  Sun  "  the 
Virgin  Mary  is  said  to  have  washed  the  garments  of  her  Son  ;  the 
ancient  Egyptians  also  believed  that  Ra  bathed  each  day  at  sunrise 
in  a  certain  lake  or  pool  which  was  in  the  neighbourhood.  Of  the 
origin  and  beginnings  of  the  worship  of  Ra  at  Heliopolis  we  know 
nothing,  but  it  is  quite  certain  that  under  the  Vth  Dynasty,  about 
B.C.  3350,  the  priests  of  Rfi  had  settled  themselves  there,  and  that 
they   had    obtained   great   power   at   that   remote    period.      The 

1  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  186,  Nos.  1-4. 


RA   WORSHIP  329 

evidence  derived  from  the  Westcar  Papyrus  ^  indicates  that  User- 
ka-f,  the  first  king  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  was  the  high-priest  of  Ra, 
and  that  he  was  the  first  to  add  "  son  of  the  Sun  "  to  the  titles  of 
Egyptian  monarchs.  Up  to  that  time  a  king  seems  to  have 
possessed  : — 1.  A  name  as  the  descendant  or  servant  of  Horus.  2. 
A  name  as  the  descendant  or  servant  of  Set.     3.  A  name  as  lord 

of  the  shrines  of  Nekhebet  and  TJatchit,  ^£.     4.   A  name  as  king 

of  the  North  and  South,  I  \^ .     User-ka-f,  however,  introduced  the 

title  of  "son  of  the  Sun,"  ^^,  which  was  always  followed  by  a 

second  cartouche,  and  it  was  adopted  by  every  succeeding  king  of 
Egypt.  According  to  the  Westcar  Papyrus  User-ka-f  and  his  two 
immediate  successors  Sahu-Ra  and  Kakaa  were  the  sons  of  the  god 
Ra  by  Rut-tetet,  the  wife  of  a  priest  of  the  god  Ra  of  Sakhabu, 

[q]  I  ^-^  J|y>  ©  j  these    were    brought    into    the    world    by    the 

goddesses  Isis,  Nephthys,  Meskhenet,  and  Heqet,  and  by  the  god 
Khnemu,  and  it  was  decreed  by  them  that  the  three  boys  should 
be  sovereigns  of  Egypt. 

This  legend  is  of  importance,  not  only  as  showing  the  order 
of  the  succession  of  the  first  three  kings  of  the  Vth  D3masty,  but 
also  because  it  proves  that  in  the  early  Empire  the  kings  of  Egypt 
believed  themselves  to  be  the  sons  of  Ra,  the  Sun-god.  All 
chronological  tradition  affirms  that  Ra  had  once  ruled  over  Egypt, 
and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  every  possessor  of  the  throne  of 
Egypt  was  proved  by  some  means  or  other  to  have  the  blood  of 
Ra  flowing  in  his  veins,  or  to  hold  it  because  he  was  connected 
with  Ra  by  marriage.  The  bas-reliefs  of  Queen  Hatshepset  at 
Der  al-Bahari,  and  those  of  Amen-hetep  III.  at  Luxor,  and  those 
of  Cleopatra  VII.  in  the  temple  at  Erment  (now  destroyed,  alas!) 
describe  the  process  by  which  Ra  or  Amen-Ra  became  the  father 
of  the  kings  and  queens  of  Egypt.  From  these  we  see  that 
whenever  the  divine  blood  needed  replenishing  the  god  took  upon 
himself  the  form  of  the  reigning  king  of  Egypt,  and  that  he  visited 
the  queen  in  her  chamber  and  became  the  actual  father  of  the  child 
who  was  subsequently  born  to  her.     When  the  child  was  born  it 

^  See  Brman,  Westcar  Papyrua^  p].  ix.  ft. 


330  RA   AND   RA-TEJM 

was  regarded  as  a  god  incarnate,  and  in  due  course  was  presented, 
with  appropriate  ceremonies,  to  Ra  or  Amen-Ra,  in  his  temple, 
and  this  god  accepted  it  and  acknowledged  it  to  be  his  child.  This 
clever  priestly  device  gave  the  priests  of  Ra  great  power  in  the 
land,  but  their  theocratic  rule  was  not  always  the  best  for  Egypt, 
and  on  one  occasion  they  brought  about  the  downfall  of  a  dynasty. 
The  first  rise  to  power  of  the  priests  of  Ra  took  place  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  when  the  cult  of  Ra  became 
dominant  in  the  land.  About  the  time  of  Userkaf  we  find  that  a 
number  of  shrines,  which  united  the  chief  characteristics  of  the 
low  rectangular  tomb  commonly  known  by  its  Arabic  name  of 

mastaha,  i.e.,  "bench,"  and  of  the  pyramid,  /\  ,  were  built  in 
honour  of  the  god ;  ^  but,  according  to  Prof.  Sethe,  the  custom  of 
building  such  only  lasted  for  about  one  hundred  years,  i.e.,  from 
the  reign  of  Userkaf  to  that  of  Men-kau-Heru.  Be  this  as  it  may, 
the  priesthood  of  Heliopolis  succeeded  in  making  their  worship  of 
Ra  to  supersede  generally  that  of  almost  every  other  god  of  Egypt, 
and  in  absorbing  all  the  local  gods  of  importance  throughout  the 
country  into  their  theological  system,  wherein  they  gave  them 
positions  subordinate  to  those  of  Ra  and  his  company  of  gods. 

Originally    the   local   god   of  the   city   was   Tem,  who    was 
worshipped  there  in  a  special  temple,  but  they  united  his  attributes 

to  those  of  Ra  and  formed  the  double  god  Ra-Tem,  O  ^^^  (Unas, 
1.  222).  With  the  close  of  the  Vlth  Dynasty  the  power  of  the  priests 
of  Ra  declined,  and  it  was  not  until  the  reign  of  Usertsen  I.,  about 
B.C.  2433,  that  the  sanctuary  at  Heliopolis  Avas  rebuilt,  or  perhaps 
entirely  refounded.  This  king  dedicated  the  temple  which  he 
built  there  to  Ra  and  to  two  forms  of  this  god,  Horus  and  Temu, 
who  were  supposed  to  be  incarnate  in  the  famous  Bull  of  Mnevis, 
which  was  worshipped  at  Heliopolis  as  Apis  was  worshipped  at 
Memphis.  In  front  of  the  temple  he  set  up  two  massive  granite 
obelisks,  each  66  feet  high,  the  pyramidions  of  which  were  covered 
with  copper;  these  were  still  in  situ  about  a.d.  1200.  BetAveen 
the  XTIth  and  the  XXth  Dynasties  we  hear  little  of  Heliopolis,  but 

1  See  an  interesting  paper  on  this  subject  by  Sethe  in  Ae<iyj)tische  ZeitscJni/t, 
1889,  p.  Ill  ff.  (i>,'e  IleillgtMl  uer  des  Be'  hn  alten  Eeich). 


HELIOPOLIS  331 

a  further  restoration  of  the  temple  buildings  took  place  under 
Rameses  III.,  who  set  apart  large  revenues  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  worship  of  Ra  and  the  dignity  of  his  priests  and  servants. 
When  Piankhi  invaded  Egypt,  about  B.C.  750,  he  visited 
Heliopolis  after   the   capture    of  Memphis,   going  by  way  of  the 

mountain  of  Kher-aha,  ^^^^   ^    CH^©,  and  he  performed 

certain  ceremonial  ablutions  in  the  "Lake  of  cold  water,"  fO, 

I    s  (A 

and  washed  his  face  in  the  "  milk  of  Nu  wherein  Ra  was  wont  to 
"  wash  his  face  ;"  ^  this  "  Lake  "  is  clearly  the  fountain  of  the  sun 
which  we  have  already  mentioned. 

At  a  place  called  Shai-qa-em-Annu  ^  he  "  made  great  offerings 
at  Sha-qa-em-Amen  to  Ra  at  sunrise,  viz.,  white  oxen,  milk,  dnti 
unguent,  incense,  and  sweet-smelling  woods,  and  then  he  passed 
into  the  temple  of  Ra,  which  he  entered  bowing  low  in 
adoration  to  the  god.  The  chief  kher  heb  priest,  r|j  '^  ® , 
offered  up  prayer  on  behalf  of  the  king,  that  he  might  be  able  to 
repulse  his  enemies,  and  then  having  performed  the  ceremony 
connected  with  the  '  Star-room,'  ,  ,  he  took  the  seteb  girdle, 
and  purified  himself  with  incense,  and  poured  out  a  libation, 
when  one  brought  to  him  the  flowers  which  are  offered  up  in  the 
Het-Benbenet,^  r   J  /vwwn  J  |.     He  took  the  flowers  and  went 

up  the  steps  [leading  to]  the  '  great  tabernacle,'    I  "^^  nrzj  ^^  , 

to  see  Ra  in  Het-Benbenet.  He  stood  [on  the  tojDJ  there  by 
himself,  he  pushed  back  the  bolt,  he  opened  the  doors  [of  the 
tabernacle],  and  he  saw  his  father  Ra  in  Het-Benbenet.  He 
made  adoration  to  the  Matet  Boat  of  Ra  (i.e.,  the  boat  of  the 
rising  sun),  and  to  the  Sektet  boat  of  Tem  (i.e.,  the  boat  of  the 
setting  sun).  He  then  dreAV  close  the  doors  again,  and  having 
affixed  thereto  the  clay  for  a  seal  he  stamped  it  with  the  seal  of 

r\  AAAAAA  (^  ra  r\     ,---—~^    A^yVW\      A/VVW\      nnn       n  A^AAAA  Q  ^  ,Q, 

1      I        ^  "     AAAAAA  ^  V\  I  AAAAAA  AAAAAA       I  Q    ,^A/vW\        <;:^>         ]  ^ 

I  AA'WVN        ^  ■> — ^  ^^HW  I  ^^  /WWNA  ^-^  /W^ysA         I  A/VW\A  ■■         ■   ' '         I     ^  • 

(Stele  of  PiankH,  1.  102). 
^  I.e.,  the  shrine  or  holy  of  holies  of  the  temple  of  Rm.. 


332  HELIOPOLIS 

"  the  king  himself.  He  then  admonished  the  priests  [saying],  '  I 
"  have  set  [my]  seal  here,  let  no  other  king  enter  herein  [or]  stand 
"  here.'  And  they  cast  themselves  on  their  bellies  before  his 
"  majesty,  saying,  '  May  Horus  who  loveth  Annu  (Heliopolis)  be 
"  firm  and  stable,  and  may  he  never  come  to  an  end.'  And  the 
"  king  went  into  the  Temple  of  Tem,  and  he  performed  all  the 
"  ceremonies  and  service  connected  with  the  worship  of  father 
"  Tem-Khepera,  ^^^   |  S  ^    | '  ^^®  prince  of  Annu." 

From  the  above  it  is  certain  that  the  sacred  boats  of  Ra  were 


kept  in  a  sort  of  wooden  tabernacle  with  two  doors,    ^|  ,  that 

I       I 

could  be  fastened  by  a  bolt,  and  from  what  we  know  from  pictures 
of  these  boats  it  is  equally  certain  that  the  Matet  boat  contained  a 
hawk-headed  figure  of  Ra,  and  that  the  Sektet  boat  contained  a 
man-headed   figure   of  Ra.     The  text  says   that   the   tabernacle, 

I  "^^  trzD,  was  situated  on  the  top  of  a  flight  of  steps,  and  this  is 

what  we  should  expect,  for  we  know  that  the  support  was  intended 
to  represent  the  high  ground  in  or  near  the  city  of  Khemennu, 

—    AftAAAA       .C\ 

z:  II   ^      x\®  (Hermopolis),    whereon  Ra    established  himself  on 

the  day  when  he  proceeded  fi'om  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu,  before 
the  pillars  of  Shu  were  set  up.     In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  this 

high  ground  is  called  "  Qaqa  in  Khemennu,"    a  ^^  a  ^^      '■^^-^ 

-  -  ^^^  \\  nn    ^    ^  ©.      During    the    period    of    the    Persian 

invasion  the  prosperity  of  the  priesthood  of  Heliopolis  declined, 
and  it  is  said  that  later,  during  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  11.  (b.c.  285- 
247)  many  of  its  members  found  an  asylum  at  Alexandria,  Avhere 
their  reputation  for  learning  caused  them  to  be  welcomed.  A 
tradition  says  Solon,  Thales,  and  Plato  all  visited  the  great  college 
at  Heliopolis,  and  that  the  last-named  actually  studied  there,  and 
that  Manetho,  the  priest  of  Sebennytus,  Avho  Avrote  a  history  of 
Egypt  in  Greek  for  Ptolemy  II.,  collected  his  materials  in  the 
library  of  the  priesthood  of  Ra.  Some  time,  however,  before  the 
Christian  era,  the  temple  buildings  were  in  ruins,  and  the  glory  of 
Heliopolis  had  departed,  and  it  was  frequented  only  by  those  who 
went  there  to  carry  away  stone  or  anything  else  which  would  be 
useful  in  building  or  farming  operations. 


CULT   OF   HELIOPOLIS  333 

We  have  now  to  consider  briefly  Avhat  was  the  nature  of  the 
doctrine  which  was  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the 
teaching  of  the  priests  of  HeliopoHs.  In  the  first  place  it  pro- 
claimed the  absolute  sovereignty  of  Ra  among  the  gods,  and  it 
made  him  the  head  of  every  company  of  the  gods,  but  it  did  not 
deny  divinity  to  the  older  deities  of  the  country.  The  chief 
authorities  for  the  Heliopolitan  doctrine  are  the  Pyramid  Texts,  to 
which  allusion  has  so  often  been  made,  and  from  these  we  see  that 
the  priests  of  Ra  displayed  great  ingenuity  and  tact  in  absorbing 
into  their  form  of  religion  all  the  older  cults  of  Egypt,  together 
with  their  magical  rites  and  ceremonies.  Apparently  they  did  not 
attempt  to  abolish  the  old,  indigenous  gods ;  on  the  contrary,  they 
allowed  their  cults  to  be  continued,  provided  that  the  local  priest- 
hoods would  make  their  gods  subordinate  to  Rii.  Thus  Osiris 
and  Isis,  and  their  companion  gods,  were  absorbed  into  the  great 
company  of  the  gods  of  Heliopolis,  and  the  theological  system  of 
the  priests  of  Osiris  was  mixed  with  that  of  the  priests  of  Ra.^ 
Nothing  is  known  of  the  origin  of  Osiris  worship,  but  the  god 
himself  and  the  ceremonies  which  accompanied  the  celebration  of 
his  festivals  suggest  that  he  was  known  to  the  predynastic  dwellers 
in  Egypt.  The  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  worship  of  the  Man-god, 
who  rose  from  the  dead,  and  established  himself  in  the  underworld 
as  judge  and  king,  was  indelibly  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the 
Egyptians  at  a  very  early  period,  and  although  the  idea  of  a 
heaven  of  material  delights  which  was  promised  to  the  followers  of 
Osiris  did  not,  probably,  commend  itself  in  all  particulars  to  the 
imaginations  of  the  refined  and  cultured  folk  of  Egypt,  it  was 
tacitly  accepted  as  true  and  was  regarded  as  a  portion  of  their 
religious  inheritance  by  the  majority  of  the  people.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  priests  of  Ra  declared  that  the  souls  of  the  blessed  made 
their  way  after  death  to  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  that  if  they  succeeded 
in  alighting  upon  it  their  eternal  happiness  was  assured.  No 
fiends  could  vex  and  no  foes  assail  them  successfully,  so  long  as 
they  had  their  seat  in  the  "  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years;  "  they  lived 
upon  the  food  on  which  the  gods  lived,  and  that  food  was  light. 
They  were  apparelled  in  light,  and  they  were  embraced  by  the  god 
of  light.     They  passed  with  Ra  in  his  boat  through  all  the  dangers 


334  CULT   OF    HELIOPOLIS 

of  the  Tuat,  and  when  the  god  rose  each  morning  they  were  free 
to  wander  about  in  heaven  or  to  visit  their  old  familiar  habitations 
on  earth,  always  however  taking  care  to  resume  their  places  in  the 
boat  before  nightfall,  at  which  time  evil  spirits  had  great  power 
to  injure,  and  perhaps  even  to  slay,  the  souls  of  those  who  had 
failed  to  arrive  safely  in  the  boat. 

But  although  the  priests  of  Ra  under  the  Early  Empire,  and 
the  priests  of  Amen-Ra  under  the  Middle  and  New  Empires,  were 
supported  by  all  the  power  and  authority  of  the  greatest  kings  and 
queens  who  ever  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Egypt,  in  their  proclama- 
tion of  a  heaven,  which  was  of  a  far  more  spiritual  character  than 
that  of  Osiris,  they  never  succeeded  in  obliterating  the  belief  in 
Osiris  from  the  minds  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  population  in  Egypt. 
The  material  side  of  the  Egyptian  character  refused  to  be  weaned 
from  the  idea  of  a  Field  of  Peace,  which  was  situated  near  the 
Field  of  Reeds  and  the  Field  of  the  Grasshoppers,^  where  wheat 
and  barley  grew  in  abundance,  and  where  a  man  would  possess  a 
vine,  and  fig  trees,  and  date  palms,  and  be  waited  upon  by  his 
father  and  his  mother,  and  where  he  would  enjoy  an  existence 
more  comfortable  than  that  which  he  led  upon  this  earth.  The 
doctrine  of  a  realm  of  light,  where  the  meat,  and  drink,  and 
raiment  were  light,  and  the  idea  of  becoming  a  being  of  light,  and 
of  passing  eternity  among  creatures  of  light  did  not  satisfy  him. 
The  result  of  all  this  was  to  create  a  perpetual  contest  between  the 
two  great  priesthoods  of  Egypt,  namely,  those  of  Ra  and  Osiris ; 
in  the  end  the  doctrine  of  Osiris  prevailed,  and  the  attributes  of 
the  Sun-god  were  ascribed  to  him.  In  considering  the  struggle 
which  went  on  between  the  followers  of  Ra  and  Osiris  it  is  difficult 
not  to  think  that  there  was  some  strong  reason  for  the  resistance 
Avhich  the  priests  of  Ra  met  with  from  the  Egyptians  generally, 
and  it  seems  as  if  the  doctrine  of  Ra  contained  something  which 
was  entirely  foreign  to  the  ideas  of  the  people.  The  city  of 
Heliopolis  appears  always  to  have  contained  a  mixed  population, 
and  its  situation  made  it  a  very  convenient  halting-place  for 
travellers  passing  from  Arabia   and  Syria  into   Egypt   and   ince 


n 


5s^   N^    ^v   V  ^^'  '   (•^''"^''  'i^'^'^  -Dcat/,  cxxv.  19). 


HYMNS   TO    RA  335 

versa;  it  is,  then,  most  probable  that  the  doctrine  of  Ra  as  taught 
by  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  was  a  mixture  of  Egyptian  and 
Western  Asiatic  doctrines,  and  that  it  was  the  Asiatic  element  in 
it  which  the  Egyptians  resisted.  It  could  not  have  been  sun- 
worship  which  they  disliked,  for  they  had  been  sun-Avorshippers 
from  time  immemorial. 

The  above  paragraphs  contain  a  statement  of  the  facts 
concerning  the  worships  of  Ra  and  Osiris  which  appear  to  be 
fairly  deducible  from  the  extant  religious  literature  of  the 
Egyptians,  but  it  is  time  to  let  the  hymns  to  these  gods  declare 
the  attributes  which  were  assigned  to  them  during  the  most 
flourishing  period  of  Egyptian  history.  More  hymns  were  ad- 
dressed to  these  two  than  to  any  other  gods,  a  fact  which  proves 
that  they  were  considered  to  be  the  chief  means  of  salvation  for 
the  Egyptians.  The  following  hymns  are  taken  from  the  Papyri  of 
Hunefer,  and  Ani,  and  Nekht  ^ : — 

"  Homage  to  thee,  0  thou  who  art  Ra  when  thou  risest,  and 
"  Temu  when  thou  settest.  Thou  risest,  thou  risest,  thou  shinest, 
"  thou  shinest,  thou  who  art  crowned  king  of  the  gods.  Thou  art 
"  the  lord  of  heaven,  thou  art  the  lord  of  earth ;  thou  art  the 
"  creator  of  those  who  dwell  in  the  heights  and  of  those  who 
"  dwell  in  the  depths.  Thou  art  the  God  One  who  didst  come 
"  into  being  in  the  beginning  of  time.  Thou  didst  create  the  earth, 
"  thou  didst  fashion  man,  thou  didst  make  the  watery  abyss  of  the 
"  sky,  thou  didst  form  Hapi  (the  Nile),  thou  didst  create  the 
"  watery  abyss,  and  thou  dost  give  life  unto  all  that  therein  is. 
"Thou  hast  knit  together  the  mountains,  thou  hast  made  mankind 
"  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  to  come  into  being,  thou  hast  made 
"the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Worshipped  be  thou  whom  Maat 
"  embraceth  at  morn  and  at  eve.  Thou  dost  travel  across  the  sky 
"with  heart  swelling  with  joy;  the  Lake  of  Testes  becometh 
"  contented  thereat.  The  serpent-fiend  Nak  hath  fallen,  and  his 
"  two  arms  are  cut  off.  The  Sektet  boat  receiveth  fair  winds,  and 
"  the  heart  of  him  that  is  in  the  shrine  thereof  rejoiceth.  Thou  art 
"  crowned  prince  of  heaven,  and  thou  art  the  One  dowered  [with 

1  See  my  Chajpters  of  Coming  Forth  ly  Day  (Translation),  pp.  8,  36. 


336  HYMNS    TO    RA 

"  all  attributes]  who  comest  forth  from  the  sky.  Ra  is  he  whose 
"  word  when  uttered  must  come  to  pass.  0  thou  divine  Youth, 
"  thou  heir  of  everlastingness,  thou  self-begotten  one,  thou  who 
"  didst  give  thyself  birth  1  0  thou  One,  thou  mighty  [one]  of 
"  myriad  forms  and  aspects,  King  of  the  world,  Prince  of  Annu 
"  (Heliopolis),  lord  of  eternity  and  ruler  of  everlastingness,  the 
"  company  of  the  gods  rejoice  when  thou  rises t  and  when  thou 
"sailest  across  the  sky,  0  thou  who  art  exalted  in  the  Sektet 
"boat."     (From  the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer,  sheet  1.) 

"  Hail,  thou  Disk,  thou  lord  of  rays,  who  risest  on  the  horizon 
"  day  by  day !  Homage  to  thee,  0  Heru-khuti,  who  art  the  god 
"  Khepera,  the  self-created ;  when  thou  risest  on  the  horizon  and 
"  sheddest  thy  beams  of  light  upon  the  lands  of  the  North  and 
"  of  the  South,  thou  art  beautiful,  yea  beautiful,  and  all  the  gods 
^'  rejoice  when  they  behold  thee,  the  King  of  heaven.  The  goddess 
"  Nebt-unnut  is  stablished  upon  thy  head ;  and  her  uraei  of  the 
''  South  and  of  the  North  are  upon  thy  brow ;  she  taketh  up  her 
"  place  before  thee.  The  god  Thoth  is  stablished  in  the  bows  of 
"  thy  boat  to  destroy  utterly  all  thy  foes.  Those  who  are  in  the 
"  Tuat  come  forth  to  meet  thee,  and  they  bow  in  homage  as  they 
"  come  towards  thee  to  behold  thy  beautiful  form.  And  I  have 
"  come  before  thee  that  I  may  be  with  thee  to  behold  thy  Disk 
' '  every  day.  May  I  not  be  shut  up  in  [the  tomb],  may  I  not  be 
"  turned  back,  may  the  members  of  my  body  be  made  new  when  I 
"  view  thy  beauties,  even  as  [are  those  of]  all  thy  favoured  ones, 
^'  because  I  am  one  of  those  who  worship j^ed  thee  upon  earth.  May 
"  I  come  in  unto  the  land  of  eternity,  may  I  come  even  unto  the 
"  everlasting  land,  for  behold,  0  my  lord,  this  hast  thou  ordained 
"  for  me. 

"  Homage  to  thee,  0  thou  Avho  risest  in  the  horizon  as  Ra, 
"  thou  restest  upon  law  unchangeable  and  unalterable.  Thou 
"passest  over  the  sky,  and  every  face  watcheth  thee  and  thy 
"  course,  for  thou  hast  been  hidden  from  their  gaze.  Thou  dost 
"  show  thyself  at  dawn  and  at  eventide  day  by  day.  The  Sektet 
"  boat,  wherein  is  thy  Majesty,  goeth  forth  with  light ;  thy  beams 
"  are  upon  all  faces ;  the  [number]  of  thy  red  and  yellow  rays 
"  cannot  be  known,  nor  can  thy  bright  beams  be  told.     The  lands 


HYMN   TO   RA  337 

"  of  the  gods,  and  the  lands  of  Punt  must  be  seen,  ere  that  which 
"  is  hidden  [in  thee]  may  be  measured.  Alone  and  by  thyself  thou 
"  dost  manifest  thyself  when  thou  comest  into  being  above  Nu. 
"  May  I  advance,  even  as  thou  dost  advance ;  may  I  never  cease  to 
"  go  forward  as  thou  never  ceasest  to  go  forward,  even  though  it  be 
"  for  a  moment ;  for  with  strides  thou  dost  in  one  little  moment 
"  pass  over  the  spaces  which  would  need  millions  and  millions  of 
"  years  [for  men  to  pass  over ;  this]  thou  doest  and  then  thou  dost 
"  sink  to  rest.  Thou  puttest  an  end  to  the  hours  of  the  night,  and 
"  thou  dost  count  them,  even  thou  ;  thou  endest  them  in  thine 
"  own  appointed  season,  and  the  earth  becometh  light.  Thou 
"  settest  thyself  therefore  before  thy  handiwork  in  the  likeness  of 
"  Ra  [when]  thou  risest  on  the  horizon. 

"  Thou  art  crowned  with  the  majesty  of  thy  beauties  ;  thou 
"  mouldest  thy  limbs  as  thou  dost  advance,  and  thou  bringest  them 
"  forth  without  birth-pangs  in  the  form  of  Ra,  as  thou  dost  rise 
"  up  into  the  upper  air.  Grant  thou  that  I  may  come  unto  the 
"  heaven  which  is  everlasting,  and  into  the  mountain  where  dwell 
"  thy  favoured  ones.  May  I  be  joined  unto  those  shining  beings, 
"  holy  and  perfect,  who  are  in  the  Underworld  ;  and  may  I  come 
"  forth  with  them  to  behold  thy  beauties  when  thou  shinest  at 
"  eventide  and  goest  to  thy  mother  Nu.  Thou  dost  place  thyself 
"  in  the  west,  and  my  two  hands  are  [raised]  in  adoration  of  thee 
"  when  thou  settest  as  a  living  being.  Behold,  thou  art  the 
"  maker  of  eternity,  and  thou  art  adored  when  thou  settest  in  the 
"heavens.  I  have  given  my  heart  unto  thee  without  wavering, 
"  0  thou  who  art  mightier  than  the  gods.  A  hymn  of  praise  to 
"  thee,  0  thou  who  risest  Uke  unto  gold,  and  who  dost  flood  the 
"world  with  light  on  the  day  of  thy  birth.  Thy  mother  giveth 
"  thee  birth,  and  thou  dost  give  light  unto  the  course  of  the  Disk. 
"  0  thou  great  Light,  who  shinest  in  the  heavens,  thou  dost 
"  strengthen  the  generations  of  men  with  the  Mle-flood,  and  thou 
"  dost  cause  gladness  in  all  lands,  and  in  all  cities,  and  in  all 
"temples.  Thou  art  glorious  by  reason  of  thy  splendours,  and 
"  thou  makest  strong  thy  Double  with  divine  foods.  0  thou 
"  mighty  one  of  victories,  thou  who  art  the  Power  of  Powers,  who 
"  dost  make  strong  thy  throne  against  evil  fiends  ;  who  art  glorious 
z 


338  HYMN   TO   RA 

"  in  majesty  in  the  Sektet  boat,  and  who  art  exceedingly  mighty 
"  in  the  Atet  boat,  make  thou  me  glorious  through  words  which 
"when  spoken  must  take  effect  in  the  UnderAvorld;  and  grant  thou 
"  that  in  the  nether  world  I  may  be  without  evil.  I  pray  thee  to 
"  put  my  faults  behind  thee  ;  grant  thou  that  I  may  be  one  of  thy 
"  loyal  servants  who  are  with  the  shining  ones  ;  may  I  be  joined 
"unto  the  souls  which  are  in  Ta-tchesertet,  and  may  I  journey 
"  into  the  Sekhet-Aaru  by  a  prosperous  and  happy  decree."  (From 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  sheet  20  f.) 

"  Homage  to  thee,  0  thou  glorious  being,  thou  who  art 
"  dowered  with  all  attributes,  0  Tem-Heru-khuti,  when  thou  risest 
"  in  the  horizon  of  heaven,  a  cry  of  joy  cometh  forth  to  thee  from 
"the  mouth  of  all  peoples.  0  thou  beautiful  being,  thou  dost 
"  renew  thyself  in  thy  season  in  the  form  of  the  Disk  within  thy 
"  mother  Hathor ;  therefore  in  every  place  every  heart  swelleth 
"  with  joy  at  thy  rising  for  ever.  The  regions  of  the  North  and 
"  South  come  to  thee  with  homage,  and  send  forth  acclamations  at 
"  thy  rising  in  the  horizon  of  heaven  ;  thou  illuminest  the  two 
"  lands  with  rays  of  turquoise  light.  0  Ra,  thou  who  art  Heru- 
"khuti,  the  divine  man-child,  the  heir  of  eternity,  self-begotten 
"  and  self-born,  king  of  earth,  prince  of  the  Tuat,  governor  of 
"  the  regions  of  Aukert ;  thou  comest  forth  from  the  water,  thou 
"  hast  sprung  from  the  god  Nu,  who  cherisheth  thee  and  ordereth 
"  thy  members.  0  thou  god  of  life,  thou  lord  of  love,  all  men  live 
"when  thou  shinest;  thou  art  crowned  king  of  the  gods.  The 
"  goddess  Nut  doeth  homage  unto  thee,  and  Maat  embraceth  thee 
"at  all  times.  Those  who  are  in  thy  following  sing  unto  thee 
"  with  joy  and  bow  down  their  foreheads  to  the  earth  when  they 
"  meet  thee,  thou  lord  of  heaven,  thou  lord  of  earth,  thou  king  of 
"  Right  and  Truth,  thou  lord  of  eternity,  thou  prince  of  ever- 
"  lastingness,  thou  sovereign  of  all  the  gods,  thou  god  of  life,  thou 
"  creator  of  eternity,  thou  maker  of  heaven  wherein  thou  art  firmly 
"  established. 

"  The  company  of  the  gods  rejoice  at  thy  rising,  the  earth  is 
"  o-lad  when  it  beholdeth  thy  rays  ;  the  peoples  that  have  been 
"  long  dead  come  forth  with  cries  of  joy  to  see  thy  beauties  every 
"  day.     Thou  goest  forth  each  day  over  heaven  and  earth  and  art 


THE   PRAISES   OF   RA  339 

'made  strong  each  day  by  thy  mother  Nut.  Thou  passest 
'  through  the  heights  of  heaven,  thy  heart  swelleth  with  joy  ;  and 
'  the  Lake  of  Testes  is  content  thereat.  The  Serpent-fiend  hath 
'  fallen,  his  arms  are  hewn  off,  the  knife  hath  cut  asunder  his 
'joints.  Ra  liveth  by  Maat  the  beautiful.  The  Sektet  boat 
'  draweth  on  and  cometh  into  port ;  the  South  and  the  North,  the 
'West  and  the  East  turn  to  praise  thee,  0  thou  primeval 
'  substance  of  the  earth  who  didst  come  into  being  of  thine  own 
'  accord.  Isis  and  Nephthys  salute  thee,  they  sing  unto  thee 
'  songs  of  joy  at  thy  rising  in  the  boat,  they  protect  thee  with  their 
'  hands.  The  souls  of  the  East  follow  thee,  the  souls  of  the  West 
'  praise  thee.  Thou  art  the  ruler  of  all  the  gods,  and  thou  hast 
'joy  of  heart  within  thy  shrine,  for  the  serpent  fiend  Nak  hath 
'been  condemned  to  the  fire,  and  thy  heart  shall  be  joyful  for 
'ever."     (From  the  Papyrus  of  NekJit,  sheet  21.) 

Even  more  instructive,  however,  than  these  are  the  Seventy- 
five  Praises  of  Ra  which  are  found  inscribed  on  the  walls  of  royal 
tombs  of  the  XlXth  and  XXth  Dynasties  at  Thebes.  In  these  we 
find  enumerated  a  large  number  of  most  remarkable  epithets  and 
attributes,  some  idea  of  the  meaning  of  which  will  be  gathered 
from  the  following  rendering : — 

1.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,^  lord  of  the  hidden 
"  circles  [of  the  Tuat],  bringer  of  forms,  thou  restest  in  secret 
"  places  and  makest  thy  creations  in  the  form  of  the  god  Tamt 
"  f  c=^5i  "^^         3 ,  i.e.,  the  universal  god). 

2.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  thou  creative  force 
"  (S  <=>  (][)  {)?  who  spreadest  out  thy  wings,  who  restest  in 
"  the  Tuat,  who  makest  the  created  things  which  come  forth 
"  from  his  divine  limbs, 

3.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Ta-thenen,  begetter 
"  of  his  gods.  Thou  art  he  who  protecteth  what  is  in  him,  and 
"  thou  makest  thy  creations  as  Governer  of  thy  Circle. 

4.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  looker  on  the 
"  earth,  and  brightener  of  Amenti.     Thou  art  he  whose  forms 

1  Literally,  "Power." 


340  THE   PRAISES    OF   RA 


v^  :  i)  are  his  own  creations,  and  thou  makest  thy 

"  creations  in  thy  Great  Disk. 

5.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  Word-soul, 
"  that   resteth  on  his   high   place.     Thou   art   he  who   pro- 

"  tecteth  thy  hidden  spirits  ("^s  v^  ')'  ^^^  they  have  form 
"  in  thee. 

6.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  mighty  one,  bold  of 
"  face,  the  knitter  together  of  his  body.  Thou  art  he  who 
"  gathereth  together  thy  gods  when  thou  goest  into  thy  hidden 
"  Circle. 

7.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem.  Thou  dost  call  to 
"  thine  Eye,  and  dost  speak  to  thy  head,  and  dost  give  breath 
"  to  the  souls  in  their  places,  and  they  receive  it  and  have 
''  their  forms  in  him. 

8.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  destroyer  of  thy 
"  enemies ;  thou  art  he  who  doth  decree  destruction  for  the 

9.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  sender  forth 
"  of  light  into  his  Circle  ;  thou  art  he  who  maketh  the 
"  darkness  to  be  in  his  Circle  and  thou  coverest  those  who  are 
"  therein." 

10.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  illuminer 
"  of  bodies  in  the  horizons  ;  thou  art  he  who  entereth  into 
"  his  Circle. 

11.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  support  (        M  /\) 

"  of  the  Circles  of  Ament ;  thou  art  indeed  the  body  of  Temu 

12.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  hidden  support 
*'of  Anpu  ((1  °  '^^)i  t^ou  art  indeed  the  body  of 
''  Khepera  (^  <=>  (|  ^)  . 

13.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  whose  duration  of 
"  life  is  greater  than  that  of  her  whose  forms  are   hidden  ; 

"  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Shu  (nsz:  ][  M\. 

14.  "  Praise    be    to    thee,    0    Ra,    exalted    Sekhem,    the   guide 


THE    PRAISES    OF   RA  341 

"  (r  J  h4  ^  ^^^^)  ^-^  ^^  *^  ^^^  members ;  thou  art  indeed  the 
"  bodies  of  Tefnut  (,^__    ^    ^)  . 

15.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  dost  make 
"to  be  abundant  the  things  which  are  of  Ra  in  their  seasons, 
"  and  thou  art  indeed  Seb  (^^  J  r^)  • 

16.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  mighty  one 
"  who  doth  keep  count  of  the  things  which  are  in  him ;  thou 
*'  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nut. 

17.  "  Praise   be   to   thee,  0   Ra,  exalted   Sekhem,  the  lord  who 

"  advancest ;  thou  art  indeed  Isis  ( j      Jj  j . 

18.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  whose  head 
"  shineth  more  than  the  things  which  are  in  front  of  him ; 

"  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nephthys  (TT    '^   3)  . 

19.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  united  is  he  in 
"  members,  One,  who  gathereth  together  all  seed  ;   thou  art 

"  indeed  the  bodies  of  Horus  ( ^^  rjj)  • 

20.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  thou  shining  one 
"  who  dost  send  forth  light  upon  the  waters  of  heaven  ;  thou 
"  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nu  ( Jj ) . 

21.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  avenger  of  Nu 
"  who  Cometh  forth  from  what  is  in  him ;  thou  art  indeed  the 
"  bodies  of  the  god  Remi  (^^^f]f|^^). 

22.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the  two 
"  Uraei  who  bear  their  two  feathers  [on  their  heads];  thou  art 

"  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  god  Huaaiti  (|  -f)  '^'^  ^^  '^  V^)' 

23.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  goest  in 
"  and  comest  out  and  thou  comest  out  and  goest  in  to  thy 
"  hidden   Circle,   and   thou   art   indeed   the   bodies  of  Aatu 

24.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  Soul  who 
"  departeth  at  his  appointed  time  ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 

O         ). 

25.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  who  standeth  up, 


342  THE   PRAISES    OF   RA 

"  the  Soul  One,  who  avengeth  his  children ;  thou  art  indeed 
''  the  bodies  of  Netuti  (^  \ZA)' 

26.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  raisest  thy 
"  head  and  thou  makest  bold  thy  brow,  thou  ram,  mightiest 
"  of  created  things. 

27.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  light  of  Shu  at 

"  the  head  of  Akert  (h  "^  )  5  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 

''of  Ament  (()  ^^^    "  ). 

28.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  soul  that 
"  seeth,  the  governor  of  Ament ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 

''  of  the  double  Circle  (^  ^  ^  ^  ). 

29.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art 
"  the     Soul     that     mourneth,    and     the     god     that     crieth 

"  ^<=>  ^^  ^  fjfl  '^^^  ^)'^   ^^^^  ^^*  indeed   the   bodies   of 

^        "Aakebi((j^^J(]^^|). 

30.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  makest  thy 
"  hand  to  pass  and  praisest  thine  Eye,  and  thou  art  indeed 

"'  the  bodies  of  the  god  of  hidden  limbs  (u  '  |  (?<?(?  ^)- 

31.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  art  the  Soul 
"  exalted  in  the  double  hidden  place  (        ^         ) :  thou  art 

"  indeed  Khenti-Amenti  (l^J  =  %,t^J)- 

32.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  of  manifold 
"  creations  in  the  holy  house ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 

"  the  god  Kheprer  (w  '^^^  Jj). 

33.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  placest 
"  thine  enemies  in  their  strong  fetters,  and  thou  art  indeed  the 

"  bodies  of  Mati  (|()^^)- 

34.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  givest  forth 
"  light  in  the  hidden  place,  and  thou  art  the  bodies  of  the  god 

"  of  generation  (         '^^    nji    r'=ifij|j. 

35.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  the 
''  vivifier  of  bodies  ;  thou  makest  throats  to  inhale  breath,  and 


36. 


37. 


38. 


39. 


40. 


41. 


42. 


43. 


44. 


THE   PRAISES   OF   RA  348 

thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  god  Tebati  (cr^i^  ^  ^^^ 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ka,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  assemblest 
bodies  in  the  Tuat,  and  they  gain  the  form  of  life,  thou 
destroyest  foul  humours,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 
thegodSerqi  (^()(]y). 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Hidden-face 
(STI)'  S««l^«-N«tt«rt  (^l^ng;);  thou 
art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Shai  (M^T  '^  M  ^  r^). 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  lord  of  might ; 
thou  embracest  the  Tuat  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 

Sekhen-Ba  ("i"  il  o^  "i^  J). 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  hidest  thy 
body  in  that  which  is  within  thee,  and  thou  art  indeed  the 

bodies  of  Amen-khat  (f]  "  |  "^  "^  ^  j  ^  )  • 
Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  more  strong  of 
heart  than  those  who  are  in  his  following  ;  thou  sendest  fire 
in  the  house  of  destruction,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 

of  the  Fire-god  Rekhi  (^  I  fjfj  Q,  ^)- 
Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  sendest  forth 
destruction,  and  thou  makest  beings  to  come  into  existence 
in  thy  creations  in  the  Tuat,  and  thou  art  the  bodies  of 

Tuati  L\^i)- 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Bua-tep  ( J r^^^  - 

W))'  governor  of  his  Eye;  thou  sendest  forth  light  into 

the  hidden  place,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  body  of  Shepi 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Temt-hatu, 
stablisher  of  Amta  (J\  -\U    '"    M) ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 

of  Temt-hatu  (g||;^|). 

Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  creator  of  hidden 


344  THE   PRAISES    OF   RA 

"  things,  generator  of  bodies ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 
"  the  god  Seshetai  (m  (]l)  ^). 

45.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  providest 
"  those  Avho  are   in  the  Tuat  with  what  they  need  in   the 

"  hidden  Circles,  and  thou  art  indeed  Aper-ta  (A    ^_^      "     3j. 

46.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Pta,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thy  limbs  rejoice 
"  when  they  see  thy  body,  0  Uash-Ba  (-^  '^  ""^  ^  "i^  3\ 
"  when  thou  enterest  thy  body,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 
"ofHaid^jlj). 

47.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  aged  one  of  the 
"pupil  (^2n|)  °^  *^^  Utchat,  Bai  (^()()^);  thou 
"  makest  full  thy  splendour,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 
"Thenti  (^;y). 

48.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Rfi,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  makest 
•'  straight  ways  in  the  Tuat,  and  openest  up  roads  in  the 
"  hidden  place,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Maa-uat 


49.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  art  the  Soul 
"  who  mo  vest   onwards,  and   thou  hastenest  thy  steps,  and 

"  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Akhpa  (u  n  4  'f^)* 

50.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  sendest 
"  forth  thy  stars  and  thou  ilium inest  the  darkness  in  the 
"  Circles  of  those  whose  forms  are  hidden,  and  thou  art  indeed 

"  the  god  Hetchiu  (|\\^^)- 

51.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  the 
"  maker  of  the  Circles,  thou  makest  bodies  to  come  into  being 
"  by  thine  own  creative  vigour.  Thou,  0  Ra,  hast  created 
"  the  things  which  exist,  and  the  things  which  do  not  exist, 

"the  dead  (    n,   and  the  gods,  and   the  spirits;    thou   art 

"  indeed  the  body  that  maketh  Khati  ("^  ^^     v^)  ^^  come 
"  into  being. 


THE   PRAISES    OF   RA  345 

52.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the 
"doubly  hidden  and  secret  god  (™|®  fj"']']^)'  and 
"  the  souls  go  where  thou  leadest  them,  and  those  who  follow 
"  thee  thou  makest  to  enter  in ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 

53.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  Uben- 
"An  (^  J'XX^I^)  ^^  Ament,  and  the  light  of  the 
"  lock  of  hair  on  thee  .  .  .  . ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 
"  the  god  Uben. 

54.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the 
"  Aged  One  of  forms  who  dost  go  about  through  the  Tuat,  to 
"  whom  the  souls  in  their  Circles  ascribe  praises  ;   and  thou 

"  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Then-aru  (aa^  -c2>-  "^  In   i  rv)  )• 

55.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  when  thou  dost 
"  unite  thyself  to  the  Beautiful  Ament,  the  gods  of  the  Tuat 
"  rejoice  at  the  sight  of  thee ;   thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 

"Aai(l)_.J£j). 

56.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  the 
"  Great  Cat,  the  avenger  of  the  gods,  and  the  judge  of  words, 
"  and  the  president  of  the  sovereign  chiefs  (or,  assessors),  and 
"  the  governor  of  the  holy  Circle  ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies 

"  of  the  Great  Cat  (|  tj  ^  |^  ^  |)- 

57.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  when  thou  fillest 
"  thine  eye,  and  speakest  to  the  pupil  thereof,  the  divine  dead 
"  bodies  shed  tears ;  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Metu- 
"khut-f(l^l^^^l). 

58.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the  Soul 
"  on  high  and  thy  bodies  are  hidden ;  thou  sendest  forth  the 
"  light,  and  thou  lookest  upon  thy  hidden  things  (or,  places)  ; 

"  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Her-ba  (|    "^   S^  ^  "J^"  J). 

59.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  exalted  of 
"Soul;  thou  destroyest  thine  enemies,  thou  sendest  fire  on 

"  the  wicked,  and  thou  art  the  bodies  of  Qa-Ba  (^T^'^^'r^)- 


346  THE   PRAISES    OF   RA 

60.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Auaiu 
(l\  "vx  '^^  M  ^J\),  who  hidest  in  purity  ;  thou  hast  gained 
the  mastery  over  the  souls  of  the  gods,  and  thou  art  indeed 
the  bodies  of  Auai. 

61.  "Praise   be   to   thee,    0    Ra,    exalted    Sekhem,    Oldest    one 

(^^  %:^  Jj  V  Great  one,  Governor  of  the  Tuat,  Creating 
one  (©<=>(](];  3)',  thou  didst  create  the  two  Setchet 
C'^  ^  ^pl  3Y  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  two 

Setchet  gods  (^  2^  |)^  I). 

62.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Mighty  One  of 
journey ings  ;  thou  orderest  thy  steps  by  Maat,  thou  art  the 
Soul  that  doeth  good  to  the  body,  thou  art  Senk-hra 
/^^  Q  "^    {q^^  Face  of  Light),  and  thou  art   indeed  the 

\V X6  1 

bodies  of  Senk-hra. 

63.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  dost  protect 
(or,  avenge)    thy  body,   and   thou   dost   hold   the   balance 

[among]  the  gods  as  the  hidden  Ama  (^"^  ^=  (j  ^),  [and] 

as  Am-ta  ([]  -  -    ""'    ^),  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 

the  double  god  Ama-Amta  ("^  ^=z  (j  ^  (j  _  _  =^  ^). 

64.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the  lord 
of  the  fetters  of  thine  enemies,  the  One,  the  Prince  of  the 

Apes  (  ^    "^^^  ')'  ^^^  *^^^  ^^*  indeed  the   bodies  of 

Antetu(|]^^). 

65.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  sendest 
forth  flames  into  thy  furnaces  (^^  \  ^^  ^^  |)'  ^^^  *^^^ 
cuttest  off  the  heads  of  those  who  are  to  be  destroyed 
(§  ci  r|  ^jnur  (]()  %  ^^  '^  ')'  ^^^  *^^^  ^^'*  indeed  the  bodies 
of  the  two  gods  Ketuit  (^  ^  ^1  ^  ^)- 

66.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  art  the 
god  of  generation  (  y>^  QQ ''^^^  ^)'  t^c>^  destroyest  [thy] 
offspring,  thou  art  One,  thou  stablishest  the  two  lands  by 


THE   PRAISES   OF   RA  347 

"  [thy]  spirit  ("^^^  "^  "^  '  '  )'  ^^^  ^^*^^  ^^^  indeed  the  bodies 
"  of  the  god  Ta-Thenen  (^  s=5  ;|.I|.  ^). 

67.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  stablishest 
"  the  gods  who  watch  the  hours  (^  oa  []()  ^  ^  1)  on  their 
"  standards,  and  who  are  invisible  and  secret,  and  thou  art 
"  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  Watcher  gods  (^g  no  (]()  ,„  ^)- 

Q8.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  the 
"double  Tchent  god  (^^  ^^)  ^^  heaven,  and  the  gate  of 
"the    Tuat,    and   the    god   Besi    (J  P  f]!)  ^S=^  ^)    [wi*^   ^^^ 

"  spiritual  bodies  (^  |  8  "^  ||  ')'  ^^^  *^^^  ^^^*  *^^^  bodies 
"  of  Besi.  " 

69.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  .  thou   art  the 

"Apes  (II        °M1  I) ,  and  thou  art  the  true  creative 

"Power  of  [thy]   divine  attributes   (-=^=^  I]l)  ^Jfl^  |)'  ^^^ 
"  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  Ape-god  in  the  Tuat. 

70.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  makest  new 
"  the  earth,  and  thou  openest  a  way  for  that  which  is  therein, 
"  thou  that  art  the  Soul  which  giveth  names  unto  his  limbs, 
"  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Sma-ta  (    l,  ^^  -  9^)- 

71.  "Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  Nehi 
"  (a^.wna  T\  I  flfl  fl  jj)  who  burnest  up  thine  enemies,  the  Fire- 
"god  Setcheti  h^  ^fl  3\  who  burneth  up  fetters,  and 
"  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nehi  ('wwvn  A    §  (]f]  ^  ^)- 

72.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the  god 
"of  mation  (cy  =^),  the  god  of  light  ('^®^^), 
"  who  travelleth,  thou  makest  the  darkness  to  come  into 
"  being  after  thy  light,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of 
"  Shemti. 

73.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  art  the  lord 

(n  n  yNAAAAA  \ 

J      /WW^A    J  j, 

"  thou  art  the  chief  of  the  gods  who  are  supreme  in  their 


348  THE   PRAISES   OF   RA 

'districts  H  r^  i   rfTK  ^      "^s  "--^  ^  ')'  ^^^  *^^^  ^^*  indeed 
'  the  god  Neb-baiu  (^37  ^^  '   '  w)>  i-^-'  Lord  of  souls). 

74.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ;  thou  art  the 
"  double  Sphinx-god,  the  Double  obelisk-god  (?  ^  1)1]  , ,  S 
"  J  AAAAAA  I  AA/w^A  (]  (]  ^ 3V  HiB  Great  God  who  lifteth  up  his 

two  Eyes,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the   double 
Sphinx  god  Huiti  (I^H^y). 

75.  "  Praise  be  to  thee,  0  Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ;  thou  art  the  lord 
"  of  light  and  declarest  the  things  which  are  hidden,  and  thou 
"  art  the  Soul  that  speaketh  with  the  gods  who  are  in  their 

Circles,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Neb-Senku 
(r,:;^-^  AAA^  y  ^  ^'  ^•^•'  *^^®  Lord  of  light)."  ^ 
An  impartial  examination  of  the  above  translation  will  show 
the  reader  the  lofty  conceptions  which  Avere  associated  by  the 
Egyptians  with  Ra  the  Sun-god,  and  there  is  not  room  for  any 
reasonable  doubt  that  they  ascribed  to  the  god,  whose  symbol  was 
the  sun,  all  the  attributes  which  modern  nations  are  wont  to 
regard  as  the  properties  peculiar  to  God  Almighty.  He  was  One, 
and  the  maker  of  "  gods  "  and  men  ;  he  was  the  creator  of  heaven, 
earth,  and  the  underworld  ;  he  was  self-begotten,  self-created,  and 
self-produced ;  he  had  existed  for  ever  and  would  exist  to  all 
eternity ;  he  was  the  source  of  all  life  and  light ;  and  he  was  the 
personification  of  right  and  truth,  and  goodness,  and  the  destroyer 
of  darkness,  night,  wickedness,  and  evil.  There  is  scarcely  an 
attribute  of  importance  ascribed  to  our  God  for  which  there  is  no 
equivalent  in  the  hymns  and  texts  which  relate  to  Ra  and  describe 
his  greatness  and  power,  for  he  was  not  only  the  god  of  the  living 
but  also  the  god  of  the  dead,  and  the  god  of  everything  unborn. 
His  relations  with  Osiris,  who  was  part  god  and  part  man,  and  was 
the  cause  and  type  of  immortality  for  man,  were  at  once  those  of  a 
god,  a  father,  and  an  equal,  and  when  we  consider  that  Osiris  was 
a  king  who  reigned  over  Egypt,   and  that   every  king  was  an 

1  For  the  hieroglyphic  texts  from  the  tombs  of  Seti  I.,  Seti  II.,  and  Rameses  IV., 
and  a  French  translation,  see  Naville,  La  Litanie  da  Soleil,  Leipzig,  1875. 


TEM    OF   HELIOPOLIS  349 

incarnation  of  Ra,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  he  came  to  have 
the  power  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and  to  act  as  the  judge  of  the 
dead  on  behalf  of  his  father  Ra. 


Tem,  or  Temu,   ^^,  ^^^^^  «r  Atem,  ^  ^^ 

Tem,  or  Temu,  or  Atem,  was  originally  the  local  god  of  the 
city  of  Annu,  or  Heliopolis,  and  in  the  dynastic  period  at  all  events 
he  was  held  to  be  one  of  the  forms  of  the  great  Sun-god  Ra,  and  to 
be   the   personification   of  the    setting  sun.     In   the   predynastic 
period,  however,  he  was,  as  M.  Lefebure  has  pointed  out,^  the  first 
man   among   the    Egyptians  who   was   believed   to   have   become 
divine,  and  who  was  at  his  death  identified  with  the  setting  sun ; 
in  other  words,  Tem  was  the  first  living  man-god  known  to  the 
Egyptians,  just  as  Osiris  was  the  first  dead  man-god,  and  as  such 
was  always  represented  in  human  form  and  with  a  human  head. 
It  is  important  to  note  this  fact,  for  it  indicates  that  those  who 
formulated  the  existence  of  this  god  were  on  a  higher  level  of 
civilization  than  those  who  depicted  the   oldest  of  all  Egyptian 
gods,  Horus,  in  the  form  of  a  hawk,  or  in  that  of  a  hawk-headed 
human  body.     In  the  papyri  and  on  the  monuments  he  usually 
wears  'U,  the  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,  upon  his  head,  and  he 
holds  -9- ,  the  emblem  of  life,  in  his  right  hand,  and  the  sceptre,  j[ , 
in  his  left.     In  the  boat  of  Ra  he  is  depicted  in  human  form  even 
when  Ra  is  symbolized  by  a  disk  which  is  being  rolled  along  by  a 
beetle,  and  the  god  Khepera  is  represented  by  a  beetle,  and  the 
rising  sun  Heru-Khuti  is  shown  under  the  form  of  a  hawk's  head, 
from  which  fall  rays  of  light.^     Tem  was,  in  fact,  to  the  Egyptians 
a  manifestation  of  God  in  human  form,  and  his  conception  in  their 
minds  marks  the  end  of  the  period  wherein  they  assigned  animal 
forms  to  their  gods,  and  the  beginning   of  that  in  which   they 
evolved  the  idea  of  God,  almighty,  inscrutable,  unknowable,  the 
maker  and  creator  of  the  universe.     It  is  useless  to  attempt  to 
assign  a  date  to  the  period  when  the  Egyptians  began  to  worship 

1  Trans.  Soc.  libl,  Arclu,  ix.,  p.  175.  "  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  398. 


350  TEM    OF   HELIOPOLIS 

God  in  human  form,  for  we  have  no  material  for  doing  so ;  the 
worship  of  Tern  must,  however,  be  of  very  great  antiquity,  and  the 
fact  that  the  priests  of  Ra  in  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties  united 
him  to  their  god  under  the  name  of  Ra-Tem,  O  "^^ ,  proves  that 
his  worship  was  wide-spread,  and  that  the  god  was  thought  to 
possess  attributes  similar  to  those  of  Ra. 

The  Pyramid  Texts  show  that  the  attributes  of  Temu  were 
confounded  with  those  of  Ra,  and  that  the  protection  and  favour 
of  this  god  were  all  essential  for  the  well-being  of  the  deceased  in 
the  Underworld  ;  indeed,  it  is  Tem  the  father  who  stretches  out 
his  hand  to  Pepi  I.  and  sets  him  at  the  head  of  the  gods,  where  he 
judges  the  great  and  the  wise.^  This  passage  shows  that  Tem  was 
regarded  as  the  father  of  the  human  race,  and  as  he  was  also 
divine  his  powers  to  help  the  dead  were  very  great.  In  many 
respects  he  was  held  to  be  the  equal  of  Ra,  and  the  prayers  and 
hymns  which  were  addressed  to  him  frequently  show  that  the 
Egyptians  were  very  anxious  to  propitiate  him.  This  is  not 
difficult  to  understand  if  we  remember  the  dogmas  of  the 
Heliopolitan  priesthood  about  the  means  by  which  the  souls  of  the 
blessed  departed  from  this  world.  They  taught  that  souls  when 
they  left  this  world  went  to  the  region  which  lay  between  the 
earth  and  the  beginning  of  the  Valley  of  the  Tuat,  and  which  was 
called  Amentet,  and  that  they  waited  there  until  the  Boat  of  the 
Setting  Sun,  i.e.,  the  boat  of  Ra  in  his  form  of  Temu,  made  his 
appearance  there  ;  as  soon  as  it  arrived  the  souls  flocked  to  it,  and 
those  who  had  served  Ra  upon  earth  and  whose  bodies  had  been 
buried  with  the  orthodox  rites,  and  ceremonies,  and  prayers  of  the 
priesthood  of  Ra,  and  were,  therefore,  provided  with  the  necessary 
words  of  power,  were  admitted  to  the  boat  of  Tem,  where  they 
enjoyed  the  protection  and  favour  of  the  god  in  his  various  forms 
to  all  eternity. 

There  was,  moreover,  another  aspect  of  Tem  which  gave  the 
god  a  position  of  peculiar  importance  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians, 


RA-TEM   OF   HELIOPOLIS  351 

i.e.,  he  was  identified  not  only  with  the  god  of  the  dead,  Osiris,  but 

also  with  the  young  Horus,  the  new  and  rising  sun  of  the  morrow. 

All  these  ideas  are  well  expressed  in  a  hymn  to  Tern  which  is  found 

in  the  Papyrus  of  Mut-lietep  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  10,010,  sheet  5),  and 

which  was  composed  to  enable  every  spirit  who  recited  it  to  "  come 

forth  by  day  "  and  in  any  form  he  pleased  and  to  have  great  power 

in   the   Tuat.     The   lady   Mut-hetep    says,   "  0    Ra-Tem,   in   thy 

"  splendid  progress  thou  risest,  and  thou  settest  as  a  living  being 

"  in   the   glories   of  the   western   horizon ;    thou   settest   in   thy 

"territory  which   is  in  the   Mount  of  Sunset  (Manu,    ,^<^  r^-^^). 

"  Thy  uraeus  is  behind  thee,  thy  uraeus  is  behind  thee.     Homage 

"  to  thee,  0  thou  who  art  in  peace  ;  homage  to  thee,  0  thou  who 

"  art  in  peace.     Thou  art  joined  unto  the  Eye   of  Tem,  and  it 

"  chooseth  its  powers  of  protection  [to  place]  behind  thy  members. 

"  Thou  goest  forth  through  heaven,  thou  travellest  over  the  earth, 

"  and  thou  jonrneyest  onward.     0   Luminary,  the  northern  and 

"  southern  halves  of  heaven  come  to  thee,  and  they  bow  low  in 

"  adoration,   and  they  do  homage  unto  thee,  day  by  day.     The 

"  gods  of  Amentet  rejoice  in  thy  beauties,  and  the  unseen  places 

"  sing  hymns  of  praise  unto  thee.     Those  who  dwell  in  the  Sektet 

"  boat  go  round  about  thee,  and  the  Souls  of  the  East  do  homage 

"  to   thee,  and  when  they  meet   thy  Majesty  they  cry :    '  Come, 

"  come  in  peace  !  '     There  is  a  shout  of  welcome  to  thee,  0  lord 

"  of  heaven  and  governor  of  Amentet !     Thou  art  acknowledged 

"  by  Isis  who  seeth  her  son  in  thee,  the  lord  of  fear,  the  mighty 

"  one  of  terror.     Thou  settest  as  a  living  being   in   the  hidden 

"  place.      Thy  father  [Ta-]tunen  raiseth  thee   up  and  he  placeth 

"  both  his  hands  behind  thee ;  thou  becomest  endowed  with  divine 

"  attributes  in  [thy]  members  of  earth ;  thou  wakest  in  peace  and 

"  thou  settest  in  Manu.     Grant  thou  that  I  may  become  a  being 

"  honoured  before  Osiris,  and  that  I  may  come  to  thee,  0  Ra-Tem ! 

"  I  have  adored  thee,  therefore  do  thou  for  me  that  which  I  wish. 

"  Grant  thou  that  I  may  be  victorious  in   the  presence   of  the 

"  company  of  the  gods.     Thou  art  beautiful,  0  Ra,  in  thy  western 

"  horizon   of  Amentet,  thou  lord  of  Maat,   thou  being  who   art 

"  greatly  feared,  and  whose  attributes  are  majestic,  0  thou  who  art 

"  greatly  beloved  by  those  who  dwell  in  the  Tuat !     Thou  shinest 


352  KHEPERA-RA-TEMU 

"  with  thy  beams  upon  the  beings  that  are  therein  perpetually, 
"  and  thou  sendest  forth  thy  light  upon  the  ]Dath  of  Re-stau. 
"  Thou  openest  up  the  path  of  the  double  Lion-god,  thou  settest 
"  the  gods  upon  [their]  thrones,  and  the  spirits  in  their  abiding- 
''  places.  The  heart  of  Naarerf  (i.e.,  An-rut-f,  a  region  of  the 
*'  Underworld)  is  glad  [when]  Ril  setteth ;  the  heart  of  Naarerf  is 
"  glad  when  Ra  setteth.  Hail,  0  ye  gods  of  the  land  of  Amentet 
"  who  make  offerings  and  oblations  unto  Ra-Tem,  ascribe  ye  glory 
"  [unto  him  when]  ye  meet  him.  Grasp  ye  your  weapons  and 
"  overthrow  ye  the  fiend  Seba  on  behalf  of  Rii,  and  repulse  the 
"  fiend  Nebt  on  behalf  of  Osiris.  The  gods  of  the  land  of  Amentet 
"  rejoice  and  lay  hold  upon  the  cords  of  the  Sektet  boat,  and  they 
"  come  in  peace ;  the  gods  of  the  hidden  place  who  dwell  in 
"  x4.mentet  triumph."  In  the  opening  words  of  another  hymn  Tem 
is  addressed  as  "  Ra,  who  in  thy  setting  art  Tem-Heru-khuti 
"  (Tem-Harmachis),  thou  divine  god,  thou  self-created  being,  thou 
"  primeval  matter,"  ^  from  which  we  see  that  the  attributes  of  self- 
creation,  etc.,  which,  strictly  speaking,  belonged  to  Khepera, 
were  ascribed  to  Tem. 

In  the  Myth  of  Ra  and  Isis  Ra  is  made  to  say,  "  I  am  Khepera 
"  in  the  morning,  and  Ra  at  noonday,  and  Temu  in  the  evening."  ^ 
From  which  we  may  understand  that  the  day  and  the  night  were 
divided  into  three  parts,  each  of  which  was  presided  over  by  one 
of  the  three  forms  of  Ra  here  mentioned.  In  the  time  of  the 
Middle  Empire  Tem  is  often  mentioned  with  Heru-khuti,  Ra,  and 
Khepera,  and  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  always  attempted  to  prove 
that  he  was  the  ancestor  of  all  the  other  forms  of  the  Sun-god. 

In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  5  ff.)  the  deceased  is  made  to 
identify  himself  with  Tem  as  the  oldest  of  the  gods,  and  he  says, 
"  I  am  Tem  in  rising ;  I  am  the  only  One  ;  I  came  into  being  in 
"  Nu.  I  am  Ra  who  rose  in  the  beginning."  The  statement  is 
followed  by  the  question,  "  Who  then  is  this  ?  "  and  the  answer  is, 

1  Naville,  Todtenbuch,  Bd.  i.,  pi.  19. 


'    o  V^QflflJIi.    *^^®ooJI\  -|j®®    " 


i 


^  ^  gO  Ojjj  ^-fj^  ^  ¥^  e 


SHRINES    OF   TEM  353 

"It  is  Ra  when  at  the  beginning  he  rose  in  the  city  of  Suten- 
"  lienen,  crowned  like  a  king  in  rising.  The  pillars  of  Shu  were 
"  not  as  yet  created  when  he  was  upon  the  high  ground  of  him 
"  that  dwelleth  in  Khemennu"  (i.e.,  Thoth).  Thus  it  is  clear  that 
the  Heliopolitans  made  out  that  it  was  Tem  who  was  the  first 
god  to  exist  in  primeval  matter,  and  they  consistently  coupled 
him   with    Harmachis,  ^  ^  ^  5^  ^i^,l^||,  and  with 

Khepera,  W  <=>  [1  Jf ,  as  forms  of  the  rising  sun ;   on  the  other 

hand,  they  often,  with  fine  inconsistency,  identified  him  with  the 
setting  sun,  and  made  the  wind  of  evening,  which  gave  refreshment 
to  mortals  and  breath  to  the  dead,  to  go  forth  from  him. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  definitely  where  the   original  shrine  of 
Tem  was  situated,   but  it   appears  to  have  been  in  the   Eighth 

Nome  of  Lower  Egypt/  v^,  Nefer   Abt,    the    Heroopolites    of 

II  Ml        ^  o         s    ^Ti 

the  Greeks),  at  the  place  which  is  called  both  Thuket,  ^ ,  and 

Pa-Atemt,  [  ^       ^ ,  and  it  is  described  as  the  "  gate  of  the 

East."  Under  the  form  "  Pithom  "  the  sacred  name  of  the  city 
Pa-Atemt  is  familiar  to  all  from  the  Bible.  The  site  of  Pa-Atemt  or 
Pithom  was  long  thought  to  be  buried  beneath  the  ruins  called  by  the 
Arabs  Tell  al-Maskhutah/  which  are  situated  close  to  the  modern 
village  of  Tell  el-Kebir,  and  the  excavations  made  on  the  spot  by 
M.  Naville  prove  that  this  view  is  correct.  The  inscriptions  prove 
beyond  all  doubt  that  the  great  god  of  Pithom  was  Tem,  and  from 
the  allusions  which  are  made  in  them  to  the  "  Holy  serpent " 
therein,  and  from  the  fact  that  one  part  of  the  temple  buildings  was 

called  Pa-Qerhet,2  ^^^  <^  i  ^  B\  ^ '  ^^'  Ast-qerhet,  j]  <f>  f  |% , 
that  is,  "the  house  of  the  snake-god  Qerliet,"  it  is  tolerably 
certain  that  one  of  the  forms  under  which  Tem  was  worshipped 
was  a  huge  serpent.  A  town  situated  as  Pithom  was  on  the  large 
canal  joining  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Nile,  and  on  the  highway  from 
Arabia  to  Heliopolis  must  have  contained  a  very  mixed  population, 
which  would  include  a  number  of  merchants  and  others  from  Western 
Asia.     These  probably  brought  in  with  them  a  number  of  strange 

1  <iL^^-~^\  Jy.  2  This  is  the  Pi-hahiroth  of  the  Bible. 

A  a 


354  lUSAASET   AND   NEBT-HETEP 

practices  connected  with  the  worship  of  their  own  gods,  which 
having  been  adopted  by  the  indigenous  peoples  in  the  district 
modified  their  worship.  From  a  passage  in  the  Pyramid  Texts 
already  quoted  it  seems  that  the  original  form  of  the  worship  of 
Tem  was  phallic  in  character,  but  if  it  was  nothing  is  known 
about  it ;  some  scholars  have  regarded  obelisks  as  phallic  emblems, 
and  have  pointed  to  their  earliest  forms,  in  which  their  tops  were 
surmounted  by  disks,  in  proof  of  the  correctness  of  their  view. 

Attached  to  the  god  Tem  were  two  female  counterparts 
called  respectively  Iusaaset,  -^  '^i^  T  Pn  '  ^^^  Nebt-Hetep, 
'^Vrs,  and  they  formed  members  of  the  company  of  the 
gods  of  Heliopolis,  being  mentioned  with  Tem,  lord  of  the  two 
lands  of  Annu,  Ra,  and  Heru-khuti.^  Iusaaset,  the  ^awcrt?  of 
Plutarch,  is  called  the  ''mistress  of  Annu,"  and  the  "  Eye  of  Ra," 

"^^^^ ,  and  she  is  reo-arded  as  the  mother,  and  wife,  and  dauo-hter 

of  Tem  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  texts  ;  ^  as  the  wife  of 
Tem   she  is  said  to  be  the  mother  of  Shu  and  Tefnut.     She  is 

depicted  ^  in  the  form  of  a  woman  who  holds  the  sceptre,   j ,  in  her 

right  hand,  and  "  life,"  •¥-,  in  her  left ;  on  her  head  she  wears  the 

vulture  head-dress  surmounted  by  a  uraeus,  and  a  disk  between  a 
pair  of  horns.     In  this  form  she  is  called  the  "  mistress  of  Annu," 

2,  and  was  the  wife  of  Tem-Heru-khuti.     The 


goddess  Nebt-lietep  appears  to  have  been  nothing  but  a  form  of 
Iusaaset,  for  in  the  scene  in  which  she  is  represented  in  the 
form  of  a  cow  she  is  called  "  mistress  of  the  gods,  lusaaset-Nebt- 
hetep." 

According  to  Brugsch  ^  Tem  was  joined  to  the  god  Osiris 
under  the  phase  Tem-Asar,  and  formed  with  Hathor  of  Annu,  or 
Ant,   AAAAAA  AAAAAA  ^ aud  H  cru- sma'taul,   wv    x  •>  the  head 

of  the  triad  of  Heroopolis.  As  local  forms  of  the  god  Tem-Ra 
he  enumerates  Khnemu  in  Elephantine,  Khnemu-Heru-shefit  in 
Heracleopolis  Magna,  and  Khnemu-Ba-neb-Tettet  in  Mendes. 

^   Great  Harris  Papyrus,  sheet  i.,  line  4.  ~  Brugsch,  Religion,  p.  284. 

•^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  51.  *  Op.  cit.,  p.  290. 


KHEPERA  355 

Khepera  Q  <i=>  (1  3 . 

The  third  form  of  Ra,  the  Sun-god,  was  Khepera  kheper- 
TCHESEF,  fi  <cz>  1]  cfj  ^  <=>  -i^  ,  i.e.,  Khepera  the  self-produced, 
whose  type  and  symbol  was  a  beetle  ;  he  is  usually  represented  in 
human  form  with  a  beetle  upon  the  head,  but  sometimes  a  beetle 
takes  the  place  of  the  i human  head.  In  one  scene  figured  by 
Lanzone  he  is  represented  seated  on  the  ground,  and  from  his 
knees  projects  the  head  of  the  hawk  of  Horus,  which  is  surmounted 
by  -r,  "  life."  ^  In  the  section  which  treats  of  the  Creation  we 
have  already  translated  and  discussed  the  text  which  tells  how 
the  Sun-god  Ra  came  into  being  under  the  form  of  Khepera 
from  out  of  the  primeval  watery  mass  of  Nu,  and  how  by 
means  of  his  soul,  which  lived  therein  with  him,  he  made  a 
place  whereon  to  stand,  and  straightway  created  the  gods  Shu 
and  Tefnut,  from  whom  proceeded  the  other  gods.  The  worship 
of  the  beetle  was,  however,  far  older  than  that  of  Ra  in  Egypt, 
and  it  is  pretty  certain  that  the  identification  of  Ra  with  the 
beetle-god  is  only  another  example  of  the  means  adopted  by  the 
priests,  who  grafted  new  religious  opinions  and  beliefs  upon  old 
ones.  The  worship  of  the  beetle,  or  at  all  events,  the  reverence 
which  was  paid  to  it,  was  spread  over  the  whole  country,  and  the 
ideas  which  were  associated  with  it  maintained  their  hold  upon 
the  dynastic  Egyptians,  and  some  of  them  appear  to  survive  among 
the  modern  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  valley.  The  particular  beetle 
which  the  Egyptians  introduced  into  their  mythology  belongs 
to  the  family  called  Scarabseidae  (Coprophagi),  of  which  the 
Scarahaeus  sacer  is  the  type.  These  insects  compose  a  very 
numerous  group  of  dung-feeding  Lamellicorns,  of  which,  however, 
the  majority  live  in  tropical  countries ;  they  are  usually  black, 
but  many  are  adorned  with  bright,  metallic  colours.  They  fly 
during  the  hottest  hours  of  the  day,  and  it  was  undoubtedly  this 
peculiarity  which  caused  the  primitive  Egyptians  to  associate 
them  with  the  sun.  Thus  as  far  back  as  the  Ylth  Dynasty  the 
dead  king  Pepi  is  said  "to  fly  like  a  bird,  and  to  alight  like  a 

1  Lanzone,  op.  cit,,  pi.  329. 


356  KHEPERA 

"  beetle  upon  the  empty  throne  in  the  boat  of  Ra."  ^     According 

to  Latreille  ^  it  was  the  species  of  a  fine  green  colour  [Ateuclius 

Aegy])tioTum)  which  was  first  identified  with  the  sun.     The  insect 

lays  a  vast  numbers  of  eggs  in  a  mass  of  dung,  which  it  proceeds  to 

push  about  with  its  legs  until  it  gradually  assumes  the  form  of  a 

ball,  and  then  rolls  it  along  to  a  hole  which  it  has  previously  dug. 

A  ball  of  dung  containing  eggs  varies  in  size  from  one  to  two 

inches  in  diameter,  and  in  rolling  it  along  the  beetle  stands  almost 

upon  its  head,  with  its  head  turned  away  from  the  ball ;   in  due 

course  the  larvae  are  hatched  by  the  heat  of  the  sun's  rays  beating 

down  into  the  hole  wherein  it  has  been  placed  by  the  beetle,  and 

they  feed  upon  the  covering  of  dung  which  protected  them.     The 

mind  of  the  primitive  Egyptian  associated  the  ball  of  the  beetle 

containing  potential  germs  of  life  with  the  ball  of  the  sun,  which 

seemed  to  be  rolled  across  the  sky  daily,  and  which  was  the  source 

of  all  life.     The  beetle  shows  great  perseverance  in  conveying  the 

egg-laden  balls  of  dung  to  the  holes  in  which  the  larvae  are  to  be 

hatched,  and  they  frequently  carry  them  over  rough  ground  on 

the  broad,  flat  surface  of  their  heads,  and  seek,  when  unable  singly 

to  complete  the  work,  the  assistance  of  their  fellows.     It  is  this 

habit  of  the  beetle  which  is  represented   in  mythological  scenes 

where  we  see  the  disk  or  ball  of  the  sun  on  the  head  of  the  beetle, 

O 

^.     A   curious  view  was   held   by  the   ancient  writers   Aelian,^ 

Porphyry,^  and  Horapollo  ^  to  the  eff*ect  that  beetles  were  all  males 
(Kdvdapo^  ya?  77as  appiqv),  and  that  as  there  were  no  females  among 
them,  the  males  were,  like  the  Sun-god  Ra,  self-produced.  This 
erroneous  idea  probably  sprang  up  because  the  male  and  female 
scarabaeus  are  very  much  alike,  and  because  both  sexes  appear  to 
divide  the  care  of  the  preservation  of  their  offspring  equally 
between  them,  but  in  any  case,  it  is  a  very  ancient  one,  for  in  the 
Egyptian  story  of  the  Creation  the  god,  whose  type  and  symbol 


i 


z:^  O  (Unds,  1.  477). 


2  Cailliaud,  Voyage,  torn,  ii.,  p.  311.  ^  J)q  j^at.  Animal.,  x.  15. 

4  Be  Abstinentia,  iv.  9.  ^  Ed.  Leemans,  p.  11. 


THE   FATHER   OF   THE    GODS  357 

was  a  beetle,  not  only  produced  himself,  but  also  begot,  conceived, 
and  brought  forth  tAvo  deities,  one  male  (Shu),  and  the  other 
female  (Tefnut). 

In  the  Egyptian  texts  Khepera  is  called  the  "  father  of  the 

gods,"  "^  111  7  ^^^^  i^  *^®  Booh  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  116)  the 
deceased  addresses  him,  saying,  "  Hail,  Khepera  in  thy  boat,  the 
"  double  company  of  the  gods  is  thy  body,"  but  the  form  of  the 
Sun-god  with  which  he  is  most  closely  allied  is  that  of  Heru-khuti, 
or  Harmachis.  In  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  Khepera  plays  a 
prominent  part  in  connection  with  Osiris ;  he  is  called  the 
"creator  of  the  gods"  (Ani,  1,  2);  " Heru-khuti-Temu-Heru- 
Khepera  "  (Qenna,  2,  15),  and  whatever  forms  he  takes,  or  has 
taken,  the  deceased  claims  the  right  to  take  also.  Moreover,  the 
god  Khepera  becomes  in  a  manner  a  type  of  the  dead  body,  that  is 
to  say,  he  represents  matter  containing  a  living  germ  which  is 
about  to  pass  from  a  state  of  inertness  into  one  of  active  life.  As 
he  was  a  living  germ  in  the  abyss  of  Nu,  and  made  himself  to 
emerge  therefrom  in  the  form  of  the  rising  sun,  so  the  germ  of  the 
living  soul,  which  existed  in  the  dead  body  of  man,  and  was  to 
burst  into  a  new  life  in  a  new  world  by  means  of  the  prayers 
recited  during  the  performance  of  appropriate  ceremonies,  emerged 
from  its  old  body  in  a  new  form  either  in  the  realm  of  Osiris  or  in 
the  boat  of  Ra.  This  doctrine  was  symbolized  by  the  germs  of 
life  rolled  up  in  the  egg-ball  of  the  beetle,  and  the  power  which 
made  those  to  become  living  creatures  was  that  which  made  man's 
spiritual  body  to  come  into  being,  and  was  personified  in  the  god 
Khepera.  Thus  Khepera  symbolized  the  resurrection  of  the  body, 
and  it  was  this  idea  which  was  at  the  root  of  the  Egyptian  custom 
of  wearing  figures  of  the  beetle,  and  of  placing  them  in  the  tombs 
and  on  the  bodies  of  the  dead  ;  the  myriads  of  scarabs  which  have 
been  found  in  all  parts  of  Egypt  testify  to  the  universality  of  this 
custom.  As  to  its  great  antiquity  there  is  no  doubt  whatsoever, 
for  the  scarab  was  associated  with  burial  as  far  back  as  the  period 
of  the  IVth  D5masty.  Thus  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  (Brit.  Mus., 
No.  10,477,  sheet  21)  we  are  told  in  the  Rubric  that  Chapter 
Ixiv.  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  was  found   inscribed  in   letters  of 


358       KHEPERA  AND  THE  HEART 

real  lapis-lazuli  inlaid  in  a  block  "  of  iron  of  the  south  "  under  the 
feet  of  the  god  (i.e.,  Thoth),  during  the  reign  of  Men-kau-Ra 
(Mycerinus),  by  the  prince  Heru-ta-ta-f  in  the  city  of  Khemennu. 

At  the  end  of  the  second  paragraph  this  Chapter  is  ordered  to 
be  recited  by  a  man  "  who  is  ceremonially  clean  and  pure,  who 
"  hath  not  eaten  the  flesh  of  animals  or  fish,  and  who  hath  not  had 
"  intercourse  with  women."  Tiie  text  continues,  "  And  behold, 
"thou  shalt  make  a  scarab  of  green  stone,  with  a  rim  of  gold,  and 
"  this  shall  be  placed  in  the  heart  of  a  man,  and  it  shall  perform 
"  for  him  the  '  Opening  of  the  Mouth.'  And  thou  shalt  anoint  it 
"  with  cinti  unguent,  and  thou  shalt  recite  over  it  the  following 
"words  of  power."  The  "words  of  power"  which  follow  this 
direction  form  Chapter  xxx  b.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  wherein 
the  deceased  addresses  the  scarab  as  "  my  heart,  my  mother ;  my 
"  heart,  my  mother  !  My  heart  whereby  I  came  into  being."  He 
then  prays  that  it  will  not  depart  from  him  when  he  stands  in  the 
presence  of  the  "  guardian  "  of  the  Balance  wherein  his  heart  is  to 
be  weighed,  and  that  none  may  come  forward  in  the  judgment  to 
oppose  him,  or  to  give  false  or  unfavourable  evidence  against  him, 
or  to  "  make  his  name  to  stink."  Curiously  enough  he  calls  the 
scarab  "  his  double "  (ka).  Another  Rubric  makes  the  Ixivth 
Chapter  as  old  as  the  time  of  Hesepti  (Semti),  the  fifth  king  of  the 
1st  Dynasty,  and  the  custom  of  burying  green  basalt  scarabs  inside 
or  on  the  breasts  of  the  dead  may  well  be  as  old  as  his  reign.  Be 
this  as  it  may,  scarabs  were  worn  by  the  living  as  protective 
amulets,  and  as  symbols  of  triumjohant  acquittal  in  the  Judgment 
Hall  of  Osiris,  and  as  emblems  of  the  resurrection  which  was  to  be 
effected  by  the  power  of  the  god  Khepera  whom  they  represented, 
and  the  words  of  power  of  Chapter  xxx  b  made  them  to  act  the 
part  of  the  Jca  or  double  for  the  dead  on  the  day  of  the  "  weighing 
of  words  "  before  Osiris,  and  his  officers,  and  his  sovereign  chiefs, 
and  Thoth  the  scribe  of  the  gods,  and  the  two  companies  of  the 
gods.  If  scarabs  were  placed  under  the  coffin  no  fiend  could  harm 
it,  and  their  presence  in  a  tomb  gave  to  it  the  protection  of  the 
"  father  of  the  gods." 


(     359     ) 


CHAPTER    X 
THE    MYTHS    OF    RA 

IN  the  preceding  pages  it  has  been  shown  how  among  theologians 
and  thoughtful  Egyptians  Ra  was  regarded  as  God,  but 
among  certain  classes,  that  is  to  say  magicians,  and  astrologers, 
and  soothsayers,  quite  other  views  were  held  about  his  nature  and 
attributes.  It  will  be  remembered  that  among  such  men  in  ancient 
times  it  was  customary  to  prescribe  as  antidotes  to  poison  and 
sicknesses  the  recital  or  wearing  of  certain  magical  texts ;  the 
power  of  such  texts  was  thought  to  be  very  great,  especially  if  it 
contained  a  narrative  of  how  some  god  or  divine  being  had  been 
delivered  by  the  power  of  a  great  being  from  death  by  poison  or 
by  a  sickness  caused  by  poison.  We  may  note  in  passing  that 
such  beliefs  were  not  confined  to  the  Egyptians,  and  that  we  find 
exactly  the  same  ideas  existent  in  Babylonia  and  Assyria ;  this  is 
illustrated  by  the  following  interesting  extract  from  a  Babylonian 
tablet  recently  published  by  Mr.  R.  Campbell  Thompson.^  The 
text  reads : — "  From  Anu  [came  the  heavens],  the  heavens  created 
[the  earth],  the  earth  created  the  rivers,  the  rivers  created  the 
canals,  the  canals  created  the  marshes,  and  the  marshes  created 
the  Worm.  Then  came  the  Worm  before  Shamash,  the  Sun-god, 
weeping,  and  before  Ea  came  up  her  tearful  plaint,  [saying], 
'  What  wilt  thou  give  me  to  eat  ?  What  wilt  thou  give  me  to 
gnaw?'  [The  gods  said],  'I  will  give  thee  dry  bones  [to  eat], 
'  and  the  pungent  hhashJchar  wood.'  [The  Worm  said],  '  What 
'  are  thy  dry  bones  to  me  ?  Or,  what  is  thy  JchashJchar  wood  to 
me?  Let  me  drink  among  the  teeth  [of  men],  and  give  me 
my  place  in  [their]  gums,  that  I  may  suck  the  blood  of  the  teeth^ 

^   Cuneiform  Texts  from  Babylonian  Tablets,  part  xvii.,  pi.  50;  and  see  E.  C, 
Thom-pson,  The  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits  of  Babylonia,  vol.  i.,  Introduction,  attlieend. 


i.  i 


360  RA   AND   ISIS 

"  *  and  that  I  may  tear  asunder  the  flesh  of  the  gums.  In  this  wise 
"  '  I  shall  have  power  over  the  bolt  of  the  door '  (i.e.,  the  mouth  of  a 
"  man).  Therefore,  0  sick  man,  shaltthou  say  the  following  words, 
"  '  0  Worm,  may  Ea  smite  thee  with  all  his  might.'  "  Following 
these  words  come  the  rubrical  directions  which  order  the  patient  to 
mix  together  a  prescription  compounded  of  beer,  oil,  and  the  juice 
of  a  certain  plant,  and  when  the  incantation  has  been  recited  over 
the  man  with  the  toothache  three  times,  the  mixture  is  to  be  rubbed 
on  the  tooth.  In  the  one  case  the  object  of  the  narrative  was  to  cure 
the  man  who  had  been  bitten  by  a  venomous  serpent,  and  in  the 
other  to  ease  the  pain  in  the  teeth  and  the  inflammation  of  the 
gums  which  were  supposed  to  be  caused  by  a  worm,  a  descendant 
of  the  original  Worm  which  claimed  before  Ea  the  right  to  make 
teeth  decay  and  to  suck  the  blood  of  the  gums. 

The  Egyptian  texts  which  were  written  for  magical  purposes 
have  preserved  for  us  some  very  curious  and  interesting  myths  of  Ra, 
and  among  these  may  be  quoted  the  following  story  about  him  and 
the  goddess  Isis.^  The  title  reads : — "  The  Chapter  of  the  divine 
"  god,  the  self-created  being,  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
"  and  the  winds  which  give  life,  and  the  fire,  and  the  gods,  and  men, 
"  and  beasts,  and  cattle,  and  reptiles,  and  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the 
"  fish  of  the  sea ;  he  is  the  king  of  men  and  of  gods,  he  hath  but 
"  one  period  to  his  life,  and  with  him  a  double  hen  period  (i.e.,  one 
"  hundred  and  twenty  years)  is  as  a  single  year ;  his  names  are 
"  manifold  and  unknown,  the  gods  even  know  them  not."  The 
story  runs : — "  Now  Isis  was  a  woman  who  possessed  words  of 
"  power ;  her  heart  was  wearied  with  the  millions  of  men,  there- 
"  fore  she  chose  the  millions  of  the  gods,  but  she  esteemed  more 
''  highly  the  millions  of  the  spirits.  And  she  meditated  in  her 
"  heart,  saying,  '  Cannot  I  by  means  of  the  sacred  name  of  God 
"  '  make  myself  mistress  of  the  earth  and  become  a  goddess  of  like 
"  '  rank   and   power   to    Ra,   in  heaven  and  upon  earth  ? '     And 

1  The  hieratic  text  will  be  found  in  Pleyte  and  Rossi,  Ze  Papy7-us  de  Turin, 
1869-1876;  pll.  31-37,  and  131-138;  and  a  transcript  into  hieroglyphics  with  a 
transliteration  and  translation  in  my  First  Steps  in  Egyptian,  1895,  pp.  241-256. 
A  French  translation  by  Lefebure  was  published  in  Aeg.  Zeit.^  1883,  pp.  27  ff.  ;  and 
for  English  renderings  see  my  Papijriis  of  Ani,  1895,  p.  Ixxxix.,  and  Egyptian 
Magic,  p.  137. 


RA   IS   POISONED  361 

"  behold,  each  day  Ra  entered  at  the  head  of  his  holy  mariners 
"  and  established  himself  upon  the  throne  of  the  two  horizons ; 
"  but  the  divine  one  (i.e.,  Ra)  had  grown  old,  he  dribbled  at  the 
"  mouth,  his  spittle  fell  upon  the  earth,  and  his  slobbering  dropped 
"  upon  the  ground.  And  Isis  kneaded  [some]  thereof  with  earth 
"  in  her  hand,  and  formed  therewith  a  sacred  serpent  in  the  form 
*'  of  a  dart ;  she  did  not  set  it  upright  before  her  face,  but  let  it 
"  lie  upon  the  ground  in  the  path  whereby  the  great  god  went 
"  forth,  according  to  his  heart's  desire,  into  his  double  kingdom. 
"  Now  the  holy  god  arose,  and  the  gods  who  followed  him  as 
"though  he  were  Pharaoh  went  with  him;  and  he  came  forth 
"  according  to  his  daily  wont ;  and  the  sacred  serpent  bit  him. 
"  The  flame  of  his  life  departed  from  him ;  and  he  who  dwelt 
"  among  the  cedars  was  overcome.  The  holy  god  opened  his 
"  mouth,  and  the  cry  of  his  majesty  reached  unto  heaven ;  his 
"company  of  the  gods  said,  *What  hath  happened?'  and  his 
"  gods  exclaimed,  "  What  is  it  ? '  But  Ra  could  not  answer,  for 
"  his  jaws  trembled  and  all  his  members  quaked,  the  poison  spread 
"  swiftly  through  his  flesh  just  as  Nile  rusheth  through  all  his 
"  land.  When  the  great  god  had  stablished  his  heart,  he  cried 
"  unto  those  who  were  in  his  train,  saying,  '  Come  unto  me,  0  ye 
"  '  who  have  come  into  being  from  my  body,  ye  gods  who  have 
"  '  come  forth  from  me,  make  ye  known  unto  Khepera  that  a  dire 
"  '  calamity  hath  fallen  upon  me.  My  heart  perceiveth  it,  but  my 
"  '  eyes  see  it  not ;  my  hand  hath  not  caused  it,  nor  do  I  know 
"  '  who  hath  done  this  unto  me.  Never  have  I  felt  such  pain, 
"  '  neither  can  sickness  cause  more  woe  than  this.  I  am  a  prince, 
"  '  the  son  of  a  prince,  the  sacred  essence  which  hath  proceeded 
"  *  from  God.  I  am  the  great  one,  the  son  of  the  great  one,  and 
"  '  my  father  planned  my  name  ;  I  have  multitudes  of  names,  and 
"  '  multitudes  of  forms,  and  my  being  is  in  every  god.  I  have 
"  '  been  proclaimed  by  the  heralds  Temu  and  Horus;  and  my  father 
"  '  and  my  mother  uttered  my  name ;  but  it  hath  been  hidden 
"  '  within  me  by  him  that  begat  me,  who  would  not  that  the  words 
"  *  of  power  of  any  seer  should  have  dominion  over  me.  I  came 
"  '  forth  to  look  upon  that  which  I  had  made,  I  was  passing  through 
'' '  the  world  which  I  had  created,  when  lo  !  something  stung  me, 


362  THE   HOLY   NAME   OF   RA 

'  but  what  I  know  not.  Is  it  fire  ?  Is  it  water  ?  My  heart  is 
'  on  fire,  my  flesh  quaketh,  and  trembling  hath  seized  all  my 
*  limbs.  Let  there  be  brought  unto  me  my  children,  the  gods 
'  who  possess  the  words  of  power  and  magical  speech,  and  mouths 
'  which  know  how  to  utter  them,  and  also  powers  which  reach 
'  even  unto  the  heaven.' 

"  Then  the  children  of  every  god  came  unto  him  uttering 
cries  of  grief.  And  Isis  also  came,  bringing  with  her  her  words  of 
magical  power,  and  her  mouth  was  full  of  the  breath  of  life  ;  for 
her  talismans  vanquish  the  pains  of  sickness,  and  her  words  make 
to  live  again  the  throats  of  those  who  are  dead.  And  she  spake, 
saying,  '  What  hath  come  to  pass,  0  holy  Father  ?  What  hath 
happened?  Is  it  that  a  serpent  hath  bitten  thee,  and  that  a 
thing  which  thou  hast  created  hath  lifted  up  his  head  against 
thee  ?  Verily  it  shall  be  cast  down  by  my  effective  words  of 
power,  and  I  will  drive  it  away  from  before  the  sight  of  thy 
sunbeams.'  The  holy  god  opened  his  mouth  and  said,  '  I  was 
passing  along  my  path,  and  I  was  going  through  the  two 
regions  of  my  lands  according  to  my  heart's  desire,  to  see  that 
which  I  had  created,  when  lo  !  I  was  bitten  by  a  serpent  which 
I  saw  not.  Is  it  fire  ?  Is  it  water  ?  I  am  colder  than  water, 
I  am  hotter  than  fire.  All  my  flesh  sweateth,  I  quake,  mine 
eye  hath  no  strength,  I  cannot  see  the  sky,  and  the  sweat 
rusheth  to  my  face  even  as  in  the  time  of  summer.'  Then  said 
Isis  unto  Ra,  '  0  tell  me  thy  name,  holy  Father,  for  whosoever 
shall  be  delivered  by  thy  name  shall  live.'  And  Ra  said,  '  I 
have  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  I  have  knit  together 
the  mountains,  I  have  created  all  that  is  above  them,  I  have 
made  the  water,  I  have  made  to  come  into  being  the  goddess 
Meht-urt,  and  I  have  made  the  Bull  of  his  mother,  from  whom 
spring  the  delights  of  love,  I  have  made  the  heavens,  I  have 
stretched  out  the  two  horizons  like  a  curtain,  and  I  have  placed 
the  souls  of  the  gods  within  them.  I  am  he  who,  if  he  openeth 
his  eyes,  doth  make  the  light,  and,  if  he  closeth  them,  darkness 
Cometh  into  being.  At  his  command  the  Nile  riseth,  and  the 
gods  know  not  his  name.  I  have  made  the  hours,  I  have 
created  the  days,  I  bring  forward  the  festivals  of  the  year,  I 


ISIS   THE   ENCHANTRESS  363 

'  create  the  Nile-flood.  I  make  the  fire  of  life,  and  I  provide 
'  food  in  the  houses.  I  am  Khepera  in  the  morning,  I  am  Ra  at 
'  noon,  and  I  am  Temu  at  even.'  Meanwhile  the  poison  was  not 
taken  away  from  his  body,  but  it  penetrated  deeper,  and  the 
great  god  could  no  longer  walk. 

"  Then  said  Isis  unto  Ra,  'What  thou  hast  said  is  not  thy 
'  name.  0  tell  it  unto  me,  and  the  poison  shall  depart ;  for 
'  he  shall  live  whose  name  shall  be  revealed.'  Now  the  poison 
burned  like  fire,  and  it  was  fiercer  than  the  flame  and  the 
furnace,  and  the  majesty  of  the  great  god  said,  '  I  consent  that 
'  Isis  shall  search  into  me,  and  that  my  name  shall  pass  from  me 
'  into  her.'  Then  the  god  hid  himself  from  the  gods,  and  his 
place  in  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years  was  empty.  And  when 
the  time  had  arrived  for  the  heart  of  Ra  to  come  forth,  Isis  spake 
unto  her  son  Horus,  saying,  '  The  god  hath  bound  himself  by 
'  oath  to  deliver  up  his  two  Eyes  (i.e.,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon).' 
Thus  was  the  name  of  the  great  god  taken  from  him,  and  Isis, 
the  lady  of  words  of  magical  power,  said,  '  Depart,  thou  poison, 
'  go  forth  from  Ra.  0  Eye  of  Horus,  go  forth  from  the  god,  and 
'  shine  outside  his  mouth.  It  is  I  who  work,  it  is  I  who  make  to 
'  fall  down  upon  the  earth  the  vanquished  poison,  for  the  name 
'  of  the  great  god  hath  been  taken  away  from  him.  Let  Ra  live, 
'  and  let  the  poison  die  !  Let  the  poison  die,  and  let  Ra  live  !  ' 
These  are  the  words  of  Isis,  the  mighty  lady,  the  mistress  of  the 
gods,  who  knew  Ra  by  his  own  name."  The  above  text  was  to 
be  recited  over  figures  of  Temu,  "  the  Bull  of  his  mother,"  and 
Horus,  and  Isis  and  Horus,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  these 
figures  were  made  to  represent  the  various  scenes  which  took 
place  when  Ra  was  poisoned,  and  when  the  goddess  Isis  succeeded 
in  taking  from  him  his  name. 

Another  myth  of  Ra  of  considerable  interest  is  that  which 
describes  the  destruction  of  mankind,  and  tells  how  men  scorned 
the  great  Sun-god  because  he  had  become  old ;  ^  the  text  of  this, 

1  For  the  hieroglyphic  text  see  Lefebure,  Tombeau  de  Seti  I.,  part  iv.,  pll.  IS- 
IS ;  Brugsch,  Die  neue  Weltordnung,  Berlin,  1881 ;  Naville  in  Trans.  Soc.  Bihl. 
ArcJi.,  iv.,  pp.  1  ff . ;  viii.,  pp.  412  ff.  ;  Bergmann,  Hist.  Inschrift.,  pll.  75-82;  and 
my  Fii'st  Stejjs  in  Egyptian,  pp.  218-230. 


364  REVOLT   OF   MEN   AGAINST 

in  a  mutilated  condition,  is  found  inscribed  upon  the  walls  of  the 
tombs  of  Seti  I.  and  Rameses  IV.  at  Thebes,  and  from  it  the 
following  is  clear.  "  [Ra  is]  the  god  who  created  himself  after  he 
had  risen  in  sovereignty  over  men,  and  gods,  as  well  as  over 
things,  the  One.  And  mankind  was  uttering  words  of  complaint, 
saying,  '  Behold  now,  his  Majesty,  life,  strength,  and  health  [to 
'  him] !  hath  become  old,  his  bones  are  like  silver,  his  limbs  are 
'  like  gold,  and  his  hair  is  like  unto  real  lapis-lazuli.'  Now  his 
majesty  heard  the  words  which  mankind  spake  [concerning 
him],  and  he  said  unto  those  who  were  following  him,  '  Cry  out, 
'  and  bring  ye  unto  me  mine  Eye,  and  Shu,  and  Tefnut,  and 
'  Seb,  and  Nut,  and  the  fathers  and  the  mothers  who  were  with 
'  me  when  I  was  in  Nu,  together  with  my  god  Nu.  Let  him 
'  bring  his  ministers  with  him,  and  let  them  be  brought  silently, 
'  so  that  mankind  may  not  perceive  it  and  take  to  flight  with 
'  their  hearts.  Come  thou  with  them  to  the  Great  House,  and 
'  let  them  declare  their  plans,  for  I  will  go  forth  from  Nu  unto 
'  the  place  wherein  I  performed  creations,  and  let  those  [gods]  be 
'brought  unto  me  there.'  Now  the  gods  were  on  both  sides  of 
Ra,  and  they  bowed  down  even  to  the  ground  in  presence  of  his 
Majesty,  and  he  spake  his  words  in  the  presence  of  the  father  of 
the  firstborn  gods,  the  maker  of  men,  and  the  king  of  those  who 
have  knowledge.  And  they  spake  before  his  Majesty,  [saying], 
'  Speak  unto  us,  for  we  are  listening';  and  Ra  spake  unto  Nu, 
saying,  '  0  thou  firstborn  god,  from  whom  I  came  into  being,  0 
'  ye  gods  [my]  ancestors,  behold  ye  what  mankind  is  doing,  they 
'  who  were  created  by  mine  Eye  are  uttering  murmurs  against 
'  me.  Give  me  your  attention,  and  seek  ye  out  a  plan  for  me, 
'  and  I  will  not  slay  them  until  ye  shall  say  [what  I  am  to  do] 
'  concernino;  it.' 

"  Then  the  Majesty  of  the  god  Nu,  the  son  of  Ra,  spake 
[saying],  '  Thou  art  the  god  who  art  greater  than  he  that  made 
"  thee,  and  who  art  the  sovereign  of  those  who  were  created  by 
'  him,  thy  throne  is  set,  and  the  fear  of  thee  is  great ;  let 
'  then  thine  Eye  be  upon  those  who  have  uttered  blasphemies 
'  against  thee.'  And  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake  [saying], 
'  Behold  ye   how   they  have   taken  flight   into    the   mountain ! 


THE    SUN-GOD   RA  365 

'  Their  hearts  are  afraid  because  of  what  they  have  said.' 
'  Then  the  gods  spake  before  his  Majesty,  saying,  '  Make 
'  thine  Eye  to  go  forth,  and  let  it  destroy  for  thee  those  who 
'  utter  evil  words  of  blasphemy  against  thee.  There  is  not  an 
'  eye  upon  all  this  earth  Avhich  can  resist  thine  when  it 
'  descendeth  in  the  form  of  Hathor.'  And  the  goddess  [Hathor] 
went  forth  and  slew  the  people  on  the  mountain,  and  the  Majesty 
of  this  god  spake,  [saying],  '  Come,  come  in  peace,  Hathor,  the 
'  work  is  accomplished.'  And  the  goddess  said,  '  Thou  livest  for 
'  me.  When  I  had  gained  the  mastery  over  men  it  was  well 
'  pleasing  to  my  heart.'  And  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake,  [saying], 
'  I  will  gain  the  mastery  over  them  as  king,  and  [I]  will  destroy 
'  them ' ;  and  it  came  to  pass  that  Sekhet  waded  about  in  the 
night  season  in  their  blood,  beginning  at  Suten-henen  (Herakleo- 
polis  Magna).  Then  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake,  [saying],  'Cry  out 
'  and  fetch  me  swift  and  speedy  messengers  who  can  run  like  the 
'  wind  ' ;  and  straightway  one  brought  these  messengers.  And 
the  Majesty  of  this  god  spake,  [saying],  '  Let  them  go  to  Abu 
'  (Elephantine),  and  bring  me  mandrakes  in  great  number '  ;  and 
one  brought  to  him  these  mandrakes,  and  the  Majesty  of  this  god 
gave  them  to  Sekhet  who  [dwelleth]  in  Annu  (Heliopolis)  to 
crush.  And  behold,  when  the  women  were  crushing  the  barley 
to  [make]  beer,  he  placed  these  mandrakes  in  the  vessels  which 
were  to  hold  the  beer,  and  some  of  the  blood  of  the  men  [who 
had  been  slain].  Now  they  made  seven  thousand  vessels  of 
beer. 

"  Now  when  the  king  of  the  South  and  North,  Ra,  had  come 
with  the  gods  to  look  at  the  beer,  and  the  daylight  appeared 
after  the  goddess  had  slaughtered  mankind  in  their  season  as  she 
sailed  up  the  river,  the  Majesty  of  Ra  said,  '  It  is  doubly  good, 
'  but  I  must  protect  mankind  against  her,'  And  Ra  spake, 
[saying],  '  Let  them  take  up  the  vases  and  carry  them  to  the 
'  place  where  men  and  women  are  being  slaughtered.'  Then  the 
Majesty  of  the  king  of  the  South  and  North,  Ra,  commanded 
them  to  pour  out  from  the  vessels  during  the  [time  of  the] 
beauty  of  the  night  the  beer  which  made  [men]  wish  to  lie  down, 
and  the  regions  of  the  four  heavens  were  filled  therewith  even 


366  REVOLT   OF   MEN   AGAINST 

according  to  the  Will  of  the  Majesty  of  this  god.  Now  when  the 
goddess  Sekhet  came  in  the  morning  and  found  the  regions  flooded, 
her  face  beamed  with  joy,  and  she  drank  of  the  beer  and  blood, 
and  her  heart  was  glad,  and  she  became  drunk,  and  she  took  no 
further  heed  of  mankind.  And  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake  unto 
this  goddess,  [saying]  '  Come,  come  in  peace,  0  fair  and  gracious 
'  goddess ; '  [and  henceforth]  there  were  young  and  beautiful 
women  in  the  city  of  Amen.-^  Then  the  Majesty  of  Ra  said  unto 
this  goddess,  '  There  shall  be  prepared  for  thee  vases  of  drink 
'  which  shall  make  thee  wish  to  sleep  at  every  festival  of  the  New 
'  Year,  and  the  number  thereof  shall  be  in  proportion  to  the 
'  number  of  my  handmaidens ; '  and  from  that  day  until  this 
present  men  have  been  wont  to  make  on  the  occasions  of  the 
festival  of  Hathor  vases  of  beer  which  will  make  them  sleep,  in 
number  according  to  the  number  of  the  handmaidens  of  Ra. 
And  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake  unto  this  goddess,  [saying], 
'  Behold,  the  pain  of  the  burning  heat  of  sickness  hath  come 
'  upon  me  ;  whence  cometh  [this]  pain  ?  '  Then  the  ^Majesty  of 
Ra  said,  '  I  am  alone,  but  my  heart  hath  become  exceedingly 
'  weary  of  being  with  them  (i.e.,  with  men) ;  I  have  slain  [some 
'  of]  them,  but  there  is  a  remnant  of  worthless  ones,  and  the 
'  destruction  which  I  wrought  among  them  was  not  commensurate 
'  with  my  power.'  And  the  gods  who  were  in  his  train  said 
[unto  him],  '  Tarry  not  in  thy  weariness,  for  thy  might  is  in 
'  proportion  to  thine  own  will.'  Then  the  Majesty  of  this  god 
said  unto  the  Majesty  of  Nu,  '  For  the  first  time  my  limbs  have 
'  lost  their  power,  and  I  will  never  permit  this  thing  to  happen 
'  a  second  time.' " 

At  this  point  the  inscription  becomes  much  broken,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  make  out  the  general  meaning  which  is  to  be  attached 


1  Here  there  is  a  pun  on  tlae  appellation  of  the  goddess  Amit  m  ¥\    (1  (1  D-. , 

and  on  the  name  of  the  city  Amen,  ^(|§  ©,  i.e.,  the  capital  of  the  nome, 


-Tl  I  I  I     ^ 

Mill: 
Ament,    where   the   goddess   Hathor   was   worshipped.     The   city    is   also    called 

n    I  A  A  A  ^ 
®  ®  ®  <^  5  ^"^  ^^16  "  city  of  Apis." 


THE    SUN-GOD   RA  367 

to  the  scattered  words  ;  according  to  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch/  the 
myth  ends  somewhat  as  follows: — When  Ra  had  described  his 
weariness  to  Nu,  this  god  commanded  Shu  to  perform  the  work  of 
Rci  and  to  take  the  place  of  his  Eye,  and  directed  the  sky  goddess 
Nut  to  help  Ra.  Nut  asked  Nu  how  this  was  to  be  done,  and  he 
told  her  to  take  Ra  upon  her  back ;  thereupon  Nut  took  the  form 
of  a  cow,  and  Ra  seated  himself  upon  her  back.  In  due  course 
mankind  saw  Ra  on  the  back  of  Nut,  and  they  were  filled  with 
remorse  at  their  former  behaviour  towards  him,  and  they  wished  to 
see  slain  his  enemies  who  had  blasphemed  him,  but  his  Majesty  did 
not  tarry,  and  he  went  on  into  the  temple.  On  the  following  day 
as  soon  as  the  morning  had  come,  men  went  forth  armed  with 
bows  and  spears  in  order  to  do  battle  Avith  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and 
as  soon  as  the  god  saw  this  he  said  to  them,  "  Your  sins  are 
"  forgiven  you,  for  the  sacrificial  slaughters  which  ye  have  made 
"  have  done  away  with  the  murders  [which  mine  enemies  have 
"  committed]."  Then  Ra  raised  himself  from  the  back  of  the 
goddess  Nut  into  the  sky,  where  he  made  for  himself  a  kingdom 
in  which  all  people  were  to  be  assembled.     Finally  he  ordered  a 


Field  to  come  into  being,  l|„i)^l|  hetep  seMiet,  and  straight- 

way the  Field  of  Hetep  ("  Peace  "),  l)^[]j  "^  "^  Sekhet-hetep,^c8i.me 
into  being,  and  the  Majesty  of  the  god  said,  "I  will  plant 
"  \\  "m^  ^^^  4  ^  dardt-d,  literally,  I  will  make  to  grow) 
"  green  herbs  therein,"  and  straightway  there  came  into  being 
Sekhet-aaru,^    MI  xT  i  1  "^  ^^^  ^  "^  m '    "  ^"^^    ^   ^^^^    P^®"^^^^ 


"  it  with  objects  which  sparkle,*  that  is  to  say  with  stars." 
Thereupon  the  goddess  Nut  quaked  in  all  her  members,  and  Ra 
declared  that  he  would  make  supports  to  come  into  existence 
to  strengthen  her,  and  straightway  supports  appeared.     Ra  next 

1  Die  Neue  Weltordnung  nacli  Veniichtung  des  siindigen  MenschengescJdecJites, 
von  H.  Brngsch,  Berlin,  1881,  p.  23. 

"  Note  the  jingle  in  tlie  words  sekhet  and  hetep. 

3  Note  the  play  on  the  verbal  aarat-d  and  the  noun  aaru. 

^  Note  the  jingle  in         ■    i    JcJiet,  "  objects,"  and   (1  ^  [1  ^  >lc  i  "  things  which 
sparkle." 


THE   COW-GODDESS   NUT  369 

ordered  his  son  Shu  to  place  himself  beneath  the  goddess  Nut, 
who  was  trembling,  in  such  a  way  as  to  suf)port  her  body,  and  he 
ordered  him  to  take  heed  to  the  supports,  or  pillars,  whereon 
the  goddess  rested,  and  to  protect  them,  and  to  keep  Nut  stayed 
upon  his  head. 

Near  this  place  in  the  text  we  have  a  representation  of  the 
great  cow-goddess  Nut,  i.e.,  the  heavens  and  the  sky  (see  opposite). 
Along  the  belly  of  the  cow,  which  is  emblematic  of  the  sky,  and  is 
supported  by  the  god  Shu,  are  thirteen  stars,  and  immediately  below 
are  the  two  boats  of  the  Sun-^od.  In  the  Matet  boat  stands  a  fisfure 
of  Ra  as  god  of  the  day,  with  a  disk  upon  his  head,  and  in  the  Sektet 
boat  we  see  the  god  seated  in  a  shrine  ;  the  former  boat  is  between 
the  fore-legs  of  the  cow  of  Nut,  and  the  latter  by  her  udders. 
Each  leg  of  the  cow  is  supported  by  two  gods,  one  in  front  and 
one  behind,  and  each  god  who  is  with  the  cow  has  a  special  name, 
which  is  duly  set  forth  in  the  text  which  runs  in  vertical  columns 
on  each  side  of  the  scene. ^ 

When  the  narrative  recommences  (line  56)  we  are  told  that 
the  Majesty  of  the  god  Ra  commanded  Thoth  to  give  the  order 

that  the  god  Seb,  or  Sab,  ^\    J  Jj  (whom  Brugsch  calls  "  Keb  "), 

should  come  into  his  presence  forthwith,  and  when  he  had  done  so, 
and  Seb  had  appeared  before  him,  Ra  told  him  that  strife  had 
arisen  by  reason  of  the  worms   (or  snakes),  ?  "^"^^^^  %.  IMS.,  which 

were  in  his  (i.e.,  Seb's)  territory,  and,  he  added,  "  May  they  fear 
me  as  long  as  I  am  alive."  Ra  also  told  him  to  find  out  what  their 
plans  were,  and  then  to  go  to  the  place  wherein  was  his  father  Nu, 
and  to  warn  him  to  be  careful  about  what  was  on  the  earth  and  in 
the  water.  The  text  which  immediately  follows  is  full  of  difficulty, 
but  its  general  meaning  seems  to  be  that  Ra  expects  Seb  to  keep 
watch  on  the  serpents  in  the  earth,  and  that  although  he  is  about 
to  betake  himself  to  the  uppermost  regions  of  heaven  his  light  will 
find  them  in  their  holes,  and  will  watch  them.  Moreover,  Ra 
promises  that  he  will  give  the  men  who  have  knowledge  of  words 

of  power,  fi  U  '^  fl  (1    v  dl)  ' '  clo^^iiiioii  over  them,  and  that  he 


^  See  Lefebure,  Tomheau  cle  Seti  I.,  part  iv.,  pi.  16,  11.  47  ff. 
B  b 


370  THOTH,    VICAR   OF   RA 

will  furnish  them  with  spells  and  charms  which  shall  draw  them 
from  their  holes.  After  these  things  the  Majesty  of  the  god 
Ra  ordered  that  Thoth  should  come  into  his  presence  speedily, 
and  when  he  had  arrived  he  said  to  him,  "  Come,  let  us  depart 
"  from  heaven,  and  from  my  place,  because  I  am  about  to  create 

"  a  thing  of  light  (^:  °)  of  the  god  of  light  (^  ®  ^  ^  J) , 
"  in  the  Tuat  ( ^)  and  in  the  Land  of  Babat  (^  i^^  ^  ^^^  ^)  • 

"  And  there  thou  shalt  write  down  for  punishment  among  the 
"  dwellers  therein  those  who  have  committed  deeds  of  rebellion, 
"  and  those  whom  my  heart  hateth.     And  thou  shalt  be  in  my 

"place   ([  ^_  dst),  and   thou    shalt  be   called   Asti    (  r  ^ i<^?i)' 

"  that  is  to  say,  the  deputy  of  Ra.     And  it  shall  be  permitted  to 

"  thee  to  send  for  thy  messenger   (m  '^  J  "^  J\  hah),  and  at 

"  these  words  the  ibis  (nU  '^.  J  W  "^^  liahi),  which  is  the  envoy 
"  of  Thoth,  came  into  being."  Ra  next  tells  Thoth  that  he  will 
give  him  the  power  to  lift  up  his  hand  before  the  great  companies 

of  the  gods,   A^  "^^  v\  -^  ''^  R  '  ^  ' '  ^"^^  makes   a  play  on  the 

words  hhen    ®    jj ,  and  Tekhni  '^      \\  ^ ,  a  bird  sacred  to  Thoth  ; 

he  also  promises  to  make  Thoth  to  embrace  (1  ^x  fi    ,^    "^ — °  dnh, 

the   two  heavens  with  his   beauties,  and  straightway  the  Moon, 

(1 Q I  ^-c^  3 ,  came  into  being.     Thoth  is  to  drive  back,  ^^'wv^   du, 

the    H  a-nebu,    mT  yz:^  ]  ^-^^ ,    and   straightway   the   Ape,    ^^^-^^  ^ 

dndn,  of  the  god  came  into  being ;  and  finally  Thoth  is  to  be 
wholly  the  representative  of  Ra  upon  earth. 

From  the  observations  which  follow  the  words  of  Ra  we 
can  see  how  holy  these  words  were  considered  to  be.  Any  one 
who  wished  to  repeat  them  must  anoint  his  face  with  oil,  and  rub 
his  hands  and  the  places  behind  his  ears  with  incense,  and  cleanse 
his  mouth  with  natron,  and  wash  his  new  apparel  in  Nile  water, 
and  put  on  white  sandals,  and  lay  a  figure  of  Maat  upon  his 
tongue ;  and  he  must  cleanse  himself  with  a  sevenfold  cleansing 
each  day  for  three  whole  days.     Finally,   the  king  (Seti  I.)  for 


THE    KING'S    SOUL  371 

whom  these  texts  were  written  declares  that  his  soul  is  the  soul  of 
Shu,  and  [Khnemu],  and  Neheli,  'vww^  |^  O  |  PQ^  3 ,  and  Kek, 
^"^^^X^,  and  Kerh,  ^  f  ""^  J?  and  Nu,  and  Ra,  and  Asar-Ba- 


Tettet,  and  the  souls  of  the  Sebak  gods,  0  J  (1  ^3^  ^^  I ,  and  of 
the  Crocodiles,  and  the  soul  of  every  god  in  the  form  of  a  serpent, 
I  ^^  1^1  ^'  ^^^  *^®  ^^"^  ^^  -'^P^P?  a^<^^  of  Ra  in  all  the  earth. 


(     372     ) 


CHAPTER    XI 


THE    LEGEND    OF    RA    AND    ISIS 


HIEROGLYPHIC    TEXT    WITH    TRANSLITERATION    AND 

TRANSLATION 


1^    1 


^      ^   \\ 


^ 


Be        en      neter  netevti        hheperu  tchesef         dri 

Chapter    of    the  god      divine  (?)      self-produced,    the  maker 


I    s 


t 


pet  fa  mdu  en 

of  heaven,    [and]  earth,    [and]  the  breath      of 


dnkh         Met 
life,        of  fire, 


^  ' 


neteru 
of  gods, 


(^ 


reth  dut 

of  men,        of  beasts 


I  till  unit 


menmen 
of  cattle. 


^   e 


I   I   I 


\ 


apt 


remu 


suten 


reth 


ci    I   I   I 
tche/fet 

of  reptiles  and 
creeping  things, 

mi  k 

neteru         em 


of  the  fowl    [and]  of  fishes,     the  king      of  men  [and]  of  gods,    in 
of  the  air, 


1      -fj=^ 


U  I 


^  w 


I 

I  I 


<=^=K 


Idler        ud  henti  er        renput      dslti        renu 

form       one,  [to  whom]  periods  [are]  as    years,  of  many  names, 
of  120  years 


RA   AND    ISIS 


373 


w 


S=f2 


AAAAAA  'Ss' 

(in        rekh 


£:f5 


w 


inii 

an       relch  pefi  an        rekh  pefi  neteru 

not    known   is  that  [god],    not      known   is  that  [god  to]  the  gods. 


dstu         Ast  em  set  saa  en 

Behold,     Isis     was  in  the     a  woman     [who  was]  skilled     in 
form  of 


set 


tclietu  khak-db-s  er  hehu  em 

words  (i.e.,  matters).     Her  heart  rebelled         at     the  millions     of 


I  I 


m^i 


D   ^ 


n 


reth        setep  eres  hehu        em      neteru  apt-set 

men,  she  chose  rather  the  millions  of    the  gods,  and  she  esteemed 


hehu        em 


khu 


IcsTT   I 


an  khem  set  em      pet 


the  millions  of         the  spirits        "  Could  she  not  be        in     heaven 
[of  more  value]. 


ma      Ba 


S 


I      IS 

ta 


ta  ma      Ba  dri        kert 

[and]  earth     like     Ra     [and]  make  herself  mistress     of  the  earth 


1 


netert 


ka-set 
and  a  goddess,"     she  meditated 


em         db-set 
in     her  heart. 


er     rekh 
by  knowing 


\\ ) 


1 

ren  neter  shepsi 

the  name     of  the  god     holy  ?  " 


374 


RA   AND   ISIS 


(^ 


A 


o 


o 

I 


^    1 


dstu  ciq  en  Bci       hru  neb       em  hat        qet    -    [/] 

Behold,     came  in        Ra     every  day  in  front  of    [his]  sailors, 


I       AAAAAA    ■ill 

smen-thd 


and  was  stablished 


(^ 


daut 
Had  become  old 


I 

her 

upon 


o  \\ 
nest 
the  throne 


hhuti 
of  the  two  horizons. 


1 


w 


T 


AAAAAA 
1    AA/^A^A 


he  poured  out 


the  divine  one, 

nebdut    -    / 
his  exudations 


e^wi-M.    -    nef    re  -  f 
he  dribbled  at  his  mouth, 

er  ta 

the  ground, 


upon 


pekas  en  su  sehher      her         sat 

and  his  spittle  fell     upon  the  earth. 


Pja 


sek-nes  Ast 
Isis  she  kneaded  [it] 


hi 


^ 


em      tet-set       hena      ta        unenet       her-set  qet-nes-set 

in    her  hand    with   earth  which  was    on  it,         she  fashioned  it 


^     w 
e7n  tchetfeti 

in  the  form  of     a  serpent 


W 


AA/VV\A        1    ^ 


shepsi  dri  en  set  em 

sacred,     [and]  she  made  [it]     in 


A 


'M!\ 

hm\ 

AAAAAA 

^'^'^'^     K>!v     '^  'wwv\    ^\      (3   [    _/\     — H — 

qad 

heti 

an 

nemunemud-s 

the  form 

of  a  dart. 

Not 

did  it  move  along 

# 

dnhli-thd 
alive 


RA   AND   ISIS 

er  hheft-set  khad-set 

before  her,        [and]  she  left  [it] 


^    I 
uat 


D    D 


^1 


I 


hamu 
lying 


375 

<^ 

her 
on 


djpep  neter  aa  hers  er  aha     -    / 

the  path  whereon  journeyed  the  great  god  according  to  his  desire 


em  khet 


=^^s    \\ 
taui  -  f 


through     his  two  lands. 


1    \ 

neter 
The  god 


shepsi 
holy 


Q 


f^?  m^ 


hhd  -  f 
rose  up, 


er  ha 
behind 


neteru 
the  gods 


j^ 


em  Aa-perti  dnJch     utcha       senb  em     Jchet- f 

in  the  great  double  house,  life,  strength,  health!  [were]  folio  wing  him. 


P^P"ri^- 

seftseft    -    f 


O 


(^ 


m(i  ^-7^1^  ?2e5         unhhu-set        em 

[and]  he  marched  on     as  [he  did]     every  day     [when]  bit     [him] 


w 


w 


f 


7^. 


tchetfeti  shepsi  khet  dnkhet  per-thd 

the  serpent  sacred ;        the  fire        of  life        was  coming  out 


i 


w 


^ 


(^111 


dm  -  f       tchesef  ter-nes  dmi  na  dshu 

from  him     himself,     it  destroyed     the  dweller     in  the      cedars. 


376 


RA    AND    ISIS 


neter  netri 

The  god        divine 

hen  -f         a.   u.   s.       ])^^}'^^^f        ^^  P^^ 

his  Majesty     L.  S.  H. !     reached     unto     heaven. 


^ 


\,m-\      -     f 
he  ojDened 


re  -  f  hheru         en 

his  mouth,    the  voice     of 

.       , ,  6 


Paut 
The  company 


niJi 


^  (2 


^ 


D   ^ 
(3   III 


neteru  tiif  her  md  ])u-u  neteru  -  f 

of  the  gods     was     for  [saying],     "  What  is  it  ?  "     His  gods  [were] 


^ 


D    ^ 


her  petrd-u 

for  [saying]     "  What  is  the  matter  ?  " 


an 

Not 


(2 


^    (3   ^/    IJ 

mettu 
words 


J 


er 
to 


X  1 
usheht 
answer 


I 

her  -f 
about  it. 


qeyri     -    f 
found  he 

drti-fi 
His  two  jaws 


1   ®  ^  t)  ^  y^    c.  9, 1 
/i-er  Ichethhet         at   -  f 
rattled,  his  limbs 


neb 
all 


^5P 


(2 


W 


WW 

dstiti 
trembled 


y^  AAAAA^ 

^^     \il    1  /vww^ 

metu 
the  poison 


n 


AAftAAA 


V 


thetet-nef  em     dufi 

took  possession     of  his  body 


md  thetet  Hdjp 

as  taketh  possession      the  Nile 


em       khet  -  f 
of   his  river  bed. 


1' 

neter 


aa 


I      rKrj\f\f^  id/     L 


The  god     great 


smen-nef  db  -f 

stablished         his  heart. 


RA   AND   ISIS 


377 


Ijnds']    -  f         er 
he  [cried]  out      to 


W 


dmiu  hhet  -  f 

those  in     his  train 


/\     A/WV\A 
I         i         I 


mdi-ten  nd 

"  Come        to  me. 


I    I    I  Jii^  A  ^    ^  I    ^ 

kliepert  em  hdt-d 

0  ye  who  have  come  into  being     from     my  members, 


neteru 
[ye]  gods 


nrz2  e 

7\     111 

peru 
who  have  proceeded 


A □ 


AAAAA^ 
I        I        I 


khejperd-set 
what  hath  happened 


em-a 
from  me, 


temu-entii 


tat     rekh-ten 
and  I  will  make  you  to  know 


!     I     I 


(2     Ci 


hhet 


meru 


I  am  wounded       by  something     deadly, 

I         C-LL  /WWV\  O  O  I  -<2>-  )^i  (VWWV 

rekh-set  db-d  dn  maa  su  maa-d  dn 

knoweth  it       my  heart.         Not       have  seen  it       my  eyes,       not 


dri       set      tet-d       dn        rekh-set  em  dri-nd      neht 

made  it   my  hand,       not     know  [I]  it     who  hath  done  [this]  to  me 


anyone, 


D  ^ 


<$. 


^^ 


i:P' 


1 1 1 


dn  teptu-d  ment      mdtet-set       dn  meru 

not     have  I  tasted       pain        like  it,  never  was  deadly  [anything] 

0 


er-s 
more  than  it. 


dnuk 
I  am 


ser 
a  prince, 


sa  ser 

the  son         of  a  prince, 


;78 


RA   AND    ISIS 


AA/W\A 


e 


1^  1^1 


mu  hheperit       em      neter 

the  divine  issue     produced      by     a  god. 


dnuh 
I  am 


ur 
a  great  one, 


^. 


so-  ur  maid  en         dtef-d  ren-d 

the  son     of  a  great  one,         thought  out         my  father     my  name. 


III       0    (^ 


<^^ 


(S 


(^ 


a?i-?J(^         «s/i2i         rennu  dsht  kheperu  du 

I  am      of  many      names,      of  many      forms  (or,  existences)      is 

hheperd-d  tmu      em   neter    neh  nds-d-tu 

my  form  (or  existence)    living    in    god    every.     I  have  proclaimed 


C^innr 


(2 


D    (2 


Temu         Hern        hehennu 
Temu  and  Heru  Hekennu. 


du      tchet 
Have  uttered 


dtef-d 
my  father 


C5 


l-J  I    AAAAAA      '    <£il    I 


iniit-d  ren-d  dmen-set  em        Jchat-d        er 

and  my  mother      my  name,      hidden  was  it     in       my  body     by 


M\ 


^ 


^  w 


mes-a  en         men 

my  begetter       who  wished 


tern  erf  at  kheperu        pehti 

not  to  let  have        power 


hehau-d  en  heJcai  er-d 

him  Avho  would  enchant  me         by  enchantments       over  me. 


RA   AND   ISIS 


{79 


(2    J\ 

peru-h  er 

1  had  come  forth    from 


I 

ha 
the  abode 


er  maa    ari-na 

to      see  what  I  had  made 


(9     -^ 


51 


^> 


sutet  em  taui  qemamu-nd 

[and]  was  being  led     through    the  lands      [which]  I  had  created, 


^>^ 


\ 


(S 


em         tchetem  kher-d  an     rekh-d      su 

when  [something]  aimed  a  blow     at  me     [and]  I  know  not  Avhat  it  is. 


an    Jchet  ds  pit  an    mu    as  pu 

Behold  it  is  not  fire,     behold  it  is  not  water. 


m    w 


db-d  kheri 

My  heart    contains 


w  w 
dstiti 


\Jchet]u  liat-d  dstiti  dt-\_d'\  kheri 

fire,  my  limbs     [are]  trembling,     [my]  members       contain 


1 1  m 

dt-\_d'\ 


m    \\ 


P\i    llH^^ 


(2 
I  I  I 

mesu  hesiu 

the  children         of  quakings. 


dmmd         dntu-nd 
I  pray  you  let  be  brought  to  me 


(3 


111^ 


mesu-d  neteru 

my  children,      the  gods 


khui 


)   I 


mighty 


I    I    I 


metet 
of  words, 

A    I    I    I    I 


rekhi 
skilful 


with  their  mouths. 


sart-sen 
their  powers, 


peh-sen  her 

they  reach   to  heaven. 


380 


RA   AND   ISIS 


J\ 


A 


iu-eref  mesu  neter       neh        dm 

Came  to  him     [his]  children,     god      every     there 


/H     w 


Jvheri 
with 


q-J 


dkebu-nef 
his  cries  of  weeping. 


■J-^    A  /wvvv\  n  "^  n  /n     ^ 

iu  en  Ast  Jcheri 

Came  Isis  with 


Jihnt-set 
her  power 


i 


/  ...   /  AAA/^A^ 

T    III 


t 


as^       'j'^-se^  em  tii/w         e?^      dnkh  thes-set 

and  her  skilled  mouth,  with   the  breath    of      life,    her  incantations 


<©.  cis::^   r"-^  ^^^ 
I    s — -fl      '^    III    4  S 
her  ter      ment       mettu-set 


n 


s 


sdnhh 


ka 


heti 


destroy  diseases,      her  word     maketh  to  live     stinking      throats 

(i.e.,  throats  of  the  dead). 


e  III 


D    ^ 


ism. 


1 

tchet-set  md  pu-u  dtef         neter  petrd  tchetji 

She  said,     What  is  this,     0  father     god  ?     What  is  it  ?     A  snake 


Q     D     (3 


"=^^ 


ten        mennii  dm-h  iid  mes-k  fa 

hath  shot  sickness    into  thee.     A  thing   made  by  thee   hath  lifted  up 


^ 


tep  -/ 


erek 


its  head      against  thee. 


hekaiu 
words  of  power 


ka 
Verily 


sekher-set 
it  shall  be  overthrown 


em 

by 


/WWV\  1 

menkhiu 
beneficent. 


td-d       khetkhet  -  f  er 

I  will  make  it  to  depart      from 


o  o      c^liw  n\  ^ 

sati-h 


RA   AND    ISIS 


1 

netei 


matt  sati-iv  neter       tcheseri 

the  sight   of  thy  rays.     The  god        holy 


381 


X 

dpu~nef         re  -  / 
opened      his  mouth : 


0 


D 


dnuk      ])u      shemi 
I         was  passing 


W 


taui 
the  two  lands 


r^^^^n 


I 

her 
over 


%5 
-^    I 

uat 
the  way 


sutut  em 

going       through 


tJI 


set-d 
of  my  country, 


dha  en     db-d     er 

wished  my  heart  to 


o    o 

maa 

see 


^   2^ 


y 


(^ 


AAA/VNA 
/VWVNA 


V 


em 


qemamu-nd  khunen-nd 

what  I  had  created       [when]  I  was  bitten     by 


w      w 
tchetfi 

a  snake 


invisible. 


D 

<X7i-   A;/ie)5    as  pu 
Behold  it  is  not  fire. 


<x?i-     77izi    as  J)'^' 
behold  it  is  not  water, 


A 


JJ 


AA/W\A 


qehehh-kiid 
I  am  colder 


AA/WW  I       \\       I      ^^ 

AAAAAA 


er  77^^t 

than    water. 


(S 


shemem-kud 
I  am  hotter 


er 
than 


X 

£^ 

seshet 
fire. 


hdt-d 
my  limbs 


w  w 
dstiti 

tremble, 


neb 
all 


m    w 


^^..r^^ 


er       kheri 
are  full  of 


III 


fetet 
sweat, 


(^ 


tild 

I 


^  , 

.^&- 


maat-d         dn  smen  dn         qemhu-d 

my  eye  is  without  stability,  I  cannot  see 


382 


RA   AND   ISIS 


^ 


AAA/V\A 
/VWVW 
> 1 


V 


<^  ^ 


-WVWN      /^S 
AVvVNA 


pe^  Ml  mu       her      hrcl-d  em     shemu 

the  heavens,     bursteth  out    water     on     my  face     [as]  in  summer. 


jj;^    —  g|   q|j    ^ 


tchet  an 
Said 


\ 


cltef 
father 


Ast 
Isis 


en 
to 


Ed 
Ra, 


d       tchet-nd 
0       tell  me 


li     f 


neter 
god; 


diikh 
liveth 


ren-Ju 
thy  name. 


sa 
the  person 


(^ 


(E 


temu-tu  her 

who  hath  declared 


ren  -  f 
his  name. 


0 


s 


(xm/7(^  art  pet  fa 

[Said  R;\]  I  am     the  maker     of  heaven     [and]  earth, 


(S(3    III  ^ 


(^ 


thes  tuu  qemamu  unnet 

theknitter  together  of  the  mountains,      the  creator      of  what  exists 


her  -  f 
upon  it. 


cx^ 


0  v{i 

nuh 

1  am 


Meht-ur 
Meht-ur, 


a7't 
the  maker 


U 


mu 
of  the  water 


/W^AAA     AA^AAA 


acting  [as] 


bull  of 


Jthepertu 
making  to  exist 


■mut  -f 
his  mother, 


Icheperu 
the  creator 


D 


X 


3XZ1  "     Ji^  I     I     I 

sesheta 


netchem  netcltemiu      nuk        dri  pet 

of  the  joys  of  love.     I  am  the  maker  of  heaven  and  have  covered  over 


RA   AND   ISIS 


383 


?  mil  - 


D   (3 


/t/?w^t  f«-<i  />a        nu      neteru       em-khemiu-set 

the  two  horizons,   I  have  set    the  soul   of  the  gods      within  them 


O 


iiiiiiiii 


hhe]3eru 


^  O  I 


^!l 


dnuh  un  maati-f  khejjeru         hetchetcMu 

I  am        he  who  openeth      his  eyes,        becometh        the  light ; 


"^ 


akliennu         maati-f        klieperu  keJmi 

shutteth  [he]     his  eyes,     becometh     the  dark. 


=v 


/^A/^.^AA 

AAAAAA       \^ 
1 1 


hu  mu 

Riseth    the  flood 


OAAAAAA 


Hap 
of  Hap  (Nile) 


}(|    AAAAAA 


rekh    en    neteru 
know  the  gods 


(5 


khefl 
when 


utu-iief 
he  pjiveth  the  command. 


O 


an 
not 


D^O    I  1 


ren      -     / 
his  name. 


W    (2 
khepeno 


ra  ^!     0 


mile  dri  imnu 

I  am     the  maker     of  hours, 

(T 

renpit 


(2  o  I 


Jiru         nuk  dpu  hebu 

the  creator   of  days,     lam   the  opener   of  the  festivals    of  the  year, 


z 


qemamu 
the  creator 


T=t. 


V 


dtru 
of  streams  of  water. 


O 


nuk 
I  am 


an 
the  maker 


e 


U 
^1 


I         /vv\fv\r\ 


I         I 


khet        dnkhet  er  sekhejperu  kat        en  amu 

of  flame     of  life     making  to  be  performed     works     in      the  houses. 


384 


RA   AND   ISIS 

(3 


^ 


hiauu 


G     O 
Rd 


nuk         Klie])erd       em 
I  am        Khepera       in     the  morning,     Ra 


em 
in 


dhdu-f 
his  noontide. 


^^nnr 


(^ 


W 


— J-ga^  I   r— n  0 


Temii 
Temu 


met 


ami 


an 


^ 


in  the  evening. 


mdsheru  an  khesef 

[But]  not   was  driven 


em         sliemi-set 


the  poison     out  of     its  course, 


tcliet  an 
Said 


illy 
Ast 

Isis 


en 
to 


0 
I 

Rd 
Ra 


1 

an       netchem  neter  da 

not  was  relieved  the  great  god. 

ail  re7i-A:  opit 

: — Thv  name  is  not  enumerated 


era         na 
among     the 


tchet'ii-k-nd 

things  which  thou  hast 
said  to  me ; 


a 
0 


tchet-k 
tell  thou 


I  III       sr 
set        nd 

it     to  me. 


nrz3 


w 


r^Ti 


2)eri  ta 

and  shall  come  out       the 


metu 
poison. 


AAA/V\A 
/VWVW 
A^A/VV\ 


f 


Shall  live     a  person 


(3 


(^ 


temu-tu  ren   -  f 

having  uttered       his  name. 


em 
with 


tchetemu 
burnings. 


t 


r=iD  f 


A/v/VW\ 


metu 
The  poison 


(^ 


sekliemu-nes 


it  was  stronger 


tchetemu-set 
it  burned 


er  nebdu 

than        the  flame 


of 


RA   AND    ISIS 


385 


X  ^ 


11   /wvw\  1/ 


art  tchet    dn  hen  en 

fire.  Said  the  majesty       of 


(5  w  , 
hehici 


Hid      Ast 
to  be  searched  out  by  Isis, 


A 


per     em        ren-a 
shall  come  forth  my  name 


0 

Rd  tdt-nd 

Ra,       I  give  myself 


em 
from 


.|<^ 


*  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 


\.^ 


W 


khat-d      er  khat-s 

my  body  into     her  body. 


1111 


(3 


dmen         en     su  netri  em 

Hid  himself       the  divine  one  from 


usekh 


neteru         usekh  dst        em  uda  en      heh  renput 

the  gods,  empty  was  the  place  in      the  Boat     of  millions  of  years. 


© 


D 


^  J^ 


dr  kheperu         md  sep  pert  ent 

When      it  became     about       the  time  of      the  coming  forth      of 


^. 


-<t- 


I 


S 


db 


tchet-s       en 


sa 


Heru 


senha 


ent  su 


the  heart  she  said     to    [her]  son  Horus: — Let  him  bind  himself  by 

an  oath 


Q     AAAAAA 

T  #  ; 

em       dnkh 


1 

netef 


1 


w 
ertdt  7ieter  maati-f 

sworn  by  the  life    of  the  god    that  the  god  will  give    his  tAvo  eyes. 


1 


e 


1\ 


^ 


■itA 


"^^  8  U 


e 


neter       dat     uthes   -   nef  her   ren  -  f 
The  god  great    was  removed  from  his  name, 


Ast       urt-hekauti 

Isis,    great  in  words 
of  power  [said]: — 


c  c 


386 


RA   AND   ISIS 


U    ^  I 

Run  out, 


r=a 


f 

metu 
poison, 


AAAAAA     I 


J\ 


o 


|:»e7'  e??i      i^rt    maat      Hern 

come  forth  from    Ra,    Eye    ofHorus, 


W    Ji 


])eri  em  neter  nubmi 

come  forth     from      the  god,        and  shine 


^ 


O 


O 


nuk 


ra 


7^ 


ari-a 


I,     I  have  worked, 


nuk 
I 


e?fc 

re  -  / 

without 

his  mouth 

1    s 

mi      /ier 

ta 

liau  er 

make  to  fall  down      upon  the  ground 


rE?k^  k 


w 


e 


i 


II 


er  metu  sekhemu  mdki  utiles  en       neter 

the  poison  which  is  defeated,         verily     was  removed  from  the  god 


aa 
rreat 


=3  AAA/VNA 


o 


f 


/.-       ,^        ,wfe)  ■'^AAA^A 

AA/WVV 


his  name. 


Ra     may  he  live,     the  poison      may  it  die 


V 


■  nnmii 

/VvAAAA  /VVWNA 


tlies  rer  men  mes  en  ment 

and  conversely.     A  certain  one,     the  son        of    a  certain  woman, 


f 


ja 


mzM  -  /  metu  mit  tchet  en      Ast  ur 

may  he  live,      the  poison     may  it  die.    [Thus]  said  Isis,  great  lady. 


O 


111 


o     I 
Rd 


hent  neteru  rekh 

mistress  of  the  gods,  who  knew    Ra 


em  ren  -  f       tchesef 

by         his  name     his  own. 


RA   AND   ISIS 


387 


tchet 


I 
he7' 


^ 


tut 


671 


To  be  said  over  an  image  of 


Te/niu 
Temu 


hend 
and 


AAAAAA 

0  e, 


Ileru-Tiekennu 
Heru-hekennu, 


erpit  Ast  tut  Heru 

and  [over]  a  figure     of  Isis,     and  an  image     of  Horns. 


(     388     ) 


CHAPTER    XII 
THE    DESTRUCTION    OF    MANKIND 

EGYPTIAN  TEXT  WITH  TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION 


1 


^ 


netev        khefer  tchesef     em-kliet      un-nef      em 

god,    who  created    himself.      After       he  was       in 


I      A/^V\AA         1      1 


sutenit 
the  sovereignty 


^  w 
TJdti 

the  One, 


reth 
of  men. 


m 

neteru 


I   I  I 
em   khet 
and  of  gods,         and  of  creation, 


iin     d)i 


V</^M 


reth       her  hat  metet 

men  and  women  were  blaspheming  and  saying, 


(2 
dstu 

Behold, 


kesu-f 


f      i       P 

eref    hen  dnkh     utcha      senh  dami 

his  majesty,        life,  strength,  health,         has  grown  old, 


ee? 


^  til 


em        hetch       hdu  -  f         em,      nvh 
his  bones     are  like    silver,     his  limbs       like    gold 


O     O      O  /VSAAAA       bliL     I 

sheni  -  f 
his  hair 


em 


H -iCl    O    O     O  — U 

kheshet  madt 


AAA/W\ 

tin     dn 


hen-f 


her   setem 


is  like      lapis-lazuli        real ;  was       his  majesty     listening  to 


DESTRUCTION    OF   MANKIND 


ISO 


^  1112 
metet     an 


reth       tchet  an         ^C'^i-f         ctnhli  utcha       senh 
what  said      mankind.      Said      his  majesty,  life,  strength,  health. 


'=^  w 


er        enti  emkhetti-f  nds        md-nd       er     maat-d 

to       those     who  were  in  his  train.     Call,    bring  me       my  Eye, 


er  Sim      Tefmit      Seh 
and  Shu,    Tefnut,     Seb 


Nut 
Nut, 


^ 


liend       dtefiu  7nut 

and       the  father  and  mother 
gods 


DOD 


m 


uneniu  hend-d  dstu-d  em      Nu       liena    kher 

who  lived      Avith  me    when  behold  I  was    in      Nu,    together  with 


1 


^7^7^  AA^AAA 
AAAAAA 


i       1 


mm 


neter-d 
my  god 


Nu 
Nu. 


dn-nef  shenthi    -    f 

Let  him  bring       his  ministers 


1 


dn-nek  set       em 

Bring  thou     them      in 


ketket 
silence. 


am 
that  not 


1^1^ 


reth 
mankind. 


am 
not 


liar 
may  flee 


I    I   I   I 
dh-sen 

their  hearts. 


I   I   I 


Ld 


:3 


I    I    I 


liend  -  f 
with  him. 


maa 
may  see 


^^ 


i-k 
Come  thou 


Mil 


hend-sen        er  het-dat  tchet-sen  sehheru-sen 

with  them    into  the  great  temple,  let  them  declare     their  counsel 


;90 


DESTRUCTION    OF   MANKIND 


B 


W,    ^\ 


tchertn. 
fully; 


lU-Ob 


em 


I  will  enter      into 


ODD    AA^^        c^ 
AAAftAA    j^ll 

<=- 

J^ 

1/ J     /-^AAAA     U 

-sJ  Jli 

Nu 

er- 

bu 

Nu 

to 

the  place 

Jcheper-nd       dm  dn-7id  dn-tu  enen      neteru        un    dn 

wherein  I  was  born,  let  be  brought  to  me         those  gods.  Were 


'^       "^        AAAAAA 


III  I     AAAA/V^  I  1  \\ 


^ 


ra  ^ 


AAAAAA  I  ^ 


'*=©  ; 


em-hah 


enen        nctern     dpen  her  kesni-f 

those        gods   on  both  sides  of  him,    bowing  to  the  earth      before 


hen  -f  tchet-f 

his  majesty.      He  spake 


semsu 
of  the  firstborn  gods, 


m.etet  -  f 
his  words 


an 
the  maker 


I 
ein-hah 

before 


rebh 
of  men. 


dtef 
the  father 


I 


suten 
the  king 


rehhit 
of  rational  beings. 


n 


I  I  I 


tchet  dn      sen  kheft 

They  said  before 


hen  -f 
his  majesty, 


I  AAAAAA 

I  III 


metu-en-n 
Speak  to  us, 


^ 


I   I   I 


er       setem-en-set 


for  we  are  listening  to  them .     Said 


o 

tchet  dn        Bd 
Ra 


DDO 


AAAAAA 


en 
to 


Nu 
Nu, 


neter  semsu 

0  god  firstborn, 


khcjH'r-nd  dm  -  f 

from  whom  I  came  into 
being, 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


391 


inii?--^ 


AAAAAA 
J]       I       I       I 


neterii      tep-du  "tnd-ten  reth  kheperu 

and  ye  ancestor  gods,  take  ye  heed  to  mankind  who  came  into  being 


^' 


r\    AAAA/VA  .1    ^ 

I  I  I  I  4 


III 


em      maat-d 
from   my  eye, 


ka-en-sen 
they  speak 


metet  er-d  tchet-nd 

words     against  me.     Tell  me 


f::^  AAAAAA 

I    I    I  I    I    I 


AAAAAA 
J]       I        I        I 


drit-ten 
[what]  ye  would  do 


er-s 
about  it. 


md-ten-ud 
take  ye  heed  to  it  for  me, 


w 


"=^>^ 


hehi'd  dn         sma-nd  set        er        setemu-d 

seek  out  a  plan  for  me.    Not     will  I  slay     them    until       I  hear 


^ 


AAAAAA 
I   I   I 


I       AAAAAA 


AAAAAA 


tchet-thd  ten  er-s  tchet  dn  hen        en 

Avhat  ye  say     concerning  it.     Said  the  majesty     of 


Nu 
Nu, 


sa 
the  son 


O 
I 

Rd 
of  Ra 


\\ 


1 

neter  da  er  dri     su 

God       greater      than       he  who  made  him, 


^> 


]] 


}ir 
mightier 


er 
than 


i 


dst-k  ur  sent-k 

thy  throne,     great  is.    the  fear  of  thee, 


I    T  _£[    ru  I  — H—  ^ 

qema\_m~\-m'SU  hems 

those  who  were  created  with  him,         sit  on 


du        niaat-k  er 

let  thine  Eye  be      upon 


392 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


nam  dm-k 

those  who  blaspheme  thee. 


III  I     III 


1^ 


^  IV  !' 

AA^A/V\ 

oi 

tchet     an     hen 

en 

Rd 

Said  the  majesty 

of 

Ra: 

r^^ 

^ 

1         r\      AAAAA/\ 

1  I 


I    I 


md-ten  set 

Behold  ye     them 


uar 
fleeing 


I 


er  set  dh-sen 

into    the  mountain,    their  hearts 


I   I   I 


^V 


sentu 
are  afraid 


her  tcJief        e7i      sen 

because  of  what  they  have  said. 


I   I   I 

tcliet     dn-sen 
They  said 


kheft        hen  -  f 
before  his  majesty 


td  shem 


o     I 


\ 


maat'k  hau-s-riek 

Let  go  forth  thine  Eye,  let  it  destroy  for  thee 


ill 
set 
those 


f^■^^^^ 


I    I    I 


navii 
who  blaspheme 


em 
with 


tu 
wickedness, 


/WVW^  '^  I 

dti     inaat 
not   an  eye 


^  w 


er 
in 


khenti  dm-s 
can  precede  it 


em  Het-IIert 

in  the  form  of     Hathor. 


t^lll- 

hu -k 

resistance  .   .  .  . 


ra 


set  has 

[when]  it  goeth  down 


7^^     1 


1 


iu        dn         eref 
Went  forth      then 


netert 
goddess 


ten 
this, 


<^ 


^    I 


smam-nes 
she  slew 


reth 
mankind 


her  set 

on     the  mountain. 


IV 

tchet  dn 
Said 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


393 


1 


□ 

AWAAA 


w 


w 


hen         en  neter    pen 
the  majesty   of    this     god 


idi-ui 


em     hetep    Het-Hert 
Come,  come      in     peace,    Hathor, 


iii^iv  ^'Tiz  f 


drit  en  drit  tcliet  dn         netert  ten  dnkli-k  nd 

for  the  deed  is  done.  Said       this  goddess  : — Thou  gavest  me  life, 


dii  sekliem-nd 
when  I  had  power 


em 
over 


reth 
mankind 


(1     V/  0     1  AAAAAA  O 

dh-d.  tcliet    dn  hen       en      Rd 

my  heart.      Said  the      majesty     of      Ra : 


III  I 

du         netchem        her 
it  was        pleasing      to 


^    q^i-t 


du-d  er  sekhem 
I  will  be  master 


I    I    I 


} 


em      sen      em        suten 
over  them     as  king 


I  I  il   III 
em  sdntu-set  kheper 

destroying  them.    It  came  to  pass  that 


TA   ^\u 


izsz:  ^  X 
I   I   I 

Sekhet  pu  shehebet 

Sekhet      of  the  offerings 


I^ 


ent 
of 


AA/VSAA     i^  AAAAAA 

^^^]    ill  I    I    I    ' 

senfsen 
their  blood 


kerh 
the  night 


n 
+ 


I 


er  rehet         her 
waded  about      in 


AAAAAA 
AAAAAA 


w 


0 


shad 
beginning 


em       Suten-henen     tchet  dn   Bd 
in       Suten-henen.       Said      Ra:- 


01  as 


ma-na 


Call,     bring  to  me 


dputi 
messengers 


III 


^1^  H^\ 

khau  sdnnu 

swift  [and]  speedy 


394 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


seklisekhsen 
they  shall  run 


I   I   I 


shut  en 

[like]  the  wind         of 


khat 
the  body ; 


an         an- 111 
one  brought 


^  w 


enen  dpufi 
messengers 


D 

AAAAAA 


^ 


w 


d'pen  her  dui 

these     straightway. 


1 


D 

AAAAAA 


I        I 


tchet    an  hen  en 

Said        the  majesty       of 


neter  yen 
this  god  :— 


sha-sen 
Let  them  go 


er 
to 


J^ 


P^/N-^l 


I 


I      I      I 


III 


Ahu  an  nd  tdtddt  er      ur 

Elephantine      [and]  bring      me       mandrakes       in  great  number, 


Q  r\     AAAAAA  AAAAAA  "X       -S 


AAAAAA  A  n    ri    d   O 

W  III 


W 


dn  dn-tu  nef  enen  tdtddt  ertdt  dn  hen 

One  brought   to  him       these      mandrakes,        gave       the  majesty 


1  ° 

I      A^AA^ 


^  w 


O 


^ 


t 


e?i     Tieie?'  pe??/  Sektet  enti        em        Annu         her       netch 

of       this  god      to  Sektet      who  is      in     Heliopolis      to      crush 


1     W     III  1      AAAAA 


tdtddt  dpen 

mandrakes     these. 

b&t)   I 


•1  A 

dstu        kher 


^ 


X 


hent 


her      tesh 


Behold,   when      the  women     were  bruising 


^  III 


^y-\ 


^:fA 


■pertu  er        he</t  ertd     dn-tu  tdtddt      dpen 

the  barley     for      beer,      and  they  were  placing    mandrakes  these 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


395 


JJ 


I  ^^  X 

lier  shebehet 
in  the  beer  vessels, 


drit-dn-hi 


AAA^^     W'/^yW 


f  f  ^  — ^  ^.^-p  I 

%%'Z>.    AAAAAA      J^  1 


[they  became]  blood  of 


reth 
men. 


^  III 
heqt 


/vvvvv\ 

drnet 


A\\ 


7000 


Z^if, 


0-72 


Having  been  made      of  beer      vessels     seven  thousand,       came 


si]  i: 


eref 


hen 


en 


sute7i  hat 


Bd 


therefore    the  majesty     of  the  king  of  the  South        Ra 

and  North 


hend 
with 


m  fi  ° 

III  I    AA/VW\ 

neteru  dpen 

gods  these 


y         I        AAAAAA  /S 


67' 

to 


libaa 
see 


^    III 


this 


heqet 
beer. 


:n: 


1^7 

hetch  ta 
when  it  was  dawn. 


iii  — 


67?- 


^=:>^ 


smama 


after  had  slaughtered 


dstu 
Behold, 


reth 
men 


ppp^:^p 


o 


III    I 

sesu-sen  nu 


ctw  netert  em 

the  goddess   during     their  period        of    sailing  up  the  river, 


khentithit 


U     '         AAAAAA 

metch  dn  hen  en 

said         the  majesty         of 


O 
I 

Bd 
Ra:— 


neferui       set 
It  is  good,  it  is  good. 


<^ 


du'd        er  mdket  reth 

I  am        for     protecting     mankind    against  her.      Said       Ra 


P     ^^V?^ 

hers  tchet  dn      Bd 


396 


DESTRUCTION    OF   MANKIND 


I  I 


1 1 


ll^'%\  '^'^^^n 


fai  md  set  er         hua 

Let  them  carry   and  bring  them     to     the  place 


ra 

D 


o 


flV 


reth 


am 


hep  d'ii 


hen 


en 


lies  syjia 
she  slew 


siden  hat 


mankind   therein.     Commanded  the  majesty     of     the  king  of  the 

South  and  North 


iZlM 


III 


S 


"T" 


'^=A 


■C^         ^Ti     ^Zi 


Bd  em         iieferu  kerh         rr  ertdt  satet-fu 

Ra      during  the  beauties  of  the  night  to    cause  to  be  poured  out 


XI       AAAAA^  I       <Clr>  ■*  ''      III  /WWV\       1     ^ 

enen  setchert  un    d.n 

these      vases  of  sleep-causing  beer,       were 


^  I 


V  i 
ahet 
the  fields 


^  \\ 
enti 

of 


III 


^ 


cx^x. 


2^et 
heaven 


ffu 
the  four 


her  meh     em. 
filled      with 


A/V\^AA 
AAAA'V^ 

mu 
water 


em 
by 


I   I 

)   I     I  AAAft/V\ 

J     I 

haiu        en 
the  Will     of 


1      .wwvv  ^^JiHW  I'^m 


hen  en    neter  pen 

the  majesty    of     this  god. 


shemt     dn  netert  ten 

Came  goddess        this 

(i.e.,  Sekhet) 


em 
in 


^ 


o 
w 
tuain 

morning, 


qem-nes 
found  she 


"^       "^        AAAAAA 
[ *  "^l"    AAAAAA 

enen 
this  [heaven] 


<^  ■=<=>^ 


AAAAAA 
AAAAAA 


flooded. 


nefer 
joyful 


qV    ?h     1 


I 
hrd-set 


m    h   TPS^ 


a^i        lira-set  dm  un      dn         set  her  surd 

was      her  face   because  of  it,        Avas  she  drinking, 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


397 


I     I     ^ 

her  dh-set 


A 


tekh-thd 


nefer  lier  ab-set  i-nes 

merry     was  her  heart,      she  came     to  a  condition  of  drunkenness, 


an 


sa-nes 


reth 


tchet  an        hen 


O 


en       Bd 


not  knew  she  mankind.        Said     the  majesty    of       Ra 


AA/\AAA 

en        netert       ten 


it-ui  em    hetep 

to      goddess   this: —    Come,  come      in     peace,    0  Beautiful  one ; 


Aonit 


^  6  ^    u  n  I  ^^    f  f  f       ^^==1  1 H 

hheper  nefert  em         A^n       tchet  an 

and  there  became    beautiful  young  women     in         Am.  Said 


O 


1^^ 


hen 


en     Bd     en        netert        ten 


dri     en      set 


the  majesty    of     Ra     to      goddess   this  : —      Let  be  made  for  her 


I     o 


D 

/VW\AA 


setchertet  em  trdiu  renjpet  dpen 

vases  of  sleep -causing  beer     at        seasons        of  the  year      these  ; 


set  er  hent-d  hheper    drit 

they  [shall  be]  in  proportion  to  my  handmaidens.    There  were  made 


D 


D   ^ 


setchert  pu  em  dpt  hent 

vases  of  sleep-       according  to      the  number      of  the  handmaidens 
causing  beer 


398 


DESTRUCTION    OF   MANKIND 


y-- 


s^! 


Iieh  en   Het-hert  dii.         refh,  neh     tcher         hm 

of  the  festival    of     Hathor    by      mankind        all     since      the  day 


@ 


W 


o 

1 


fepi        tchet  an         hen  en 

first.         Said     the  majesty      of 


Rd 
Ra 


en 
to 


netert 


ten 


goddess    this  :- 


^^ 


ra 
ra 


^^ 


an    du  mer  en      heh      en        mer  kheper 

Behold  a  pain        of      fire      of    sickness    hath  come  [on  me], 


*~ -*       *^ -*       I     I      £ZJ!  'I  /vww\  I 

klier  trd-ui 


dn  mer         tchet   dn  hen  en 

whence,  0  whence        is    the  pain  ?        Said        the  majesty     of 


5Q 
I 

Rd 
Ra:- 


f 


W^.i    m,\ 


^^       ^. 


dnkh-nd 
I  live. 


dn    dh-d  urtu        ur        nnen 

[but]  my  heart  is        very  weary      of  being 


hend-sen 
with  them. 


%^^ 


smam-d 
I  slew 


set  Sep 

them,      [but]  there  remain 


en 
of 


^^ 


^^1 


dti  dn  un  dnt  dutu 

the  worthless,     for  not      was     the  destruction     as  wide-spreading 


Q 


ni 


A/VW\A 

^  w 


J\ 


d-d  tchetet  en      neteru 

[as]  my  power.       Said         the  gods 


enti  ami-  Jchet- f 

who  were  in      his  train 


em  hell 
Tarry  not 


DESTRUCTION   OF   MANKIND 


399 


? 


em 
in 


nrt-h  du-k 

thy  weariness     [for]  thou  art 


sekhem-thd 
mighty 


1 


em 
according  to 


merret-h 
thy  will. 


tchet  an  hen 

Said 


en 


ivoiu  viv     neter  fen 

the  majesty     ol      this  god 


AAAAAA 


e?e 


ra 


^^ 


en  hen  en 

to     the  majesty    of 


Nu 
Nu:- 


hdu-d  ahet  em 

My  members      are  weak       for 


D    ®        D  /VWNAA 

sejp  tepi  an 

the  first  time,    not 


(     400     ) 


CHAPTER    XIII 

THOTH   ^  (TEHUTI),   AND   MAAT,  ^"p^,    AND 

the"  OTHER    GODDESSES    AVHO    WERE 

ASSOCIATED    WITH    HIM 

T"^  H  B  hymns  to  Ra  which  are  found  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
and  in  other  funeral  works  of  the  ancient  Egyptians 
state  that  the  deities  Thoth  and  Maat  stand  one  on  each  side  of 
the  great  god  in  his  boat,  and  it  is  clear  that  they  Avere  believed 
to  take  some  important  part  in  directing  its  course ;  and  as  they 
were  with  Ra  when  he  sprang  up  from  the  abyss  of  Nu  their 
existence  must  have  been  coeval  with  his  own.  The  conceptions 
which  the  Egyptians  formed  about  Thoth  and  Maat  were  both 
material  and  spiritual,  and  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  any 
conclusion  concerning  the  functions  of  these  deities  without 
enumerating  the  facts  about  them  which  may  be  derived  from  the 
texts ;  speaking  generally,  Maat  may  be  considered  the  female 
counterpart  of  Thoth.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts,  our  earliest 
authorities,  the  functions  of  Thoth  are  of  a  purely  funereal  character, 
that  is  to  say,  he  appears  only  as  a  god  who  is  willing  to  be  a 
helper  of  the  deceased  kings,  and,  although  it  is  certain  from  many 
passages  that  his  assistance  was  eagerly  awaited  by  souls  in  the 
Underworld,  there  is  no  description  given  in  these  early  works  of 
the  functions  of  the  god.  We  must,  then,  rely  upon  the  inscrip- 
tions of  the  later  dynastic  period  for  our  knowledge  of  the  powers 
of  Thoth,  and  from  these  we  learn  that  he  was  called,  ''  Lord  of 
"  Khemennu,  self-created,  to  whom  none  hath  given  birth,  god 
"  One ;  "  "  he  who  reckons  in  heaven,  the  counter  of  the  stars,  the 
"  enumerator  of  the  earth  and  of  what  is  therein,  and  the  measurer 
''  of  the  earth  ;  "  and  the  "  heart  of  Rii  which  cometh  forth  in  the 


THOTH  401 

"form  of  the  god  Thoth."^  The  chief  shrine  of  the  god  was 
in  Khemennu,  zz©,  called  Hermopolis  by  the  Greeks,  and 
Eshmunen  by  the  Ai-abs,  but  he  also  had  shrines  in  Abydos, 
Hesert,    |^,    Urit,    ^(1(]@,    Per-ab,    ^^[=zd,    Rehui, 

<=>  I  ^ ']©'],    Ta-ur,    ^,    Sep,    ^,    Hat,    ^,     Pselket, 


^ ,   Talmis,  s=5  [j^  H  J ,  Aa-tcha-Mutet,  u^^  | 


Bah,  ^©,  Amen-heri-ab,  (1         <z=>tOi©,    and  Ta-kens,    >  s's:. 


As  lord  of  these  places  he  was  "  lord  of  divine  words,"  "1  \  ^^"^^ , 
"lord  of  Maat,"  ,  and  "judge  of  the  two  combatant  gods," 

\J  <=>  f  \\  ^  e?)  cJf  5  i-6-?  Horus  and  Set ;  and  among  other  titles 
we  find  him  called  "Twice  great,"  ^^,  and  "Thrice  great," 
^^<-='.     From  this  last  were  derived  the  epithets  "Trismegistos" 

and  "  ter  maximus  "  of  the  classical  writers. 

The  above  facts  prove  that  Thoth  was  regarded  as  a  god  who 
was  self-begotten  and  self-produced,  that  he  was  One,  that  he  made 
the  calculations  concerning  the  stablishing  of  the  heavens,  and  the 
stars,  and  the  earth,  that  he  was  the  heart  of  Ra,  that  he  was  the 
master  of  law  both  in  its  physical  and  moral  conceptions,  and  that 
he  had  the  knowledge  of  "  divine  speech."  From  many  passages 
we  see  also  that  he  Avas  the  inventor  and  god  of  all  arts  and 
sciences,  that  he  was  the  "  lord  of  books,"  and  the  "  scribe  of  the 
gods,"  and  "  mighty  in  speech,"  i.e.,  his  words  took  effect,  and  he 
was  declared  to  be  the  author  of  many  of  the  funeral  works  by 
which  the  deceased  gained  everlasting  life.  In  the  Booh  of  the 
Dead  he  plays  a  part  which  gives  him  a  unique  position  among 
the  gods,  and  he  is  represented  as  the  possessor  of  powers  which 
are  greater  than  those  of  Osiris,  and  even  those  of  Ra  himself. 
Before,  however,  we  go  on  to  consider  these  the  forms  in  which  he 
appears  on  the  monuments  must  be  mentioned.  Usually  he 
appears  in  human  form  with  the  head  of  an  ibis,  but  he  also 
appears  as  an  ibis.     When  in  human  form  he  holds  in  his  hands 

1  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit,  p.  1265. 
D  d 


402  THOTH 

the  sceptre  and  emblem  of  "life"  common  to  all  gods,  but  his 
headdress  varies  according  to  the  particular  form  of  the  god  in 
which  the  artist  wishes  to  depict  him.  As  the  reckoner  of  times 
and  seasons  he  has  upon  his  head  the  crescent  moon  and  disk, 
O;  as  a  form  of  Shu  and  An-Her  he  wears  the  headdresses  of  these 

gods ;  he  is  also  seen  wearing  the  atef  crown,  ^^^ ,  and  the  united 

crowns  of  the  South  and  the  North/  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  he 
appears  as  the  "  scribe  of  Maat  of  the  company  of  the  gods," 
®  "1 ,  and  then  he  holds  in  his  hands  the  writing  reed 


and  palette  of  the  scribe ;  but  his  connection  with  Ra  and  his  first 
rising  in  primeval  times  is  indicated  sometimes  by  the  utchat  ^^i 
i.e.,  the  power  or  strength,  of  the  Eye  of  Ra,  which  he  is  seen 
carrying  along  in  his  hands. 

The   name  of  the   god  Thoth,  ^>^  ,  Telmti,    appears   to    be 

derived  from  the  supposed  oldest  name  of  the  ibis  in  Egypt,  i.e., 

teliu^  to  which  the  termination  ti  has  been  added,  with  the  idea  of 

indicating  that  the  king  called  Tehuti  possessed  the  qualities  and 

attributes  of  the  ibis.^     A  derivation  of  the  name  which  appears  to 

have  been  favoured  by  the  Egyptians  connected  it  with  the  word 

tehh,    ^  'C,  "a  weight,"  and  in  passages  quoted  by  Lanzone^  we 

find  the  god  actually  called  tehh^  ^  »^  ^'     ^^^^  *^^  determinative 

for  the  word   tekli,  a  weight,  is  the  sign  for  "heart,"  "O",  and  we 

know  that  the  bird  called  tehh  or  tekhnu,  which  closely  resembled 

the  ibis,  the  bird  sacred  to  Thoth,  was  in  the  opinion  of  some 

ancient  writers  connected  with  the  heart.     Thus  HorapoUo  says 

(i.  36)  that  when  the  Egyptians  wish  to  write  "  heart "  they  draw 

an  ibis,  for  this  bird  was  dedicated  to  Hermes  (i.e.,  Thoth)  as  the 

lord  of  all  knowledge  and  understanding;    and  ^lian  {De  Nat. 

Animal,  x.  29)  supports  his  testimony  by  adding  several  cuinous 

and  interesting  facts  about  the  habits  of  the  ibis.     Other  names 

given  to  Thoth  were,^  A,   (]  J ,  and    Sheps,  lord   of  Khemennu, 

^P^Ez©,  Asten,  ()  fl^ ^,  Khenti,  f{|l^  T;,  Mehi,  o<=^  I 


^  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  402  f.  ~  Compare  Brugsch,  Religion,  p.  439. 

3  Op.  cit.,  p.  1265.  ■*  See  Brugsch,  Beligion,  p.  441. 


THOTH  403 

etc.  The  commonest  name  given  to  Thoth  is  hab,  m  %.  '  |  ^^  '^^^ 
"  ibis,"  a  Avord  which  finds  its  equivalent  in  the  Coptic  giRcui, 
and  one  of  his  commonest  forms  is  the  dog-headed  ape,  rzS^, 

/\A/\AAA     J^9 

which  occupies  such  a  prominent  position  in  the  Judgment  Scene 
in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead.  Here  we  see  him  seated  on  the  top  of  the 
support  of  the  beam  of  the  Balance  in  which  the  heart  of  the 
deceased  is  weighed,  where  his  duty  is  to  watch  the  pointer,  and 
tell  the  ibis-headed  Thoth  when  the  beam  is  exactly  level ; 
according  to  Brugsch,  this  ape  is  a  form  of  Thoth  as  the  god  of 
"  equilibrium,"  ^  and  he  appears  to  be  a  symbol  of  the  equinoxes. 
The  ape  dan  is  also  connected  with  the  moon,  for  he  is  often  seen 
with  the  lunar  crescent  and  disk,  Q,  upon  his  head  ;  but  there  is 
no  doubt  that  he  represented  Thoth  in  his  character  of  "  lord  of 
divine  words  and  the  scribe  [of  the  gods],"  for  in  a  scene  re- 
produced by  Lanzone  ^  we  see  him  holding  in  one  paw  the  god's 
palette  and  writing  reeds,  and  these  titles  are  given  to  him. 
Besides  these  forms  of  Thoth  may  be  also  mentioned  those  in 
which  he  possesses  the  attributes  of  other  gods.  Thus  as  a  god  of 
Mendes  he  has  a  human  body  with  the  head  of  a  bull  surmounted 
by  a  disk  and  uraeus  ;  as  Shu  he  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  man 
wearing  the  crown  of  Shu ;  as  An-her  he  is  depicted  in  the  form 
of  a  man  wearing  the  crown  of  this  god ;  as  Sheps  he  has  the  head 
of  a  hawk  ;  ^  the  ibis  and  the  ape  dan  are  his  commonest  forms. 

The  principal  seat  of  the  worship  of  Thoth  was  Khemennu,  or 
Hermopolis,  a  city  famous  in  Egyptian  mythology  as  the  place 
containing  the  "  high  ground,"  a  "^  a  ^  ^,  on  which  Ra  rested 
when  he  rose  for  the  first  time.  Here  he  was  regarded  as  the  head 
of  the  company  of  the  gods  of  the  city,  who  were  eight  in  number  : 
Nu  and  Nut,  Hehu  and  Hehut,  Kek  and  Keket,  and  Kerb  and 
Kerhet  (or  Nau  and  Nait),  i.e.,  four  pairs  of  deities,  each  pair 
consisting  of  a  male  and  a  female  deity.  As  to  the  importance  of 
this  company  of  the  gods  two  eminent  Egyptologists  have  held 
directly  opposite  opinions,  for  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch  thought  that 

1  Eeligion,  p.  443.  2  Qp.  cit.,  pi.  404,  No.  1. 

3  iiid,^  pii_  402  ff. 


404  THOTH 

the  four  pairs  of  deities  formed  the  oldest  example  of  the  ogdoad, 
while  M.  Maspero  is  of  opinion  that  we  must  join  the  four  pairs  to 
Thoth,  when  the  nine  gods  will  form  an  independent  yaut,  con- 
structed partly  on  the  model  of  the  ]jaut  of  Heliopolis.  Dr.  Brugsch 
thought  that  the  eight  gods  of  Hermopolis  were  primordial  deities, 
but  M.  Maspero  thinks  that  their  character  is  entirely  artificial,  and 
that  they  are  only  "  gods  formed  according  to  the  laws  of  grammar, 
"  four  being  masculine,  and  four  feminine."  ^  The  latter  argues 
that  because  the  high  priest  of  Hermopolis  was  called  by  a  title 
which  indicates  that  he  served  "  him  that  is  chief  of  five,"  the  gods 
of  the  city  were  only  five  in  number,  i.e.,  Thoth  and  the  four  gods 
of  the  cardinal  points  ;  to  the  four  gods  of  the  cardinal  points  were 
then    assigned    female    counterparts,    hence    the    "  Eight    gods " 

1  I -^V  r^  I.     Thoth,  according  to  M.   Maspero,  is  to  these  what 

Tem  or  Ra-Tem  was  to  the  jpaut  of  Heliopolis,  and  the  Hermo- 
politan paid  was  constructed  after  the  model  of  the  Heliopolitan 
paut ;  thus  Nu  and  Nut  =  Shu  and  Tefnut,  Helm  and  Hehut  = 
Seb  and  Nut,  Kek  and  Keket  =  Osiris  and  Isis,  and  Kerh  and 
Kerhet  (or,  Nau  and  Nait)  =  Set  and  Nephthys.  This  view  is, 
however,  not  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the  texts,  which,  in 
the  writer's  opinion,  indicates,  as  has  already  been  said,  that  the 
four  pairs  of  gods  of  Hermopolis  belong  to  a  far  older  conception 
of  the  theogony  than  that  of  the  company  of  gods  of  Helio- 
polis. Another  point  to  be  remembered  is  that  Thoth  was 
intimately  associated  with  the  ape,  as  were  also  the  gods  of  his 
company  ;  this  takes  us  back  to  a  very  remote  period  when  super- 
natural poAvers  were  assigned  to  the  particular  class  of  ape  which 
was  the  companion  of  Thoth,  and  when  the  primitive  Egyptian 
regarded  the  knowledge  and  cunning  of  the  dog-headed  ape  as 
proofs  of  his  divine  nature.  Between  the  period  when  this  took 
place  and  the  development  of  the  Heliopolitan  theogony,  a  very 
long  interval  of  time  must  have  passed  ;  the  two  conceptions 
belong  not  only  to  different  stages  of  civilization,  but  probably  to 
two  distinct  races  of  men. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  titles  of  Thoth  is  "  Judge  of  the 

1  La  Mythologie  ]Sgyptienue,  p.  257. 


THOTH  405 

*'  ReheliTii,  the  pacifier  of  the  gods,  who  dwelleth  in  Unnu 
''  (Hermopolis),  the  great  god  in  the  Temple  of  Abtiti."  ^  A  very- 
early  Egyptian  tradition  made  a  great  fight  to  take  place  between 
the  god  of  light  and  the  god  of  darkness,  and  in  later  days  Ra 
himself,  or  some  form  of  him,  generally  one  of  the  Horus  gods, 
was  identified  with  the  god  of  light,  and  Set,  in  one  form  or  other, 
was  identified  with  the  god  of  darkness.  Thus  the  fights  of  Ra 
and  Apep,  and  Heru-Behutet  and  Set,  and  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  and 
Set,  are  in  reality  only  different  versions  of  one  and  the  same 
story,  though  belonging  to  different  periods.  In  all  these  fights 
Thoth  played  a  prominent  part,  for  when  the  Eye  of  Ra,  i.e.,  the 
Sun,  was  doing  battle  with  Set,  this  evil  power  managed  to  cast 
clouds  over  it,  and  it  was  Thoth  who  swept  them  away,  and 
"  brought  the  Eye  alive,  and  whole,  and  sound,  and  without  defect 
"to  its  lord"  (Book  of  the  Dead,  xvii.  71,  ff.) ;  he  seems  also  to 
have  performed  the  same  office  for  Ra  after  his  combat  with  Apep. 
At  the  contest  between  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  who  fought  with  Set  in 
order  to  avenge  the  murder  of  his  father  Osiris,  Thoth  was  present, 
and  when  Horus  had  cut  off  his  mother's  head  because  of  her 
interference  in  the  fight  at  the  moment  when  victory  was  inclining 
to  him,  it  was  Thoth  who  gave  her  a  cow's  head  in  place  of  her 
own.  In  all  these  fights  Thoth  was  the  arbiter,  and  his  duty 
was  to  prevent  either  god  from  gaining  a  decisive  victory,  and 
from  destroying  the  other ;  in  fact,  he  had  to  keep  these  hostile 
forces  in  exact  equilibrium,  the  forces  being  light  and  darkness,  or 
day  and  night,  or  good  and  evil,  according  to  the  date  of  the 
composition  of  the  legends,  and  the  objects  which  the  scribes 
intended  to  secure  by  ^vriting  them  down.  In  the  group  of  titles 
of  Thoth  quoted  in  this  paragraph  we  see  that  he  is  called  "great 
god  in  Het-Abtit,"  or  the  Temple  of  Abtit,  which  was  one  of  the 
chief  sanctuaries  of  the  god,  and  was  situated  in  Hermopolis. 

The   hieroglyphics  with  which   the  name  "  Het  Abtit"  are 
written  prove  that  they  mean  the  "  House  of  the  Net,"  i.e.,  the 


I  W\V      AWW\      /VWW\ 


406  THOTH 

temple  where  a  net  was  preserved  and  venerated,  but  the  questions 
naturally  arise,  what  was  this  net,  and  what  was  its  signification  ? 
We  know  from  the  two  versions  of  Chapter  cliii.  of  the  Book  of  the 
Bead  that  a  net  was  supposed  to  exist  in  the  Underworld,  and  that 
the  deceased  regarded  it  with  horror  and  detestation.     Every  part 
of  it,  its  poles,  and  ropes,  and  weights,  and  small  cords,  and  hooks, 
had  names  which  he  was  obliged  to  learn  if  he  wished  to  escape 
from  it,  and  would  make  use  of  it  to  catch  food  for  himself,  instead 
of  being  caught  by  "  those  who  laid  snares."     Thus  in  a  prayer  we 
read,  "  Hail,  thou  '  god  who  lookest  behind  thee,'  thou  'god  who 
"  hast  gained  the  mastery  over  thine  heart,'  I  go  a-fishing  with 
"  the  cordage  of  the  '  uniter  of  the  earth '  (Horus  ?),  and  of  him 
"  that  maketh  a  way  through  the  earth.     Hail,  ye  fishers  who  have 
"  given  birth  to  your  own  fathers,  who  lay  snares  with  your  nets, 
"  and  who  go  round  about  in  the  chambers  of  the  waters,  take  ye 
"  not  me  in  the  net  wherewith  ye  ensnared  the  helpless  fiends,  and 
"  rope   me   not   in   with   the   rope   wherewith   ye   roped    in   the 
"  abominable  fiends  of  earth,  which  had  a  frame  which  reached 
"  unto  heaven,  and  weighted  parts  that  rested  upon  the  earth." 
From  this  passage  it  is  clear  that  the  Egyptians  possessed  a  legend 
in  which  one  power  or  the  other  in  the  mythological  combats  was 
armed  with  a  net  wherein  he  tried  to  ensnare  his  adversary.     In 
Chapter  cxxxiii.  the  deceased  says,  ''  Lift  thyself  up,  0  thou  Ra, 
"  who  dwellest  in  thy  divine  shrine,  draw  thou  into  thyself  the 
"  winds,    inhale    the   north   wind,    and   swallow  thou   the    heqesii 
"  (  J  ^  1  ^  (^)  of  thy  net  (()  J  ^  >^)  on  tlie   day  wherein  thou 
"  breathest  Maat."     The  meaning  of  heqesu  is  not  quite  clear  in 
this  passage,  because  from  its  determinative,  Q^ ,  we  should  naturally 
connect  it  with  some  organ  of  the  human  body,  but  it  is  evident 
from  its  context  that  Rfi  possessed  a  net,  and  we  are  certain  from 
the   former   extract   that   it  was   one  of  the  weapons  which  he 
employed  in  his  war  against  the  god  and  fiends  of  darkness. 

An  interesting  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  Assyrian  and 
Babylonian  versions^  of  the  fight  between  the  Sun-god  Marduk 
and  the  monster  Tiamat  and   her  fiends,  for  it  is  said  in  tliem, 

1  See  L.  W.  King,  Babylonian  Beliijion,  p.  71. 


THOTH  407 

"  He  (i.e.,  Marduk)  set  the  lightning  in  front  of  him,  with  burning 
"  fire  he  filled  his  body.  He  made  a  net  to  enclose  the  inward 
"  parts  of  Tiamat,  the  Four  Winds  he  set  so  that  nothing  of  her 
"  might  escape ;  the  South  wind,  and  the  North  wind,  and  the 
"  East  wind,  and  the  West  wind,  he  brought  near  to  the  net  which 
''  his  father  Anu  had  given  him."  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in 
the  passage  from  the  cxxxiiird  Chapter  the  winds  are  also  men- 
tioned in  connexion  with  the  net  of  Ra,  and  it  is  difficult  not  to 
arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  use  to  which  the  Sun-god  put  his 
net  was  the  same  in  each  legend ;  whether  this  be  so,  however,  or 
not  matters  little  for  our  purpose  here.  It  is  quite  clear  that  in 
the  Egyptian  legend  the  god  Thoth  was  supposed  to  have  some 
connexion  with  the  net  of  Ra,  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  in  his 
temple,  Avhich  was  called  the  Temple  of  the  Net,  the  emblem  of  a 
net,  or  perhaps  even  a  net  itself,  was  venerated. 

We  are  now  able  to  sum  up  the  attributes  ascribed  to  Thoth, 
and  to  consider  how  he  employed  them  in  connection  with  the 
dead.  In  the  first  place,  (he  was  held  to  be  both  the  heart  and  the 
tongue  of  Ra,  that  is  to  say,  hejwas  the  ^reason  and  the  mental 
powers  of  the  god,  and  also  the  means  by  which  their  will  was 
translated  into  speech ;  from  one  aspect  he  was  speech  itself,  and 
in  later  times  he  may  well  have  represented,  as  Dr.  Birch  said,  the 
Xoyo9  of  Plato.  In  every  legend  in  which  Thoth  takes  a  prominent 
part  we  see  that  it  is  he  who  speaks  the  word  that  results  in  the 
wishes  of  Ra  being  carried  into  efiect,  and  it  is  evident  that^when 
be^  had  once  given,  the  word  of  command  that  command  could  not. 
fail^fco  be  carried  out  by  one  means  or  the  other.  He  spoke  the 
words  which  resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
and  he  taught  Isis  the  words  which  enabled  her  to  revivify  the 
dead  body  of  Osiris  in  such  wise  that  Osiris  could  beget  a  child  by 
her,  and  he  gave  her_the  formulae  which_  brought  back  her  son 
Jlorus  to  life  after  he  had  been  stung  to  death  by  a  scorpion.  His 
knowledge  and  powers  of  calculation  measured  out  the  heavens, 
and  planned  the  earth,  and  everything  which  is  in  them ;  his  will 
and  power  kept  the  forces  in  heaven  and  in  earth  in  equilibrium ; 
it  was  his  great  skill  in  celestial  mathematics  which  made  proper 
use   of  the  laws  (madt  ^^  '=^  :  h  upon  which  the  foundation  and 


408  THOTH 

maintenance  of  the  universe  restedj^it  was  he  who  directed  the 
potions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  times  and  seasons ;  and 
without  his  words  the  gods,  whose  existence  depended  upon  them, 
could  not  have  kept  their  place  among  the  followers  of  Ra.  He 
was  the  inscribe  of  the  gods^"  and  possessed  almost  unlimited  power 
in  the  Underworld ;  the  god  Osiris  was  in  many  ways  wholly 
dependent  upon  his  good  offices,  and  the  ordinary  mortal  sought 
his  words  and  help  with  great  earnestness.  In  the  Judgment 
Scene  in  the  Book  of  the  Bead  it  is  Thoth  who  acts  the  part  of  the 
recording  angel,  and  it  is  his  decision  which  is  accepted  by  the 
gods,  who  ratify  the  same  and  report  it  to  Osiris ;  for  when  once 
Thoth  said  that  the  soul  of  the  deceased  had  been  weighed,  and 
that  it  had  been  found  true  by  trial  in  the  Great  Balance,  and 
that  there  was  no  wickedness  whatsoever  in  it,  the  gods  could  not 
fail  to  answer,  "  That  which  cometh  forth  from  thy  mouth  is  true, 
"  and  the  deceased  is  holy  and  righteous " ;  and  in  consequence 
they  straightway  award  him  a  place  with  Osiris  in  the  Sekhet- 
Hetepu,  or  Elysian  Fields.  _Thoth  as  the  ^reat  god  ofwordswas 
rightly  regarded  as  the  judge  of  words,  and  the  testing  of  the  soul 
in  the  Balance  in  the  Hall  of  Osiris  is  not  described  as  the  judging 
or    "Aveighing    of    actions,"    but    as    the    ^^  weighing   of  words," 

To  words  uttered  under  certain  conditions  the  greatest 
importance  was  attached  by  the  Egyptians,  and  in  fact  the  whole 
efficacy  of  prayer  appears  to  have  depended  upon  the  manner  and 
tone  of  voice  in  which  the  words  were  spoken.  Thoth  could  teach 
a  man  not  only  words  of  power,  but  also  the  manner  in  which 
to  utter  them,  and  the  faculty  most  coveted  by  the  Egyptian 
was  that  which  enabled  him  to  pronounce  the  formulae  and 
Chapters  of  the  Boole  of  the  Bead  in  such  a  way  that  they  could 
not  fail  to  have  the  effect  which  the  deceased  wished  them  to  have. 
After  the  names  of  deceased  persons  we  always  find  in  funeral 

papyri  the  words  maci  Jcheru   '^  I  ^  ^ '  ^^  ^^   ^  -^^  ^  I  9(1 ' 
which  mean  "  he  Avhose  word  is  mad,'^  that  is  to  say,  he  v/hose 

1  See  the  passages  enumerated  in  my  Vocabulary  to  the  Boole  of  the  Dead, 
p.  96. 


THOTH  409 

words  possess  such  power  that  whenever  they  are  uttered  by  him 
the  effects  which  he  wished  them  to  produce  unfaihngly  come  to 
pass.     The  words,  however,  here  referred  to  are  those  which  must 
be  learned  from  Thoth,  and  without  the  knowledge  of  them,  and  of 
the  proper  manner  in  which  they  should  be  said  the  deceased  could 
never  make  his  way  through  the  Underworld.     The  formulae  of 
Thoth  opened  the  secret  pylons  for  him,  and  provided  him  with 
the  necessary  meat,  and  drink,  and  apparel,  and  repelled  baleful 
fiends  and  evil  spirits,  and  they  gave  him  the  power  to  know  the 
secret  or  hidden  names  of  the  monsters  of  the  Underworld,  and  to 
utter  them  in  such  a  way  that  they  became  his  friends  and  helped 
him  on  his  journey,  until  at  length  he  entered  the  Fields  of  Peace 
of  Osiris  or  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years.     These  are  the  words 
referred  to  in  the  title  of  Thoth,  "  lord  of  divine  words,"  or  "  lord 
of  the  words  of  god."     The  whole  of  the  BooTc  of  the  Dead  was 
assumed  to  be  the  composition  of  Thoth,  and  certain  chapters  of  it 
he  "wrote  with  his  own  fingers."     In  the  late  work  called  the 
"  Book  op  Breathings  "  it  is  said,  "  Thoth,  the  most  mighty  god, 
"  the  lord  of  Khemennu,  cometh  to  thee,  and  he  writeth  for  thee 
"  the  '■  Book  of  Breathings  '   with  his  own  fingers.     Thus   thy 
"  soul   shall   breathe   for  ever  and  ever,  and   thy  form   shall   be 
"  endowed  with  life  upon  earth,  and  thou  shalt  be  made  a  god 
"  along  with  the  soals  of  the  gods,  and  they  shall  be  the  heart 
"  of  Ra,  and  thy  members  shall  be  the  members  of  the  great  god."  ^ 
In  later  times  the  epithet  mad  hheru  appears  to  have  had  a  some- 
what difi^erent  meaning  from  that  given  to  it  above,  and  at  times  it 
may   well   be   rendered    "  he   whose   word    is   right,"    and    have 
reference  to  the  words  of  Thoth  in  the  Judgment,  when  he  informs 
the   gods   that   the  heart  of   Osiris   has    been  weighed  with   the 
strictest  care  on  the  part  of  himself  and  his  ape,  which  sits  on  the 
support  of  the  Balance,  and  that  at  the  weighing  the  heart  in  one 
pan  of  the  Scales  was  able  to  counterbalance  exactly  the  feather  of 
Right  or  the  Law  in  the  other,  and  that  the  case  of  the  individual 
under  examination  was  a  "  right  "  one. 

From  many  passages  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  we  learn  of  the 

1   Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Translation),  p.  cscvii. 


410  THOTH 

services  which  Thoth  performed  for  Osiris,  and  which  he  was  to 
repeat  for  the  benefit  of  every  man  who  was  acquitted  in  the 
Judgment.  In  the  xviiith  Chapter  is  a  list  of  calamities  which 
were  averted  from  Osiris  by  Thoth,  who  gave  words  to  the  dead 
god  and  taught  him  to  utter  them  with  such  effect  that  all  the 
enemies  of  Osiris  were  vanquished.     Thus  he  made  him  to  triumph 

(semaa-kheru    I  ^^  :  |  QA )  "in  the  presence  of  the  great  assessors 

of  every  god  and  of  every  goddess ;  in  the  presence  of  the  assessors 
who  are  in  Annu  on  the  night  of  the  battle  and  of  the  overthrow 
of  the  Sebau-fiend  in  Tattu  ;  on  the  night  of  making  to  stand  up 
the  double  Tet  in  Sekhem ;  on  the  night  of  the  things  of  the 
night  in  Sekhem,  in  Pe,  and  in  Tepu  ;  on  the  night  of  stablishing 
Horus  in  the  heritage  of  the  things  of  his  father  in  Rekhti ;  on 
the  night  when  Isis  maketh  lamentation  at  the  side  of  her 
brother  Osiris  in  Abtu  ;  on  the  night  of  the  Haker  festival  when 
a  division  is  made  between  the  dead  and  the  spirits  who  are  on 
the  path  of  the  dead ;  on  the  night  of  the  judgment  of  those  who 
are  to  be  annihilated  at  the  great  [festival  of]  the  ploughing  and 
the  turning  up  of  the  earth  in  An-rut-f  in  Re-stau ;  and  on  the 
night  of  making  Horus  to  triumph  over  his  enemies."  In  the 
clxxxiiird  Chapter  the  deceased  Hunefer  says  to  Osiris,  "  I  have 
come  unto  thee,  0  son  of  Nut,  Osiris,  Prince  of  everlastingness ; 
I  am  in  the  following  of  the  god  Thoth,  and  I  have  rejoiced  at 
every  thing  which  he  hath  done  for  thee.  He  hath  brought  unto 
thee  sweet  (i.e.,  fresh)  air  for  thy  nose,  and  life  and  strength  to 
thy  beautiful  face,  and  the  north  wind  which  cometh  forth  from 
Tem  for  thy  nostrils,  0  lord  of  Ta-tchesert.  He  hath  made  the 
god  Shu  to  shine  upon  thy  body  ;  he  hath  illumined  thy  path 
with  rays  of  splendour ;  he  hath  destroyed  for  thee  [all]  the  evil 
defects  which  belong  to  thy  members  by  the  magical  power  of 
the  words  of  his  utterance.  He  hath  made  the  two  Horus 
brethren  to  be  at  peace  for  thee ;  he  hath  destroyed  the  storm- 
wind  and  the  hurricane  ;  he  hath  made  the  Two  Combatants  to  be 
gracious  unto  thee,  and  the  two  lands  to  be  at  peace  before  thee ; 
he  hath  put  away  the  wrath  which  was  in  their  hearts,  and  each 
hath  become  reconciled  unto  his  brother." 


THOTH  411 

In  the  xcivth  Chapter  the  deceased  addresses  the  ''  guardian 
of  the  book  of  Thoth,"  and  says,  "  I  am  endowed  with  glory,  I  am 
endowed  with  strength,  I  am  filled  with  might,  and  I  am 
supplied  with  the  books  of  Thoth,  and  I  have  brought  them  to 
enable  me  to  pass  through  the  god  Aker,  who  dwelleth  in  Set. 
I  have  brought  the  palette  and  the  ink-pot  as  being  the  objects 
which  are  in  the  hands  of  Thoth ;  hidden  is  that  which  is  in 
them  !  Behold  me  in  the  character  of  a  scribe  !  0  Heru-khuti, 
thou  didst  give  me  the  command,  and  I  have  copied  what  is 
right  and  true,  and  I  do  bring  it  unto  thee  each  day."  In  the 
vignette  of  the  chapter  we  see  the  deceased  seated  with  a  palette 
and  an  ink-pot  before  him. 

In  the  Pyramid  Texts  there  is  evidence  ^  that  Thoth  was 
connected  with  the  western  sky  just  as  Horus  was  identified  with 
the  eastern  sky,  and  this  idea  is  amplified  in  an  interesting  fashion 
in  the  clxxvth  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Bead,  where  we  find 
that  the  deceased  addresses  Thoth  both  as  Thoth  and  as  Temu,  the 
setting  sun,  or  god  of  the  west.  He  is  disturbed  about  that  which 
"  hath  happened  to  the  divine  children  of  Nut,"  for  "  they  have  done 
"  battle,  they  have  upheld  strife,  they  have  done  evil,  they  have 
"  created  the  fiends,  they  have  made  slaughter,  they  have  caused 
"  trouble ;  in  truth,  in  all  their  doings  the  mighty  have  worked 
"  against  the  weak  ....  And  thou  regardest  not  evil,  nor  art 
"  thou  provoked  to  anger  when  they  bring  their  years  to  confusion 
"  and  throng  in  and  push  to  disturb  their  months  ;  for  in  all  that 
"  they  have  done  unto  thee  they  have  worked  iniquity  in  secret." 
The  deceased  adds,  "  I  am  thy  writing  palette,  0  Thoth,  and  I 
"  have  brought  unto  thee  thine  ink-jar,"  and  as  he  declares  that 
he  is  not  one  of  those  who  work  iniquity  in  secret  places,  at  the 
same  time  he  clearly  dissociates  himself  from  those  who  do.  These 
words  are  followed  by  a  very  remarkable  passage  in  which  the 
deceased,  addressing  Thoth  under  the  name  of  Temu,  asks  the  god 
what  the  place  is  into  which  he  has  come,  and  he  says  that  it  is 
without  water,  that  "  it  hath  not  air,  it  is  depth  unfathomable,  it 
"  is  black  as  the  blackest  night,  and  men  wander  helplessly  therein. 

1  Brugscli,  BeUgion,  p.  451. 


412  THOTH 

"  In  it  a  man  may  not  live  in  quietness  of  heart ;  nor  may  the 
"  longings  of  love  be  satisfied  therein."  A  little  further  on  in  the 
Chapter  he  asks  the  lord  Tern,  i.e.,  Thoth,  "  How  long  have  I  to 
live  ? "  i.e.,  how  long  will  my  existence  in  this  new  world  be  ? 
and  the  god  replies,  "  Thou  art  for  millions  of  millions  of  years, 
"  a  period  of  life  of  millions  of  years,"  n  ^  ^^zz:^  <=>  ^  i  /www  W  \ 


^    .  ^,    . .     It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  it  is  not  Osiris,  the 

lord  of  life  everlasting,  but  Temu-Thoth  who  promises  the  deceased 
this  coveted  gift. 

In  the  first  part  of  the  Chapter  from  which  the  above  extracts 
have  been  made  Thoth  is,  clearly,  appealed  to  in  his  capacity  of 
measurer  and  regulator  of  times  and  seasons,  that  is  to  say,  as  the 

Moon-god,  who  is  commonly  called  Aah-Tehuti,  n  - o  ft  Q  cs/F  "^ , 

or  (1 fl  I  O  i^5  "  tlie  great  god,  the  lord  of  heaven,  the  king  of 

the  gods,"  and  "  the  maker  of  eternity  and  creator  of  everlasting- 
ness."  Under  this  form  the  god  Thoth  is  depicted  : — 1.  As  a 
mummy,  standing  upon  the  symbol  of  inaM  / — i,  and  holding  in 
his  hands  the  emblems  of  "  life,"  ■¥-,  "stability,"  u,  "  sovereignty 
and  dominion,"  ^  | ,  and  the  sceptre  1;  on  his  head  is  the 
crescent  moon,  O,  and  by  the  side  of  his  head  he  has  the  lock  of 
hair,  symbolic  of  youth,  \.  2.  As  a  bearded,  mummied  human 
figure  with  the  crescent  moon  on  his  head,  and  the  lock  of  hair 
symbolic  of  youth.  The  head,  however,  has  two  faces,  Avhich  are 
intended,  presumably,  to  represent  the  periods  of  the  waxing  and 
the  waning  of  the  moon.^  In  some  scenes  we  have  Aah-Tehuti 
represented  in  the  form  of  a  disk  resting  between  the  horns  of  the 
crescent  moon,  and  placed  upon  a  pedestal  in  a  boat  similar  to 
that  in  which  Ra  is  usually  seen;  sometimes  an  utchat,  ■^^,  is 
placed  over  each  end  of  the  boat.  In  one  interesting  scene  the 
god  Aah-hetep  is  represented  with  the  head  of  an  ibis  surmounted 
by  the  lunar  disk  and  crescent  seated  in  a  boat,  and  a  dog-headed 
ape  stands  before  him  and  presents  an  utcliaf ;  it  is  noteworthy 
that  the  curved  end  of  the  boat  is  notched  like  the  notched  palm 
branch  which   symbolizes   "years,"  ^.     In   the   narrowest   sense 

1  For  the  figures  see  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pll,  36  ff. 


THOTH  413 

Aah-Tehuti  symbolizes  the  new  moon,  and  this  is  only  natural, 
for,  as  is  well  known,  all  calculations  made  by  the  moon  in  the 
East  from  time  immemorial  have  been  based  upon  the  first 
appearance  of  the  new  moon  in  the  sky ;  but,  generally  speaking, 
Thotli  as  the  Moon-god  represents   the   moon  during  the  whole 

month.  On  the  other  hand,  the  JJtcliat  of  Thoth,  ^^ ,  indicates 
the  full  moon,  just  as  the  TJtchat  of  E,a  ^^  stands  for  the  mid-day 
sun ;  this  fact  is  proved  by  an  interesting  scene  reproduced  by 
Signor  Lanzone  ^  from  Brugsch,  Monuments  (Berlin,  1857).  Here 
we  see  the  god  Thoth,  ibis-headed,  standing  by  the  side  of  a  lotus 

pillar  which  supports  heaven,  |  ,  resting  on  heaven  is  a  crescent, 
and  in  it  is  the  TJtcliat  of  Thoth,  ^^.     Leading  up  to  the  top  of 

the  pillar  is  a  flight  of  fourteen  steps,  of  unequal  length,  which  are 
intended  to  represent  the  first  fourteen  days  of  the  month,  and  at 
the  foot  of  it  stand  fourteen  gods,^  the  first  of  these  being  Tem,  who 
has  his  right  foot  resting  on  the  first  step,  which  is  the  shortest  of 
the  whole  flight.  The  gods  who  stand  behind  him  are : — Shu, 
Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  Horus,  Isis,  Nephthys,  Heru-em-het-Aa,  Amseth, 
Hap,  Tua-mut-f,  Qebli-sennuf,  and  a  god  without  a  name. 

In  a  more  extended  sense  the  TJtcliat  of  Thoth  represented  the 
left  eye  of  Ra,  or  the  winter  half  of  the  year,  when  the  heat  of  the 
sun  was  not  so  strong,  nor  its  light  so  great,  and  when  darkness 
remained  in  the  skies  for  a  longer  period.  This  TJtcliat  of  Thoth, 
or  of  Thoth-Horus,  as  it  should  more  correctly  be  called,  is 
mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,^  where  it  is  called  the  "  Black 
Eye  of  Horus"  ;  thus  of  King  Unas  it  is  said,  "Thou  hast  seized 
"  the  two  Eyes  of  Horus,  the  White  Eye  and  the  Black  Eye, 
"  and  thou  hast  carried  them  off  and  set  them  in  front  of  thee  and 
"  they  give  light  to  thy  face."  ^     The  White  Eye  here  referred  to 

1  Op.  cit.,  pi.  39. 

2  The  head  and  name  of  the  fourth  god  are  wanting. 

3  Unas,  1.  37 ;  the  reference  given  by  Brugsch  is,  like  many  others  in  his 
Beligion,  incorrect. 


^  s^      I 


°J^      '  I      AAA/V\A        <:IZ>         ^\  [|Th 


I 


414  THOTH 

is,  of  course,  the  sun.  Thus  we  see  that  Thoth  not  only  brought 
the  Eye  of  Rfi  to  the  god,  as  we  have  already  said,  but  that  he  also 
established  the  Eye  of  the  Moon-god,  who  was  indeed  only  a  form 
of  himself,  and  that  Thoth  was  also  in  certain  aspects  identified 

with  Osiris,  r|^         jj,  and  with  Horus,  ^^  ^^,  and  with  Tern, 

and  therefore  with  Khepera.  One  other  attribute  of  Thoth 
remains  to  be  noticed,  i.e.,  that  which  is  made  known  to  us  by 
the  xcvth  Chapter  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead^  wherein  the  deceased 
says,  "  I  am  he  who  sendeth  forth  terror  into  the  powers  of  rain 
"  and  thunder,  ....  I  have  made  to  flourish  my  knife  along  with 
"  the  knife  which  is  in  the  hand  of  Thoth  in  the  powers  of  rain  and 
"  thunder."  The  short  composition  in  which  this  passage  occurs  is 
called  the  "  Chapter  of  being  nigh  unto  Thoth,"  and  in  the  vignette 
the  deceased  is  seen  standing  before  Thoth  with  both  hands  raised 
in  adoration. 

From  the  above  facts  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  Greeks  were 
generally  correct  in  the  statements  which  they  made  about  the 
wisdom  and  learning  of  Thoth,  whom  they  identified  with  their 
own  Hermes.  They  described  him  as  the  inventor  of  astronomy 
and  astrology,  the  science  of  numbers  and  mathematics,  geometry 
and  land  surveying,  medicine  and  botany ;  he  was  the  first  to 
found  a  system  of  theology,  and  to  organize  a  settled  government 
in  the  country ;  he  established  the  worship  of  the  gods,  and  made 
rules  concerning  the  times  and  nature  of  their  sacrifices ;  he 
composed  the  hymns  and  prayers  which  men  addressed  to  them, 
and  drew  up  liturgical  works  ;  he  invented  figures,  and  the  letters 
of  the  alphabet,  and  the  arts  of  reading,  writing,  and  oratory  in  all 
its  branches  ;  and  he  was  the  author  of  every  Avork  on  every 
branch  of  knowledge,  both  human  and  divine.  According  to 
Clemens  Alexandrinus  (Stromata,  vi.)  the  "  Books  of  Thoth  "  ^  were 
forty-two  in  number,  and  they  were  divided  into  six  classes ; 
books  i.-x.  dealt  with  the  laws,  and  the  gods,  and  the  education  of 

1  On  the  Books  of  Thoth,  see  some  interesting  remarks  by  Brugsch  in 
Beligion  und  Mythologie,  pp.  448  S. ;  this  distinguished  Egyptologist  thought  he 
had  discovered  the  original  hieroglyphic  titles  of  many  of  these  inscribed  on  the 
walls  of  the  temple  of  Edfil. 


THOTH  415 

the  priests ;  books  xi.-xx.  treated  of  the  services  of  the  gods,  i.e., 
sacrifices,  offerings,  forms  of  worship,  etc. ;  books  xxi.-xxx.  related 
to  the  history  of  the  world,  geography,  and  hieroglyphics  ;  books 
xxxi.-xxxiv.  formed  treatises  on  astronomy  and  astrology ;  books 
XXXV.  and  xxxvi.  contained  a  collection  of  religious  compositions  ; 
and  books  xxxvii.-xlii.  were  devoted  to  medicine.  An  attempt  was 
made  some  years  ago  to  include  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  among  the 
"  Books  of  Thoth,"  but  it  is  now  quite  certain  that,  although  Thoth 
was  declared  to  have  written  some  of  its  Chapters,  it  must  be  re- 
garded as  an  entirely  separate  work  and  as  one  which  enjoyed  a  much 
greater  reputation  than  they.  How  Thoth  was  able  to  perform  all 
the  various  duties  which  were  assigned  to  him  by  the  ancients  it  is 
difficult  to  understand,  until  we  remember  that  according  to  the 
Egyptian  texts  he  was  the  heart,  i.e.,  the  mind,  and  reason,  and 
understanding  of  the  god  Ra.     The  title  given  to  him  in  some 

inscriptions,    <-=>  ^^  :  ,  "  three  times  great,  great,"  from  which 

the  Greeks  derived  their  appellation  of  the  god  6  rptcrju-eyicrTo?, 
or  "  ter  maximus,"  has  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  explained,  and 
at  present  the  exact  meaning  which  the  Egyptians  assigned  to  it  is 
unknown.^  It  is,  however,  quite  clear  that  Thoth  held  in  their 
minds  a  position  which  was  quite  different  from  that  of  any  other 
god,  and  that  the  attributes  which  they  ascribed  to  him  were 
unlike  the  greater  number  of  those  of  any  member  of  their 
companies  of  the  gods.  The  character  of  Thoth  is  a  lofty  and  a 
beautiful  conception,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  highest  idea  of  deity  ever 
fashioned  in  the  Egyptian  mind,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
was  somewhat  prone  to  dwell  on  the  material  side  of  divine 
matters.  Thoth,  however,  as  the  personification  of  the  mind 
of  God,  and  as  the  all-pervading,  and  governing,  and  directing 
power  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  forms  a  feature  of  the  Egyptian 
religion  which  is  as  sublime  as  the  belief  in  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead  in  a  spiritual  body,  and  as  the  doctrine  of  everlasting 
life. 

1  A  nnmber  of  valuable  facts  have  been  collected  on  the  subject  generally  by 
Pietschmann,  in  his  Hermes  Trismegistus,  nach  aegyptisclien,  griechischen  unci 
orientalischen  Ueherliefungen,  1875. 


416  MAAT 

The  goddess  Maa,  or  Maat,   ^,■=^^5  ^^         ^  ^  h\v 

Closely  connected  with  Tlioth,  so  closely  in  fact  that  she  may 
be  regarded  as  the  feminine  counterpart  of  the  god,  is  the  goddess 
Maat,  who  stood  with  Thoth  in  the  boat  of  Ra  when  the  Sun-god 
rose  above  the  waters  of  the  primeval  abyss  of  Nu  for  the  first 
time.  The  type  and  symbol  of  this  goddess  is  the  ostrich  feather, 
[S,  which  is  always  seen  fastened  to  her  head-dress,  and  is  some- 
times seen  in  her  hand.  She  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a  woman 
seated,  or  standing,  "S,  and  she  holds  the  sceptre,  I,  in  one  hand, 
and  ■?-,  the  emblem  of  "life,"  in  the  other;  in  many  pictures  of 
her  she  is  provided  with  a  pair  of  wings  which  are  attached  one  to 
each  arm,  and  in  a  few  cases  she  has  the  body  of  a  woman  with  an 
ostrich  feather  for  a  head. 

The  reason  for  the  association  of  the  ostrich  feather  with  Maat 
is  unknown,  as  is  also  the  primitive  conception  which  underlies  the 
name,  but  it  is  certainly  very  ancient,  and  probably  dates  from 
predynastic  times.  The  hieroglyphic  ^=^,  which  also  has  the 
phonetic  value  of  Maat,  is  described  by  some  as  a  "  cubit,"  i.e.,  the 
measure  of  a  cubit,  and  by  others  as  a  "  flute,"  which  would, 
presumably,  be  made  of  a  reed.  We  see,  however,  that  the  god 
Ptah  usually  stands  upon  a  pedestal  made  in  the  shape  of  ^=i,  and 
that  figures  of  the  god  Osiris  stand  upon  pedestals  of  similar  form, 
and  as  we  have  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  figures  of  these 
two  gods  were  placed  upon  flutes  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  -c=i 
must  mean  something  else  besides  flute.  We  know  that  Ptah  of 
Memphis  was  the  god  of  artificers  in  general  and  of  workers  in 
metal  and  of  sculptors  in  particular  ;  it  is  far  more  likely  that  the 
form  of  his  pedestal,  /=j,  was  intended  to  represent  some  tool 
which  was  used  by  sculptors  and  carvers,  e.g.,  a  chisel,  or  the 
identification  of  the  object  as  a  "  cubit "  may  be  correct  if  it 
means  that  it  Avas  some  instrument  used  for  measuring  purposes. 
About  the  meaning  of  the  word  maat  ^^  ^  (|  '  ?  there  is,  fortunately, 
no  difiiculty,  for  from  many  passages  in  texts  of  all  periods  we 


CONCEPTIONS    OF   MAAT  417 

learn  that  it  indicated  primarily  "  that  which  is  straight,"  and  it 
was  probably  the  name  which  was  given  to  the  instrument  by 
which  the  work  of  the  handicraftsman  of  every  kind  was  kept 
straight ;  as  far  as  we  can  see  the  same  ideas  which  were  attached 
to  the  Greek  word  KavMv  (which  first  of  all  seems  to  have  meant 
any  straight  rod  used  to  keep  things  straight,  then  a  rule  used  by 
masons,  and  finally,  metaphorically,  a  rule,  or  law,  or  canon,  by 
which  the  lives  of  men  and  their  actions  were  kept  straight  and 
governed)  belong  to  the  Egyptian  word  mactt.  The  Egyptians 
used  the  word  in  a  physical  and  a  moral  sense,  and  thus  it  came  to 
mean  "  right,  true,  truth,  real,  genuine,  upright,  righteous,  just, 
steadfast,  unalterable,"  etc.;  hheshet  macit  is  "real  lapis-lazuli  "  as 
opposed  to  blue  paste  ;  shes  madt  means  "  ceaselessly  and  regularly," 
em  un  madt  indicates  that  a  thing  is  really  so,  the  man  who  is 
good,  and  honest  is  madt,  the  truth  {madt)  is  great  and  mighty, 
and  "  it  hath  never  been  broken  since  the  time  of  Osiris  "  ;  finally, 
the  exact  equivalent  of  the  English  words  "  God  will  judge  the 
right "  is  found  in  the  Egyptian  pa  neter  dpu  pa  madt, 


V%x^  ^^    => 


1 

The  goddess  Maat  was,  then,  the  personification  of  physical 
and  moral  law,  and  order  and  truth.  In  connexion  with  the  Sun- 
god  Ra  she  indicated  the  regularity  with  which  he  rose  and  set  in 
the  sky,  and  the  course  which  he  followed  daily  from  east  to  west. 
Thus  in  a  hymn  to  Ra  we  read,  "  The  land  of  Manu  (i.e.,  the  West) 
"  receiveth  thee  with  satisfaction,  and  the  goddess  Maat  embraceth 
"  thee  both  at  morn  and  at  eve;"  "  the  god  Thoth  and  the  goddess 
"  Maat  have  written  down  thy  daily  course  for  thee  every  day ;  " 
"  may  I  see  Horus  acting  as  steersman  [in  the  boat  of  Ra]  with 
''  Thoth  and  Maat,  one  on  each  side  of  him."  ^  In  another  hymn 
Qenna  says,  "  I  have  come  to  thee,  0  Lord  of  the  gods,  Temu- 
"  Heru-khuti,  whom  Maat  directeth ;  "  Amen-Ra  is  said  to  "  rest 
upon  Maat,"  i.e.,  to  subsist  by  Maat;  Ra  is  declared  to  "live  by 
Maat ;  "  Osiris  "  carries  along  the  earth  in  his  train  by  Maat  in  his 
name  of  Seker."     In  her  capacity  of  regulator  of  the  path  of  the 

1  Papyrus  of  Ani,  slieet  1. 
E  e 


418  HALL   OF   MAAT 

Sun-god  Maat  is  said  to  be  the  "  daughter  of  Rii,"  and  the  ''  eye  of 
Ra,"  and  "  lady  of  heaven,  queen  of  the  earth,  and  mistress  of  the 
Underworld,"  and  she  was,  of  course,  "  the  lady  of  the  gods  and 
goddesses."     As  a  moral   power   Maat   was   the   greatest   of  the 

goddesses,  and  in  her  dual  form  of  Maati,   f)f)     J|  Jj,  i.e.,  the  Maat 

goddess  of  the  South  and  the  North,  she  was  the  lady  of  the 
Judgment  Hall,  and  she  became  the  personification  of  justice, 
who  awarded  to  every  man  his  due ;  judging  by  some  vignettes 
which  represent  the  weighing  of  the  heart  she  took  at  times  the 
form  of  the  Balance  itself.  The  hall  in  which  Maat  sat  in  double 
form  to  hear  the  "  confession  "  of  the  dead  is  often  depicted  in 
connection  with  the  cxxvth  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
and  we  see  that  it  was  spacious,  and  that  the  cornice  thereof 
was  formed  of  uraei  and  of  feathers  symbolic  of  Maat.  In  the 
centre  of  it  is  a  god  with  both  hands  stretched  out  over  a 
lake,  and  at  each  end  of  the  hall  is  seated  an  ape  before  a  pair 
of  scales. 

Anubis   was    the    guardian    of    the    door    at    the    end    by 
which  the  deceased  entered,  and  which  was  called  Khersek-Shu, 

,,_^  ^    P  V  "v^ '    ^^®  ^^^^  *^^  *^^®   ^^^^^  ^^^  called  Neb-Maat- 

heri-tep-retui-f,  ^^37  ^  i  ""X  f  f  -  ?  ^^^  tl^e  other  leaf 
Neb-pehti-thesu-menmenet,  ^^1:7  — ^  f^,  f^  ""^^"^  ^  /wwv^  '^^  1 . 
These  names  had  to  be  learnt  and  uttered  by  the  deceased  before 
he  was  allowed  to  enter  the  Hall  of  the  Maati  goddesses,  ^  1  ^ 

^:PPI  («'•'  ^lWk\l)-  ^^hen  he  arrived  inside^ 
Hall  he  found  assembled  there  the  Forty-two  Assessors  or  Judges 
drawn  up  in  two  rows,  each  of  which  contained  twenty-one  Judges, 
one  on  each  side  of  the  length  of  the  Hall.  Before  each  of  these 
he  was  obliged  to  make  a  solemn  declaration  that  he  had  not 
committed  a  certain  sin ;  these  forty-two  denials  are  commonly 
known  as  the  "Neo:ative  Confession."  ^     The  names  of  the  Assessors 


■'O' 


1  An  English  translation  Avill  be  found  in  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by 
Lay,  p.  193  fe. 


ASSESSORS 

according  to  the  Papyrus  of  Neb 
30)  are  as  follows  : — 


OF   MAAT  419 

seni  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  9,900,  sheet 


1.  Usekht-nemmat, 

2.  Hept-shet,  |°r 

3.  Fenti,  ^()()^. 

4.  Am  -  khaibetu,   - 

5.  Neha-hau,  ^ 

6.  Rerti, 

7.  Maati-f-em-tes 


\7 


^  111" 


X 


nrrni 


W 


8.  Neba-per-em-khetkhet,  \\\\\ 


9.  Set-kesu, 
10.  Uatch-nes, 


A 


\>  X 


I . 


11.  Qerti, 


^   o  o 


I    I    I 


12.  Hetch-abehu,  ^-f^  o 

13.  Am-senf, -[]- ^  ^  ' 

14.  Am  -  beseku,    4  -  ^^^  ^ 

15.  Neb-Maat,  -w^  ^  =>  fi ; 


JP 


17.  Aati,  o'^^^lfj- 

18.  Tutu-f,  c^^t^^^. 

19.  Uamemti,-^'^ 


20.  Maa-an-f, 


I 


21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 

39. 

40. 
41. 
42. 


H  eri-seru, 
Khemi,   ® 


Shet-kheru,  ^^"^^ 


/VVVVVN 

Nekhen,     0 
Ser-khera, 
Basti,  ^l^. 
Hra-f-lia-f,  j' 
Ta-ret,  <=, 
Kenemti, 


^ 


i^ 


^   D 


An-hetep-f,    A 
Neb-hrau,  ^37- 
Serekhi,  "^ 
Neb-abui,  ^^c:7  -Ujix  >^  w 
Nefer-Tem,  J^^|. 
Tem-sep,  ^^^@|. 
Ari-em-ab-f,  -<2>-  ^^^^  '^ 
Ahi-mu  (?),  q  I  l]n  "^ 
ITtu  -  rekhit,  {  ^  |  * 


AWSAA 


Neheb  -  nefert,    Ik   |  J 
Neheb.kau,\yxU| 


X 


Tcheser-tep, 


\=^ 


I 


An-a-f, 


1 


420  ASSESSORS   OF   MAAT 

Even  when  the  deceased  had  satisfied  the  Forty-two  Assessors 
he  could  not  pass  out  of  the  Hall  of  Maati  unless  he  knew  the 
magical  names  of  the  various  parts  of  the  door  which  opened  into 
the  reo;ions  of  the  blessed.  In  the  address  which  he  makes  to  the 
gods  collectively,  and  which  is  usually  considered  to  have  been 
made  after  the  Negative  Confession,  he  summarizes  his  good  deeds, 
and  declares  to  the  god  Osiris,  whom  he  calls  the  "  lord  of  the 
Atef  crown,"  that  he  has  done  Madt,  and  purified  himself  with 
Madt,  and  that  none  of  his  members  lack  Madt.  He  tells  how  he 
has  been  to  the  "  Field  of  the  Grassho]Dpers,"  and  how  he  has 
bathed  in  the  pool  wherein  the  sailors  of  Ra  bathe,  and  describes 
all  the  things  which  he  has  done,  including  the  finding  of  a  sceptre 
of  flint  in  the  "  furrow  of  Maat."  Finally,  having  satisfied  all  the 
various  jDarts  of  the  door  by  declaring  to  them  their  magical  names, 

he  comes  to  the  god  Mau-taui,  ^,^ o  f^  v^  ^^^  ^  J) ,  who  acts 

as  guardian  of  the  Hall  of  Maati,  and  who  refuses  to  allow  him  to 
pass  unless  he  tells  his  name.     The  deceased  says,  "  Thy  name  is 

Sa-abu-tchar-khat,"  ^^  "^  dl)  '  -^1  -^  ^  m'  ^^^  demands 
to  be  admitted,  but  the  god  is  not  satisfied,  and  asks  him,  "  Who  is 
the  god  that  dwelleth  in  his  hour  ?  "  In  reply  the  deceased  utters 
the  name  Mau-taui,  whereupon  he  is  at  once  asked  by  the  god, 
"  And  who  is  this  ?  "  and  in  answer  the  deceased  says,  "  Mau-taui  is 
Thoth."  On  this  Thoth  asks  the  reason  of  his  coming  to  the  Hall, 
and  when  the  deceased  has  told  him  that  he  has  come  because  he 
wished  his  name  to  be  written  down  by  him,  Thoth  questions  him 
further  as  to  the  fitness  of  his  condition  and  as  to  the  identity  of 
the  being  "  whose  heaven  is  of  fire,  Avhose  walls  are  living  uraei, 
^'  and  the  floor  of  whose  house  is  a  stream  of  water."  In  answer  to 
these  questions  he  says  that  he  is  "purified  from  evil  things,"  and 
that  the  being  whose  house  is  described  is  Osiris,  whereupon  Thoth 
calls  upon  him  to  enter,  saying  that  his  name  shall  be  "  mentioned  " 
or  recorded. 

Thus  we  see. how  closely  the  attributes  of  Maat  merge  into 
those  of  Thoth,  and  how  the  fate  of  the  deceased  depends  ultimately 
upon  these  deities.  It  was  not,  however,  sufi^icient  for  him  to  pass 
the  Assessors,  for  beyond  them  stood  Thoth  with  his  final,  search- 


NEHEMAUAIT  421 

ing  questions  ;  Thotli  spake  the  word  which  caused  the  universe  to 
come  into  being,  and  it  was  he  who  had  the  power  to  utter  the 
name  of  the  deceased  in  such  a  way  that  his  new  spiritual  body 
would  straightway  come  into  being  in  the  realm  of  Osiris.  Thoth 
in  one  respect  was  greater  than  Ra,  and  in  another  he  was  greater 
than  Osiris,  but  both  from  a  physical  and  a  moral  point  of  view  he 
was  connected  inseparably  with  the  Maat,  which  Avas  the  highest 
conception  of  physical  and  moral  law  and  order  known  to  the 
Egyptians. 

The  goddess  Nehemauait    ^  ^  -^  j  LJU  ^  ^• 

Now  besides  Maat  or  the  Maati  goddesses  we  find  that  there 
were  other  goddesses  who  were  associated  with  Thoth  in  different 
parts  of  Egypt,  and  among  these  is  Nehemauait,  who  is  described 

as  the  dweller  in  Aat-tchamutet,  L:^^  \  ^\  ^^,  and  as  the  "holy 

and  mighty  lady  in  Khemennu  "  (Hermopolis),^  and  the  "  mistress  of 

and  "  the  dweller  in  Dendera,"  w=^  A  ® .     Thus  we  see  that  she 

was  the  goddess  of  the  great  temple  in  the  city  of  Thoth,  i.e., 
Hermopolis,  and  that  she  had  a  shrine  in  Dendera,  and  in  the 
metropolis  of  the  fifteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,  which  is  here 
mentioned  under  its  civil  name  "  Bahut  "  ;    the   sacred   name  of 

the  city  was  Per-Tehuti-ap-reliuh,  '""' ^^  ^  ?  ^?©,  i.e., 
"  Temple  of  Thoth,  the  judge  between  the  Behui  (Hdrus  and  Set)." 
The  texts  described  her  as  the  "  daughter  of  Ra,"  and  the  manner 
in  which  she  is  depicted  proves  that  she  was  regarded  as  a  form  of 
the  goddess  Hathor.  In  the  examples  given  by  Signor  Lanzone  ^ 
she  has  the  form  of  a  woman,  and  she  wears  upon  her  head  either 

the  sistrum,  i ,  or  a  disk  resting  between  a  pair  of  horns  ;  in  one 
picture  a  papyrus  sceptre,  I,  rests  on  the  palm  of  her  right  hand, 
and  a  figure  of  Maat,    ^  ,  on  that  of  her  left.     A  very  interesting 


=  =  0 


Dizionario,  pi.  174;  and  see  Bragscli,  Beligion,  p.  471. 


422  NEHEMAUAIT— MEHURT 

sketch  also  given  by  Signer  Lanzone  shows  that  her  emblem  was  a 
Hathor-headed  standard,  on  the  top  of  which  was  a  sistrum  ;   on 

each  side  of  the  sistrum  is  a  uraeus  with  a  disk  on  its  head,   p  , 

and  from  each  side  of  the  face  of  the  goddess  hang  two  similar 
uraei.  The  standard  is  held  up  in  a  vertical  position  by  two  men 
who  stand  one  on  each  side.  Plutarch,  as  Brugsch  has  noted,  says 
that  Typhon  Avas  driven  away  by  a  sistrum,  which  seems  to 
iudicate  that  the  rattling  of  the  Avires  produced  a  sound  that  had  a 
terrifying  effect  upon  that  evil  beast ;  ladies  of  high  rank  and 
priestesses  are  often  depicted  with  sistra  in  their  hands,  and 
though  this  fact  is  usually  explained  by  assuming  that  those  who 
hold  sistra  assisted  in  the  musical  parts  of  the  services  in  the 
temples,  it  is  very  probable  that  they  carried  them  both  as  amulets 
and  as  musical  instruments.  Dr.  Brugsch  quotes  two  passages 
from  texts  in  which  a  royal  personage  declares  that  demoniacal 
powers  are  kept  away  from  him  by  means  of  the  sistrum  which  he 
holds  in  his  hand.  N^ehemauait  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Booh  of 
the  Dead,  and  it  seems  that  she  is  not  an  ancient  deity  ;  she  is 
probably  a  comparatively  modern  form  of  some  well  known  older 
goddess. 

From  the  texts  of  the  late  dynastic  period  we  find  that  she 
was  identified  with  Meh-urt  ^  and  with  the  goddess  whose  name 

.^^  A^/vv\^ 

<=r>  "^w-^i  P^ ,  is   mentioned   but   rarely  in   the   Booh  of  the  Dead 

(xvii.  76,  79;  Ixxi.  13;  cxxiv.  17),  but  the  passage  in  the 
xviith  Chapter  tells  us  exactly  who  she  is.  The  deceased  says 
there,  "  I  behold  Ra  who  was  born  yesterday  from  the  buttocks  of 
"  the  goddess  Meh-urt,"  and  as  answer  to  the  question,  "  What 
"then  is  this?"  we  have  the  words,  "It  is  the  watery  abyss  of 
"  heaven,  or  (as  others  say),  It  is  the  image  of  the  Eye  of  Ra  in 
"  the  morning  at  his  daily  birth.  Meh-urt  is  the  Eye  (Utchat)  of 
"  Ra."  Meh-urt  was  originally  a  female  personification  of  the 
watery  matter  which  formed  the  substance  of  the  world,  and  her 
name,  which  means  "  mighty  fulness,"  indicates  that  she  was  the 

1  The  Methyer  (Mc^ucp)  of  Plutarch. 


NEHEIMAUAIT— MEHURT  423 

abundant  and  unfailing  source  of  the  matter  of  every  kind  which 
was  fecundated  by  the  male  germs  of  life  of  every  kind  ;  she  was, 
in  fact,  a  form  of  the  primeval  female  creative  principle,  and  in 
some  aspects  was  identified  with  Isis  and  Hathor.  She,  of  course, 
is  a  later  conception  than  Nut,  or  Nit  (Neith),  of  both  of  whom  she 
was  also  a  form.  In  one  of  the  representations  of  the  goddess 
figured  by  Signor  Lanzone  ^  she  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a 
pregnant  woman  with  full,  protruding  breasts,  emblem  of  fertility, 
but  she  usually  appears  as  the  great  cow  of  the  sky,  either  in  the 
form  which  is  illustrated  on  p.  368,  or  in  that  given  in  the  accom- 
panying plate.  Sometimes  she  has  the  body  of  a  woman  and  the 
head  of  a  cow,  and  then  she  holds  in  her  right  hand  a  sceptre 
round  which  is  twined  the  stalk  of  a  lotus  flower  which  she  appears 
to  be  smelling  ;  the  flower  itself  is  between  ^ ,  the  symbols  of  the 
South  and  the  North,  and  is  supposed  to  represent  the  great  world 
lotus  flower,  out  of  Avhich  rose  the  sun  for  the  first  time  at  the 
Creation.  The  usual  titles  of  the  goddess  are  "lady  of  heaven, 
"  mistress  of  all  the  gods,  mistress  of  the  two  lands,"  but  she  is  also 
said  to  have  "  existed  from  the  beginning,"  and  to  have  helped 
Thoth  to  create  the  first  things  which  appeared  in  Khemennu  or 
Hermopolis.  In  primitive  times  the  "  weighing  of  words,"  i.e.,  the 
examination  and  judgment  of  the  dead,  was  believed  to  take  place  in 
the  Hall  of  Meh-urt,  which  seems  to  prove  that  in  very  early  times 
the  attributes  of  Maat  were  ascribed  to  the  great  goddess,  whose 
form  was  the  cow,  and  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  were  thought  to 
be  judged  in  the  sky.  The  first  conception  of  the  Judgment  was 
probably  physical,  and  it  was  not  until  the  period  when  the  cult  of 
Osiris  became  predominant  that  it  assumed  the  character  with 
which  we  are  familiar  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  It  would  seem 
that  in  the  very  ancient  times  it  was  the  body  and  not  the  soul 
that  was  the  subject  of  examination  by  the  celestial  powers,  and 
this  is  what  is  to  be  expected  in  predynastic  times  when  the 
theory  of  the  resurrection  then  current  demanded  a  renewed  or 
revivified  physical  body. 

Closely  associated  with  Thoth  in  the  performance  of  certain  of 

1  Op.  cit.,  pi.  131  fe. 


424  THOTH   AND    SEFKHET-AABUT 

his  duties  as  the  god  of  letters  and  learning,  was  the  goddess 
T^  Jj ,  whose  name  is  generally  read  Sefkhet-aabut,  [1  ''^"^^ 
XXX  J);  the  reading  "Sesheta"  has  also  been  proposed  for 
the  hieroglyphic  sign,  ^,  which  forms  the  symbol  of  this  goddess, 
but  both  readings  are  merely  guesses,  for  the  phonetic  value  of  the 
sign  has  not  yet  been  ascertained,  and  even  the  sign  itself  has  not 
been  identified.  All  that  is  certain  about  it  is  that  in  some 
pictures  of  the  goddess  the  sign  seems  to  be  compounded  of  a  pair 
of  horns  inverted  over  a  seven-rayed  star,  or  flower  with  seven 
petals,  supported  on  a  standard.  Dr.  Brugsch  believed  that 
Sefkhet-aabut  was  the  correct  reading  of  the  name,  and  that  it 
either  meant,  "  she  who  has  inverted  her  horns,"  or,  "  she  who  is 
provided  with  seven  horns,"  the  latter  meaning  being  suggested  by 
the  similarity  of  the  first  part  of  the  name  Sefkhet  with  the  ordinary 
word  for  "  seven."  From  the  pictures  of  the  goddess  and  the  titles 
which  accompany  them  it  is  quite  certain  what  her  functions 
were.  We  see  her  wearing  her  characteristic  symbols  on  her 
head,  with  a  close-fitting  panther  skin  garment  upon  her  body, 
and  in  her  hands  she  holds  a  scribe's  palette  and  writing  reed ; 
in  this  form  she  is  called  "  the  great  one,  the  lady  of  the  house  of 

books,"  .  .     Thus  she  was  a  goddess  of  literature 

and  the  library. 

Elsewhere  we   see   her  without   her   panther   skin  garment, 
holding  a  writing  reed  in  the  right  hand,  and  the  cartouche  czz>, 

symbolic  of  "  name "  in  her  left ;  in  this  form  she  suggests  the 
idea  of  being  a  kind  of  recording  angel,  not  so  much  of  the  deeds 
committed  by  man,  but  of  their  names,  of  which  she,  presumably, 
took  note,  that  her  associate  Thoth  might  declare  them  before 
Osiris.  In  the  title  which  accompanies  this  picture  she  is  called 
"  great   one,    lady   of  letters,    mistress   of  the  house   of  books," 

"^^^^^  liR   ^      ,     "^^^  . ..     In  another  scene  ^  she  holds  a  notched 

palm  branch  in  her  hand,  and  she  appears  to  be  counting  the 
notches  ;  the  lower  end  of  the  branch  rests  on  the  back  of  a  frog, 

1  For  all  these  pictures  see  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  340. 


SEFKHET-AABUT  425 

seated  upon  Q,  the  emblem  of  "eternity,"  and  from  the  upper 
end  hangs  the  symbol  of  the  double  Set  festival,  L|| J .     Thus  she 

appears  in  the  character  of  the  chronographer  and  chronologist ; 
the  use  of  the  notched  palm-branch  as  a  symbol  of  the  counting  of 
years  takes  us  back  to  a  custom  which  was  probably  prevalent  in 
predynastic  times.  In  yet  another  scene  we  find  the  goddess 
standing  before  a  column  of  hieroglyphics  meaning  "life,"  and 
"power,"  and  "thirty-year  festivals,"  which  rest  upon  a  seated 
figure  who  holds  in  each  hand  •¥-,  "life,"  and  who  typifies 
"  millions  of  years."  In  connection  with  this  must  be  noted  a 
passage  in  a  text  in  which  she  declares  to  a  king  that  she  has 
inscribed  on  her  register  on  his  behalf  a  period  of  life  which  shall  be 
"  hundreds  of  thousands  of  thirty-year  periods,"  and  has  ordained 
that  his  years  shall  be  upon  the  earth  like  the  years  of  Ra,  i.e.,  that 
he  shall  live  for  ever.  In  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (Ivii.  6)  the  deceased 
says,  "  My  mouth  and  my  nostrils  are  opened  in  Tattu,  and  I  have 
"  my  place  of  peace  in  Annu,  wherein  is  my  house ;  it  was  built 
"  for  me  by  the  goddess  Sefekh-aabut  (or  Sesheta),  and  the  god 
"  Khnemu  set  it  up  for  me  upon  its  walls."  And  again  he  says 
(clii.  3),  "  The  goddess  Sefekh-aabut  hath  brought  the  god  ISTebt, 
"  and  Anpu  (Anubis)  hath  called  unto  the  Osiris  Nu  (i.e.,  to  me) 
"  to  build  a  house  on  the  earth.  Its  foundation  is  in  Kher-aha, 
"  its  shrine  is  the  god  Sekhem,  who  dwelleth  in  Sekhem,  according 
"  to  that  which  I  have  written  the  renewal  thereof,  and  men  and 
"  women  bring  ofi'erings,  and  libations,  and  ministrants.  And 
"  Osiris  saith  unto  all  the  gods  who  are  in  his  train,  and  who 
"  journey  [with  him],  '  Behold  ye  the  house  which  hath  been  built 
"  '  for  a  spirit  who  is  well-equipped,  and  who  cometh  daily  to 
"  '  renew  himself  among  you.'  "  In  the  clxixth  Chapter  (line  18) 
the  goddess  is  said  to  be  seated  before  the  deceased,  and  the 
goddess  Sa  protects  his  members. 

These  passages  show  that  Sefekh-aabut  was  supposed  to  be 

the  "goddess  of  construction,"  Vm^   and  she  would  thus  be  a 

suitable  counterpart  of  Thoth,  and  one  fitted  to  carry  out  his 
commands  concerning  the  Creation.  It  is,  however,  certain  from 
many  passages  that  her  chief  duties  were  connected  with  the  writing 


426  THOTH   AND   UNNUT 

of  history,  and  happy  was  the  king  who  was  fortunate  enough  to 
have  his  deeds  recorded  by  the  fingers  of  the  goddess  herself,  and 
his  abode  in  the  next  world  built  on  the  plan  which  she  drew  up 
in  accordance  with  her  attributes  as  the  inventor  of  letters,  the 
lady  of  the  builder's  measure,  and  the  founder  of  architecture.^ 
In  a  text  quoted  by  Brugsch  she  declares  to  Seti  that  her  words 
concerning  him  shall  never  be  gainsaid,  that  her  hand  shall  set 
down  in  writing  his  fame  after  the  manner  of  her  brother  Thoth, 
and  all  according  to  the  decree  of  Tem.  She  was  identified  with 
the  goddess  Renenet,  /vwwv  ^  H, ,  and  with  Isis,  and  at  Dendera  she 
is  called  the  ''  daughter  of  Nut ; "  at  Lycopolis  she  was  regarded 
as  the  sister  of  Osiris,  and  the  mother  of  Heru-nub,  "^ ,  or  the 
"  Horus  of  gold." 

Yet  another  goddess  must  be  mentioned  in  connection  with 
Maat  and  Thoth,  that  is  to  say,  Unnut,  -^^  ^  ,  the  lady  of  Unnu, 
^^  (^ '  ^^^^  must  not  be  confused  with  Unnut,  the  goddess  of 
the  hours,  who  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman  with  a  star  upon 
her  head.  The  former  goddess  has,  on  the  other  hand,  the  body 
of  a  woman  with  the  head  of  a  hare,  and  she  usually  holds  in  each 
hand  a  knife,  ^^=>-. ;  ^  sometimes  she  holds  a  sceptre  in  one  hand, 
and  •¥-,  "life,"  in  the  other.  One  aspect  of  her,  i.e.,  that  of  the 
goddess  who  destroys  with  her  knives,  was  identified  with  Sekhet, 
Y  T)r^,  and  in  this  form  she  was  the  deity  of  the  city  Menhet, 

ft  g^ .     From  a  passage  in  the  cxxxviith  Chapter  of  the  Booh 

of  the  Dead  we  may  gain  some  idea  of  the  antiquity  of  the  goddess 
Unnut,  for  towards  the  end  of  the  rubric  (line  38)  it  is  said  that 
the   Chapter  was    found   in   the   handwriting   of  the   god  Thoth 

in  the   temple  of  "  Unnut,    lady  of  Unnu,"  ^^     ,^  J)^ 

•^"O  V®'  ^y  Heru-tata-f,  the  son  of  Khufu,  i.e.,  Cheops,  a 
king  of  the  IVth  Dynasty.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  even  in  that 
remote  period  a  temple  in  honour  of  the  goddess  existed  at 
Unnu,  i.e.,  Hermopolis,  or  the  city  of  Thoth.  Unnu,  as  we  know, 
was  the  chief  city  of  the  nome  Un,  the  chief  local  god  of  which 

1   See  Brugsch,  Eeligion,  p.  474.  "  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  52. 


AP-REHUI  427 

was  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  hare,  ;^ ,  and  Unnut  is  the  female 
counterpart  of  the  god  Unnu,  and  was  the  old  local  goddess  of  the 
metropolis  of  the  nome. 

In  the  vignette  of  the  cxth  Chapter  of  the  Boole  of  the  Dead 
(Papyrus  of  Ani,  pi.  35)  we  see  the  deceased  standing  with  hands 
raised  in  adoration  before  three  seated  deities,  the  first  having  the 
head  of  a  hare,  the  second  that  of  a  snake,  and  the  third  that  of  a 
bull ;  behind  him  stands  the  god  Thoth  with  palette  and  reed,  but 
whether  he  is  in  any  ^vay  connected  with  the  three  gods  cannot  be 
said.     A  hare-headed  god  is  also  seen  as   one    of  the   group    of 
three  gods  who  preside  over  one  of  the  Arits  in  the  Underworld ; 
according  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  it  is  the  first  Arit,  and  according 
to   the   Papyrus   of  Nu   it  is  the  second.     At  Dendera  a  hare- 
headed  god  is  seen  wrapped  in  mummy  swathings,  with  his  hands 
in  such  a  position  that  they  suggest  his  identification  with  Osiris, 
and  an  attempt  has  been  made  ^  to  show  in  connexion  with  this 
representation  that  the  hare -headed  god  Avas  called  Un,  that  this 
name  appears  in  the  compound  name  "Un-nefer,"  the  well-known 
title  of  Osiris,  that  the  hare-god  Un  was  only  another  form  of 
Osiris,  and  that  the  name  Un  was  applied  to  Osiris  because  he 
"sprang  up,"  like  the  hare,  which,  as  the  rising  sun,  is  said  to  be 
the  "  springer."     According  to  this  view  the  goddess  Unnut  would 
be  a  female  form  of  the  hare-god  Un  or  Unnu,  but  Brugsch's 
opinion  which  makes  her  to  be  the  goddess  of  the  city  of  Unnu,  or 
Hermopolis,  is  more  correct,  especially  when  we  remember  that 
the  cities  An,  and  Apt,  and  Behutet,  etc.,  possessed  goddesses  of 
the  city  which  Avere  called  Anit,  and  Apit,  and  Behutit.     We  have 
already  seen  that  the  goddess  Maat  had  two  forms,  i.e.,  Maat  of 
the  South  and  Maat  of  the  North,  and    similarly  we   find   that 
Unnut  had  two  forms,  one  of  which  belonged  to  Hermopolis  of  the 
South,  and  the  other  to   Hermopolis  of   the  North,  the  ^^ 
Unnu  me/it  of  the  text,  i.e.,  Hermopolis  Parva,  wherein  Thoth 
was  worshipped  under  the  form   of  Ap-rehui,  \/  <:=>  ^  ^^ 
together  with  his  female  counterpart  Nehemauait.^ 

1  See  Renouf  in  Trans.  Soc.  Bill.  Arch.,  vol.  ix.,  pp.  281-294. 

2  Brugsch,  Beligion,  p.  477 ;  de  Eouge,  GeograpJiie,  pp.  30,  102. 


(     428     ) 


CHAPTER  XIV 


HATHOR,  []-^"|,  HET-HERT,  AND  THE 
HATHOR,  GODDESSES 


T 


"^HE  goddess  Hathor  is  one  of  the  oldest  known  deities  of 
Egypt,  and  it  is  certain  that,  under  the  form  of  a  cow, 
she  was  worshipped  in  the  early  part  of  the  archaic  period, 
because  a  flint  model  of  the  head  and  horns  of  the  cow,  which  was 
her  type  and  symbol,  has  been  found  among  the  early  archaic,  or 
late  predynastic  flints  in  Egypt/  The  forms  in  which  the  goddess 
is  depicted  are  numerous,  but  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at, 
because  during  the  course  of  the  dynastic  period  she  was 
identified  with  every  important  local  goddess,  and  all  their 
attributes,  of  whatever  class  and  kind,  were  ascribed  to  her. 
The  oldest  form  of  all  is  probably  that  of  the  cow,  and  this  was 
preserved,  though  chiefly  in  funeral  scenes  and  in  the  Book  of 
the  Dead,  until  the  beginning  of  the  Roman  period.     Het-Hert, 

n  <=^  i))  the  name  of  the  goddess,  means  the  "  House  above," 

i.e.,  the  region  of  the  sky  or  heaven,  and  another  form  of  it,  ^1, 

which  is  to  be  read  Het-Heru,  and  which  means  "  House  of 
Horus,"  shows  that  she  was  a  personification  of  the  house  in  which 
Horus  the  Sun-god  dwelt,  and  that  she  represented  the  portion  of 
the  sky  through  which  the  course  of  the  god  lay.  In  the  earliest 
times  Hathor,  the  'AOcop  of  the  Greek  writers,  t3q3ified  only  that 
portion  of  the  sky  in  which  Horus,  the  oldest  form  of  the  Sun- 
god,  had  been  conceived  and  brought  forth,  and  her  domain  was  in 
the  east  of  the  sky ;   but  at  length  she  came  to  represent  the  whole 

1  This  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  No.  32,124. 


HATHOR  429 


sky,  and  in  so  doing,  she,  no  doubt,  absorbed  many  of  the  attributes 
of  predynastic  goddesses.  In  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line  593)  it  is 
said,  "  Every  god  will  take  the  hand  of  Ra-meri  in  heaven,  and 

"  they  will  conduct  him  to  Het-Heru  (  ^    ^) ,  which  is  in  the 


"  heaven  of  Qebhu  (/]  Jl  ||V  ^  ^=^)?  ^^^  ^i^  double  shall  be  able 
^'  to  make  his  voice  (or  word)  take  effect  upon  Seb."  From  this 
passage  it  seems  as  if  the  House  of  Horus  was  only  one  special  part 
of  the  great  watery  mass  of  heaven  which  is  generally  known  by 
the  name  of  "  Qebh." 

At  the  time  when  the  Egyptians  first  formulated  their 
theogony  Hathor  was  certainly  a  cosmic  goddess,  and  was 
associated  with  the  Sun-god  Ra,  of  whom  she  was  the  principal 
female  counterpart.  In  the  theological  system  of  the  priests  of 
Heliopolis  she  became,  as  Brugsch  says,^  the  "  mother  of  the  light," 
the  birth  of  which  was  the  first  act  of  creation ;  her  next  creative 
act  was  to  produce  Shu  and  Tefnut,  that  is  to  say,  certain  aspects 
of  these  gods,  for  according  to  a  very  old  tradition  Temu  was 
their  begetter  and  producer.  Of  the  various  forms  in  which  Hathor 
is  depicted  may  be  mentioned  the  following  ^ : — As  the  "  chief- 
tainess,"  "f*  ^ ,  of  Thebes  and  the  mistress  of  Amentet  she  is  usually 

represented  in  the  form  of  a  woman  who  wears  upon  her  head  a 
pair  of  horns  within  which  rests  the  solar  disk ;  as  the  lady  of 
Hetepet,  ^  © ,  she  wears  the  vulture  tiara,  with  a  uraeus  in 

front  and  five  uraei  on  the  top  of  it ;  as  the  lady  of  Senemet, 
""^"^^  ^,  she  appears  in  the  form  of  a  woman  with  the  headdress 
yYy  ,  or  with  plumes  and  horns ;  as  the  lady  of  Abshek,  q  J  rm  ^.^^^ , 
she  wears  a  disk  between  horns  ;  as  the  great  goddess  of  Dendera, 
I         ,  she  appears  in  the  form  of  a  lioness,  with  a  uraeus  on  her 

head,  and  as  a  woman  wearing  X°/  and  I) ,  or  [|1 ,  or  O  and  \/,  or 
X^  and  [jl ,  or  the  sistrum,  i ,  or  ^  and  \\,  or  Yf  ^^^  111  ?  o^^  \/ 
and  X°/ ,  and  ^ ,  and  [1] ,  and  she  usually  carries  a  sceptre,  1  oi'  I  ? 

1  Beligion,  p.  312.  2  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  314  fE. 


430  HATHOR 

in  one  hand,  and  ''life,"  ■¥-,  in  the  other;  as  the  lady  of  the 
"  southern  sycamore,"  /|  X     ,  she  has  the  head  of  a  cow  ;   as 

the  lady  of  Annu  she  has  on  her  head  ^^2'  ^^  ^^^^  goddess  of 
turquoise  [land],  i.e.,  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula,  called  "  Mafek," 
Q — D  o  J  she  wears  the  crown  of  the  north,  >/ ,  or  /Yy  and  \Jf ; 

and  in  another  form  she  wears  the  vulture  head-dress  surmounted 
by  a  tiara  formed  of  uraei,  and  above  these  is  a  pylon  set  among  a 
mass  of  lotus  flowers  and  buds.     As  the  "  lady  of  the  Holy  Land," 

i.e.,  the  Underworld,  and  Amentet,  If  ^  "^j  she  appears  in  the  form 
of  a  cow  Avalking  out  from  the  funeral  mountain,  and  she  is  some- 
times reiDresented  in  the  form  of  a  cow  standing  in  a  boat  sur- 
rounded by  papyrus  plants  which  are  growing  up  to  a  considerable 
height  above  her  body.  As  the  cow-goddess  of  the  Underworld, 
however,  she  wears  a  long,  pendent  collar,  and  on  the  back  of  her 
neck  is  the  Mendt,  (w  ,  an  emblem  of  joy  and  pleasure.  On  her 
back  also  is  a  kind  of  saddle-cloth  with  a  linear  design,  and  the 
whole  of  her  body  is  sometimes  marked  with  crosses,  which  are 
probably  intended  to  represent  stars.  Two  other  interesting  forms 
of  the  goddess  which  are  illustrated  by  Signor  Lanzone  ^  represent 
her  holding  in  her  hand  the  notched  palm  branch,  which  is  usually 
the  characteristic  of  the  goddess  Sefekh-aabut,  who  acted  as 
assistant  chronographer  and  chronologist  to  the  god  Thoth,  and 
from  this  point  of  view  Hathor  must  be  regarded  as  a  female 
counterpart  of  Thoth.  Finally,  she  is  represented  as  a  sphinx, 
wearing  on  her  head  the  vulture  head-dress,  with  uraeus  and  disk  ; 
the  side  of  her  body  is  made  to  resemble  a  part  of  a  mendt,  and  she 
rests  upon  a  pylon.  The  titles  which  accompany  this  last  form  call 
her  "  lady  of  Hetep,  the  eye  of  Ra,  dweller  in  his  disk,  lady  of 


D   -^^     I      I 


"  heaven,    mistress   of  all  the   gods,"  fcj 

l-i-^  Y  ^  i^  111  ,T.- 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  Avorship  of  Horus  was  universal 
in  Egypt,  probably  from  the  earliest  period,  and  that  in  dynastic 
times  shrines  which  were  specially  consecrated  to  his  worship  were 

1  Op.  cit.,  pi.  325  &. 


HATHOR  431 

common  throughout  the  country ;  the  texts  prove  that  the  worship 
of  Hathor  was  also  universal,  and  that  her  shrines  were  even  more 
numerous  than  those  of  Horus.  She  was,  in  fact,  the  great  mother 
of  the  world,  and  the  old,  cosmic  Hathor  was  the  personification  of 
the  great  power  of  nature  which  was  perpetually  conceiving,  and 
creating,  and  bringing  forth,  and  rearing,  and  maintaining  all 
things,  both  great  and  small.  She  was  the  "  mother  of  her  father, 
"  and  the  daughter  of  her  son,"  and  heaven,  earth,  and  the  Under- 
world were  under  her  rule,  and  she  was  the  mother  of  every  god 
and  every  goddess.  In  all  the  important  shrines  of  the  local 
goddesses  she  was  honoured  with  them,  and  she  always  became  the 
chief  female  counterpart  of  the  head  of  the  com23any  or  triad  in 
which  she  had  been  allowed  to  enter  as  a  guest.  A  clear  proof  of 
this  fact  is  given  in  the  list  compiled  by  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch,  which 
showed  the  various  names  and  forms  she  took  in  all  the  large 
cities  in  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  and  from  this  we  see  that  she 
was   identified   with    Satet,       jT  Jj ,    and    Anqet,    a^/wvs  ^  D  ^    in 

Elephantine  ;  with  Ta-sent-nefert,  ^  "^^  1  ^  A  ^^  Jt  '  ^^  Ombos; 
with   Behutet,  j  I  y>         ^  J ,  in   Apollinopolis    Magna ;    with 


Nit,  ^^l,  Nebuut,  ^  ^^^,  and  Menhit,  _](i^lj^^,  m 
Latopolis  ;  with  Mut,  '\\  '^  Jj ,  and  Nekhebet,  1.  ^  J  J) ,  in 
Eileithyiaspolis ;    with  Rat-tauit,    ^3    "'    ^  Jj ,   and  Thenenet, 


^=[|.[|.^,  in  Hermonthis;  with  Mut,  ^\,  and  Amenthet, 
1/vwwv^^'  ^^  Thebes;  with  Heqet,  Jf  O  J,  in  Apollinopolis 
Parva;  with  Isis,  fj^J?  and  Anit,  [iflfl^J?  in  Coptos ;  Avith 
Sefkhet  -  AABUT,    in    Diospolis    Parva  ;     with    Mehit  -  Teenut  - 

This ;    with   Isis   and    Khent   Abtet,    rfTk  ^J'^^^Jj,    in 

Panopolis  ;  with  Heqet  and  Anthat,  ^  l  ()  "^  Pn  ?  i^  Aphrodi- 
topolis;  with  ISTit,  Uatchet,  |^^,  Sekhet,  ^^®^^,  etc.,  in 
Hypselis ;  with  Maat  and  Isis  in  Hierakonpolis  ;    with   Mut  and 


432  HATHOR 

Sefkhet-aabut  in  Lycopolis ;  with  Sekhet  and  Maat  in  Cusae ; 
with  Nehemauait,  '^  ^  - — a  ^  f]f)  ^  5'  ^^^  Sefkhet-aabut, 
and  Meh-urt,  =^|^>^,  in  Hermopolis ;  Avith  Heqet  and 
AsHET,  "^  ^^ ,  in  Ibiu ;  with  Pakhth,  ^  ^:^ ,  at  the  Speos 
Artemidos  ;  with  Anpet,  fl  S  q  ^ '  ^^  Cynopolis  ;  with  Uatchet 
in  Alabastronpolis ;  with  Hathor  of  Ox3^rinchus  ;  with  Anthat  and 
Mersekhent  •■ — r  R  ^  ^ji_  ^ ,  in  Herakleopolis  Magna;  with  Renpit, 
■T  J) ,  in  Crocodilopolis  ;  with  Khersekhet  in  Ptolemais  ;  with  Isis 
and  Tep-ahet  in  Aphroditopolis ;  with  Bast,  ^  ^  ^  ?  Sekhet,  and 
Renpit  in  Memphis;  Avith  Nebuarekht-aat,  '^37-^^^®'^ 
TTn  J)  ,  in  Letopolis  ;  with  Usert-heqet,  ]  ^^  ?  zi  ^ ,  in  Prosopis ; 

with  Nit  (Neith)  in  Sa'is ;  with  IJrt- Apset,  ^  \/  ^  ^  ^  ^  ?  ^^ 
XoU ;  with  Isis  in  Canopus ;  with  Uatchet  in  Buto ;  with  Tefnut 
in  Pa-Tern  (Pithom) ;  with  Tatet  or  Tait,  J^fjf]^^^  i^ 
Busiris ;  with  Khuit,  Atjf]'^^?  i^  Athribis;  with  Tetet, 
dauo-hter  of  Ra,  ft  n  "^     ^ ,  and  Tefnut,  in   the   form  of  a  lion, 


—  /Wu'v^^ 


l\^  / .^^,    and    Hert,    C\      ,    i.e.,    the    female 


counterpart  of  Horus,  and  Nesert,  ^     ^    I40\5  with  Iusaset, 

■^  P  Z!  o '  '^^^  Nebt-hetep,  Y  r^  o  3 '  ^^^  ^'^^^'''  "  1  o  I ' 
and  Repit,  '^  (]!]  ^  5;  with  Khent-Abtet,  ^  |  ^,  in  Sele  (?) ; 
with  Nehemauait,  Tefnut,  and  Isis  in  Hermopolis;  with  Hat- 
MEHiT,  ^=^  QQ  "^J?  in  Mendes;  with  Mut,  Tefnut,  and  Khent- 
Abtet,  in  Diospolis;  with  Bast,  ^^^j  in  Bubastis ;  with  Isis 
and  Uatchet  in  Ammet,  h  /=  ^^  ^ ;  and  with  Septit,  P  ^  !)f]  ^  ^^ 
and  Khekhsit,  ®®  flfl  ^  "iXi,  in  the  nome  of  Sept.  It  is,  then, 
quite  certain  that  in  late  dynastic  times,  at  least,  Hathor  became 
the  representative  of  all  the  great  goddesses  in  Egypt,  and  that 
shrines  in  her  honour  were  built  in  most  great  cities  there.  In 
his   valuable    Dizionario    di    Mitologia    Egizia    (p.    875),    Signor 


THE   SEVEN   HATHORS  433 

Lanzone  has  collected  the  names  of  a  number  of  cities  which 
contained  shrines  of  Hathor,  hut  the  enumeration  of  them  all  ^ 
here  would  serve  no  useful  purpose,  because  the  identifications 
of  the  goddess  described  above  are  sufficient  to  indicate  the 
universality  of  her  worship. 

A  little  consideration  of  the  texts  shows  us  that  it  was  quite 
impossible  for  any  worshipper  of  Hathor,  however  devout,  to 
enumerate  all  the  forms  of  the  goddess  which  existed,  and  also 
that  some  of  them  were  considered  of  greater  importance  than  the 
others ;  as  a  result  we  find  that  at  a  comparatively  early  period  a 
selection  of  the  Hathors  was  made,  and  that  it  usually  contained 
seven.     The   Seven  Hathors  who  were  worshipped  at  Dendera 

were: — 1.  Hathor  of  Thebes,  T  ^.  2.  Hathor  of  Heliopolis,  f|  £. 
3.  Hathor  of  Aphroditopolis,  ®  "i^-^  ^ .  4.  Hathor  of  the  Sinaitic 
Peninsula,  ^  °^^o  ^  .  5.  Hathor  of  Momemphis  (Ammu), 
(M(l<v>.  6.  Hathor  of  Herakleopolis,  I^""^.  7.  Hathor  of 
Keset,  \Tj  ^ .  These  were  represented  ^  in  the  form  of  young  and 
handsome   women    arrayed    in   close-fitting   tunics,    and   wearing 

^  The  f ollowiBg  selection  may,  however,  be  of  interest : — Arit,  [I  [1  ^ 

Akent,  ^^  Z ,  Sekhet-Ra,  f\l\f\  ^,  Keset,  "^^  S  5  Senmet,  '^'^'^  ^  ^,  Khanit, 
f  f  ^  ,  Matchet,  ^  - — fl  ^  \J^ ,  Shetenu,  ^^  £ ,  Akenn,  rr  ^  © , 
Khakhat  (?),  '^  '^  "^  '^  2  ,  She-Tesher,  ™  ^,  Kepemit  (in  Syria), 
^  O  (X)  2  '  P^^"^^^^^  ^^  Ankh-tauit,  I  S  I  I  Y  ==  s  ©  '  ^^^^STi, 
^r©'  ^'^'''  It®'  Tep-ahet,  ^^@,  Alkat,  ^^J'  ^''■ 
Menthu,  I  A  2^  Maati,  Rp  ^^  Sebti,  ^  J  ^©,  Kennu,  ^^®,  Tcherutet, 
^^n®'  Sek,  pS©,  Per-Utchat,  ^^@,  Hes,  j^~^ ,  Kenset, 
'^'^  '^ ,  I^eferus,   I  "^^^  %  P  ©,  Khekliuit,  J  ^     ®^ ,   Antet,    \\  ^  rv£x^ 

Sennnt,   1112- 

2  Brngsch,  Mytlwlogische  Inschriften,  Leipzig,  1884,  p.  801  ff. 
E    f 


434  THE    SEVEN   HATHORS 

vulture  head-dresses  surmounted  by  X^  ?  and  holding  tambourines 
in  their  hands.  In  the  "  Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers  "  ^  we  find  the 
Seven  Hathors  acting  the  part  of  prophetic  fairies,  for  in  that 
entertaining  narrative  they  are  made  to  come  and  look  upon  the 
wife  whom  Khnemu  had  fashioned  for  the  younger  brother  Bata, 
and  who  "  was  more  beautiful  in  her  person  than  any  other  woman 
"  in  all  the  earth,  for  every  god  was  contained  in  her  ;  "  but  when 
they  had  looked  upon  her,  they  said  with  one  voice,  "  Her  death 
will  be  caused  by  the  knife."  Unfortunately  we  do  not  know  the 
districts  which  these  Seven   Hathors,  ^  '^  ^^  ^^  o  &l  ' ' 

represented.  The  Seven  Hathors  mentioned  by  Mariette  ^  com- 
prise  the  Hathors  of  Dendera,  [l,^^?  Keset  (Cusae),  Nehet 
S^A©,  the  Two  Mountains,  ^^^  (i.e.,  the  modern  Gebelen), 
Eileithyiaspolis,  -I*  ^  J  © '  ^^^  Mafek  (Sinai),  Kepenut  ff  O  ^  q 
(Byblos),  and  Het-seshesh,     f     (Diospolis  Parva)  ;   thus  it  is  clear 


that  the  company  of  the  Seven  Hathors  did  not  always  include  the 
same  forms  of  the  goddess.  In  the  Litanies  of  Seker  ^  we  have  also 
a  "  Litany  of  the  Hathors,"  wherein  are  mentioned  the  Hathors 
of:— 1.  Tep-ahet.  2.  Mafek  and  Thebes.  3.  Thebes.  4.  Nebt- 
hetep.  5.  Suten-henen.  6.  Memphis.  7.  She-Tesher  ;  here,  then, 
is  a  different  group  of  Seven  Hathors.  In  the  six  lines  of  text 
which  follow,  Hathor  is  identified  with  the  goddesses  : — 1.  Bast. 
2.  Sati.  3.  Uatchet.  4.  Sekhet.  5.  Lady  of  Ammu.  6.  Nit 
(Neith) ;  and  after  this  we  have  addresses  to  the  Hathors  of 
Thebes,  Suten-henen,  Tep-ahet,  Nehau,  Rehsau,  Shet-Teshert, 
Mafek,  Aneb,  Uaua,  Ammu,  Amem,  and  Hathor,  lady  of  the  "  City 
of  Sixteen,"  x  ^  ^  Jj  R  .  f\,  i.e.,  Lycopolis,  in  all  Twelve  Hathors. 
If  we  had  full  information  on  the  subject  we  should  probably  find 
that  each  great  city  possessed  its  own  selection  of  Hathors,  and 
that  the  forms  of  the  goddess  whose  names  were  inscribed  on 
funeral  papyri  were  only  those  which  were  popular  with  those  who 
caused  such  documents  to  be  made. 

1  Page  ix.,  1.  8.      (Bii'cli,  Select  Papyri.') 

-  See  Denderah,  torn.  1,  pi.  27  ;  Brugscli,  Diet.  Gcog.,  p.  972. 

3  See  my  paper  in  Archaeolo(jia,  vol.  Hi.  (Papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu). 


HATHOR-APHRODITE  435 

The  Greeks  identified  Hathor  with  their  goddess  Aphrodite, 
and  there  are  many  passages  in  the  Egyptian  texts  which  show 
that  they  were  justified  in  doing  so.  She  represented  not  only 
what  was  true,  but  what  was  good,  and  all  that  is  best  in  woman 
as  wife,  mother,  and  daughter ;  she  was  also  the  patron  goddess  of 
all  singers,  dancers,  and  merry-makers  of  every  kind,  of  beautiful 
women,  and  of  love,  of  artists  and  artistic  works,  and  also  of  the 
vine  and  wine,  and  ale  and  beer,  and,  in  fact,  of  joy  and  happiness, 
and  of  everything  which  contributed  thereto.  She  was  identified 
astronomically  with  the  star  Sept,  1  A  ^  ,  or  Sothis,  which  was 
called  the  "  second  sun  "  in  heaven,  she  was  thereby  connected 
with  the  rise  of  the  Nile  preparatory  to  the  Inundation,  and  she 
appeared  in  the  form  of  this  star  in  the  heavens  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  sun  in  the  second  half  of  July.  Sothis  rose  heliacally 
on  the  first  day  of  the  Egyptian  New  Year,  and  when  the  Sun-god 
Ra  had  entered  his  boat,  Hathor,  the  goddess  of  the  star  Sothis,  went 
with  him  and  took  up  her  place  like  a  crown  upon  his  forehead.^ 
She  was,  as  we  have  seen,  both  the  wife  of  Ra,  and  the  daughter  of 
Ra ;  she  herself  was  brought  forth  by  the  goddess  Nut  in  the  form 
of  a  black-skinned,  ^>'-  i  "^ ,  or  blackish-red  skinned  child  and 
received  as  her  name  that  of  the  last  hour  of  the  day,  KhDcmet- 
ankh,  Q  ^^  "^  1^  IT  #  '  °^  W"  T  '^  Hathor,  as  lady  of  the 
Underworld,  played  a  very  prominent  part  in  connection  with  the 
welfare  of  the  dead,  for  without  her  friendly  help  and  protection 
the  deceased  could  never  attain  to  everlastino-  life. 

o 

The  position  which  Hathor  held  among  the  gods  of  the 
Underworld  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following  passages  from  the 
Book  of  the  Dead.  In  his  hymn  to  Ra  the  deceased  ofiEicer  Nekht 
says,  "  0  thou  beautiful  being,  thou  dost  renew  thyself  in  thy 
"  season  in  the  form  of  the  Disk  within  thy  mother  Hathor,"  with 
which  words  he  refers  to  the  goddess  as  a  nature  power.  In  the 
Judgment  Scene  we  find  that  she  is  one  of  the  company  of  the 
gods  who  watch  the  "  weighing  of  words,"  and  who  afterwards 
decree  joy  and  felicity  for  the  heart  which  has  been  weighed  and 

1  Brugsch,  Beligion,  p.  318 ;  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  865. 

3  Brugscli,  MythologiscJie  Inschrtften,  p.  844  (Twelfth.  Hour  of  the  Day). 


436  HATHOR   OF   THE   DEAD 

found  just.  When  the  deceased  is  face  to  face  with  the  monster 
Apep,  Hathor  is  one  of  the  group  of  gods  consisting  of  Netcheb- 
AE-F,  ^JI'O'^^,  Tem,  Nentcha,  Zl^i'  ^eb,  Nut,  and 
Khepera,  who  encourage  the  deceased  to  do  battle  with  him,  and 
she  cries  out  to  the  deceased,  "  Take  your  armour ;  "  but  she,  like 
the  deceased,  is  in  terror  of  Apep  and  "  she  quaketh  "  thereat 
(xxxix.  22).  In  the  Chapter  (xlii.)  which  describes  the  deification 
of  the  members  of  the  deceased,  she  becomes  his  two  eyes,  and  he 
declares,  ''  My  eyes  are  the  eyes  of  Hathor."  Now  Hathor  was, 
according  to  one  myth,  the  star  Sothis,  A    ^   ,  Sept,  and  she  took 

up  her  place  in  the  face  of  Horus  or  Ra  as  his  right  eye  ;  another 
myth  which  made  her  the  night  sky  also  made  her  the  moon 
therein  ;  hence  the  eyes  of  Hathor  are  the  sun  and  moon,  and  the 
deceased  regards  these  as  his  own  eyes  in  the  text.  In  other 
Chapters  (lii.,  Ixiii.A,  Ixviii.),  she  appears  as  the  goddess  who 
provides  the  deceased  with  meat  and  drink,  and  thus  we  find  the 
following : — "  Let  me  eat  my  food  under  the  sycamore  tree  of  my 
"  lady  Hathor,  and  let  my  times  be  among  the  divine  beings  who 
"  have  alighted  thereon ;  "  and  again,  "  In  a  clean  place  I  shall  sit 
"  on  the  ground  beneath  the  foliage  of  the  date  palm  of  the  goddess 
"  Hathor,  who  dwelleth  in  the  spacious  Disk  as  it  advanceth  to 
"  Annu,  having  the  books  of  the  divine  words  of  the  writings  of 
"the  god  Thoth;  "  and  again,  "Let  me  have  power  over  cakes, 
"  and  let  me  eat  of  them  under  the  leaves  of  the  palm  tree  of  the 
''  goddess  Hathor,  who  is  my  divine  lady  "  (Ixxxii.  7). 

In  the  Hall  of  Maati  the  name  of  the  left  foot  of  the  deceased 
was  "Staff  of  Hathor"  (cxxv.  35),  and  a  special  Chapter  (ciii.) 
was  composed  with  the  view  of  enabling  the  deceased  to  "be 
among  those  who  are  in  the  following  of  Hathor."  Thus  Ave  see 
that  she  was  held  to  be  sufficiently  important  to  have  a  train  of 
attendant  gods,  or  ministering  angels,  about  her.  In  the  vignette 
of  Chapter  cxxxiv.  Hathor  forms  one  of  the  company  of  the  gods 
of  Heliopolis,  which  here  consists  of  Tem,  Shu,  Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut, 
Osiris,  Isis,  Nephthys,  Hathor,  and  Horus,  the  last  named  taking 
the  place  of  Set  or  Suti ;  and  in  Chapter  cxl.  Hathor,  with  Tera, 
Utchatet,    "vi.  j  '^^  ^  ^^  ^  J)^  ,    Shu,    Seb,    Osiris,    Suti,    Horus, 


HATHOR   OF   THE   DEAD  437 

Menth,  <^=i  ]  i     Bah,    11 a  f  ^  Z^  i) ,  Ra-er-neheh,  9  1  <==" 

§®§,    Thoth,    Naau-tchetta  (?)     ^(j^^?     Nut,    Isis, 

Nephthys,  Neklit,  ^g^,  Mert,  (?)  ^^^p^,  Maat,  Anep,  and 
Ta-mes-tchetta,  "^^  |t|  0  ^^5  are  said  to  be  "  the  soul  and  body  of 
Ea."  In  Chapter  cli.A  Nephthys  addresses  the  deceased  and  says, 
"  Ra  hearkeneth  unto  thy  cry ;  thou,  0  daughter  of  Hathor,  art 
"  made  to  triumph,  thy  head  shall  never  be  taken  away  from  thee, 
"  and  thou  shalt  be  made  to  rise  up  in  peace."  It  was  Hathor  in 
the  form  of  a  cow  who  received  the  dead  when  they  entered  the 
Underworld,  she  gave  them  new  life,  and  celestial  food  wherewith 
to  maintain  it,  and  in  the  Roman  period  the  personality  of  the 
deceased  is  merged  in  that  of  the  goddess  in  the  funeral  texts,  just  as 
during  the  dynastic  period  it  was  merged  in  that  of  Osiris.  Finally, 
it  is  said  in  a  passage  quoted  from  a  papyrus  by  M.  Maspero^ 
which  prescribes  the  placing  of  the  "  swathing  of  Hathor  "  on  the 
face  of  the  deceased,  "She  (i.e.,  Hathor)  shall  make  thy  face 
"  perfect  among  the  gods,  she  shall  make  thy  thighs  large  among 
"  the  goddesses,  she  shall  open  thine  eye  so  that  thou  shalt  see 
"  each  day,  she  shall  enlarge  thy  place  in  Amentet,  she  shall  make 
"  thy  voice  to  prevail  over  thy  adversaries ;  and  she  shall  make 
"  thy  legs  to  walk  with  ease  in  the  Underworld  in  her  name  of 
"  Hathor,  lady  of  Amentet." 

In  an  interesting  text  in  the  Ptolemaic  temple  at  Der  al- 
Medina,-  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Nile  opposite  Thebes,  we  find  that 
Hathor  is  called  Nubt,  [J^,  i.e.,  the  "Golden  One,"  and  that  she 
is  addressed  as  the  "  queen  of  the  gods,"  and  her  adorer  says, 
"  thou  standest  high  in  the  south  as  the  lady  of  Teka  (Eileithyias- 
"  polls),  and  thou  illuminest  the  west  as  lady  of  Sais.  Thou 
"  appearest  and  thou  art  commemorated  in  festivals  as  Hathor, 
"  the  great  lady,  the  beloved  of  Ra  in  [thy]  seven  forms."  Thoth, 
we  are  told,  comes  to  look  upon  her  face,  and  he  praises  her 
according  to  her  desire,   and  she  is  built  up  by  his  words.     As 

1  Memoire  sur  quelques  Pcqnjrus  du  Louvre,  Paris,  1875,  p.  104. 

2  The  Egyptian  name  of  the  place  was   ^^^    ^  '^^-^vaa  ^37    I  © ,  Kheft-hra- 
en-neb-s,  and  the  Greek  Pasemis ;  Brugsch,  Diet.  Geog.,  p.  574. 


438  NEKHEBET 

Nebt-hetepet  she  is  glorious  in  heaven,  and  mighty  upon  earth, 
and  queen  of  the  Underworld.  As  the  goddess  Temt  she  is  the  lady 
of  the  "  two  lands,"  and  of  the  red  covering,  and  she  shines  in  the 
cities  of  Buto  and  Bubastis.  It  is  evident  from  the  above  that  as 
the  goddess  of  the  Underworld  Hathor  was  identified  with  the  four 
great  and  ancient  goddesses,  Nekhebet  of  Nekhebet  (Eileithyias- 
polis),  Uatchet  of  Per-Uatchet,  Bast  of  Bubastis,  and  Nit  (Neith) 
of  Sai's,  i.e.,  with  the  four  typical  goddesses  of  the  four  quarters  of 
the  world  and  of  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  it  is  also  quite 
evident  that  this  identification  is  the  product  of  a  late  period, 
when  the  earliest  attributes  of  Uatchet  and  Nekhebet,  etc.,  were 
forgotten.  It  is,  however,  convenient  to  consider  these  goddesses 
under  the  head  of  Hathor,  and  they  will,  therefore,  be  described 
here,  not  because  the  writer  regards  the  Ptolemaic  identification 
as  the  correct  one,  but  because  there  is  something  to  be  said  for  it. 

Nekhebet,  1  Jp^    \N ,  the  goddess  of  the  South. 

From  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  which  belong  to  the 
archaic  period  we  find  that  the  kings  of  Egypt  were  in  the  habit 
of  placing  before  their  names  the  sign  ]^£ ,  by  which  they  intended 

to  indicate  their  sovereignty  over  the  South  and  the  North ;  it  is 
uncertain  how  these  signs  are  to  be  read,  but  there  is  no  doubt 
whatsoever  about  their  meaning.  The  vulture  is  the  symbol  of 
the  goddess  of  the  South,  and  the  uraeus  is  the  symbol  of  the 
goddess  of  the  North,  and  down  to  very  late  dynastic  times  the 
kings  of  Egypt  gloried  in  declaring  that  they  were  sovereigns  of 
the  country  by  virtue  of  the  favour  of  the  goddesses  whose  emblems 
were  the  vulture  and  uraeus.  It  is  tolerably  certain  that  in 
predynastic  times  the  vulture  was  worshipped  generally  throughout 
Upper  Egypt,  and  that  a  particular  form  of  the  serpent  Avas 
venerated  in  the  Delta ;  the  centre  of  the  worship  of  the  vulture 

was  in  the  city  called  Nekhebet,  4-0  \\  ^,  or,  c=^:=  a  ^  |  -j*  ®  J  ' 
which  was  named  Eileithyiaspolis  by  the  Greeks,  and  ''  Civitas 
Lucinae  "  by  the  Latins,  and  formed  the  capital  of  the  third  nome 
of  Upper  Egypt,  and  the  centre  of  the  worship  of  the  serpent  was 


NEKHEBET  489 

Per-Uatchet,  """"  I  ^  © ?  *^6  Bovto<;  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Buto 
of  the  Latins,  and  the  capital  of  the  seventh  nome  of  Lower  Egypt. 
Nekhebet  was  declared  to  be  the  daughter  of  Ka,   ^^^ ,  and  also 


the  "  divine  wife  of  Khent  Amenti,"  |  ^  /wsaaa  ^  ^ ,  The  shrine 
of  the  goddess  was  Nekhent,       ^ ,  or,  aaa/^v    or,     ^     _    ,  and  its 

site  is  represented  by  the  modern  Arab  village  of  El-Kab  ;  in  late 
times  Nekhebet  lost  all  its  political  importance,  and   the  neigh- 

1      AAAAAA  H 

bouring  towns  of  Ani,  n  hh  © ,  and  Senit,  ^^^^^  © ,  came  into 
prominence  in  its  place. ^  Nekhen,  also  written,  j'^^^?  i.e.,  the 
"  White  Nekhen,"  was  the  town  which  contained  the  sanctuary  of 
the   "venerable   (or,   holy)   vulture,"  (]   yj^    pi^  ^    '  ^^^  *^® 

vulture  goddess  Nekhebet  in  the  land  of  the  South  is  distinctly,  in 
later  texts,  identified  with  Hathor.^ 

Nekhebet  is  usually  represented  in  the  form  of  a  woman  who 
wears  on  her  head  the  vulture  head-dress  surmounted  by  the  white 

crown,  Q ,  the  sign  of  sovereignty  over  Upper  Egypt,  to  which  are 
attached  two  plumes ;  sometimes  she  holds  in  one  hand  the  sceptre, 
I,  and  sometimes  j,  and  in  the  other  we  see  the  symbol  of  "life," 

■¥-.     Occasionally  the  sceptre  is  formed  of  a  long-stemmed  flower, 

which  seems  to  be  a  water-lily,  with  a  serpent  twined  round  it ; 
this  serpent  is  none  other  than  the  winged  serpent,  with  the  crown 
of  the  South  upon  its  head,  which  is  as  symbolic  of  the  goddess  as 
the  vulture.  Nekhebet  is  also  represented  in  the  form  of  a  woman 
with  the  head  of  a  vulture,  and  in  a  picture  of  her  reproduced  by 
Signer  Lanzone'^  she  stands  upon  madt  ^c:=],  and  holds  a  bow  and 
an  arrow  in  her  left  hand.  In  the  form  of  a  uraeus  Nekhebet  took 
her  place,  with  her  twin  sister  Uatchet,  upon  the  brow  of  Ra,  and 
both  goddesses  devoted  themselves  to  destroying  the  enemies  of 
the  god ;   this  idea  is  alluded  to  in  the  winged  disks  which  are  seen 

1  Brugscli,  Bid.  Geog.,  p.  352  &. 
3  Op.  cit.,  pi.  848. 


440  NEKHEBET 

sculptured  over  the  doors  of  temples  in  Egypt,  for  on  each  side  is 
a  serpent,  that  on  the  right,  or  south  side,  being  Nekhebet,  and 
that  on  the  left,  or  north  side,  being  Uatchet.  Nekhebet  was, 
astronomically,  the  western  or  right  eye  of  the  sun  during  his 
journey  in  the  Underworld,  and  Uatchet  was  his  eastern  or  left 
eye.  As  a  nature  power  Nekhebet  was  a  form  of  the  jDrimeval 
abyss  which  brought  forth  the  light,^  and  she  is  therefore  called  the 
"  father  of  fathers,  the  mother  of  mothers,  who  hath  existed  from 
"  the  beginning,  and  is  the  creatrix  of  the  world."  In  the  bas- 
reliefs  in  Egyptian  temples  she  is  usually  represented  with  her 
twin  sister  Uatchet,  and  also  in  coronation  scenes,  for  it  was  most 
important  for  a  king  to  be  crowned  with  the  double  crown,  W^, 
by  these  deities. 

According  to  Brugsch,  special  rooms  or  chambers  were  set 
apart  in  the  temples  of  Egypt,  near  the  sanctuaries  of  the  gods 
wherein  Uatchet  and  Nekhebet  were  supposed  to  abide ;  the 
chamber   of  the  former  was   on  the  west,   or  right   side   of  the 


sanctuary,  and  was  called  j;er  nesert  ~'*~^|lj  or  "house  of 

fire,"  and  that  of  the  latter  was  on  the  east,  or  left  side  of  the 

sanctuary,   and  was   called  j^er  ur,   or    "great   house,"  ^^=*, 

And  it  is  very  probable  that  at  the  time  of  the  coronation  of  a 
king  priestesses  dressed  themselves  in  the  character  of  the  two 
goddesses,  and  that  the  one  declared  the  South  had  been  given  to 
him  whilst  the  other  asserted  the  same  concerning  the  North.     In 


coloured  pictures  of  Nekhebet  Fakit,  S  iJll     ,  we  find  that  she 

is  painted  of  a  light  yellow,  or  almost  white  colour,  which  is 
probably  intended  to  represent  the  colour  of  the  desert  regions  of 
the  South,  and  of  the  white  light  of  the  newly  risen  sun  or  moon. 
From  one  aspect  she  was  identified  with  Isis,  the  fertile  nature 
goddess,  just  as  Uatchet  was  identified  with  Nephthys,  who  was 
supposed  to  act  the  part  of  nurse  to  the  ofi'spring  whom  Isis 
brought  forth ;  in  other  words,  Nekhebet  was  the  mother  of  the 
Sun-god,  and  therefore  also  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  his  son,  and 
Uatchet   was   his   nurse.     A    passage   in  the  text   of  Mer-en-Ra 

1  Brugscli.  Religion,  p.  324. 


UATCHET  441 

(line  762)  seems  to  connect  Nekhebet  with  Annu,  for  we  read, 
"  Thou  protectest  Mer-en-Ra,  0  Nekhebet,  thou  hast  protected 
"  Mer-en-Ra,  0  Nekhebet,  in  the  House  of  the  Prince  in  Annu ; 
"  thou  hast  committed  him  to  Am-hent-f,  and  Am-hent-f  hath 
"  committed  him  to  Am-sepa-f  ;"  ^  if  this  be  so  it  is  probable  that 
Nekhebet  was  identified  with  one  or  other  of  the  local  goddesses 
lusaaset  or  Nebt-hetep.  In  an  interesting  text  published  by 
M.  Maspero^  an  allusion  is  made  to  the  natron  of  the  city  of 
Nekheb,  which  was  apparently  much  used  in  embalming  the  dead, 
and  it  was  believed  that  in  consequence  the  goddess  Nekhebet  would 
watch  over  them  in  the  Underworld,  and  would  change  their  faces 
into  things  of  beauty  Avith  two  brilliant  eyes  of  light.  To  make 
certain  of  this  result  the  "  bandage  of  Nekheb  "  was  laid  upon  the 
forehead  of  every  carefully  prepared  mummy. 

UaTCHET,  '^^  ^^  "^S^y    "^^^    GODDESS    OF    THE    NOETH. 

Uatchet,   or  Uatchit,   as  we  have  already  said  above,  is  a 
goddess  who  was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a  serpent,  and  the 

oldest  seat  of  her  cult  was  at  Per-uatchet,  I  Pn  ^ '  ^^®  Bovto? 

of  the  Greeks,  a  city  which  was  situated  in  the  ''land  of  Uatchet," 

'  ,^  i.e.,  in  the  seventh  nome  of  Lower  Egypt, 


^hl 


or    Nefer-Ament,     ''^f .      The    temple    in   which   Uatchet   was 


venerated  and  its  precincts  are  known  in  texts  of  all  periods  by 
the  name  Pe-Tep,  S^^,  and  from  the  frequent  mention  of  this 
double  name  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  it  is  clear  that  the  shrine  was 
both  very  famous  and  very  old.     Uatchet  was  identified  with  Isis 


l\-l\^^iiZ:\ 


2  The    ^devorrjs   of    Ptolemy,    and   the    Ptenetu   of    Pliny;     see   de   Rouge, 
Geographic,  p.  41. 

3  Memoire  siir  quelques  Pcqyyriis,  pp.  50,  83. 


442  UATCHET 

at  a  very  early  period,  and  there  is  abundant  proof  that  Horus,  the 
son  of  Isis,  was  worshipped  with  Isis  at  Per-Uatchet ;  we  are,  then, 
driven  to  the  conckision  that  Pe-Tep  was  a  city  with  two  distinct 
divisions,  in  one  of  which  Uatchet-lsis  was  worshipped,  and  in  the 
other  Horus,  and  that  Horus  dwelt  in  Pe,  and  Uatchet-lsis  in  Tep. 
Among  the  variants  of  the  name  worthy  of  mention  are  Pi-Tchepet, 

D  M  °^  2'  andPi-Tep,  D  (1(1  ^     .^     In  late  dynastic  times  Uatchet 

was  called  Ap-taui,  i.e.,  ^'  opener  of  lands,"  \/  ^^  ^ ,  but  the  exact 

meaning  of  this  title  is  not  quite  certain.     Near  the  city  of  the 

goddess    was    situated    the    Island    of    Khebit,    ©  J  \^  Z ,    or 

^J^JS'^^'^Jl^  \^  ^r  ^^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  rightly  identified 
with  the  island  called  Xe/A/xt?^  and  Xe/xpe?  -  by  classical  writers,  and 
round  about  which  were  the  papyrus  swamps  T^^^  h  c^  |  J , 
Na-ateh,  the  Natho  of  the  Greeks,  which  play  such  a  prominent 
part  in  the  legends  of  Isis  and  Horus.  According  to  these,  Isis 
retreated  to  the  papyrus  swamps  after  she  had  conceived  her  child, 
and  she  remained  hidden  in  them  until  her  months  were  fulfilled, 
when  she  brought  forth  Horus,  who  afterwards  became  the 
"  avenger  of  his  father ; "  Set  never  succeeded  in  finding  her 
hiding  place,  because  the  great  goddess  had  found  some  means 
whereby  she  caused  the  papyrus  and  other  plants  to  screen  her 
from  his  view,  and  the  goddess  Uatchet  visited  her  and  helped  her 
in  her  retreat. 

In  pictures  and  reliefs  the  goddess  is  represented  in  the  form 
of  a  woman  who  wears  upon  her  head  the  crown  of  the  North,  %/ , 
and  she  holds  in  one  hand  the  papyrus  sceptre,  round  which 
is  sometimes  twined  a  long  snake ;  in  some  examples  she  is  seen 
bearing  in  her  right  hand  the  crown  of  the  North,  ^  ,  which  she 
is  about  to  place  upon  the  head  of  a  king.  Occasionally  we  find 
her  in  the  form  of  a  large  winged  serpent  ^  with  the  croAvn  of  the 
North  upon  her  head  ;  her  titles  are  "  Uatchet,  lady  of  heaven ;  " 
"  Uatchet,  lady  of  Pe,  mistress  of  Tep,  the  august  one,  the  mighty 

1  Bmgsch,  Diet.  Gcoy.,  p.  215.  2  JUd^  p.  553. 

•^  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  58  f. 


UATCHET  443 

one ; "  "  Uatchet,  lady  of  heaven,  mistress  of  all  the  gods ; " 
"  Uatchet,  lady  of  Nebiui,  -a.-  J  (]()  ^  wflf]©,  lady  of  Neter- 
"ta,     I  ^"^,  lady  of  Per-Menat,  ^^?  ^^^  l^^y  ^^  Amemt, 

"~^  © ."     Besides  her  shrines  in  these  last  named  cities 


i 


one  built  in  her  honour  seems  to  have  existed  in  Sept,  ^^.     The 

<=>© 
views  held  about  the  goddess  in  connexion  with  the  dead  are  well 

illustrated  by  certain  allusions  made  to  her  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead. 

In  the  xviith  Chapter  she  is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  a  god 

called  Rehuj  i   y^  't^  '  ^^^  ^^^®  ^^  definitely  identified  with  Isis 

who  is  said  to  have  protected  her  son  Horus  by  shaking  her  hair  out 
over  him,  although  Uatchet  appears  in  the  form  of  a  serpent  twined 
round  the  stalk  of  a  papyrus  plant  and  is  called  the  "  eye  of  Ra." 
In  the  xliind  Chapter  the  shoulder  of  the  deceased  is  said  to 
be  the  shoulder  of  Uatchet;  in  the  Ixvith  Chapter  the  deceased 
says,  "  I  have  knoAvledge.  I  was  conceived  by  Sekhet,  and  the 
"  goddess  Nit  (Neith)  gave  me  birth.  I  am  Horus,  and  I  have 
"  come  forth  from  the  Eye  of  Horus  (i.e.,  Ra).  I  am  Uatchet  who 
"  came  forth  from  Horus.  I  am  Horus,  and  I  fly  up  and  perch 
"  myself  upon  the  forehead  of  Ra  in  the  bows  of  his  boat  which  is 
"  in  heaven."     In  Chapter  cxxxvi.A  the    deceased   is  said  to  be 

the  "  lord  of  Maat  (^_n  "-  \),  which  the  goddess  Uatchet  worketh  ;  " 
in  Chapter  cxxxvi.B  he  says,  ''I  am  the  spiritual  body  (sdh 
"  58')  ^^  ^^®  ^^^^  ^^  Maat  which  is  made  by  the  goddess 
"  Uatchet ;  "  and  in  Chapter  clxxix.  he  says,  "  The  Enemy  hath 
"  come  to  an  end  beneath  me  in  the  presence  of  the  Assessors, 
•'  and  I  eat  him  in  the  great  field  on  the  altar  of  Uatchet ; " 
finally,  in  Chapter  clxxii.  (1.  19)  certain  bones  in  the  head  of 
the  deceased  are  identified  with  those  of  the  Uatchti  goddesses, 
i.e.,  Nekhebet  and  Uatchet.  During  the  ceremonies  connected 
with  embalming,  the  operator  or  priest  addressed  the  mummy, 
saying,  "  The  goddess  Uatchet  cometh  unto  thee  in  the  form  of  the 

"  living  Uraeus   (<=>  ^  Pn  ,  Ardt),  to  anoint  thy  head  with  their 
1  Their  =  Uatcliet  and  Nekhebet. 


444  BAST 

"  flames.  She  riseth  up  on  the  left  side  of  thy  head,  and  she 
"  shineth  from  the  right  side  of  thy  temples  without  speech  ;  they 
"  rise  up  on  thy  head  during  each  and  every  hour  of  the  day,  even 
"  as  they  do  for  their  father  Ra,  and  through  them  the  terror 
"  which  thou  inspirest  in  the  holy  spirits  is  increased,  and  because 
"  Uatchet  and  Nekhebet  rise  up  on  thy  head,  and  because  thy  brow 
''  becometh  the  portion  of  thy  head  whereon  they  establish  them- 
"  selves,  even  as  they  do  upon  the  broAv  of  Ra,  and  because  they 
"  never  leave  thee,  awe  of  thee  striketh  into  the  souls  which  are 
"  made  perfect,"  ^ 

In  the  Boole  of  the  Bead  Uatchet  generally  plays  the  part  of 
destroyer  of  the  foes  of  the  deceased,  but  her  connexion  with 
Maat  shows  that  she  was  identified  with  some  one  of  the  female 
counterparts  of  Thoth.     In  a  calendar  published  by  Brugsch^  we 

see  that  under  the  name  of  Apt,   (1     ,  or,  (1    ^    ^^S7 ,  Uatchet  was 

regarded  as  the  goddess  of  the  eleventh  month  of  the  Egyptian 
year  (Epiphi). 


Bast,  ^     j4,  the  Lady  of  the  East. 

Bast  was  the  goddess  jMr  excellence  of  the  eastern  part  of  the 
Delta,  and  the  centre  of  her  worship  was  at  Per-Bast,  or  Pa-Bast, 

or,  J  ^^,  J  ^ ,    or   Bubastis,   the   capital   of   the 


1     "  o 
Am-khent,    -^__ ,  the  seventh  nome  (Bubastites)  of  Lower  Egypt ; 

this  city  is  often  referred  to  by  classical  writers  (Herodotus  ii. 
137,  156;  Diodorus  16,  51;  Strabo  xvii. ;  Pliny  v.  9),  and  is 
mentioned  in  the  Bible  under  the  name  Pibeseth,  riDTS  (Ezekiel 
XXX.  17).  The  site  is  marked  by  the  ruins  at  Tell-Basta  which 
were  carefully  excavated  by  M.  Naville,  who  made  some  interesting 
discoveries  concerning  the  great  antiquity  of  the  city  of  Bubastis, 
and  who  published  the  inscriptions  which  are  still  to  be  found 
upon  the  ruins  of  the  great  buildings  which  once  stood  there."^ 

1  Maspero,  Memoire  sur  qiielques  Papyrus,  p.  82. 

2  Astronomische  und  Astrologisclie  Inschriften,  p.  473,  No.  11. 

^  See  Bubastis,  Eighth  and  Tenth  Memoirs  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund, 
1891  and  1892. 


BAST  445 

In  the  version  of  Manetho  according  to  Julius  Africanus  (Cory's 
Ancient  Fragments,  p.  98),  it  is  said  that  in  the  reign  of  Boethus, 
the  first  king  of  the  Ilnd  Dynasty,  a  chasm  opened  at  Bubastis, 
and  that  many  persons  perished,  but  M.  Naville  found  no  historical 
remains  so  old  as  this  period  on  the  site ;  he  has,  however, 
discovered  on  blocks  of  stone  there  the  names  of  Khufu  and  Khaf- 
Ra,  kings  of  the  IVth  Dynasty,  written  in  such  a  way  as  to  prove 
that  the  inscriptions  were  cut  during  the  period  of  the  Early 
Empire.  Of  the  kings  of  the  Vlth  Dynasty  only  the  name  of 
Pepi  I.  is  found  at  Bubastis,  and  in  connection  with  this  king  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  in  his  funeral  inscription  (line  569)  his 
heart  is  said  to  be  the  heart  of  Bestet,  i.e..  Bast,  J  P^^^^- 
This  fact  shows  that  the  worship  of  Bast  was  already  very  old  in 
Egypt,  at  all  events  in  the  Delta,  and  that  a  definite  position 
was  assigned  to  her  in  the  theological  system  of  the  priests  of 

Heliopolis.     In   the   text   of  Pepi  II.  (Sljy  (oluj?  it  is  said, 

"  0  god  of  the  double  town   (  |         )   the  double  of  Pepi  is  for  thy 

"  two  fingers  ;  Pepi  hath  swept  off  towards  the  heavens  like  a  crane, 
"  Pepi  hath  scented  out  the  heavens  like  a  hawk,  Pepi  hath  flown 
"up  to  heaven  like  the  grasshopper  of  Ra ;  Pepi  must  not  be 
"  repulsed,    0   king,    there   is   no   green   herb    for  Pepi,  0  Bast 

"  (^^=1)]^^),  and   none   hath    made    dances   for   Pepi    [who 

"  standeth]  like  a  great  man  at  the  door"  (line  869).  To  find  the 
name  of  Bast  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  is  natural  enough,  for  their 
Heliopolitan  editors  introduced  many  local,  and  even  foreign 
deities  into  the  companies  of  their  gods  ;  in  the  Theban  Recension 
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  however.  Bast  and  her  city  are  very 
rarely  mentioned,  and  her  name  is  entirely  omitted  from  the  list 
of  the  gods  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  deification  of  members 
(Chapter  xlii.). 

In  the  "  Negative  Confession"  (line  16)  of  the  cxxvth  Chapter 
we  have  the  mention  of  the  assessor  called  Thenemi,         (  ^,   flu  ZV, 

A^AAAA  Jl    UIP^      1      I 

i.e.,  he  who  goes  backwards,  who  is  said  to  come  forth  from  Bast, 
^  2,  and  an  assessor  called  Basti,  ^^  J\  (line  26),  is  said  to  come 
forth  from  the  city  of  Shetait. 


446  BAST 

The  goddess  Bast  is  usually  represented  in  the  form  of  a 
woman  with  the  head  of  a  cat,  but  she  also  has,  at  times,  the  head 
of  a  lioness  surmounted  by  a  snake ;  in  her  right  hand  she  holds 
a  sistrum,  and  in  her  left  an  aegis  Avith  the  head  of  a  cat  or 
lioness  on  the  top  of  it.  The  form  in  which  the  goddess  was 
worshijDped  in  the  earliest  times  was  that  of  a  cat,  and  her  identifi- 
cation with  a  lioness  probably  belongs  to  a  comparatively  late 
period.     From  the  inscription  we  find  that  she  was  also  identified 

with   Rat,     ^  ,  the  female  counterjDart  of  Ra,  and  with  Temt, 
s^^      I      ,  the  female  counterpart  of  Tem ;  she  is  often  called  the 


"  eye  of  Ra,"  and  the  "  eye  of  Tem,"  and  the  Shetat,       ^ 
i.e.,  the  "  Hidden  one."     According  to  one  legend  Bast  was  the 
personification   of  the   soul   of  Isis,    ^^^  jj  "^  W  ^ '    ^^^   ^^^ 

worshipped  as  such  in  Bubastis,  and  it  was  only  at  "  Bubastis  of 
the  South,"  "^   -ifl  ^ ,  i.e.,  Dendera,  that  she  was  regarded  as 

the  female  counterpart  of  Tem.  From  the  fact  that  she  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  god  Sept,  "  the  lord  of  the  East,"  it  is  tolerably 
certain  that  in  one  aspect  as  least  she  was  regarded  as  a  foreign 
goddess,  whose  attributes  and  characteristics  had  been  transferred 

to  her.  As  Temt,  ."^  T  ^,  at  Dendera,  she  was  said  to  be  the 
mother  of  the  lion-headed  god  Ari-hes,  5v7^  y  -^^  i  the  lord  of 
Aphroditopolis,  ^-f  ,  the  holy  Sekhem,  Y  '  1  D  '  ^^^^  dwelt  in 
the  temple  of  Bast  of  Dendera  ;  ^  her  husband  in  this  case  was  the 
god  An,  I  3 ,  who  was  a  form  of  Osiris. 

At  Thebes  Bast  was  identified  with  Mut,  the  lady  of  Asheru  ; 
at  Memphis  with  Mut  and  Uatchet,  at  Helioj^olis  with  lusaaset, 
and  in  Nubia  with  Sekhet  and  Menhet,  at  a  town  in  the  Delta 

called  Sekhet,  jjM  "^©j  ber  name  appears  to  have  been  Bare- 
As  t,  J  "f^'  *^~^  il  "^  Pn  -^  ^^  ^'^^  ^^'®  *^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  derivation  of 
the  name  Bast  in  Egyptian  we  must  connect  it  with  the  word  for 

1  See  Brugscli,  Diet.  Gvo<j.,  p.  208  ;  UeUcjion,  p.  332. 

2  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  226. 


BAST  447 

"fire,"  hes    J    1  fl,  and  regard  the  goddess  as  a  personification  of 

a  power  of  the  sun  which  made  itself  manifest  in  the  form  of  heat. 
That  this  view  is  correct  is  certain  from  several  passages  in 
Egyptian  texts,  wherein  both  Bast  and  Sekhet  are  described  as 
closely  connected  forms  of  a  female  personification  of  the  heat  and 
light  of  the  Sun-god,  and  wherein  they  are  made  to  act  as  the 
destroyers  both  of  the  enemies  of  the  Sun-god,  and  of  the  deceased. 
Thus  of  Sekhet  it  is  said  in  the  ''  Book  of  Overthrowing  Apep  " 
(xxvii.  15),  "The  Eye  of  Horus  falls  upon  him  cutting  and 
"  hacking  his  head  from  his  neck ;  the  goddess  Sekhet  tears  out 
"  his  intestines  and  kicks  them  on  the  fire  with  her  left  leg ;  she 
"  places  them  on  the  fire  and  burns  into  him  in  her  name  of  '  Set- 

"  usert-aa '    (     li    |   '  ^  S\  "  -  )  5  she  burns   into   him   and 

"  drives  out  his  soul  from  his  body ;  she  obtains  the  mastery  over 

"  him  in  her  name  of  '  Sekhet '   (v    ®   Jj) ;  and  she  overpowers 

"him  in  her  name  of  'Khut-nebat'  (''^^  ^^^^  ^  '^^^^^  JM'^iii' 
"  i.e.,  Eye  of  Flame)  ;  she  consumes  his  interior  and  blazes  in  it 
"  with  the  flame  of  her  mouth."  Speaking  generally,  Sekhet 
personified  the  burning,  fiery,  and  destructive  heat  of  the  sun,  and 
Bast  represented  the  milder  heat  which  at  certain  periods  of  the  day 
and  year  encouraged  the  growth  of  vegetation,  and  the  germination 
of  seeds. 

That  Sekhet  and  Bast  are  goddesses  of  fire  is  quite  clear,  for 
they  accompany  Hathor  in  her  character  of  the  "  Eye  of  Ra,"  and 
as  forms  of  the  Sun-god  they  symbolize  the  heat  of  the  late  and 
early  summer  respectively.  It  has  already  been  said  that  Bast  is 
identified  with  Mut  at  Thebes,  but  we  also  find  that  at  Thebes 
Mut-Bast  ^  is  depicted  as  Isis,  and  we  see  her  wearing  upon  her 

head  the  feathers  of  the  god   Shu,  )lf),  and  horns  with  the  sun's 

disk  between  them.  The  god  of  whom  she  is  the  female  counter- 
part is  in  this  case  Amen-Ra-Temu-Khepera-Heru-khuti,  who  is 
represented  with  the  head  of  a  hawk  wearing  the  crown  of  Shu ; 

the  ofli'spring  of  the  two  deities  is  Khensu,    ^   i  V  <i^  *     '^^^^® 
1  See  Brugsch,  Beligion  und  MytJwlogie,  p.  33-1. 


448  FESTIVALS   OF   BAST 

considerations  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  Bast  was,  at  all 
events  in  dynastic  times,  a  personification  of  the  moon,  especially 
when  we  remember  that  Khensu  was  a  lunar  god.  With  the  head 
of  a  lioness,  which  is  usually  painted  green,  she  symbolized  the 
sunlight,  but  when  she  is  given  the  head  of  a  cat  her  connexion 
with  the  moon  is  undoubted ;  Dr.  Brugsch  refers  to  Plutarch's 
remark  that  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  of  cats  become  full  and  very 
large  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon,  and  it  is  probable  that  the 
primitive  Egyptians  held  the  same  view,  and  that  as  a  result 
they  identified  the  cat-headed  goddess  Bast  with  the  moon. 
From  another  aspect  Bast  Avas  regarded  as  exercising  a  special 
influence  over  women  Avho  were  with  child,  and  she  appears  on 
several  occasions  as  one  of  the  goddesses  of  the  birth-chamber  ; 
her  son  Khensu  was  declared  "  to  make  women  fruitful,  and  make 
"  the  human  germ  to  grow  in  his  mother's  Avomb,"  and  he  was 
supposed  to  do  this  especially  in  his  character  of  the  "  moon,  the 
light-bearer." 

According  to  the  Stele  of  Canopus,  the  chief  festivals  of  the 
goddess  Bubastis  were  celebrated  in  the  months  of  April  and  May, 
and  of  one  of  these  Herodotus  (ii.  60)  furnishes  some  interesting 
information.  He  says  : — "  Such  of  this  people  as  with  entyre  and 
"  afi"ectionate  zeale  most  religiously  obserue  the  feast  at  Bubastis, 
"  behaue  and  beare  themselues  on  this  maner.  Certayne  shippes 
"  being  addressed,  wherein  infinite  numbers  of  men  and  women 
"  sayle  towards  the  city,  in  the  meane  season  whiles  they  be  in 
"  voiage  on  ye  Avater,  certaine  of  the  women  play  upon  drums  and 
"  tabers,  making  a  great  sound  and  noyse,  ye  men  on  pipes.  Such 
"  as  want  these  implements,  clap  their  hands  and  straine  their 
"  uoice  in  singing  to  ye  highest  degree.  At  Avhat  city  soeuer  they 
''  ariue,  happely  some  of  the  women  continue  their  mirth  and  dis- 
•'  port  on  ye  timbrels,  some  others  raile,  reuile,  and  scold  at  the 
"  dames  of  ye  city  beyond  measure  :  many  trauise  and  daunce 
"  minionly :  other  cast  up  their  clothes,  and  openly  discouer  and 
"  beAvray  their  shame,  doing  this  in  all  those  cittes  yt  are  neere 
'^  adioyning  to  the  riuers  side.  Being  assembled  and  gathered 
"  together  at  Bubastis,  they  honour  the  feast  day  with  principall 
"  solemnity,  making  large  offerings  to  Diana,  Avherein  is  greater 


FESTIVALS    OF   BAST  449 

"  expence  and  effusion  of  grape  wine  than  all  the  yeare  besides. 
"  To  this  place  by  the  voice  of  ye  countrey  are  wont  to  repayre 
"  7000  men  and  women,  besides  children,  and  thus  they  passe  the 
"  time    at   Bubastis."  ^     Of  the  city  of  Bubastis  itself  the  same 
writer  says  ^  (ii.  137,  138) : — "  The  noble  city  of  Bubastis  seemeth 
"to  be  very  haughty  and  highly  planted,  in  which  city  is  a  temple 
"  of  excellent  memory  dedicate  to  the  goddesse  Bubastis,  called  in 
"  our  speech  Diana,  then  the  which,  albeit  there  be  other  churches 
"  both  bigger  and  more  richly  furnished,  yet  for  the  sightly  grace 
"  and  seemelynesse   of  building,   there   is  none  comparable  unto 
"  it.     Besides,  the  very  entrance  and  way  that  leadeth  unto  the 
"  city,  the  reste  is  in  forme  of  an  Ilande,  inclosed  round  about  with 
"  two  sundry  streames  of  the  river  Nilus,  which  runne  to  either 
"  side   of  the  path  way,  and  leaning  as  it  were  a  lane  or  causey 
"  betweene  them,  without  meeting,  take  their  course  another  way. 
"  These  armes   of  .the  floud  are  each  of  them  an  hundred  foote 
"  broade,  beset  on  both  sides  the  banckes  with  fayre  braunched 
"  trees,  ouershadowing  ye  waters  with  a  coole  and  pleasant  shade. 
"  The  gate  or  entry  of  the  city  is  in  heighth  10.  paces,  hauing  in 
"  the  front  a  beautifull  image,  6.  cubites  in  measure.     The  temple 
"  it  selfe  situate  in  the  middest  of  ye  city,  is  euermore  in  sight  to 
"  those  yt  passe  to  and  fro.     For  although  ye  city  by  addition  of 
"  earth  was  arrered  and  made  higher,  yet  ye  temple  standing  as  it 
"  did  in  ye  beginning,  and  neuer  mooued,  is  in  maner  of  a  lofty 
"  and  stately  tower,  in  open  and  cleare  viewe  to  euery  parte  of  ye 
"  city.     Round    about    the   which   goeth    a   wall,    ingrauen   with 
"  figures  and  portraitures  of  sundry  beasts.     The  inner  temple  is 
"  enuironed  with  an  high  grove  of  trees,  set  and  planted  by  the 
"  hande  and  Industrie  of  men :  in  the  whiche  temj)le  is  standino-  an 
"  image.     The  length  of  the  temple  is  in  euery  way  a  furlong. 
"  From  the  entrance  of  the  temple  Eastward,  there  is  a  fayre  laro-e 
"  causey  leading  to  the  house  of  Mercury,  in  length,  three  furlongs 
"  and  four  acres  broade,  all  of  faire  stone,  and  hemmed  in  on  each 
"  side  with  a  course  of  goodly  tall  trees  planted  by  the  hands  of 
"  men,  and  thus  as  touching  the  description  of  ye  temple." 

1  B.  R.'s  Translation,  fol.  86a.  2  B.  R.'s  Translation,  fol.  108a. 

G   g 


450  NET   OR   NEITH 

According  to  Brugsch,^  the  great  triad  of  the  city  of  Bubastis 
consisted  of  Osiris,  Bast,  and  their  offspring,  who  was  called  Heru- 
hekennu,  ^^  fi  ^  c?)  ?  or  JSTefer-Tem,  or  Bast ;  their  equivalents 
in  Heliopolis  were  Tern,  lusaaset,  and  Nefer-Tem ;  in  Memphis, 
Ptah-Sekhet,  and  Nefer-Tem ;  in  Thebes,  Amen-Ra-Heru-khuti, 
and  Mut-Bast,  and  Khensu,  or  Horus,  or  Neb-aut-ab  ;  in  Aphro- 
ditopolis,  Osiris- An,  and  Bast-Temt,  and  'Ari-lies.  In  the  Bu- 
bastite  nome  were  many  temples  and  localities  in  which  the 
worship    of    Bast    was    paramount,    and    among    such    may   be 

mentioned    Bairast,     J  ^^:  <=>  J  '^  © ,   the    modern   Belbes,    and 

Netert,  hi  ^ ,  or    |    "^    © ,  where  was  preserved  a  thigh  of  Osiris, 
^  n ,  shut  up  in  a  ''  hidden  chest."  ^ 

Net,   ^  ^^,  oe    ^   ^ ,  or    ^   ^c=k,  on    ^    )<^, 

THE  Lady  of  the  West. 

Net,  or  Neith,  was  one  of  the  oldest  of  all  the  Egyptian 
goddesses,  and  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  her  worship  was  wide- 
spread even  in  predynastic  times  ;  many  attempts  have  been  made 
to  arrive  at  a  decision  about  her  earliest  attributes  by  means  of 
etymological  processes,  but  they  are  unsatisfactory  because  they  only 
illustrate  the  views  which  the  Egyptians  held  concerning  her  in  com- 
paratively late  dynastic  times,  and  several  of  them  only  explain 
the  objects  which  the  goddess  is  seen  holding  in  her  hands  in 
pictures.  The  examples  reproduced  by  Lanzone  represent  the 
goddess  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  who  wears  upon  her  head  the 
crown  of  the  North,  V  ;  she  often  holds  a  sceptre,  |,  or  T,  in  one 
hand,  and  the  symbol  of  life  in  the  other,  but  sometimes  the  hand 
which  holds  the  sceptre  also  grasps  a  bow  and  two  arrows,  which 
are  her  characteristic  symbols.  She  once  ^  appears  in  the  form  of 
a  cow  with  eighteen  stars  on  one  side,  and  a  collar  round  her  neck 
from  which  hangs  •¥■;   on  her  back  is  a  ram-headed  lion  with  horns 

and  plumes,    ^y  ,  upon  his  head.     The  cow  stands  in  a  boat,  the 

1  Religion,  p.  336.  ^  gee  de  Rouge,  Geograj)hie,  p.  122. 

3  Op.  cit.,  pi.  175  ff. 


NET    OR   NEITH  451 

prow  of  which  terminates  in  a  lion's  head  with  a  disk  upon  it,  and 
is  provided  with  wings  ;  the  stern  of  the  boat  terminates  in  a 
ram's  head,  and  by  the  fore  feet  of  the  cow,  which  is  described  as 
"Net,  the  Cow,  which  gave  birth  to  Ra,"  ^  1^^  l^f. 
is  an  utchat,  '^^ .  In  one  scene  she  is  represented  with  a  crocodile 
sucking  at  each  breast/  In  late  dynastic  times  there  is  no  doubt 
that  Net  or  Neith  was  regarded  as  nothing  but  a  form  of  Hathor, 
but  at  an  earlier  period  she  was  certainly  a  personification  of  a 
form  of  the  great,  inert,  primeval  watery  mass  out  of  which  sprang 
the  Sun-god  Ra,  and  it  is  possible,  as  Brugsch  has  suggested,  that 
the  name  Net  may  be  akin  in  meaning  to  Nut.  On  the  other 
hand,    if   we    connect   her   name  with   the   root    netet  ^   , 

"  to  knit,  to  weave,"  and  the  like,  we  may  accept  the  view  of 
those  who  describe  Net  as  the  goddess  of  weaving,  and  who 
identify  the  signs,  xix:,  and  ;czk,  which  are  often  seen  upon 
her  head,  with  a  shuttle.  It  is,  however,  quite  clear  that  the 
oldest  and  most  characteristic  symbols  of  the  goddess  were  two 
arrows  and  a  shield,  which  at  a  very  early  period  became  the 
recognized  emblems,  not  only  of  Net  herself,  but  also  of  the  city  in 
which  her  chief  temple  was  situated,  and  they  also  served  as  the 
symbols  which  formed  the  name  of  the  nome  of  which  the 
city  Sais  was  the  capital.  Now  since  Net  was  represented  by  a 
bow  and  two  arrows,  there  is  no  good  reason  for  doubting  that  she 
was  originally  either  a  goddess  of  war  or  of  the  chase,  and  it  is 
probable  that  she  was  identified  with  a  local  wood- spirit,  or 
hunting-spirit,  which  was  worshipped  in  the  east  of  the  Delta  in 
the  predynastic  period.  In  any  case  it  is  quite  certain,  when  we 
consider  the  attributes  which  are  ascribed  to  her  in  the  texts,  that 
she  represents  several  goddesses  who  were  the  conceptions  of  quite 
different  periods  of  history  and  of  stages  of  civilization.  Thus,  at 
times,  her  attributes  cannot  be  distinguished  from  those  of  Isis, 
Uatchet,  Sekhet,  Bast,  Mut,  Nekhebet,  and  other  goddesses,  and 
she  was  identified  with  one  and  all  of  them  by  turns. 

The  most  ancient  and  famous  sanctuary  of  Net  Avas  at  Sai's, 
,  8aui^  the  capital  of  the  fifth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt^ 

■^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  175,  No.  .3. 


452  ^ET    OR   NEITH 

which  bore  the  name  of   ^i— In  ff    "  Sapi-meht,"  i.e.,  "  Sapi  of  the 


North,"  and  which  was  also  called  Het  Net,      c:.  [1  ^,  i.e.,  "  House 

of  Net,"  and  "  Ast-Net,"  jj^  [j",  i.e.,  "The  seat  of  Net;" 
a  rare  name  of  the  city  quoted  by  Brugsch  ^  and  de  Rouge  ^  is 
"Sapi,"  fl()°^,  ^^^  ~^f  II-  ^^^^  *®^*^  ^^'^^^  mention  the 
"temples  of  Net,"  [j  T  1,  that  is  to  say,  the  temples  of  the  gods 
who  were  Avorshipped  with  Net  at  Sais ;  the  names  of  these 
temjDles  are : — Het-khebit,   M  \^ ,  Resenet  and  Mehenet,  ^ 


/wXvN,  Per-Ra,  ^ ,  and  Per-Tem,  ^"^   .     The  ffreat  temple  of 

Net  at  Sais  must,  of  course,  not  be  confounded  with  that  of  Sais  of 
Upper  Bgyj)t,  i.e.,  Esneh,  which  was  called  Per-Net-mut-kheper- 
hetch,         ^ctk'Vx  ^  /)  ©;  the  names  of  Esneh  are  Ani,  |  /wwva  [1(|  ©, 

H ^ 

and  Seni,  ^'^.     At  Sais  was  held  the    2:reat  annual  festival  in 

honour  of  Isis-Net,  as  recorded  by  Herodotus  (ii.  59),  and  it  is  this 
which  is  described  by  the  same  writer  (ii.  62)  in  the  following- 
words  ^ : — "  In  like  manner  meeting  (as  before)  at  the  city  Sais, 
"  there  to  accomplishe  the  rites  and  ceremonies  due  to  the  day,  at 
"  the  approche  and  neere  poynt  of  the  euening,  they  furnish  and 
"  beset  their  houses  Avith  torches  and  lampes,  which  being  re- 
"•  plenished  with  pure  oyle  mingled  with  salte,  they  giue  tire  to  the 
"  weike,  and  suffer  them  to  continue  burning  till  the  next 
"  morning,  naming  the  day  by  the  feast  of  lampes.  Such  as 
"  resort  not  to  this  feast,  do  neuerthelesse  at  their  owne  homes  giue 
"  due  honour  to  the  night,  j^lacing  in  euery  corner  of  theyr  house 
,"  an  infinite  number  of  tapers  and  candles,  the  custome  being  not 
"  only  kept  at  Sais,  but  spread  and  scattered  throughout  the 
"  whole  region.  But  for  what  ende  this  night  is  held  solemne  by 
"  lighting  of  lampes,  a  certayne  mysticall  and  religious  reason  is 
*'  yeelded  which  we  must  keepe  secret." 

After  describing  the  place  in  the  temple  of  Sais  where  Apries 

1  Did.  Grog.,  p.  1323.  -   Grographie  dc  la  Basse  l^gypie,  p.  24. 

'^  B.  R.'s  translation,  fol.  SQh. 


NET   OR   NEITH  453 

was  buried,  and  mentioning  the  "  fayre  Chamber  builte  of  stone, 
"  beauty fied  with  sundry  Pyllers  ingrauen  like  unto  Palme- trees, 
"  being  other wyse  very  sumptuously  and  royally  garnished,"  and 
the  two  "  mayne  posts  in  the  middest  of  the  chamber,  betweene 
"  the  which  standeth  a  Cophine,"  and  the  "  toumbe  in  the  same, 
"  the  name  whereof,"  he  says,  "  I  may  not  descry  without  breache 
"  of  Religion,"  Herodotus  goes  on  to  sjDeak  of  other  matters 
connected  with  Sai's,  and  says  (ii.  170) :  — "At  Sais  in  the  Temple 
"  of  Minerva,  beneath  the  Churche  and  neere  unto  the  walle  of 
"  Minerva,  in  a  base  Chappell,  are  standinge  certayne  greate 
"  brooches  of  stone,  whereto  is  adioyninge  a  lowe  place  in  manner 
"  of  a  Dungeon,  couered  over  wyth  a  stone  curiously  wroughte,  the 
"  vaute  it  selfe  being  on  euery  side  earned  with  most  exquisite 
"  arte,  in  biggnesse  matchinge  with  that  in  Delos,  which  is  called 
"  Trochoides.  Herein  euery  one  counterfayteth  the  shadowes  of 
*'  hys  owne  affections  and  phantasies  in  the  nyghte  season,  which 
"  the  Aegyptians  call  Mysteryes  ;  touchinge  whiche,  God  forbid,  I 
"  should  aduenture  to  discouer  so  much  as  they  vouchsafed  to  tell 
"  mee."  ^  The  "Mysteries"  here  referred  to  were  probably  the 
ceremonies  performed  in  connexion  with  the  annual  commemoration 
of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Osiris,  who,  according  to  an  old 
legend,  was  buried  at  Sais. 

Passing  now  to  consider  the  antiquity  of  the  cult  of  Net  at 
Sais  we  find  much  to  prove  that  the  worship  of  this  goddess  dates 
from  the  latter  part  of  the  predynastic  period.  The  earliest  form 
of  Net's  name  is  found  on  an  ivory  cover  of  a  box  and  on  an  ivory 
vase,^  where  it  occurs  in  connexion  with  hetep,  and  so  serves  as  a 

constituent  part  of  the  proper  name  Net-hetep,  v^  — ^^  •  Now, 
Net-hetep,  we  know,  was  connected  with  the  early  king  Sma,  and 
she  appears  to  have  been  the  wife  of  king  Ck^,  Aha,  who  has  been 
commonly,  but  on  insufficient  evidence,  identified  with  Mena,  the 
first  historical  king  of  Egypt.  But  whether  Aha  is  Mena  or  not 
matters  little  for  our  purpose  here,  for  it  is  quite  certain  that  both 
he  and   Sma  flourished  about  the  beginning  of  the  period  of  the 

^  B.  R.'s  translation,  fol.  1166, 

*  See  Petrie,  Boyal  Tombs,  ii.,  pp.  4-20,  and  pi.  ii. 


454  NET    OR   NEITH 

1st  Dynasty,  and  this  being  so  the  name  of  the  goddess  which 
forms  part  of  the  name  of  the  queen  Net-hetep  must  also  be  as 
old.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  even  in  the  1st  Dynasty  the  cult  of  Net 
must  have  been  of  considerable  antiquity.  During  the  first  four 
dynasties  the  goddess  possessed  sanctuaries  in  many  parts  of 
Egypt,  and  several  of  her  priests  and  priestesses  were  buried  in 
mastaba  tombs  in  and  near  Sakkara.  M.  Mallet  quotes  ^  an 
interesting  passage  from  the  sarcophagus  of  Apa-iinkh  in  which 
she  is  addressed  together  with  Anunu,  (1^0  E©^?  and  Nesert, 
— *^  ^  L.  5  who  are  two  very  ancient  goddesses,  and  in  which  it  is 

declared  that  she  came  forth  from  the  god,  and  that  the  god  came 
forth  from  her.-  We  thus  see  that  in  the  IVth  Dynasty  she  was 
thought  to  be  at  once  the  mother  and  the  daughter  of  the  Sun-god 
Ra,  and  that  she  had  more  than  one  form,  and  possessed  also  the 
power  to  conceive  and  bring  forth  the  new  Sun-god  daily  by 
means  of  the  divine  and  magical  formulae  with  which  she  was 
provided.  Among  her  early  titles  is  that  of  Apt-uat,  i.e.,  "  Opener 
of  the  ways,"  \/ £535^  £55,  which  seems  to  suggest  that  she 
was  in  some  way  a  female  counterpart  of  Anubis. 

In  the  text  of  Unas  (line  67)  we  find  the  "  temples  of  Net," 

,    mentioned,  side  by  side  with  the  city  of  Tep,       ^ ,  and 

the  name  of  the  goddess  is  coupled  with  that  of  Tatet,  D  ^^      > 

who  was  supposed  to  dress  the  dead ;  thus  the  passage  clearly 
proves  that  Net  was  believed  to  perform  some  important  ceremonies 
in  connexion  with  the  preservation  of  the  dead,  and  it  would 
seem  that  these  were  of  a  magical  character.  We  may  note  in 
passing  that  in  the  late  "  Ritual  of  Embalmment,"  published  by 
M.  Maspero,^  it  is  directed  that  a  piece  of  linen,  upon  which  were 
drawn  or  painted  figures  of  Hapi  and  Isis,  be  placed  in  the  hand 
of  the  deceased,  and  that  Isis  is  identified  with  Neith.     This  piece 

1  Le  Cult  de  Neit  a  Sais,  Paris,  1888,  p.  104. 


3  Compare  also  ^^;  ^^^^   ^   ffl  ]  ffl    .     £ 
*  Memoire  snv  qvelqiies  Papyrus  du  Louvre,  p.  90. 


NET   OR   NEITH  455 

of  linen  was  intended  to  serve  as  an  amulet,  and  to  bring  to  the 
mummy  the  protection  of  Net,  who  is  referred  to  under  the  name 
of  Isis.  In  the  text  of  Unas  (line  597)  we  have  the  following 
address : — "  Homage  to  thee,  0  Horus,  in  the  regions  of  Horus  ; 
"homage  to  thee,  0  Set,  in  the  regions  of  Set;  homage  to  thee, 
''  0    Aarer  Ih  "^  ^^^^)    i^    Sekhet-Aarer ;  ^    homage   to   thee,    0 

"  Netetthaab  Q^  l  ^  '^) '  *^°^^  ^^^  ^^  *^®^®  ^^^^'  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^®  ^^ 
"  the  Great  Temple,  wherefrom  the  voice  of  Unas  goeth  not  out. 
''Take  off  your  apparel  in  order  that  Unas  may  see  you  as 
"Horus  seeth  Isis,  and  that  Unas  may  see  you  as  Nehebu-kau 
"  (/wwNA  I  1J\  J%4y5))  ^®®*^  Selqet;  and  that  Unas  may 
"  see  you  as  Sebek  seeth  Net,  and  that  Unas  may  see  you  as  Set 
"seeth  Netetthaab."  A  little  further  on  (lines  620-627)  we  have 
another  reference  to  Net  and  her  son  Sebek  in  these  words,  "  Unas 

(ffh  ^  ^ 

a  °^  ZZ  "^  S  II  []  '^  )  ?  ^^cl  this  Unas  is  Sebek  with  the  green 
"feather  (■jTl'^lB)?  ^^^^^  watcheth  and  who  raiseth  up  his 
"  forehead,  and  who  is  the  white  one  who  cometh  forth  from  the 

"  thigh[s]  of  Khebset-urt  (^  J  "T"  ^) '  ^'^^  ^^  ^"^  *^®  ^^^^** 
"  Unas  hath  come  to  his  pools  which  are  on  the  banks  of  the  canal 
"(%  Z;5  11  Z^^  ofMeht-urt  ("^  ^  ^)  ,  at  the  place  where 
"  offerings  flourish,  and  in  the  fields  which  are  in  the  horizon,  and 
"  he  hath  made  to  flourish  his  garden  on  the  banks  of  the  horizon. 
"  Unas  hath  brought  the  crystal  {^=^  |  ^  ffif )  to  the  Great 
"  Eye  which  is  in  the  field.  Unas  hath  taken  his  place  in  the 
"  horizon,  he  riseth  like  Sebek,  the  son  of  Net  (^  ^  ^j  ,  ^^ 
"  eateth  with  his  mouth,  he  voideth  water,"  etc.  In  the  text 
of  Teta    (line    204)    Net   is   mentioned   in   connection   with   Isis, 

Nephthys,  and  Serqet-Hetu,  |  Y  RT  ^P  ^^  i  ^  ^  ^ 


as  one  of  the  four  goddesses  who  shot  forth  flame,  |i^^  U^' 


_2^ 


456  NET   OR   NEITH 

and  worked   "protection,"  °m«-,  on  behalf  of  the  god  Nu,  ^^, 
when  he  was  seated  on  his  throne. 

These  same  four  goddesses  also  appear  in  connection  with  the 
Four  Children  of  Horus,  whom  they  assisted  in  protecting  by 
magical  means  the  various  parts  of  human  bodies  which  were 
placed  in  "  Canopic  jars."  Thus  Isis  says,  "  I  conquer  the  foe,  I 
"make  protection  for  Amseth  who  is  in  me";  Nephthys  says, 
"  I  hide  the  hidden  thing,  and  I  make  protection  for  Hapi  who  is 
"  in  me"  ;  Net  says,  "  I  pass  the  morning  and  I  pass  the  night  of 
"each  day  in  making  protection  for  Tuamutef  who  is  in  me"; 
Serqet  says,  "  I  employ  each  day  in  making  protection  for  Qebh- 
"  sennuf  who  is  in  me."  ^  The  Egyptian  word  used  here  to 
express  the  meaning  of  "  protection  "  is  sa,  <=mi°,  and  the  character 
represents  a  knot  of  a  peculiar  kind  ;  the  part  which  knots  and 
cords  tied  in  various  ways  have  always  played  in  magical 
ceremonies  is  too  well  known  to  need  description,  and  it  need 
only  be  pointed  out  here  that  the  sign  "^m^  indicates  that  the 
protection  which  Net  exercised  on  behalf  of  the  dead  must  have 
been  of  a  magical  character.  This  view  is  supported  by  a  passage 
in  the  text  of  Unas  (1.  271  fF.)  in  which  we  find  Net  mentioned  in 

connection   with    the    goddesses    Ana,     l\     []     ^  ,    Ilrt,    <cz=>  ^ , 

Nesert,    — -^  ^  ^,    and    Urt-hekau,     <==>  §  4,    y;    now    Urt- 

hekau  is  distinctly  said  to  be  the  "protective  power  of  the  Eye  of 
Horus,"  and  thus  the  attributes  of  Net  and  of  the  other  goddesses 
must  be  of  a  kindred  nature.  In  the  text  of  PeiDi  I.  (1.  572),  in 
the  passage  relating  to  the  deification  of  the  members  of  the 
deceased  it  is  said  that  the  thighs  of  Pepi  are  "  Net  and  Serqet," 

n   «  ^ ;  but  in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the 

Dead  (Chapter  xlii.  11),  it  is  the  fore-arms  of  the  deceased  which 
are  identified  with  the  fore-arms  of  the  lady  of  Sai's,  i.e.,  Net.  In 
the  Theban  Recension  the  deceased  declares  (Ixvi.  2)  that  he  was 
conceived  by  the  goddess  Sekhet,  and  that  the  goddess  Net  gave 
birth  to  him.  In  Chapter  Ixxi.  15,  we  read,  "  Behold,  the  god  of 
"  One  Face  is  with  me.     The  god  Sebek  hath  stood  up  within  his 

^  For  the  texts  see  my  Miiiiimy,  p.  199  ff. 


NET    OR   NEITH  457 

"  ground,  and  the  goddess  Net  hath,  stood  up  within  her  planta- 
"tion";  and  elsewhere  (cxiv.  5;  cxvi.  2)  we  read  that  she 
shineth  in  the  city  of  Matchat,  or  Mentchat.  In  Chapter  cxvi.  4, 
the  deceased  says,  "  0  ye  gods  who  dwell  in  Khemennu,  ye  know 
me  even  as  I  know  the  goddess  Net "  ;  and  in  Chapter  cxlv.  81, 
he  says,  "  I  have  entered  into  the  house  of  Astes,  and  I  have  made 
"  supplication  to  the  Khati  gods  and  to  Sekhet  in  the  Temple  of 
"  Net."  In  the  Rubric  to  Chapter  clxiii.,  which  has  for  its  vignette 
a  serpent  on  legs,  and  two  utcUats  on  legs,  it  is  ordered  that  in  the 
pupil  of  one  iitchat  there  shall  be  drawn  a  figure  of  the  "  god  of  the 
lifted  hand  "  with  the  face  of  Net,  and  having  plumes  and  a  back 
like  unto  a  hawk.  From  one  aspect  at  least  it  is  clear  that  Net  must 
have  been  a  form  of  the  power  of  the  Eye  of  Horus,  as  well  as  of 
Isis,  his  mother  ;  her  son  Sebek  is  a  local  form  of  Horus,  and  it  is 
probable  that  the  two  crocodiles,  which  are  seen  accompanying  her, 
and  which  have  been  already  mentioned,  are  in  some  \YSij  connected 

with  the  god  Henti,  "^^^r^/l,  whose  symbols  are  two  crocodiles. 

Henti,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  was  a  form  of  Osiris.  It  is, 
however,  possible  that  one  of  the  crocodiles  may  represent  Horus, 

or  Osiris,  and  the  other  Hetch-nefer-Sebeq,  6*  I  O  J  ^  ,  the  son  of 
Net.  '^^ 

We  have,  unfortunately,  no  description  of  the  ceremonies 
connected  with  the  worship  of  Net,  but  there  is  good  reason  for 
believing  that  they  were  of  a  mystic  character,  and  that  they  were 
modified  from  time  to  time  in  accordance  with  the  chan2:e  of  beliefs 
of  the  priests  in  respect  of  the  attributes  of  the  goddess.  Origin- 
ally its  chief  characteristics  must  have  been  those  of  a  local  Delta 
or  Libyan  goddess  of  nature,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  included 
ceremonies  which  were  intended  to  represent  the  various  processes 
of  generation  and  reproduction.  This  view  is  supported  by  several 
of  the  titles  which  are  given  in  Egyptian  texts  to  her  and  to  her 
kindred  goddesses.     Thus  as  Isis  she  was  the  first  to  give  birth  to  a 

god,   T^T^T  ]   iJl  "^ ;  ^   as  Hathor  she  was  the  "  great  cow  which 

gave  birth  to  Ra  ;  "  and  she  is  called  ^'  the  great  goddess,  the  mother 

1  See  Mallet,  Le  Cidte  de  Nelt,  p.  140. 


458  NET  OR   NEITH 

"  of  all  the  gods,"  and  "  Rat  (i.e.,  the  female  Sun),  the  lady  of 
"  heaven,  the  mistress  of  all  the  gods,  who  came  into  being  in  the 
"  beginning."     In  a  text  quoted  by  M.  Mallet  she  is  actually  called 

"  One,"  Pp. ,  a  fact  which  proves  that  at  a  certain  period  of  her 

history  she  was  to  goddesses  what  Ra  Avas  to  gods.  A  certain 
amount  of  light  is  thrown  upon  the  history  of  Net  by  the  inscrip- 
tion ^  on  the  famous  shrine-bearing  statue  of  Utchat-Heru  now 
preserved  in  the  Vatican,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  this 
monument  is  not  older  than  the  early  part  of  the  Persian  period. 
Utchat-Heru  was  an  official  of  very  high  rank  in  Sai's,  and  he  was 
high-priest  of  Net,  and  as  such  bore  the  official  title  of  Ur-sun, 

"^^    -^  ,  i.e.,  "  great  one  of  knowledge."     He  was  commander  of 

the  vessels  of  Aahmes  11.  (Amasis),  and  when  Cambyses  came  to 
Egypt  and  visited  Sai's  after  his  conquest  of  the  country,  it  was 
Utchat-Heru  who  received  him,  and  explained  to  him  the  antiquity 
and  greatness  of  the  goddess  Net,  and  conducted  him  through  the 
various  sanctuaries  which  were  grouped  together  in  her  temple. 
In  the  course  of  his  conversation  with  the  king  he  told  him  that  it 
was  Net,  the  mighty  mother,  who  had  given  birth  to  Ra,  and  that 
she  was  the  first  to  give  birth  to  anything,  and  that  she  had  done 
so  when  nothing  else  had  been  born,  and  that  she  had  never  her- 
self been  born.  For  some  reason  or  other  Utchat-Heru  found 
favour  in  the  sight  of  Cambyses,  and  the  text  tells  us  that  the 
king  made  offerings  "  even  as  every  other  good  king  had  done." 
The  funds  provided  by  Cambyses  were  spent  by  Utchat-Heru  in 
reviving  the  schools  which  had  fallen  into  decay,  and  in  refounding 
colleges  for  the  priests  of  Sai's.  The  fame  and  traditions  of  the 
antiquity  of  Net  and  her  worship  were  current  among  the  late 
Greek  writers,  and  it  will  be  remembered  that  Plutarch  {De  hide 
et  Osir.,  ix.)  refers  to  an  inscription  on  a  statue  of  Pallas  which  he 
renders,  "  I  am  everything  which  hath  been,  and  which  is,  and 
"  which  shall  be,  and  there  hath  never  been  any  who  hath  un- 
"  covered  (or  revealed)  my  veil."  -     Elsewhere   (Chapter  Ixii.)  he 

^  See  Revillout  in  Revue  jSgyptologiqne,  torn,  i.,  p.  72  ff. 

Eyw    ei'/xt   TTtti^  TO   ycyovo?,   Kal    ov,   Kal   iaofxevov,  Kol   toi/   ifJLOv  Tri-rrXov   ouSet's   ttoj 
aTrf.Ka\v\p(.v. 


NET   OR   NEITH 


459 


says  that  the  Egyptians  often  called  Isis  by  the  name  Athene, 
which  signifies,  "  I  have  come  from  myself."  ^ 

Up  to  the  present  no  hieroglyphic  inscription  has  been  found 
which  can  be  regarded  exactly  as  the  original  of  the  Greek  words, 
but  there  is  no  doubt  that  Plutarch  only  turned  into  words  the 
opinions  about  the  goddess  Net  which  were  current  when  he  wrote 
his  famous  treatise  on  Isis  and  Osiris.  In  a  |)assage  of  Proclus, 
who  gives  a  Greek  rendering  of  an  Egyptian  text  in  terms  closely 
resembling  those  of  Plutarch,  after  the  words  Tov  iy^ov  ^trwi^a  ovSets 
arreKoXyxpev,  the  goddess  Net  is  made  to  say,  ov  eyw  Kapirov  ereKou, 
17X105  iyevETo,  which  beyond  all  doubt  reflects  with  considerable 
exactitude  the  meaning  of  the  Egyptian  title  of  "  Net,  the  mighty 
mother,"who  gave  birth  to  Ra."  ^  The  words  put  into  the  mouth  of 
the  goddess,  "  I  am  what  has  been,  what  is,  and  what  shall  be," 
are,   as  M.  Mallet  has  remarked,^  only  a  development  of  a  play 

A^AAAA  /VV\AA^ 

upon  her  name  Net  and  the  word  ent  ,  or  entet  ,  i.e.,  a 

person  or  thing  which  is,  or  which  exists,  or  which  has  being. 
In  other  words,  the  Egyptians  regarded  Net  as  the  "  Being  "  j;a7^ 
excellence,  i.e.,  the  Being  who  was  eternal  and  infinite,  and  was 
the  creative  and  ruling  power  of  heaven,  earth,  and  the  under- 
world, and  of  every  creature  and  thing  in  them.  Plutarch,  how- 
ever, was  not  without  authority  when  he  made  Net  say,  koL  tov 
i/xov  Tre-rrXov  ovSet?  ttco  a7TeKaXv\\fev,  for  in  an  Egyptian  text  published 
by  Pierret^  under  the  title    of  "lady  of  the    sycamore   house," 

the  goddess  Net  is  addressed   in   the   following 


m 


iznn' 


words 


a 


milt 


X 


KiP 


Hail,      mother 


tir        an  sefekh  mesu-s 

great,     not     hath  been  uncovered       thy  birth 


^   r]X6ov  (xtt'  ijxavT^<;. 

4: 


Net  urt  mut  mes  Rd, 


3  Op.  cit.,  p.  191. 

*  Etudes  lEgyptologiques,  etc.,  Paris,  1873,  p.  45  ff. 


460 


NET    OR   NEITH 


1 


o 


d        netert       dat 
Hail,  goddess  great, 


v7  A^A^/> 

em  Iclien  en 
within 


-k 


ISIIl  ^ 
=?=  X 


@ 


Tuaut 


shetat  sejp  sen 

the  underworld  which  is  doubly 
hidden. 


n     ^i    i^f 


w 


X 


diet  reJih-s 
thou  unknown  one  ! 


a 
Hail, 

/I 


netrdi 
thou  divine  one 


url 
great. 


not 


sefehh-tu  qerds-s 

hath  been  unloosed     thy  garment 


0 


sefehh 
unloose 


senhu-s 
thy  garment. 


(^ 


^  J^ 


a-  i?a^i  dn      ertd-tu        uat-d       en  dq 

Hail,   Hapt  (Hidden  one),     not     is  given     my  way     of    entrance 


J\ 


D 


jol  e^^ip 


er-es      mddt  shept  ha        en       Asdr  Jchui-s 

to  her,    come,      receive  thou  the  soul   of      Osiris,        protect  it 

em  Ichen  en  ddid 

within         [thy]  two  hands. 

These  lines  form  a  prayer  Avhich  is  put  into  the  mouth  of 
Ankh-f-en-Khensu,  and,  in  the  form  in  which  we  have  it  here,  is 
not  older  than  the  Saite  period,  i.e.,  about  B.C.  550 ;  but  the 
petition  refers  very  distinctly  to  the  mysterious  character  of  the 
births  of  Net,  and  to  her  attribute  of  inscrutability  in  the  doubly 
hidden  underworld,  and  whilst  the  deceased  declares  that  none  has 
ever  penetrated  the  cloak  wherewith  she  is  shrouded,  he  beseeches 
her  to  unloose  it  for  him.     Two  words  are  used  to  express  "  cloak," 


NET    OR   NEITH  461 

i.e.,  qerds  and  senhu,  ^_^  (jig  and  Jl^  I  "^  ?^'  ^  ^^^*  whicli  calls 
to  mind  the  two  words  TreVXo?  and  -x^ltcov  which  are  used  by 
Plutarch  and  Proclus  respectively  to  express  the  same  word.  It 
is,  however,  quite  certain  that  the  ideas  and  beliefs  expressed  in 
the  above  prayer  are  far  older  than  the  time  of  the  Psammetici, 
and  in  one  form  or  other  they  may  be  actually  traced  back  to  the 
period  of  the  Early  Empire. 

Another  proof  of  the  mysterious  and  remarkable  powers 
which  were  attributed  to  Net  by  Greek  writers  is  given  by 
HorapoUo,  who  in  his  "  Hieroglyphica  "  (i.  12)  says  that  when  the 
Egyptians  wish  to  depict  a  figure  of  Hephaistos  they  draw  a  scarab 
and  a  vulture,  and  when  they  want  to  represent  Athene  (i.e.,  Net) 
they  draw  a  vulture  and  a  scarab,  for  they  believe  that  the  world 
is  composed  of  two  elements,  the  one  male  and  the  other  female, 
these  two  being  the  only  gods  whom  they  believe  to  be  both  male 
and  female.^  We  have  already  seen  that  the  god  Khepera  was 
supposed  to  possess  the  jDowers  of  begetting  and  conceiving,  and 
giving  birth,  and,  in  fact,  to  be  at  once  both  male  and  female, 
"  and  other  forms  of  the  Sun-god  were  said  to  be  self-begotten, 
self-produced,  and  self-born ; "  these  characteristics  are,  however, 
not  applied  to  any  goddess  except  Net.  Since  the  Egyptians 
declared  that  she  was  eternal,  and  was  self-produced,  it  followed  as  a 
matter  of  course  that  both  a  masculine  and  a  feminine  nature  must  be 
attributed  to  her.  We  have  already  described  how  Khepera  pro- 
duced his  son  Shu  and  his  daughter  Tefnut,  the  information  on  these 
points  being  derived  from  ancient  Egyptian  writings,  but  details  of 
the  birth  of  Ra  by  Net  have  not  come  down  to  us,  and  as  far  as 
can  be  seen  the  Egyptian  conception  of  the  manner  in  which  this 
goddess  exerted  her  reproductive  powers  is  of  a  far  loftier  character 
than  that  which  appertained  to  the  creation  of  Shu  and  Tefnut  by 
Khepera.  It  is  customary  to  say  that  the  Egyptians  possessed 
no  philosophical  conceptions  until  the  arrival  of  the  Greeks  in 
their  country,  but  this  view  is  a  mistaken  one,  for  there  is  much 
evidence  extant  which  proves  that  already  under  the  Early  Empire 
Egyptian  philosophers  were  constantly  engaged  in  thinking  out  the 

^   ovTOL  yap  fiovoL  6ewv  Trap'  atirots,  dptrevo^TjAeis  VTr6.p-)^ov(Ti  (ed.  Leemans,  p.  19). 


462  NET   OR   NEITH 

problems  which  are  connected  with  cosmogony  and  theogony. 
The  reason  why  they  did  not  advance  as  a  nation  further  in 
such  matters  is  that  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  hampered  by 
traditional  opinions  and  beliefs,  and  by  the  rituals  and  ceremonies 
which  the  people  in  general  demanded  should  be  integral  portions 
of  the  public  worship  of  the  gods.  The  statements  of  Greek 
writers,  taken  together  with  the  evidence  derived  from  the  hiero- 
glyphic texts,  prove  that  in  very  early  times  Net  was  the  personi- 
fication of  the  eternal  female  principle  of  life  which  was  self- 
sustaining  and  self-existent,  and  was  secret,  and  unknown,  and 
all-pervading ;  the  more  material  thinkers,  whilst  admitting  that 
she  brought  forth  her  son  Ra  without  the  aid  of  a  husband,  were 
unable  to  divorce  from  their  minds  the  idea  that  a  male  germ  was 
necessary  for  his  production,  and  finding  it  impossible  to  derive  it 
from  a  power  or  being  external  to  the  goddess,  assumed  that  she 
herself  provided  not  only  the  substance  which  was  to  form  the 
body  of  Ra  but  also  the  male  germ  which  fecundated  it.  Thus  Net 
was  the  prototype  of  partheno-genesis. 

When,  however,  as  Horapollo  says,  the  Egyptians  represented 
Net  by  a  vulture  they  referred  to  her  in  her  character  of  the 
universal  mother,  and  as  such  many  allusions  are  made  to  her  in 
the  texts.  Certain  passages,  it  is  true,  speak  of  her  having  set  her 
arrow  to  her  bow,^  and  of  her  enemies  falling  daily  under  her 
darts,  but  usually  she  is  said  to  provide  clothing  for  the  dead,  just 
as  the  house-mother  arrays  her  dead  in  linen.  Thus  in  the  form  of 
Mehenit,  ^^  I]  U  ^  Pn  '  ^^^^  brought  linen  apparel  and  coverings  of 
white,  green,  red,  and  purple  linen  to  deck  the  face  of  the 
deceased,  and  an  ancient  legend  declared  that  she  arrayed  Osiris 
in  the  apparel  which  had  been  specially  woven  for  him  by  the  two 
Rekhti  goddesses,  '^,^,  i.e.,  Isis  and  Nephthys.  And  because  of 
the  part  which  she  had  taken  in  arraying  Osiris  in  his  grave- 
clothes    Net    was    made    to    preside     over    the    "good    house," 

I  ?  i-e.,  the  chamber  in  which  the  dead  were  embalmed 
and  swathed  in  linen,  and  over  the  chambers  of  the  temples  in 
which  the  unguents  which  were  employed  in  public  worship  were 

'  See  Brugscli,  Beligion,  p.  340. 


NET   OR   NEITH  463 

compounded.  The  unguents  which  she  mixed  for  Osiris  proved  to 
be  the  means  by  which  the  body  of  the  god  was  preserved  from 
destruction  and  made  young  again,  and  happy  were  the  dead  who 
were  able  to  secure  the  ministrations  of  Net.  We  must  note  in 
connexion  with  these  facts  that  many  of  the  attributes  of  Net  as  a 
goddess  of  the  dead  were  assigned  to  her  because  of  her  association 
with  Osiris,  and  it  is  clear  from  the  texts  of  the  late  dynastic 
period  that  Net  was  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  mother  of  Osiris, 
and  Sai's  was  actually  called  the  city  of  Osiris.  At  certain  seasons 
of  the  year,  festivals  were  celebrated  there  in  commemoration  of 
the  embalming,  and  bandaging,  and  burial  of  this  god,  and  the 
great  feast  of  lamps,  which  is  also  referred  to  by  Herodotus,  was 
one  of  the  most  important.  Another  very  important  festival  was 
that  kept  in  the  spring,  on  the  birthday  of  Osiris,  the  son  of  Isis- 
Net,  which  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch  identified  with  the  birthday  of  the 
spring  sun.^ 

In  Upper  Egypt  Net  was  chiefly  worshipped  at  Seni  (Esneh), 
the  Latopolis  of  the  Greeks,  which  is  called  in  the  texts,  "the 
house  of  Net  in  the  land  of  the  south."     Here  she  was  identified 


with  Nebuut,  jv,    Menhit,   Sekhet,   and    Tefnut,    and   was 

represented  with  the  head  of  a  lioness  painted  green ;  and  her 
titles  were,  ''  Father  of  fathers,  and  Mother  of  mothers,"  and 
"  Net-Menhit,  the  great  lady,  lady  of  the  south,  the  great  cow 
"  who  gave  birth  to  the  sun,  who  made  the  germ  of  gods  and 
"  men,  the  mother  of  Ra,  who  raised  up  Tem  in  primeval  time, 
"  who  existed  when  nothing  else  had  being,  and  who  created  that 
"  which  exists  after  she  had  come  into  being."  The  people  of 
Seni  (Latopolis)  assigned  to  her  as  husband  the  ram-headed  god 
Khnemu,  Pj  ^^^  (^  5| ,  the  lord  of  the  First  Cataract,  and  she  be- 
came therefore  "lady  of  Abu"  (Elephantine),  and  the  mother  of 
Tutu,  a  form  of  the  god  Shu,  whose  symbol  was  a  lion  walking. 
Tutu,  ^ ^  Jj ,Ms  also  known  by  the  names  Hee-ka,  "^U  'Sl,^  and 

1  Religion  unci  Mythologie,  p.  347. 

r 

(3         d 


3  Variants,  ^^^^5^,  or      ^        ^     5^. 


3  Or,  "^    LI    D     ^    Her-Jca-p-khart. 


464  NET   OR   NEITH 

Hetch-nefer-sebeq,  d  1  P  J  /^  ?  ^^^  ^^-  ^^  depicted  in  the  form 
of  a  young  man  ^  wearing  on  his  head  the  crown  of  the  North,  and 
the  Atef  crown  with  uraei  and  disks  ;  the  forefinger  of  his  right 
hand  is  raised  to  his  mouth,  which  suggests  that  he  had  something 
in  common  with  the  Harpocrates  gods.  According  to  Dr.  Brugsch 
he  is  the  personification  of  the  sun  when  he  enters  the  zodiacal 
sio:n  of  Leo,  and  the  same  scholar  would  connect  the  lion-headed 
rain- spouts  of  the  temples  of  Dendera,  Khensu  at  Thebes,  Edfu, 
and  Philae,  with  the  summer  sun.^  In  the  texts  which  describe 
these  spouts  they  are  called  "  Lion,"  the  "  Strong  one  of  strength," 
"  mighty  of  strength,"  "  possessor  of  two-fold  strength,"  "  the 
mighty  one  of  roarings,"  "fiery-face,"  and  "lion  of  the  face  which 
enchanteth  (or  terrifieth)."  A  form  of  Tutu,  the  son  of  Net  and 
Khnemu,  called  Ar-hes-nefer,  (j  *S*  ^^  J  ^ ,  often  appears  in 
inscriptions  wherein  he  is  described  as  a  "  god  of  the  south,"  and 
he  must  be  identified  with  the  crocodile-headed  god  who  appears 
in  the  temple  at  Esneh  under  the  names  Sebek-Ra.  and  Hes- 
nefer-Sebek,  the  son  of  Net. 

From  certain  passages  in  the  texts  quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch  ^  it 
is  clear  that  Amen-Rri,  the  "  king  of  the  gods,"  was  the  son  of  Net, 
and  in  the  hymn  which  Darius  IL  caused  to  be  inscribed  on  the 
walls  of  the  temple  of  Hebt,  in  the  Great  Oasis,  it  is  said  that  the 

ra 


Cow,  ^^  '"^  ^r^i'  ^•^•'  -^®*'  rejoiceth  in  the  "Bull  of  his  mother." 
Here  the  Sun-srod  is  described  as  the  husband  who  maketh  fertile 
with   his    seed,*  and   he    is  said  to  come   to    the   town    of   Sapi, 

J^  ^  ^^ ,  i.e.,  Sais.  The  hymn  continues,^  "  Thine  image  reposeth 
"  in  Het-khebit,  in  the  nest  of  the  lady  of  Sai's.  Thy  mother  Net 
"uniteth  herself  unto  thee  (11^  ^)  i^  ^l^®  f^i'i^^  ^^  ^"j  ^^d  with 
"  thy  body  arrayed  in  the  veil  [which  she  hath  Avoven]  thy  body 
"  dwelleth  in  the  temples  Resenet  and  Mehenet.     Thy  raiment  is 

1  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  407,  No.  3. 

2  Religion,  p.  349.  ""  Ihul,  p.  353. 

5  See  Brug-sch,  Beise  nacli  der  grossen  Oaae,  pi.  xxvi.,  1.  28  f. 


NET   OR   NEITH  465 

"  upon  the  hands  of  the  two  crocodile  gods,"  1^1'  ^=^  "^ 


I  I  I   I   I 


The  crocodile  gods  here  mentioned  are,  of  course,  the  two  crocodiles 
which  are  seen  one  on  each  side  of  the  goddess  in  certain  pictures 
of  her.  Finally,  we  find  that  in  Thebes  Net,  as  the  mother  and 
wife  of  Amen-Ra,  was  known  under  the  form  and  name  of  the 
ancient  goddess  Ament.  She  is  represented  as  a  young  woman 
who  wears  upon  her  head  the  crown  of  the  North,  and  holds  in 
each  hand  the  emblem  of  water,  '^^v^^^;  as  such  she  is  called  "Ament, 
the  dweller  in  Apt,  Nini,"  (|  =s  ^  ^  ^  n  63  —  — .  Under  the 
name  of  Ament-Ra,  (j  a^  ^  ^  gj^g  jg  ^qq^  suckling  Horus,  and  she 
also  appears  as  a  ram-headed  goddess  wearing  the  Atef  crown.^ 
All  the  attributes  of  Net  were  ascribed  to  Ament,  who  was  origin- 
ally the  female  counterpart  of  the  local  god  Amen,  and  of  necessity 
a  deity  of  little  importance.  Thus  Ament  is  styled,  "  the  Cow,  the 
"  great  lady,  who  fashioned  the  company  of  the  gods,  the  mother 
"  of  Ra,  who  gave  birth  to  Horus."  It  is  very  difficult  to 
harmonize  all  the  various  statements  which  are  made  in  the  texts 
concerning  the  attributes  of  Net,  and  the  above  paragraphs  on  this 
goddess  will  illustrate  the  difficulty.  They  prove,  however,  that 
the  opinions  which  the  Egyptians  held  concerning  her  varied  from 
time  to  time,  and  that  contradictions  in  their  statements  are  due 
not  so  much  to  inconsistency  or  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  priests 
and  copyists,  as  to  the  attempt  made  to  harmonize  every  new 
religious  system  of  belief  with  every  one  which  had  existed 
before  it. 

^  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  25. 


H   h 


(     466     ) 


CHAPTER   XV 
THE   HORUS   GODS 

IT  has  already  been  stated  that  the  hawk  was  probably  the  first 
living  creature  which  was  worshipped  generally  throughout 
Egypt,  and  that  as  the  spirit  of  the  heights  of  heaven,  and  as  the 
personification  of  the  god  who  made  the  sky  he  was  called  Heru, 

X    '^   ^^,  i.e.,  "he  who  is  above,"  or,  "that  which  is  above." 

It  appears,  however,  that  at  a  very  early  period  this  conception  of 
Heru  was  partly  lost  sight  of,  and  whether  as  a  result  of  the 
different  views  held  by  certain  early  schools  of  thought,  or  whether 
due  to  the  similarity  in  sound  between  the  name  "  Heru"  and  the 
word  for  "  face,"  Her  or  Hra,  the  idea  which  became  associated 
with  the  god  Heru  was  that  he  represented  the  Face  of  heaven, 
i.e.,  the  Face  of  the  head  of  an  otherwise  unknown  and  invisible 
god.  We  can  see  that  this  view  was  an  ancient  one  even  in  the  time 
when  the  Pyramids  were  built,  for  several  allusions  are  made  in 
the  funeral  texts  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties  to  the  "  hair  "  or 

"tresses,"   ft    vl  ^:z::^(l(l     CCl.  ,  of  the  Face  of  Heru  as  the  Face  of 

heaven,  and  four  gods  who  are  called  the  "  children  of  Horus," 

jtj  n  (1  ci  ^^ ,    are  declared  to  have  their  abodes  in   these  tresses.^ 

The  Face  of  heaven  was  supported  by  the  four  gods  by  means  of 
the  four  sceptres  which  they  held  in  their  hands,  and  these  four 

sceptres  took  the  place  of  the  four  pillars,  1 1 1  K  of  the  god  Shu 
which,  according  to  an  older  myth,  supported  the  four  corners,  i.e., 
the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  great  iron  plate  that  formed  the  floor 

1  Pepi  I.,  11.  593,  600 ;  and  see  Maspero,  La  Mylhologic  J^gyptienne,  p.  227. 
3  The  "  Children  of  Horus"  will  be  described  later. 


HORUS   THE   ELDER  467 

of  heaven  and  the  sky  above  the  earth.  That  the  heavens,  or  the 
skies,  were  considered  to  be  a  Face  is  evident  from  many  allusions. 
Thus  the  Sun  is  frequently  called  "  Eye  of  Horus,"  and  the  Moon 
is  also  an  "  Eye  of  Horus,"  the  Sun  being  the  right  eye,  and  the 
Moon  the  left ;  a  well  known  title  of  the  Face  is  "  Horus  of  the 


Two  Eyes,"  '^^  Jj,  and  when  neither  Eye  is  visible  it  is  called 
"Horus     dwelling    without     Eyes,       ^v  o/|  fffl)  ^^"^  <j(- 

The  forms  of  Horus  mentioned  in  Egyptian  texts  are  numerous, 
but  the  following  are  the  most  important : — 

1.  Heru-ue,  ^k^^wl?  i-®-?  Horus  the  elder"  (or  the 
"  aged  "),  the  'ApayrjpL^  of  the  Greeks,  so  called  to  distinguish  him 
from  Heru-pa-khart,  or,  "  Horus  the  younger."  He  is  depicted  in 
the  form  of  a  man  with  the  head  of  a  hawk,  and  also  as  a  lion  with 
the  head  of  a  hawk ;  he  usually  wears  the  crowns  of  the  South  and 
l^orth  united,  but  he  is  once  seen  with  the  horns  of  Khnemu 
upon  his  head,  and  above  them  are  a  crown  with  plumes,  uraei, 
disks,  etc.^  According  to  the  Egyptian  texts  Heru-ur  was  the 
son  of  Ra  and  Hathor ;  the  Hathor  here  referred  to  is  the  form  of 

the  goddess  which  was  specially  worshipped  at  Qesqeset,    '^  ^  ^ , 

i.e.,  Apollinopolis  Parva ;  but  Plutarch  declared  him  to  be  the 
son  of  Kronos  and  Rhea,  i.e.,  Seb  and  Nut,  and  therefore  the 
brother  of  Osiris.  This  statement  was  probably  correct  enough  in 
late  dynastic  times,  when  men  had  wholly  identified  Horus,  the 
son  of  Isis,  with  Horus  the  Elder.  Originally  Heru-ur  represented 
a  phase  or  aspect  of  Horus,  the  Face  of  heaven,  and  it  was  he  who 
was  the  twin  god  of  Set ;  Heru-ur  was  the  Face  by  day  and  Set 
the  Face  by  night.  There  was  also  a  Heru-ur  of  the  South,  as  we 
learn  from  the  picture  of  the  god  given  by  Lanzone,^  the  seat  of 

whose  worship  was  at  Makhenut,  -^V  ^  ^^ ,  near  El-Kab  in  Upper 

Egypt,  and  a  Heru-ur  of  the  North,  the  seat  of  whose  worship  was  at 

Sekhemet,     ^    Ix   "^°'"©,   or  -='°^^,  or  Seshemet,  i=3^     ^,  the 

Latopolis  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  OYtxjG  jui  of  the  Copts,  which  lay  a 

1  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  226.  ^  Ihid.,  No.  3. 


468  HORUS   THE    ELDER 

few  miles  to  the  north  of  Memphis  ;  other  shrines  of  Heru-ur  were 
at  Ombos,  A)  ^ ,  at  Smennut,    1         ^  ^  5  ^^^  ^t  Apollinopolis. 


AA/\AAA    (2 

The  most  important  shrine  of  the  god  was  at  Sekhem,  where  stood 
the  sanctuary  Pa- Ait,  s  90  4  4    ^  '  ^^  ^^^  shrine  was  preserved 

the  shoulder,  mdhhaq,  ^^  ^ ,  of  the  god  Osiris,  and  close  by 

JC\     A  AAAAAA      A 

I  (I ,  and    Shent,  5         ffi  5    trees. 

Heru-ur  of  Sekhem  is  called  "  lord  of  the  Utchati,  ^^,"  i.e.,  lord 
of  the  Sun  and  Moon.  In  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (xviii.c)  it  is  said 
that  the  sovereign  princes  in  Sekhem  are  Heru-khent-an-maati 
and  Thoth,  but  it  is  clear  that  locally  the  great  gods  of  the  city 
were  Isis,  Osiris,  and  Horus.  The  form  in  which  Heru-ur  was 
worshipped  at  Sekhem  and  other  places  was  a  lion.  The  inscrip- 
tions on  the  Avails  of  the  temple  at  Ombos  ^  prove  that  he  was  called 
the  "  lord  of  the  south,"  the  "  lord  of  Nubti  (Ombos),"  and  that 
he  was  identified  with  Shu,  son  of  Ra ;  with  "  Heru-tema,  the 
"  great  god  and  lord  of  heaven,  of  two-fold  strength,  mighty  one 
"  among  all  the  gods,  whose  power  hath  vanquished  the  foes  of  his 
"  father  Ra  " ;  with  Amen-ur,  or  Amen  the  Elder ;  and  in  fact  with 
several  gods  who  were  regarded  as  gods  of  light  and  of  aspects  of 
the  rising  Sun,  and  also  with  the  various  gods  who  were  connected 
with  them.  At  Ombos  Heru-ur  was  the  head  of  a  triad  which 
consisted  of  himself,  and  his  female  counterpart,  Ta-sent-nefert, 

^  ^^  1  ^  J  c^  v) '  ^^^  their  son  P-neb-taui,  D  ^^3:7     ""    ^,3  Avho  is 

sometimes  called   "the   child,"  Q  ^.     The  third  member  of  this 

triad  wears  a  disk  upon  his  head,  and  has  a  lock  of  hair  at  the  side 
of  his  face  like  Harpocrates,  and  he  is  called  the  "  young  sun," 
and  the  general  titles  which  are  given  to  Heru-ur  and  Ta-sent- 
nefert  indicate  that  in  later  days  they  were  considered  to  be 
identical  with  Shu  and  Tefnut. 

2.  Heru-p-kiiart,  ^'t  °    i"^^  #),  i.e.,  "Horus  the  Youno-er" 

(or,  the  "  Child "),  the  'Ap7T0KpdTr]<;  of  the  Greeks,   so    called  to 

1  Brugsch,  Eeligion,  p.  539.  2  gge  de  Morgan,  Kom  Ombos,  pp.  156,  181  ff. 


HORUS   THE   YOUNGER  469 

distinguish  him  from  Heru-ur,  or  Horus  the  Elder.  In  Egyptian 
pictures  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a  youth  wearing  a  lock 
of  hair,  the  symbol  of  youth,  on  the  right  side  of  his  head ;  some- 
times he  wears  the  triple  crown  with  feathers  and  disks,  and  the 

like,  and  sometimes  a  disk  with  plumes,  i\rJS^  but  usually  his 
cro^vn  is  formed  by  the  united  crowns  of  the  South  and  North, 
xf .  In  one  scene  he  is  seated  inside  a  box  which  rests  on  the 
back  of  a  lion.^  Heru-p-khart  was  the  son  of  a  Horus  god  by  the 
goddess  Rat-tauit,  ^  ""  i^  Jj ,  who  is  said  to  have  brought  him 
forth  in  the  temple  of  Het-ennut,    J    "^    ^     x^^?  ^^  Hermonthis, 

in  a  birth  chamber,  |T|  1 ,  in  the  precincts  of  the  building 

Qemqem, © ;  the  goddess   seems  to  have  been  wor- 


shipped   here    under    the   form    of    a    hippopotamus,    <= 

Heru-p-khart,  or  Harpocrates,  was  a  form  of  the  rising  sun  and 
represented  his  earliest  rays;  the  Egyptians  distinguished  seven 
forms  or  aspects  of  the  god,  which  may  be  thus  enumerated : — 

1.  Heru-Ra-p-khart,  ^v  ^  fi^  t^e  dweller  in  Hermonthis.  2. 
Heru-Shu-p-khart  the  great,  ^^  p  (^  |  D  ^  ;  his  father  was 
Saaba,  [1  vT"  r^,  and  his  mother  Anit,  |  flu  T  rlj'  3-  Sma-taui-p- 
khart  [son]  of  Hathor,  J^^j^^VH*  ^'  ?eru-p-khart, 
the   dweller   in   Busiris,    fln^^-     5.  Ahi,  ^n,   son   of  Hathor. 

11  lA  '=^  &  Jl 

6.  Haq-p-khart,  v=^  ^  °  i^'  *^^®  ^^^  ^^  Sekhet.  7.  Heru-Hennu, 
^'  ?   "^  S  ^^  i-e.,  "Horus  the  Child."  ^ 


^  w 


o  o 


3.    HeRU-MERTI,     ^  o  r^  ^  •       ^"^     *^^^     ^°^'"^    *^®     &^^     ^^ 


represented  as  a  man  with  a  hawk's  head,  above  which  are  the 
horns  of  the  god  Khnemu  and  the  solar  disk  encircled  by  a  uraeus ; 

in'  his   hand   he   bears   the   Utchati,    ^^.     A   passage   in   a 
^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  328.  -  See  Brugsch,  Diet.  Geog.,  p.  348. 


470  HARMACHIS 

papyrus  quoted  by  Lanzone  ^  calls  him  "  Horus  of  the  Two  Eyes," 

Amseti-Aali  (^^  3  Q  M)  -,  in  the  city  of  Apu,"  i.e.,  Panopolis, 
and  this  seems  to  show  that  Heru-merti  was  a  local  form  of  the 
god  Amsu,  or  Khem,  or  Min,  as  the  Moon. 

4.  Heru-an-mut-f,  ^^  I  ^  ^,  was  a  local  form  of  Horus 
which  was  worshipped  at  Ateb,  IjjL©?  i-e.,  EdfCi,  but  the  exact 
characteristics  of  the  god  here  are  unknown. 

5.  Heru-nub.  ^^  f^ii^.     This  was  the  form  of  the  god  which 

was  worshipped  at  Hierakonpolis,  Per-Heru-nubt,  J^  ^ ,  and 

he  was  depicted  as  a  hawk  seated  on  the  head  of  an  antelope, 
which,  according  to  Brugsch,^  commemorates  his  triumphant 
victory  over  Set,  the  murderer  of  Osiris. 

6.  Heru-khenti-Khat,  ^  rJTV,    ^    .     In  this  form  the  god  is 

represented  with  a  human  body  and  the  head  of  a  crocodile,  on 
which  he  wears  the  horns  of  Khnemu,  and  the  triple  crown  and 
plumes  ;  ^  this  form  of  Horus  does  not  appear  to  be  ancient. 

7.  Heru-khenti-an-maati,  ^  fflhoo^'  ■^■^■'  "-^^^^^  ^* 
the  head  of  sightlessness,"  or  the  "  Blind  Horus ;  "  he  appears  to 
represent  the  god  when  neither  of  his  eyes  was  visible. 


8.  Heru-khuti,   ^°,  ^'^^^, >5  ^  ^, ^Ct"  i-e.. 


"  Horus  of  the  two  horizons,"  or  the  Harmachis  of  the  Greeks. 
He  was  one  of  the  chief  forms  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and,  speaking 
generally,  represented  the  sun  in  his  daily  course  across  the  skies 
from  the  time  he  left  the  Mount  of  Sunrise  (Bakhau)  to  the  time 
when  he  entered  the  Mount  of  Sunset  (Manu).  Thus  he  combined 
in  his  own  person  the  god  Ra  and  several  of  his  forms,  and  in  the 
Boole  of  the  Dead  and  other  funeral  works  he|is  joined  to  Temu, 

1  Op.  cit.  p.  617.  2  Religion,  p.  664. 

s  See  Lanzone,  p.  622,  pi.  17  ;  Brugscli,  Religion,  p.  606. 

*  For  the  passages  see  my  VocaJmlary  to  the  Chq^tert^  of  Coming  Forth  by  Datjy 
p.  225. 


HARMACHIS 


471 


Temu  here  indicates  the  god  of  the  setting  sun,  and  Khepera  the 
god  of  the  sun  when  he  is  about  to  rise.  When  Heru-khuti  was 
identified  with  the  various  forms  of  the  Sun-god  he  was  also 
supposed  to  possess  their  particular  attributes,  and  thus  it  happens 
that  he  is  said  to  have  produced  himself,  and  it  is  this  fact  which 
supplies  the  reason  why  hymns  addressed  to  him  are  found.  In 
the  texts  he  is  called  the  "  lord  of  heaven,"  "  the  great  god,  lord  of 

Sept-Hat,"  TFPff  "^7   a  city  or  district  near  the  First  Cataract, 


the   governor   of  the    Aat   of  Ra," 


u^^ 


Cv 


^    (Heliopolis), 


Thothmes  IV.  making  offerings  to  the  Sphinx. 

"  Heru-khuti-Tem,  the  lord  of  the  two  lands  of  Annu,"  and  the 
"  dweller  in  Behutet."  The  chief  shrines  of  the  god  were,  how- 
ever, situated  at  Annu  and  at  Apollinopolis,  and  the  greater  of 
these  was  Annu,  or  Heliopolis,  where  he  was  identified  with  the 
forms  of  Ra  which  were  worshipped  there.  The  largest  known 
monument  or  figure  of  Heru-khuti  is  the  famous  Sphinx,  near  the 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  which  was  his  type  and  symbol.  This 
marvellous  object  was  in  existence  in  the  days  of  Kha-f-Ra, 
or  Khephren,  the  builder  of  the  Second  Pyramid  at  Gizeh,  and  it 
is  probable  that  it  is  a  very  great  deal  older  than  his  reign,  and 


472  HERU-SIMA-TAUI 

that  it  dates  from  the  end  of  the  archaic  period.  No  mention, 
however,  is  made  of  the  Sphinx  in  the  inscriptions  until  the  time 
of  Thothmes  IV.,  when  we  are  told  in  the  text  inscribed  on  the 
stele  between  the  paws  of  the  Sphinx,  that  the  image  had  become 
entirely  covered  over  with  sand.  To  this  king  the  god  of  the 
Sphinx,  Heru-khuti-Ra-Temu-Khepera,  appeared  one  day  when 
he  was  sleeping  his  midday  sleep,  and  promised  to  give  him  the 
crown  of  Egypt  if  he  would  clear  away  the  sand  from  his  image, 
and  restore  his  temple.  Thothmes  IV.  carried  out  the  wishes  of 
the  god,  and  having  excavated  the  Sphinx,  and  rebuilt  the  temple 
between  his  paws,  Thothmes  set  up  an  inscribed  stele  to  com- 
memorate his  work.  Judging  by  the  silence  of  the  ancient 
monuments  about  the  Sphinx  this  figure  of  Heru-khuti  cannot 
have  been  popular  in  dynastic  times,  and  if  this  was  so  it  is 
possible  that  it  Avas  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Sphinx  was  thought  to 
be  connected  in  some  way  with  foreigners  or  with  a  foreign  religion 
which  dated  from  predynastic  times.  A  recent  but  fanciful  theory 
makes  the  Sphinx  to  be  the  Avork  of  Amenemhat,  a  king  of  the 
Xllth  Dynasty;  its  name  in  Egyptian  was  Hu,  fi  vi..^^.  The 
forms  in  which  Heru-khuti  is  represented  are  many,  but  whether 
in  human  form  or  not,  he  usually  has  the  head  of  a  hawk  ;  in  the 
examples  collected  by  Signor  Lanzone  ^  we  see  him  wearing  on  his 
head  the  solar  disk  encircled  with  a  uraeus  or  the  triple  crown, 
i§Mi^  or  the  atef  crown.  In  one  scene  he  is  depicted  as  a  double 
man  with  a  head  having  the  faces  of  two  hawks,  one  looking  to  the 
risfht,  and  the  other  to  the  left,  and  above  this  two-faced  head  is  an 
utchat,  ^§,;  in  another  scene  he  has  the  head  of  a  ram,  which 
identifies  him  with  Khnemu,  the  god  of  the  First  Cataract,  and  in 
another  he  is  seated  on  a  throne  Avhich  is  carried  on  poles  by  two 
snake-  and  two  beetle-headed  gods. 

9.  Heru-sma-taui,  ^^  "T  ^  ""  \  i.e.,  "  Horus,  the  uniter  of  the 
South  and  North."  He  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Hathor ;  his  chief 
places  of  worship  Avere  Aat-hehu,  i^-^^  J  |  V  ®'  ^  district  near 
Herakleopolis  Magna,  and  Ant,  [n         ,  i.e.,  Denderah,  and  the  city 


'  Op.  cit.,  pll.  229  ff. 


HORUS    OF   BEHUTET  473 

of  Khatat,  T  A  ^ ,  a-nd  the  creatures  in  which  he  was  thought  to 
be  incarnate  were  the  hawk  and  a  species  of  serpent.  He  is 
usually  depicted  with  the  body  of  a  man  with  the  head  of  a  hawk, 

or  serpent,  or  man,  and  he  wears  as  head-dresses,  ^a,  ^,  and  ^Mj-; 

in  one  scene  he  is  represented  as  a  hawk/  and  he  wears  upon  his 

head  a  disk  and  plumes,  yK  .     In  this  form  Horus  was  believed  to 

spring  into  existence  out  of  a  lotus  flower  which  blossomed  in  the 
heavenly  abyss  of  Nu  at  dawn  at  the  beginning  of  the  year. 

10.  Heru-hekennu,   ^k?  pr^v?[-     He  is  said  to  have  been 

the  son  of  the  goddess  Bast,  and  the  seats  of  his  worship  were  the 

towns  of  Netert,  T  ^__^  (  ^ ,  and   Het-Nefer-Tem ;   he  is  usually 

depicted  in  the  form  of  a  hawk-headed  man,  with  the  solar  disk 
encircled  by  a  serpent  on  his  head.  The  exact  attributes  of  the 
god  are  unknown. 

11.  Heru-Behutet,  ^^  JI^^"^^©-  This  is  one  of  the 
greatest  and  most  important  of  all  the  forms  of  Horus,  for  he 
represents  that  form  of  Heru-khuti  which  prevailed  in  the 
southern  heavens  at  midday,  and  as  such  typified  the  greatest 
power  of  the  heat  of  the  sun.  It  was  under  this  form  that  Horus 
waged  war  against  Set  or  Typhon,  and  the  inscriptions  are  full  of 
allusions  to  the  glorious  victory  which  the  god  of  light  gained  over 
the  prince  of  darkness  and  his  fiends. 

The  principal  shrines  of  the  god  were  at  Mesen,  H  V         ,  ^^^^ 

Qem-baius,    ^^g  '^^    ^  ,    Aat-ab,    i-^^  f\  ^a/^n  ^    (Philae),    and 

/  AA  \        Ks^  f      ^    /www    v£? 

Tebt,  A  jL^  (Tanis) ;  in  the  last  named  place  he  was  worshipped 

under  the  form  of  a  lion,  which  Avears  the  triple  croAvn  upon  its 
head,  and  is  depicted  in  the  act  of  trampling  upon  its  enemies. 
The  god  is,  however,  usually  depicted  with  the  head  of  a  hawk, 
and  carrying  in  his  hands  some  weapon  which  indicates  his 
character  as  a  destroyer.  Thus,  in  one  illustration  given  by 
Signor  Lanzone,^  we  see  him  holding  a  weajDon  like  a  club  or  mace 

'  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  239.  2  Qp.  cit.,  pll.  242  ff. 


474 


HORUS   OF   BEHUTET 


in  his  right  hand,  and  a  bow  and  three  arrows  in  his  left^;  in 
another  he  is  about  to  club  an  ass-headed  man  in  fetters  with  the 
club,  -G — ^ ;  in  another  we  see  him  standing  on  an  oryx  or 
antelope,  and  holding  a  long  hawk-headed  spear  in  his  right  hand, 
and  three  cords,  to  each  of  which  is  attached  a  prisoner,  ^. 
Elsewhere  we  see  him  depicted  with  the  head  of  a  lion,  which 
seems  to  have  been  the  form  in  which  he  was  worshipped  at 
Tchar,  ^^  <=>  ^ ,  or  Tanis,  in  the  Delta,  and  in  one  place  he  is 
seated  on  a  throne  which  rests  on  the  back  of  a  lion.     As  the  god 


Horus  of  Behutet  armed  with  a  bow  and  arrows  and  a  club. 

of  generation  and  reproduction  he  appears  as  a  hawk  with  a 
phallus  terminating  in  the  head  of  a  lion,  and  in  a  scene  of  the  late 
period  he  is  represented  with  the  body  of  a  man,  and  the  head  and 
wings  of  a  hawk,  kneeling  upon  two  crocodiles  ;  on  his  head  he 
wears  ^ ,  and  in  his  left  hand  he  holds  a  scorpion,  §  . 


1  He  is  here  called 


cesh=i 


2  He  is  here  called  "  smiter  of  the  rebel,"    fX] 


,-r— S> 


J 


HORUS   OF   BEHUTET 


475 


In  an  extract  from  a  text  inscribed  on  a  wall  of  the  temple  of 
Edfu  given  by  Dr.  Brugsch/  Heru-beliutet  is  described  as  the 
power  which  dispels  darkness  and  night,  and  drives  away  clouds, 
rain,  and  storms,  and  fills  all  heaven  and  the  world  with  his 
brilliance  and  light ;  he  rises  with  golden  disk  as  the  holy  beetle  of 
gold,  and  he  is  declared  to  be  the  lord  and  creator  of  the  gods. 
He  created  himself,  there  is  none  like  unto  him,  he  rencAvs  his 
birth  daily,  and  year  by  year  he  performs  his  appointed  course  in 
the  heavens,  bringing  in  his  train  the  seasons,  and  their  proper 
produce.  In  one  of  his  aspects  he  is  identified 
with  Osiris,  and  then  the  goddesses  Isis  and 
Nephthys  are  said  to  help  him  to  emerge 
from  the  abyss  of  JSTu ;  he  made  the  heavens 
to  be  the  dwelling-place  for  his  soul,  and  he 
created  the  deep  that  it  might  serve  as  a 
place  wherein  to  hide  his  body,  which  is  here 
called  Un-nefer,  -^^  T  J) .    But  the  forms 

in  which  Heru-behutet  appealed  most  strongly 
to  the  mind  of  the  Egyptians  were  those  in 
which  as  the  god  of  light  he  fought  against 
Set,  the  god  of  darkness,  and  as  the  god  of 
good  against  the  god  of  evil.  We  know 
from  a  passage  in  the  xviith  Chapter  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead  (line  66)  that  in 
very  early  times  a  combat  took  place 
between  Horus  and  Set,  wherein  the 
former  destroyed  the  virility  of  Set, 
and  the  latter  cast  filth  in  the  face  of  Horus,  and  it  is  this  form  of 
the  traditional  fio-ht  between  the  two  "  Combatants,"   or  Rehui, 

O  J.I 

^"^  I  %^  J)  Jj ,  which  is  the  base  of  the  narrative  inscribed  on  the 
walls  of  the  great  Temple  of  Edfu.  There  was,  however,  one  very 
great  difference  between  the  fight  of  Horus  and  Set  of  predynastic 
times  and  that  described  between  the  Horus  and  Set  known  at 
Edfu ;  in  the  former  fight  the  two  combatants  were  unarmed,  but 
in  the  latter  Horus  was  armed  with  weapons  of  iron,  and  he  was 


The  double  srod  Horus-Set. 


^  Religion,  p.  548. 


476  HORUS    OF   BEHUTET 

accompanied  by  a  number  of  beings  who  are  called  mes7iiu, 
m  \\  ^  ' '  ^^'  mesnitu,  nj  I  ^  m  '  '^  It  is  pretty  certain  from 
E^crreT,  the  Coptic  equivalent  of  the  word  mesneti,  that  the 
mesniu  were  workers  in  metal,  and  that  this  name  was  first  applied 
to  them  as  blacksmiths,  and  that  at  a  later  period  the  mesniu 
were  men  armed  with  weapons  made  of  metal.  The  place  where 
metal  work  was  done,   i.e.,  Avhere  the  ore  was  smelted  and  the 

weapons  were  forged,  was  called  mesnet,  ,  the  "  foundry,"  and 

the  worshippers  of  Horus  of  Behutet  never  tired  of  describing 
their  god  as  the  "lord  of  the  forge-city,"  i.e.,  Edfu,  the  place 
where  tradition  declared  he  first  established  himself  as  the  great 
master  blacksmith.  And  Edfu  itself  was  regarded  as  the  foundry 
Avherein  the  great  disk  of  the  sun  was  forged,  as  we  see  from  a 
passage  quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch,  in  which  it  is  said  "  when   the 

"  doors  of  the  foundry  are  opened  the  Disk  riseth  up,"  \/  ~ 

•^  -■•  ■•■  '       □  X  ^    iiiiiiiii 


In  support  of  this  tradition  we  find  that  a  certain  chamber  in 
the  temple  of  Edfu,  which  lay  just  behind  the  sanctuary,  was  called 

mesnet,  fn   1  and  it  was  here  that  the  "  blacksmiths  "  waited 

in  attendance  to  usher  forth  the  image  of  the  god  in  his  temple. 
From  the  representations  of  the  "  blacksmiths  "  given  on  the  walls 
of  the  temple  of  Edfu  ^  we  see  that  they  were  originally  men  with 
shaven  heads  who  wore  a  short  tunic  and  a  deep  collar,  and  that  in 
their  right  hands  they  carried  a  spear  inverted,  I ,  and  in  their  left 
a  metal  instrument,  b.  In  the  same  scene  in  which  these  occur 
Horus  of  Behutet  is  represented  standing  in  a  boat,  dressed  like 
his  followers,  and  driving  a  long  spear  into  the  head  of  a  hippo- 
potamus beneath  the  boat  with  his  right  hand,  and  holding  the 
monster  in  restraint  by  a  double  chain  Avhich  he  grasps  in  his  left 
hand.  In  the  bows  of  the  boat  kneels  Isis,  who  also  holds  the 
hippopotamus  by  a  chain  in  each  hand,  and  we  may  note  that 


^x'S^^Sf'  ^0 


1  Variants  are  mm.  „ 

nil  0  © 

2  Worterhuch,  p.  703. 

3  See  Naville,  Mythe  cVHorus,  Geneva,  1870,  pi.  7. 


HORUS    OF   BEHUTET  477 

the  tackle  of  the  boat  consists  of  chains,  presumably  of  iron,  and 
not  of  ropes.  In  another  place  ^  Horus  stands  on  the  back  of  the 
hippopotamus,  the  legs  of  which  are  tied  together  by  chains,  and 
the  lower  jaw  of  which  is  held  fast  by  a  chain.  The  story  of  the 
defeat  of  Set  by  Heru-Behutet  is  told  in  the  texts  on  the  walls  of 
the  temple  of  Edfu  substantially  as  follows : — In  the  year  363, 

(3(^^|^[^|^|||,  of  Ra-Heru-khuti,  5a  T  '^^  J,  the  king  of  the 
South  and  North  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  his  Majesty  found 
himself  in  the  country  of  Ta-kens  f  V    ■"   ,  or  Nubia),  for  he  had 

gone  to  the  district  of  Uauat,^  because  certain  folk  had  conspired 
against  their  lord.  Having  suppressed  the  rebellion  he  returned 
to  Edfu,  and  deputed  his  son  Heru-behutet  to  continue  the  war 
on  his  behalf;  this  god  had  observed  how  men  had  conspired 
against  his  father,  and  he  was  ready  to  carry  out  his  behests. 
Thereupon  Heru-behutet  flew  up  to  heaven  in  the  form  of  a 
winged  disk, ^ss?,  and  ever  after  he  was  called  "great  god,  lord  of 
heaven." 

From  the  height  of  heaven  he  was  able  to  see  his  father's 
enemies,  and  he  chased  them  in  the  form  of  a  great  winged  disk ; 
he  attacked  them  with  such  wrath  and  vigour,  that  they  lost  their 
senses  and  could  see  neither  with  their  eyes  nor  hear  with  their 

ears,  o^  .=  ^  [1  0  -^  ^  f  f  §>§>  f  P  0,  and  every  man  fell 

upon  his  neighbour  and  slew  him,  and  in  a  moment  all  were  dead. 
And  straightway  Horus,  with  many-coloured  shapes  and  feathers, 
^A  '^^  n  ^.vwvA    tCl  ,  returned   to   his  form  as  a  winged  disk  and 

took  up  his  position  in  the  boat  of  Ra.  At  this  juncture  Thoth 
declared  that  Horus,  son  of  Ba,  should  be  called  Heru-Behutet, 
and  Behutet  (Edfu)  should  be  called  the  city  of  Horus ;  and  Ra 
referred  with  pleasure  to  the  blood  which  his  son  had  shed  and 
which  he  likened  to  grapes.  Then  Horus  suggested  that  Ra 
should  come  and  look  upon  his  dead  enemies,  and  Ra,  escorted  by 

1  Naville,  op.  cit.,  pi.  9. 

3  Note  the  pun  on  the  name  Uauat,  X| -C)  ,  and  the  verb  "  to  murmur, 

conspire,"  4o  )  -L  )  ^h  . 


478  HORUS    OF   BEHUTET 

Hathor,    and   followed   by   the    goddess   Asthertet,  ^^  ^__^  ^ 
who  is  described  as  the   "mistress  of  horses,"   |  Q  ^ 


and  who  in  the  form  of  a  woman  with  the  head  of  a  lioness  is  seen 
standing  in  a  chariot,  agrees  to  his  son's  proposal.  The  chariot  of 
the  goddess  is  drawn  by  four  horses,  which  trample  upon  the  foes 
of  Ra,  who  lie  upon  the  ground  bound  with  fetters.     When  Ra 

saw  this  he  said  to  Horus,  "  This  is  a  very  pleasant  life,"  |  T"  | , 

and  therefore  the  temple  of  Horus  was  called  "  Pleasant  Life," 
from  that  day.     Then  Thoth  observed,  "  This  was  the  spearing  of 

my  foes,"  and  therefore  Edfu  was  called  Teb,  A®\\,  from  that 

day  ;  and  he  further  said  to  Horus,  "  Thou  art  a  great  protector," 

LJ      Kzi:^  I ,  and  straightway  the  boat  of  Horus  was  called  "  Great 

Protector."  After  this  Ra  proposed  that  they  should  journey 
upon  the  water,  and  his  enemies  also  Avent  to  the  water,  and  as 
soon  as  they  had  entered  it  they  turned  into  crocodiles,  emsuhu 

'^^^^^^ ,    and   hippopotamuses,       <^^  i ,   tejm,    and    when    they   were 

near  enough  to  him  they  opened  their  mouths  intending  to  swallow 
up  the  god.     Then  Horus  came    along  with  his  "blacksmiths," 

n  n  AAA^  ^  '^  '  ?  each  having  a  spear  made  of  divine  iron,    |    i)   ^-oi-  ^ 


/\AAA/V\ 


and  a  chain,  (^ ,  in  his  hand,  and  they  slew  the  crocodiles,  and 

the  hippopotamuses,  and  they  brought  in  651  ^  enemies,  M  (j  J  ^^^, 

immediately.     Ra-Heru-khuti  next  ordered  that  statues  of  himself 

should   be    set  up  in  the  land   of  the  south  in  the  place  called 

AA/wv.  r~| 

Het-ii-nekht,  ^;;^="^  "^ — a    U    ,  and  Thoth   applauded  Horus  because 

he  had  made  use  of  the  formulae  which  were  to  be  found  in  the 

Book  of  the  slaughter  of  the  Hippopotamus,  ^^^^  ^aaa^^         s^ — a  ^  <^^ ; 

from  that  day  the  blacksmiths  of  Heru-Behutet  have  existed  at 
Edfu. 

(D  (3  (3  n  n  n 

^  Naville  gives  (pi.  xiii.,  !•  8)  ^  ^  ^  p>  p,  Ij  ^^^  Brugscli  (Ahhandlungen 
Koniglichen  Gesellscliaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Gotfingen,  Bd.  xiv.,  p.  216)  and 
Wiedemann  both  give  381,  i.e.,  they  read  ^  ^      . 


HORUS   OF   BEHUTET  479 

And  Horus  once  again  took  the  form  of  a  winged  disk,  and 
placed  himself  in  the  bows  of  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  he  took  with  him 
the  two  goddesses  Nekhebet,  ^  £  J  ^  ^  and  Uatchit,  |  ^  ^ ,  in 
the  form  of  two  serpents,  that  they  might  destroy  the  crocodiles 
and  the  hippopotamuses  in  their  dens.  As  soon  as  the  enemies  of 
Ra  perceived  that  they  were  being  followed  they  turned  round  and 
fled  to  the  south,  but  they  were  overtaken  by  Horus  and  his 
blacksmiths,  each  with  his  spear  and  his  chain  in  his  hands,  and  a 
mighty  slaughter  took  place  on  a  plain  which  was  situated  to  the 

south-east  of  Thebes,  dL  ¥  V  1  ^ '  ^^^^  which  on  account  of  the 
terrible  scenes  of  carnage  that  were  enacted  there  was  called 
Tchetemet,     ^^         ,   i.e.,    "  slauojhter."      This   was   the   second 

slaughter  of  the  foes  of  Ra,  and  after  this  they  retreated  north- 
wards, to  the  region  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  they  were 
utterly  disheartened  and  in  fear  of  Horus ;  but  this  god  followed 
after  them  in  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  with  him  were  his  companions 
who  were  provided  with  spears  and  chains,  Horus  himself  was 
provided  with  a  battle  spear,  [Kx  «^^ ,  ^^^1  a  chain,  ^  ^^,  and 
blacksmiths,  ^=^f^  ^  i ,  and  when  he  had  waited  a  whole  day  he 
saw  his  foes  to  the  north-east  of  Dendera,  ^^^p  ^  fe^?  and 
having  attacked  them  he  made  a  third  great  slaughter,  T  '^^  (1  [1  ^^>^ 
JiJiai,  among  them :  the  name  of  the  place  where  the  enemy  was 
defeated  was  called  "Divine  Slaughter,"  | -^^^  1 'fe^  f^ 4  """^^ '  ^^^ 
it  was  situated  quite  close  to  Dendera.  Heru-Behutet  was  made 
the  god  of  the  region,  and  the  acacia,  ><  ^°^  A ,  and  the  sycamore, 
\\m,  were  sacred  to  him. 

Once   more  the   enemy  fled  to  the  north  and  was   pursued 
closely  by  Horus,  who  was  armed  as  before ;  for  four  whole  days 

and  nio-hts,  ^  '  ^'  ',  he  saw  nothing;  whatsoever  of  the  enemy,  for 
they  had  changed  themselves  into  crocodiles  and  hippopotamuses, 
but  when  he  did  see  them  he  attacked  them  with  great  vigour  and 
slew  them  in  large  numbers.  One  hundred  and  forty-two  of  them 
he  bound  in  chains  and  dragged  on  to  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  he 


480  HORUS    OF   BEHUTET 

captured  also  a  "male  hippopotamus,"  <Q  f=iD;  all  the  fiends  he 
slew,  and  he  gave  their  entrails  to  his  companions,  and  their  bodies 
to  the  gods  and  goddesses  who  were  in  the  boat  of  Ra  near  the 
town  of  Heben,  §  S  J-  As  a  proof  of  his  victory  he  got  up  and 
stood  upon  the  back  of  the  hippopotamus,  and  as  a  result  he  was 
called  "Her-pest,"  i.e.,  "He  who  is  on  the  back."  All  these 
things  took  place  on  the  piece  of  ground  which  formed  the  temple 
estate  of  the  town  of  Heben,  and  which  measured  342  hhet, 
^^^  (0(3(3  ^  ^  1 1 ,  on  the  South,  North,  West,  and  East.  The  enemy, 
however  was  not  wholly  defeated,  and  some  fled  to  the  north 
hoping  to  reach  the  "  Great  Green  Sea,"  '^  ^ ;  but  the  god 
Horus   followed   after   them   and   slew  many  of  the   rebels,    the 

remainder  of  whom  went  to  the  Sea  of  Mertet,  aaaaaa  ^  ^ ^rx/vy^? 

and  there  joined  themselves  to  the  fiends  of  Set,  '6-^.  After 
some  difficulty  Horus  found  out  where  the  enemies  were,  and 
having  come  up  with  them  he  captured  381  rebels,  whom  he 
slew  in  the  bows  of  the  boat  of  Ea,  and  he  sent  one  body  to  each 
of  his  companions.  When  Set  saw  what  had  been  done  to  his 
friends  he  cried  out  and  uttered  awful  imprecations  and  complaints 
of  the  terrible  destruction  which  Horus  had  wrought,  and  because 

of  his  foul  words,  |  (§.  ^  ^'^^  ^  "^ — °'  ^^.^^-^^^?^^>  t^®  ^^nd  was 
ever  after  called  Nehalia,  AA^/w^  #"  <^  4^ .  Horus  straightway 
attacked  Set,  and  hurled  his  lance  at  him,  and  threw  him  down 
upon  the  ground  in  a  place  near  the  city  which  was  always  after- 
wards called  Per-Rerehu,  """^  '^^  §  ^ ;  when  he  came  back  he 
brought  Set  with  him,  and  his  spear  was  in  his  neck,  v^^  <=> 
J  ^  ,  and  the  legs  of  the  monster  were  chained,  and  his  mouth 
had  been  closed  by  a  blow  from  the  club  of  the  god.  After  these 
exploits  Ra  ordered  that  Horus  should  be  called  Urui-Tenten, 
^^^  c=^>  cr^ia  V^  ^    and   he    further   decreed   that    the    enemies    of 

(§  \\     AAAAA^     AA/V^A^         LA 

himself  and  Horus,  Set  and  his  confederates,  should  be  handed 
over  to  the  goddess  Isis  and  her  son  Horus  for  them  to  do 
with  them  as  they  pleased.     Thereupon  Isis  and  Horus  took  up 


HORUS   OF   BEHUTET  481 

their  position  near  Ra,  and  the  young  god  drove  his  weapon, 
^^^    mdbj  into  Set,  at  a  place  called  "  She-nu-aha,"  Q^,  i.e., 

"  Lake  of  Battle,"  or,    ''  She-neter,"  rrr-i    |    "^   ,  i.e.,  "  Lake    of 

God;"  he  next  cut  off  his  head,  and  the  heads  of  his  followers, 
in  the  presence  of  Ra  and  the  great  company  of  the  gods,  and  then 
dragged  his  body  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  his  land  with 
his  spear  thrust  through  his  head  and  his  back. 

Then  Ra  ordered  that  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  should  drag  the 
body  of  the  monster  about,  and  because  of  this  "dragging"  the 
place  was  called  "Atha,"  fl  ^  \|/  ^  ever  after.  At  this  juncture 
the  divine  Isis  asked  her  father  Ra,  that  the  winged  sun-disk,  .4^, 
might  be  given  to  her  son  Horus  as  a  talisman,  because  he  had  cut 
off  the  heads  of  the  fiend  and  his  companions,  and  as  a  result  Heru- 
behutet  and  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  together  pursued  the  foe  Set,  and 
both  gods  were  of  the  same  form  and  appearance.  They  had  the 
bodies  of  men,  and  the  heads  of  hawks,  and  they  wore  the  White 
and  Red  Crowns,  with  plumes,  and  uraei.  All  these  events 
took  place  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month  Tybi,  w  <=>  ?; , 
and   the    place   wherein    they   happened   was   called   Aat-shatet, 

After  these  things  Set  changed  himself  into  a  serpent  which 
hissed  loudly,  and  he  sought  out  a  hole  for  himself  in  the  ground 
wherein  he  hid  himself  and  lived,  whereupon  Ra  said,  "  the  monster 
"  Ba  (  J  ^5^)  1  hath  turned  himself  into  a  hissing  serpent,  let 
"  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  set  himself  above  his  hole  in  the  form  of  a 
"pole  on  the  top  of  which  is  the  head  of  Horus,  (9),  so  that  he 

"  may  never  again  come  forth  therefrom."  As  the  result  of  this 
the    serpent   of  that   town   was    called    "  Hisser "    or   "  Roarer," 

rO  T  i)m,  )  Hemhemet,  and  Horus  the  son  of  Isis  stood  U23on 

him  in  the  form  of  a  pole,  or  staff,  on  the  top  of  which  was  the 
head  of  a  hawk.  When  all  these  things  were  done  the  boat  of  Ra 
arrived  at  Per-aha,  crm  fV^,  or  "  House  of  Battle  "  ;  the  fore  part 
f  of  the  boat  was  made  of  acacia  wood,  and  the  after  part  of 
sycamore  wood,  and  both  kinds  of  wood  were,  henceforth,  holy. 
I  i 


482  HORUS   OF   BEHUTET 

Meanwhile,  however,  there  still  remained  some  of  the  enemies  of 
Ra  in  the  land,  and  this  god  exhorted  his  son  to  set  out  and 
to  make  an  end  of  them,  whereupon  Horus  told  his  father  that  if 
he  would  allow  the  boat  to  go  whither  he  pleased,  he  would  treat 
the  enemy  in  such  a  way  that  it  would  be  pleasing  to  Ra.     When 

the  boat  had  sailed  but  a  little  way  on  the  water  of  Meh,  °^  ^^a^  , 

he  found  one  of  the  friends  of  Set,  and  having  hurled  his  spear  at 
him,  he  caught  him,  and  slaughtered  him  in  the  presence  of  Ra,  at 

a  place  called  Astabet,  j]  ¥  J  Wj  ^'  ^  truce  for  six  days  and  six 
nights  then  followed,  and  Horus  had  rest,  while  Isis  made  use  of 
her  words  of  power  to  keep  away  Ba,  i.e.,  Set,  from  the  district 
called  "  An-rut-f."  Soon  afterwards  Horus  slew  106  of  the  enemy, 
and  then  made  a  final  attack  upon  them  in  the  neighbourhood  of 

An-hat,  f\  , ,  "HYP  . ^ ,  and  Tchar,   ^^^  |  ^ ,   or  Tanis  ;    some 

made  their  escape  and  succeeded  in  getting  away  to  the  moun- 
tains, and  others  threw  themselves  into  the  sea.  Horus  changed 
himself  into  the  form  of  a  lion,  with  the  head  of  a  man  sur- 
mounted by  the  triple  crown,  and  grasping  in  his  hand  his  keen- 
edged  knife  he  pursued  them,  and  brought  back  142  of  the  enemy, 
whom  he   slew,  and  he  tore  out  their  tongues,  and  their  blood 

gushed  out  upon  the  ridges  of  the  ground,  ^^  T|    I  o 

<=> /^  no  "^  ^^  D 

I       I  III    I   v  III  o* 

When  this  Avas  done  Ra  told  Horus  that  he  wished  to  travel 

further  upon  the  sea,  and  to  smite  the  remainder  of  his  foes  who 
still  lived  in  the  form  of  crocodiles  and  hippopotami  near  Egypt, 
but  Horus  told  him  that  it  was  impossible  to  sail  further  on  the  sea 
because  the  one-third  of  the  enemy  which  still  remained  were 
therein.^  When  Thoth  heard  this  he  recited  certain  chapters 
containing  magical  formulae,  with  the  view  of  protecting  the  Boat 
and  the  vessels  of  the  blacksmiths  which  were  with  it,  and  of  quiet- 
ing the  sea  during  the  period  of  storm.  It  is  clear  that  when 
these  chapters  had  been  recited,  Ra  and  his  company  set  out  and 
went  over  the  whole  sea,  but  as  no  more  enemies  were  seen  they 


.„„llll     -     0  Ml 


D®  i^   I   I   I    I    ^  I 


qr 


HORUS    OF   BEHUTET  483 

returned  to  Egypt,  travelling  by  night.     Finally,  Horus  and  his 
companions   went   back   to    Nubia,    to   the    town    of    Shashertet, 

■^   ^  ^,  where   he    destroyed    the   rebels    of  Uauat,    and 


m(]P 


[\yvr)' 


their  ablest  soldiers.  When  this  was  done  Horus  changed  himself 
once  more  into  the  form  of  the  winged  sun-disk  with  uraei,  and 
took  with  him  the  goddesses  Nekhebet  and  Uatchit  in  the  form  of 
two  serpents,  that  they  might  consume  with  fire  any  rebels  who 
still  remained.  When  the  gods  who  were  in  his  boat  saw  this 
they  said,  "  Great  indeed  is  that  which  Horus  hath  done  by  means 
"  of  his  double  snake  diadem ;  he  hath  smitten  the  enemy  who 
"  were  afraid  of  him  !  "  And  Horus  said,  "  Henceforward  let  the 
''  double  snake  diadem  of  Heru-Behutet  be  called  tlr-uatchti 
"/^^Ij  on  V"  ^Yid  it  was  so.  After  these  things  Horus 
journeyed  on  in  his  ship,  or  boat,  and  arrived  at  Apollinopolis 
Magna  (Edfii)  flv^®?  ^^^  Thoth  decreed  that  he  should  be 
called  the  "  Light-giver,  who  cometh  forth  from  the  horizon 
"(([()  ^^^         cQ]);  "   hereupon  Horus  commanded  Thoth  that  the 

winged  sun-disk  with  uraei,  €Ds,  should  be  brought  into  every 
sanctuary  wherein  he  dwelt  and  in  every  sanctuary  of  all  the  gods 
of  the  lands  of  the  South  and  of  the  North,  and  in  Amentet,  in 
order  that  they  might  drive  away  evil  from  therein.  Then  Thoth 
made  figures  of  the  winged  sun-disk  with  uraei,  and  distributed 
them  among  the  temples,  and  sanctuaries,  and  places  wherein 
there  were  any  gods,  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  winged 
disks  with  uraei  which  are  seen  over  the  entrances  of  the  courts  of 
the  temples  of  all  the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Egypt.  The  snake 
goddess  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  disk  is  Nekhebet,  and  that 
on  the  left  is  IJatchit.^ 

The  above  legend  is  very  important  for  the  study  of  Egyptian 
mythology,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  in  its  form  here  described 
it  belongs  to  a  very  modern  period.  The  fundamental  facts  of  the 
story   are    very   old,  for   they   belong   to    the    earliest   period   of 

^  For  tlie  text  of  the  legend  summarized  above  see  Naville,  Mytlie  cTHorus, 
pll.  xii.  f£. ;  and  for  a  translation,  witli  transliteration  of  text  and  commentary,  see 
Brugscli,  Die  Sage  von  der  gefliUjelten  Sonnenscheibe  in  the  Abiumdiungen  of  the 
Royal  Society  of  Sciences  in  Gottingen  (Phys.  Classe,  Bd.  xiv.,  p.  173  ff.). 


484  HORUS   OF   BEHUTET 

Egyptian  history,  and  are  derived  from  the  old  nature  myth 
of  the  combat  between  Light  and  Darkness.  With  these,  how- 
ever, we  have  mingled  another  element,  which  is  apparently 
historical,  and  is  also  of  very  great  antiquity.  In  the  original 
fight  between  Ra  and  Apep,  or  Horus  and  Set,  the  Sun-god  was 
accompanied  by  his  followers,  whose  duties,  apparently,  consisted 
in  watching  the  combat,  and  who  were,  like  Ra  himself,  un- 
connected with  the  earth.  But  in  the  fight  of  Heru-Behutet  with 
Set,  the  companions  of  the  gods  were  beings  in  the  forms  of  men 
who  were  armed  with  spears  and  chains  for  fettering  purposes,  and 
they  were  rewarded  by  him  after  the  manner  of  men.  The  god 
himself  was  armed  with  a  very  long  spear  made  of  "  iron  of  the 
god "  or  "  divine  iron,"  and  with  a  chain  of  unusual  length,  and 
his  method  of  fighting  was  to  hurl  his  spear  at  his  foes,  and  when 
it  had'  struck  home,  he  fettered  them  with  his  chain,  and  having 
dragged  them  to  his  boat,  slaughtered  them  at  leisure.  The 
first   great   defeat   of    the    enemy   took    place    at   Aat-Tchetemi, 

i^-^-j  ^°^  ( —  (](]©,  near  Thebes  ;  the  second  took  place  at  Neter- 

Khaita,  T  ^  T  "^  (1  (1  A  © ,  near  Dendera,  and  was  followed  by  the 
overthrow  of  small  bodies  of  them  in  the  neighbouring  nomes 
going  towards  the  north ;  and  the  last  great  conquest  was  effected 
by  the  god,  who  took  the  form  of  a  lion,  at  Tchar,  ^^  .Ss.  |  f^^^ , 
or  Tanis,  in  the  east  of  the  Delta,  not  far  from  the  modern 
Suez  Canal. 

All  these  facts  indicate  that  we  are  not  dealing  entirely  with 
mythological  events,  and  it  is  nearly  certain  that  the  triumphant 
progress  ascribed  to  Heru-Behutet  is  based  upon  the  exploits  of 
some  victorious  invader  who  established  himself  at  Edfu  in  very 
early  times,  and  then  made  his  way  with  his  followers  northwards, 
beating  down  all  opposition  as  he  went.  It  is  pretty  clear  that 
he  owed  his  success  chiefly  to  the  superiority  of  the  weapons 
with  which  he  and  his  men  were  armed,  and  to  the  material  of 
which  they  were  made  ;  given  equality  of  bravery  in  two  bodies 
of  men  opposed  each  to  the  other,  troops  armed  with  weapons  of 
flint  would  not  long  oppose  successfully  those  armed  with  weapons 
of  iron.     In  other  words,  the  followers  of  Horus,  who  are  called 


HORUS   OF   BEHUTET  485 

mesniti  in  the  text,  as  we  have  already  shown,  were  actually 
workers  in  metal,  or,  "  blacksmiths,"  and  men  who  knew  how  to 
smelt  iron  ore  and  to  forge  the  metal  into  weapons  of  offence 
and  defence.  These  men  called  their  workshop  or  foundry  mesnet 
or  mes7iit,  and  later,  when  their  leader  and  themselves  had  become 
deified,  and  priests  had  been  appointed  to  perform  the  worship  of 
the  god,  the  portion  of  the  temple  which  was  set  apart  for  them 
was  also  called  mesnet  or  mesnit,  and  when  the  metal  statue  of 
the  god  of  the  rising  sun,  Heru-Behutet,  was  brought  out  by 
them  fi'om  their  chamber  the  god  was  said  to  issue  from  the 
foundry  wherein  he  had  been  cast,  and  the  mesnet  was  identified 
with  that  portion  of  the  sky  from  which  the  Sun-god  appeared. 

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  say  who  were  the  blacksmiths 
that  swept  over  Egypt  from  south  to  north,  or  where  they  came 
from,  but  the  writer  believes  that  they  represent  the  invaders  in 
predynastic  times,  who  made  their  way  into  Egypt,  from  a  country 
in  the  East,  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  by  some  road  across  the 
eastern  desert,  e.g.,  that  through  the  Wadi  Hammamat,  or  that 
which  touches  the  Nile  a  little  to  the  south  of  Thebes.  They 
brought  with  them  the  knowledge  of  working  in  metals  and  of 
brick-making,  and  having  conquered  the  indigenous  peoples  in  the 
south,  i.e.,  those  round  about  Edfu,  they  made  that  city  the  centre 
of  their  civilization,  and  then  proceeded  to  conquer  and  occupy 
other  sites,  and  to  establish  sanctuaries  for  their  god  or  gods.^  In 
later  times  the  indigenous  priesthoods  merged  the  legendary 
history  of  the  deified  king  of  the  blacksmiths  in  that  of  Horus,  the 
god  of  heaven  in  the  earliest  times,  and  in  that  of  Ra,  which 
belonged  to  a  later  period.  The  priests  of  Edfu  found  many 
parts  of  this  mixed  history  very  difficult  to  explain,  and  they 
endeavoured  to  get  out  of  their  difficulties  by  the  fabrication  of 
foolish  etymologies  and  puns,  whereby  they  sought  to  elucidate 
events  and  names.  These,  however,  have  a  certain  importance, 
for  they  at  least  prove  that  parts  of  the  legends  were  not  under- 
stood when  the  puns  or  plays  on  words  were  made,  and  that  the 

1  The  historical  element  in  the  legend  was  long  ago  recognized  by  Maspero ; 
see  Les  Forgerons  cVHorus  et  la  Legende  cle  VEorus  cVEdfou  (in  Bib.  Egyj)t.,  torn,  ii., 
pp.  313  ff.). 


486  HORUS,    SON    OF   ISIS 

legends  themselves  are  of  great  antiquity ;  another  point  is  also 
made  clear  by  them,  i.e.,  that  the  Egyptians  themselves  were  not 
better  informed  on  such  subjects  than  we  are. 

12.  Heru-thema,    ^.     j^ a,    i.e.,    "  Horus    the   piercer." 

This  form  of  Horus  is  that  in  which  the  god  attacked  Set,  the 
murderer  of  his  father  Osiris,  with  his  long  spear  Avith  a  sharp- 
pointed  iron  head ;  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a  hawk- 
headed  man  in  the  act  of  driving  his  long  spear  into  sonie  unseen 
foe  on  or  below  the  "'round. 

13.  Heru-Hebenu,  V^  k  5-  i.e.,  Horus  of  Hebenu,  or 
Hebennut,  \\  ^  ^ '  ^^  metropolis  of  the  sixteenth  nome  of 
Upper  Egypt.^  He  is  mentioned  in  the  myth  of  Heru-Behutet, 
with  whom  he  is  often  identified,  and  he  is  usually  depicted  in  the 
form  of  a  hawk-headed  man  standing  upon  the  back  of  an  antelope ; 
this  animal  was  supposed  to  be  connected  with  Set,  and  Horus  of 
Hebennu  mounted  upon  his  back  as  a  symbol  of  his  sovereignty 
over  the  god  of  darkness  and  all  his  host. 

U.  Heru-sa-Ast..a-Asar,  ^' I  ^J  j^g,  ^|  J^- 
i.e.,  "  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  son  of  Osiris,"  like  many  other  forms  of 
Horus,  represented  in  general  the  rising  sun,  and  appears  to  have 
been  to  the  Egyptians  exactly  what  Apollo  was  to  the  Greeks  in 
this  respect ;  the  aspects  of  this  god  were  many,  and  in  consequence 
his  shrines  were  very  numerous  both  in  the  South  and  in  the 
North.     In  him  were   at   one    time   or   another  included    all  the 

various  Horus  gods,  beginning  with  Heru,  |    "^   ^^,  the  god 

of  the  heights  of  heaven,  and  Horus  the  Elder,  and  ending  with  the 
least  important  Hoi'us,  i.e.,  the  god  of  some  provincial  town.  His 
principal  aspects  were,  however,  two,  i.e.,  he  represented  the 
new  Sun  which  was  born  daily,  and  which  was  the  successor  of 
Heru-khuti  or  of  Ra,  and  he  was  also  the  offspring  of  the  dead 
man-god  Osiris  and  his  lawful  successor.  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis 
and  of  Osiris,  was  a  god  whose  attributes  appealed  strongly  to  the 
Egyptians  from  one  end  of  Egypt  to  the  other,  because  in  him 

^  Brugscli,  Did.  Geog.,  p.  490  ;  and  Brugscli,  Religion,  pp.  558  ff. 


HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS  487 

every  man  and  woman  saw  the  type  of  what  he  or  she  Avished  to 
possess,  that  is  to  say,  reoewed  life,  and  life  as  opposed  to  death^ 
and  movement  as  opposed  to  inactivity,  and  intercourse  with  the 
living  instead  of  with  the  dead.  In  a  Avay  Osiris  and  Horus  were 
complements,  each  of  the  other,  but  the  chief  difference  was  that 
Osiris  represented  the  past,  and  Horus  the  present,  or,  as  we  have 
it  expressed  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  15),  "Osiris  is  Yester- 
"  day,  and  Ra  (i.e.,  Horus  grown  up)  is  to-day,"  (]  <cr>  |l  ^  Jj 
D  ^  ij  ^i^  i<  "^  %.  O  ^^  '^  D  % .     The  texts  are  not  always 

consistent  in  the  matter  of  the  paternity  of  Horus,  for  though  Isis 
is  invariably  regarded  as  his  mother,  his  father  is  sometimes  said 
to  be  Osiris,  and  sometimes  Ra ;  but  this  inconsistency  is  easily 
accounted  for  by  remembering  that  Osiris  is,  under  one  aspect,  a 
form  of  the  dead  Sun-god.  Of  the  circumstances  under  which 
Horus  was  begotten  we  gain  a  good  idea  from  a  hymn  to  Osiris 
in  which  the  sorrow  of  his  mother  Isis  at  the  death  of  her 
husband  is  described.  The  goddess  was  greatly  distressed,  but 
she  was  equipped  with  mighty  words  of  power,  and  she  knew  how 
to  utter  them  so  that  they  might  have  the  greatest  effect,  and  she 
set  out  in  search  of  the  dead  body  of  Osiris  and  never  rested  until 
she  had  found  him.  With  her  hair  she  made  light,  and  with  her 
wings  she  stirred  the  air  as  she  made  lamentation  for  her  brother 
Osiris,  and  at  length  she  brought  his  body  into  a  state  of  activity, 
and  was  then  united  to  him ;  thus  she  became  with  child  by  him, 
and  her  son  Horus  was  born  in  a  secret  place  where  she  suckled 
him  and  reared  him.^ 

This  spot  appears  to  have  been  situated  among  the  papyrus 
swamps  in  the  Delta,  and  the  event  is  alluded  to  in  many  scenes  in 
which  the  goddess  is  seen,  suckling  her  child  amidst  a  dense  mass 
of  papyrus  plants.  Soon  after  the  birth  of  her  child  she  was 
persecuted  by  Set,  who  kept  herself  and  Horus  prisoners,  in  a 
house,  but  by  the  help  of  Thoth  she  escaped  with  her  child  one 
evening,  and  set  out  on  her  way  under  the  protection  of  seven 
scorpions    called     Tefen,    =cfL(^gg,    Befen,      jj'^^^^i^,     Mestet, 

^  See    Chabas,    Eeiue    Archeologique,    1857,    p.    65 ;    Ledrain,    Monuments 
^gyptiens,  pll.  22  ff. 


488  HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS 

12^,  Mestetef,  |^^^^e,  Petet,  J^^(M,  Thetet,  7; 
and  Matet,  -Z^  (M^-  These  scorpions  probably  represent  the 
seven  stars  of  the  constellation  Canis  Major,  in  which  the  stars  of 
Isis  and   Sothis  were  situated.     The  last  three  scorpions  showed 

Isis  the  way  and  led  her  to  the  to^vn  of  Per-Sui,  1  Y^  QCl  ^^^/ 
or  Crocodilopolis,  and  then  on  to  the  city  of  Thebti,  the  city  of  the 
Two  Sandals-Goddesses,  ^  ,  W  ^  w  m  r^  ?  where  the  swamp  country 
begins.  Whilst  Isis  was  absent  one  day  Horus  was  stung  by  a 
scorpion,  and  when  she  came  home  she  found  him  lying  on  the 
ground,  and  the  foam  was  on  his  lips,  and  his  heart  was  still,  and 
there  was  not  a  muscle  or  limb  of  him  which  was  not  rigid  ;  she  had 
protected  him  against  Set,  and  against  the  possibility  of  attack  by 
any  being  in  the  papyrus  swamps,  but  a  scorpion  had  stung  the 
child,  and  he  was  dead.  Whilst  Isis  was  lamenting  his  death  her 
sister  Nephthys  came  with  Serqet,  the  scorpion  goddess,  and 
advised  her  to  cry  out  to  heaven  for  help,  and  she  did  so,  and  her 
cry  penetrated  to  Ra  in  his  "  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years."  The 
great  god  stopped  his  boat,  and  Thoth  came  down  with  words  of 
power,  and  by  means  of  these  her  son  was  once  more  raised  to  life 
and  health.  Soon  after  these  things  had  taken  place  Horus  set  to 
work  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  father  Osiris,  and  it  was  under  his 

form   of   "  Horus,    the   avenger   of  his   father,"  ^,^  rj]  "T    ^     "^ 

(]    "^    J4  ^.=^  ,2  that  he  appealed  so  strongly  to  the  imagination  of 

the  Egyptians. 

According  to  a  notice  in  the  Calendar  given  in  the  Fourth 
Sallier  Papyrus  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  10,184),  Horus  began  his  fight 
with  Set,  which  lasted  three  days,  on  the  26th  day  of  the  month 
of  Thoth,  and  the  two  gods  fought  in  the  form  of  two  men.  Isis 
was  present  at  the  fight  and,  because  she  in  some  way  supported 
Set  against  Horus,  her  son  turned  upon  her  with  the  fury  of  a 
"  panther  of  the  south,"  and  cut  off  her  head.  Thoth,  however, 
seeing  what  had  been  done,  took  the  head  of  the  goddess,  and  by 

^  The    story  is  told  on   the  Metteniichsieic,  ed.    Golenischeff,   Leipzig,   1877, 
pi.  iii.,  11.  46  ff. 

2  For  references  to  him  in  the  BooTc  of  the  Dead  see  my  Vocabulary,  p.  225. 


HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS  489 

means  of  his  words  of  power  transformed  it  into  the  head  of  a  cow, 

and  then  fixed  it  upon  the  body  of  Isis.-^     According  to  Plutarch 

{De  Iside  et  Osiride),  Isis  found  that  her  son  Horus  had  succeeded 

in  fettering  Set  and  in  binding  him  in  chains,  but  not  wishing  that 

he  should  perish  she  loosed  his  fetters  and  set  him  at  liberty ;   then 

it  was  that  Horus  tore  off  her  head  the  symbols  of  sovereignty 

which  were  upon  it.     We  have  no  means  of  assigning  a  date  to  the 

composition  of  the  above  legend,  but  it  must  be  very  old,  and  it  is 

easy  to  see  that  it  is  only  a  version  of  the  older  legend  of  the 

combat  between  Ra  and  Apep,  and  Heru-ur  and  Set,  and  Heru- 

Behutet  and  Set,  and  it  is,  of  course,  one  of  the  sources  of  all  the 

post- Christian  legends  of  the  overthrow  of  dragons  by  kings  and 

heroes,  e.g.,  Alexander  the  Great  and  Saint  George.     When  Horus 

had  overcome  Set  he  succeeded  to  the  inheritance  of  his  father,  and 

took  his  seat  upon  the  throne  of  Osiris,  and  reigned  in  his  stead ; 

and,  in  the  words  addressed  to  Osiris  by  the  official  Hunefer,  "  Horus 

'  is  triumphant  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  company  of  the  gods, 

'  the  sovereignty  over  the  world  hath  been  given  unto  him,  and  his 

'  dominion  is  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.     The  throne  of 

'  the  god  Seb  hath  been  adjudged  unto  him,  along  with  the  rank 

'  which  hath  been  founded  by  the  god  Temu,  and  which  hath  been 

'  stablished  by  decrees  in  the  Chamber  of  Books,  and  hath  been 

'  inscribed  upon  an  iron  tablet  according  to  the  command  of  thy 

'  father  Ptah-Tanen,  on  the  great  throne.  .  .  .  Gods  celestial  and 

'  gods  terrestrial   transfer  themselves   to  the  service  of  thy  son 

'  Horus,   and  they  follow  him  into  his  hall,  [where]  a  decree  is 

'  passed  that  he  shall  be  lord  over  them,  and  they  perform  the 

'  decree  straightway."  ^ 

Now,  besides  the  fight  in  which  he  engaged  with  Set,  Horus 
performed  many  other  filial  duties  which  endeared  him  to  the 
Egyptians.  Thus  he  took  the  greatest  care  that  every  ceremony 
which  could  possibly  benefit  the  deceased  was  jDerformed  on  his 
father's  behalf,  and  every  detail  of  the  mummification  of  the  god, 
and  of  the  method  of  swathing,  and  of  the  placing  of  amulets,  etc., 
upon  the  body  was  watched  by  him  with  loving  attention,  and  his 

^  Chabas,  Calendrier,  Paris,  ]863,  pp.  29  ff. 
^  BooTc  of  the  Dead,  Chap,  clxxxiii.,  11.  12  &. 


490  HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS 

filial  affection  became  the  pattern  which  was  followed  by  every 
pious  Egyj)tian  from  time  immemorial.  We  find,  however,  that 
Horus  was  believed  to  help  the  dead  generally,  even  as  he  helped 
Osiris,  and  all  men  hoped  that  he  would  come  to  their  assistance 
after  death,  and  act  as  a  mediator  between  the  judge  of  the  Under- 
world and  themselves.  In  the  Judgment  Scene  in  the  Booh  of  the 
Dead  (Papyrus  of  Ani,  plates  3  and  4),  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis, 
leads  the  deceased,  after  his  heart  has  been  weighed,  into  the 
presence  of  Osiris,  and  he  says  to  his  father,  "  I  have  come  to  thee, 
"  0  Un-nefer,  and  I  have  brought  unto  thee  Osiris  Ani,"  and  then 
goes  on  to  say  that  Thoth  has  weighed  Ani's  heart  in  the  Balance 
according  to  the  decree  of  the  gods,  and  has  found  it  right  and 
true.  He  also  asks  Osiris  that  Ani  may  be  allowed  to  appear  in  his 
presence,  and  that  cakes  and  ale  may  be  given  to  him,  and  that  he 
may  be  among  the  followers  of  Horus  for  ever.  In  none  of  the 
variants  of  the  Judgment  Scene  do  we  find  that  the  place  of  Horus 
as  introducer  of  the  dead  is  taken  by  any  other  god,  and  there  is 
no  doubt  that  this  duty  was  assigned  to  him  because  it  was 
believed  that  Osiris  would  favourably  receive  those  who  were  led 
into  his  presence  by  the  son  who  had  done  so  much  for  him.  From 
the  Pyramid  Texts  we  learn  that,  at  the  time  when  man  believed 
that  it  was  necessary  to  have  a  ladder  in  order  to  ascend  into 
heaven  from  the  earth,  Horus  was  regarded  as  the  god  of  the 
ladder,  and  that  he  was  entreated  to  set  up  the  ladder  and  to  hold 
it  in  place  whilst  the  deceased  climbed  up  it.  Sometimes  Ra  held 
one  side  of  it  whilst  Horus  held  the  other,  and  sometimes  its 
supporters  were  Horus  and  Set,  but  even  so  the  deceased  seems 
sometimes  to  have  experienced  difficulty  in  ascending  it,  for  we 
read  that  Horus  had  to  give  him  a  push  upwards  with  his  two 
fingers.^ 

More  than  this,  howe\'er,  was  done  for  the  deceased  by  Horus, 
for  he  took  the  bodies  of  the  dead  under  his  care  just  as  he  took  the 
body  of  his  father  Osiris  into  his  own  hands,  and  superintended  the 
performance  of  his  funeral  rites  and  ceremonies.  In  this  great 
work  he  was  assisted  by  a  number  of  beings  called  Heru-shemsu, 

^  English  renderings  of  the  passages  Avill  be  found  in  my  Eyijptian  Magic, 
pp.  52  ft. 


HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS  491 

^  ^  P  ^  -/\  ^  j ,    i.e.,    "  Followers    of   Horus."     Now  we   know 

from  several  passages  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  that  Osiris,  Ra, 
Nefer-Tem,  Neb-er-tcher,  Mehi,  Hathor,  and,  in  fact,  all  great 
gods  were  ministered  to  by  a  number  of  lesser  gods,  but  none  of 
these  are  of  the  importance  of  the  followers  of  Horus,  and  none  of 
them  are  as  old.     We  have  already  seen  that  the  original  Horus- 

god,    I  y>  ^  7    '^iio    represented    the   face    of    heaven,    was 

supposed  to  have  long  hair  which  hung  down  from  his  face,  and  which 
probably  supported  it,  and  that  in  the  myth  of  Shu  the  sujDports 

of  this  god,  i.e.,  the  four  pillars,   1 1| I.  which   held   up   the  vast, 

rectangular,  iron  plate  that  formed  the  floor  of  heaven  were  placed 
in  the  tresses  of  Horus.  At  a  later  period,  when  the  four  followers 
of  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  were  identified  with  the  followers  of  the 
older  Horus,  these  gods  were  made  to  dwell  near  the  pillars  of  Shu 
and  to  have  dominion  over  them,  and  also  over  the  four  quarters 
of  heaven,  and  they  took  the  place  of  the  earlier  gods  of  the 
cardinal  points.  In  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  these  four  children 
of  Horus  play  very  prominent  parts,  and  the  deceased  endeavoured 
to  gain  their  help  and  protection  at  all  costs,  both  by  offerings  and 
prayers.  In  the  pictures  of  the  funeral  procession  four  men  draw 
along  the  coffin  containing  the  mummied  intestines  of  the  deceased, 
four  animals  are  taken  for  sacrifice,  and  all  the  instruments  used  in 
the  ceremony  of  "  opening  the  mouth,"  as  well  as  the  vases,  and 
boxes  of  unguents,  etc.,  are  in  quadruplicate.  Even  prayers  and 
formulae  are  said  four  times  over,  e.g.,  in  Chapter  xL,  the  deceased 
in  addressing  the  Eater  of  the  Ass  says,  "  I  know  thee,"  four  times; 
and  in  Chapter  cxxiv.,  he  says,  "  I  am  pure,"  four  times.  Most 
important  of  all,  however,  it  was  to  remember  that  the  four 
children  of  Horus  shared  the  protection  of  the  body  of  the  deceased 
among  them,  and  as  far  back  as  the  Vth  Dynasty  we  find  that  they 
presided  over  his  life  in  the  underworld.     The  names  of  the  four 

gods    are: — Hap,     Sqa'^,     Tuamutef,     :^  "^  ^^   ,     Amset, 

(]^=P'=^,  and  Qebhsennuf,  ^  J  1 1?  lU  0  ^ '^"=-;  *l^i^  ^'^  ^^^^ 
order  in  which  they  are  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,  but  in 


492  HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS 

later  times  the  order  of  the  names  and  the  spelling  vary  thus : — 
Mestha,  =]  (j  ^,  Hapi,  §  (j^ ,  Tuamutef,  ^^  J  |  ^^  ^' 

and  Qebh-sennuf,  [8  |  ^  ^  ^  '  '^■'^^  •  '^^^  ^^^  arms  of  the  de- 
ceased were  identified  with  Hapi  and  Tuamutef,  and  his  two  legs 
with  Amset  and  Qebhsennuf ;  and  when  he  went  into  the  Sekhet- 
Aaru  they  were  his  guides  and  went  in  with  him,  two  on  each  side. 
Hapi  represented  the  north  and  protected  the  small  viscerae  of  the 
body ;  Tuamutef  represented  the  east,  and  protected  the  heart  and 
lungs ;  Amset  represented  the  south,  and  protected  the  stomach 
and  large  intestines,  and  Qebhsennuf  represented  the  west,  and 
protected  the  liver  and  the  gall  bladder.  Associated  with  the  four 
gods,  perhaps  as  female  counterparts,  were  the  goddesses  ISTephthys, 
Neith,  Isis,  and  Selqet,  or  Serqet. 

As  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  Avas  so  thoroughly  identified  with 
Horus  the  Elder,  and  with  other  forms  of  the  rising  sun,  it  is 
not  surprising  to  find  that  the  sanctuaries  of  the  god  were  very 
numerous,  and  that  they  existed  in  all  parts  of  the  country ;  the 
names  of  a  great  many  of  these  have  been  collected  by  Signor 
Lanzone,^  and  from  them  we  learn  that  Horus,  dweller  in  the  two 

Egypts,    '   ^-^  ^ ,  was  lord  of  Nubti,  A]  ^  (Ombos),  and  lord  of 


^^^'  T^  (Thebes),  and  of  Maam,  y  "^^^^^  c£V£) ,  Kenset,   I     "    r\>^^ 
Het-Ant,  n"™^,  Re-ur,   ^^^%*,  Pe,  °©,  Behen,    I)    ^   c.^^^ 


Nekhen,     ^     ,     Per-netchem,    [z:z]|^©,    Re-au,    '^  ^ 
Hurent,  l\^,  Ka-qem,  .^^,    Reqetit,   <^  ^  ^  (]()  ^ 


Therer,  ^^©,  Bak,  "J^  ^,  xVat-aat,  l^tJ  ^  ,  Hu,  ^^^  ^ 
Tchart,  ^^,  Aat-ab,  k^^©,  Hut,  ^,  Het-suten,  ^  [J  ^ 
Petchatcha,  □  JJ  ©,  It,  Q  !](]  2,  Rethma  '^^^  ^,  Heben,  |J  ^ 
Sekhem,  ^  ^^^,  Abtu,  y  J^©,  Shes-en-meli,  8  pi,  aa^vwv  <^ 
0|,    Hebt,    ^2'    Shep,  ^^,   Khat,    7^,    Qali 


Het-neh, 


^  Op.  eit.,  p.  569. 


HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS  493 


^      Q   1    ^       m  ±    1.     c:^^  _ga>   ^ 


-'    Tenretut,  ^^^,    Ant,    |  ^,    and    Baka, 

The  forms  in  which  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  is  depicted  are  both 
numerous  and  interesting,  and  they  show  how  completely  he 
absorbed  the  attributes  of  all  the  other  Horus  gods.  Thus  he  is 
represented  as  a  child  seated  on  a  lotus  flower,  with  one  of  his 
forefingers  touching  his  lips,  and  with  the  lock  of  hair  on  the  side 
of  his  head ;  he  wears  the  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,  and 
holds  both  £\  and  |  .^  In  another  section  he  stands  on  the  back 
of  a  hippopotamus,  into  the  head  of  which  he  is  driving  a  spear  ; 
in  this  instance  he  is  clearly  identified  with  Heru-Behutet.  In 
late  dynastic  times  the  god  was  depicted  in  a  great  many  fantastic 
forms,  and  the  various  attributes  which  were  ascribed  to  him  are 
indicated  in  many  curious  Avays.  Thus  as  guardian  of  the  funeral 
coffer  of  Osiris  he  has  the  head  of  a  hawk,  on  which  is  the  triple 
crown,  with  the  body  of  a  lion,  and  a  tail  in  the  form  of  a  head 
and  neck  of  some  unknown  animal.  Elsewhere  he  is  represented 
with  seven  heads,  among  which  are  those  of  a  bull,  a  ram,  a  cat, 
and  a  crocodile,  and  with  the  body  of  a  man,  ithyphallic,  and  the 
legs  and  hoofs  of  a  bull,  and  the  wings  of  a  bird  ;  in  one  hand  he 
holds  a  knife,  and  in  the  other  a  serpent. 

But  besides  the  attributes  of  the  other  Horus  gods,  Horus, 
son  of  Isis,  was  endowed  with  many  of  the  characteristics  of  other 
gods.  Thus  with  the  god  Anpu  or  Anubis,  he  becomes  Heru-em- 
Anpu,  i.e.,  Horus  as  Anubis,  and  is  said  to  dwell  in  the  "  divine 

hall,"    '     I  nn  I i'  ^^®   recalls   under  this  name  the  god   "  Her- 

manubis,"  who  is  mentioned  by  Plutarch  (De  Iside  et  Osiride,  §  61) 
and  by  Diodorus  (lines  18,  87).  This  dual  god  is  represented  in 
the  form  of  a  man  with  the  head  of  a  jackal,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
distinguish  him  by  his  picture  from  the  two  jackal  gods  Anpu,  or 
Anubis,  and  Ap-uat,  who  are  only  two  forms  of  one  and  the  same 
god.     Strictly  speaking,  Anpu  is  the  "  opener  of  the  roads  of  the 

South,  the  power  of  the  two  lands,"  \/^^  i  Y  ^  j)^  and 

Apuat  is  the  "opener  of  the  roads  of  the   North,  the  power  of 

^  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit,,  pll.  214  ff. 


494 


HORUS,    SON   OF   ISIS 


heaven,"  \/^ 


^  111 


? 


D  ^ 


The  two  jackal  gods  are  often 

seen  depicted  on  stelae,  Avhere  they  symbolize  the  two  halves  of 
the  year,  and  the  night  and  the  day  sky,  and  tlie  periods  of  waxing 
and  waning  of  the  powers  of  nature  in  summer  and  winter. 

The    particular   form    of   Horus   Avhich   was    identified   with 

n      n  AAAA^\ 

Horus,  son  of  Isis,  was  Horus  of  Hebennu,  ^  Jq^©?  the 
Hipponon  of  the  Greeks,  where  also  Anubis  was  specially  venerated. 
The  identification  of  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  with  Anubis  is  easy  to 
explain,  for  both  gods  assisted  in  mummifying  the  dead  body  of 
Osiris,  and  it  is  expressly  stated  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (xvii. 
125  ff.),  that  it  is  Anubis  wdio    passes  through  the  purification 

chamber  in  the  Mesqet  (t\\\ ^,  and  that  he  stood   "behind  the 

chest  which  contained  the  inner  parts  of  Osiris."  According 
to  the  same  chapter  (lines  100-108),  it  was  Anubis  who 
appointed  the  Seven  Spirits,  *'  the  followers  of  their  lord  Sepa," 
— «—  aK^  "^v  ^^^  c^  ?  to  be  the  protectors  of  the  dead  body  of 
Osiris.     One  authority  quoted  in  the  same  chapter  stated  that  the 


Seven  Spirits, 


O 


I   111 
I 
I  ill 


,  were  the  Four  Children  of  Horus, 


already  mentioned  above,  and  Maa-atef-f,  .^ 
and   Kheri-beq-f,  ^^  w  )]  J  ^  |  "^^^  ^ 


,  and    Heru-khenti-maati, 


1 


^  w 


but  another  authority  gives  the  names  of  the 


Seven  Spirits  as  follows: — 1.  Netcheh-netcheh ;  2.  Aaqetet  ; 
3.  An-erta-nef-bes-f-khenti-heh-f;  4.  Aq-her-ammi-unnut-f ;  5. 
Tesher-maati-ammi-het-Anes ;  6.  Ubes-hra-per-em-khetkhet ;  7. 
Maa-em-kerli-an-nef-em-hru.^     In   connexion  Avith  these  must   be 


1  Bool-  of  the  Dead,  Chap,  cxlii.,  §  iv.  24-,  25. 


AAA/WS     n      AAA/\AA 


.     2 

:1   4 


o 


0 


^T^f 


O^o 


I       7^ 

ra  tk  o 


ci  ^  1^ 


-A.     7.    ^ 


s 


1^1 


HARPOCRATES  495 

mentioned  the  goddess  Hetep-sekhus,  ^^  q  ''^^^^P^' 
who  is  identified  either  Avith  the  Eye  of  Ra  or  with  the  flame 
which  follows  Osiris  to  burn  up  his  enemies,  and  the  assessors  of 
that   section   of    the   Underworld   which   is   called   An-aareretef, 


A         ,    or    An-aretf,  H    ^       ^  ,    i.e.,    the 

"  place  where  nothing  grows,"  the  chief  of  whom  was  Heku-netch- 
HiiA  =  ATEF-F,    ^k  5^  '^    O     V  (1    ^    jj  ^^^_  ^    qj.    "  Horus,    the 


aveno;er  of  his  father." 


"O 


15.  Heru-pa-khart,  ^^  Ji  aK  ^  <=>  ^')  Jfj  i-e.,  "  Horus 
the  Child."  We  have  already  described  Horus  the  Child,  who  was 
the  son  and  successor  of  Horus  the  Elder,  and  brief  mention  must  be 
made  of  Horus  the  Child  who  was  the  son  and  successor  of  Osiris. 
The  greater  number  of  the  attributes  which  belonged  to  the  old 
Horus  gods  were  transferred  to  the  son  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  especially 
in  late  dynastic  times  when  the  worship  of  Osiris  was  dominant  in 
Egypt,  and  Horus  the  Child  became  the  type  of  the  new  birth,  and 
new  life,  the  first  hours  of  the  day,  and  the  first  days  of  the  month, 
and  the  first  months  of  the  year,  and  in  fact  of  everything  which 
was  young  and  vigorous.  Soon,  however,  the  characteristics  of 
the  great  forms  of  the  Sun-god  were  added  to  his  own,  and  his 
original  conception  as  Horus  the  Child  was  somewhat  forgotten ; 
at  times  it  is  very  difiicult  to  distinguish  in  the  texts  exactly 
which  Horus  is  referred  to.  In  all  the  great  sanctuaries  of  Egypt, 
from  the  period  of  the  New  Empire  onwards,  we  find  that  Horus 
the  Child,  or  Harpocrates,  was  identified  by  the  priests  of  the  local 
gods  as  a  form  of  their  principal  deities  in  which  the  chiefs  of  the 
companies  or  triads  of  gods  had  renewed  and  rejuvenated  them- 
selves. The  late  Dr.  Brugsch  collected  a  large  number  of  examples 
of  this  fact,^  and  he  proved  that  as  Heru-sma-taui-pa-khart  he  was 
identified  with  Tem,  and  was  said  to  be  son  of  Heru-khuti  and 

Hathor;  that  joined  with  Ahi,  l|  |  (](]  Tl,  Harpocrates  became  a 
form  of  Ra,  and  was  called  "  son  of  Hathor,  to  whom  Isis  gave 
birth,"  and  was  regarded  as  the  offspring  of  Un-nefer,  -^^^^  I 

1  Religion  unci  Mythologie,  p.  373. 


496  HARPOCRATES 

i.e.,  of  Osiris ;  and  that  he  was  also  made  to  be  the  renewed  form 
of  the  gods  Shu,  Seb,  Khensu,  and  Amsu,  or  Min. 

In  connexion  with  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  in  one  or  other  of  his 
forms  must  be  mentioned  the  interesting  legend  which  is  preserved 
in  the  cxiith  Chapter  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead,  and  which  has 
reference  to  the  district  or  place  called  Khat,  j|  "^  ^  '  ?  '^f  ^^^ 
dweller  in  Khat,  in  the  city  of  Anpet,   ^aaaaa  ©,  in  the  nome  of  Ha- 


"1    ie 


meliit,    v^,  i.e.,  the  sixteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.     Strictly 

^  1 1 1 1 
speaking,  Anpet  was  the  name  of  the  temple  and  quarter  of  the 

city  of  Mendes,  the  local  triad  of  which  consisted  of  Ba-neb-Tetet, 


37  n  ^,  Ha-mehit,  _S  ^'^^^^  X  4l  e^  ^'  ^^^  Heru-pa-khart. 
Mendes  was  full  of  associations  with  the  worship  of  the  god  Osiris, 
for  in  the  temple  there  were  preserved  the  phallus  and  the  back- 
bone of  Osiris  ;  the  temple  was  called  Het-baiut,  IJ  ^^  I  i  1  @  ?  i-®-? 
"  House  of  the  Rams,"  and  the  place  where  the  relics  were  found 
Per-khent,  '  '  d£j  ^  -^  The  rams  here  referred  to  recall  the  legend 
in  which  the  Ram  of  Mendes  was  said  to  unite  within  himself  the 
souls  of  Rfi,  Osiris,  Shu,  and  Khepera,  and  he  was  known  as  the 
"Ram  with  four  heads  upon  one  neck,"  ^^^^^=  J  ^ ^.^ 
It  is  possible  that  he  is  also  referred  to  in  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line 
419)  where  a  god  with  four  faces  is  mentioned,  ^=:^  ^  ^  ^  '^^' 

In  the  Chapter  above  mentioned  the  deceased  is  made  to  ask  a 
number  of  gods,  "  Do  ye  know  for  what  reason  the  city  of  Pe  hath 
"  been  given  unto  Horus  ? "  and  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  I,  even  I, 
"  know  it  though  ye  know  it  not.  Behold,  Ra  gave  the  city  to  him 
"  in  return  for  the  injury  to  his  Eye ;  for  which  cause  Ra  said  to 
"  Horus,  '  Let  me  see  what  is  coming  to  pass  in  thine  eye,'  and 
"  forthwith  he  looked  thereat.  Then  Ra  said  unto  Horus,  '  Look 
"  at  that  black  pig,'  and  he  looked,  and  straightway  an  injury  was 
"  done  unto  his   eye,  that  is  to  say,  a  mighty  storm   [took  place 


C^^^    D    ^  N^     "~2^ 


See  de  Rouge,  Geogvdjjhe  Ancienne,  j).  114. 


HARPOCRATES  497 

"  therein].  Then  said  Horus  unto  Ra,  '  Verily,  my  eye  seems  as  if 
"  it  were  an  eye  upon  which  Suti  had  inflicted  a  blow '  ;  and  [thus 
"  saying]  he  ate  his  heart/  Then  said  Ra  to  those  gods,  '  Place  ye 
"  him  in  his  chamber,  and  he  shall  do  well.'  Now  the  black  pig 
"  was  Suti  (Set)  who  had  transformed  himself  into  a  black  pig,  and 
"  he  it  was  who  had  aimed  the  blow  of  fire  which  struck  the  eye  of 
"  Horus.  Then  said  Ra  unto  those  gods, '  The  pig  is  an  abominable 
'' '  thing  unto  Horus  ;  but  he  shall  do  well,  although  the  pig  is  an 
"  '  abomination  unto  him.'  Then  the  company  of  the  gods,  who 
"  were  among  the  divine  Followers  of  Horus  when  he  existed  in 
"  the  form  of  his  own  child,  said,  '  Let  sacrifices  be  made  of  his 
^'  bulls,  and  of  his  goats,  and  of  his  pigs.'  Now  the  father  of 
"  Mesthi,  Hapi,  Tuamutef,  and  Qebh-sennuf  is  Horus,  and  their 
"  mother  is  Isis.  Then  said  Horus  to  Ra,  '  Give  me  two  divine 
"  '  brethren  in  the  city  of  Pe  and  two  divine  brethren  in  the  city  of 
"  '  Nekhen,  who  [have  sprung]  from  my  body  and  who  shall  be  with 
"  ^  me  in  the  guise  of  everlasting  judges,  and  then  shall  the  earth 
"  '  blossom  and  thunder-clouds  and  rain  be  done  away.'     And  the 

"  name  of  Horus  became  Her-uatch-f,    '^   f=5|1       ^^-=— ." 

In  addition  to  the  forms  of  Horus  mentioned  in  the  above 
paragraphs  the  Pyramid  Texts  make  known  the  following: — 
1.  Heru-Aah,  ^_^|^>  i-e-,  Horus,  the  Moon-god ;2  2.  Heru- 

KHENT-PERU,     ^  rffk  _^ ;  ^     3.    HeRU-AM-HeNNU,     ^  (1  1\     ^UlS'/ 
rv\^  mil  LjLJ  *  Kins    1    wvy  ■         ■ ' 

and  Heru  of  Tat,  ^^  c:^^  "^  Z  .^  According  to  the  same 
authorities  Horus  possessed  one  white  eye  and  one  black, 
^^  ^^I^  ^  ''^  Avhich  king  Unas  is  said  to  have  taken  to 
illumine  his  face ;  and  two  other  titles  of  the  god  are  "  Horus  of 
the  two  blue  eyes,"  ^  ®  P  J  '^  ^^'>'  ^^^  "  Horus  of  the  two 
red  1  eyes,"  ^  ^'^^ /«>^  ^^^  .^     In  the   Theban  Recension  of  the 


^  I.e.,  he  lost  his  temper  and  raged. 

2^^:^  (]<c:=>  ^^^=^  I  ^(j o|^,  Teta,  1.  365. 

3  Unas,  1.  202.  *  Unas,  1.  211.  &  Unas,  1.  218. 

6  Unas,  1.  37.  7  Unas,  1.  369.  «  xjnas,  1.  869. 

K   k 


498  MISCELLANEOUS    HORUS    GODS 

Booh  of  the  Dead  these  titles  are  also  mentioned  (Chap,  clxxvii.  7) 
as  well  as  the  following: — Heru-aa-abu,  -^^  i  i n  jj '  ^^^^^^ 

^      ^    w 


ahai,  ^^ °f  (jv  Heru-ami-abu-her-ab-ami-khat,  '^ 

1^  ^  (j  -  -  \\  ^,  Hem-ami-athen,  ^  ()  -  -  ^  W  (]  ^  ^j  Heru- 
em-khebit,  '^'  l\   \^  4,  Heru-neb-ureret,  ^^  ^^37  <=>  ^  A 
Heru-her-neferu,  ^^  "^  I  "^^^  ^  ^  """^  i ,  Heru-khent-heh,  v 
v^  ^  ^  ^  I ,  Heru-khenti-heh,  ^  ^  ^     ^^  Mr  i ,  Heru-sekhai, 

^  P  1 11  ^  ^ '  Hem-shet-hra,  ^  ^  ^  f ,  etc.  Finally,  in 
the  text  of  Unas  (line  462  fF.)  we  meet  with  the  form  of  Heru- 
Sept,  ^.  PA'  ^^^  ^®  mentioned  in  connexion  with  Ra,  Tem, 

AAA/W\ 

Thoth,  and  Horus  of  Tat,  and  the  star  Nekhekh,  „^.  Heru-Sept 
is  a  form  of  Horus,  presumably  the  god  of  the  rising  sun,  united  to 
the  particular  form  of  the  same  god  Sept  which  Avas  worshipped 
in  the   twentieth   nome   of  Lower   Egypt,   i.e.,   the   nome    Sept, 

(i^.     In  the  examples  given  by  Signor  Lanzone  of  the  various 

forms  under  which  Sept  is  depicted  he  is  sometimes  seen  in  the 
form  of  a  man  having  upon  his  head  either  the  symbol  A ,  or  double 
plumes,  [11 ,  or  a  disk,  © ,  and  sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  mummied 
hawk,  ^  ,  with  plumes  on  his  head,  and  the  symbol  A  in  front  of 
him,  and  the  mendt,  (^  ,  on  his  back.  The  titles  which  accompany 
these  representations  describe  him  as  the  "  lord  of  the  east,"  i.e., 
the  eastern  part  of  the  Delta  and  Arabia.  On  a  shrine  discovered 
at  Saft  al-Henna  by  M.  Naville  he  appears  in  the  form  of  the  god 

Bes,  J  P  ^ ,  who  is  represented  with  outspread  arms,  hands,  and 
wings,  and  with  feathers  on  the  top  of  his  head.     In  this  form 

I  lit  II I  til    ^^\  /y~)       I 

he  is  called,  "  Sept,  the  smiter  of  the  Menti,"  ^^  ^^  ^^  i, 
i.e.,   the   tribes   of  the    Eastern    Desert   and   Arabia.     Sept   was 


clearly   a    god   of    battles,  h4^'    ^^^    ^*^    ^'^®    called 

the    "  Bull     that     trampleth     on     the     Menti ;  "     he    was     the 


MISCELLANEOUS   HORUS    GODS  499 

"  strengthener  of  Egypt,  and  the  protector  of  the  temples  of  the 
gods."  ^ 

The   principal  seat  of  the  worship    of  the  god  was   in  the 
metropolis  of  the  nome,  i.e.,  at  Per-Sept,  A  VV  S'  ^^  Kesem, 

Q  ^^  ^ ,  was  a  distinct  city  from  Per-Sept  a  temple  to  the  god 
may  have  stood  there  also.  The  female  counterpart  of  Heru-Sept 
was  a  form  of  the  goddess  Hathor  to  whom,  in  the  twentieth  nome 
of  Lower  Egypt,  the  name  Septit,  P^^fl^Jj)  was  given;  his 
sanctuary  contained  some  fine  nebes  ^  trees,  hence  its  name  dst 
nebes,  jj  ^  ^^^  JO''"  ^^o^se  of  nebes  trees."  As  the  '^  lord  of 
battle,"  ^^i^  Q^ ,  Sept  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  hawk-headed 
lion  with  the  tails  of  a  lion  and  a  hawk,  and  in  his  hands,  which 
are  those  of  a  man,  he  holds  a  bow  and  a  club  ;  on  his  head  are  a 
disk  ^  and  plumes.  Sept  is  mentioned  even  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
with  the  attributes  of  a  god  of  war,  and  in  Chapter  xvii.  (line  30) 
he  is  said  to  "  thwart  the  acts  of  the  foes  of  Keb-er-tcher."  In  the 
xxxiind  Chapter  the  deceased  drives  away  the  Crocodile  of  the 
South,  and  says,  "  I  am  Sept " ;  and  in  the  cxxxth  Chapter 
(line  11)  we  read  of  the  "slaughtering  block  of  the  god  Septu," 

[^  "^  A  V  \^  •  ^P  *^  ^^®  present  no  satisfactory  explanation 
has  been  given  of  the  object  A  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  god 
Sept,  but  it  appears  to  have  been  some  kind  of  a  triangle ;  a  figure 
or  model  of  it  was  preserved  at  Amen-kheperutet,  ^^  ^  ^^~^  fl  ^ , 
which  is  described  in  the  Edfu  list  as  A -^  ]  aaaaaa  ^^ /wwvs  ^v  ^ 
i.e.,  "  the  hidden  |^  of  Khas  (?)  en-Sept." 

^  De  Rouge,  Geographie  Ancienne,  p.  141. 

^  The  Cordia  Sebestena,  or  Zizyphus  Lotos  W.,  according  to  Brugsch,  Religion, 
p.  567. 

^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  1048. 


(     500     ) 


CHAPTER   XVI 

THE   GREAT   TRIAD    OF   MEMPHIS,    PTAH,     °  §  jf , 

SEKHET,  ^f  ^,  AND  I-EM-HETEP,  ^f)!)^^^^- 

THE  greatest  of  all  the  old  gods  of  Memphis  was  undoubtedly 
Ptah,  °  I  ^ ,  or  Ptah-neb-ankh,  °  |  ^c:7  ^   ^    ^,  and 

his  worship,  in  one  form  or  another,  goes  back  to  the  earliest  part 
of  the  dynastic  period.  He  has  usually  been  regarded  as  a  form 
of  the  Sun-god,  and  as  the  personification  of  the  rising  sun,  either 
at  the  time  when  it  begins  to  rise  above  the  horizon  or  immediately 
after  it  has  risen.  The  name  has  often  been  explained  to  mean 
"  Opener,"  and  to  be  derived  from  a  root  which  was  cognate  in 
meaning  with  the  well-known  Semitic  root  pdthakh,  nrip^  in  fact 
Ptah  was  thought  to  be  the  "  Opener  "  of  the  day  just  as  Tem  was 
considered  to  be  the  "  Closer "  of  the  day.  The  chief  drawback, 
however,  to  the  acceptance  of  this  derivation  is  the  fact  that  Ptah 
never  forms  one  of  the  groups  of  the  chief  forms  of  the  Sun-god  in 
the  texts,  and  his  attributes  are  entirely  different  from  those  of 
Khepera,   Tem,    Heru,    and   Ra.     Moreover,    although   the  word 

ptahj      ft  ,  is  found  in  Egyptian  it  never  has  the  meaning  "  to 

open,"  in  the  sense  of  opening  a  door,  and  the  determinative  which 
follows  it,^  *— ,  proves  conclusively  that  although  it  does  mean 
^' to  open"  it  is  always  in  the  sense  of  "to  engrave,  to  carve,  to 
chisel,"  and  the  like ;  compare  Heb.  D^-^?  "  engraving,  sculpture." 
The  meaning  proposed  for  the  name  "Ptah"  by  Dr.  Brugsch  is 
"  sculptor,  engraver,"  and  many  passages  in  the  texts  of  all  periods 
make  it  plain  that  Ptah  was  the  chief  god  of  all  handicraftsmen, 

^  Brugsch,  Worterhuch,  p.  528. 


PTAH   THE   ARTIFICER  501 

and  of  all  workers  in  metal  and  stone.  What  the  form  of  the  god 
was  originally  it  is,  unfortunately,  impossible  to  say,  but  from  the 
titles  which  the  dynastic  Egyptians  gave  to  him  it  is  clear  that 
his  main  characteristics  did  not  change  from  the  period  of  the 
Ilnd  Dynasty  to  that  of  the  Ptolemies  and  Eomans.  At  a  very 
early  period  he  was  identified  with  one  of  the  great  primeval  gods 
of  Egypt,  and  he  was  called  "  the  very  great  god  who  came  into 

"being  in  the  earliest  time,"  ^^  "^  ^  Mi_^  ^^;  "father 
"  of  fathers,  Power  of  powers,"  ^  ^  ^  '^^  -r  "[nn.  "  father  of 
"  beginnings,  and  creator  of  the  egg[s]  of  the  Sun  and  Moon," 
^^I'^^IP^i  0^--^;  "lord  of  Maat,  king  of  the  two 
"  lands,  the  god  of  the  Beautiful  Face  in  Thebes,  who  created  his 
"  own  image,  who  fashioned  his  own  body,  who  hath  established  Maat 
throughout  the  two  lands  ;  "  ^  "  Ptah,  the  Disk  of  heaven,  illuminer 
"  of  the  two  lands  with  the  fire  of  his  two  eyes."  ^     In  the  text  of 

Teta  (lines  87,  97)  the  "workshop  of  Ptah,"  |^  °|,  is  men- 
tioned, and  the  general  sense  of  the  passages  indicates  that  it  was 
Ptah  who  was  believed  to  fashion  the  new  bodies  in  which  the 
souls  of  the  dead  were  to  live  in  the  Underworld.  Ptah,  as  we 
shall  see  later  from  the  passages  quoted  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
was  the  great  artificer  in  metals,  and  he  was  at  once  smelter,  and 
caster,  and  sculptor,  as  well  as  the  master  architect  and  designer 
of  everything  which  exists  in  the  world.  The  Greeks  and  the 
Latins  rightly  identified  one  form  of  him  with  Hephaistos  and 
Vulcan. 

Ptah  was  the  fellow-worker  with  Khnemu  in  carrying  into 
effect  the  commands  concerning  the  creation  of  the  universe  which 
were  issued  by  Thoth,  and  whilst  the  latter  was  engaged  in 
fashioning  man  and  animals,  the  former  was  employed  in  the 
construction  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.     The  large  rectangular 

,  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  240. 


I       AAAAAA      IJ 


D  I  []^  ^  ,=,  Pl"^  ^  ^  ^®  ^K_,  I6,U,  p.240. 


502  FORMS    OF   PTAH 

iron  slab  which  formed  the  floor  of  heaven  and  the  roof  of  the  sky 
was  beaten  out  by  Ptali,  and  he  and  his  assistants  made  the  stays 
and   supports   which   held   it   in   position.     In   the   character   of 
architect  of  the  universe  he  partakes   of  the   nature   of  Thoth, 
especially  in  respect  of  his  title  "  lord  of  Maat ;  "  and,  as  the  god 
who  beat  out  the  iron  firmament  with  a  hammer  and  supported  it, 
his  attributes  resemble  those  of  Shu.     In  other  capacities  he  was 
supposed   to   be    endowed  with   powers   which   we   are   wont   to 
associate  with  other  gods,  and  thus  we  find  enumerated  in  religious 
and  funeral  texts  Ptah-Asar  (Ptah-Osiris),  Ptah-Hapi,  Ptah-Nu, 
Ptah-Seker,   Ptah-Seker-Asar,  Ptah-Seker-Tem,  Ptah-Tanen, 
and  the  like.     The  part  which  Ptah  in  his  various  forms  plays  in 
the  Booh  of  the  Dead   is  well  illustrated  by  the   following: — In 
Chapter  iv.  he  is  said  to  come  forth  from  the  Great  Temple  of  the 
Aged  One  in  Annu ;  in  Chapter  xi.  the  deceased  says,  "  I  shall 
"  stand  up  like  Horus,  I  shall  sit  down  like  Ptah,  I  shall  be  mighty 
^'  like  Thoth,  and  I  shall  be  strong  like  Tem."     From  Chapter  xxiii. 
we  learn  that  Shu  or  Ptah  performed  the  ceremony  of  "  opening 
the  mouth  "  of  the  gods  with  an  iron  knife ;  in  Chapter  xlii.  the 
feet   of  the    deceased    are   identified   with   the   feet  of  Ptah ;    in 
Chapter  Ixiv.,  line  8,   he  is  said   to   have  covered  his  sky  with 
crystal;  Chapter  Ixxxii.   is  a  text  by  the   use   of  which  a  man 
transforms  himself  into  Ptah,  when  his  tongue  becomes  like  that  of 
the  god;   in  Chapter  cxlv.,  line  67,  the  "writings  of  Ptah"  are 
referred  to ;  in  Chapter  cli.A   Mestha  tells  the  deceased  that  he 
has   "  stablished  his   house  firmly  according  to  what  Ptah  hath 
commanded ; "  and  in  Chajoter  cliii.,  line  6,  the  "  hook  of  Ptah " 
is    mentioned ;    in    Chapter    clxvi.    Ptah    is    said    to    overthrow 
the  enemies  of  the   deceased   (see  also   Chapter  clxxii.    10).     In 
Chapter  cli.  the  hair  of  the  deceased  is  compared  to  that  of  Ptah- 
Seker,  and  in  Chapter  clxx.  this  god  is  said  to  give  him  help  with  his 
khakeru,  ^:r:::^  ti  \  ^  i  weapons  from  his  divine  house.     In  a  hymn  to 
Osiris  (Chapter  xv.)  Osiris  is  addressed  as  Un-nefer  Heru-khuti, 
and   as  "Ptah-Seker-Tem,  ^  I  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^tor^'  ^^  Annu,   the 
"lord  of  the  hidden  place,  and  the  creator  of  Het-ka-Ptah  (i.e., 
"  '  the  House  of  the  Double  of  Ptah,'  or  Memphis) ;  "  finally,  Ptah- 


FORMS   OF   PTAH  503 

Tanen  is  mentioned  in  Chapter  clxxxiii.,  line  15,  as  having  caused 
to  be  inscribed  certain  decrees  concerning  Horus  upon  an  "  iron 
tablet." 

The  commonest  form  in  which  Ptah  is  represented  is  that  of  a 
bearded  man  with  a  bald  head  who  is  shrouded  in  a  close-fitting 
garment,  from  an  ojDening  in  the  front  of  which  project  his  two 
hands ;  from   the  back  of  his  neck  hangs  the  mendt,  symbol  of 

pleasure  and  happiness,  and  in  his  hands  he  holds  a  sceptre,  j, 

and  the  emblems  of  "life,"  -V-,  and  "  stability,"  u.     When  standing 

upright  his  feet  rest  upon  a  pedestal  made  in  the  shape  of  the 
sign  madt  / — i,  and  when  seated  his  throne  rests  upon  a  pedestal 
of  similar  shape.     At  the  back  of  standing  figures  of  the  god  we 

sometimes  see  an  obelisk,  J] ,  or  the  tet,  u ,  which  symbolizes  both 

"stability"  and  the  tree  trunk  in  which  the  body  of  Osiris  was  hidden 

by  Isis.     Ptah  under  his  forms  of  Ptah-Nu,      |  w)  ^_^  Jf  j  and 

Ptah- H  API,  ^  §  J)  §     n    "^^X^  rjj  ?  naerely  represents  the  union  of 

the  great  celestial  workman  and  architect  with  the  primeval 
elements  of  earth  and  water,  and  there  are  no  representations 
specially  set  apart  for  these  forms. 

On  the  other  hand,  his  forms  of  Ptah-Sekee,  or  Ptah-Sekee- 

AsAit,    °|g|,     °i^|^,    and   Ptah-Tanbk,  \ 


11.  A,  must  be  specially  considered.     Ptah-Sekee  represents 

a  personification  of  the  union  of  the  primeval  creative  power 
with  a  form  of  the  inert  powers  of  darkness,  or  in  other  words, 
Ptah-Seker  is  a  form  of  Osiris,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  night  sun,  or 
dead  Sun-god.  Sekee  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  hawk-headed 
man  in  mummied  form  resembling  that  of  Ptah,  and  his  hands 
project  from  the  front  of  his  close-fitting  garment  and  hold  the 

emblems  of  sovereignty  and  dominion,  f ,  ^ ,  | ;  sometimes  he  has 
the  head  of  a  man  and  holds  in  each  hand  a  knife. ^  Seker  was 
originally  a  power  of  darkness,  or  of  the  night,  which  in  later 
times  was  identified  with  forms  of  the  night  sun  like  Tem.     He  is 

^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  368,  N^o.  4. 


504 


THE   SEKER   BOAT 


called  "  the  great  god,  who  came  into  being 
"  in  the  beginning,  he  who  resteth  upon  the 

"  darkness,"  1_^<=>T-=^=^'^ 
I"  ^^T^.  In  the  xviith  Chapter  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  (line  113)  occurs  a  petition 
in  which  the  deceased  begs  to  be  delivered 
from  the  "  great  god  who  carrieth  away 
"  the  soul,  who  eateth  hearts,  and  who 
"  feedeth  upon  offal,  the  guardian  of  the 
"  darkness,  the  god  who  is  in  the  Seker 

,"  and  in  the  explanation 


Seker-Asar. 


"  boat, 

of  the  passage  which  is  given  in  answer  to 
the  question,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  the  god  who  is 
in  the  Seker  boat  is  said  to  be  either  Suti, 

l^^^S^'  ''''  Smam-ur,  P^^^s3 
^^,  the  soul  of  Seb.  Thus  it  is  clear  that 
Seker  was  an  ancient  spirit  or  god  whose  attributes  were  such  that 
he  might  well  be  represented  by  Set,  or  Suti,  the  enemy  of  Ka,  or 
by  the  soul  of  the  earth-god  Seb.  In  comparatively  early  dynastic 
times  Seker  was 
exalted  to  the 
position  of  god  of 
that  portion  of  the 
Underworld  which 
was  allotted  to  the 
souls  of  the  in- 
habitants of  Mem- 
phis and  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  it 
is  tolerably  certain 
that  he  was  re- 
garded as  the  tute- 
lary deity  of  the 
necropolis  of  Sak- 

^'f^^^'  rtolemy  Euergetes  and  the  Ileiiuu  Boat. 


SEKER   OR   HENNU   BOAT  505 

The  Sekee  Boat  which  has  been  mentioned  above  is  often 
represented  on  sepulchral  monuments  and  papyri,  and  it  was 
certainly  made  to  play  a  very  prominent  part  in  certain  solemn, 
sacred  ceremonies.  It  was  not  made  in  the  form  of  an  ordinary 
boat,  but  one  end  of  it  was  very  much  higher  than  the  other,  and 
was  made  in  the  shape  of  the  head  of  some  kind  of  gazelle  or  oryx  ; 
the  centre  of  the  boat  was  occupied  by  a  carefully  closed  coffer 
which  was  surmounted  by  a  hawk  with  protecting  wings  stretched 
out  over  the  top  of  it.  This  coffer  contained  the  body  of  the  dead 
Sun-god  Af,  or  of  Osiris,  and  it  rested  upon  a  framework  or  sledge 
which  was  provided  with  runners.  On  the  great  day  of  the 
festival  of  Seker  which  was  celebrated  in  many  places  throughout 
Egypt,  the  ceremony  of  placing  the  Seker  boat  upon  its  sledge  was 
performed  at  sunrise,  at  the  moment  when  the  rays  of  the  sun 
were  beginning  to  spread  themselves  over  the  earth.  The  whole 
ceremony  was  under  the  direction  of  the  high  priest  of  Memphis, 

whose  official  title  was  "  Ur  kherp  hem,"  ^=*  f  f  ?  "  ^•®-5  gi'sat  chief 

of  the  hammer  "  ;  this  official  was  expected  to  lift  the  Seker  Boat 
upon  its  sledge,  and  to  march  at  the  head  of  the  procession  of 
priests  which  drew  the  loaded  sledge  round  the  sanctuary.  By 
this  action  the  revolution  of  the  sun  and  other  celestial  bodies  was 
symbolized,  but  no  texts  explaining  the  symbolism  have  come 
down  to  us.  From  the  inscriptions  which  are  found  at  Memphis 
and  in  the  neighbourhood  we  know  that  the  office  of  high  priest  of 
Ptah  was  considered  to  be  a  most  honourable  position,  and  that 
many  men  of  noble  family  and  of  high  rank  held  it  as  far  back  as 
the  period  of  the  Ilnd  Dynasty.  Now  since  the  priestly  office 
existed  in  those  remote  times  it  is  only  reasonable  to  assume  that 
the  Seker  Boat  also  existed,  and  that  the  ceremonies  with  which  it 
was  used  in  the  later  period  were  also  performed  in  the  earlier ; 
the  god  Seker  was,  even  when  the  Pyramids  were  built,  an  ancient 
god,  and  the  chief  characteristics  of  his  worship  must  be  as  old  as 
the  god  himself. 

The  name  given  to  the  Seker  Boat  is  "  Hennu,"  8  "^  ^  ^/, 
and  it  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  BooJc  of  the  Dead,  and 
sometimes   in    connexion   with   traditions    of    great    importance. 


506  SEKER   OR   HENNU   BOAT 

Thus  after  the  Ixivth  Chapter  we  have  a  rubric  which  states 
that  the  composition  was  found  in  the  masonry  below  the  shrine  of 
Hennu  during  the  reign  of  Semti  (Hesepti)  a  king  of  the  1st 
Dynasty ;  now  Hennu  can  only  be  the  god  of  the  Hennu  boat, 
and  the  shrine  of  Hennu  must  be  the  place  where  it  was  kept.  A 
most  valuable  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  this  boat  is  found  on  an 
ebony  tablet  in  the  British  Museum  ^  Avhich  was  made  for  the  royal 
chancellor  Hemaka,  who  flourished  during  the  reign  of  Semti, 
whose  Horus  name  was  Ten.  On  this  we  see  a  representation  of 
the  king  dancing  before  Osiris,  who  is  seated  within  a  shrine  on 
the  top  of  a  flight  of  steps,  and  in  the  register  immediately  below 
it  is  a  figure  of  the  Hennu  Boat.  The  Seker  or  Hennu  Boat  was 
probably  a  form  of  the  Sektet  Boat,  i.e.,  the  boat  in  which  the 
sun  sailed  over  the  sky  during  the  second  half  of  his  daily  journey, 
and  in  which  he  entered  the  Underworld  in  the  evening,  for  Ra 

the  Aged,  ^  "1  f^  ?  is  said  to  be  like  Horus,  and  Ra  the  Babe, 
^  i  ''^^  ,  to  be  like  Seker.  The  sanctuaries  of  Seker  must  have 
been  extremely  numerous  ^  in  Lower  Egypt  in  very  early  dynastic 
times,  but  it  appears  that  before  the  great  development  of  Ra 
worship  took  place,  the  god  Seker  was  already  identified  with  and 
merged  in  Ptah,  and  that  these  gods  were  adored  together  in  one 
temple.  The  forms  in  which  Ptah-Seker  is  represented  are 
interesting,  for  they  illustrate  the  attributes  of  the  double  god,  and 
prove  that  it  was  Ptah  who  usurped  the  characteristics  of  Seker, 
and  that  Seker  was  the  older  god.  Ptah-Seker  is  often  depicted 
in  the  form  of  a  man  who  wears  upon  his  head  a  crown  composed 

of  disk,  plumes,  horns,  and  uraei  with  disks  on  their  heads,  ^^ ; 

a  cognate  form  is  perhaps  that  reproduced  by  Lanzone  ^  in  which 
the  god,  Avho  in  this  case  is  called  "  Ptah  whose  double  plumes  are 
lofty,"  has  upon  his  head  horns,  plumes,  and  a  uraeus,  and  a  uraeus 
upon  his  forehead.     Another  interesting  form  is  that  of  a  mummy 

with  a  disk  and  the  two  feathers  of  Maat,  J^qR,  upon  his  head.^ 

Elsewhere  he  is  found  in  the  usual  form  of  Ptah    seated   upon 

*  No.  32,650.  -  See  a  list  given  by  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  1117. 

3  Op.  cit.,  pi.  94,  No.  4.  i  Ibid.,  pi.  95. 


PTAH-SEKER-ASAR  507 

a  throne  behind  Osiris  and  followed  by  Anubis,  Horus,  son  of  Isis, 
and  Hathor. 

Under  the  name  of  Ptah-Seker-Asar  we  find  Ptah  and 
Seker  united  with  Osiris  to  form  a  remarkable  triad,  which  is 
depicted  in  various  ways.  A  common  representation  of  the  god  is 
the  hawk,  with  the  White  Crown  and  plumes  upon  his  head, 
standing  upon  a  low  pedestal,  from  the  front  of  which  projects  a 
serpent ;  in  this  form  he  is  often  met  with  on  painted  coffins  and 
sepulchral  chests.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Anhai  (Brit.  Mus.,  plate  5) 
the  god  is  seated  within  a  shrine  in  human  form  with  the  crown, 

iy  ,  upon  his  head  ;  behind  him  stand  Isis  and  Nephthys.     The 

titles  here  given  to  him  are,  "  Dweller  in  the  secret  place,  great 
"  god,  lord  of  Ta-tchesertet,  king  of  eternity,  governor  of  ever- 

"lastingness,"  t  ?S^q^^1  H  -  r^^  ^Ml  "-M 
I  3  X^ .     Before  the  god  is  the  skin  of  the  pied  bull,  of  which 

the  head  has  been  cut  off,  with  blood  dripping  from  it  into  a  bowl, 
and  perched  on  the  side  of  the  throne  is  his  son  Horus  in  the  form 
of  a  hawk.  The  cornice  of  the  shrine  in  which  the  god  is  seated 
is  composed  of  uraei  with  disks  on  their  heads,  and  before  it  stand 

the  Mer  goddess  of  the  South,  X ,  wearing  a  red  garment,  and 

the  Mer  goddess  of  the  North,  "W ,  wearing  a  blue  garment, 

and  it  is  quite  clear  from  the  general  arrangement  of  the  vignette 
that  in  the  XXIInd  Dynasty  Ptah-Seker-Asar  was  wholly 
identified  with  Osiris.  A  very  interesting  form  of  the  triune  god 
is  that  in  which  he  appears  as  a  squat  pigmy  with  a  large,  bald 
head,  and  thick  limbs ;  on  the  top  of  his  head  he  usually  has  a 
beetle,  but  occasionally  plumes  are  given  to  him.  An  examination 
of  the  variants  of  this  form  proves  that  he  was  supposed  to  possess 
all  the  virile  power  of  Amsu,  or  Min,  and  the  creative  power  of 
Khepera,  which  is  symbolized  by  the  beetle,  and  the  youth  and 
vigour  of  Harpocrates,  which  is  represented  by  the  lock  of  hair  on 
the  right  side  of  his  head;  and  as  sometimes  he  stands  upon  a 
crocodile,  and  holds  a  serpent  in  each  hand,  he  must  have  possessed 
besides  the  powers  of  several  of  the  great  solar  gods.  Ptah-Seker- 
Asar  is,  then,  like  Osiris,  the  type  and  symbol  of  the  resurrection 


508  PTAH-TANEN 

from  the  dead,  and  he  has  been  fittingly  described  as  the  "  triune 
god  of  the  resurrection  " ;  that  he  was  the  outcome  of  some  local 
Memphite  belief,  or  the  result  of  some  compromise  between  the 
priests  of  Osiris  and  the  priests  of  the  old  Memphite  god  is  toler- 
ably certain,  but  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  exactly  what  belief, 
or  doctrine,  or  dogma  was  associated  with  this  mysterious  god  who 
united  within  himself  the  attributes  of  Seker,  and  those  of  Ptah 
the  architect  and  builder  of  the  material  world,  and  of  Khepera 
the  self-begotten  and  self-born,  and  Osiris  the  giver  of  everlasting 
life. 

Finally  must  be  mentioned  Ptah  in  his  connexion  with  the 

primeval  god  Tenen,  a^  A,  or  Ta-tu-nen,  ["^^  ^  "v^  -1-^  iS?  or 

Ta-thunen,  ■■■  £=5  ^  4"f  ^7  or  Ta-thu-nenet,  __.4-4-  ^' 
This  god  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a  man,  either  sitting  or 
standing,  who  wears  on  his  head  the  crown,  ^y  ,  and  holds  in  his 
hands  the  symbols  of  sovereignty  and   dominion,  ^,    | ,  and  1; 

in  a  figure  reproduced  by  Lanzone  ^  we  see  him  seated  upon  the 
oval  object,  ( — ).  Another  figure  represents  the  god  seated  with 
a  potter's  Avheel  before  him,  which  he  works  with  his  foot,  and  on 
the  upper  part  of  it  is  the  Qg^  of  the  world  which  he  is  fashioning 
with  his  hands ;  elsewhere  he  is  depicted  with  a  scimitar  in  his 
right  hand,  which  suggests  that  in  one  form  he  was  regarded  as  a 
destructive  power  of  nature,  or  as  a  warrior-god.  Tenen,  or 
Ta-Tenen,  must  have  been  one  of  the  earliest  gods  of  Lower  Egypt, 
and  have  been  a  personification  of  a  nature  power,  the  exact 
attributes  of  which  appear  to  have  been  unknown  even  to  the 
Egyptians.  In  the  early  part  of  the  dynastic  period  it  was  thought 
that  Ptah,  the  local  god  of  Memphis,  might  be  fittingly  identified 
with  Tenen,  or  Ta-Tenen,  and  his  name  was,  therefore,  joined  to 
that  of  the  older  god,  just  as  in  later  days  the  name  of  Amen  was 
joined  to  that  of  Ra  ;  later  Tenen  and  Ta- tenen  were  merely  forms 
and  names  of  Ptah.  From  a  hymn  to  Ptah -Tenen,"  which  is  pro- 
bably a  product  of  the  XXth  or  XXIst  Dynasty,  we  may  gain  some 

Op.  cit.,  pi.  401,  No.  3. 
*  For  the  hieratic  text  see  Lepsius,  Denhndler,  vi.,  pi,  118. 


HYMN   TO   PTAH-TANEN 


509 


idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  name  Ta-tenen,  "  Ta,"  ,  is  of  course 

"  earth,"  and  "Tenen,"  aaaaaa,  is  probably  to  be  connected  with  the 
word,  -1-4-^,^,^^^?  6wew,  or  nen,  which  means  "inertness,  in- 
activity, rest,  motionless,"  and  the  like,  and  if  this  derivation  be 
correct  Ta-Tenen  must  be  the  god  of  the  inert  but  living  matter  of 
the  earth. 

The  passage  on  which  this  view  is  based  is  a  very  difficult 
one,  and  appears  to  read,  "  There  was  given  to  thee  a  Sekhem 
"  (i.e..  Power)  upon  the  earth  in  its  things  which  were  in  a  state 
"  of  inactivity,  and  thou  didst  gather  them  together  after  thou 
"  didst  exist  in  thy  form  of  Ta-Tenen,  in  thy  becoming  the  '  Uniter 
"  of  the  two  lands,'  which  thy  mouth  begot  and  which  thy  hands 
"  fashioned."  ^  It  is,  as  Dr.  Brugsch  suggested,  quite  possible 
that  in  this  passage  the  writer  was  not  discussing  the  derivation 
of  the  name  Tenen,  or  Ta-Tenen,  seriously,  and  was  only  making 
a  play  upon  the  words  of  similar  sound.  In  the  hymn  to  Ptah- 
Tenen  already  mentioned  we  find  the  following  address  to  the  god 
and  titles : — "  Homage  to  thee,  0  Ptah-Tenen,  thou  great  god, 
"  whose  form  is  hidden  !  Thou  openest  thy  soul  and  thou  Avakest 
"up  in  peace,  0  father  of  the  fathers  of  all  the  gods,  thou  Disk 
"  of  heaven !  Thou  illuminest  it  with  thy  two  Eyes,  and 
"  thou  lightest  up   the   earth  with   thy  brilliant   rays   in   peace." 


It 


AAAAAA 


1^2^ 


I  IIIIIIIII 


f^kJ 


(^  III 


n    ^  , ,  s\  f  f  p  ^2>-  o  . 

I         AAAAAA        AAftAAA        1/  0      „  /T     "^Z^-^.        f^hJ\N\f\  iS,  ^^  Q 


s  I 


s:  I 


y  ^s  ^^  Lm        '    Ms       n  ' '  •     ■'"^  *^®  ^^^^^  which  follow  he  is 


called  the  "begetter  of  men,"    (s      (*=u) 


I ,   the    "  maker 


1  A fl 


NX 

w 


s 
s 


(Q       f=S^ 


J       N\r^/\r\K 


510 


HYMN   TO   PTAH-TANEN 


of  their  lives,"  the  "  creator  of  the  gods,"  "  he  who  passeth  through 
eternity  and  everlastingness,"  P  J  ^  i  ^  I  "^ ,  "  of  multitudinous 


forms," 

make  to  him,"  ^ 

his    own   limbs," 


ITU 


D 


^    111 


"  the  hearer  of  prayers  which  men 

=>  "J  ^  ^^  ^  j ,  ''  builder  of 
=—  -^,    and   maker   of  his   body, 


"  when  as  yet  heaven  and  earth  were  not  created,  and  when  the 
"  waters  had  not  come  forth,"  ffi  <=>       ^  W  <=>     '" 


Jf15^Zi1^ 


/V\/SAAA 
AAAAAA 


"  Thou  didst  knit  tos^ether  the 


s 


"  earth,  thou  didst  gather  together  thy  members,  thou  didst 
"  embrace  thy  limbs,  and  thou  didst  find  thyself  in  the  condition 
"  of  the  One  who  made  his  seat,  and  who  fashioned  (or,  moulded) 
"  the  two  lands.^  Thou  hadst  no  father  to  beget  thee  in  thy 
"  person,  and  thou  hadst  no  mother  to  give  birth  unto  thee  ;  thou 
"  didst  fashion  thyself  without  the  help  of  any  other  being.  Fully 
"  equipped  thou  didst  come  forth  fully  equipped."  ^     Next  we  have 

an  allusion  to  thy  "aged  son,"   "^^  Jj  ^^zi^s  M  i^  1 '  ^•®*'  "^^' 

and  to  the  dissipation  of  night  and  darkness  by  the  sun  and  moon, 
which  are  called  the  "  Eyes  "  of  Ptali-Tenen.  The  hymn  continues, 
Thy  feet  are  upon  the  earth  and  thy  head  is  in  the  heights  above 
in  thy  form  of  the  dweller  in  the  Tuat.  Thou  bearest  up  the 
work  which  thou  hast  made,  thou  supportest  thyself  by  thine 
own  strength,  and  thou  boldest  up  thyself  by  the  vigour  of  thine 
own  hands.  .  .  .  The  upper  part  of  thee  is  heaven  and  the  lower 


part   of    thee   is   the   Tuat."     <^  <^ 

n  p>^ 


I  I  I 


i^rii 


^vi 


/"/^-vvs      ra  ^  1-1? 


s 
s 


^  r=a  '^  ^< 


(2 


P^AI^P^M 


HYMN   TO   PTAH-TANEN  511 


0^  n  ^ ^ .        ft^   .r ^  -C -Zf,     ^ 


The  winds  come  forth  from  thy  nostrils,  and  the  celestial  water 
from  thy  mouth,  and  the  staff  of  life  (i.e.,  wheat,  barley,  etc.), 
proceeds  from  thy  back ;  thou  makest  the  earth  to  bring  forth 
fruit,  and  gods  and  men  have  abundance,  and  they  see  Meh-urit 
cattle  in  thy  field.  When  thou  art  at  rest  the  darkness  cometh, 
and  when  thou  openest  thy  two  eyes  beams  of  light  are  produced. 
Thou  shinest  in  thy  crystal  form   according  to  [the  wont  of] 

thy  majesty The  company  of  the  gods  of  thy  supreme 

company  praise  thee,  and  they  acclaim  thee  at  thy  rising  and 
hymn  thee  at  thy  setting  in  the  land  of  life."  A  few  lines  lower 
down  Ptah-Tenen  is  called  the  ''great  god  who  stretched  out  the 
heavens,  who  maketh  his  disk  to  revolve  in  the  body  of  Nut  and 
to  enter  into  the  body  of  Nut  in  his  name  of  Ra,  Moulder  of 
gods,  and  of  men,  and  of  everything  which  is  produced,  maker  of 
all  lands,  and  countries,  and  the  Grreat  Green  Sea  in  his  name  of 
Khepee-ta  (m.'^Jj  Bringer  of  Hapi  (  J^  X^  i^ )  from  his 
source,  making  to  flourish  the  staff  of  life,  maker  of  grain  which 

Cometh  forth  from  him  in  his  name  Nu  the  Aged  ( ^^^^^  i^^ly 

who  maketh  fertile  the  watery  mass  of  heaven,  and  maketh  to 
come   forth   the  water   on   the   mountains   to  give  life  to   men 

and   women    {'^^  (Ju      ^^  V§^  J)  i)   in   his  name    of  Aei-ankh 

•<2>- ■¥-  ^  i\u  Maker  of  the  Tuat  with  all  its  arrangements, 
who  driveth  away  the  flame  from  those  who  live  in  their  corners 
in  his  name  of  Suten-taui  Q  ^  ""  ^  I),  King  of  eternity 
and  everlastingness,  and  lord  of  life."  Among  other  titles  of  the 
god  in  this  hymn  we  have: — "Babe,  born  daily,"  ®  (1(1  ^^  rfl  Ofl 
^_^;  "Aged  one  on  the  borders  of  eternity,"  ^^  ft  "II" ^^^ 
<^  ^  1^  ^  i  ®  i'  "  ^^^^  ^^®  traversing  eternity,"  (1  "^  Q.  j^ 
^  J  J  ^  ^Q ;  "  Inert  one  passing  over  all  his  aspects,"  11  ^'"'^  (§\ 
A  ^      "^"=^5  ''  Exalted  one  without  his  strength,"  zi  'v\  V 


512  SHRINES    OF   PTAH 

"^  "^^  D  I  "^^^  ''^-^^ ;  "  Lord  of  the  hidden  throne,  hidden  is  he," 

"form  is  unknown,"  fl'^^lf^  -^  •=*  Jl  'fe  ^  J  ^^  f\  ;  "Lord 

of  years,  giver  of  life  at  will,"  '^=^i,||^__,7®     <r>li)^^' 

The. above  extracts  are  sufficient  to  show  the  importance  of 
the  god  Ptah-Tenen  in  the  eyes  of  the  Egyptians  about  B.C.  1100, 
at  which  time,  if  we  may  judge  from  palaeographical  evidence,  the 
hymn  was  probably  written,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing 
that  he  was  thought  less  of  during  any  period  of  Egyptian  history. 
The  papyrus  upon  which  the  text  is  inscribed  is  said  to  have  been 
found  at  Thebes,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  style  of  writing 
closely  resembles  the  fine  bold  hand  of  the  great  papyrus  of 
Rameses  III.,  king  of  Egypt  about  B.C.  1200,  which  also  was 
discovered  at  Thebes ;  we  should  not,  however,  expect  to  find,  in 
the  city  of  Amen-Ra,  the  king  of  the  gods,  papyri  containing 
hymns  to  Ptali-Tenen,  the  god  of  Memphis,  in  which  this  god  is 
made  to  possess  all  the  attributes  of  all  the  great  gods  of  Egypt, 
yet  such  has  been,  undoubtedly,  the  case.  The  fact  that  the  triad 
of  Ptah,  Sekhet,  and  Nefer-Tem  was  Avorshipped  at  Thebes  is 
another  proof  of  the  influence  which  the  priests  of  Heliopolis 
exerted  over  the  religious  views  of  the  Thebans  in  almost  every 
period  of  Egyptian  history  after  the  Vlth  Dynasty. 

Returning  now  to  the  consideration  of  Ptah  in  his  simplest 
form,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  principal  centre  of  his  worship  was 

It  in        ^  1 

in  the  city  of  Men-nefer,  T  A  ,   i.e.,  Memphis,   the  capital  of 

AAAAAA    0    ti 


Aneb-hetch,  ^  y ,  the  first  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.     The  commonest 

names   for   Memphis    in    the   religious   texts   are  : — 1.  Ha-nefer, 

^l(\®'     2.    Het-ka-PtaV   Oi=^  °i  V®'   ^^^^   ^^^^^^'   *^^ 
Greek   name   for  Egypt,  "AtyvuTo^^  has  been  commonly  derived. 

3.    Khut-taui,     [O^  g^,    i.e.,    "horizon    of    the    two    lands." 

1  I.e.,  "  House  of  the  Double  of  Ptah." 


ASAR-HAPI   OR   SERAPIS 


518 

Anebu,   y^, 


4.    Het-ka-khnem-neteru,^    P    ^    '^  Q  1 
i.e.,  the   "  city  of  walls."     6.  Makha-taui, 

i.e.,  "the  balance  of  the  two  lands."  In  the  city  of  Memphis  or  its 
neighbourhood  were  the  temjDles  of  Ptali,  Sekhet,  Bast,  Hathor, 
Osiris,    Seker,    and   I-em-hetep,    the   most    important   being    the 

Het-aa,  |      ^    j^.  "the  house  of  the  Aged   One,"  i.e.,   Ra.     In 

the  temple  called  Ankh-taui,  ■¥-  =^^j  were  the  sacred  persea 

and    acacia    trees ;    in    Hekennut,    |  ''yr^  ^ , 

Osiris  was  worshipped  ;    in  Het-utet,     J    ^ 

V  "^  "^  S '  ^•®''  "  ^o^s6  of  the  begetter,"  the 
cult  of  Khnemu  was  observed  ;  another  sacred 
place    was    called    the    "Path    of    Anubis," 


riirrr 


^ 


n  I ;  and  another 


Y*   Ta-het-pa-Aten,  ^  ^  f 


I  /wwv\    I.e., 
1    o  '       ' 

the  "  House  of  the  Disk";  and  in  Tepeh-tchat, 
nil    "^  '  ^^^  y®^  another  sacred  tree.^ 

The  Serapeum,  which  was  discovered 
by  M.  Mariette  in  1868,  was  known  by 
the  name  of  "  ISTeter-het  per  en  Asar-Hap," 

1    """^  ^  ^AJ\    ^  '  ^  <iistrict  called  Balitet, 
§  ^  ^,  was  the  centre  of  the  worship  of 


Seker ;  the  district  of  Pa-penat,  D 
was  the  centre  of  the  worship  of  Bast ;  Osiris 

~^  ^ ;    Hathor  was 
n  e^:^^  ]l  fi  ^ ;  Khnemu  was 

I       AAAAAA      i!/    I       W 


Asar-Hapi  (Serapis). 

was  adored  in  the   district  of  Hekennut, 

adored  in  the  district  of  Smen-Maat,  , .  ii  u  ^^  ? 

I       AAAAAA      4i'    I       w 

adored  at  TJafet,  ^    ^   ©;   and  Ptah  and  Sekhet  and  their  son 


I-em-hetep  appear  to  have  possessed  temples  wherein  they  were 
worshipped  exclusively.  The  city  of  Memphis  is  often  called  in 
the  hieroglyphic  texts  *'  Aneb,"  a  name  which  is  written 


V 


1  I.e.,  "  House  of  tlie  Double  which  uniteth  the  gods." 

2  See  cle  Rouge,  Geogvaphiej  pp.  4  f£. 


l1 


514  SEKHET   AND   NEFER-TEM 

or  Jl '",  or  nnn  "',^  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  appellation 
of  "Walls"  was  given  to  it  because  of  its  strong  fortifications. 
Once  a  year  the  priests  of  Ptah-Seker-Asar  formed  a  solemn 
procession,  and  led  by  the  Sem-priest,  ^  ^^ ,  and  usually  ac- 
companied by  the  king,  they  marched  all  round  the  walls  of 
Memphis ;  it  is  probable  that  the  image  of  this  triune  god  was 
carried  in  the  procession.  The  god  Ptah  himself  was  worshipped 
in  a  temple  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  city  called  "  Aneb-abt," 
n  "f ;  the  temple  of  Tenen  bore  the  name  of  "  Aneb  Athi,"  y  f|  ®  • 
and  Ptah-Seker-Asar  was  adored  in  a  temple  on  the  south  side  of 
the  city  called  "  Aneb-rest-f,"  i.e.,  "  his  southern  wall,"  i  3  F   ^  • 

The  whole  city  was  known  by  the  name  of  "  White  Wall,"  ^  9  @  ? 
to  which  reference  is  made  by  Herodotus^  (iii.  91). 

The   principal  female  counterpart  of   Ptah  was   the  goddess 

Sekhet,  n  ^  "^ ,  who  was  at  once  his  sister  and  wife,  and  the 
mother  of  his  son  Nefer-Tem,  and  a  sister-form  of  the  goddess 
Bast.  She  is  generally  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman  with  the 
head  of  a  lioness  which  is  surmounted  by  the  solar  disk  encircled 
by  an  uraeus,  O,  but  sometimes  the  disk  is  omitted,  and  a  uraeus 
only  is  seen  upon  her  head.  The  name  of  the  goddess  appears  in 
the  Pyramid  Texts  (Unas,  line  390),  where  after  the  statement 
that  Unas  hath  proceeded   from   the    thighs   of  the    company  of 

the  gods,  ^^  -S  mi^lll'l  5  ^^^  i^  ^^i^  *^  hnYe  been  conceived 
by  Sekhet,  H®,  and  by  Sheskhentet,  ™f|||]^5'^^^  V  Sothis, 
(1  J  ^  n  A  "^  .  In  comparatively  late  dynastic  times  Sekhet  and 
Bast  were  identified  with  forms  of  Hathor,  and  were  regarded  as 
the  goddesses  of  the  West  and  the  East  respectively,  just  as  Nekhe- 
bet  and  Uatchet  were  the  goddesses  of  the  South  and  the  North 
respectively.  Each  goddess  had  the  head  of  a  lioness,  but  the  body 
of  Sekhet  is  said  to  have  been  draped  in  a  red  garment  Avhilst  that 
of  Bast  was  arrayed  in  a  green  garment.  Several  special  forms  of 
Sekhet  are  known  to  have  existed,  viz.,  Sekhet,  lady  of  Rekht, 

1  Brugsch,  Diet.  Geog.,  p.  55.  ~  Iv  rw  A^vkw  Tct'xet  '^4'  ^''  Me'/x^i. 


SEKHET-MEHENET  515 

0®^^.=:^^'^'^©,  Sekhet,  lady  of  Sa,  "^  '  ©,   Sekhet, 

lady  of  Rehesani,   <=>  ft    1  [j=p         ,   Sekhet,   the   great   lady,  the 

queen  of  Ant,  ^  Q  ^^  Sekhet  in  Bashu,  J  []  n^n  p  ^  ©,  Sekhet 

in  Sah,  «.  :^  ©,  Sekhet-Nut  in  Het-khat,  P  ^  ®  ^  "  |\    D  ^, 

and  Sekhet  in  Nefer  (?)-Shuu,  J  oa  ^  ^  © .     The  principal  titles 
of  Sekhet  were  "  Mighty  lady,  lady  of  Flame,  Tefnut  in  Senemet," 

—  AAAAAA      1 .  "greatly  beloved  one  of 


^  o  —     c.    '*  o  D  ^ 


Ptah,  lady  of  heaven,   mistress  of  the  two  lands,"  ^  | 

^=^^  __     ;   "  lady  of  Tep-nef,"    ,    ,,_  ^©;   '' lady  of  T char, 
'^  '^^"^  y  J\ ,  and  of  Sehert,     ry-i  ";    "chief  of  the  Libyan 


lands,  mistress  of  Pa-mertet,"    "^   r=^    |  9  ^  i   ^ 


The  name  "  Sekhet  "  appears  to  be  derived  from  or  connected 

with  the  root  sekhem,   1  ^  ^^^  V  )\,  "to  be  strong,  mighty,  violent," 

and  the  like,  and  as  she  was  the  personification  of  the  fierce, 
scorching,  and  destroying  heat  of  the  sun's  rays,  these  attributes 
would  be  very  suitable  for  her  character.     In  the  form  of  the 

serpent-goddess  Mehenet,  °^  9,  ^^^^^^  4h  ^'  ^^®  ^^^^  ^P  ^^^'  position 
on  the  head  of  her  father  Ra,  and  poured  out  from  herself  the 
blazing  fire  which  scorched  and  consumed  his  enemies  who  came 
near,  whilst  at  those  who  were  some  distance  away  she  shot  forth 
swift  fiery  darts  which  pierced  through  and  through  the  fiends 
whom  they  struck.  In  a  text  quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch  ^  she  is  made 
to  say,  "I  set  the  fierce  heat  of  the  fire  for  a  distance  of  millions 
"  of  cubits  between  Osiris  and  his  enemy,  and  I  keep  away  from 
"  him  the  evil  ones,  and  remove  his  foes  from  his  habitation."  One 
of  the  commonest  names  of  the  goddess  is  "  Nesert,"  i.e..  Flame,  as 
a  destroying  element,  and  in  texts  of  all  periods  she  plays  the  pait 
of  a  power  which  protects  the  good  and  annihilates  the  wicked. 


Var. 


mrp 


Q      c.   ^    ^f? 


2  Religion,  p.  520. 


516  SEV'EN   GODS    OF   LEARNING 

In  some  aspects  she  may  be  compared  with  Uatchet,  of  whom  a 
well-known  name  is  "  Lady  of  flame."  We  have  already  said  that 
in  some  respects  Sekhet  may  be  regarded  as  a  form  of  Hathor  and 
Net,  and  indeed  several  of  the  titles  of  the  last  named  goddesses 
are  bestowed  upon  her,  e.g.,  "  Lady  of  Amentet,  lady  of  Manu 
"  (i.e.,  the  mountain  of  the  setting  sun),  the  queen  of  the  Libyan 
"  lands,"  etc.  ;  these  appear  to  suggest  a  western  or  Libyan  origin 
for  the  goddess. 

In  connexion  with  Sekhet  and  her  relationship  with  Hathor, 
Net,  and  Maat  must  be  mentioned  the   Seven  Wise   Ones  of  the 

goddess  Meh-urt,  who  too-ether  with  Thoth,  ^5^^^,  Tekh, 
planned  the  world ;    they  were   born  of   Meh-urt,   °^  ^^^  '^^-^ , 

at   the    feet    of    Nu,    t=t  ,    in    their    home    in    Nehet-rest, 

|-T-|  ^  JL  ,  and  they  came  forth  from  the  water,  from  the 
pupil  of  the  Eye  of  Ra,  and  they  took  the  form  of  seven  hawks 
and  flew  upwards,  and  together  with  Asten,  n  M  ^^^  Ml ,  a  form  of 
Thoth,  they  presided  over  learning  and  letters.  The  names  of 
these  Seven  Wise  Ones,  I  "^  Cl  P  ^  ^f)  i  '"  ,  are: — Nefer-hati, 
Aper-pehui,  Neb-Tesheru,  Ka,  Bak,  Khekh,  and  San.^  Ptah, 
as  the  master  architect  and  workman  who  carried  out  the  designs 
of  Thoth  and  his  Seven  Wise  Ones,  partook,  in  some  respects,  of 
the  characteristics  of  them  all,  and  as  Sekhet  was  his  female 
counterpart  she  appears  to  have  acquired  some  of  their  attributes 
also,  because  Thoth  was  in  reality  only  a  personification  of  the 
intelligence  of  Ptah.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Sekhet  becomes 
identified  with  the  goddess  Maat,  for  Maat  was  the  inseparable 
companion  of  Thoth,  and  inasmuch  as  Thoth  was  contained  in 
Ptah,  Maat  became  the  female  counterpart  of  Ptah  and  a  sister 
form  of  Sekhet.  In  one  of  the  titles  of  Sekhet  given  above,  the 
goddess  is  identified  with  Tefnut,  the  female  counterpart  of  Shu ; 


A    cj] '    — " —  ^  ^ '    ^^^    Dumichen,    Tempelinschriften,    pi.    25 ;    Brugsch, 

Religion,  p.  522. 


SEKHET,    BAST,    PAKHT  517 

this  need  cause  no  surprise,  because  Tlioth  was  only  the  Hermo- 
politan  form  of  Shu,  and  Tefnut  was  therefore  his  female  counter- 
part, and  as  Ptah  absorbed  Thoth,  that  is  to  say,  Shu,  the  female 
counterpart  of  Ptah  (i.e.,  Sekhet)  absorbed  the  female  counterpart 
of  Thoth,  or  Shu  (i.e.,  Tefnut).  In  many  texts  Sekhet  is  called 
the  "  Eye  of  Ra,"  ^  ,  and  in  a  scene  reproduced  by  Lanzone  ^  we 
see  the  goddess  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  with  the  Utchat,  "^g ,  in 
place  of  a  head,  kneeling  upon  a  rectangular  throne,  whilst  a  hawk 
with  outstretched  wings  stands  behind  her.  Her  titles  in  this 
form  are,  "  Great  lady,  beloved  of  Ptah,  holy  one,  powerful  one, 

"  dweller  in  xit-Tefnut,"  "^      ^  <v^ . 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  small  porcelain  figures  of 
Ptah-Seker-Asar,  and  seen  how  they  were  intended  to  represent 
the  union  of  the  powers  of  the  three  great  gods  whose  names  are 
here  joined  together,  and  we  must  now  note  that  on  the  backs  of 
certain  examples  we  find  outlined  the  form  of  a  goddess,  who 
might  be  identified  with  any  of  the  female  counterparts  of  the 
great  gods  to  Avhom  the  head  of  a  lioness  Avas  given  by  Egyptian 
sculptors  and  artists.  The  goddess  here  found,  however,  is  Bast, 
^  ^  J ,  who  was  for  some  time  confounded  by  Egyptologists  with 
the  o'oddess  Pekheth,  £  s=^  _2^ ,  or  Pekhet,    _    ^   ,  or  Pekh, 

°  tSj,  the  Cat  or  Lioness  deity  of  Pekhit,  ^  flfl  t^@5  ^^  honour 
of  whom  a  temple  of  Pekheth,  tS.  \zrz2 ,  was  hewn  out  of  the 

solid  rock  in  the  mountain  near  the  modern  village  of  Beni 
Hasan  in  Upper  Egypt ;  this  temple  is  known  by  the  names  of 
"  Stabl  al-Antar,"  and  ''  Speos  Artemidos."  The  name  Pekht,  or 
Pakht,  or  Pasht  means  the  "  tearer,"  and  is,  of  course,  suitable  for 
a  goddess  who  possessed  the  attributes  of  the  cat  or  lioness ;  this 

goddess  was  the  lady  of  Ant,  (1  ^  ,  and  of  Set,  ^^_^^,  or  v-^, 
the  supplementary  nome  of  which  the  city  Pekht,  ^ ,  was  the 
capital.^  Her  title  was  "lady  of  Sept,"  ^^  A  ^,  i.e.,  of  the  star 
Sothis,    and    she    Avas   identified    with    Isis    and  with    a   form   of 

1  Op.  cit.,  pi.  364,  No.  3.  2  Diet.  Geog.,  pp.  225,  226. 


518  SEKHET-BAST-RA 

Hathor,  and  also  with  a  form  of  Sekhet.  In  the  great  inscription 
of  Beni  Hasan  (line  18)  we  find  the  mention  of  Horus  Pakht, 
^^  □  z;^  ^  -Sa^  J  and  we  may  therefore  assume  that  Pakht  was 
in  some  way  connected  with  one  of  the  forms  of  Horus,  and  that 
she  was  a  local  deity  of  great  importance. 

It  is  jDrobable  that  Bast  was  a  female  counterpart  of  the 
triune  god  Ptah-Seker-Asar,  and  that  she  possessed  attributes 
which  cannot  at  present  be  clearly  defined.  As  a  nature  power 
she  represented  the  gentle,  fructifying  heat  of  the  sun,  and  its 
regenerative  influence  in  the  most  comforting  form.  In  late 
dynastic  times  Bast,  and  Sekhet,  and  Ra  formed  a  deity  whose 
existence  is  made  known  to  us  by  a  Chapter  in  the  Booh  of  the 
Bead  (clxiv.).  In  the  vignette  Sekhet-Bast-Ra  is  represented  as  a 
woman  with  a  man's  head,  and  wings  attached  to  her  arms,  and  the 
heads  of  two  vultures  springing  either  from  her  head  or  neck  ;  she 
has  the  phallus  of  a  man  and  the  claws  of  a  lion.  One  vulture's 
head  is  like  that  of  Pekhat,  ^  I  '^  ^  Pn  ?  and  has  plumes  upon 
it,  and  the  other  is  like  that  of  an  ordinary  vulture,  and  appears 
to  have  plumes  upon  it  also ;  the  man's  head  has  upon  it  the 
united  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,  and  taken  together  with 
the  phallus  they  indicate  that  the  body  of  the  woman,  who  is  here 
called  Mut,  was  supposed  to  possess  the  generative  and  procreative 
powers  of  Ra. 

The  text  which  forms  the  chapter  is  a  very  interesting  one, 
and  reads : — "  Homage  to  thee,  0  Sekhet-Bast-Ra,  thou  mistress 
of  the  gods,  thou  bearer  of  wings,  thou  lady  of  the  red  apparel 
\\\  AAAAAA  5  dnes),   queen  of  the   crowns   of  the  South  and  North, 

only  One,  sovereign  of  her  father,  superior  to  whom  the 
gods  cannot  be,  thou  mighty  one  of  enchantments  (or,  words 
of  power)  in  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years,  thou  who  art  pre- 
eminent, who  risest  in  the  seat  of  silence,  mother  of  Pasiiakasa 

V^S^SM'^,  "^^^ '^^  ^  J))?     queen    of    Parehaqa - Kheperu 

the  tomb.  Mother  in  the  horizon  of  heaven,  gracious  one,  beloved, 
destroyer  of  rebellion,  ofl^erings  are  in  thy  grasp,  and  thou  art 


SEKHET-BAST-RA  519 

'  standing  in  the  bows  of  the  boat  of  thy  divine  father  to  over- 

'  throw  Qetu/     Thou  hast  placed  Maat  in  the  bows  of  his  boat. 

Thou   art   the   fire   goddess    Ammi-seshet    (- -  ^.  flfl  li^r}))^ 

whose  opportunity  escapeth  her  not ;  thy  name  is  Tekahaeesa- 

PUSAEEMKAKAREMET        { J^     "^^  FD  '^^  [g]  []  tk  tHl  "^^^"^  / U 


'     1     — U 
^ ,  j .     Thou  art  like  unto  the  mighty  flame    of  the 

goddess    Saqenaqat   (^         "^  zi  '^  '^  rl) )  ?    which   is   in   the 

bows    of    the   boat    of    thy   father   Haeepukakashaeeshabaiu 

for  behold,  thus  is  [his]  name  in  the  speech  of  the  Negroes,  and 
of  the  Anti,  and  of  the  people  of  Ta-kensetet  (Nubia).  Praise 
be  unto  thee,  0  Lady,  who  art  mightier  than  the  gods,  words  of 
adoration  rise  unto  thee  from  the  Eight  Gods  of  Hermopolis. 
The  living  souls  who  are  in  their  hidden  places  praise  the 
mystery  of  thee,  0  thou  who  art  their  mother,  thou  source  from 
which  they  sprang,  who  makest  for  them  a  place  in  the  hidden 
Underworld,  who  makest  sound  their  bones  and  preservest  them 
from  terror,  who  makest  them  strong  in  the  abode  of  everlasting- 
ness,  who  preservest  them  from  the  evil  chamber  of  the  souls 
of  Hes-hra  ^  f  Q  I  0  ,^3^  wj)?  who  is  among  the  company 
of  the  gods.     Thy  name  is  Sefi-per-em-Hes-hra-hapu-tchet-f 

each  side  of  Sekhet-Bast-Ra  in  the  vignette  is  a  dwarf  with 
two  faces,  one  of  a  hawk  and  one  of  a  man,  and  the  body  of  each 

is  fat ;  each  has  on  his  head  the  disk  and  plumes,  ^ ,  and  each 
has  one  hand  and  arm  raised  after  the  manner  of  x^Lmsu,  or 
Min.     The  name  of  one  dwarf  is  Atare-am-tcher-qemtu-rennu- 


par  -  SHETA,       ^    ^^^^,  ,_,     „^^        .  <,•     ^     ;v^  .     /  1 

.^^  ^^^^^^    ,    and   that   of  the   other,    Pa-nemma-nemma. 

^""'^^  1\  1\   fl  ^^  1 1 .      Finally,  the  last  name    oiven   to 
Sekhet-Bast-Ra  is  Utchat-Sekhet-urt-hent-neteru,  ^^  Y 

^  \  ^^^  ^^ ">  ^'^  nfin^e  of  a  fiend.         -  I.e.,  "god  of  the  terrible  face." 


520  FORMS   OF   NEFER-TEM 


I  Ml '  ^^^  ^^®  ^^  ^^^^  *^  ^^  ^^^  emanation  of  Mut,  "  who 
*^  maketh  souls  to  be  as  gods,  who  maketh  bodies  to  be  sound,  and 
"  who  delivereth  them  from  the  abode  of  the  fiends  which  is  in  the 
"  chamber  of  the  evil  one."  According  to  the  Rubric,  the  deceased 
for  whom  pictures  of  the  goddess  and  the  two  dwarfs  were  made 
would  become  like  the  immortals,  and  worms  would  not  eat  his 
body,  and  his  soul  would  never  be  fettered,  and  he  would  drink 
water  at  the  source  of  the  river,  and  would  have  a  homestead  of 
his  own  in  Sekhet-Aanre,  and  he  would  become  a  star  of  heaven, 

and  he  would  fight  and  overcome  the  fiends  Tar,    ^  "^^  .^s,  ^ , 

and  Nekau,  ^__^  [|  ^  1^. 

The   third   member   of  the    Memphite   triad  is  Nefer-Tem, 

1  ^^  J) ,  or  Nefer-Tem Q,  ^si^  ^.   %  ^ ,  who  is  the  son  of  Ptah  and 

Sekhet,  or  of  Ptah  and  Pakht,  or  of  Ptah  and  Bast.  He  is  usually 
represented  in  the  form  of  a  man  who  holds  in  his  hands  either 

the  tchdm  sceptre,     ^  ^^  1 ,  and  the  symbol  of  life,  or  the  lotus 

sceptre    surmounted  by  plumes,  |;  in   these  forms   he   is    called 

"  Nefer-Tem     ehu     taui,"    and    "  Nefer-Tem   khu    taui    ankh 

^^^™'"  J^  /^  ='  ^^^  J^  /^  ^  t  ^-  T^^  ^^^^1 
blue  and  green  glazed  porcelain  statues  of  the  god  make  him  to  stand 
upon  a  lion,  and  sometimes  he  appears  in  religious  scenes  with  the 
lotus  flower,  or  the  lotus  flower  and  plumes  upon  his  head.^  In 
some  cases  Nefer-Tem  has  the  head  of  a  lion,  and  his  body  has  the 
form  of  a  mummy,  and  consistently  with  this  his  hands  project 
from  a  close-fitting   garment,   and   he   holds  in  them  the  tcham 

sceptre  and  flail,  J\  j .     In  the  earliest  times  the  lotus  flower  was 

associated  with  Nefer-Tem,  and  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find 
allusions  to  this  fact.  Thus  in  the  text  of  Unas  (line  392)  the 
dead  king  is  compared  to   a  lotus  at  the  nostrils  of  the   Great 

Sekhem,  (1  <=>  ^^^  ^  yV  B  m.    ^^ ,  and  a  line  or  two  further 

on  it  is  said,  "  Unas  hath  risen  like  Nefer-Tem  from  the  lotus  to 

^   See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pll.  147  and  148. 


FORMS    OF   NEFER-TEM  521 

"  the  nostrils  of  Ra,  and  he  goeth  forth  from  the  horizon  on  each 
"  day,  and  the  gods  are  sanctified  by  the  sight  of  him."  ^ 

In  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  24)  is 
a  passage  which  appears  to  show  that  the  attributes  of  Nefer-Tem 
were  not  well  defined,  and  we  find  him  mentioned  in  connexion 
with  a  number  of  gods  in  a  manner  which  is  hard  to  explain. 
The  text  makes  the  deceased  to  beseech  Ra  to  deliver  him  from 
the  god  "  whose  form  is  hidden,  and  whose  eyebrows  are  like  unto 
"  the  two  arms  of  the  Balance  on  the  night  of  reckoning  destruc- 
"  tion,"  and  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Who  then  is  this  ?  "  we 
have  the  words,  "  It  is  An-a-f,"  i.e.,  the  "  god  who  bringeth  his 
"  arm,"    K  AA^A/v^  ^..=_  jj  ,2  who  is  usually  regarded  as  a  form  of 

Amsu,  or  Min.  The  words  "  night  of  reckoning  destruction  "  are 
explained  by  making  them  refer  to  the  burning  of  the  damned  and 
the  slaughter  of  the  wicked  on  the  block  of  the  god  by  the 
"  Slaughterer  of  Souls,"  'wwvn  ^^:>^  ^-^  1  ^  Tent-baiu.  The  opinions 
of  the  Egyptian  theologians  differed  greatly  as  to  the  identity  of  this 
god  Tent-baiu,  for  some  thought  he  was  !Nemu,^  Yiilf  \\  >>  <S\^ 
the  headsman  of  Osiris,  and  others  thought  he  might  be  Apep, 
with  one  head,  or  Horus  with  two  heads,  or  Horus  the  Great 
of  Sekhem,  or  Thoth,  or  Nefer-Tem,  or  Septu,  k\^-     ^^^^  ^® 

remember  that  Nefer-Tem  is  the  "  young  Tem,"  i.e.,  a  god  of  the 
rising  sun,  and  that  the  Horus  gods  and  Septu  were  likewise  forms 
of  the  rising  sun,  it  is  evident  that  Nemu  and  Apep  must  have  had 
some  characteristic  in  common  with  the  son  of  Ptah  and  Sekhet. 
From  Chapters  Ixxxi.,  versions  a  and  b,  we  learn  that  the  deceased 
had  power  to  transform  himself  into  a  lotus ;  in  the  first  version  of 
the  text  he  says,  "  I  am  the  pure  lotus  which  springeth  up  from 
''  the  divine  splendour  that  belongeth  to  the  nostrils  of  Ra,"  and  in 
the   second  we  read,  "  Hail,  thou  Lotus,  thou  type  of  the  god 

a  V —  H  1'^  _^5^  ()^pizK  _m^  oa  /wvwv   T  ^  ^  ^   =^v^ 


0  M"     '^ 

"  He  is  one  of  the  Forty-two  Assessors  in  the  Hall  of  Maati, 
3  See  Book  of  tJie  Dead,  cliii.A  8,  31,  32  j  cliii.  5  ;  clxx.  6. 


522  I-EM-HETEP 

"  Nefer-Tem !  I  am  he  who  knoweth  you,  and  I  know  your 
"  names  among  the  gods,  the  lords  of  the  Underworld,  and  I  am 
"  one  of  you."  The  vignette  of  the  first  version  is  a  lotus,  and 
that  of  the  second  is  a  lotus  plant  with  a  flower  and  buds 
growing  out  of  a  ^dooI  of  water,  and  out  of  the  flower  springs  a 
human  head,  i.e.,  the  head  of  the  deceased. 

The  idea  conveyed  by  the  last  vignette  seems  to  have 
originated  in  the  mind  of  some  early  writer  who  was  accustomed 
to  see  the  sun  rise  over  the  flooded  lands  of  the  Delta  where  the 
lotus  grew  in  abundance.  In  Chapter  clxxiv.  19,  the  deceased 
says,  "  I  rise  like  Nefer-Tem,  who  is  the  lotus  at  the  nostrils  of 
"  Ra,  when  he  cometh  forth  from  the  horizon  each  day,"  and  in 
Chapter  clxxviii.  36,  Nefer-Tem  has  the  same  title.  We  must 
also  note  that  he  is  the  thirty-fourth  Assessor  in  the  Hall  of 
Maati  and  that  the  deceased  makes  the  following  address  to 
him : — "  Hail,  Nefer-Tem,  who  comest  forth  from  Het-ka- 
"  Ptah  (Memphis),  I  have  not  acted  with  deceit,  and  I  have  not 
"  worked  wickedness."  In  the  late  Egyptian  texts  Nefer-Tem 
is  identified  with  a  number  of  gods,  all  of  whom  are  practically 
forms  of  Horus  and  Thoth,  and  in  consequence  the  mother  of  each 
of  these  gods  becomes  his  mother. 

The  Egyptian  texts  prove  that  besides  Nefer-Tem  another  son 

of  Ptah  called    I-em-hetep,    fl   t\  jj,  was  regarded   as  the 

third  member  of  the  great  triad  of  Memphis  ;  he  was  called 
'"IixovOti^  by  the  Greeks,  and  possessed  many  attributes  in  common 
with  their  god  Aesculapius.  The  name  of  I-em-hetep  means,  "  He 
who  cometh  in  peace,"  and  is  appropriate  to  the  god  who  brought 
the  art  of  healing  to  mankind.  The  god  is  represented  like  Ptah, 
Avith  a  bald  head,  and  he  is  depicted  in  a  seated  position  with  a  roll 
of  papyrus  open  upon  his  knees  ;  he  was  a  god  of  study  and  learn- 
ing in  general,  but  he  owed  his  great  power  to  the  knowledge  of 
medicine  which  he  possessed.  As  a  god  of  learning  he  partook  of 
some  of  the  attributes  of  Thoth,  and  he  was  supposed  to  take  the 
place  of  this  god  in  the  performance  of  funeral  ceremonies,  and  in 
superintending  the  embalming  of  the  dead  ;  in  later  times  he 
absorbed  the  duties  of  Thoth  as   "scribe  of  the  gods,"   and  the 


1-EM-HETEP  523 

authorship  of  the  words  of  power  which  protected  the  dead  from 
enemies  of  every  kind  in  the  Underworld  was  ascribed  to  him. 
In  certain  aspects  the  god  had  a  funeral  character  which  somewhat 
resembled  that  of  Ptah-Seker-Asar,  although  he  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead.  In  the  "  Ritual 
of  Embalmment"^  it  is  said  to  the  deceased,  "Thy  soul  uniteth 
"  itself  to  I-em-hetep  whilst  thou  art  in  the  funeral  valley,  and  thy 
"  heart  rejoiceth  because  thou  dost  not  go  into  the  dwelling  of 
"  Sebek,  and  because  thou  art  like  a  son  in  the  house  of  his  father, 
"  and  doest  what  pleaseth  thee  in  the  city  of  Uast  (Thebes)."  The 
oldest  shrine  of  the  god  was  situated  close  to  the  city  of  Memphis, 
and  was  called  "  the  Temple  of  I-em-hetep,  the  son  of  Ptah," 
0  f fi  ,    to   which   the    Greeks    gave    the    name, 

TO  'AcrK\y]TneLov ;  ^  it  stood  well  outside  the  city,  and  lay  quite  near 
the  Serapeum,  on  the  edge  of  that  portion  of  the  desert  which 
formed  the  necropolis  of  the  city.  Under  the  Ptolemies  a  small 
temple  was  built  in  honour  of  I-em-hetep  on  the  Island  of  Philae  ; 
the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  are  those  of  Ptolemy  IV.,  Philopator, 
but  the  Greek  text  over  the  door  was  placed  there  by  the  command 
of  Ptolemy  V.,  Epiphanes.  From  one  of  the  former  we  learn  that 
the  god  was  entitled,  "  Great  one,  son  of  Ptah,  the  creative  god, 
"  made  by  Thenen,  begotten  by  him  and  beloved  by  him,  the  god 
"  of  divine  forms  in  the  temples,  who  giveth  life  to  all  men,  the 
"  mighty  one  of  wonders,  the  maker  of  times  (?),  who  cometh  unto 
"  him  that  calleth  upon  him  wheresoever  he  may  be,  who  giveth 

"sons  to  the  childless,  the  chief  l-her-heh   (/T\  %,  i.e.,  the  wisest 

"  and  most  learned  one),   the  image  and  likeness  of  Thoth  the 
Wise., 

I-em-hetep  was  the  god  who  sent  sleep  to  those  who  were 
suffering  and  in  pain,  and  those  who  were  afflicted  with  any  kind 
of  disease  formed  his  special  charge ;  he  was  the  good  physician 
both  of  gods  and  men,  and  he  healed  the  bodies  of  mortals  during 
life,  and  superintended  the  arrangements  for  the  preservation  of 
the   same    after    death.      If  we    could    trace    his   history   to    its 

1  See  Maspero,  op.  cit.,  p.  80.  3  Brugscli,  Diet.  Geog.,  p.  1098. 

3  See  Brugscli,  Thesaurus,  p.  783 ;  Religion,  p.  527  ;  Sethe,  Imliotep,  1903. 


524  1-EM-HETEP    AND    HERUTATAF 

beginning  we  should  find  probably  that  he  was  originally  a  very 
highly  skilled  "  medicine  man "  who  had  introduced  some  ele- 
mentary knowledge  of  medicine  amongst  the  Egyptians,  and  who 
was  connected  with  the  practice  of  the  art  of  preserving  the 
bodies  of  the  dead  by  means  of  drugs,  and  spices,  and  linen 
bandages.  He  was  certainly  the  god  of  physicians  and  of  all  those 
who  were  occupied  with  the  mingled  science  of  medicine  and 
magic,  and  when  we  remember  that  several  of  the  first  kings  of 
the  Early  Empire  are  declared  by  Manetho,  whose  statements  have 
been  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the  papyri,  to  have  written,  i.e., 
caused  to  be  edited,  works  on  medicine,  it  is  clear  that  the  adora- 
tion of  the  god  of  medicine  was  in  Memphis  as  old  as  the  archaic 
period.  In  the  songs  which  were  sung  in  the  temple  of  Antuf, 
the  writer  says,  "  I  have  heard  the  words  of  I-em-hetep   and  of 

"  Heru-tata-f,  (^^  3  tl^  mA  ,  which  are  repeated  over  and  over 

"again,  but  where  are  their  places  this  day?  Their  walls  are 
"  overthrown,  their  seats  (or  places)  have  no  longer  any  being,  and 
"  they  are  as  if  they  had  never  existed.  No  man  cometh  to  declare 
"  unto  us  what  manner  of  beings  they  were,  and  none  telleth  us 
"  of  their  possessions,"  etc.  Heru-tata-f,  as  we  knoAv  from  later 
texts,  was  a  very  learned  man,  even  though  his  speech  could  only 
with  difficulty  be  understood,  and  we  also  know  the  prominent 
part  which  he  took  as  a  recognized  man  of  letters  in  bringing  to 
the  court  of  his  father,  Khufu,  the  magician  Tetteta,  and  how  his 
name  is  associated  with  the  "  finding  "  of  certain  Chapters  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead.  Of  the  sage  I-em-hetep,  who  is  mentioned  in 
connexion  with  him,  it  is  difficult  not  to  think  that  he  was  famous 
as  a  skilled  physician  whose  acts  and  deeds  were  worthy  of  being 
classed  Avith  the  words  of  Heru-tata-f. 

From  the  manner  in  which  these  great  and  wise  men  are 
referred  to  it  is  clear  that  they,  who  were  the  chosen  representatives 
of  the  ablest  and  most  learned  among  men,  had  become,  even  at 
the  time  when  the  Songs  of  Antuf  were  composed,  mythical  beings 
in  whole  or  in  part,  and  there  is  no  good  reason  why  I-em-hetep, 
the  third  member  of  the  triad  of  Memphis,  should  not  be  a 
deified  form  of  a  distinguished  physician  who  was  attached  to  the 


I-EM-HETEP  525 

priesthood  of  Ra,  and  who  flourished  before  the  end  of  the  rule  of 
the  kings  of  the  Ilird  Dynasty.  The  pictures  and  figures  of  the 
god  suggest  that  he  was  of  human  and  of  strictly  local  origin,  but 
it  is  not  evident  how  he  came  to  usurp  the  place  of  Nefer-Tem  at 
Memphis,  especially  as  he  was  not  the  son  of  Ptah  by  Sekhet,  or 
Bast,  or  any  form  of  these  goddesses.  The  worship  of  I-em-hetep 
was  commoner  in  the  Sai'te  and  Ptolemaic  periods  than  in  the 
Early  and  Middle  Empires,  and  all  the  bronze  figures  of  the  god 
belong  to  a  period  subsequent  to  the  XXIInd  Dynasty.  The 
titles  given  to  him  in  the  inscriptions  at  Philae  may,  it  is  true, 
represent  ancient  beliefs,  but  it  is  improbable,  and  as  he  does  not 
appear  in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  it  is 
tolerably  certain  that  his  worship  was  as  popular  and  fashionable 
at  Memphis  immediately  before  and  during  the  Ptolemaic  period 
as  that  of  Amen-hetep,  the  son  of  Hapu,  the  famous  sage  who 
had  seen  and  conversed  with  the  gods,  was  at  Thebes  about  the 
same  time. 


END    OF    VOL.    I. 


LONDON 
PRINTED  BY  GILBERT  AND  RIVINGTON,  LD. 

ST.  John's  house,  clebkenwell,  e.c. 


DATE  DUE 

Oemco.  Inc.  38-293 

NORTHEASTERN  UNIVERSITY  UBRARIES      DUPL 

39358  01429750  8 


