V  _,o 


^P-^^ 


•e^. 


<9-       *  o  «  o  '        o.  V- 


"o  K       ,',|^K^<^.       '^^o^        °i^v 


o 
o 


'i^^^SC^.'^ 


i  u.       ^^ 


■\  o 


oV 


^"^  z^^:.  \,_ . 


,*^ 


c^ 


A  0^         !  ^.^ 


•o  V 


.0  V- 


•^^0^ 

Ao^ 


^oV 


vO 


.0 


,^^ 


iq. 


,0 


r-^^. 


jK  •'■0 


■■>-«i>-: 


^       '  o  «  o 


3  •      ^  ^x\ 


>"  •'•*■, 


.*■*  = 


. . .  '■  ^** 


iq 


V^  <.  'O   .     .  \5  ^^    /.   5^  A. 


\^y 


U 


%. 


i^/T'/ 


> 


I 


\^ 


u 

y* 


■*'V. 


Is 


?- 


%^ 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PAPERS 


OF    THE 


American  Museum  of  Natural 
History. 


Vol.  I.  Part  HI. 


GROS   VENTRE    MYTHS   AND    TALES. 

BY 
A.  L.  KROEBER. 


NEW  YORK: 

Published  by  Order  of  the  Trustees. 

May,    1907. 


Wonofffanh 


.r|sl  t^l 


x\ 


h 


ryc/ 


0' 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PAPERS 

OF    THE 

American  Museum  of  Natural  History 

Vol.   I,     Part  III. 


GROS   VENTRE  MYTHS  AND  TALES. 

By  a.  L.  Kroeber. 

CONTENTS. 


Introduction'  ....... 

Myths  and  Tales 

1.  The  Making  of  the  Earth  . 

2.  Origin  Myth 

3.  Tebiaanta",  the  Two  Women,  the  Bald  Eagle, 

4.  Nix'a^t  obtains  Summer  and  the  Buffalo 

5.  Nix'a^t  is  taught  to  call  Buffalo 

6.  Nix 'ant  and  the  Mouse     .... 

7.  Nix 'a^t  and  the  Mice's  Sun-dance    . 

8.  Nix  VH  eats  Fat 

9.  Nix  Vt  eats  Hiitceni         .... 

10.  Nix'a'H  and  the  liird  with  the  Large  Arrow 

11.  Nix 'a^t  toses  his  Eyes       .... 

12.  Nix 'a"t  kills  his  Wife        .... 

13.  Nix  'a^t  and  the  Bear-Women  . 

14.  Nix'a^t  and  the  Dancing  Ducks 

15.  Nix 'a"t's  Adventures         .... 
(a)     With  the  Mice's  Sun-dance 

(5)     With  the  Women  who  loused  him 

(c)  With  his  Daughters    .... 

(d)  With  the  AVoman  who  crossed  the  River 

(e)  With  the  Sleeping  Woman 

(/)     With  the  Buffalo  he  called  anil  the  Rabbit 

16.  One-eyed  Owl  and  his  Daughter 

17.  The  Man  who  went  to  War  with  his  Mother-in- 

18.  The  Kit-fox  and  the  Ghost 

19.  Found-in-the-Grass    .         .         .•        . 

20.  Clotted-Blood 

55 


nd  N 


law 


"t 


P.\GE 

57 
59 
59 
59 
61 
65 
67 
68 
68 
69 
69 
69 
70 
70 
70 
71 
71 
71 
72 
73 
74 
74 
75 
75 
76 
77 
77 
82 


56 


Atithropologica!  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [Vol.  I, 


21.  Moon-Child 

22.  The  Boy  who  was  raised  by  the  Seven  Bulls 

23.  White-Stone 

24.  The  Women  \^'ho  married  the  Moon  and  a  Buffalo 

25.  The  Women  who  married  a  Star  and  a  Buffalo 

26.  The  Deserted  Children 

27.  The  Girl  who  became  a  Bear 

28.  Shell-Spitter       .... 

29.  Yellow-Plume  and  Blue-Plume 

30.  The  Swallows  and  the  Snake 

31.  The  Origin  of  the  Tsooyanehi  Degree  of  the  Dog-dance 

32.  The  Origin  of  the  Chief  Pipe 

33.  Separation  of  the  Tribe 

34.  The  Cave  of  the  Buffalo     . 

35.  The  Woman  and  the  Black  Dog 

36.  The  Man  born  from  a  Horse 

37.  The  Woman  and  the  Horse 

38.  The  Little  Girl  who  was  married  by  a  Bear 

39.  The  Young  Man  who  became  a  Water-monster 

40.  The  Woman  who  was  recovered  from  a  Water-monster 

41.  The  Man  who  killed  Hawks 

42.  The  Man  who  was  killed  by  a  Bullet-hawk 

43.  The  Man  who  was  killed  by  a  Bald  Eagle 

44.  The  Woman  who  tempted  and  betrayed  her  Brother-in-law 

45.  The  Woman  who  tried  to  betray  her  Brother-in-law 

46.  The  Bad  Wife 

47.  The  Man  who  acquired  Invulnerability 

48.  The  Man  who  recaptured  his  Wife 

49.  The  Woman  who  married  the  Snake  Indian 

50.  The  Woman  who  revenged  her  Brothers    . 


Abstracts 


P.\GE 

90- 

94 
97 
100 
101 
102 
105 
108 
109 
111 
111 
112 
112 
112 
113 
113 
114 
115 
115 
117 
117 
117 
118 
118 
119 
120 
122 
125 
126 
128 
130 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  Gros  Ventre  myths  and  tales  herewith  presented  do  not  exhaust 
the  traditions  of  the  tribe:  they  include,  however,  the  majority  of  the  more 
important  stories  known  to  them,  and  are  probably  representative  of  the 
mythology  and  tales  of  the  tribe.  They  were  collected  in  the  winter  and 
early  spring  of  1901,  at  the  Fort  Belknap  Reservation  in  northern  Montana, 
as  part  of  the  work  of  the  ISlrs.  Morris  K.  Jesup  Expedition. 

Naturally  there  are  many  similarities  to  the  Arapaho  traditions.  As  a 
larger  body  of  Arapaho  traditions  has  been  published  with  extended  com- 
parative notes,^  such  notes  have  not  been  added  to  the  present  Gros  Ventre 
traditions;  but  references  have  been  made  to  the  corresponding  Arapaho 
versions,  under  which  the  comparisons  will  be  found. 

Among  the  more  important  Arapaho  traditions  and  episodes  which 
have  a  widespread  distribution,  but  which  have  not  yet  been  found  among 
the  Gros  Ventre,  are  the  story  of  the  origin  of  death;  of  the  woman  who 
married  a  dog;  of  the  young  man  who  disguised  himself  us  a  woman,  and 
cut  off  seven  heads;  of  the  well-known  imitation  of  the  host  by  the 
trickster  in  various  ways;  of  the  diving  through  the  ice  by  the  trickster  to 
obtain  food  in  imitation  of  his  host;  of  the  young  man  who  was  tempted 
by  his  sister-in-law,  and  then  buried  in  a  pit  by  her;  of  the  turtle's  war- 
party;  of  the  deceived  blind  man,  a  favorite  Eskimo  and  northern  Atha- 
bascan tradition;  and  the  well-known  Plains  story  of  the  buffalo  and  elk 
women,  or  buffalo  and  corn  women.  The  story  of  the  girl  who  was  born 
from  the  foot  of  a  young  man  exists  among  the  Gros  Ventre,  but  was  not 
obtained.  It  is  very  probable  that  some  of  these  stories  will  be  found 
among  the  Gros  Ventre.  An  account  of  the  origin  of  death  similar  to  that 
of  most  of  the  Plains  tribes  is  almost  certain  to  exist.  The  story  of  the 
seven  heads  —  being  common  to  the  Arapaho,  Kootenai,  and  Sarcee,  tribes 
surroimding  the  Gros  Ventre  —  is  also  very  likely  to  exist  among  them.  One 
would  expect  the  same  of  the  story  of  the  woman  and  the  dog,  though  it  is 
to  be  remembered,  in  this  connection,  that  some  of  the  northern  Arapaho 
deny  this  to  be  a  story  of  their  tribe. 

'  G.  A.  Dorsev  and  A.  L.  Kroeber,  Traditions  of  the  Arapaho  (Field  Columbian  Museum 
Publications,  Anthropological  Series  V.     Chicago,  1903). 

57 


58  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [Vol.1, 

Of  the  more  important  stories  and  incidents  occvirring  in  the  present 
Gros  Ventre  collection,  but  wanting  in  the  larger  Arapaho  collection,  the 
following  may  be  mentioned:  the  separation  of  the  tribe  while  crossing  the 
ice;  the  very  widespread  incident  of  the  hero  who  is  swallowed  by  a  monster, 
and  kills  him  by  cutting  his  heart ;  the  boy  who  is  abandoned  by  his  parents, 
and  raised  by  buttalo-bulls;  the  tale  of  a  young  man  who  enters  a  tent  among 
a  hostile  tribe  to  marry  a  girl;  and  the  tale  of  the  bad  wife  as  told  by  the 
Blackfeet. 

Some  of  the  mythical  incidents  that  have  the  most  common  distribution 
in  central  North  America,  but  that  so  far  have  not  been  found  among  either 
the  Arapaho  or  Gros  Ventre,  are  the  story  of  the  theft  of  light  or  the  sun ; 
of  the  theft  of,  or  some  other  means  of  obtaining,  water;  of  the  supernatural 
being  that  has  been  w^ounded  by  a  human  being,  so  that  a  human  medicine- 
man only  can  extract  the  weapon;  of  the  person  or  pursuer  who  crosses  a 
body  of  water  or  a  chasm  on  a  leg,  usually  of  the  crane,  and  is  shaken  oft"; 
of  the  hero  who  transforms  himself  into  a  leaf  or  small  object,  which  is 
drunk  by  a  woman,  as  whose  son  he  is  reborn;  of  the  bathing  women 
with  bird-skins,  one  of  whom  is  captured;  of  the  visit  far  to  the  east  to  the 
sun;  of  the  unfaithful  wife  who  has  a  snake  or  water-monster  as  her  lover, 
—  one  of  the  most  i)ersistent  traditional  ideas  in  northeastern  America;  the 
common  conception  of  the  origin  of  mankind  or  the  tribe  from  the  lower 
world  or  successive  lower  worlds;  and  a  tradition  of  a  visit  to  the  land  of 
the  dead,  other  than  in  stories  told  as  the  actual  experience  of  persons 
recentlv  alive  or  still  livino-. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  59 


MYTHS  AND  TALES. 

1.   The  Making  of  the  Earth. 

There  was  water  everywhere.  A  person  sent  the  Duck,  the  Otter,  the 
Beaver,  and  the  Turtle  to  dive  for  earth.  All  the  other  animals  lost  their 
breath  before  they  reached  the  bottom.  They  had  to  come  up  again.  But 
the  Turtle  said,  "I  am  the  one  who  can  get  it."  He  dived,  and  brought  up 
mud.  When  the  person  scattered  the  mud,  earth  was  made.  He  made 
the  mountains  by  pouring  a  little  earth  from  his  hand.  He  also  made 
streams  and  trees.     It  is  not  known  who  he  was.     Perhaps  he  was  Nix'a'H.^ 

2.   Origin  Myth. 

The  people  before  the  present  people  were  wild.  They  did  not  know 
how  to  do  anything.  Nix'a"t  did  not  like  the  way  they  lived  and  did. 
He  thought,  "I  will  make  a  new  world."  He  had  the  chief  pipe.  He  went 
out  doors  and  hung  the  pipe  on  three  sticks.  He  picked  up  four  buffalo- 
chips.  One  he  put  under  each  of  the  sticks  on  which  the  pipe  hung,  and 
one  he  took  for  his  own  seat.  He  said,  "I  will  sing  three  times  and  shout 
three  times.  After  I  have  done  these  things,  1  will  kick  the  earth,  and 
water  will  come  out  of  the  cracks.  There  will  be  a  heavy  rain.  There  will 
be  water  over  all  the  earth."  Then  he  began  to  sing.  After  he  sang  three 
times,  he  shouted  three  times.  Then  he  kicked  the  ground  and  it  cracked. 
The  water  came  out,  and  it  rained  for  days,  and  over  all  the  earth  was  water. 
By  means  of  the  buffalo-chips  he  and  the  ])ipe  floated.  Then  it  stopped 
raining.  There  was  water  everywhere.  He  floated  wherever  the  wind 
took  him.  For  days  he  drifted  thus.  Above  him  the  Crow  flew  about. 
All  the  other  birds  and  animals  were  drowned.     The  Crow  became  tired. 

1  The  Gros  Ventre  myths  and  tales  here  recorded  were  obtained  from  seven  informants, 
who  have  tieen  designated  as  follows:  — 

M     Bill  Jones,  one  of  tlie  oldest  men  of  the  tribe,  Nos.  5,  18,  25,  41. 
N     Watches-All.  an  old  woman,  Nos.  26,  28,  30,  32,  33,  39,  40,  45-50. 
P      Flea,  a  yonng  man,  Nos.  2-4,  20-23,  29. 
Q      Blackbird,  an  old  man,  Nos.  1,  6,  16,  17,  38,  42,  43. 
R     .A.ssiniboine,  a  yoiuif;  middle-aged  man,  Nos.  14,  15,  27,  34,  35,  37,  44. 
S      Paul  Plumage,  a  young  man,  Nos.  7,  19. 
T      Black  Wolf,  a  middle-aged  chief,  No.  33. 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  traditions  told  by  Flea,  one  of  the  youngest  of  the  informants,  are 
of  a  higher  character  tlian  the  otliers.     Nos."  7  and  19  were  obtained  as  texts  in  Gros  Ventre. 
All  the  others  were  reconli'd  in  English. 

The  Gros  Ventre  distinguish  between  myths  and  tales,  which  they  call  ha''tii'a"tya°  and 
waa"tsea'a"  respectively.  The  first  thirty  of  the  following  traditions  may  be  regarded  as  myths; 
the  last  twenty,  as  tales. 

The  present  myth  is  by  informant  Q.  Compare  Traditions  of  the  Arapaho,  op.  cit.,  tales 
Nos.  1,  2,  3,  6,  and  "note,  p."  6. 

Pronoimce  x  like  German  ch  or  Spanish  j;  to,  like  English  ch:  a,  as  in  English  bad;  a° 
(nasal  a),  like  French  an;  a",  similarly  nasalized;  g,  like  English  th  in  thin;  6,  nearly  as  in 
German. 


GO  Anthropological  Papers  American  Muscinn  of  A'aturnl  History.         [Vol.  I, 

It  flew  about  crying,  "My  father,  I  am  becoming  tired.  I  want  to  rest." 
Three  times  it  said  this.  After  it  had  said  so  three  times,  Nix'a"t  said, 
"AHght  on  the  pipe  and  rest."  Repeatedly  the  Crow  cried  to  him,  and 
each  time  was  allowed  to  alight  on  the  pipe.  Xix'a"t  became  tired  sitting 
in  one  position.  He  cried.  He  did  not  know  what  to  do.  After  he  had 
cried  a  long  time,  he  began  to  unwrap  the  chief  pipe.  The  pipe  contained 
all  animals.  He  selected  those  with  a  long  breath  to  dive  through  the  water. 
First  he  selected  the  Large  Loon  (biias^eiby^ii).  The  Loon  was  not  alive, 
but  Nix'a"t  had  its  body  wrapped  up  in  the  pijie.  Xix'a"t  sang,  and  then 
commanded  it  to  dive  and  try  to  bring  mud.  The  Loon  dived.  It  was 
not  halfway  down  wlien  it  lost  its  breath  and  immediately  turned  back. 
It  came  up  almost  drowned  at  the  place  where  Nix'a'^t  was.  Then  Nix'a"t 
took  the  Small  Loon's  body  and  sang.  Then  the  Small  Loon  dived.  It 
nearly  reached  the  mud  at  the  bottom.  Then  it  lost  its  breath  and  went 
up  again,  and,  nearly  dead,  reached  the  place  where  Nix'a"t  was.  Then 
he  took  the  Turtle  (baii'n).  He  sang  and  it  became  alive,  and  he  sent  it 
and  it  dived.  Meanwhile  the  Crow  did  not  alight,  but  flew  about  crying 
for  rest.  Nix'a'H  did  not  listen  to  it.  After  a  long  time  the  Turtle  came  uj). 
It  was  nearly  dead.  It  had  filled  its  feet  and  the  cracks  along  its  sides 
with  mud.  When  it  reached  Nix'a"t,  all  the  mud  had  been  washed  away 
and  it  was  nearly  dead.  Nix'a"t  said,  "Did  you  succeed  in  reaching  the 
mud?"  The  Turtle  said,  "Yes,  I  reached  it.  I  had  much  of  it  in  my  feet 
and  about  my  sides,  but  it  all  washed  away  from  me  before  I  came  to  you." 
Then  Nix'a"t  said  to  it,  "Come  to  me;"  and  the  Turtle  went  to  him. 
Nix'a'H.  looked  at  the  inside  of  its  feet  and  in  the  cracks  of  its  sides.  On 
the  inside  of  its  feet  he  found  a  little  earth.  He  scraped  this  into  his  hand. 
JNIeanwhile  the  Crow  had  become  very  tired.  Then  Nix'a'H,  when  he  had 
scraped  the  earth  into  his  hand,  began  to  sing.  After  he  had  sung  three 
times,  he  shouted  three  times.  Then  he  said,  "I  will  throw  this  little  dust 
that  I  have  in  my  hand  into  the  water.  I>ittle  by  little  let  there  be  enough 
to  make  a  strip  of  land  large  enough  for  me."  Then  he  began  to  drop  it, 
little  by  little,  into  the  water,  opening  and  closing  his  hand  carefully.  And 
when  he  had  dropped  it  all,  there  was  a  little  land,  large  enough  for  him 
to  sit  on.  Then  he  said  to  the  Crow,  "Come  down  and  rest.  I  have  made 
a  little  j)iece  of  land  for  myself  and  for  you."  Then  the  Crow  came  down 
and  rested.  After  it  had  rested,  it  flew  u])  again.  Then  Xix'a"t  took  out 
from  his  pipe  two  long  wing-feathers.  He  had  one  in  each  hand,  and  began 
to  sing.  After  he  had  sung  three  times,  he  shouted  three  times,  "Youh, 
hou,  hou,"  and  sjiread  his  arms,  and  closed  his  eyes.  When  he  had  done 
this,  he  said  to  himself,  "Let  there  l)e  land  as  far  as  my  eyes  can  see  around 
me."     When  he  opened  his  eyes,  then  indeed  there  was  land.     After  he 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  61 

had  made  the  land,  there  was  no  water  anywhere.  He  went  about  with 
his  pipe  and  with  the  Crow.  They  were  all  that  there  was  to  be  seen  in  the 
world.  Now  Nix'a'^t  was  thirsty.  He  did  not  know  what  to  do  to  get  water. 
Then  he  thought,  "I  will  cry."  He  cried.  While  he  cried,  he  closed  his 
eyes.  He  tried  to  think  how  he  could  get  water.  He  shed  tears.  His 
tears  dropped  on  the  ground.  They  made  a  large  spring  in  front  of  him. 
Then  a  stream  ran  from  the  spring.  When  he  stopped  crying,  a  large  river 
was  flowing.  Thus  he  made  rivers  and  streams.  He  became  tired  of 
being  alone  with  the  Crow  and  the  pipe.  He  decided  to  make  persons  and 
animals.  He  took  earth,  and  made  it  into  the  shape  of  a  man.  He  made 
also  the  shape  of  a  woman.  Then  he  made  more  figures  of  earth,  until 
he  had  many  men  and  women.  When  he  thought  he  had  enough  persons, 
he  made  animals  of  all  kinds  in  pairs.  Wlien  he  had  finished  making 
these  shapes,  he  named  the  tribes  of  people  and  the  kinds  of  animals.  Then 
he  sang  three  times  and  shouted  three  times.  After  he  had  shouted,  he 
kicked  the  ground,  and  there  were  living  pairs  of  beings  standing  before 
him,  animals  and  men.  The  reason  why  men  are  dark  in  color  is  that 
earth  is  dark.  Nix'a"t  called  the  world  Turtle  because  the  Turtle  was  the 
animal  that  had  helped  him  to  make  the  world.  Then  he  made  bows 
and  arrows  for  men,  and  told  them  how  to  use  them.  The  pipe  he  gave 
to  a  tribe  which  he  called  haa'ninin  (the  Gros  Ventre).  Then  he  said  to  the 
people,  "If  you  are  good  and  act  well,  there  will  be  no  more  water  and  no 
more  fire."  Long  before  the  water  rose,  the  world  had  been  burned.  This 
now  is  the  third  life.  Then  he  showed  them  the  rainbow,  and  said  to  them, 
"This  rainbow  is  the  sign  that  the  earth  will  not  be  covered  with  water 
again.  Whenever  you  have  rain,  you  will  see  the  rainbow;  and  when 
you  see  it,  it  will  mean  tliat  the  rain  has  gone  by.  There  will  be  another 
Avorld  after  this  one."  He  told  the  ])eople  to  separate  in  pairs  and  to  select 
habitations  in  the  world  for  themselves.  That  is  why  human  beings  are 
scattered.^ 

3.  Tebiaa^'ta^",  the  Two  ^VoMEx,  the  Bald  Eagle, 
AND  Nix'A^t. 

There  was  a  lone  tent.  Two  sisters  lived  in  it.  One  was  older,  the 
other  young.  Tebiaa"ta^  ("cut-off-head")  knew  that  the  two  women 
lived  alone  there.  One  morning,  one  of  them  went  out  to  get  wood.  In 
front  of  the  tent  she  found  a  fat  deer,  freshly  killed  and  untouched.     This 


1  Told  by  informant  P.  Compare  Arapaho,  op.  cit.,  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  6,  and  note.  p.  6.  For  the 
recession  of  the  water  before  stretched  arms,  compare  also  Arapaho,  No.  5.  The  idea  of  the 
previous  race  occurs  in  Arapaho,  No.  6,  p.  15,  footnote,  and  in  No.  129,  p.  299. 


62  AnthropuliHjical  Papers  Atnerican  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [\'ol.  I, 

happened  every  night.     The  fourth  night  the  two  women  watched.     One 
of  them  said,  "Perhaps  it   is  Naxaa"tsts'   ('with-projecting-teeth,'  another 
name  for  Tebiaa^ita").     If  it  is  he,  it  will  go  hartl  with  us,  for  he  is  powerful." 
In  the  middle  of  the  night  they  saw  a  person  rolling  a  dead  deer  toward 
them.     When  he  came  near  they  saw  that  it  was  Tebiaa"ta"  indeed.     After 
he  had  left  the  deer  he  went  off  again.     As  soon  as  he  had  gone,  the  two 
women  began  preparations  to  fiee.     The  older  stuck  an  awl  in  the  ground 
on  the  side  of  the  tent  where  she  had  her  bed,  and  said  to  it,  "When  Te- 
biaa"ta"  comes  in,  tell  him,  'Go  to  my  younger  sister.     She  is  young,  and  is 
the  one  whom  you  ought  to  have  for  your  best  wife.' "     The  younger  sister 
stuck  a  quill-flattener  (isowa")  at  the  side  of  her  bed,  and  told  it,  "When 
Tebiaa"ta»  comes  rolling  to  you,  say  to  him,  'Go  to  the  older  woman.     Siie 
knows  best  how  to  work.     You  should  have  her  for  your  best  wife.'"     At 
night  Tebiaa"ta'^  came  to  the  tent.     The  women  had  gone.     Only  the  awl 
and   the  quill-flattener  were  there.     When  he  arrived,   he  saw  the    deer 
lying  there,  still  untouched.     He  became  angry,  and  said,  "I  worked  hard 
to  kill  this  deer  for  you.     It  is  bad  that  you  did  not  touch  it."     He  went 
mside.     The  two  bones  looked  like  women.     He  went  to  the  side  where 
the  older  sister's  awl  Avas.     It  said   to  him,  "Roll  to  my  younger  sister. 
She  will  be  your  best  wife,  for  the  older  wife  does  the  work  for  the  tent  and 
for  her  husband."     Then  he  began  to  roll  to  the  younger  sister's  bone.     It 
said  to  him,  "Roll  back  to  my  older  sister.     Let  her  be  your  best  wife.     I 
am  young,  and  better  able  to  move  around  quickly,  and  can  do  more  work 
about   the  tent."     Then  Tebiaa'Ha"  became  angry.     He  rolled   violently 
to  one  to  strike  her.     The  woman  disappeared,  and  he  struck  the  awl, 
wliich  pierced  his  face  so  that  he  cried  out  in  pain.     The  other  woman 
disappeared  at  the  same  time.     W'hen  he  had  pulled  the  awl  from  his  face 
he  said,  "You  will  not  escape  from  me.     I  will  kill  you."     He  jumped 
out  of  the  tent,  looked,  and  smelled  about  to  find  where  the  women  had 
gone.     He  found  their  trail,  and  rolled  after  them.     They  were  already 
far  away.     They  looked  bac-k  constantly,  fearing  that  he  would  follow  them. 
Then,  from  the  direction  in  which  they  had  come,  they  saw^  him  rolling. 
One  of  them  said  to  the  other,  "Oh,  my  older  sister,  what  shall  we  do! 
Tebiaa'Ha"  is  rolling  on  our  trail.     What  shall  we  do  to  escape  him?     Do 
something  supernatural."     "I   will    try  something,"   said    the   older.     "I 
will  try  to  delay  him  so  that  we  shall  leave  him  far  behind  us.     Let  it  be 
foggy  before  Tebiaa"ta",  so  that  he  will  lose  our  tracks."     Then  there  was 
a  fog  between  them  and  the  head,  and  he  lost  their  trail  and  strayed  from 
It.     He  looked  for  it,  and  after  a  time  found  it  again,  and  followed  them. 
Then  they  saw  him  coming  once  more.     Then  the  older  sister  said  to  the 
younger,  "Pity  me,  my  younger  sister.     The  head  is  pursuing  us  again 


1907.]  Kroeher,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  63 

What  shall  we  do  to  flee  from  him  ?  Now  it  is  your  turn  to  do  something 
supernatural,  so  that  we  may  leave  him  behind  us."  "Yes,  I  will  try. 
Let  there  be  a  deep  ravine  between  him  and  us.  Let  it  be  boggy  and 
hummocky,  so  that  it  will  be  long  before  he  passes  through  it."  Then  there 
was  such  a  valley  behind  them.  When  Tebiaa^ta"  got  into  the  valley,  he 
struck  the  hummocks,  and  bounded  back  and  stuck  in  the  swamp.  It  was 
long  before  he  crossed,  and  the  women  had  got  far  ahead.  He  said  to  him- 
self, "These  women  will  not  hide  in  a  hole  anywhere.  If  they  do,  I  shall 
overtake  them  and  kill  them.  They  shall  not  go  to  the  sky,  for  if  they  go  to 
the  sky,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  reach  them.  That  is  the  one  place  in  which  I 
cannot  kill  them."  After  a  while  the  women  saw  him  again,  and  the 
younger  one  said,  "My  older  sister,  do  something  supernatural  again!  I 
am  getting  tired."  "Yes,"  said  the  older,  "I  will  try.  Let  there  be  a  river 
between  us  and  the  head,  and  along  it  let  there  be  thick  thorny  brush,  and 
rose-brush  as  thick  as  can  be,  so  that  Tebiaa"ta"  will  have  great  difficulty  in 
passing  through."  Then  there  were  a  river  and  thorny  brush  behind  them. 
Tebiaa"ta"  came  up.  It  was  very  difficult  for  him  to  pass.  He  was  all 
scratched  when  he  got  through.  The  women  were  already  far  away.  After 
a  while  they  saw  him  on  their  trail  again.  Then  the  older  sister  begged  the 
younger  to  use  her  supernatural  power  to  delay  the  head.  Her  younger 
sister  said,  "I  will  try  again  to  bring  something  between  us  and  the  head. 
Let  there  be  cactus  as  thick  as  can  be."  Then  there  was  a  dense  cactus 
behind  them.  When  Tebiaa"ta"  reached  the  cactus,  he  stop])ed.  He  tried 
to  roll  around,  but  it  extended  indefinitely.  Then  he  thought,  "I  will  go 
through."  Then  he  really  rolled  through  it;  but  he  was  full  of  spines,  and 
bleeding.  He  stopped  and  pulled  out  all  the  cactus-spines.  Then  he 
followed  the  women  again.  They  saw  him  coming.  Both  of  them  said, 
"I  can  do  nothing  more  supernatural.  I  have  done  all.  We  must  try  to 
run."  As  they  ran,  they  saw  a  man  sitting  on  a  high  bunk.  He  liad  his 
iiair  in  a  large  knot  above  his  forehead.  When  they  reached  him  they 
said,  "Please  ])ity  us.  We  are  running  for  our  lives  from  the  person  who 
pursues  us  to  kill  us."  "Run  around  me  four  times,"  he  said,  and  they 
did  so.  "What  is  the  person's  name?"  he  asked.  They  said  to  him, 
"Tebiaa"ta"."  "That  is  bad.  He  is  more  powerful  than  L  But  I 
will  try."  He  loosened  the  knot  of  hair  on  his  forehead.  It  had  never 
been  combed.  The  hair  covered  him  entirely.  He  hid  one  of  the  women 
under  each  arm.  W'hen  Tebiaa'Ha"  came,  he  said,  "Have  you  seen  my 
prey  going  by  here?"  "Yes,  they  have  just  pa.ssed  by,"  said  the  man. 
The  head  went  on,  and  smelled.  Finding  no  tracks,  he  came  back  to  the 
man.  "They  never  went  by  here,"  he  said.  "Yes,  they  went  by,"  said 
the  man;    and  the  head  went  on  again.     As  ^oon  as  he  was  out  of  sight. 


64  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        \Yo\.  I, 

/  the  man  said  to  the  women,  "Run  over  there,  where  there  is  a  Bald  Eagle. 

y  Perhaps  he  will  help  you."     Then  Tebiaa'Ha'^  came  back  and  said  to  him, 

/  "Tell  me  this  time  where  my  prey  is."     "I  have  told  you,"  said  the  man. 

The  head  looked  around  and  saw  the  women's  tracks.  He  folio ^^ved  them 
again.  The  older  sister  said,  "Now,  my  younger  sister,  try  to  run  as  hard 
as  you  can.  Tebiaa"ta"  is  on  our  trail  again."  They  reached  the  Bald 
Eagle.  "Bald  Eagle,"  they  said,  "pity  us,  because  we  are  poor:  try  to 
save  our  lives."  The  Eagle  said,  "Go  around  me  four  times.  I  will  help 
you.  I  will  try  to  save  you  from  Tebiaa'Ha";  but  he  is  very  powerful. 
j  Now  each  of  you  get  on  one  of  my  wings  and  shut  your  eyes."     He  flew 

(  down  from  the  bank  where  he  had  been  sitting,  dived  into  the  water,  swam 

/  underneath   a    long   distance,    came   up   again,    and  flew  off.     Tebiaa"ta" 

came  there,  dived  into  the  water,  swam  under  it,  emerged,  and  followed 
/  their  trail.     He  fiew  after  them  through  the  water  and  the  air.     He  nearly 

caught  the  Eagle.  When  he  came  too  near,  the  Eagle  swooped  aside. 
Thus  they  fought  and  dodged  for  a  long  time.  Below  where  they  were 
strug-gling;  there  was  a  tent.  It  was  Nix'a'H's  tent.  His  two  sons  were 
lying  flat  on  their  backs,  looking  iip  into  the  sky.  They  began  to  see  what 
was  going  on  there.  Whenever  the  head  nearly  toviched  the  Eagle,  the 
boys  cried  "Wuuu!"  Nix'a"t  heard  his  boys  crying  "Wuuu,"  and  saw 
them  looking  up  in  the  air.  He  went  outside,  lay  down  on  his  robe,  looked 
(  up,   and  cried    "Wuvm!"     But  he  saw  nothing.     The  boys  asked  him, 

'  "Father,  why  did  you  say  that?"     "I  like  to  say  that,  because  you  boys 

/  say  it.     What  are  you  looking  at  above?"     "Father,  we  are  looking  at  your 

j  friend  the  Eagle.     He  is  dodging  about.     On  each  of  his  wings  sits  a  woman, 

j  Tebiaa"ta"  is  pursuing  them."     "I  am  sorry,"  said  Nix 'a'^t.     "Tebiaa'Ha'^ 

j  is  powerful.     Nevertheless  I  will  try  to  do  something  for  the  Eagle  and  the 

j  women.     Therefore,  my  sons,  gather  wood  as  fast  as  you  can,  and  I  will 

I  cut  willows  and  build  a  sweat-house.     Also  gather  stones,  and  then  light 

the  wood  and  heat  the  stones  in  the  fire."  Nix'a"t  got  willows,  bent  them 
round,  and  covered  them  with  robes.  Then  he  gave  each  of  his  boys  a 
club.  He  said  to  one,  "Stay  here  at  the  door  and  hold  it  up."  To  the 
other  one  he  said,  "Stand  at  the  back  and  hold  up  the  robes  there."  The 
boys  stood  at  their  places.  Nix'a"t  stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  sweat-house, 
and  cried,  "Bald  Eagle,  come  down  and  sweat  in  my  sweat-house."  Four 
times  he  cried  it.  Then  the  Eagle  heard  him  and  came  flying  down. 
Nix'a'^t  said  to  him,  "Go  in  at  the  entrance,  and  fly  out  at  the  other  end." 
The  head  was  now  close  at  the  Eagle's  tail.  The  Eagle  flew  in,  and  out 
again.  As  soon  as  he  had  gone  through,  the  boy  at  the  back  of  the  sweat- 
house  put  down  his  robes.  The  other  one  closed  the  door.  Tebiaa'^ta'^ 
was  caught  in  the  sweat-house.     Hot  stones  were  lying  in  a  small  pit  in  the 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  65 

centre  of  the  sweat-house.  Xix'a"t  poured  water  through  a  small  hole 
in  the  top  straight  on  the  hot  rocks.  It  steamed  inside.  Whenever  the 
head  pressed  against  the  robes,  the  boys  struck  him  Avith  their  clubs.  At 
last  he  was  killed.  The  Eagle  sat  there  breathing  hard.  Thus  Tebiaa^ta'^ 
was  killed.^ 

4.   Nix'a^'t  obtains  Summer  and  the  Buffalo. 

Nix'a"t  was  on  his  way,  going  visiting.  He  arrived  at  a  camp.  There 
was  deep  snow,  and  the  people  had  nothing  to  eat.  To  whatever  tent  he 
went,  he  got  nothing  to  eat.  The  people  had  nothing.  He  asked  them, 
"Why  do  you  not  try  to  do  something  to  obtain  food?"  "We  cannot 
do  it,"  they  said.  "There  are  no  buffalo.  We  starve.  There  is  only 
one  old  woman  who  has  food.  She  is  very  stingy  of  it."  At  some  distance 
there  lived  an  old  woman  who  kept  the  buffalo.  She  gave  no  food.  Nix'a'H 
said,  "I  will  try  to  make  the  old  woman  give  up  her  food."  Walking  about 
the  camp,  he  saw  a  boy,  a  chief's  son,  just  old  enough  to  speak.  He  took 
the  boy  by  the  shoulders  and  said,  "Child,  are  you  hungry?"  "Yes,  I  am 
Inmgry,"  said  the  boy.  "Would  you  like  to  see  large  herds  of  buffalo?" 
"Yes."  "Would  you  like  to  see  the  ground  bare?"  "Yes.  I  am  be- 
coming tired  of  playing  on  the  snow.  I  should  like  to  see  the  bare  ground, 
so  that  I  could  play  on  it."  "When  I  let  you  go,  you  must  run  to  your 
father's  tent,  and  cry.  When  your  kin  ask  you,  you  must  say  nothing,  but 
continue  to  cry.  Only  when  I  come  and  ask  you,  you  must  say,  'I  should 
like  to  see  large  herds  of  buffalo  and  the  bare  ground  to  play  on;  for  I  am 
tired  of  the  snow.'"  Then  the  boy  ran  to  his  father's  tent  and  began  to 
cry.  All  asked  him  why  he  cried.  But  he  said  no  word,  crying  continually. 
He  cried  day  and  niglit.  His  father  thought  he  would  invite  man  after 
man  in  the  camp  to  ask  the  boy  why  he  cried.  He  asked  all  the  men  to 
come.  But  the  boy  never  answered.  Then  he  thought,  "I  will  ask  Nix'a'^t. 
He  is  wise.  Perhaps  he  will  persuade  the  boy  to  tell  why  he  is  crying." 
Then  he  called,  "Nix'a"t!"  and  Xix'a"t  came  in.  He  took  the  boy  in  his 
aniiS  and  said,  "Well,  jxjor  child,  what  are  you  crying  about?  Your 
j)arents  can  hardly  sleep,  because  you  continually  cry.  You  must  be  crying 
about  something  that  is  very  hard.  I  want  you  to  tell  me  what  it  is."  Then 
the  boy  stopped  crying,  and  said,  "I  cry  because  I  am  hungry,  and  should 
like  to  see  large  herds  of  buffalo.  I  should  like  to  eat  back-fat  (nanii)  and 
unborn  calves.     I  should  like  to  see  the  bare  ground,  for  I  am  tired  of  play- 


>  Told  by  informant  P.  Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  5,  6,  35,  124.  The  Magic  Flight  is  found 
also  in  No.  27.  Compare  note  to  Arapaho,  No.  6.  See,  also.  No.  26  for  the  calling  back  of  the 
ipursuer.     The  pursuit  by  a  round  rolling  object  is  found  in  Arapaho,  Nos.  5,  6,  33-35,  81-124. 


66  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

ing  in  the  deep  snow."  Then  Nix'a'H  said  to  him,  "You  shall  have  what 
you  want.  You  shall  eat  calves  and  fat  from  the  back,  and  shall  play  on 
the  bare  ground."  The  boy  was  satisfied,  and  cried  no  more.  Nix'a"t 
said  to  the  boy's  father,  "Get  an  old  man  to  cry  out,  'Let  the  people  move 
elsewhere.  Nix'a"t  has  found  out  from  the  boy  what  he  wants  and  what 
he  cried  for."'  Then  the  people  moved  camp,  and  Nix'a'H  changed  into  a 
little  dog.  The  dog  was  scabby,  with  loose  hanging  ears.  He  remained 
at  the  camp-site  after  the  people  had  left  it.  The  old  woman  who  kept  the 
buffalo  had  a  little  grand-daughter  who  worked  for  her.  The  little  girl 
said,  "  Grantlmother,  I  want  to  go  to  the  camp-site  to  pick  up  things  that 
have  been  lost."  But  the  old  woman  said,  "No,  don't.  Nix'a'H  was  in 
the  camp.  He  is  very  deceitful."  "I  will  not  go  far,  only  to  the  nearest 
tent.  Let  me  go!"  Then  the  girl  went  there.  When  she  arrived,  she  saw 
the  dog,  who  wagged  his  tail  at  her.  She  pitied  him,  and  said  "I  will  raise 
him."  She  took  him  back  with  her.  "Grandmother,  I  have  found  a  poor 
scabby  dog.  I  want  to  raise  him  to  be  my  dog,"  she  said.  The  old  woman 
.said  to  the  dog,  "You  are  a  scabby  dog  indeed!  You  are  not  a  dog  at  all. 
You  are  Nix'a"t."  Then  she  said  to  her  grand-daughter,  "No,  I  do  not 
want  you  to  take  this  dog  into  the  tent.  Tie  him  outside."  So  the  girl 
tied  him  outside,  but  fed  him  well;  and  he  became  fat,  and  his  scabs  fell  off, 
and  he  grew  fast.  Soon  he  was  able  to  carry  a  load  of  wood  on  a  travois. 
The  girl  used  to  take  him  with  her  into  the  woods.  At  last  the  old  woman 
began  to  think  that  he  was  really  a  dog.  She  allowed  him  to  come  into  the 
tent  with  them.  But  at  times  she  still  looked  at  him  suspiciously.  Some- 
times she  still  said,  "You  look  like  a  dog;  but  you  are  no  dog.  You  are 
•Nix'a'H."  After  a  time  their  meat  was  all  gone.  At  the  back  of  the  tent 
hung  an  untanned  buffalo-skin.  The  girl  raised  this,  and  the  dog  saw  a 
hole  beyond.  Soon  a  young  buffalo-cow  came  out.  Just  as  she  emerged, 
the  old  woman  struck  her  on  the  back  of  the  head  with  her  hammer,  and 
killed  her.  Many  other  buffalo  tried  to  come  out;  Init  the  girl  and  the  old 
woman  put  the  skin  down  again.  They  pulleil  out  the  young  cow,  and 
skinned  her.  The  dog  was  there  with  them.  The  old  woman  had  begun 
to  like  him.  She  now  thought  that  he  was  really  a  dog.  By  the  skin 
curtain  there  was  an  old  greasy  skin  sack.  The  dog  saw  the  old  woman  go 
to  this,  take  a  pinch  from  it,  and  throw  it  outside.  Thereupon  there  was 
no  snow  about  the  door.  Now  Nix'a'H  knew  what  to  do.  One  day  the 
girl  took  him  far  out  into  the  Avoods  with  her.  Then  he  turned  into  Nix'a'H. 
He  said  to  the  girl,  "You  thought  me  a  dog,  but  I  am  Nix'a'H."  Penem 
monstravit  et  ei  raptje  vim  attulit.  Puella  fortiter  clamavit,  "Avia,  Nix'a'H 
mecum  copulat!"  The  old  woman  answered,  "I  told  you  he  was  Nix'a'H. 
You  would  not  believe  me.     It  is  your  own  fault."     Taking  her  hammer. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  67 

she  ran  towards  them.  When  she  arrived,  Ni.x'a'H  released  the  girl,  ran 
off,  and  entered  the  tent.  He  seized  the  bag  and  ran  into  the  hole  behind 
the  curtain.  There  he  turned  dog  again,  and,  bai'king,  drove  all  the  buffalo 
out.  The  last  one  to  emerge  was  a  bull.  Nix'a"t  ejus  in  testiculis  adhsesit. 
Taurus  cum  testes  suos  tactos  sensisset,  eos  in  corpus  retraxit,  ita  ut  Nix'a"t 
sub  ventre  celatus  est.  Thus  he  passed  out  by  the  old  woman  without 
being  seen.  As  the  buffalo  ran,  he  threw  out  what  was  in  the  bag.  Every- 
where the  snow  disappeared,  and  it  was  summer.  When  the  bag  was 
emptied,  he  went  back  to  the  old  woman,  threw  her  the  bag,  and  said, 
"That  is  all  I  wanted  from  you."  Thus  Nix'a"t  obtained  buffalo  and 
summer.  Then  he  killed  a  cow  and  took  the  unborn  calf,  and  cut  the 
cow's  back-fat  and  the  tongue  and  some  of  the  entrails.  He  carried  this 
meat  on  his  back,  following  the  trail  of  the  people.  He  reached  their  camp 
at  night.  Then  he  asked,  "Where  is  the  tent  of  the  boy's  father?"  Being 
shown  it,  he  went  there  and  entered,  called  the  boy,  and  said  to  him,  "Here 
is  what  you  asked  for.  Now  eat  it.  To-morrow  you  will  see  summer  and 
large  herds  of  buffalo."  Then  the  boy's  father  told  an  old  man  to  go  out 
and  cry,  "Nix'a"t  has  come  back.  You  will  see  herds  of  buffalo  and  the 
summer  to-morrow.  He  has  brought  some  parts  of  buffalo  to  show  that  it 
will  be  so."  That  night  there  was  a  strong  Chinook  wind.  That  is  why 
now  we  sometimes  get  the  Chinook  winds.  Next  morning,  indeed,  the 
peoj)le  saw  the  bare  land  and  herds  of  buffalo.^ 

5.   Nix'.Ot  is  taught  to  call  Buffalo. 

A  certain  man,  when  he  was  visited  and  had  no  food,  would  go  on  a 
liill,  sit  down,  and  sing,  "  Hi'itana"  wu'katyli."  Then  the  buffalo  would 
come  running  toward  him  in  strings.  Xix'a"t  came  to  him  and  cried, 
wisiiing  to  learn  the  song.  The  man  gave  him  the  song,  but  said,  "Do  not 
use  it  too  often.  Sing  it  only  when  you  need  buffalo."  Nix'a"t  started 
off".  Soon  he  sat  down  and  sang.  Then  the  buffalo  came  toward  him  in 
strings.  He  sang  fom*  times.  The  fourth  time  the  buffalo  did  not  stop 
approaching  him,  and  all  lay  down  on  him.  Cum  ano  solum  eminente 
cuberet,  lepus  qui  venisset  cum  eo  copula vit.  Nix'a"t  denique  cum  emer- 
sisset  abiit.  Lepusculos  qui  profugerunt  inquinans  peperit.  Ssepius  ita 
cum  accideret,  Nix'a"to  displicebat.  Togse  margini  lapides  imposuit, 
inquinavit,  exsiliit,  et  ut  lepores  interficeret  pedibus  togam  protrivit.  Sed 
solum  toffam  foedavit.^ 


1  Told  by  informant  P.     Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  122,  133. 

-  Told  by  informant  M.     Compare  No.  15,  and  Arapaho,  Nos.  32,  33. 


68  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [\'ol.  I, 

G.     Xix'a^'t  axd  the  Mouse. 

Nix'a"t  cum  femiuam  trans  flumen  dormientem  vitleret,  ab  mure  ut 
penem  ad  eam  portaret  petiit.  Mus  penem  transportavit,  sed  terrfe  asperse 
parti  anteposuit,  ita  ut  Nix'a"t  penem  vagina?  inserere  cum  vellet  se 
Iffisit  et  clamavit.^ 

7.   Xix'a^'t  and  the  Mice's  Sun-dance. 

Nix'a"t  was  travelling.  As  he  went,  he  heard  the  noise  of  the  sun- 
dance.  Then  he  stopped.  He  wanted  to  hear  where  the  noise  of  the  dance 
came  from.  He  could  not  discover  it.  Where  he  stood,  there  lay  an  elk- 
skull.  He  sat  down  on  it.  When  he  sat  down,  he  heard  the  noise  of  the 
dance  clearly.  "Ya!  This  must  be  the  place,  and  I  was  looking  for  it 
at  a  distance."  Then  he  looked  into  the  skull,  and  saw  the  mice  holding 
a  sun-dance.  As  he  looked  in,  he  said  to  the  hole  through  which  he  looked, 
"Become  larger!"  Then  it  grew  larger.  As  often  as  he  told  it  to  stretch, 
it  stretched.  Finally  he  succeeded  in  thrusting  his  head  through,  and  the 
mice  scattered  and  ran  out.  Then  his  head  stuck  fast  in  the  skull.  Nix'a"t 
began  to  cry,  because  he  did  not  know  what  to  do.  He  could  not  even  see. 
He  got  up  and  wandered  off.  He  struck  something  with  his  foot,  and  said, 
"Who  are  you?"  "I  am  a  cherry-tree,"  it  answered.  "Indeed!  I 
must  be  near  the  river,"  said  Nix'a"t.  And  he  continued  to  feel  about  him 
with  his  feet.  When  he  touched  something  he  said,  "What  are  you?" 
"I  am  a  cottonwood,"  it  said  to  him.  "Indeed!  I  must  be  very  near  the 
river,"  said  Nix'a"t,  and  went  on.  Again  he  felt  something  with  his  foot, 
and  said,  "What  are  you?"  "I  am  a  willow,"  it  said  to  him.  "Indeed! 
I  must  be  very  close  to  the  river  now."  Then  he  walked  very  carefully. 
In  spite  of  all  his  care,  he  felt  himself  falling.  "What  are  you?"  he  asked. 
Then  it  splashed,  and  he  floated  down  the  stream.  He  came  floating  to 
where  there  was  a  camp.  People  were  swimming  there.  As  soon  as  the 
swimmers  saw  him,  they  said,  "Look  out,  there  comes  a  bax'aa"  (water- 
monster),"  and  all  ran  on  the  bank.  When  he  had  floated  near  them,  he 
said,  "I  allow  only  girls  to  get  me."  Then  two  girls  went  into  the  water 
on  each  side  of  him,  and  caught  his  horns.  Then  they  pulled  him  to  shore. 
One  of  them  went  ashore,  liut  he  caught  the  other  and  lay  with  her.  As 
soon  as  the  others  saw  him  seize  her,  they  ran  back  to  the  camp.  "Ejus 
virginitatem  Nix'a'H  violat,"  omnes  clamaverunt.  Puelltie  mater  malleinii 
portans  ad  eum  decucurrit.     Adhuc  puellfe  concubebat.     In  dorsum  eum 

1  From  informant  Q.     Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  29-31. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  69 

percussit.  Nix'a^t  dixit,  "Tua  percussio  meis  impetibus  in  filiam  tuam 
vim  majorem  dat.  The  place  where  you  can  kill  me  is  in  the  middle  of  the 
heatl."  The  woman  struck  the  top  of  his  head,  and  broke  the  elk-skull. 
Xix'a"t  got  up  and  ran.  All  the  women  pursued  him,  but  could  not  catch 
him.^ 

8.    Nix'a^t   eats  Fat. 

Nix'a"t  found  some  fat  floating  in  the  stream.  He  asked,  "How  much 
does  one  bite  off  you  when  he  meets  you?"  "A  little  piece  only,  alioquin 
diarrhceam  segrescas."  Nix'a"t  bit  off  as  much  as  he  could.  Then  he 
went  ahead  down  stream,  and  again  met  the  fat.  He  asked  it  and  was  told 
the  same,  but  again  bit  off  all  he  could  swallow.  He  met  it  repeatedly, 
until  at  last  he  swallowed  it  all.  Tum  abiit.  Cito  diarrhoea  afflictatus  est, 
Tantum  inquinavit  ut  abire  coactus  est.  Iterum  cum  inquinaret  tanta 
excrementa  defluxerunt  ut  eum  abegerunt.  Denique  dum  semper  inqui- 
navit in  tumulum  ascendit.  Inquinare  continuavit  donee  defluxus  eum 
circumdederat  et  quasi  insulte  tumulo  institit.^ 

9.    Xix'a^t  eats  Hiitceni. 

Nix'a'H  radices  quje  hiitceni  appellantur  edebat.  Diu  edebat.  Tum 
crepuit.  Cum  creparet,  sursum  jactus  est.  Perpetuo  altius  jactus  est. 
Tandem  mulierem  liberosque  suos  omnibus  cum  rebus  familiaribus  in  se 
ponere  jussit  ut  terra  retineretur.  Sed  cum  iterum  crepuisset  omnes  sur- 
sum pulsi  sunt.^ 

10.  Xix'a^t  and  the  Bird  with  the  Large  Arrow. 

Nix'a"t  met  a  Bird  which  had  an  immense  arrow.  He  taunted  it, 
saying  that  it  was  not  able  to  use  the  arrow.  At  last  the  Bird  said,  "Well, 
I  will  shoot  you  with  it."  Nix'a"t  went  off.  Several  times  he  stopped, 
tiiinking  he  had  gone  far  enough.  But  the  Bird  always  told  him,  "Go 
farther,  for  I  will  kill  you  if  you  stand  so  near."  Then  at  last  the  Bird  shot 
and  the  arrow  came  flying.  Nix'a"t  was  frightened,  ran,  turned,  and 
dodged,  but  could  not  escape  the  arrow.  He  ran  as  hard  as  he  could,  but 
it  came  nearer  and  nearer.  He  took  refuge  behind  a  rock.  The  arrow 
I  struck  the  rock  and  turned  it  over,  so  that  it  rolled  on  Nix'a"t.  He  could 
not  get  out.     At  last  the  Night-hawk  came  flying  by.     It  shot  past  the 

'  From  informant  S.     Compare  No.  15,  and  Arapaho,  Nos.  52,  53. 

2  Compare  Arapaho,  No.  34. 

3  Compare  Arapaho,  p.  60,  footnote  1.     Pronounce  tc  like  English  ch. 


70  Anthropological  Papers  Aynerican  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [^  ol.  I, 

rock,  venting  wind  each  time.  The  fourth  time,  it  broke  the  rock.  Nix'a"t 
got  up.  "Come  here,"  he  said  to  the  Bird.  The  Night-hawk  came  to 
him.  Nix'a"t  took  it,  and  said,  "Why  did  you  do  that  to  me?  I  was  very 
comfortable  tnider  the  rock."  Then  he  pulled  the  Night-hawk's  mouth 
wide  open.' 

11.   Nix'a^'t  loses  his  Eves. 

Nix'a'H  met  a  Bird  that  was  sending  its  eyes  into  a  tree.  Then  he  cried, 
and  begged  the  Bird,  until  at  last  it  gave  him  the  power.  It  told  him, 
"You  must  do  this  only  when  it  is  necessary."  Nix'a'H  went  off.  He 
tried  his  new  power,  and  his  eyes  successfully  left  him  and  returned  to  him. 
After  a  time  they  remained  in  a  tree.  He  could  not  get  them  back.  Then 
he  cried.  A  INIouse  came  to  him,  and  Nix'a"t  asked  it  to  lend  him  its  eyes. 
The  Mouse  lent  him  its  eyes,  and  Nix'a"t  was  able  to  find  his  own.  But 
his  own  eyes  had  already  shrivelled  on  the  tree.  He  soaked  them  in  water 
until  thev  swelled.     Then  he  put  tliem  back  in  his  head.- 

12.   Nix'a^t  kills  his  Wife. 

Nix'a'H  was  out  on  the  prairie,  crying  for  his  wife,  who  had  died.  A 
man  came  to  him,  and  asked,  "Why  do  you  cry?"  He  was  accompanied 
by  his  Avife.  Nix'a"t  told  him,  "I  am  mourning  for  my  wife,  who  has  died." 
Then  the  stranger  motioned  with  a  stick  as  if  to  strike  his  wife.  The  fourth 
time,  he  struck  her.  Then  she  turned  into  two  women.  He  gave  one  of 
them  to  Nix'a"t.  Then  Nix'a"t  was  glad.  He  went  on  with  his  new  wife. 
He  found  a  man  crying  for  his  dead  wife.  Then  he  motioned  four  times, 
and  struck  his  wife  and  doubled  her,  and  gave  the  man  one  of  the  women. 
He  found  another  man,  and  a  third,  and  gave  them  wives.  Then  he  met  a 
fourth  man  who  was  crying  for  his  wife.  Nix'a"t  motioned,  and,  when 
he  had  motioned  four  times,  he  struck  his  wife  on  the  head.  Then  she 
fell  dead. 

13.  Nix'a^'t  axd  the  Bear-Womex. 

The  myth  of  Nix'a'H's  diving  for  the  reflection  of  fruit  in  the  water, 
and  of  his  adventures  with  the  Bear-Women,  is  found  among  the  Gros 
Ventre  as  among  the  Arapaho,  with  only  the  following  differences.  Nix'a"t 
found  berries,  not  plums.  He  climbed  on  top  of  the  tent,  and  from  there 
dropped  the  berries  down  inside.  While  the  Bear-Women  were  eating 
their  own  children,  thev  sent  one  little  girl  out  to  get  wood  for  the  fire. 


1  Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  19  and  33.  ^  Compare  Arapaho,  Xos.  16,  17. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  71 

Nix'a"t  said,  "I  will  get  it,"  and  went  out.  Then  he  threw  wood  into  the 
door  until  it  was  blocked.  Then  he  ran,  calling,  "I  have  made  you  eat 
your  own  children."  The  dialogue  about  the  flint-birds,  fire-birds,  and 
smoke-birds,  is  missing.  In  all  other  details,  the  Gros  Ventre  version 
resembles  the  Arapaho.^ 

14.   Xix'a^'t  axd  the  Daxcixg  Ducks. 

Nix'a"t  was  going  along  the  river  in  the  thick  timber.  Then  he  came 
to  an  opening  in  the  woods.  There  he  stopped  and  thought  what  to  do. 
He  sat  with  his  head  down.  Suddenly  he  stood  up.  He  shouted  loudly, 
■"AH  ducks,  prairie-chickens,  and  cottontail-rabbits  come  here!  I  will 
make  a  dance  for  you."  Then  the  birds  came  flying  to  him,  and  the  rabbits 
ran  up.  He  made  them  all  stand  in  a  circle  and  close  their  eyes.  He  said, 
*'You  must  keep  your  eyes  shut  when  you  dance."  Then  he  sang,  and 
they  danced.  He  began  to  break  the  birds'  necks.  INIeanwhile  he  sang, 
■"As  you  dance,  you  must  not  look!"  At  last  a  little  prairie-chicken  dancing 
at  the  end  opened  its  eyes  and  saw  him.  It  flew  up  crying,  "Nix'a°t  is 
killing  you  all!"  Then  the  remaining  birds  all  flew  off  and  the  rabbits  ran 
away.  Nix'a"t  said,  "Nix'a"t  always  accomplishes  what  pleases  him. 
Nix'a'H  is  always  fortunate.  Now  he  has  a  feast."  Then  he  made  a  fire. 
He  put  the  ducks  and  prairie-chickens  and  rabbits  that  he  had  killed  into 
the  ashes  under  the  coals.  Then  he  said,  "Nix'a"t  is  sleepy.  I  think  I 
will  sleep."  Ano  jussot,  "Wake  me  if  any  one  comes."  Then  he  w^ent  to 
sleep.  Wolves  and  coyotes  came.  They  smelled  around.  They  ate  all 
the  meat,  and  left  only  the  bones.  At  last  Nix'a"t  woke  up.  He  coughed. 
He  said,  "Now  I  shall  have  a  feast."  He  found  only  bones.  He  looked 
all  around.  There  was  nothing  left.  Ano  suo  dixit,  "I  told  you  to  move 
and  wake  me  if  any  one  came."  He  took  a  firebrand,  and  suum  anum 
attrivit.  Tantum  dolore  aft'ectus  est  ut  ano  eminente  cuberet  ut  ventus 
eum  refrigeraret.^ 

15.     Nix'a^t's   Advextures. 

(a)    With  the  Mice's  Sun-dance. 

Nix'a"t  was  out  on  the  prairie.  Then  he  heard  a  noise.  He  said, 
* 'There  must  be  a  camp  near  by."  He  ran  one  way,  listening,  then 
another.  But  he  always  came  back  to  the  same  place.  He  stood  on  a 
skull  in  order  to  look  about.  Then  the  noise  was  under  his  feet.  He 
looked  in,  and  saw  people  dancing.     There  were  men,  women,  and  children. 

1  Compare  Arapaho,  No.  49,  also  50. 

2  Told  by  informant   R.     Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  26,  27. 


72  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatia^al  History.        [Vol.  I, 

Thev  were  mice  that  were  making  the  sun-dance.  Xix'a"t  watched  the 
dance.  He  Avanted  to  see.  He  continually  told  the  opening  of  the  skull 
to  stretch  wider.  It  became  large  enough  for  him  to  look  in  with  both  his 
eyes.  i\s  he  continued  to  look,  he  liked  the  dance  better.  He  tokl  the  hole 
to  stretch  wider.  He  wanted  to  get  to  the  women  inside.  At  last  the  hole 
stretched  over  his  head.  It  contracted  around  his  neck.  The  Mice  ran 
out.  Nix'a"t  could  not  get  his  head  out  from  the  skull.  He  wandered 
about.  He  asked  the  trees  and  bushes  what  they  were.  He  came  to  sage- 
brush, then  to  a  rosebush.  Then  he  came  to  a  large  Cottonwood.  When 
he  found  this  he  said,  "I  am  still  at  a  distance  from  the  river."  Then  he 
came  to  a  birch.  He  said,  "That  is  the  kind  of  tree  with  many  kidneys  on 
it."  Next  he  came  to  a  young  Cottonwood.  Then  he  said,  "Now  I  am 
near  the  river."  Then  he  came  to  the  small  willows,  and  then  he  fell  down 
the  bank  into  the  river.  He  went  down  with  the  current.  He  came  floating 
to  women  and  girls  who  were  bathing.  He  said,  "I  will  give  beads  to 
whomever  pulls  me  ashore."  [The  tale  continues  like  No.  7,  until  the  elk- 
skull  is  split  from  his  head.]  Then  he  got  up  and  ran  off,  all  the  women 
running  after  him.  He  said,  "I  wish  there  were  a  hole  I  could  enter.'^ 
Then  there  was  a  hole  and  he  went  in.  He  came  out  on  the  other  side. 
He  found  white  clay.  He  put  some  over  his  right  eye.  He  took  a  stick, 
peeled  the  bark  off  so  that  it  looked  white,  and  laid  it  across  his  arm.  Then 
he  went  back  to  where  the  women  were,  and  asked  them  what  they  were 
doing.  They  told  him.  Then  he  abused  Nix'a"t.  He  said,  "He  is 
always  doing  such  things.  Why  do  you  not  dig  him  out  ?  Then  you  can 
pound  him  to  pieces."  Then  all  the  women  crawled  into  the  hole.  He 
blocked  the  entrance  with  wood,  and  set  it  on  fire.  Then  he  smothered 
them . 

(b)    With  the   Women   ichn  loused  him. 

Then  he  went  on  to  the  river.  As  he  went  along  he  saw  two  pretty 
young  women.  They  sat  lousing  each  other.  He  said,  "That  is  a  nice 
thing  they  are  doing."  He  pretended  to  scratch  his  head  and  catch  and 
bite  his  lice.  "I  have  too  many  lice,"  he  said.  Then  he  said,  "Do  you 
not  want  to  louse  me?"  They  said,  "Yes."  Then  they  sat  opposite  to 
each  other,  stretching  out  their  legs,  and  told  him  to  lay  his  head  on  their 
laps.  Then  he  was  satisfied.  Soon  he  went  to  sleep.  They  took  burrs, 
and  filled  his  hair  with  them.  They  went  off.  The  burrs  made  his  hair 
stretch.  They  pulled  the  skin  of  his  fprehead  up.  Then  he  sat  up.  He 
could  hardly  close  his  eyes.  At  last  he  cut  off  all  his  hair.  Then  he  cov- 
ered himself  with  mud,  and  went  home,  crying.  His  wife  saw  him  coming. 
She  said,  "There  comes  the  fool!     He  has  been  doing  something  again.'* 


1907-1  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Mijths  and  Tales.  73 

AYlien  he  was  at  a  little  distance,  he  began  to  cry  harder.  At  last  she 
became  impatient  and  went  out  to  him.  Then  he  said,  "Those  bad  peo- 
ple who  visited  me!  They  told  me,  'Your  wife  is  dead.'"  Then  he  kissed 
his  wdfe. 

(c)    With  his  Daughters. 

After  he  had  been  at  his  tent  a  while,  he  pretended  to  be  sick.  He 
would  not  eat,  and  became  very  thin.  He  had  two  daughters.  They 
were  unmarried,  and  young  and  pretty.  Now  Xix'a'H  seemed  nearly  dead. 
Then  he  said,  "Old  woman,  I  shall  leave  you  soon.  There  are  those  skin- 
scrapers,  and  sleighs  of  ribs,  and  stone  hammers,  which  I  made  for  my 
daughters.  I  want  them  buried  with  me.  Put  me  into  that  crooked  tree 
here.  Do  not  tie  me:  only  wrap  me  in  my  robe,  and  put  those  things  in  with 
me.  There  is  a  man  called  One-eyed  Owl.  He  always  has  white  clay 
over  his  right  eye.  He  carries  a  sharp  tomahawk  (kaahaanou).  Give 
him  both  my  daughters  when  he  comes,  and  put  up  a  tent  for  him.  Give 
them  to  no  one  but  him."  Then  he  became  worse,  and  died.  His  wife 
and  daughters  mourned  for  him.  They  cried.  They  buried  him  as  he 
had  said.  He  lay  in  the  tree  for  four  days.  Then  a  coyote  passed.  Nix'a'H 
called  it  and  said,  "Howl,  and  call  all  the  coyotes  and  wolves."  The 
coyote  sat  down  and  howled  until  they  all  came.  Nix'a"t  broke  all  the 
skeletons  that  were  there,  and  scattered  them  about.  He  broke  and  scat- 
tered the  im])lements  that  were  buried  with  him.  Then  he  said  to  the 
wolves,  "Now  howl,  'We  have  eaten  Nix'a'H.'"  Then  they  howled,  "We 
have  eaten  Nix'a'H;"  and  he  ran  into  the  brush.  When  his  wife  and  his 
daughters  heard  what  the  wolves  howled,  they  screamed  and  cried.  Nix'a"t 
remained  out  four  days  more.  Then  he  made  himself  a  pointed  tomahawk, 
and  painted  his  robe  white.  He  put  white  clay  over  his  right  eye.  He 
also  covered  a  scar  on  his  cheek.  Then  he  came  and  sat  on  the  hill  near 
the  tent.  One  of  the  girls  went  out.  She  saw  him.  "He  looks  like  the 
man  that  my  father  was  telling  of,"  she  said.  She  went  in  and  told  her 
mother.  The  woman  looked  out  and  saw  him.  "That  is  the  one,"  she 
said.  "Both  of  you  go  and  take  his  robe.  Take  hold  of  it  on  each  side, 
and  bring  him  in.  Do  not  be  ashamed.  He  is  the  one  your  father  men- 
tioned." Then  the  two  girls  went  out  and  brought  him.  The  woman 
put  up  a  tent  for  him,  and  the  girls  sat  by  him  on  the  bed,  one  on  each 
side.  At  night  they  lay  down,  one  on  each  side  of  him.  Then  he  slept 
Avith  them  both.  Thus  they  did  many  nights.  The  two  girls  were  very 
beautiful,  and  he  too  Avas  a  fine-looking  man  in  the  day.  One  of  the  two 
girls  noticed  that  at  night  he  was  not  good  looking.  Then  she  saw  a  scar 
under  his  right  eve,  and  thought,  "He  looks  like  my  father."     She  could 


74  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museujn  of  Natural  History.        \\o\.  I, 

not  help  thinking  it  was  he.  "I  think  it  is  Nix'a"t  my  father  who  has 
married  us,"  she  said  to  her  mother.  "You  foohsh  one!  Your  father 
is  dead,"  said  the  woman.  Several  times  the  girl  said  the  same  to  her 
mother.  At  last  one  night  the  woman  raised  the  tent-door  a  little  and 
looked  in.  Indeed  it  was  Nix'a'H!  She  eried,  "Ah!  is  that  how  you  die, 
Nix'a'H,  to  marry  your  daughters?"     She  ran  to  get  a  club,  and  he  ran  off. 

{d)    With  the   Woman  ivho  crossed  the  River. 

Then  he  continued  to  go.  He  saw  a  woman  going  in  his  direction.  He 
overtook  her.  He  pretended  to  be  a  woman,  "^^here  are  you  going,  my 
friend?"  he  said.  "My  husband  beat  me  antl  I  am  going  away.  Where 
are  you  going?"  she  said.  "My  husband  beat  me  too,  and  I  am  leaving 
also.  Let  us  go  together,"  said  Nix'a"t.  Then  they  went  together.  They 
came  to  a  river.  "Go  first,"  said  the  woman.  "No,  you  go  first,"  said 
Nix'a"t.  Then  they  both  lifted  up  their  dresses.  "Oh!  your  legs  look 
like  a  man's,"  said  the  woman.  "Have  you  never  heard  tell  of  the  woman 
whose  legs  look  like  a  man's?"  said  Xix'a"t.  Cum  longius  in  flumen 
introiissent,  vestes  altius  levaverunt.  "O,  clunibus  viro  similis  es!"  dixit 
femina.  "Nunquam  fama  illam  feminam  accepisti  cujus  clunes  viri  illis 
simihe  essent?"  dixit  Nix'a'H.  Pa?ne  cum  transiissent  penis  Xix'a'Ho  e 
manibus  prolapsus  aquam  percutiens  sonum  dedit.  He  picked  it  u]) 
hastily.  "What  did  you  drop?"  asked  the  woman.  "It  is  too  bad!  It 
was  a  love-root.  I  am  sorry  I  dropped  it,"  said  Nix'a'H.  When  they  had 
crossed,  subito  penem  ei  monstrans,  "Aspice,  amica!"  Nix'a"t  dixit.  £x- 
territa  in  terram  cecidit.  Ad  earn  adiit  libidinamque  explevit.  Turn 
iterum  profectus  est. 

(e)    With  the  Sleeping  Woman. 

He  came  to  a  camp.  He  looked  into  a  tent  and  saw  a  pretty 
woman  asleep.  He  went  in,  sat  down,  and  waited  for  her  to  wake  up. 
When  she  did  not  awake,  he  went  out,  and,  cum  excrementum  in  extremum 
baculi  cepisset,  put  it  on  her  dress.  Then  he  came  in  once  more  and  coughed. 
Still  she  did  not  wake  up.  Then  he  pushed  her  thighs,  saying,  "Surge, 
lectum  inquinavisti."  At  last  she  awoke.  Then  Nix'a"t  pretended  that 
he  was  about  to  cry  out,  but  the  woman  hastily  told  him,  "Do  not!"  Four 
times  he  made  as  if  to  call  out  loudly,  "Hjiec  femina  lectum  inquinavit," 
sed  summissa  voce  susurravit.  Mulier  dixit,  "Si  taces,  me  tibi  dabo." 
"Bene,  si  te  possidere  me  sines,  tacebo."  "Cautus  sis,  fratres  prope 
dormiunt,"  mulier  dixit.     Tum  Nix'a"t  libidinam  explevit. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Veyitre  Myths  and  Tales.  75 

(/)    With  the  Buffalo  he  called  and  the  Rabbit. 

Then  he  went  on  again.  He  saw  a  man  sittmg  on  a  high  bank. 
His  legs  were  hanging  over  the  cliff.  He  had  two  round  rattles.  He  sang, 
and  struck  the  rattles  on  the  ground.  Then  the  buffalo  came  in  strings 
on  each  side  of  him,  and  fell  over  the  bank  and  were  killed.  Then  Nix'a'H 
cried.  He  said,  "Pity  me ! "  The  man  said,  "What  do  you  wish  ? "  Nix 'a"t 
cried  louder.  At  last  he  persuaded  the  man  to  let  him  have  the  power  of 
calling  the  buffalo.  The  man  gave  it  to  him,  saying,  "You  must  not  use 
the  song  for  nothing.  You  must  only  use  it  when  the  camp  is  very  hungry." 
Then  Nix'a"t  went  oft'.  Soon  he  began  to  try  his  power.  He  sat  at  the 
edge  of  a  bank,  and  sang  and  rattled.  The  buffalo  came  in  strings,  and 
fell  over  the  bank.  He  left  them  and  went  on.  Three  times  he  called  the 
buffalo.  When  he  called  them  the  fourth  time,  the  buffalo  came  and 
pushed  him  over  the  bank,  and  fell  on  top  of  him.  Anus  ejus  solus  eminuit. 
Lepus  advenit  et  cum  anum  vidisset,  cum  eo  copulavit.  Nix'a^t  lay  there. 
After  a  time  he  saw  a  Coyote.  "Come  here.  Coyote,"  he  said.  "What  is 
it?"  asked  the  Coyote.  "Call  all  the  coyotes  and  wolves,"  said  Nix'a"t. 
The  Coyote  went  on  a  hill,  and  howled.  All  the  coyotes  and  w^olves  came, 
and  ate  the  buffalo,  and  dragged  away  the  bones,  until  at  last  Nix'a'H 
emerged.  He  went  on.  Tum  inquinavit.  When  he  looked  back,  he  saw 
little  rabbits  scampering  away.  He  said,  "Good!"  He  was  pleased. 
Three  times  he  saw  rabbits  run  off.  Quater  cum  inquinare  pararet,  he 
picked  up  rocks,  spread  out  his  robe  behind  him,  and  weighted  its  edge 
with  rocks.  Tum  inquinavit,  and  suddenly  jumped  out  from  his  robe. 
"I  will  get  you  this  time!"  he  cried  as  he  stamped  about  on  his  robe.  Then 
he  lifted  up  the  edge  and  looked  under.  He  thought  he  had  killed  rabbits, 
but  there  was  only  excrement.  His  robe  was  soiled.  He  began  to  run 
toward  camp  as  hard  as  he  could,  crying  loudly,  "Come  out,  all!  The 
enemy  pursue  me!  Mount  your  horses!  Inquinantes  Piegani  me  perse- 
quuntur!  Celeriter  nisi  venietis,  togam  meam  inquinabunt!"  The  people 
hastily  mounted,  rode,  came  there,  and  found  him  toga  inquinata.  "I 
told  you  to  hurry,"  said  Nix'a"t.^ 

IG.   One-eyed  Owl  and  his  Daughter. 

A  man  lived  alone  with  his  family.     He  had  a  pretty  daughter.     He 
said,  "When  I  die,  let  my  daughter  marry  a  one-eyed  man  who  has  white 


I  Obtained  from  informant  R.  Compare,  for  the  first  episode,  Nos.  7  and  13,  and  Arapaho, 
Nos.  49,  50,  52,  53:  for  the  second,  Arapaho,  Nos.  53-55;  for  the  third.  No.  16,  and  Arapaho, 
Nos.  42,  43:  for  the  fourth  and  fifth  respectively,  Arapalio,  Nos.  36  and  37;  for  the  sixth,  No.  5, 
and  Arapalio,  Nos.  32,  33. 


76  Anthropological  Papers  A)nerican  Museum  of  Natural  Histonj.        [Vol   I, 

clay  on  his  eye."  Then  he  pretended  to  be  sick.  He  told  his  wife,  "When 
I  am  dead,  do  not  bind  me  up,  but  lay  me  on  the  prairie."  Then  he  seemed 
to  cUe,  and  she  put  liim  out  on  tlie  prairie.  He  called  the  wolves,  and  told 
them  to  howl,  "We  have  eaten  the  person  here."  He  gathered  bones  and 
laid  them  by  his  l)lanket.  He  Avent  away,  painted  one  of  his  eyes  white, 
and  came  to  his  own  tent.  His  daughter,  coming  out  of  the  tent,  saw  him, 
and  told  her  mother,  "There  is  the  man  that  my  father  wanted  me  to  marry." 
Her  mother  said  to  her,  "Let  us  put  up  a  tent  for  him."  Then  they  put  uj) 
a  tent,  and  the  girl  married  him.  He  always  went  off  in  the  morning  and 
came  back  at  night.  Then  the  girl  saw  that  he  had  a  scar,  which  her  father 
had  had.  She  said  to  her  mother,  "He  looks  like  my  father."  Her  mother 
said  to  her,  "Tie  a  string  from  your  bed  to  mine,  and  pull  it  when  he  enters." 
At  night  he  came,  and  the  girl  pulled  the  string.  Then  the  woman  came 
from  her  tent  and  found  her  husband.     She  beat  him  nearly  to  death/ 

17.  The  Man  who  went  to  War  with  his  jNIother-in-law. 

There  was  a  camp-circle.  A  man  went  off.  At  a  distance  he  built 
two  brush  shelters.  The  next  day  he  came  back.  He  sat  in  his  lodge 
and  did  not  speak.  His  wife  asked  him,  "What  is  the  matter?"  He 
did  not  answer.  She  asked  him  again  and  again.  At  last  he  said,  "I  saw 
many  men  going  to  war  with  their  mothers-in-law  in  order  to  steal  horses  for 
them."  Then  his  wife  said,  "I  will  ask  my  mother  to  go  with  you."  She 
asked  her  mother,  and  her  mother  consented.  Then  they  started  off  to- 
gether, the  man  riding  in  front  and  she  behind.  They  came  to  the  place 
where  he  had  been,  and  each  slept  in  a  shelter.  In  the  morning  the  man 
went  out  as  if  to  look  for  tracks.  When  he  came  back  he  said,  "I  cannot 
find  the  tracks  of  the  people  I  saw.  I  do  not  know  where  they  can  have  gone." 
Then  they  staid  there  over  night  again.  The  man  had  put  stones  near  his 
bed.  He  threw  them  at  his  mother-in-law's  shelter.  Soon  she  said,  "Some 
one  is  troubling  me  here.  There  is  a  ghost  about.  I^et  me  come  into  your 
shelter."  He  consented.  After  a  time  he  again  threw  stones  to  where 
she  was  lying.  She  said  again  that  she  Avas  being  disturbed,  and  asked, 
"Una  dormiamus."  Iterum  assensus  est.  Tum  se  frigere  questus  est. 
Mulier  rogavit,  "Qua  parte  friges?"  "Hie,"  dixit.  Iterum  rogavit,  "Qua 
parte?  Sumus  soli.  Nullus  cognitum  habebit.  Die  mihi  qua  parte  te 
frigere."  "Hie,  tange,"  dixit.  Tum  ilia  tetigit.  Erectus  ei  penis  fuit. 
Dixit,  "Inserere  ut  calescat  volo."  Muliere  assensa  penem  inseruit.  Illic 
vixerunt  donee  mulier  filium  peperit,  postquse  domuni  redierimt.- 

^  From  informant  Q.     Compare  No.  15,  and  Arapaho,  Nos.  42,  43. 
2  From  informant  Q.     Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  39,  40. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  77 

18.  The  Kit-fox  and  the  Ghost. 

The  Kit-fox  started.  He  went  along  a  path  in  the  woods.  As  he  went, 
he  smeh  something  that  stunk.  He  stopped  and  sniffed.  The  odor  eame 
from  a  dead  person  buried  in  a  tree.  The  Kit-fox  said,  "It  stinks."  Then 
the  dead  person  came  dowTi  from  the  tree  and  asked,  "AVhat  were  you 
saying?"  "I  said  it  smelled  good,"  said  the  Kit-fox.  "No,  you  said 
something  bad  of  me."  "No,  I  said,  'It  smells  like  sweet-grass  about 
here.'"  The  ghost  at  last  allowed  him  to  go.  The  Kit-fox  went  oft'. 
When  at  some  distance,  he  called  to  the  ghost,  "I  said,  'Something  smells 
bad  here.' "  Then  the  ghost  pursued  him.  He  came  near,  and  almost 
caught  him.  The  Kit-fox  ran  into  a  hole  just  as  the  ghost  caught  the  end 
of  his  tail  and  pulled  it  off.  After  a  time  the  Kit-fox  came  out  again  and 
<?ried.^ 

19.    Found-in-the-Gr.\ss. 

A  man  camped  alone.  In  the  morning  he  would  go  to  hunt,  and  in 
the  evening  he  came  back.  "If  a  person  comes  while  I  am  away,  do  not 
ask  him  to  come  in,"  he  said  to  his  wife.  "Even  if  he  is  just  about  to  come 
in,  do  not  cause  him  to  enter."  And  surely,  when  he  was  away,  somebody 
■came  there;  but  his  wife  said  nothing,  and  the  person  merely  walked  around 
the  tent.  Sometimes  he  made  as  if  to  enter;  but  the  woman  would  not  say 
anything,  and  he  did  not  come  in.  Then  her  husband  retiu-ned,  and  asked 
her,  "Has  that  jHTson  been  here?"  "Yes,  he  came,"  she  told  him. 
"Indeed!"  he  said  to  her.  "Now,  even  if  he  seems  about  to  come  in, 
you  must  not  tell  him  to  enter."  Then  he  went  hunting  again.  After 
he  was  gone  some  time,  that  ])erson  came  there  again.  He  made  as  if  to 
come  in,  but  he  did  not.  Then  he  opened  and  shut  the  door  several  times. 
Then  the  woman  could  restrain  herself  no  longer,  and  told  him,  "Come 
in!"  Then  the  man  came  in.  She  cooked  for  him  to  eat,  and  after  she 
hud  cooked  she  gave  him  the  food;  but  he  said,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of 
plate  I  use."  Then  she  changed  the  plate;  but  again  he  said,  "That  is 
not  the  kind  of  plate  I  use."  Then  she  continued  to  give  him  other 
])lates;  and  he  said  the  same  thing  to  her,  until  she  had  used  all  the 
plates  and  dishes.  She  did  not  know  what  to  give  him.  Then  she 
thought  what  kind  of  plate  to  use.  She  took  off  one  of  her  moccasins  and 
gave  it  to  him  as  a  plate.  "That  is  nearly  it,"  he  said  to  her.  Then  she 
took  off  one  of  her  leggings  and  used  it  as  a  plate.  "Very  nearly,"  he  told 
her.     Then  she  thotight,  "I  will  try  my  dress  for  a  plate."     Then  she  took 

1  From  informant  M. 


78  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.         [Vol.  I, 

off  her  dress,  and  spread  it  out  for  him  as  a  plate.  "That  is  very  nearly  it," 
he  said  to  her.  Then  she  lay  flat  on  her  back  and  made  a  plate  of  her  belly. 
"That  is  it,"  he  told  her.  She  was  pregnant.  After  the  man  had  eaten, 
he  cut  her  open.  Then  he  drew  out  one  of  her  children,  and  threw  it  to 
the  door.  "Ka'a"en  will  be  your  name,"  he  told  it.  Then  he  drew  out 
the  other  and  threw  it  away.  "Nii^a'"  will  be  your  name,"  he  said  to  it. 
She  had  been  with  twins,^  this  woman  he  had  cut  o})en.  After  he  had  done 
this,  he  went  out  and  disappeared.  After  a  time  the  man  who  was  the 
husband  of  this  woman  who  had  ])een  ripped  open,  returned  from  the  hunt, 
and  his  wife  did  not  appear.  When  she  did  not  come  out,  he  became  fright- 
ened. He  dismounted  and  threw  off  his  meat.  "I  told  her  so,"  he  said 
to  himself.  Then  he  went  inside.  There  she  lay  at  the  back  of  the  tent. 
He  cried  when  he  saw  his  wife  lying  dead  on  her  back.  He  went  out  on  the 
prairie  and  cried.  He  mourned  day  and  night.  When  he  came  back  to 
his  tent,  his  arrows  were  scattered  about.  Then  he  put  his  arrows  back 
into  the  quiver.  Whenever  he  was  away,  the  arrows  were  scattered  about 
the  tent.  He  continued  to  gather  them  up  and  put  them  back  into  the 
quiver.  When  he  had  done  this  repeatedly,  he  watched  for  those  who  took 
his  ari'ows  out.  Going  out  doors,  he  lay  on  his  face  near  the  tent  and  began 
to  cry.  It  sounded  as  if  he  were  far  off".  While  he  cried,  he  heard  a  child 
speaking.  It  said,  "Xii^a'",  let  us  play.  Our  father  is  far  away,  crying." 
Soon  he  again  heard  children  speaking.  "I  beat  you,"  they  said  to  each 
other.  "Look,  look  at  it  closely,"  they  said.  Then,  when  he  heard  them 
say  it  again,  he  got  up  and  ran  into  the  tent.  One  of  the  boys  escaped, 
but  the  one  who  was  looking  at  the  arrows  most  closely  he  caught.  The 
child  scratched  him  and  cried,  and  said,  "Let  me  go."  The  man  said, 
"Come,  my  son,  be  quiet.  I  want  you  to  live  with  me.  I  will  make  you  a 
bow  and  arrows.  You  can  always  shoot  with  them."  Then  the  boy 
became  quiet,  and  they  remained  together.  Soon  after,  the  man  said,  "Well, 
my  son,  I  will  go  out  as  I  did  when  I  caught  you.  I  will  do  it  again,  because 
I  am  trying  to  catch  your  younger  brother.  After  I  begin  to  cry,  you  must 
say  to  your  younger  brother,  'Let  us  play  together,'  and,  when  you  beat 
him,  you  must  say,  'Look  close!'  When  you  say  that  to  him,  I  will  come 
in."  When  he  had  told  his  son  what  to  do,  he  went  out  and  lay  down  on 
his  face  and  began  to  cry.  And  indeed  Ka'a"en  soon  called,  "Nii^a'",  come 
here!  Let  us  play!  Our  father  is  crying  at  a  distance."  "No,  I  will 
not,  for  you  smell  like  your  father,"  his  younger  brother  said  to  him.  "You 
need  not  touch  me,"  he  told  him.  "No,  I  do  not  want  to.  You  smell 
like  your  father,"  Nii^a'"  told  him.     He  had  difficulty  in  persuading  him. 

1  The  older  of  Gros  Ventre  twins,  if  boys,  is  given  tlie  name  Ka'a"en.      Tlie  younger  is. 
sometimes  called  Niica'"  "  second." 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  79 

At  last  he  came  in,  and  they  playetl  together.  When  Ka'a"en  beat  him,  he 
said,  "I  beat  you."  Then  the  man  got  up  and  ran  into  his  tent.  There 
hay  Xii^a'"  looking  closely  at  the  arrows.  Just  as  he  was  about  to  escape, 
his  father  caught  him.  He  cried  and  scratched,  and  said,  "Let  me  go!" 
"Be  cjuiet,  my  son.  You  will  live  with  me.  I  will  make  you  a  bow  and 
arrows,  and  you  can  always  shoot  with  them,"  said  his  father.  Then  he 
quieted  down.  Thus  their  father  caught  them  both.  He  made  bows  and 
arrows  for  both  of  them.  Then  Ka'a"en  said  to  him,  "Now,  father,  make 
a  sweat-house  and  lay  our  mother  down  in  it."  Then  he  did  as  his  son 
told  him.  Then  Ka'a"en  said,  "Step  aside,"  and  he  went  to  one  side.  Then 
Ka'a"en  shot  up,  and  as  he  shot  he  said,  "Look  out,  look  out,  look  out, 
my  mother!"  Then  he  said  to  his  brother,  "Now  it  is  your  turn."  Then 
Xiiya'"  shot  up,  calling,  "Look  out,  look  out,  look  out,  my  mother!"  When- 
ever they  shot,  the  sweat-house  shook.  Ka'a"en  shot  upward  four  times, 
and  Nii^a"^  four  times;  and  when  each  had  shot  up  four  times,  their  mother 
ran  out  from  the  sweat-house.     Thus  they  restored  their  mother  to  life. 

After  a  time,  their  father  said  to  the  boys,  "Now,  my  sons,  when  you  are 
out  shooting,  never  pick  up  an  arrow  after  you  have  shot  it."  Then  when 
tliey  went  shooting,  they  never  picked  up  their  arrows  after  they  had  shot 
them.  Once,  when  they  had  started  to  return,  they  had  used  up  all  their 
arrows.  Near  where  they  were  going  sat  a  bird.  Then  Nii9a"^  said  to  his 
brother,  "My  older  brother,  I  will  go  back  and  pick  up  one  of  my  arrows. 
I  want  to  shoot  this  bird."  "No,  our  father  told  us  never  to  pick  up  our 
arrows  after  we  had  shot  them."  Nevertheless,  Nii9a'"  ran  back  and  took 
one  of  his  arrows.  As  soon  as  he  took  it,  the  dust  rose  behind  them.  When 
Ka'a"en  saw  it,  lie  ran  toward  their  tent,  and  Nii9a'"  followed  him.  Ka'a"en 
just  got  in.  Just  as  his  younger  brother  took  hold  of  the  door,  the  wind 
blew  him  away  together  with  it.  He  was  blown  far  away.  There  was  a 
camp  near  the  place  to  which  he  was  blown.  A  dry  lake  was  near  the 
camp.  It  was  there  that  he  came  down.  When  the  women  of  the  camp 
had  put  up  their  tents,  they  went  out  to  cut  grass  at  the  lake.  They  carried 
it  home  on  their  backs.  An  old  woman  went  out  while  the  rest  were  already 
coming  back.  When  she  reached  the  lake,  there  was  no  longer  anybody 
there.  Then  she  saw  a  bunch  of  grass.  "I  am  glad  that  there  is  some  left. 
I  will  cut  it,"  she  said  to  herself.  Then  she  went  to  it  and  began  to  cut  it. 
As  she  cut  it,  a  child  cried.  "I  am  glad  to  find  a  child.  I  will  have  it  for 
my  grandson,"  the  old  woman  said  to  herself.  Then  she  took  Nii9a"^  home. 
When  she  got  to  her  tent,  she  said,  "I  found  this  child  to  have  for  myself. 
I  found  it  in  the  dry  lake  as  I  was  cutting  grass  for  bedding.  Found-in-the- 
Grass  will  be  his  name."  Then  the  old  woman  raised  him.  When  he  had 
grown  up  to  be  a  boy,  a  man  who  had  pretty  daughters  that  were  not  married. 


) 


80  Ahthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

said  to  an  old  man,  "Cry  out,  'Any  one  that  may  catch  a  porcujnne,  or 
any  two  young  men  that  may  catch  porcupines,  will  marry  my  daughters. ' " 
Then  all  the  young  men  set  traps.  Found-in-the-Grass  said  to  his  grand- 
mother, "Make  me  a  trap,  grandmother.  I  will  also  trap  porcupines." 
He  made  her  laugh,  trying  to  do  what  he  was  too  young  for.  "What  do 
you  want  a  wife  for?  You  cannot  even  keep  yourself  clean,"  his  grand- 
mother said  to  him.  "No,  grandmother,  you  must  make  me  a  trap  and  I 
will  set  it."  Then  she  made  him  a  trap,  and  when  she  had  made  it,  he  took 
it  and  went  out  with  it.  He  set  it  right  in  the  trail.  Then  it  became  night. 
In  the  morning  all  the  young  men  got  up  and  went  to  look  at  their  traps. 
But  first  of  all,  just  as  it  was  beginning  to  be  light,  the  Crow  went  out  flying, 
and  looked  at  the  traps  of  all.  When  he  had  examined  all  the  traps,  he 
went  to  the  trap  that  Found-in-the-Grass  had  set;  and  this  was  the  only 
one  that  succeeded  in  catching  a  porcupine.  Then  the  Crow  stole  it,  but 
left  a  quill.  Found-in-the-Grass  came  and  looked  at  his  trap.  He  found 
it  as  he  had  set  it.  But  a  porcupine-quill  lay  there.  Then  he  thought, 
"It  must  be  that  somebody  has  stolen  it."  He  went  back,  and  said  to  his 
grandmother,  "Grandmother,  I  think  somebody  stole  the  porcupine  from 
me:  here  is  a  quill."  "Indeed!"  she  said  to  him.  Not  very  long  after 
he  had  told  her  that  some  one  had  robbed  him,  an  old  man  cried  out,  "The 
Crow  is  the  one  who  has  succeeded  in  trapping  a  porcupine."  "Grand- 
mother," said  Found-in-the-Grass,  "it  must  be  he  who  stole  my  jiorcupine. 
Take  this  quill  and  show  it  to  that  man,  the  father  of  those  two  young 
women."  The  old  woman  took  the  quill  and  showed  it  to  the  man.  "Here 
is  a  porcupine-quill.  I  came  to  show  it  to  you.  The  Crow  who  said  that 
he  trapped  it,  stole  his  porcupine.  He  stole  it  from  my  grandson."  This 
she  said  to  the  man.  "Yes,"  he  told  her.  "Well,  then,  the  Crow  and 
Found-in-the-Grass  must  each  marry  one  of  my  daughters.  Well,  which 
of  you  two  wants  to  marry  Foimd-in-the-Grass  ?  "  he  said  to  his  daughters. 
The  oldest  one  said,  "I  will  not  marry  him.  He  has  a  big  belly,  and  has 
mucus  on  his  nose,  and  his  hair  is  sticky  and  tangled."  Thus  she  spoke 
about  Found-in-the-Grass.  "The  Crow  is  the  one  I  will  marry,"  she  said. 
The  younger  said,  "Found-in-the-Grass  is  the  one  I  will  marry.  I  would 
not  marry  the  Crow,  for  he  has  a  large  nose,  and  he  is  only  a  bird."  Thus 
the  younger  one  said.  But  the  older  one  said  to  her,  "Who  would  want 
to  marry  him,  that  Found-in-the-Grass  with  the  big  belly!"  "Who  would 
marry  the  Crow!  He  is  only  a  bird  with  a  big  nose,"  her  yovmger  sister 
said  to  her.  Thus  the  Crow  and  Found-in-the-Grass  were  married.  After 
a  time  there  was  a  famine.  The  Crow  said  to  an  old  man,  "Cry  out,  'The 
Crow  will  go  after  buffalo.  He  says,  "Build  an  enclosure."'  Tell  them 
that."     Thus  he  told  the  old  man,  and  flew  off".     He  was  gone  a  long  time. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  81 

In  the  evening  he  came  flying  back  alone.  As  soon  as  he  started,  the  people 
had  all  made  a  large  enclosure  for  the  buffalo.  Now  he  came  back  and 
said,  "I  flew  everywhere,  but  I  saw  no  buffalo."  Then  they  had  made 
their  enclosure  in  vain.  The  Crow  had  failed.  After  a  while  Found-in-the- 
Grass  said  to  an  old  man,  "I  want  you  to  cry  out,  ' Found-in-the-Grass 
will  go  to  get  buft'alo.     He  says,  "Make  an  enclosure.'""     Thus  he  told  \ 

the  old  man.  Then  he  sent  his  wife  to  her  father.  "Go  and  tell  vour 
father  that  I  want  him  to  go  with  me  to  hunt,"  he  said  to  his  wife.  When 
she  entered  her  father's  tent,  her  older  sister  was  there.  As  soon  as  she 
entered,  her  older  sister  said,  "^Yhere  are  you  going,  you  wife  of  the  big- 
bellied  child  with  the  dirty  nose?  Why  do  you  leave  him?  You  should 
not  let  him  out  of  your  sight."  "And  what  are  you  doing  here?  Whv 
do  you  leave  your  husband  the  Crow,  the  one  with  the  big  nose?  You 
should  not  let  him  out  of  your  sight.  My  husband  is  changed  every  night. 
In  the  evening  he  goes  out :  when  it  is  dark  he  comes  in  again,  and,  when 
lie  comes  in,  he  is  a  good-looking  yoimg  man.     He  is  perfumed.     Your  jf 

husband  the  Crow  cannot  do  that!"     But  her  older  sister  said,  "Found-  ^"^ 

in-the-Grass  is  not  the  kind  to  be  changed  in  the  night."  Then  Found-in- 
the-Grass  and  his  father-in-law  went  hunting.  When  they  had  gone, 
Found-in-the-Grass  said  to  his  father-in-law,  "Xow  go  up  on  this  hill  and 
watch  me  from  there."  There  was  a  large  flat  place.  Found-in-the-Grass 
went  there  and  began  to  gather  buft'alo-chips.  Then  he  placed  them  here 
and  there  in  pairs  on  top  of  each  other.  When  he  had  covered  the  large 
flat  here  and  there  with  chips,  he  went  down  (into  a  gully)  out  of  sight. 
Soon  he  reappeared.     As  soon  as  he  appeared,  buffalo  stood  all  about.  i 

Then  he  took  a  buft'alo-chip  and  burned  it.  After  he  had  burned  it,  he  went 
towards  the  wind  to  cause  the  buft'alo  to  smell  it.  When  he  had  done  this, 
he  ran  to  where  the  enclosure  was,  and  all  the  buft'alo  followed  him.  He 
dropped  out  of  sight,  and  right  there  the  buffalo  followed  him  over  the  bank. 
But  he  had  jumped  to  one  side.  Thus  Found-in-the-Grass  satisfied  the 
])eople's  hunger.  Then  he  went  home  to  call  his  wife  to  shoot  the  buft'alo 
in  the  enclosure.  His  quiver  was  of  otter-skin.  Then  his  wife  shot  the 
buffalo.  While  she  was  killing  them,  her  sister  came  to  her  and  said,  "Let 
me  have  the  bow:  let  me  do  the  shooting."  "No,"  said  her  younger 
sister.  "What  do  you  want  to  kill  them  for?  If  you  want  to  do  the  killing, 
you  should  kill  them  with  your  husband's,  the  big-nosed  Crow's,  bow  and 
arrows."  After  she  had  killed  all  the  buft'alo  that  were  in  the  enclosure, 
Found-in-the-Grass  said  to  the  people,  "Do  not  take  for  your  own  the  one 
that  is  scabby.  It  is  for  my  grandmother  to  skin."  This  one  that  he  called 
scabby  was  the  fattest  of  all.  Then  all  the  people  began  to  butcher.  Found- 
in-the-Grass,  and    his    wife,   and    his    grandmother,  together   skinned    the 


82  Anihropolofjical  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.         [Vol.  I, 

scabby  one.  He  filled  a  gut  with  blood,  and  put  it  on  his  wife's'  back. 
"Carry  home  this  gut  filled  with  the  blood  which  we  have  obtained,"  he 
told  her.  Just  as  she  started  to  go,  he  stabbed  the  gut  in  which  the  blood 
was.  As  soon  as  he  had  cut  it,  his  wife  was  wearing  a  red  robe  and  a  red 
dress  and  red  leggings.  The  blood  had  changed  to  clothing.  His  sister- 
in-law  saw  him  do  this,  and  came  over  to  him.  "I  wish  you  would  do  to 
me  as  you  did  to  your  wife.  That  is  why  I  came,"  his  sister-in-law  said 
to  him.  "Yes,"  he  said.  "Get  blood,  and  I  will  do  to  you  as  I  did  to 
your  younger  sister."  Then  she  got  blood  and  put  it  on  her  back,  and  he 
cut  the  gut.  When  he  cut  it,  blood  ran  down  all  over  her.  Thus  Found- 
in-the-Grass  ridiculetl  his  sister-in-law.^ 

20.    Clotted-Blood. 

There  was  an  old  man  who  had  four  daughters  and  a  son-in-law.  As 
his  daughters  grew  up,  his  son-in-law  married  them  until  he  had  all  four. 
The  son-in-law  was  bad.  He  and  his  wives  never  lived  with  the  old  man. 
They  lived  in  another  tent.  The  son-in-law  would  go  hunting  and  take 
the  old  man  with  him.  The  old  man  did  all  the  butchering,  but  his  son-in- 
law  gave  him  no  meat.  The  old  man  got  only  bones  to  boil  for  the  marrow. 
Once  they  went  hunting,  and  drove  the  buffalo  under  a  steep  bank.  The 
son-in-law  shot  several.  They  ran  away  wounded,  fell,  and  died.  The 
old  man,  following  their  tracks,  came  to  where  a  buffalo  that  had  been  shot 
through  the  lungs  had  coughed  out  a  piece  of  clotted  blood.  Then  he 
pretended  to  fall  down.  He  picked  up  the  blood  and  put  it  into  his  quiver. 
When  he  and  his  son-in-law  came  together  again,  his  son-in-law  asked 
him,  "What  did  you  pick  up  in  that  place?"  The  old  man  said,  "I  did 
not  pick  up  anything.  I  fell  down.  I  took  a  thorn  out  of  my  foot."  \\'hen 
they  had  finished  butchering,  they  took  the  meat  home.  The  young  man 
kept  it  all,  and  the  old  man  had  only  the  blood  which  he  had  hidden.  Then 
he  told  his  wife,  "Put  a  kettle  on  the  fire.  WV  will  cook  this  blood."  The 
old  woman  did  so.  When  the  water  boiled,  she  threw  the  blood  in.  Then 
a  child  cried.  The  old  man  said,  "Take  the  child  out.  It  will  be  our  son." 
Then  the  olil  woman  took  it  out  from  the  kettle.  It  was  a  boy.  The 
son-in-law  heard  the  child  crying.  He  told  his  youngest  wife,  "Run  to  the 
tent  and  see  what  the  child  is.  If  it  is  a  girl,  I  want  to  marry  her  when  she 
is  old  enough.  If  it  is  a  boy,  they  must  throw  him  away  and  kill  him."  The 
young  woman  went  over.  She  was  the  only  one  of  the  daughters  who  cared 
for  the  old  people.     Sometimes  she  stole  food  for  them.     She  asked  her  par- 

>  From  a  te.xt  obtained  from  informant  S.  Compare  Arapaho,  No.s.  19-143.  For  tlie  dis- 
astrous consequence  of  shooting  an  arrow,  compare  Arapaho,  No.s.  6,  141,  142. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  83 

■ents  what  the  child  was.  The  old  man  said  to  her,  "  It  is  a  boy,  but  you  must 
say,  'It  is  a  girl.'"  The  young  woman  went  back  and  told  that  it  was  a 
girl.  The  man  said,  "Take  some  of  this  refuse  over  and  let  the  old  woman 
drink  it,  so  that  she  will  have  milk  to  raise  the  child."  The  old  man  knew 
that  the  child  was  supernatural.  He  said  to  his  wife,  "Swing  the  child 
on  the  southwest  side  of  the  tent  (to  the  right  of  the  door),  then  swing  it 
on  the  northwest,  then  at  the  northeast,  then  at  the  southeast."  The  old 
woman  swung  the  child  at  the  west  (right)  of  the  door.  \Vhile  she  was 
swinging  it,  the  child  began  to  laugh.  AYhen  she  swung  it  for  the  second 
time,  at  the  northwest  of  the  tent,  it  began  to  talk.  When  she  swung  it 
the  third  time,  it  became  a  large  boy,  who  nearly  jumped  off  the  swing. 
When  she  swung  him  the  fourth  time,  at  the  left  of  the  door,  he  jumped  off. 
He  Avas  a  fine-looking  young  man.  Then  he  told  his  father,  "Make  me  a 
bow  from  the  last  rib  of  a  buffalo,  and  make  me  four  arrows  from  the  neck- 
tendons  of  buffalo."  Then  the  old  man  made  the  bow  and  arrows. 
He  made  them  well,  and  put  stone  points  on  the  ends  of  the  arrows. 
The  young  man  asked  him,  ".When  are  you  and  your  son-in-law  going 
hunting?"  The  old  man  said,  "I  do  not  know.  I  go  whenever  he  tells 
me."  At  night  the  son-in-law  sent  one  of  his  wives  to  tell  the  old  man  to 
be  ready  to  hunt  the  next  morning.  Very  early  the  next  morning  the  old 
man  and  Clotted-Blood  went  out.  The  son-in-law  sent  one  of  his  wives 
to  tell  the  old  man  to  come.  The  old  woman  cried  back,  "He  has  gone 
ahead."  The  woman  told  what  her  mother  had  said.  Then  the  son-in- 
law  said,  "I  will  find  him,  and  when  I  find  him  I  will  kill  him."  Clotted- 
IJlood  had  alrciidy  killed  a  fat  buffalo.  The  man  saw  the  buffalo,  came 
near,  and  called,  "Look  about  you  for  the  last  time,  old  man,  before  I  kill 
you."  Clotted-Blood  had  said  to  the  old  man,  "Take  this  kidney  and  eat 
it.  Let  him  see  it.  Turn  around,  and  hold  it  up  so  that  he  can  see  you 
eat  it."  He  himself  Avas  hiding,  lying  behind  the  buffalo.  The  man  said, 
"What  are  you  eating  there?  Drop  it  I"  The  old  man  was  frightened, 
and  nearly  let  the  kidney  fall.  Clotted-Blood  said  to  him,  "Hold  it  fast 
and  eat  it!"  Again  the  man  ordered  him  to  dro])  it.  Clotted-Blood 
ordered  him,  "Hold  it,  else  I  will  kill  you  before  him!"  Now  the  man 
was  very  close.  Then  Clotted-Blood  stood  up  beside  the  old  man.  The 
man  stopped,  looked  at  him,  laughed,  and  said,  "Well,  there  is  my  brother- 
in-law."  Clotted-Blood  said,  "Yes,  I  am  your  brother-in-law.  I  have 
been  waiting  a  long  time  to  see  you.  You  have  treated  my  father  badly." 
He  rolled  up  liis  sleeve,  and  put  an  arrow  on  his  bow.  The  man  jumped 
back.  Clotted-Blood  shot  him  in  the  right  side.  When  he  tried  to  pull 
out  the  arrow,  it  stretched.  The  more  he  pulled,  the  farther  it  stretched. 
He  could  not  [)iill  it  out.     Then  Clotted-Blood  shot  him  in  the  other  side. 


84  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

When  he  tried  to  pull  out  the  arrow,  it  stretched.  He  could  not  pull  it  out. 
Then  he  fell  down.  The  boy  had  killed  him.  Even  while  he  was  dyings 
he  continued  to  speak:  "You  cannot  escape  me.  You  cannot  get  where 
I  will  not  find  you."  Clotted-Blood  told  his  father  to  get  wood  and  make 
a  large  fire.  The  old  man  made  a  fire.  Clotted-Blood  told  him,  "Cut 
off  the  legs  and  arms  of  the  dead  man."  The  old  man  refused.  He  said, 
"My  son-in-law  was  very  wonderful.  I  do  not  wish  to  do  this."  "Well, 
I  will  do  it,"  said  the  young  man.  He  cut  off  an  arm,  and  threw  it  into  the 
fire.  The  arm  spoke:  "You  can  go  to  no  place  where  I  will  not  get  you." 
Clotted-Blood  did  not  care.  He  cut  off  the  rest  of  the  limbs,  and  threw 
everything  into  the  fire.  When  he  had  burned  up  the  dead  man  altogether, 
he  asked  his  father,  "Wliich  of  your  four  daughters  tried  to  help  you?" 
The  old  man  said,  "My  youngest  daughter  is  the  only  one  that  ever  loved 
me.  She  alone  helped  me.  The  others  never  helped  me."  Then  they 
started  to  go  back.  "  We  will  leave  this  meat.  You  will  not  need  it.  You 
will  have  plenty  when  you  get  back,"  said  Clotted-Blood.  Then  he  killed 
three  of  the  women  and  their  children.  Only  the  youngest  woman  and 
her  child  he  did  not  kill.  He  burned  the  bodies  up,  as  he  had  the  man's. 
Then  they  went  into  the  man's  tent  and  took  all  the  property.  They  had 
plenty  to  eat. 

Clotted-Blood  asked  the  old  man,  "My  father,  are  there  any  ])eople 
in  the  land  besides  you?"  "Yes,  there  are  many  tribes,"  said  the  old 
man.  "I  will  go  visiting,"  said  Clotted-Blood.  The  old  man  told  him, 
"Do  not  go.  No  one  ever  returns.  There  is  something  that  kills  them." 
But  the  young  man  was  determined  to  go.  Then  the  old  man  said  to 
him,  "If  you  will  go,  I  will  tell  you  all  the  dangerous  places.  The  first 
is  a  tree.  Every  one  that  passes  on  the  trail  by  that  tree  is  killed." 
Then  Clotted-Blood  started.  He  saw  the  tree.  "There  is  the  tree,"  he 
said.  He  came  near  it.  The  tree  began  to  sway.  Then  he  tried  to  go 
around  it.  It  was  impossible.  He  had  to  pass  by  the  tree.  Then  he 
made  a  motion  to  go  under.  The  tree  nearly  fell,  and  he  jumped  back. 
Then  again  he  made  a  motion  to  go  past,  but  jumped  back.  Then  he  went 
far  back,  and  ran.  When  he  was  under  the  tree,  it  fell  and  broke.  Then 
Clotted-Blood  was  a  down  feather  floating  in  the  air.  It  lit  on  the  ground 
and  he  was  a  man  again.  The  tree  had  been  hollow.  The  })eople  it  had 
killed  were  inside.  Some  were  dead,  some  were  only  bones.  Some  were 
not  yet  dead.  Clotted-Blood  took  them  all  out.  He  caused  those  who 
were  not  dead  to  live.  Then  he  burned  the  tree.  He  told  the  people, 
"Go  back  where  you  came  from.  Why  did  you  let  this  tree  kill  you? 
You  should  have  known  better.     You  are  not  children." 

Then  he  came  to  a  bridge  which  was  supported  in  the  middle  by  a 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  85 

buffalo-head.  Whenever  he  tried  to  step  on  it,  the  bridge  gave  way. 
Then  he  stepped  on  it  as  if  to  cross,  and  the  bridge  went  down.  Three 
times  he  stepped  on  it  and  the  bridge  went  down.  The  fourth  time,  he 
walked  out  on  it.  Just  as  the  bridge  began  to  sink,  he  jumped,  and  reached 
the  land  on  the  other  side  of  the  water.  The  bridge  went  down  and  never 
emerged. 

Then  he  came  to  a  great  wolf.  His  father  had  told  him,  "Even  if  you 
stand  far  away,  the  wolf  will  suck  you  towards  him."  Then  Clotted- 
Blood  stood  at  a  distance,  and  said  to  the  wolf,  "Now  draw  me  in.  I 
have  heard  that  you  draw  people  toward  you."  Then  the  wolf  began  to 
suck.  The  young  man  walked  toward  him.  He  pretended  that  he  was 
being  drawn  along,  and  made  motions  as  if  resisting.  "Indeed  you  are 
wonderful!  You  are  really  drawing  me  toward  you!"  he  said.  He  went 
toward  him  as  fast  as  he  could  walk.  The  wolf  lay  there  with  his  mouth 
open.  Without  stopping,  Clotted-Blood  went  right  on,  and  jumped  down 
his  throat.  Inside  he  found  people.  Some  Avere  alive,  some  nearly  dead, 
some  dead,  and  some  were  only  bones.  Above  him  he  saw  the  heart  hang- 
ing and  beating.  Then  he  said,  "  Ix't  us  dance.  You  sing  and  I  will  dance." 
Then  the  people  sang  for  him.  He  tied  a  knife  to  the  top  of  his  head,  and 
danced.  When  he  jumped,  he  pricked  the  heart.  Each  time,  the  wolf 
leaped.  Then  Clotted-Blood  jumped  high  and  pierced  the  heart,  and  the 
wolf  fell  dead.  Then  he  reached  up  and  cut  it  off.  Then  he  cut  the  sides 
of  the  wolf  open,  and  came  out  with  the  peo[)le.     Then  he  went  on. 

He  met  an  old  woman.  She  had  a  large  wooden  dish  which  she  heUl 
up  toward  people.  It  drew  them  toward  it,  and  when  they  struck  the  dish 
they  were  burned.  He  went  toward  the  old  woman  and  called,  "Old 
woman,  come  out  with  your  dish.  I  wish  to  be  drawn  by  it."  "My 
grandson,  I  have  been  wishing  for  a  long  time  to  see  you,"  said  the  old 
woman.  Clotted-Blood  continued  to  tell  her,  "Bring  your  dish  and  point 
it  at  me."  Then  at  last  she  brought  it  out.  He  was  really  drawn  by  the 
dish.  As  he  went,  he  made  himself  go  faster.  When  he  came  near,  he 
turned  into  a  down  feather,  which  was  blown  over  her  head,  and  lit  behind 
her.  Then  he  turned  to  himself  again,  seized  the  old  woman  from  behind, 
and  began  to  turn  the  dish  toward  her.  She  said,  "Pity  me,  my  grandson!" 
He  said,  "You  are  the  old  woman  who  destroys  people  with  her  dish." 
He  continued  to  play  with  her.  Then  he  turned  the  dish  toward  her,  and 
she  was  drawn  into  it  and  consumed.  Then  he  put  the  dish  on  a  large 
flat  rock,  pounded  it  with  mauls,  broke  it  up,  and  burned  it. 

He  came  to  a  large  camp,  whose  chief  was  a  large  Bull.  The  first  tent 
he  came  to  was  an  old  tent  outside  the  camp-circle.  He  went  in  and  found 
an  old  woman.     She  said,  "Well,  my  grandson,  what  are  you  doing  here? 


\ 


86  Anthropologicol  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [\'ol.  I, 

This  place  is  dangerous.  Go  back  before  they  fiiifl  you  have  come  here. 
I  pity  you.  Go  back."  "To  whom  do  you  refer?"  asked  Clotted-Blood. 
Then  she  told  him  about  the  powerful  rnill.  Clotted-Blood  said,  "That 
is  the  one  I  came  to  see."  The  old  woman  urged  him  again  to  go  back. 
He  said,  "He  is  the  one  I  came  to  see.  I  Avill  not  go  back.  Cook  for  me. 
I  am  hungry."  The  old  woman  continued  to  urge  him  to  go  back;  but 
he  said,  "Cook  for  me.  I  am  hungry."  When  the  Bull  learned  that  he 
was  in  camp,  he  sent  for  him.  The  Bull  was  accustomed  to  gamble  with 
any  one  that  came.  He  had  everything  prepared  for  playing.  Clotted- 
Blood  went  to  him.  They  played  with  a  wheel  and  sticks.  Clotted-Blood 
le;  him  win  everything  except  his  bow  and  four  arrows.  Then  he  began 
to  win.  He  won  everything  the  Bull  had.  When  the  Bull  had  only  one 
thing  left  to  bet  with,  he  became  angry.  As  they  ran,  following  the  wheel, 
he  snorted.  Next  time,  as  they  ran  after  it  side  by  side,  he  was  more  angry. 
He  turned  his  head,  hooked  the  young  man.  and  tossed  him.  As  Clotted- 
Blood  flew  up,  he  turned  to  down.  When  it  lit,  he  was  a  man  again.  The 
Bull's  horn  was  broken.  "When  one  does  that  to  me,  it  is  what  makes 
me  angry,"  said  the  Bull.  He  charged,  and  tossed  the  young  man  again. 
Again  Clotted-Blood  turned  to  a  plume,  and  when  it  reached  the  ground, 
he  was  a  man.  At  once  he  ran  for  his  l)ow.  The  Bull's  other  horn  was 
broken.  "When  one  does  that  to  me,  it  is  what  makes  me  still  more  angry," 
said  the  Bull,  and  charged  again.  Then  Clotted-Blood  turned  to  down  and 
flew  entirely  over  him.  He  was  wondering  what  to  do  to  wound  him, 
for  the  Bull  was  altogether  of  bone.  He  was  impenetrable.  That  is  why 
all  were  afraid  of  him.  The  Bull  charged  again.  Clotted-Blood  turned 
to  a  down  feather,  jumped  over  him,  lit  behind  him,  and  shot  him  in  the 
anus.  The  arrow  went  in  out  of  sight.  The  Bull  fell,  and  Clotted-Blood 
cut  him  to  pieces.  Then  a  crier  called  to  the  camp,  "Clotted-Blood  has 
come.  He  has  killed  the  powerful  Bull.  He  has  killed  all  that  was  danger- 
ous on  the  way.  The  people  are  free  again."  Clotted-Blood  gave  all  his 
winnings  to  the  old  woman.  He  asked  her,  "Where  is  there  another 
camp?"  She  told  him,  "There  is  one  down  stream.  Do  not  go  there. 
The  people  are  powerful."     But  Clotted-Blood  started. 

Wlien  he  reached  the  camp,  he  went  into  an  old  tent.  An  old  woman 
said,  "There  is  my  grandson  Clotted-Blood!  You  had  better  go  back. 
If  they  find  you  here,  you  will  never  go  away  alive."  Clotted-Blood  said, 
"Give  me  to  eat.  What  is  it  you  refer  to?"  When  he  had  eaten,  the  old 
woman  told  him,  "There  is  one  who  has  a  swing  at  the  river.  He  kills  all 
that  swing  with  him."  Then  Clotted-Blood  said,  "That  is  what  I  want. 
I  have  heard  of  that  swing,  but  I  have  never  swung.  I  wish  to  try  it.  That 
man  is  the  one  v.hom  I  have  come  to  see."     When  it  was  found  out  that 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  87 

he  was  in  the  camp,  the  man  Avho  swung  people  sent  for  him,  saying, 
"Tell  him  to  come  to  swing."  Clotted-Blood  made  answer,  "It  is  good. 
I  will  come.  He  is  the  one  whom  I  wished  to  see.  I  shall  come  to  him 
soon."  Then  he  went  to  him.  On  a  tree  that  leaned  over  a  steep  bank 
there  was  a  swing.  Below  it  there  was  deep  water.  Then  the  man  swung 
him.  Clotted-Blood  said,  "Good!  this  is  good."  Then  he  said,  "Now  you 
in  your  turn  swing."  Then  he  swung  the  man.  Then  Clotted-Blood  in 
turn  went  on  the  swing  again.  The  man  swung  him.  He  swung  him  hard, 
and  when  he  was  far  out,  he  cut  the  rope,  and  Clotted-Blood  fell.  When 
he  was  near  the  water,  he  turned  into  a  down  feather.  It  was  blown  along 
by  the  wind,  hovered,  and  lit  just  across  the  river  at  the  edge  of  the  water. 
There  he  stood  as  a  man  again.  Then  he  went  back.  He  said  to  the  man, 
"It  is  much  pleasure  to  swing,  is  it  not  ?  Let  us  continue.  Now  it  is  your 
turn.  Get  on  the  swing."  Then  the  man  went  on.  Clotted-Blood 
swung  liim  hard.  When  he  was  above  the  water,  he  cut  the  swing.  The 
man  fell  into  the  deep  water.  A  large  water-monster  (bi'i^a"  or  bax'aa"^)  was 
in  the  water.  This  was  the  guardian  spirit  of  the  man  that  had  the  swing. 
He  swung  people  in  order  to  feed  them  to  this  animal.  Then  it  swallowed 
him.  But  it  knew  the  man,  and  brought  him  to  shore.  He  came  back 
to  Clotted-Blood.  Clotted-Blood  said,  "Let  us  continue  to  enjoy  ourselves 
by  swinging.  Xow  it  is  my  turn."  Then  he  swung.  Then  the  man  cut 
the  swdng,  and  he  fell.  He  allowed  himself  to  fall  into  the  water.  He  fell 
straight  into  the  water-animal's  mouth.  Inside  of  it  he  found  people  whom 
it  had  eaten.  He  cut  up  the  animal.  Then  he  came  out.  He  went  back 
to  the  man,  and  said  to  him,  "I  have  found  you  out.  It  is  you  who  have 
been  inflicting  suffering  on  the  people.  I  shall  make  you  suffer."  Then 
he  shot  an  arrow  into  his  side  and  another  into  his  other  side.  He  killed 
him.  Then  a  crier  called  out  to  the  camp,  "Clotted-Blood  has  arrived. 
He  has  killed  the  man  with  the  swing  and  his  supernatural  animal.  We 
are  free  again.  We  will  live  happily  from  now."  Clotted-Blood  asked 
the  old  woman,  "Is  there  another  camp?"  She  said,  "Down  the  river. 
But  do  not  go.  The  people  there  are  powerful."  "I  am  travelling  in  order 
to  see  such  places,"  said  Clotted-Blood,  and  started. 

Then  he  came  to  the  camp  and  went  into  an  old  woman's  tent.  [The 
original  here  repeats  the  dialogue  between  him  and  the  old  woman.]  In 
this  place  there  was  a  man  with  a  sharp  leg.  He  caused  those  who  came, 
to  play  at  kicking  with  him.  Clotted-Blood  put  a  limb  of  a  cottonwood 
under  his  robe.  They  played,  and  he  proved  superior  to  the  man.  Then 
the  man  kicked  at  him  with  his  sharpened  leg.  Clotted-Blood  threw  the 
stick  out,  and  the  other's  foot  pierced  it.  Then  a  large  cottonwood-tree 
stood  there.     In  the  top  of  it  stuck  this  man.     Clotted-Blood  left  him  there 


88  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [\o\.  I, 

to  starve.  Then  a  crier  called  to  the  camp,  "Clotted-Blood  has  killed  the 
one  that  kicked.  We  are  free  again.  He  has  killed  every  dangerous  being^ 
that  he  has  met." 

Then  Clotted-Blood  asked  his  way  to  the  next  camp  from  the  old  woman. 
He  came  to  another  old  woman's  tent.  [The  original  repeats  the  incident 
in  full.]  The  old  woman  told  him,  "A  chief  gives  his  daughter  to  those 
who  come  visiting.  Then  he  asks  them  to  do  something  that  will  kill  them." 
When  the  chief  learned  that  Clotted-Blood  was  in  the  camp,  he  sent  for  him. 
He  said  to  him,  "I  have  been  waiting  for  you.  I  wish  you  for  my  son-in- 
law."  Clotted-Blood  said,  "Yes,  1  am  glad  to  have  a  wife,  for  I  am  poor."^ 
After  he  had  been  given  the  girl,  his  father-in-law  first  wished  him  to  get 
a  bin-ning  coal.  His  wife  told  Clotted-Blood  what  her  father  wanted,  and 
that  he  must  go  to  a  certain  light  that  was  shining.  Clotted-Blood  went. 
He  knew  at  once  what  the  light  was.  It  was  the  morning  star.  So  he 
got  it  and  brought  it  back.  Then  his  father-in-law  sent  him  to  get  sticks 
of  cherry-wood  for  arrows.  He  told  him  to  go  to  a  certain  thicket.  There 
he  had  four  bears  that  killed  all  who  came.  Clotted-Blood  took  his  bow 
and  went  toward  the  thicket.  The  bears  came  out  and  rushed  at  him.  He 
jumped  about,  avoiding  them,  and  shot.  He  killed  them  all.  Then  he 
cut  up  their  skins  into  thongs.  He  made  a  big  bundle  of  the  cherry-sticks,, 
put  the  fat  of  the  bears  in  with  it,  and,  tying  the  whole  together  with  the 
bearskin  thongs,  carried  it  home.  Then  he  sent  it  to  his  father-in-law  by 
his  wife.  The  old  man  was  frightened,  and  blushed.  He  did  not  know 
what  to  say.  When  he  had  made  his  arrows  ready  for  feathering,  he  told 
his  daughter  to  send  her  husband  to  get  feathers.  He  told  her  to  ask  him 
to  go  to  a  rocky  precipice  w4iere  birds  that  had  suitable  feathers  lived. 
Clotted-Blood  went  there  and  found  a  nest  with  two  young  ones  in  it.  Then 
he  went  into  the  nest  and  sat  with  the  young  birds.  He  watched  them. 
Whenever  they  opened  their  eyes,  lightning  flashed.  Whenever  they  moved, 
it  thundered.  "You  are  wonderful  little  birds,"  he  said.  He  took  the 
little  female  by  the  bill,  and  twisted  it.  "How  does  it  cloud  up  when  your 
mother  comes?"  he  asked.  The  Bird  said,  "It  clouds  up  very  dark.  My 
mother  is  terrible.  She  comes  with  hard  rain,  and  with  thunder  and  light- 
ning." "Oh,  yes!  your  mother  is  very  powerful,"  said  Clotted-Blood,  and 
twisted  the  bird's  bill  again.  Then  he  twisted  the  bill  of  the  young  male, 
and  asked  him,  "How  does  it  cloud  when  your  father  comes?"  The 
Bird  said,  "The  clouds  are  Avhite  when  my  father  comes,  and  he  comes 
with  heavy  hail  and  thunder  and  lightning,  for  my  father  is  very  powerful." 
"Oh,  yes!  your  father  is  very  powerful,"  Clotted-Blood  said,  and  twisted 
his  nose.  Then  he  saw  a  black  cloud  coming.  Soon  the  sky  was  clouded 
all  over,  and  it  rained  and  thundered,  and  there  was  lightning.     Clotted- 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  89 

Blood  went  into  a  cavity  in  tlie  rocks.  When  the  shower  was  over,  he  saw 
a  white  cloud  come  very  quietly;  he  could  hear  the  roar  of  the  hail.  Then 
the  old  female  Thunder  spoke  to  him  from  the  cloud,  "What  are  you  doing 
there  among  my  children  ?  Go  away!  You  will  make  me  angry."  Clotted- 
Blood  came  out  from  the  young  birds.  He  said,  "Very  well.  Let  me 
speak  to  you  first.  If  you  are  powerful,  you  will  be  able  to  pull  my  arrow 
out."  Then  he  shot  his  arrow  into  a  solid  flat  rock.  It  went  half  in. 
"If  you  can  pull  it  out,  you  can  kill  me,"  he  said.  Then  the  female  came 
down,  and  the  thunder  roared,  and  the  lightning  flashed,  and  she  seized 
the  arrow,  and  rushed  up.  The  arrow  stretched,  and  lengthened,  and 
pulled  back  with  all  its  force,  and  she  was  dashed  on  the  rock.  Then  the 
male  Thunder  went  far  up,  and  came  down  violently,  seized  the  arrow,  and 
pulled  it  until  the  arrow  snapped  back,  and  he  was  dashed  against  the  rock. 
The  two  Thunders  were  not  dead,  but  they  could  not  move.  They  said, 
"Pity  us!  W^e  will  give  you  our  power  if  you  will  let  us  live."  Clotted- 
Blood  said,  "Very  well,  I  will  not  destroy  you  altogether.  I  will  leave 
your  young  ones  so  that  there  will  be  some  thunders.  But  I  will  kill  you, 
for  I  need  your  feathers."  Then  he  wrung  their  necks  and  took  their 
feathers;  but  he  left  the  young  ones.  That  is  why  there  still  are  thunder 
and  lightning.  Then  he  went  home.  "Take  these  feathers  to  your  father," 
he  said  to  his  wife.  Then  she  took  them.  The  old  man  was  very  much 
frightened  when  he  saw  the  feathers  of  the  powerful  birds. 

Then  his  father-in-law  told  him,  "There  are  seven  buffalo-l)ulls.  Go 
and  kill  tiiem.  I  want  the  sinew  of  their  shoulders  to  put  on  my  arrows." 
Clotted-Blood  went  and  saw  the  seven  bulls.  He  approached  them  very 
cautiously.  Nevertheless  they  saw  him.  One  of  them  charged  on  him. 
He  stood  still,  and  the  buffalo  struck  at  him  with  his  sharp  horn.  Then 
only  a  down  feather  flew  there,  and  the  buffalo's  horn  was  broken.  Then 
the  rest  charged,  until  all  seven  had  broken  a  horn.  Then  they  ceased 
attacking  him.  There  was  a  large  rock  that  rose  a  little  above  the  ground. 
Clotted-Blood  said,  "I  will  not  kill  you  if  you  can  knock  this  rock  out  of 
the  ground.  If  you  cannot  loosen  it,  I  will  kill  you."  Each  of  the  bulls 
still  had  a  horn.  One  of  them  made  medicine  and  charged  at  the  rock. 
He  struck  it,  and  broke  his  horn.  Six  of  them  charged  it,  and  broke  their 
horns.  Then  the  seventh,  an  old  one,  charged.  He  knocked  the  rock  loose. 
Clotted-Blood  said,  "I  will  kill  you  all.  Only  this  old  one  knocked  the 
rock  out,  and  shall  live."  Then  he  shot  the  six,  and  killed  them.  He  cut 
the  sinew  from  their  shoulders,  and  took  their  horns  in  his  robe.  Then  he 
went  back.  He  gave  the  horns  and  the  sinew  to  his  father-in-law.  His 
father-in-law  was  angry  because  he  overcame  everything.  He  told  him  to 
get  him  flint  for  arrow-points.     The  place  was  under  a  high  cliff.     Clotted- 


90  AnthrnjxAogical  Papers  American  Muscion  0/  Xatural  History.        [\'ol.  I, 

Blood  went.     When  he  stood  at  the  place,  the  cliff  fell.     He  turned  into  a 
feather,  and  the  wind  from  the  falling  bank  blew  it  away.     It  lit,  and  he 
.stood  there  a  man.     The  cliff  was  all  down.     AVhere  it  had  fallen,  the  flint 
was  exposed.     Then  he  filled  his  robe  with  it  for  his  father-in-law.     At 
night  his  father-in-law  sent  him  to  get  water  at  the  river.      Clotted-Blood 
took  a  bucket.     When  he  came  near  the  river  he  saw  two  lights.     They  were 
the  eyes  of  a  water-monster  (bi'i^a") .     He  tried  to  go  aside,  but  the  animal 
drew  him.     When  he  found  he  could  not  keep  away,  he  took  its  horn, 
and  stepped  on  the  middle  of  its  head.     He  filled  his  bucket,  cut  off  its 
horns,  and  took  them  back  with  him  together  with  the  water.      He  told  his 
wife,  "Take  this  water  and  these  horns  to  your  father.     Tell  him  he  can 
have  them."     The  old  man  was  angry.      He  had  thought  the  water-animal 
would  surely  kill  his  son-in-law.      He  said,  "My  son-in-law  is  indeed  a 
powerful  man.      He  has  killed  everything  he  has  met."      Then  he  went 
to   kill  him  himself.     He  took  his  bow.     He  went  out  and  called,  "Come 
out,  my  son-in-law!     You  have  killed  all  my  powerful  beings  (nana'Uil'i^ihii). 
Now  i  will  kill  you."     Clotted-Blood  said,  "My  father-in-law,  I  did  not 
destroy  your  beings.     Why  do  you  want  to  kill  me?"      He  went  outside. 
The  old  man  shot  at  him,  and  he  stepped  aside.      The  arrow  went  into  the 
ground.      His  father-in-law  continued    to  shoot  imtil  all  his  arrows  were 
gone.     Then  Clotted-Blood  took  his  bow  and  arrows.     He  had  only  four 
arrows  and  a  down  feather,  which  he  always  wore  tied  at  the  back  of  his 
head.     He  said,  "My  father-in-law,  you  have  been  shooting  at  me  much. 
Now  I  in  my  turn  will  shoot.     I  have  waited  for  this  a  long  time.     You 
have  killed  many  men.     Now  you  in  turn  will  die."     Then  he  shot,  and 
killed  his  father-in-law.     He  cut  him  to  pieces  and  burned  him  up.^ 

21.    :Moox-Child. 

The  Sun  and  the  ]Moon  disagreed  al)out  women.  The  ^Nloon  said, 
"The  women  outside  of  the  water  and  outside  of  the  brush  (human  females) 
are  the  prettiest  down  below."  The  Sun  said,  "No,  they  are  not.  When- 
ever they  look  at  me,  they  make  faces.  They  are  not  pretty:  they  are  the 
worst-looking  women  in  the  world.  The  women  in  the  water  are  the  most 
beautiful.  When  they  look  at  me,  they  look  just  as  if  they  were  looking 
at  their  own  people.  I  think  them  the  most  beautiful  women  on  earth." 
He  meant  the  Frog.  The  INIoon  said,  "You  think  the  Frog  is  a  pretty 
woman?     You  surely  have  poor  judgment  of  women.      The  Frog  has  long 


>  From  informant  P.  Compare,  for  the  first  part  of  the  story,  Arapaho,  Nos.  130,  131, 
also  132,  133:  for  the  swing,  No.  5;  for  tlie  sliarpened  leg,  Nos.  57,  108,  109:  for  the  thunder- 
birds,  Nos.   139-143;  for  tlie  tasks  set  by  the  fatlier-in-law.  No.  129. 


1907.]  Kwi'bcr^  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  91 

le^s.  She  is  green,  with  spots  on  her  back,  and  large  himpy  eyes.  I  do 
not  think  one  hke  that  pretty."  The  Sun  said,  "Well,  we  will  compete 
in  this.  As  soon  as  I  have  set,  I  will  go  to  the  earth  and  get  the  Frog.  I 
will  bring  her  up  here  to  be  my  wife."  "Very  well,"  said  the  Moon. 
The  Sun  got  the  Frog  without  any  trouble,  and  brought  he-r  up  with  him 
during  the  night  to  his  mother's  tent.  The  Frog  hopped.  With  each 
leap,  she  urinated.  Then  his  mother  asked,  "Wliat  ridiculous  thing  is 
that?"  He  said,  "My  mother,  be  still.  That  is  your  daughter-in-law." 
Then  his  mother  was  silent.  During  the  night  the  ^Nloon  shone,  and  selectetl 
a  woman  on  earth.  When  he  disappeared  early  in  the  morning,  he  went 
to  the  earth.  The  woman  that  he  had  chosen  was  troubled  all  night,  and 
could  not  sleep.  She  did  not  know  what  troubled  her.  She  could  not 
satisfy  herself.  Early  in  the  morning  she  took  a  rawhide  rope  and  told 
her  sister-in-law  to  come  with  her  to  get  wood.  They  both  went  to  the 
woods.  When  they  came  among  the  trees,  they  saw  a  porcupine.  The 
woman  said,  "I  will  kill  this  porcupine,  for  I  want  to  use  its  quills  for 
embroidery."  She  pursued  it,  and,  when  the  porcupine  ran  up  a  tree, 
she  climbed  after  it.  The  porcupine  kept  climbing  up.  Several  times 
she  could  almost  touch  it.  Whenever  she  rested,  it  rested  only  a  little  dis- 
tance above  her.  Thus  it  continued  to  do  until  they  reached  the  sky.  The 
tree  reached  to  a  hole  in  the  sky,  and  the  porcupine  went  in  through  this. 
When  th(>  woman  had  climbed  up  to  the  hole,  she  saw  a  young  man  standing 
at  the  side  of  it.  He  .said  to  her,  "Let  us  go  to  my  mother's  tent."  They 
went,  and,  when  they  arrived  at  the  tent,  he  went  inside.  The  woman 
remained  outside.  The  man  said,  "My  mother,  ask  your  daughter-in-law 
to  come  in."  Then  his  mother  went  outside.  As  soon  as  she  came  out, 
she  called  gladly,  "Oh,  what  a  fine-looking  daughter-in-law  I  have!  Come 
in!"  Then  the  girl  went  in.  The  Frog  was  sitting  beside  the  Sun,  and 
the  woman  sat  down  ne.xt  to  the  Moon.  So  their  mother-in-law  had  two 
daughters-in-law  to  use  for  her  work.  The  woman  did  much  for  her,  but 
the  Frog  did  little.  Whenever  she  was  sent  anywhere,  she  hopped  along. 
When  the  mother-in-law  forgot  that  she  had  a  Frog  as  a  daughter-in-law, 
she  sometimes  startled  her  by  her  hopping.  Then  their  mother-in-law 
one  day  lioiled  the  thickest  part  of  a  paunch.  When  she  had  boiled  it, 
she  cut  it  in  two  ])ieces,  and  gave  one  to  the  woman  and  one  to  the  Frog. 
"Xow,  my  daughters-in-law,"  she  said,  "I  want  you  to  eat  this  paunch. 
I  \\ill  have  the  one  that  makes  the  mo.st  noise  in  chewing  it  for  my  best 
daughter-in-law."  Then  the  woman  was  the  best,  for  she  had  good  teeth. 
She  made  much  noise  in  chewing.  The  Frog,  in.stead  of  chewing  the 
paunch,  took  a  piece  of  charcoal.  But  while  she  chewed  it,  her  blackened 
saliva  ran  down  from  each  side  of  her  mouth.     The  Moon  did  not  like  the 


92  Anthropological  Papers  Ayncrican  Museum  of  Natural  History.        {\o\.  I, 

Frog,  his  sister-in-law.  He  said,  "Wherever  the  Frog  is  sent  to  go,  she 
only  hops  and  urinates.  You  should  not  move  at  all,  Frog.  Whenever 
you  move,  you  urinate,  dirty  one!"  Thus  the  ]Moon  spoke  to  the  Frog 
whenever  she  was  sent  on  an  errand.  At  last  the  Sun  could  hold  his  j)atience 
no  longer.  He  picked  up  the  Frog,  and  threw  her  against  the  Moon's  face. 
"Because  you  do  not  like  her,  the  Frog  shall  always  stick  to  your  face. 
But  I  will  have  your  wife."  That  is  why  there  is  black  on  the  moon.  Then 
the  Sun  took  the  JVIoon's  wife.  The  woman  had  had  a  son  by  the  IMoon. 
The  boy  was  already  old  enough  to  talk.  The  woman  ditl  not  like  the 
country  in  the  sky.  When  her  husband  the  Sun  was  hunting,  she  would 
go  out  on  the  prairie  and  cry,  feeling  lonely.  Once  she  found  the  hole 
through  which  the  Moon  had  taken  her  up  to  the  sky.  When  she  looked 
down,  she  saw  people  and  the  things  she  used  to  see.  She  went  back"  to 
her  tent.  When  her  husband  went  hunting  again,  she  told  him  to  bring 
her  all  the  sinews  in  one  buffalo.  Then  he  did  what  she  asked.  But  he 
forgot  one  sinew.  When  he  went  hunting  again,  the  woman  went  out  on 
the  prairie,  and  began  to  twist  the  sinew  into  a  long  string.  When  she  had 
finished  it,  she  left  it  out  on  the  hills,  and  came  back.  Her  husband  went 
hunting  again.  As  soon  as  he  was  gone,  she  prej^ared  to  go  to  the  ])Iace 
where  the  hole  was.  She  tried  repeatedly  to  leave  her  boy;  but  he  begged 
her,  "Please,  mother,  do  not  leave  me  behind!  Take  me  with  you!" 
Then  she  took  him.  She  tied  the  sinew  rope  to  a  stick,  and  tied  the  other 
end  around  her  chest.  Then  she  descended,  climbing  down  with  her  hands. 
When  she  got  down  to  the  end  of  the  string,  she  was  about  as  high  above 
the  earth  as  a  tent.  She  could  do  nothing,  for  she  had  no  knife.  She 
hung  helpless.  When  her  husband  the  Sun  missed  her  on  arriving  at  his 
tent,  he  looked  for  her  everywhere.  At  last  he  came  to  the  hole.  Tiien  he 
saw  his  wife  hanging  below,  swinging.  Then  he  took  a  stone  and  spit  on  it. 
He  said  to  the  stone,  "When  I  drop  you,  fall  straight  on  the  woman  and 
strike  her  head,  but  do  not  touch  the  boy."  He  dropped  the  stone,  and 
it  killed  the  woman.  The  string  broke,  and  she  fell  to  the  ground.  The 
boy  remained  near  his  mother.  Even  when  she  was  rotten,  and  when 
only  her  bones  remained,  he  played  about  her.  There  was  a  field  near  by, 
and  every  night  he  went  and  stole  from  it.  It  belonged  to  an  old  woman. 
She  missed  what  she  had  planted,  and  watched.  Then  she  caught  the  boy. 
She  spoke  very  kindly  to  him:  "Is  that  you,  my  grandchild  jVIoon-child ? " 
"Yes,  it  is  I,  my  grandmother."  "Come  and  live  with  me.  I  want  vou 
to  work  about  the  tent."  Then  he  went  with  her.  He  lived  with  her, 
but  whenever  he  was  out  doors  he  spoke  with  his  father  in  the  sky.  Once 
the  old  woman  warned  him:  "Do  not  go  to  that  place.  If  you  go  there, 
you  will  see  a  tent.     There  are  only  pretty  girls  in  it.     If  they  see  vou, 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  93 

they  will  invite  you  to  come  to  them.  You  will  be  able  to  do  nothing  but 
go  to  them,  because  they  are  very  beautiful."  Then  the  boy  wondered 
why  his  grandmother  told  him  not  to  go  there.  Instead  of  following  her 
warning,  he  decided  to  go  and  at  least  look  at  the  tent,  and  see  what  kind  of 
a  tent  it  was.  Then  he  went  in  that  direction.  Then,  indeed,  he  saw  very 
pretty  girls  playing  outside  the  tent.  As  soon  as  they  saw  him,  they  said, 
*'Is  that  you,  Moon-Child?"  "Yes,"  said  the  boy.  They  said,  "Come 
and  play  with  us.  You  are  so  handsome!  If  you  wish,  you  can  select 
one  of  us  to  be  your  wife."  Then  the  boy  went  to  them.  He  picked  up  a 
flat  rock  and  put  it  away  out  of  sight  on  his  body.  When  he  came  to  the 
tent,  the  girls  embraced  him,  and  kissed  him,  and  put  their  arms  around 
him;  and  as  each  one  touched  him,  she  said,  "Take  me  for  your  wife." 
One  of  them  said,  "We  want  you  to  tell  myths."  The  boy  said,  "Very 
well.  But  when  I  tell  myths,  I  do  not  allow  people  to  lie  on  the  bed  in  the 
usual  way.  I  want  them  to  lie  with  their  heads  toward  the  fire."  Then 
the  girls  lay  down  as  he  told  them,  and  he  began  to  tell  mv'ths.  He  had 
put  the  flat  rock  under  him  for  his  seat.  One  of  the  girls  turned  into  a  snake, 
and  went  imderground.  While  he  was  telling  myths,  he  felt  the  snake  try 
to  dash  up  into  his  body.  It  smashed  its  head  on  the  stone.  He  felt  it, 
but  continued  to  tell  myths  until  all  the  girls  went  to  sleep.  Then  he  took 
out  his  knife.  The  girls  were  lying  with  their  heads  on  the  logs  along  the 
edge  of  the  beds  all  around  the  Are.  He  went  on  talking.  As  he  talked, 
he  went  around  and  cut  off  their  heads.  Just  as  he  got  to  the  last  one,  she 
turned  into  a  large  snake  and  went  underground.  She  said,  "You  will  be 
overtaken  some  day.  You  cannot  always  iiave  stone  for  your  seat.  You 
will  be  caught  somewhere."  The  boy  answered,  "You  will  live  under- 
ground." After  he  had  killed  the  snakes,  he  went  back  to  his  grandmother. 
She  told  iiim  to  watch  the  field  closely.  Then  he  guarded  it.  As  he  walked 
around  it,  watching,  he  found  a  tent.  An  old  woman  stood  there.  She 
said,  "Is  that  you,  my  grandchild  Afoon-child?"  "Yes,  it  is  I,"  he  said. 
"Will  you  come  in  and  have  something  to  eat?"  she  asked.  "Yes,  I  will 
come  in,"  he  said.  lie  went  in,  and  she  gave  him  food.  While  he  ate, 
she  began  to  jnit  wood  into  the  fire.  She  made  a  large  fire.  She  said, 
"When  persons  come  into  my  house,  I  play  with  them  after  they  have  eaten." 
The  boy  said,  "Yes,  I  will  play  with  you."  Tlien  they  wrestled.  When 
she  thought  he  was  getting  out  of  breath,  she  ])ushed  him  toward  the  fire. 
He  turned  aside,  however.  Thus  they  continued  to  push  each  other  toward 
the  fire.  At  last  the  old  woman  became  tired,  and  he  threw  her  into  the  fire. 
He  held  her  there  until  she  was  consumed.  This  old  woman  had  always 
stolen  from  his  grandmother's  field.  Meanwhile  the  boy  never  forgot  what 
the  snake  had  said  to  him.     When  he  went  to  sleep,  he  stuck  an  arrow  up 


94  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

near  his  head,  and  said  to  it,  "If  the  snake  comes,  fall  on  my  face."  Then, 
indeed,  the  snake  came,  and  the  arrow  fell  on  him,  and  he  woke  and  got  up. 
But  one  night  he  Avas  very  sleepy.  He  stuck  the  arrow  tightly  into  the 
ground,  and  went  to  sleep.  The  snake  came  to  where  he  was  lying.  The 
arrow  tried  to  fall.  It  tried  several  times.  But  it  could  not  fall.  The 
snake  was  close.  Then  it  made  a  dash,  and  shot  into  the  boy's  anus.  "Well, 
at  last  I  have  you.  You  said  I  would  not  catch  you.  This  is  the  last  you 
will  live.  Now  you  will  die."  Thus  the  snake  said  to  the  boy.  But  he 
answered,  "No,  I  do  not  think  I  will  die.  You  will  become  hungry,  or 
out  of  breath,  and  you  will  leave  me."  The  snake  said,  "No,  I  will  remain 
in  you  until  you  die."  The  boy  said,  "No,  I  do  not  think  you  will.  I 
think  you  will  go  out  from  me  before  I  am  dead."  The  boy  lived  some 
time  with  the  snake  in  him.  Then  he  died.  The  snake  was  in  him  still. 
After  a  time  he  had  become  nothing  but  bones.  The  snake  would  not  leave 
him.  He  continued  to  lie  there.  Then  the  jNIoon  wondered  where  his  boy 
was.  He  never  saw  him  going  about  any  more.  At  last  the  boy  was  tired 
of  lying  on  the  ground  so  long.  He  said  to  his  father,  "Do  something  for 
me.  I  am  tired  of  lying."  Then  the  Moon  made  a  cold  rain.  The  snake 
crawled  about  under  the  bones,  and  at  last  went  to  find  shelter.  As  soon 
as  it  had  gone  out  from  him,  the  boy  stood  up  alive,  just  as  he  had  been 
before.  He  caught  the  snake  and  cut  it  to  pieces.  He  said,  "You  thought 
you  would  kill  me.  You  were  deceived.  Instead  of  killing  me,  you  are 
dead  yourself."  As  the  boy  rose  from  his  bones,  his  mother  at  the  same 
time  also  got  up  alive.^ 

22.  The  Boy  who  was  raised  by  the  Seven  Bulls. 

There  was  a  camp.  A  boy  and  a  girl  were  lovers.  The  girl  became 
pregnant.  Her  mother  asked  her  what  made  her  belly  swell.  She  would 
not  acknowledge,  but  said  that  she  was  sick.  When  she  was  about  to 
deliver,  she  told  her  mother,  "I  have  had  a  lover  and  am  pregnant.  I  am 
ashamed.  Let  us  throw  the  child  away."  The  camp  moved,  and  she  and 
her  mother  fell  behind.  She  was  in  great  pain.  When  the  rest  of  the 
camp  was  out  of  sight,  they  stopped,  and  the  girl  gave  birth  to  a  boy.  Her 
mother  dug  a  hole  in  a  buffalo-wallow,  put  the  child  in,  and  covered  it 
with  earth.  Then  they  left  it.  The  child  cried  and  struggled,  and  partly 
uncovered  itself.  Seven  old  Buffalo-bulls  were  near  by.  They  were 
following  the  trail  of  the  camp.  One  went  to  the  wallow  in  order  to  wallow 
in  it.     He  heard  a  sound  he  did  not  know.     Then  the  others  came,  until 

'  From  iuforinaiit  P.     Compare  Arapaho,  Nos.  134-138,  and  note  to  No.  137,  p.  339. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  95 

all  seven  were  there.  They  found  the  child  and  looked  at  it.  They  pitied 
it.  One  of  them  said,  "Let  us  raise  it.  We  will  have  it  for  our  son." 
Then  the  first  Buffalo  began  to  wallow.  As  he  wallowed,  he  licked  the 
boy  all  over.  Then  another  one  licked  him.  When  all  seven  had  licked 
him,  he  was  no  longer  a  baby,  but  a  boy.  The  Bulls  told  him  to  climb 
on  the  Bull  who  had  first  found  him,  and  to  hold  on  to  his  mane.  Then 
they  went  off.  The  Bulls  thought  the  boy  hungry,  but  did  not  know  what 
to  give  him  to  eat.  They  asked  him,  "Will  you  eat  grass  with  us?"  "No, 
I  cannot  eat  it,"  the  boy  said.  "What  do  you  eat?"  "I  do  not  know," 
said  the  boy.  .One  of  the  Buffalo  said,  "They  eat  buffalo."  At  first  the 
Bulls  did  not  know  how  to  kill  a  cow  for  him.  They  planned.  They  got 
a  cow  among  themselves,  and  killed  her  with  their  horns.  They  told  the 
boy,  "Break  a  stone,  and  use  the  sharp  edge  to  cut  her  up  with."  The 
boy  broke  rocks,  and  used  the  points  and  edges  for  a  knife.  Thus  he  was 
happy,  for  he  had  much  to  eat.  He  played  wnth  his  fathers.  W'hen  he 
found  feathers,  he  would  tie  knots  in  the  long  hair  of  their  manes,  and 
fasten  the  feathers  there.  He  also  tied  feathers  to  their  tails.  Then  the 
Bulls  told  him  to  make  a  bow.  He  knew  nothing  of  the  life  of  his  tribe, 
therefore  they  instructed  him.  They  told  him,  "Go  into  the  woods  and 
cut  a  piece  of  cherry-wood.  Make  it  so  long.  Cut  also  seven  sticks  of 
cherry-wood  for  arrows.  Season  these.  Shape  the  wood  into  a  bow  and 
arrows.  Then  cut  sinew,  and  twist  it  into  a  bowstring."  The  boy  did  all 
this.  Then  they  told  him  how  to  attach  feathers  to  the  arrow  with  sinew, 
and  how  to  break  flint  into  shape  for  arrow-points.  When  the  boy  had 
finished  his  bow  and  arrows,  his  fathers  told  him  to  kill  his  game  himself. 
They  carried  him  into  a  herd  on  their  backs.  In  the  middle  of  the  herd 
he  would  jump  oflF,  and  kill  the  cow  he  thought  the  best.  The  Bulls  loved 
the  boy  very  much,  and  never  became  angry  at  what  he  did.  Sometimes 
the  boy  in  play  cut  thongs  of  rawliide  and  tied  their  feet  together;  but  they 
did  not  become  angry.  Each  in  his  turn,  they  carried  him  over  the  country. 
He  lived  with  them  until  he  was  a  young  man.  Then  his  fathers  took  him 
to  a  large  herd  in  which  there  was  a  powerful  Bull.  He  kept  only  young 
Cows  in  his  herd.  Whenever  any  Bull  approached,  he  drove  him  away. 
One  of  the  Seven  Bulls  told  the  young  man,  "You  must  be  very  careful 
when  we  come  to  this  herd,  for  the  Bull  is  jealous  and  powerful.  Do  not 
even  go  near  the  Cows,  or  you  may  lose  your  life."  When  they  reached 
the  place  where  the  herd  was,  they  saw  the  dangerous  Bull.  The  Seven 
Bulls  watched  the  young  man  closely.  But  he  escaped  from  them,  and 
went  toward  the  herd.  One  of  the  young  Cows  came  running  to  him. 
"I  heard  that  the  Seven  Bulls  had  a  good-looking  young  man.  Are  you 
he?"  she  said.     "Yes."     "You  are  indeed  handsome."     Then  she  began 


96  Anthrojiological  Papers  American  Mvsetim  of  Natural  History.         [Vol.  I, 

to  try  to  attract  the  young  man's  desire,  and  at  last  succeeded:  he  went  to 
her  et  earn  olfactavit.  Then  a  young  Bull,  a  servant  of  the  powerful  Bull, 
went  and  said,  "A  young  man,  the  son  of  the  Seven  Bulls,  is  with  one  of 
your  young  wives."  The  Bull  became  angry.  He  came  swiftly  to  where 
the  young  man  was  standing  with  the  Cow.  When  the  young  man  saw 
the  Bull,  he  fled.  The  Bull  said,  "It  is  useless  for  you  to  try  to  escape. 
I  will  overcome  you  together  with  your  fathers,  the  Seven  Bulls."  When 
the  young  man  reached  his  fathers,  they  said,  "We  must  save  our  son, 
even  though  we  die  for  it."  They  got  up  and  stood  around  him  with  their 
tails  raised.  One  of  them  went  out  to  meet  the  powerful  Bull.  The  power- 
ful Bull  broke  all  his  legs  so  that  he  was  unable  to  move.  Then  another 
one  went,  but  was  disabled;  and  another;  and  so  all  went  against  him, 
and  had  their  legs  broken.  Then  the  powerful  Bull  said  to  the  yoimg 
man,  "Now  it  is  time  for  you  to  be  killed."  The  young  man  said  to  him, 
"I  do  not  think  you  will  kill  me.  Perhaps  you  will  kill  me;  but  I  do  not 
think  so."  He  rolled  up  his  sleeve,  preparing  to  shoot.  He  had  a  white 
plume  on  his  head.  The  Bull  charged  on  him,  and  tossed  him  up;  but  only 
the  white  plume  flew  up  in  the  air.  When  it  came  down,  then*  stood  the 
young  man.  The  Bull  tossed  him  repeatedly,  l)ut  did  not  injure  him.  Then 
the  young  man  shot  the  Bull.  His  arrow  nearly  went  through  him.  Then 
he  went  to  the  other  side  of  him,  and  shot  another  arrow  nearly  through 
him.  Then  he  killed  the  powerful  Bull.  After  he  had  killed  him,  he  told 
his  seven  fathers,  "I  will  try  to  heal  you."  He  went  to  the  one  who  had 
first  found  him,  drew  his  bow  on  him,  and  said,  "Get  up,  or  I  will  shoot 
you."  Four  times  he  made  a  motion  as  if  to  shoot.  The  fourth  time,  the 
Bull  got  up  well  and  sound.  Then  the  young  man  took  another  of  his 
seven  arrows,  and  pretended  four  times  to  shoot  one  of  the  others,  and  this 
one  arose  sound.  With  each  of  his  seven  arrows  he  cured  one  of  the  Bulls. 
Each  of  the  seven  thanked  him.  They  said,  "You  have  shown  that  you 
think  well  of  what  we  have  done  for  you."  Then  one  of  them  said,  "It  is 
time  for  you  to  go  to  your  own  people.  We  have  raised  you.  You  are  a 
man.  Now  it  is  time  for  you  to  go.  We  cannot  change  you  into  a  buffalo. 
Go  to  your  father  and  mother."  Then  they  went  to  look  for  the  camp 
where  his  parents  were.  They  went  one  behind  the  other,  and  the  young 
man  rode  them  in  turn  and  played  with  them.  When  they  came  near  the 
camp,  they  all  stopped.  "Your  people  are  very  near.  You  had  better  go 
to  them.  We  thank  you  for  restoring  us  to  life."  The  young  man  thanked 
them  for  having  raised  him  to  manhood.  As  he  was  about  to  leave  them, 
he  stopped  and  said,  "I  do  not  like  to  leave  you,  my  fathers.  I  love  you. 
If  I  go  to  the  camp,  I  shall  not  know  my  people.  I  shall  not  understand 
them  if  they  talk  to  me.     I  shall  not  know  my  father  and  mother."     The 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  97 

Bulls  said  to  him,  "You  will  know  your  father  and  mother  when  you  reach 
the  camp.  You  will  understand  the  people  when  they  speak  to  you,  and 
they  will  understand  you.  You  are  a  human  being:  we  are  animals.  We 
cannot  turn  you  into  an  animal.  That  is  why  we  tell  you  to  leave  us.  Now 
go.  ^Yhen  you  are  near  the  camp,  stop.  Many  young  women  will  be 
playing  ball.  The  ball  will  roll  straight  to  you,  and  stop  in  front  of  you. 
Then  pick  it  up.  One  of  the  young  women  will  follow  the  ball,  and  will 
come  to  you.  She  is  your  mother.  When  she  comes  to  you,  you  must 
give  her  the  ball,  saying,  'Here  is  the  ball,'  my  mother.'"  The  young 
man  did  all  this.  When  he  said,  "Here  is  the  ball,  my  mother,"  she  was 
ashamed.  Instead  of  acknowledging  him  as  her  son,  she  ran  home,  crying. 
All  the  other  young  women  were  surprised  to  see  him  following  her.  She 
entered  the  tent,  and  he  entered  it  after  her.  There  he  saw  her  father  and 
mother.  He  said  to  them,  "My  grandparents,  I  am  here.  I  am  your 
grandson."  When  he  had  said  this,  his  grandmother  spoke.  She  said, 
"How  is  it  that  we  are  your  grandparents?"  "Do  you  not  know,"  said 
the  young  man,  "tiiat,  when  the  people  were  moving  camp,  my  mother 
gave  birth  to  a  child  ?  After  I  was  born,  you  l)uried  me  in  a  buffalo-wallow. 
Seven  old  bulls  found  me.  They  brought  me  up  until  I  was  a  man."  His 
grandfather  was  surprised.  He  had  known  nothing  of  what  his  wife  and 
daughter  had  done.  When  the  young  man  had  finished  telling  about 
iiimself,  the  girl  stopped  crying,  and  his  grandmother  took  him  in  her  arms 
and  kissed  liim  as  her  grandson.  When  night  came,  the  young  man  said, 
"Now  I  will  go  and  look  for  my  father.  I  want  my  mother  to  go  with  me." 
Then  they  went  out.  Many  young  men  were  gambling  with  hiding-buttons 
in  a  tent.  The  young  man  and  his  mother  went  there.  He  looked  in  at 
the  men  gambling.  While  he  looked,  one  party  guessed  right.  Then  the 
others  threw  the  buttons  (kaa(;haan)  to  them,  and  the  man  that  picked  them 
up  was  his  father.  As  soon  as  he  saw  this,  the  young  man  went  in  and 
said,  "My  father,  let  us  go  home."  The  man  was  surprised  and  got  up. 
The  young  woman  had  come  in  too.  Then  all  three  went  out  and  to  their 
tent.     That  is  how  the  young  man  found  his  father  and  mother.^ 

23.   White-Stone. 

There  were  seven  brothers  and  one  sister.  Every  morning  one  of  them 
went  hunting  and  did  not  return.  The  oldest  was  the  first  to  go.  Then 
tli(^  next  old(>st  \\ent  to  look  for  his  brother.  He  also  did  not  return.  Thus 
thev   continued    until   all   were   gone.     When  the   woman   knew  that   her 


1  Told  by  informant  P. 


98  Anthropological  Papcr^i  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.         [\\)1.  I, 

brothers  had  all  been  killed,  she  went  into  the  hills  and  cried.  She  thought 
she  would  kill  herself.  She  swallowed  a  white  stone  that  was  near  her. 
After  she  had  swallowed  it,  her  abdomen  began  to  grow  larger  day  by  day. 
She  gave  birth  to  a  boy.  She  said  to  herself,  "I  am  so  glad  that  1  have  a 
son.  His  name  shall  be  White-Stone  (Na"khaana''"tya")."  She  made  a 
swing  for  her  baby  at  the  left  of  the  door,  the  southeast  side  of  the  tent. 
She  swung  the  child  four  times,  and  it  began  to  smile.  Then  she  made  a 
swing  on  the  northeast  side  of  the  tent,  and  swung  the  bal)v  four  times. 
Then  it  began  to  talk.  Then  she  put  the  swing  on  the  other  side  of  the  tent,. 
at  the  northwest  corner.  After  four  swings,  the  child  almost  jumped  off. 
Then  she  put  the  swing  near  the  door  again,  at  the  southwest  of  the  tent, 
and,  after  she  had  swung  him  four  times,  he  jumped  oft"  as  a  boy.  The 
woman  made  him  a  bow  of  a  short  rib  and  an  arrow  of  neck-tendons 
(hityii'ta").  Then  the  boy  asked  his  mother,  "In  what  direction  did  my 
uncles  go?"  She  said,  "Do  not  seek  them.  It  must  be  a  very  dangerous 
place  to  which  my  brothers  went,  or  they  would  have  come  back." 
"Nevertheless,  mother,  I  wish  to  go  to  that  place.  Therefore  tell  me  in 
which  direction  they  went."  At  last  she  told  him.  There  was  a  hill  not 
far  from  the  tent,  over  which  they  had  gone.  The  boy  went  to  the  hill, 
and  when  he  had  gone  over  the  top,  he  saw  a  buftalo-buU  standing.  He 
started  to  creep  up  on  him.  The  buffalo  stood  still.  The  boy  noticed  at 
once  that  it  was  the  buffalo  that  had  been  the  cause  of  his  uncles'  deaths. 
When  he  came  near,  he  shot  it.  He  killed  it.  He  began  to  cut  the  skin 
in  order  to  flay  it.  Then  an  old  woman  came  toward  him.  When  she 
reached  him,  she  said,  "You  drew  blood  from  my  buffalo."  "Yes,. 
grandmother."  Then  she  imitated  the  boy's  speech,  "Yes,  grandmother." 
She  told  him  that  he  must  take  the  entire  bull,  and  carry  it  on  his  back  to 
her  tent.  The  boy  said,  "It  is  impossible  to  carry  so  heavy  a  load  as  the 
meat  of  a  whole  bull.  Besides,  I  have  nothing  Avith  which  to  carry  it." 
"  Use  your  bowstring,"  she  said.  The  boy  said,  "  ^ly  bowstring  is  not  strong 
enough."  She  said,  "Use  it  anyway,  you  have  nothing  else.  I  want  you 
to  carry  the  bull."  The  old  woman  had  an  iron  cane.  She  had  done  thus 
to  the  boy's  uncles.  When  they  had  got  to  her  tent  and  stooped  to  lay 
down  the  load  of  meat,  she  had  struck  them  in  the  back  of  the  head  with 
her  cane,  and  killed  them.  When  the  old  woman  told  the  boy  so  often  to 
carry  the  bull,  he  became  angry.  He  knew  that  it  was  she  who  had  killed 
his  uncles.  He  took  his  bow  and  said  to  her,  "And  I  want  you  to  carrv  the 
bull  to  your  tent  on  your  back.  You  must  be  the  one  who  has  killed  mv 
uncles.  1  am  glad  that  I  have  found  you  to-day.  This  is  your  last  day." 
Then  the  old  woman  began  to  speak  kindly  to  him,  "Is  that  you,  mv  grand- 
.son  White-Stone  ?     I  have  been  longing  to  see  vou.     I  am  glad  to  see  voii 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  99 

to-day.  Do  not  compel  me  to  carry  this  Ijull.  I  have  nothing  to  carry  it 
with."  "Well,  grandmother,  I  am  glad  to  see  you  too.  To-day  you  shall 
repay  the  death  of  my  uncles.  You  have  a  belt  with  Ayhich  you  can  carry 
the  meat."  When  the  old  woman  knew  that  she  must  carry  the  bull,  she 
took  it  on  her  back.  Then  she  asked,  "Where  are  we  going  with  this  bull ?" 
White-Stone  said,  "You  should  know  where  we  are  going.  Have  you  a 
tent?"  "Yes."  "Take  it  there."  He  took  the  cane  away  from  her. 
On  the  way  she  became  tired,  and  wanted  to  rest.  "Grandson,  please  let 
me  rest,"  she  said.  "No,  I  do  not  wish  you  to  rest.  You  will  have  time  to 
rest  when  you  reach  the  tent."  When  they  were  at  the  tent,  and  she  stopped 
to  unload,  he  struck  her  on  the  head  with  her  cane,  and  killed  her.  Then 
he  saw  his  uncles  lying  around  outside  of  the  tent.  He  said  to  them,  "You 
are  men.  You  are  not  boys  to  be  killed  by  an  old  woman  like  this."  Then 
he  took  hold  of  the  seven  dead  bodies,  and  dragged  them  into  the  tent. 
After  he  had  dragged  them  in,  he  closed  the  door  and  stepped  aside.  He 
shot  an  arrow  up  in  the  air,  and  when  it  descended  he  called,  "Look  out, 
look  out,  look  out,  my  uncle!"  and  one  of  them  jumped  up  and  ran  out. 
Then  he  shot  and  called  out  again,  and  he  could  see  the  tent  move;  and 
again  one  of  them  jumped  out.  He  shot  up  again,  and  another  one  came 
out  of  the  tent.  He  shot  up  a  fourth  time  and  called,  "Look  out,  look  out, 
look  out,  my  uncles!"  and  all  four  emerged  from  the  tent.  Thus  he  brought 
all  his  uncles  to  life.  He  took  them  home  with  him.  After  he  had  brought 
his  uncles  back,  he  asked  his  mother,  "Where  is  there  a  camp?"  She  did 
not  want  him  to  go  away.  He  insisted.  Finally  she  told  him  where  the 
camps  of  the  people  were.  Then  he  went  in  that  direction.  He  came  to 
a  camp  and  went  into  an  old  woman's  tent.  As  soon  as  he  had  entered, 
she  looked  at  him  and  said,  "Is  that  you,  my  grandson  White-Stone? 
Where  did  you  come  from,  and  where  are  you  going?"  "I  came  from 
home,  and  I  am  visiting  here."  The  old  woman  said  to  him,  "Do  not  stay 
here  long.  Go  back.  Bone-Bull  (i^a'^na^tya*^)  is  here.  He  is  very  jealous 
towards  strangers.  If  you  stay  long,  you  will  have  trouble  with  him." 
White-Stone  said,  "I  do  not  like  to  go  home.  I  came  here  in  order  to  see 
p('o])le.  I  wish  to  stay."  The  old  woman  warned  him:  "Do  not  go  near 
the  tent  of  Bone-Bull.  You  will  get  into  trouble  with  him."  The  bull  had 
a  beautiful  young  wife.  White-Stone  asked,  "Which  of  the  women  is 
Bone-Bull's  wife?"  The  old  woman  pointed  her  out  to  him,  and  he  saw 
that  she  was  a  beautiful  Avoman.  White-Stone  dressed  himself  finely. 
On  his  head  he  wore  a  white  plume.  He  also  carried  his  bow.  Then  he 
went  and  stood  at  the  place  where  the  women  got  water.  As  soon  as  the 
young  woman  saw  him,  she  took  a  bucket  and  went  for  water.  When  she 
was  filling  her  bucket,  he  went  to  her,  caught  her  around  the  back,  and  began 


100  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

feeling  her  breasts.  She  ran  back  to  her  tent,  and  cried,  "Bone-Bull, 
White-Stone  has  touched  my  breasts."  Bone-Bull  came  out.  He  ran  in 
all  directions,  he  was  so  angry.  "You  cannot  go  very  far,  young  man," 
he  called  to  White-Stone.  Meanwhile  White-Stone  was  standing  at  one 
place.  The  bull  came  to  him  very  angry.  "You  cannot  escape  me," 
he  said.  But  White-Stone  had  been  standing  still.  The  bull  ran  against 
him,  and  hooked  him.  The  horn  with  which  he  struck  him  flew  to  one 
side,  broken.  White-Stone  said,  "You  also  cannot  escape  very  far  from  me." 
When  the  bull  had  hooked  liim,  the  plume  on  his  head  flew  up,  and  White- 
Stone  with  it.  He  dropped  on  the  bull's  back.  "When  persons  do  things 
like  this,  it  makes  me  still  angrier.  You  will  not  be  able  to  escape  me," 
said  the  bull.  He  hooked  White-Stone  with  his  other  horn.  This  horn 
broke  also,  and  White-Stone  again  flew  up  with  the  pliune  and  lit  on  the 
bull's  back.  Then  White-Stone  took  his  bow,  and  shot  him  in  the  anus. 
After  he  had  shot  him  behind,  he  went  in  front  of  him,  and  shot  him  in  the 
mouth.  This  arrow  went  straight  to  the  heart.  After  he  had  killed  him, 
he  built  a  fire,  and  put  the  body  in  and  burned  it  to  ashes.  Then  he  went 
to  the  old  woman  and  said  to  her,  "  From  to-day  you  are  free.  1  have  killed 
Bone-Bull."  Before  this,  the  people  did  not  go  out  doors  in  the  da}1:ime. 
They  were  afraid  of  the  l)ull.  Xow  the  people  were  rid  of  him,  and  hapj^y 
that  White-Stone  had  killed  him.^ 

24.   The  Womex  who  married  the  Moon  and  a  Buffalo. 

Two  women  were  lying  out  doors  at  night.  (3ne  of  them  said,  "I  wish 
I  had  the  moon  for  my  husband."  The  other  said,  "I  wish  I  had  that 
smallest  star  for  my  husband."  The  next  day,  when  they  were  getting 
water,  the  ■Moon  appeared  to  the  women  as  a  porcupine  on  a  dead  tree. 
Wlien  the  woman  who  had  wished  to  have  the  moon  as  a  husband  saw  it, 
she  climbed  up  the  tree  after  it.  She  came  near  it,  but  never  reached  it. 
The  ^Nloon  caused  the  tree  to  stretch  up  and  up.  The  other  woman  called 
to  her,  "You  are  rising,"  but  she  did  not  listen  to  her.  Thus  she  con- 
tinued to  ascend  until  she  reached  the  sky.  Then  the  ]Moon  took  her  and 
married  her.  Then  she  had  a  child.  When  the  jNIoon  went  hunting, 
she  Avent  to  dig  hiitceni-roots.  The  Moon  told  her,  "Do  not  dig  the  roots 
of  a  blue  flower."  Then  she  dug  the  plant  with  the  blue  flower,  and  there 
was  a  hole  in  the  sky.  She  looked  down  and  saw  her  home.  Then  she 
became  sad.     Her  husband  noticed  it  and  asked  her,  "Why  are  you  sad?" 


1  Told  by  informant  P.  For  the  restoration  to  life  in  the  sweat-house,  compare  No.  40,  and 
Arapalio,  Nos.  5,  6,  119;  for  Bone-Bull,  No.  81;  for  the  child  born  from  a  stone,  No.  6:  for  the 
bow  of  rib,  and  arrow  of  tendon.jNos.  139-142;  for  a  general  parallel,  the  myth  of  Liglit-Stone, 
No.  85. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  101 

She  told  liim  that  she  wanted  to  return  to  the  earth.  He  said  to  her,  "I 
will  send  you  home."  Then  she  made  a  rope  of  sinew  and  a  bag  of  skin. 
With  this  the  Moon  let  her  down.  The  people  were  on  the  prairie  playing. 
An  old  man  with  sore  eyes  was  lying  on  his  back.  As  he  looked  up,  he  saw 
a  speck.  Then  he  told  others.  They  ridiculed  him.  Then  they  looked 
and  saw  it  also.  They  all  watched.  The  tiling  came  nearer.  At  last  they 
saw  that  it  was  a  woman.  Then  she  reached  the  earth,  and  returned  to 
her  people. 

The  other  woman,  who  had  wished  for  a  star,  was  approached  by  a  buffalo- 
bull  when  she  was  getting  water.  He  said  to  her,  "I  am  the  one  you  wished 
for."  She  denied  it.  Then  he  asked  her,  "What  did  you  say  at  night?" 
Then  she  remembered  that  she  had  wished  for  the  faintest  star.  He  said, 
"I  am  he."  Then  he  took  her  away.  Xo  one  knew  where  she  was.  At 
last  the  hunters  found  her  in  the  middle  of  the  herd.  But  they  could  not 
reach  her.  Then  the  Gopher  said,  "I  will  rescue  her."  He  dug  a  long 
hole,  and  excavated  under  the  place  where  she  was  sitting.  Then  the 
woman  fell  into  the  hole.  Only  her  robe  was  left  in  the  position  in  which 
she  had  been  sitting.  Then  the  Bull  told  her  to  get  up.  She  did  not 
answer.  He  became  angry,  and  struck  her  with  his  horn.  He  found  her 
robe  empty.  Then  he  sent  the  buffalo  out  in  pursuit.  The  woman,  having 
returned  through  the  underground  passage,  fled  with  her  father  and  mother. 
They  came  to  three  trees,  and  climl)ed  one  of  them.  All  the  buffalo  came 
there  and  went  by.  At  last  came  an  old  buffalo  who  was  scabby.  He 
rubbed  his  sides  against  the  tree.  The  woman  had  to  urinate.  She  could 
restrain  herself  no  longer.  Tlie  urine  flowed  down  on  the  old  bull.  He 
looked  up  and  saw  the  woman.  He  went  after  the  other  buffalo  and  brought 
them.  They  hooked  the  tree  with  their  horns  until  it  fell.  It  fell  on  one 
of  the  other  trees.  Then  the  people  climbed  on  that.  Then  the  buffalo 
butted  this  tree  until  it  fell  on  the  middle  tree.  Then  this  tree  told  the 
people,  "Climb  on  me."  The  buffalo  all  went  to  strike  this  tree  also. 
At  last  all  of  them  broke  their  horns.     [End  uncertain.]^ 

25.   TiTK  WoMF.x  wno  married  a  Star  axd  a  Buffalo. 

One  night  two  girls  were  hdng  out  doors  with  their  faces  toward  the  sky. 
They  wished  for  stars.  They  would  say,  "I  want  that  one,"  and  then, 
"I  want  that  one."  Then  a  star  came  down  and  took  one  of  them  up. 
The  other  one  remained  on  earth.  Once  she  saw  a  buffalo-bull  running 
by,  and  said,  "I  wish  you  were  my  husband."     When  she  went  to  get  water, 

•  Compare  No.  25,  and  Arapaho,  Nos.  12,  81-84,  144. 


102  Anthro])ologicaJ  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.         [^'ol.  I, 

she  saw  a  young  man  standing  bv  the  path.  He  tohl  her,  "I  am  the  one 
you  Avanted  to  marry."  He  took  her  with  him,  and  she  hved  surrounded 
by  a  buffalo-herd.  Her  husband  looked  for  her,  and  found  her  in  the  middle 
of  a  buffalo-herd.  Then  the  Gopher  burrowed  underground  to  where  she 
was,  and  took  her  back  Avith  him.  The  woman  and  her  husband  climbed  a 
tree.  When  the  Buffalo-bull  missed  her,  he  ran  about,  searching.  At  last 
he  smclled  her,  looked  up,  and  saw  her  in  the  tree.  All  the  buft"alo  began 
to  hook  the  tree  with  their  horns.  They  finally  cut  the  tree  down,  and 
when  it  fell,  killed  the  man.  The  Bull  took  the  woman  back  with  him  into 
the  herd.  The  people  asked  the  Badger  to  help  them.  He  dug  under- 
ground to  where  the  woman  was.  He  made  a  hole  there,  into  which  she 
fell.  Then  he  took  her  back  with  him  through  the  burrow.  Then  her 
brother-in-law  fled  with  her.  The  Buffalo  followed  their  tracks  by  scent. 
The  man  and  the  woman  reached  the  camp,  followed  closely  l)y  the  Buffalo. 
The  woman  ran  inside  a  tent.  The  Bull  stood  outside,  shaking  his  tail. 
Then  he  went  in.  The  people  could  not  stop  him  nor  wound  him.  He 
took  the  woman  back  with  him.  The  people  all  went  to  bring  her  back. 
They  saw  her  in  the  herd,  but  could  not  rescue  her.  Then  they  sent  the 
Bald  Eagle.  He  seized  her  by  her  head,  and  flew  oft'  with  her.  All  the 
buft'alo  looked  up  and  saw  her  soaring  through  the  air.  They  could  do 
nothing.     Then  the  woman  came  back  to  her  people.^ 

26.   The  Deserted  Children. 

There  was  a  camp.  All  the  children  went  oft"  to  play,  "^rhey  went  to 
some  distance.  Then  one  man  said,  "Let  us  abandon  the  children.  Lift 
the  ends  of  your  tent-poles  and  travois  when  you  go,  so  that  there  will  be 
no  trail."  Then  the  people  went  off.  After  a  time  the  oldest  girl  amongst 
the  children  sent  the  others  back  to  the  camp  to  get  something  to  eat.  The 
children  found  the  camp  gone,  the  fires  out,  and  only  ashes  about.  They 
cried,  and  wandered  about  at  random.  The  oldest  girl  said,  "Let  us  go 
toward  the  river."  They  found  a  trail  leading  across  the  river,  and  forded 
the  river  there.  Then  one  of  the  girls  found  a  tent-pole.  As  they  went 
along,  she  cried,  "My  mother,  here  is  your  tent-pole."  "Bring  my  tent- 
pole  here!"  shouted  an  old  woman  loudly  from  out  of  the  timber.  The 
children  went  towards  her.  They  found  that  she  was  an  old  woman  who 
lived  alone.  They  entered  her  tent.  At  night  they  were  tired.  The 
old  woman  told  them  all  to  slec]^  with  their  heads  toward  the  fire.  Only 
one  little  girl  who  had  a  small  brother  pretended  to  sleep,  but  did  not.     The 

1  From  informant  M.     Compare  note  to  tlie  preceding  version. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  103 

■old  woman  watched  if  all  were  asleep.  Then  she  put  her  foot  in  the  fire. 
It  became  red  hot.  Then  she  pressed  it  down  on  the  throat  of  one  of  the 
children,  and  burned  through  the  child's  throat.  Then  she  killed  the  next 
one  and  the  next  one.  The  little  girl  jumped  up,  saying,  "My  grandmother, 
let  me  liye  with  you  and  work  for  you.  I  will  bring  wood  and  water  for  you." 
Then  the  old  woman  allowed  her  and  her  little  brother  to  liye.  "Take 
these  out,"  she  said.  Then  the  little  girl,  carrying  her  brother  on  her  back, 
dragged  out  the  bodies  of  the  other  children.  Then  the  old  woman  sent 
her  to  get  wood.  The  little  girl  brought  back  a  load  of  Cottonwood.  When 
she  brought  it,  the  old  woman  said,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of  wood  I  use. 
Throw  it  out.  Bring  another  load."  The  little  girl  went  out  and  got 
willow- wood.  She  came  back,  and  said,  "My  grandmother,  I  have  a  load 
of  wood."  "Throw  it  in,"  said  the  old  woman.  The  little  girl  threw  the 
wood  into  the  tent.  The  old  woman  said,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of  wood 
1  use.  Throw  it  outside.  Now  go  get  wood  for  me."  Then  the  little 
girl  brought  birch- wood,  then  cherry,  then  sagebrush;  but  the  old  woman 
always  said,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of  wood  I  use,"  and  sent  her  out  again. 
The  little  girl  went.  She  cried  and  cried.  Then  a  bird  came  to  her  and 
told  her,  "Bring  her  ghost-ropes  (tsookan^ana^tso),  for  she  is  a  ghost." 
Then  the  little  girl  brought  some  of  these  plants,  which  grow  on  willows. 
The  old  woman  said,  "Throw  in  the  wood  which  you  haye  brought."  The 
little  girl  threw  it  in.  Then  the  old  woman  was  glad.  "You  are  my  good 
grand-daughter,"  she  said.  Then  the  old  woman  sent  the  little  girl  to  get 
water.  The  little  girl  brought  her  riyer-water,  then  rain-water,  then  spring- 
water;  but  the  old  woman  always  told  her,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of  water 
I  use.  Spill  it!"  Then  the  bird  told  the  little  girl,  "Bring  her  foul,  stag- 
nant water,  which  is  muddy  and  full  of  worms.  That  is  the  only  kind  she 
drinks."  The  little  girl  got  the  water,  and  when  she  brought  it  the  old 
woman  was  glad.  Then  the  little  boy  said  that  he  wanted  to  go  out  ut 
mingeret  inquinaretque.  Puella  anui  dixit,  "Ayia,  fraterculum  oportet 
mingere  inciuiuareque."  "In  tabernaculo  mingito!"  " Quandocuncjue 
urinat  flumen  fecit."  "In  tabernaculo  inquinato!"  "Cum  inquinat 
semper  montem  fecit."  "Well,  then,  go  out  with  your  brother,  but  let  half 
of  your  robe  remain  inside  of  the  tent  while  you  hold  him."  Then  the  girl 
took  her  little  brother  out,  leaving  half  of  her  robe  inside  the  tent.  When 
she  was  outside,  she  stuck  an  awl  in  the  ground.  She  hung  her  robe  on 
this,  and,  taking  her  little  brother,  fled.  The  awl  made  the  sound  of  the 
boy  qui  inquinare  conatus  est.  The  old  woman  called,  "Hurry!"  Then 
the  awl  answered,  "My  grandmother,  my  little  brother  is  not  yet  ready." 
Again  the  old  woman  said,  "Now  hurry!"  Then  the  awl  answered  again, 
"My  little  brother  is  not  ready."     Then  the  old  woman  said,  "Come  in 


104  Anthropohcjical  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

now,  else  I  will  go  outside  an.l  kill  you."     She  started  to  go  out,  and  .stepped 
on  the  awl.     The  little  girl  and  her  brother  fled,  and  came  to  a  large  river. 
An  animal  with  two  horns  (a  bax'aa")  lay  there.     It  said,  "Louse  me." 
The  little  bov  loused  it.     Its  lice  were  frogs.     "  Catch  four,  and  crack  them 
with  your  teeth,"  said  the  Water-monster.     The  boy  had  on  a  necklace  of 
plum-seeds.     Four  times  the  girl  cracked  a  seed.     She  made  the  monster 
think  that  her  brother  had  cracked  one  of  its  lice.     Then  the  ba.x'aa"  .said, 
"Go  between  my  horns,  and  do  not  open  your  eyes  until  we  have  crossed." 
Then  he  went  under  the  surface  of  the  water.     He  came  up  on  the  other 
side.     The  children  got  off  and  went  on.     The  old  woman  was  pursuing 
the  children,  saving,  "I  will  kill  you.     You  cannot  escape  me  by  going 
to  the  skv  or  bv  entering  the  ground."     She  came  to  the  river.     The  bax'aa" 
had  returned,  and  was  Iving  at  the  edge  of  the  water.    "  Louse  me,"  it  said. 
The  old  woman  found  a  frog.     "These  dirty  lice!     I  will  not  put  them 
into  mv  mouth!"  she  said,  and  threw  it  into  the  river.     She  found  three 
more,  and  threw  them  away.     Then  she  went  on  the  Water-monster.     He 
went  under  the  surface  of  the  water,  remained  there,  drowned  her,  and 
ate  her.     The  children  went  on.     At  last  they  came  to  the  camp  of  the  peo{)le 
who  had  deserted  them.     They  came  to  their  parents'  tent.     "  My  mother, 
here  is  vour  little  .son,"  the  girl  sai.l.     "I  did  not  know  that  1  had  a  .son," 
their  mother  said.     They  went  to  their  father,  their  uncle,  an.l  their  grand- 
father.    Thev  all  said.  'T  did  not  know  1  had  a  son,"   "I    did   not    know 
I  had  a  nephew,"  "1  did  not  know  I  had  a  grandson."     Tlicn  a  man  sai(l, 
"Let  us  tie  them  face  to  face,  and  hang  them  in  a  tree  and  leave  them." 
Then  thev  tied  them  together,  hung  them  in  a  tree,  put  out  all  the  fires, 
and  left  them.     A  small  dog  with  sores  all  over  his  body,  his  mouth,  and 
his  eyes,  pretended  to  be  sick  and  unable  to  move,  and  lay  on  the  ground. 
He  kept  a  little  fire  between  his  legs,  and  had  hidden  a  knife.     The  people 
left  the  dog  Iving.     When  they  had  all  gone  oft',  the  dog  went  to  t  he  children, 
climbe.l  the  "tree,  cut  the  ropes,  and  freed  them.     The  Uttle  boy  cried  an.l 
cried.     He  felt  bad  about  what  the  people  had  done.     Then  many  butt'alo 
came  near  them.     "L.)ok  at  the  buft'alo,  my  brother,"  said  the  girl.     The 
boy  looked  at  the  buffalo,  and  they  fell  dead.     The  girl  wondered  how  they 
might  cut  them  up.     "Look  at  the  meat,  my  younger  brother,"  she  said. 
The  bov  looked  at  the  dead  buffalo,  and  the  meat  was  all  cut  uj).     Then 
she  toki  him  to  look  at  the  meat,  and  when  he  looked  at  it,  the  meat  was 
dried.     Then  they  had  much  to  eat,  and  the  dog  became  well  again.     The 
girl  sat  down  on 'the  pile  of  buffalo-skins,  and  they  were  all  dressed.     She 
folded  them  together,  sat  on  them,  and  there  was  a  tent.     Then  s1k>  went 
out  with  the  dog  and  looked  for  sticks.     She  brought  dead  branches,  broken 
tent-poles,  and  rotten  wood.     "Look  at  the  tent-poles,"  she  said  to  her 


1907.]  Kroeber.  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  105 

brother.  When  he  looked,  there  were  large  straight  tent-poles,  smooth 
and  good.  Then  the  girl  tied  three  together  at  the  top,  and  stood  them  up, 
and  told  her  brother  to  look  at  the  tent.  He  looked,  and  a  large  fine  tent 
stood  th?re.  Then  she  told  him  to  go  inside  and  look  about  him.  He 
went  in  and  looked.  Then  the  tent  was  filled  with  property,  and  there 
were  beds  for  them,  and  a  bed  also  for  the  dog.  The  dog  was  an  old  man. 
Then  the  girl  said,  "Look  at  the  antelopes  rimning,  mv  brother."  The 
boy  looked,  and  the  antelopes  fell  dead.  He  looked  at  them  again,  and  the 
meat  was  cut  up  and  the  skins  taken  off.  Then  the  girl  made  fine  dresses 
of  the  skins  for  her  brother  and  herself  and  the  dog.  Then  she  called  as 
if  she  were  calling  for  dogs,  and  four  bears  came  loping  to  her.  "You 
watch  that  pile  of  meat,  and  yoti  this  one,"  she  .said  to  each  one  of  the  bears. 
The  bears  went  to  the  meat  and  watched  it.  Then  the  boy  looked  at  the 
woods,  and  there  was  a  corral  full  of  fine  painted  horses.  Then  the  children 
lived  at  this  place,  the  .same  place  where  they  had  been  tied  and  abandoned. 
They  had  very  much  food  and  much  property.  Then  a  man  came  and 
saw  their  tent  and  the  abundance  they  had,  and  went  back  and  told  the 
people.  Then  the  people  were  told,  "  Break  camp  and  move  to  the  children, 
for  we  are  without  food."  Then  they  broke  camp  and  travelled,  and  came 
to  the  children.  The  women  went  to  take  meat,  but  the  bears  drove  them 
away.  The  girl  and  her  brother  would  not  come  otit  of  the  tent.  Xot 
even  the  dog  would  come  out.  Then  the  girl  said,  "I  will  go  out  and  bring 
a  wife  for  you,  my  brother,  and  for  the  dog,  and  a  husband  for  myself." 
Then  she  went  out,  and  went  to  the  camp  and  .selected  two  pretty  girls  and 
one  good-looking  yoimg  man,  and  told  them  to  come  with  her.  She  took 
them  into  the  tent,  and  the  girls  .sat  down  by  the  boy  and  the  old  man,  and 
the  man  by  her.  Then  they  gave  them  fine  clothing,  and  married  them. 
Then  the  sister  told  her  brother,  "(io  outside  and  look  at  the  camp."  The 
boy  went  out  and  looked  at  the  people,  and  they  all  fell  dead.^ 

27.   The  Girl  who  became  a  Bear. 

There  was  a  large  camp.  Many  little  girls  were  playing.  They  were 
all  little.  Only  one  was  older.  She  played  with  the  rest  in  the  brush  near 
the  river.  She  said  to  the  others,  "All  go  and  bring  something  to  eat. 
Whoever  does  not  bring  the  last  rib  is  not  loved  by  her  parents."  The 
children  all  ran  home,  and  each  one  brought  back  a  short  rib  of  a  buffalo. 
Then  they  cooked  and  ate  the  meat,  and  the  oldest  girl  took  eight  of  the 
ribs.     She  said.  "Now  we  will  play  bear.     I  will  play  that  these  are  my 

1  From  informant  N.     Compare  No.  3,  and  Arapalio,  Nos.  127,  128. 


h 


1 00  A  nlhni/jolnrpral  Pnprr.s  American  MuHmm  of  Natural  History.         [\  ol.  I, 

white  Haws."     'J'lxii  ili<y  played  hear.     Suddenly  she  turned  into  a  bear. 
She  killed  all  exeept  hc^r  little  sister.     Her  little  sister  ran  home  and  brought 
tin;  news.     Soon  the   liear  eanie  loijing  toward  the  eanip.     All   took  up 
their   weapons:    old   and   yowtin   nicii    used   flubs  and   spears   and  arrows. 
None  (,r  IJK'  jiirovvs  penetrated  her,  and  she  would  cateh  and  kill  the  men 
that  fought  her.     'J'hus  she  did  until  she  had  killed  every  one  in  the  eamp, 
exeepting  her  little  si.ster,  who  had   run,  and  hidden   in  a  dog-hut.     The 
Bear  knew  that  she  had  not  killed  her  little  sister,  and  went  to  the  dog-hut. 
She  said,  "Cowr.  out,  or  I  will  kill  you."     So  the  little  girl  eame  out.     Her 
elder  sister  told  h(;r,  "Take  four  of  the  largest  tents  you  ean  find,  and  make 
one  tent  of  them   for  me.     You  must  get   jimiper   ((,'ililtouwuus6o"),    and 
cover  the  floor  of  the  tent  with  it."     ^Yhen  the  little  girl  had  done  all  this, 
the  bear  lay  down  an<l  groaned  and  groaned.    She  rolled  and  .sprawled  in  pain 
from  her  W(nuids.     The  little  girl  sat  by  the  door,  afraid.     She  said,  "Sister, 
]iia,y  I  go  to  get  water?"     Her  sister  said,  "Yes;  but  you  must  be  quick. 
Do  not  try  1o  run  away.      If  you  try  to  escape,  I  ean  catch  you.     You  ean 
go  nowhere  where  1  cannot  catch  you.     You  cannot  go  into  a  hole  where  I 
cannot  catch  you.     If  you  go  into  the  water,  I  will  catch  you."     Then  the 
little  girl   went  out.     Her  six  brothers  had  been  away.     Now  they  eame 
back;    but  when  they  found  the  canii)  deserted,  they  were  afraid  to  enter 
il .     So  they  lay  down  behinrl  a  hill.     When  they  .saw  their  little  sister  going, 
for  wat(>r,  they  went  to  meet  her.     "Why  is  the  camp  empty?"  they  asked. 
She  said,  "My  sister  turned  into  a  bear,  and  killed  all  the  people."     Then 
her  brothers  said  to  her,  "You  must  go  back.     Roast  this  bufialo-fat  from 
the  paunch,  and  when  it  is  hot,  throw  it  between  her  legs  as  she  sprawls. 
Then  run  awav.     Hut  first  you  nuist  ask  her,  'Is  there  any  spot  in  which 
you  can  be  killed?     Is  there  anything  that  will  kill  you?'     Ask  her  that. 
Then  throw  the  fat  on  her,  and  flee."     Then  the  little  girl  went  back  and 
asked  the  Bear  as  her  brothers  had  told  her.     The  Bear  asked  her,  "^Yho 
told  you  to  ask  me  that?     Some  one  nnist  have  told  you."     The  little  girl 
said,  "No.      I  only  wanted  to  know  it."     The  Bear  .said,  "Yes,  some  one 
must  have  told  you  to  ask  me."     But  the  little  girl  answered  "No.     I  only 
wanted  to  know,  because  you  have  killed  every  one  in  can)]),  and  I  thought 
vou  were  powerful."     Then  the  15car  said,  "I  caujiot  be  killed  except  in 
the  little  finger  of  my  left    hand.      And   I  cannot  l)e  killed  by  any  arrow 
except  an  arrow  of  tendon."     Then  the  littl(>  girl  roasted  the  fat.     When 
it  was  hot,  she  threw  it   between  the  Bear's  legs,  so  that  .she  rolled  about 
in  pain.     Then  the  girl  ran  to  her  brothers.     Then  they  ran  along  the  river, 
going  through  the  water.     WHien  they  had  gone  a  distanc(>,  the  little  girl 
looked  back,  and  sa\v  the  Bear  coming.     Sh(>  said,  "There  is  my  sister!" 
The  Bear  was  following  their  tracks  through  the  water.     WMien  the  people 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myth.^  and  Tales.  107 

saw  that  they  couhl  not  escape  her,  they  stopped,  and  began  to  shoot  the 
Bear.  Their  arrows  had  no  effect.  The  youngest  brother  had  a  bow  made 
of  tendon  and  an  arrow  of  the  same.  Now  he  drew  hLs  bow  at  the  Bear. 
He  stretched  it  four  times,  and  shot.  He  struck  her  in  the  httle  finger,  and 
she  died.  Then  they  made  a  fire  and  burned  her.  Whenever  a  spark 
flew  out  of  the  fire,  they  heard  the  Bear  roaring  there,  and  quickly  ran  to  it 
and  threw  it  in  the  fire  again;  and  when  some  of  her  fat  spattered  out,  it 
roared  Hke  a  bear,  and  they  threw  it  back.  Thas  they  entirely  consumed 
the  Bear.  But  one  spark  they  did  not  see.  Then  they  started.  They 
travelled  the  entire  night.  Then  the  little  girl  looked  back.  "There 
comes  my  sister  I"  she  said.  Then  they  ran.  They  ran,  and  became  very 
tired.  Then  the  oldest  brother  said,  "Let  there  be  a  deep  swamp  behind 
us,  so  that  the  Bear  will  become  fast  in  the  bog."  Then  there  was  a  swanijj. 
They  went  more  slowly  again,  and  recovered  their  breath.  I^ooking  back, 
they  saw  the  Bear  coming  again.  They  ran.  Then  the  next  brother 
said,  "  Let  much  timber  be  between  us  and  the  Bear.  Let  it  be  veri'  dense, 
so  that  the  Bear  cannot  pass  through  it;  or,  if  she  does  pass  through,  that 
it  will  be  a  ver^-  long  time."  Then  there  was  timber  behind  them,  and 
they  went  more  slowly.  Th?n  they  saw  the  Bear  coming  again,  and  the 
third  brother  said,  "I^t  there  be  a  very  deep  canyon  behind  as.  Let  it  be 
^o  large  and  steep  that  the  Bear  cannot  descend  into  it ;  or,  if  she  does  descend, 
tliat  she  cannot  come  out  of  it."  Then  there  was  a  canyon,  and  they  watched 
the  Bear  enter  it.  At  last  they  saw  her  emerge,  and  they  ran  again.  Then 
the  fourth  brother  said,  "Let  a  river  be  behind  as.  Let  it  be  large  and 
deep  and  ven'  swift,  so  that  she  cannot  swim  it,  or,  if  she  does  swim  it,  let 
her  be  carried  far  down  stream."  Then  there  was  a  river  behind  them. 
After  the  Bear  entered  it,  they  did  not  .see  her.  They  thought  her  drowned, 
and  went  on  slowly.  At  last,  after  a  long  time,  the  Bear  came  on  again. 
The  people  were  ven,'  tired.  They  said  to  the  fifth  brother,  "Cannot  you 
do  something?  We  are  ver\'  tired.  We  have  done  what  we  could.  It 
is  all  that  we  can  do."  Their  brother  answered,  "Yes.  Let  there  be  a 
terrible  fire  behind  as,  which  the  Bear  will  be  afraid  to  pass  through." 
Then  there  was  a  fire.  At  last  the  Bear  passed  through  it  and  came  on 
again.  They  .said,  "There  comes  the  Bearl"  and  ran.  Then  they  asked 
the  last  bn>ther,  "Cannot  you  do  something?  We  are  ver}-  tired.  If  you 
cannot  do  .something,  we  shall  surely  be  killed."  "Yes,"  he  .said.  "Let 
there  be  cactus.  Let  them  be  exceedingly  thick.  Let  them  be  so  that  the 
Bear  cannot  pass  over  them,  or,  if  she  does  pass  over  them,  let  it  be  a  very 
long  time."  The  Bear  went  into  the  cactas-thickets.  They  could  not  .see 
her  any  more.  They  went  far  on.  Then  the  little  girl  .said,  "There  comes 
mv  sister  againi"     "What   can  we   do  now?"  they  said.     They  ran  on. 


lOS  AnthropoliH/ical  Papers  AuHrkan  Museum  oj  Natural  Ilistury.         [\o\.  I, 

"Sister,  can  you  not  do  something?  Perliii])s  in  your  life  you  liave  dreamed 
somethino;.  rerliai)s  you  are  al)le  to  do  sometliino;  wondcM-ful."  'I'lie 
little  ti'ii-l  said,  "  \'es.  Let  us  run  on  until  we  ti'et  to  this  flat  ])lace.  Then  I 
will  do  it."  'rh(>y  ran  until  they  came  where  it  was  tint.  There  they 
stopped.  The  brothers  said,  "Now  we  sliall  see  what  she  can  do."  T\w 
liear  was  close  up.  'i'he  o'irl  made  them  all  stand  facin*!  the  east.  "The 
two  oldest  were  in  front,  and  behind  them  the  two  next,  then  another,  and 
behind  him  the  youngest.  She  herself  was  ])ack  of  them  all.  Then  she 
said,  "M\'  brothers,  all  our  relatives  are  dead.  We  should  not  be  hap])y  if 
we  lived  here  alone  and  without  them.  We  will  go  above  and  we  will  live 
there."  Then  she  called  her  oldest  brother  by  name.  "Now  my  brother," 
she  said,  and  kicked  a  little  ball  that  she  always  carried  in  her  dress  on  a 
string,  'i'hen  he  tiew  u|).  'Hien  she  did  the  same  with  the  others,  one  after 
the  other.  Only  two  brotluM's  were  left.  ''I'he  Bear  was  very  near,  and  she 
kicked  the  ball  twice,  as  fast  as  she  could.  Then,  just  as  the  Bear  reached 
her,  she  kicked  the  ball  for  herself,  and  I  hey  had  all  become  stars  in  the  sky. 
The  Bear  stood  looking  upward,  but  could  not  catch  them.  'J'hey  are 
iiibiitcivaa"   (cu1-oll'-he;id,   Trsa   major).' 

28.     SlIELL-Sl'ITTKH, 

TIkmv  were  two  girls,  sisters.  'i'he  older  sister  said,  "We  will  go  to 
look  for  Shell-Spitter."  There  was  a  man  who  was  poor  and  who  lived 
alone  with  his  old  inolher.  lie  was  t he  Loon  (ce'ibyhi),  and  his  luother  was 
Badger-Woman  (ba\aouu(,';i").  He  heard  that  two  girls  were  looking  for 
Shell-Spillcr.  lie  went  to  the  children  of  tlu>  camp,  and  took  their  shells 
awav  from  them.  The  girls  ai'rivcd,  and  asked  for  Shell-Spitt(>r's  tent.  It 
was  shown  tluMii,  and  they  went  to  it.  There  stood  the  Loon.  "What 
are  you  girls  looking  for?"  h.-  said.  "We  are  looking  for  Shell-Spitter." 
"I  am  he."  "Let  us  see  you  s[)it  shells."  He  had  lilled  his  mouth  with 
shells,  and  now  spit  them  out.  The  two  girls  stooped,  and  hastilv  ])icked 
them  up,  each  trying  to  snatch  them  before  the  other.  'I'hen  he  took  them 
to  his  tent.  His  tent  was  old  and  poor.  His  luother  was  grav-headed. 
He  said  to  them,  "  I  have  another  tent,  ll  is  Hue  and  large.  I  have  brought 
you  here  because  there  is  nion^  room   to  sUhm)."     The  girls  went  inside. 


1  From  infonnaut  R.  Aiiottier  version,  obtained  from  inlorniani  M,  showed  the  follow  imr 
dilTerenees.  The  Jiear  told  her  little  sister,  whose  hack  slit-  had  seratelied,  not  to  tell  that  she 
was  hurt.  If  she  did  tell,  all  the  dofjs  in  tile  eamp  would  howl.  When  the  little  sirl  came  Ijack, 
her  mother  tried  to  make  her  carry  a  baby  on  her  back.  She  cried  from  pain.  Her  mother 
questioned  her,  and  she  told.  Tiic  doj^s  howled,  and  the  Hear  came.  The  story  then  continues 
as  above,  except  that  her  six  brotliers  f,'ive  lh(>  liiUc  f,'irl  a  ral)bit  to  use  for  its  fat  in  order  to 
burn  the  bear.  'J'he  six  l)rotliers  l)ccome  the  Pleiades,  the  fjirl  sitting  a  little  at  one  side  of 
them.  Compare  ."Vraiiaho,  Nos.  80,  105,  and,  for  the  so-called  Maijic  Flight,  Arapaho,  No.  6. 
The  Ma^ic  Flight  is  found  also  in  No.  3,  and  in  Arapaho,  Nos.  6,  35,  124. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  109 

Soon  some  one  called  to  the  Loon,  "Come  over!  they  are  making  the  sun- 
dance!"  "Oh!"  he  said.  "Now  I  have  to  sit  in  the  middle  again,  and 
give  away  presents.  I  am  tired  of  it.  For  once  they  ought  to  get  some  one 
else.  I  am  to  sit  on  the  chief's  bed  in  the  middle  of  the  lodge."  He  told 
his  mother,  "Do  not  let  these  women  go  out."  Then  he  went  out,  and  the 
old  woman  guarded  the  door.  When  she  was  asleep,  one  of  the  girls  said, 
"  I  will  go  out  to  look."  She  stepped  over  the  old  woman,  and  went  to  the 
dance-lodge.  Looking  in,  she  saw  the  people  dancing  on  the  Loon's  rump. 
On  the  bed  in  the  middle  sat  a  fine  man.  Whenever  he  spit,  he  spit  shells. 
The  ground  all  around  him  was  covered  with  them.  Then  the  girl  went 
back,  and  called  to  her  sister,  "Come  out!  They  are  dancing  on  this  man; 
but  the  one  who  spits  shells  sits  in  the  middle  of  the  lodge."  Then  they 
both  went  to  the  lodge.  They  went  inside  and  sat  down  behind  Shell- 
Spitter.  Then  the  man  on  the  ground,  on  whom  the  people  were  dancing, 
saw  them.  He  jumped  up.  He  killed  Shell-Spitter,  and  ran  out.  He 
said  to  his  mother,  "I  told  you  to  watch,  and  not  to  let  those  women  out." 
Then  he  told  her,  "Dig  a  hole  quickly!"  She  quickly  dug  a  hole  inside 
the  tent.  He  entered  it,  and  then  she  followed  him.  The  people  came, 
I)ut  could  do  nothing.  When  they  stojiped  trying  to  shoot,  Badger- 
AVoman  came  out  of  the  hole,  singing  in  ridicule  of  Shell-Spitter's  death. 
Before  the  people  could  reach  her,  she  dropped  into  the  hole  again.  She 
did  this  re])eate(lly.^ 

29.   Yp:llow-Plume  .wd  Blue-Plume. 

There  were  two  boys,  brothers.  One  wore  a  yellow  plume  on  his  head, 
the  other  a  l)lue  one.  They  were  playing  with  a  wheel  painted  yellow. 
The  one  with  the  yellow  plume  rolled  it  toward  the  one  with  the  blue  plume. 
This  one  threw  at  it  and  nii.s.sed  it.  The  wheel  kept  on  rolling.  The  boy 
with  the  blue  phiine  followed  it.  At  last  the  wheel  rolled  into  the  tent  of 
an  old  woman.  When  the  boy  came  to  the  tent,  he  said,  "  Grandmother,  did 
the  wheel  come  into  your  tent?"  "Dirty  boy,  your  wheel  did  not  come 
in  here.  But  come  in  for  a  while,"  she  answered.  The  boy  went  inside. 
"I  am  glad  to  have  you  here,  dirty  boy,"  she  said.  "Perhaps  this  will  be 
the  last  of  your  life.  Xow.wait  here  while  I  go  to  get  wood  to  make  a  fire." 
She  went  out,  got  rotten  wood,  brought  it  in,  piled  it  up,  and  lit  it.  She 
wanted  to  smother  the  boy.  She  closed  the  door,  and  put  logs  along  the 
edges  of  the  tent,  that  he  would  not  escape.  The  tent  filled  with  smoke; 
but  where  the  bov  sat  there  was  no  smoke.     Looking  around,  he  saw  an 


I  From  informant  N.     Compare  Arapaho.  Nos.  89,  121. 


110  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I^ 

awl,  took  it  out  of  its  handle  (case?),  and  stuck  it  into  the  ground  by  the 
door.  The  old  woman  said,  "Are  you  still  there?"  and  the  awl  answ^ered, 
"Yes."  "Dirty  child,  you  should  have  been  burned  by  this  time,"  she 
said.  After  a  time  she  asked  again,  "Are  you  still  there?"  "Yes,  I  am 
still  here,"  said  the  awl.  The  boy  sat  altogether  untouched  by  the  smoke. 
The  (3ld  woman  asked  again,  and  the  awl  gave  the  same  answer.  She  asked 
a  fourth  time,  and  the  awl  answered  again.  Then  she  said,  "You  are  still 
speaking,  dirty  boy:  you  should  have  been  smothered  by  this  time."  She 
took  away  the  logs  with  which  she  had  closed  the  tent.  She  looked  in  and 
saw  the  boy.  "Dirty  child,  there  you  are  still  sitting!  You  are  the  first 
one  I  have  not  succeeded  in  smothering  to  death.  Now  I  want  you  to  go- 
for  water."  Then  the  boy  went  for  water.  He  brought  hack  clear  water. 
The  old  woman  said,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of  water  I  drink."  The  boy 
went  to  get  another  bucketful,  and  again  brought  clear  water.  When  he 
came  back,  the  old  woman  told  him  again,  "That  is  not  the  kind  of  water 
I  use."  Again  he  brought  some,  and  she  told  him  she  did  not  use  that  kind. 
This  time  she  said  to  him,  "If  you  get  the  same  kind  of  water  again,  I  will 
kill  you."  The  boy  went  out  to  the  stream,  thinking  what  kind  of  water 
he  should  get,  thinking  as  hard  as  he  could.  A  person  above  his  head  spoke 
to  him,  "Go  where  the  spring  is,  and  there  get  water.  That  is  the  kind  of 
water  the  old  woman  drinks."  The  boy  ran  to  the  spring,  which  was  dirty 
and  scummy.  When  the  old  woman  saw  the  water,  she  said,  "You  may 
live,  for  that  is  the  kind  of  water  I  use.  Now  you  may  go  home,  because 
you  have  brought  it.  If  you  had  brought  me  the  wrong  water  again,  I 
should  have  killed  you  at  once."  So  the  boy  went  out,  taking  his  wheel' 
with  him.  When  he  was  off  some  distance,  he  called,  "Dirty  old  woman, 
you  did  not  succeed  in  doing  what  you  wanted.  I  am  more  powerful  (holy) 
than  you."  He  had  left  the  awl  sticking  in  the  ground  at  the  door.  The 
old  woman  had  not  seen  it.  When  the  boy  called  to  her  thus,  she  became 
angry,  got  up,  and  cried  back,  "Why  do  you  talk  to  me  like  that,  dirty  boy?' 
You  were  about  to  be  allowed  to  live.  Now  I  will  kill  you."  She  started 
to  go  out  and  stepped  on  the  awl,  which  pierced  her  foot.  She  lay  down 
and  went  no  farther.  The  boy  came  back,  and  told  his  brother  (the  one 
wath  the  yellow  pliune),  "Brother,  while  I  was  away,  I  was  in  danger 
from  an  old  woman.  She  tried  to  kill  me,  but  somehow  I  escaped  her." 
"W'e  will  kill  her  with  a  flood  of  water,"  said  his  brother.  The  old  woman's 
tent  stood  in  a  deep  gully.  Then  they  flooded  her  house  with  water,  and 
she  was  drowned.     That  was  the  end  of  her  life.^ 

1  From  informant  P. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  Ill 

30.  The  Swallows  and  the  Sxake. 

There  was  a  high  bank  where  the  swallows  (byiiteibyi^as^aha")  lived. 
A  snake  went  there  and  ate  all  the  young  swallows.  When  the  swallows 
tried  to  resist  the  snake,  it  blew  something  yellow  out  of  its  mouth  and  killed 
the  swallows,  so  that  they  fell  into  the  water.  The  swallows  went  and  got 
the  tsootsohih'a"  (small  birds)  to  help  them,  and  then  the  byiitciyeihih'a" 
(another  species  of  small  birds) ;  but  the  snake  killed  them  with  its  yellow 
breath.  Then  the  swallows  went  to  ask  the  bluebirds  to  help  them.  The 
bluebirds  came;  but  the  snake  breathed  hard,  the  yellow  came  out,  and 
the  bluebirds  fell  into  the  water  dead.  Again  the  swallows  flew  away,  and 
got  an  owl;  but  the  snake  killed  it  in  the  same  way.  The  swallows  flew 
away  and  got  an  eagle  to  help  them.  The  eagle  also  fell  into  the  water 
dead.  They  got  a  duck,  and  then  a  bullet-hawk  (aiidy');  but  the  snake 
breathed,  and  killed  them.  Then  they  brought  the  birds  called  ako'uuhuh'a", 
and  these,  too,  were  killed.  Then  they  asked  the  night-hawk  to  help  them. 
The  night-hawk  tried  to  break  wind  against  the  snake,  but  was  killed. 
Then  the  swallows  got  bax'a'a",  the  thunder.  The  snake  breathed  yellow 
at  him;  but  he  flew  by  unhurt,  turned  in  his  flight,  and  came  back.  Then 
the  snake  breathed  red  towards  him,  and  then  blue,  and  then  black;  but 
it  did  not  hurt  him.  The  fifth  time,  the  thunder  seized  the  snake  with  his 
bill,  threw  it  U[)  in  the  air  and  cut  it  in  two.^ 

31.   The  Origlv  of  the  Tsooyanehi  Degree  of  the  Dog-daxce. 

The  people  were  travelling.  They  left  a  shaggy  ^  dog  behind  them. 
Then  the  dog  followed  the  trail  of  the  camp.  An  old  man  went  out  on  the 
hills.  He  saw  something  following  the  trail,  and  wondered  what  it  was. 
He  went  toward  it  to  see.  He  saw  that  it  was  a  dog,  and  pitied  it.  Then 
the  old  man  went  to  sleep  by  the  dog.  The  dog  knew  that  the  old  man  pitied 
him,  and  in  return  he  pitied  the  old  man.  In  his  sleep,  the  dog  appeared  to 
him  and  said,  "I  will  give  you  a  dance.  It  is  to  be  called  'Shaggy  Dog' 
(tsooyane'hi)."  Then  he  told  the  old  man  how  they  were  to  make  the  dance, 
what  they  were  to  wear,  and  how  they  were  to  dance.  The  dog  gave  him 
a  whistle  and  a  forked  rattle  and  a  head-dress  of  owl-feathers  and  a  shirt 
covered  with  feathers.  The  old  man  after  a  time  gave  them  to  another, 
and  so  they  were  passed  on  to  the  present. 


1  From  informant  N.  The  snake,  undoubtedly,  is  to  be  conceived  as  one  of  the  bax'aa" 
or  bi'ica°,  the  supernatural  serpent-like  water-animals  that  are  the  enemies  of  the  thunder. 

2  The  original  says  smooth-haired,  but  his  shirt  is  rough  with  feathers.  The  Arapaho 
also  call  this  dancer  "shaggy  dog."  Probably  long-haired  is  meant.  Compare  the  Arapaho 
account  of  the  origin  of  the  women's  buffalo-dance,  No.  14. 


112  Ay^thropoloyical  Pajjers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

32.   The  Origin  of  the  Chief  Pipe. 

A  certain  man  was  jealous  of  a  yoiuig  man,  and  jioisoned  him. 
Before  tlie  young  man  died,  he  said,  "Do  not  tie  me  up.  Do  not  look  at 
my  tent  for  four  days."  Then  he  died.  He  was  laid  inside  his  tent  together 
with  much  property.  The  people  kept  away.  After  four  days  a  storm 
came.  It  rained  and  thundered,  and  there  was  lightning  in  the  dark. 
Then  a  cloud  came  down.  It  went  up  again.  It  had  taken  the  tent  and 
all  the  property  with  it.  It  left  in  their  place  a  pi])e  resting  on  two  forked 
sticks.  The  bowl  of  the  pipe  was  to  the  south.  At  this  end  lay  buffalo- 
chips  (to  make  fire,  with  the  smoke  of  which  to  incense  the  pipe)  and  sage 
(on  which  to  lay  the  pipe)  and  a  bag  of  red  paint.  Around  the  pipe-stem 
was  calico  of  different  colors.  Under  the  pipe  sat  the  young  man  alive. 
The  thunder  had  pitied  him.  After  this  the  pipe  was  handed  down  from 
one  man  to  another.  Whenever  it  was  given  to  a  new  keeper,  the  people 
took  everything  away  from  him,  just  as  the  thunder  had  taken  everything 
from  the  man  who  first  received  it.  At  last  a  man  died,  and  the  pipe  was 
buried  with  him.     The  pipe,  was  called  "chief  pipe."  ^ 

33.   Separation  of  the  Tribe. 

Long  ago  the  people  were  crossing  a  large  body  of  water.  Perhaps  it 
was  a  lake,  perhaps  it  was  a  river.  They  were  travelling  north  or  south. 
Some  had  crossed,  some  had  not  yet  crossed,  and  some  were  on  the  ice. 
A  little  girl  saw  a  horn  sticking  out  of  the  ice.  She  asked  her  grandmother, 
"Chop  it  out  for  me?  I  want  it  for  a  spoon."  Her  grandmother  refused. 
Then  the  little  girl  began  to  cry.  The  old  woman  went  back  and  chopped 
the  horn  out.  Then  blood  flowed.  The  horn  must  have  belonged  to  some 
animal  under  the  water,  which  began  to  move.  The  ice  broke  up.  All 
that  were  on  the  ice  were  drowned.  The  people  on  the  two  shores  never 
came  together  again. - 

34.   The  Cave  of  the  Buffalo. 

To  the  northwest  from  the  present  Gros  Ventre  reservation  there  is  a 
hole  in  a  hill.  The  mouth  is  as  large  as  a  house.  When  the  people  hunted 
near  this  hole,  they  always  saw  large  herds  of  buifalo.     Buffalo-trails  led 


1  From  informant  N. 

2  From  informants  N  and  T.  Similar  traditions  are  found  among  the  Sarcee  (Wilson,  Re- 
port of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  1888),  Cheyenne  (Grinnell, 
American  Anthropologist,  1892,  p.  163),  and  Blackfeet  (ibid.). 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  113 

toward  the  hole  from  all  directions.  All  about,  the  ground  was  beaten  into 
dust,  and  there  were  piles  of  manure.  When  the  buffalo  were  hunted,  they 
ran  into  the  hill.  Sometimes  all  entered  it  before  any  could  be  killed. 
Once  two  brave  men  went  into  the  cave.  They  had  long  sticks  with  which 
they  felt  the  sides  and  top  of  the  hole.  They  kept  going  farther,  and  the 
hole  grew^  larger.  At  last  they  could  no  longer  touch  the  top  or  the  sides 
of  the  cave  with  their  sticks.  Then  they  became  afraid  that  they  would 
not  find  their  way  back  in  the  dark.  They  returned.  They  could  hear 
the  noise  of  buffalo  running  inside.  It  is  thought  that  it  is  here  that  all  the 
buffalo  have  disappeared.^ 

35.   The  Womax  axd  the  Black  Dog. 

Outside  an  old  woman's  tent  a  young  man  lay  at  night,  waiting  for 
women.  There  was  a  man  who  had  a  beautiful  wife.  In  his  lodge  were 
many  people,  smoking  and  talking.  The  young  man  outside  saw  this 
woman  come  out  and  take  firewood  in.  Then  she  came  out  again  and 
went  off  ut  defecaret.  Canis  niger  eam  secutus  est.  Pedibus  ei  blanditus 
est  C|uasi  fe.stinaverit.  ]\lulier  dixit,  "Retine!  Ximis  festinas.  Mane 
donee  inquinaverim."  Cum  intjuinavisset,  longius  abiit  et  in  manus 
genuacjue  descendit.  Tum  canis  eam  texit.  The  young  man  thought, 
"She  is  a  beautiful  woman.  She  should  have  taken  one  of  the  many  hand- 
some young  men  for  her  lover."  When  the  visitors  had  left  the  tent,  he 
went  in.  He  said  to  the  man,  "You  are  a  good-looking  young  man,  and 
you  have  a  beautiful  wife.  But  she  has  done  something  bad."  The  man 
said,  "Yes?  Whatever  you  say  shall  be  done."  Juvenis  dixit,  "Multi 
sunt  juvenes,  sed  canem  pro  adultera  ista  habet."  Mr  mulieri  suse  dixit, 
"Ne  id  fecisses.  Homo  pro  amatore  a  te  eligendus  fuit."  Then  he  killed 
her.     He  was  deeply  ashamed.^ 

30.   The  ]\Iax  borx  from  a  Horse. 

In  spring,  when  tlie  mares  foal,  a  mare  gave  birth  to  a  person.  This 
newly  born  human  being  was  like  a  colt  in  that  he  stood  up  at  once  and 
walkc^l  about.  Soon  he  talked.  The  man  to  whom  the  mare  belonged 
that  had  given  birth  to  the  person,  called  the  people.  Wlien  they  had  come 
and  stood  about  in  a  circle,  he  said  to  the  colt-person,  "I  have  called  all 


1  From  informant  R.     The  general  idea  is  common  on  the  Plains. 

2  Told  by  informant  R  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  knew  the  myth  of  the  woman 
who  had  children  by  a  dog,  told  by  the  Arapaho.  This  myth  does  not  seem  to  be  found 
among  the  Gros  Ventre. 


114  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  1^ 

these  people  in  order  that  you  may  find  your  father."  The  colt-person  got 
up,  walked  around  the  circle,  looked  at  every  one,  and  said  to  a  man,  "You 
are  my  father."  The  man  did  not  hesitate,  but  ^vent  to  him  and  acknowl- 
edged him  as  his  son. 

37.    The  Woman  and  the  Horse. 

The  people  sent  out  two  young  men  to  look  for  buffalo.  They  killed 
one  and  were  butchering  it.  Then  one  of  them  said,  "I  will  go  to  that  hill 
and  look  around;  do  you  continue  to  butcher."  He  went  on  the  hill,  and 
his  companion  went  on  with  the  butchering.  The  one  on  the  hill  looked 
about  him  with  field-glasses.  At  Many-Lakes  he  saw  a  large  herd  of  wild 
horses.  He  continued  to  look  at  them.  Then  he  saw  a  person  among  them. 
Then  he  saw  something  streaming  behind  the  person.  He  thought  it  was 
a  loose  breech-cloth.  He  called  his  companion,  and  said  to  him,  "Look!" 
Then  they  went  nearer.  They  saw  that  it  was  indeed  a  person.  They 
thought  that  it  was  something  unnatural  (kaxtawuu).  Therefore  they 
did  not  try  to  disturb  the  person,  but  went  back.  They  asked  the  people, 
"Did  you  ever  miss  a  person?"  An  old  man  said,  "Yes.  A  man  once 
lost  his  wife  as  the  camp  moved.  She  was  not  found."  Thereupon  the 
young  men  told  what  they  had  seen.  The  people  thought  it  must  be  this 
woman.  The  whole  camp  went  there.  All  the  people  mounted  their  best 
horses  in  order  to  catch  her.  When  they  approached  the  place,  they  sur- 
rounded the  whole  country.  All  of  them  had  mirrors.  When  they  had 
gone  all  around,  they  turned  the  mirrors  and  reflected  with  them,  signalling 
that  the  circle  was  complete.  Then  they  drew  together.  The  four  that 
were  mounted  on  the  fastest  horses  started  toward  the  herd.  The  wild 
horses  ran,  but,  wherever  they  went,  they  saw  people.  The  person  in  the 
herd  was  always  in  the  lead.  The  people  continued  to  close  up  on  the 
horses.  When  they  got  them  into  a  small  space,  they  began  to  rope  them. 
Six  of  the  horses  and  the  woman  escaped.  She  was  exceedingly  swift. 
The  people  headed  them  off,  and  at  last  drove  them  into  an  enclosure. 
With  much  trouble  they  at  last  succeeded  in  fastening  one  rope  on  her  leg 
and  one  on  her  arm.  Then  they  picketed  her  at  the  camp  like  a  horse. 
Pubis  suae  crines  equi  caudse  similes  facti  erant.  At  night  a  young  man 
went  oiit.  He  lay  down  on  the  ground  near  her,  looking  at  her.  Then  the 
woman  spoke:  "Listen,  young  man.  I  will  tell  you  something.  You 
must  do  what  I  tell  you.  It  is  the  truth.  Long  ago  the  camp  was  moving. 
I  was  far  behind.  I  saw  a  large  black  stallion  come.  He  had  a  rope  on 
him.  I  jumped  off  my  horse  and  caught  him,  thinking  he  belonged  to  some 
one  in  camp.     When  I  had  hold  of  the  rope,  he  spoke  to  me.     He  said. 


1907-1  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Mijths  ajid  Tales.  315 

'Jump  on  my  back.'  Then  I  climbed  on  him.  He  is  the  one  that  took 
me  away.  He  is  my  husband.  I  have  seven  children  by  him,  seven  young 
horses.  There  is  one,  that  gray  one;  there  another  one,  that  spotted  one; 
there  a  black  painted  one;  there  a  black  one."  She  showed  him  all  her 
children.  "That  is  my  husband,"  she  said  of  a  black  horse  that  was  tied 
near  by.  "I  cannot  go  back  to  the  tribe  now.  I  have  become  a  horse. 
Let  me  go.  Let  us  all  go.  Tie  a  bell  on  a  horse  of  such  a  color;  then  you 
will  be  lucky  in  getting  horses.  If  you  will  let  me  loose,  I  will  give  you 
forty  persons  (you  will  kill  forty  enemies).  If  you  do  not  loose  me,  many 
of  the  tribe  will  die."  Then  the  young  man  went  to  his  father  and  told 
what  the  woman  had  said.  The  old  man  went  outside  and  cried  it  out  to 
the  people.  Then  they  freed  her  and  the  horses.  They  ran  amid  flying 
dust,  the  woman  far  in  the  lead.^ 

38.   The  Little  Girl  avho  was  married  by  a  Bear. 

A  camp  moved  and  a  little  girl  was  left  behind.  She  started  to  follow 
the  peo{)le's  tracks.  At  last  she  stopped,  sat  down,  and  cried.  A  bear 
called  her  by  name,  and  said,  "Stay  with  me.  I  am  rich.  I  can  kill  buffalo, 
deer,  and  any  kind  of  game."  Then  the  girl  began  to  make  a  tent.  She 
set  it  up.  The  bear  ai)i)roached  her,  turned  into  a  man,  and  married  her. 
The  people  came  back  looking  for  her,  and  saw  a  large  tent.  The  little 
girl  told  them  not  to  come  near.  She  would  not  allow  any  one  to  approach. 
So  they  went  back.  Three  times  they  came.  The  fourth  time  they  asked 
her,  "Pity  us;  we  are  starving."  Then  she  permitted  them  to  come.  They 
made  camp  close  to  her,  and  she  gave  them  dried  meat.- 

39.   The  Youxc;  I\Iax  who  became  a  Water-monster. 

Two  young  men  who  were  friends  were  travelling.  They  found  a  trail. 
"Let  us  go  on  this  trail,  my  friend,"  one  of  them  said.  They  followed  and 
followed  the  trail  a  long  time.  At  night  they  would  sleep.  At  last  the 
trail  went  into  a  hill.  They  entered  the  hill,  still  following  the  trail.  It 
l(>d  through  the  earth  out  to  the  other  side.  They  continued  to  go  on,  still 
following  the  trail.  They  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  became  thin  and  bony. 
Then  they  saw  a  tall  person,  as  large  as  a  tree.  He  found  them  and  said, 
"Little  children,  climb  on  my  hand."  He  took  them  back  with  him  to  the 
camp  of  his  people.  They  all  admired  the  little  men.  One  day  the  giants 
saw  that  they  were  to  be  attacked.     They  went  outside  and  prepared  to 


1  Told  by  informant  R.     Compare  the  Arapaho  fragment,  No.  63,  also  No.  107. 

2  From  informant  Q. 


) 


116  Anthrupolugical  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.         [Vol.  I, 

fight.  Then  large  birds  (biiasooihi'h'a")  came  and  fought  them.  The 
birds  had  spears  on  their  feet  with  which  they  kicked  the  giants  in  their 
jugular  veins.  The  giants  fell  down  and  bled  to  death.  The  two  young 
men  were  inside  the  tent.  One  of  them  said,  "Let  us  look  out  and  see  what 
sort  of  a  fight  this  is  that  is  carried  on  without  noise."  They  looked,  and 
saw  the  large  birds.  "They  are  only  birds.  Let  us  take  clubs  and  go  out 
and  kill  them,"  they  said.  They  went  out,  and  killed  many  of  the  birds. 
They  drove  them  away.  Then  the  giants  said,  "We  are  very  thankful 
that  we  found  these  little  children,  for  they  killed  the  large  birds,  and  saved 
us."  They  kept  the  men  with  them  for  some  time,  and  would  not  allow 
them  to  leave.  But  at  last  they  allowed  them  to  go  if  they  wished;  and 
one  of  the  men  said,  "My  friend,  let  us  return."  Then  they  started  home. 
They  came  to  the  hole  from  which  they  had  emerged,  entered  it,  and  went 
on.  Then  they  saw  an  animal  lying  l)efore  them.  They  tried  to  jump 
over  it,  but  it  rose.  They  tried  to  go  beneath  it,  but  it  lowered  its  body. 
It  blocked  their  way  completely.  They  went  back  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave, 
and  got  wood.  With  this  they  built  a  fire  against  the  side  of  the  animal,, 
and  roasted  it.  Then  they  saw  that  it  had  red  meat.  One  of  them  said,  "  I 
will  eat  some  of  it."  "No,  my  friend,  I  love  you  too  much,"  said  the  other,, 
and  held  him.  But  the  one  who  wanted  to  eat  dragged  him  to  the  meat. 
"My  friend,  if  you  eat  of  it,  perhaps  you  will  die."  "If  I  do  not  eat  of  it, 
I  will  die  of  hunger  before  I  reach  home,"  said  the  other.  At  last  his  friend 
let  him  eat  it.  Then  they  went  on  through  the  cave,  and  travelled  home- 
ward. Then  they  slept.  During  the  night  the  other  man  woke  up  and 
looked  at  his  friend.  He  saw  that  he  had  horns,  and  that  from  the  middle 
down  he  was  like  the  animal  of  which  he  had  eaten,  being  striped  with  white. 
In  the  morning  he  saw  that  he  was  a  man  again.  The  next  night  he  noticed 
that  his  friend  smelled  bad.  In  the  morning  he  was  a  human  being  again. 
The  next  night  they  slept  by  a  river.  Then  the  one  who  changed  at  night 
started  to  go  into  the  river.  He  said  to  his  friend,  "  You  will  be  lucky  steal- 
ing horses,  my  friend,  and  you  will  kill  persons.  You  will  not  l)e  poor. 
When  you  go  by  the  water,  feed  me.  Feed  me  only  with  guts."  Then  he 
went  into  the  river.  His  friend  cried  for  him.  The  water-animal  raised 
his  head  out  of  the  water  and  told  him,  "Do  not  mourn  for  me.  Go  home. 
You  will  be  rich."  Then  he  went  home  and  told  the  peo})le  what  had 
happened.  Whenever  he  went  to  war,  he  was  fortunate,  and  he  became 
a  chief.  ^ 


J  From  informant  N.     Compare  Arapaho,  No.  76,  also  78.     The  visit  to  the  giants  is  not 
Arapaho. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  117 


40.   The  Wo.max  wfio  was  recovered  from  a  Water-mox.ster. 

A  man  accompanied  by  his  wife,  Avho  had  a  baby,  went  to  hunt  bufi'alo. 
He  killed  buffalo,  and  all  day  was  busy  cutting  them  up.  In  the  evening 
he  finished.  Then  they  went  back  only  a  short  distance,  and  slept  near  the 
water.  Their  horses  were  a  little  distance  off.  Far  in  the  night,  the  woman, 
who  was  not  asleep,  saw  a  bax'aa"^  come  out  of  the  water  and  encircle  them. 
It  put  its  head  and  tail  together,  completely  enclosing  them.  The  woman 
woke  the  man.  He  said,  "We  must  jump  over  it."  He  jumped.  Then 
the  woman  jumped,  but  she  Ht  astride  the  bax'aa'^,  as  if  on  a  horse,  and  it 
started  to  go  away  with  her.  The  man  tried  to  pull  her  off,  but  she  was 
fast;  and  the  bax'aa"  entered  the  water  with  her.  The  man  cried  for  her. 
He  returned  to  the  camp.  Then  he  came  back  to  the  place,  carrying  his 
baby,  which  had  become  very  thin.  Then  his  wife  rose  up  out  of  the  water. 
She  was  a  woman  from  the  hips  up,  and  a  snake  below.  She  said  to  him, 
"I  pity  you.  I  will  suckle  the  baby."  Then  she  suckled  it.  Then  the 
water  rose  behind  her.  The  welling  came  nearer  the  bank.  She  said  to 
the  man,  "That  is  the  bax'aa".  Load  your  gun  well.  When  the  welling 
water  comes  close,  shoot  the  place  where  it  flows  highest."  The  water 
rose  and  approached,  imtil  the  man  nearly  touched  it  with  his  gun.  Then 
he  shot.  The  water  stirred.  He  had  killed  the  bax'aa".  The  woman 
came  to  the  bank,  and  went  half  out  of  the  water.  The  lower  part  of  her 
body  was  like  a  snake  and  smelled  bad.  She  told  her  husband,  "Make 
a  sweat-house  and  sweat  me  four  times.  Then  I  shall  be  changed  to  a 
human  woman  again."  The  man  made  the  sweat-house  and  sweated  her. 
Thus  he  recovered  his  wife.^ 

41.   The  Max  who  killed  Hawks. 

A  certain  person  used  to  wear  his  robe  inside  out,  and  carried  a  hatchet 
on  his  back.  When  he  saw  a  hawk  high  up  above  him  in  the  air,  he  would 
point  his  hatchet  at  it  and  the  hawk  fell  down  dead.^ 

42.   The  ^NIax  who  was  kh.led  by  a  Bullet-hawk. 

A  man  climbed  to  a  difficult  place  to  take  young  bullet-hawks  (aadyi). 
When  he  reached  the  nest,  the  young  birds  cried.  One  of  the  old  birds 
flew  swiftly  down,  struck  the  man  with  its  sharp  breast,  and  split  his  head.^ 

1  From  informant  N.  Compare,  for  the  recovery  of  the  woman  from  the  monster,  Arapaho, 
No  .5-  for  the  people  encircled  bv  the  monster,  Arapaho,  Nos.  6  and  74;  for  the  restoration  to 
life'in'the  sweat -honse.  No.  23,  aiid  Arapaho,  Nos.  5,  6,  119,  139-142. 

2  From  informant   >L  ^  From  mformant  Q. 


118  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museiim  of  Natural  History.        [\'ol.  I, 

43.   The  ]Max  who  was  killed  by  a  Bald  Eagle. 

A  man  was  catching  eagles  from  a  covered  pit.  A  bald  eagle  lit,  and  he 
took  hold  of  it.  The  eagle  seized  him  with  its  claws  and  flew  up.  It  carried 
the  man  up  high  and  dropped  him,  and  he  was  killed.' 

44.   The  Woman  who  tempted  axd  betrayed  her  Brother-ix-law. 

There  was  a  man  who  had  two  wives.  One  of  them  was  young  and 
beautiful.  He  had  a  younger  brother,  of  whom  he  thought  highly.  He 
constantly  gave  him  horses  and  other  things.  When  the  young  woman 
was  alone  with  the  young  man,  she  asked  him  to  be  her  lover.  He  refused. 
He  said,  "My  brother  tliinks  too  much  of  me."  But  at  last  he  consented. 
Then  she  said,  "Let  us  elope."  He  took  his  brother's  best  horses,  and 
they  ran  away.  They  fled  for  several  days.  They  came  to  a  large  camp 
which  had  just  been  abandoned.  The  fires  were  still  burning.  There 
were  a  number  of  shades  made  of  cottonwood-branches.  They  went  from 
one  to  another.  Then  they  saw  something  hanging  in  one  of  the  shades. 
It  was  an  elk-skin  case.  They  examined  it.  It  contained  a  shield,  a  lance, 
a  rawhide  bag  to  hold  war  paraphernalia,  and  a  buckskin  bag  for  clotliing. 
Then  the  young  man  said,  "Whoever  camped  here  forgot  this.  He  will 
come  back  for  it.  W^e  will  wait  here,  and  when  he  comes  I  will  kill  him. 
If  I  kill  him,  I  will  make  a  sun-dance  and  a  crazy-dance.  Whoever  he  is, 
I  will  try  to  make  peace  mth  him  when  he  comes.  I  will  smoke  with  him, 
and  suddenly  seize  him  and  hold  him.  While  I  hold  him,  you  must  bring 
that  lance  there  and  stab  him  with  it."  After  a  time  they  saw  a  man  coming 
on  horseback.  They  had  tied  their  horses  in  the  brush  so  that  they  would 
not  be  seen,  and  they  themselves  were  inside  the  shelter.  When  the  man 
was  near,  the  Gros  Ventre  came  out  and  made  signs  for  him  to  stop.  Then 
the  other  stopped,  and  asked  by  signs,  "What  do  you  want?"  The  Gros 
Ventre  said,  "I  had  intended  to  find  your  camp,  but  I  got  here  too  late. 
I  want  to  talk  with  you  and  smoke  with  you.  I  was  sent  by  the  people 
to  make  peace  with  you.  After  we  have  smoked,  I  will  go  with  you  to  your 
camp."  Then  the  stranger  said,  "Very  well.  Put  down  your  weapons, 
and  I  will  put  down  mine.  We  will  meet  in  the  middle,  and  smoke."  Then 
the  Gros  Ventre  held  u})  his  weapons  and  each  piece  of  his  clothing,  and 
laid  them  down  until  he  had  taken  off  all  his  clothes.  He  kept  only  his  pipe. 
The  stranger  did  the  same.  Then  they  met.  The  stranger  sat  dow7i, 
but  the  (iros  Ventre  put  only  one  knee  on  the  ground.     He  lit  the  pipe 


1  From  informant  Q. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  119 

with  a  flint,  held  it  out  with  two  hands,  and  said,  "Take  it  and  smoke  it, 
that  I  may  kill  you."  The  other  took  the  pipe,  smoked  it,  and  handed  it 
back  to  the  Gros  Ventre,  holding  it  in  the  same  way.  The  Gros  Ventre 
handed  it  back  to  him,  pointing  at  the  same  time  in  another  direction. 
When  the  stranger  looked  in  that  direction,  he  sprang  upon  him.  They 
fought,  rolling  back  and  forth.  The  Gros  Ventre  repeatedly  called  to  the 
woman  to  bring  the  spear.  But  she  would  not  bring  it.  She  had  fallen  in 
love  with  the  stranger,  whom  she  thought  more  beautiful  than  her  brother- 
in-law.  He  got  on  top  of  the  Gros  Ventre.  Then  he  made  signs  to  the 
woman  to  bring  the  spear.  She  came  with  it,  and  stabbed  her  brother-in- 
law.  She  stabbed  him  several  times  in  the  side  and  in  the  shoulder.  She 
did  not  wound  him  severely.  She  only  hit  the  bone.  The  two  men  continued 
to  roll  about  until  they  came  near  the  place  where  the  young  Gros  Ventre 
had  left  his  knife.  Then  he  came  on  top.  He  released  the  other,  jumped 
up,  got  his  knife,  and,  before  the  other  rose  to  his  feet,  was  back  at  him  and 
killed  him.  Then  he  took  the  woman  back  with  him.  He  did  not  kill  her. 
He  took  her  to  his  older  brother.  He  told  him  everything.  The  older 
brother  said,  "She  ought  not  to  have  asked  you  to  run  off  with  her.  She 
did  wrong."  He  took  her  down  to  the  river.  He  cut  off  one  of  her  breasts. 
Then  he  cut  off  the  other.  One  by  one  they  cut  off  all  her  limbs  until  she 
was  dead.' 

45.   The  Wo.m.w  who  tried  to  betray  her  Brother-in-law. 

A  man  who  had  a  younger  brother,  and  was  married,  lived  away  from 
the  camj).  His  wife  was  in  love  with  his  brother,  and,  when  her  husband 
went  out  to  hunt  buffalo,  she  asked  the  young  man  to  be  her  lover.  He 
refused.  He  took  his  robe,  his  shield,  and  his  spear,  and  went  out  to  where 
the  horses  were.  The  Avoman  followed  him,  and  again  urged  him.  Then 
he  mounted  a  horse  and  rode  oft".  She  caught  a  well-broken  horse,  and, 
using  her  belt  as  a  bridle,  followed  him.  Then  she  came  up  with  him.  At 
night  he  used  his  saddle  as  a  jjillow,  and  pretended  to  sleej).  She  lay  down 
beside  him.  Late  at  night  he  got  up  and  fled.  She  had  been  watching 
him,  and  followed.  Then  they  came  to  a  deserted  camp.  On  an  elevation 
above  the  camp  was  a  shelter.  In  this  hung  a  mirror  reflecting  the  sun. 
They  saw  it,  and  waited.  Soon  the  owner  of  the  mirror  came,  a  Ute.  The 
Gros  Ventre  signed  to  him  to  put  down  his  weapons,  and  laid  down  his 
own.  He  signed  to  the  Ute  that  he  would  give  him  a  smoke.  When  he 
reached  him  the  pipe,  he  jumped  on  him  and  they  struggled.     The  Gros 

1  From  informant  R.     For  this  and  the  following  version,  compare  Arapaho,  No.  114. 


120  Anthropohxjical  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [\o\.  I, 

Ventre  was  stronger,  and  got  on  top  of  his  adversary.  Then  he  called 
to  the  woman,  who  came,  but  stabbed  him  in  the  side.  Then  the  Gros 
Ventre  pledged  a  sun-dance  if  he  killed  the  Ute.  He  struck  one  of  his  arms 
and  broke  it,  then  the  other  and  broke  that  too.  Then  he  killed  the  Ute, 
and  scal]:)ed  him.  Then  he  and  the  woman  returned.  She  wanted  to  kiss 
him.  "There  will  be  time  enough  to  kiss  when  we  get  back,"  he  said. 
They  hid  in  the  mountains  in  order  to  avoid  the  Utes.  Then  they  came 
back  to  the  camp,  and  entered  his  elder  brother's  tent.  The  young  man 
had  painted  his  face  black,  and  called  all  the  people.  Then  he  told  how 
his  sister-in-law  had  tried  to  seduce  him  and  afterwards  to  betray  him. 
Then  the  woman's  husband  called  to  her  mother,  "Bring  out  your  daughter! 
This  is  the  last  day  of  her  life."  Then  he  antl  his  younger  brother  went 
out  of  the  camp.  The  woman  followed  them,  and  as  she  passed  l)etween 
them,  both  of  them  shot.  She  dropped.  They  did  not  biny  her,  but  left 
her  to  the  dogs.^ 

46.   The  Bad  ^YIFE. 

There  was  a  camp-circle.  A  man  went  out  with  a  war-party.  While 
he  was  away,  the  Crows  attacked  the  camp  and  captured  his  wife.  When 
he  came  back  and  asked  for  her,  the  people  told  him,  "The  Crows  have 
taken  her."  Then  he  took  his  three  brothers  and  three  brothers-in-law 
with  him  and  started  out.  They  came  to  the  Crow  camp.  The  man  said 
to  his  six  companions,  "Wait  here  in  hiding.  I  will  go  into  the  brush,  and 
where  the  women  go  to  get  water  I  will  watch  for  my  wife."  He  waited 
all  the  morning.  Many  women  came,  but  not  his  wife.  At  last  she  came. 
The  man  jumped  out,  caught  her,  and  said,  "I  have  come  to  take  you  back." 
She  asked  him,  "How  many  are  there  of  you?  Where  are  they?"  He 
said,  "There  are  your  three  brothers  and  my  three,  and  they  are  in  that 
place."  The  woman  said,  "Wait  for  me  there,  and  I  will  steal  something 
and  bring  meat  for  you  to  take  with  you."  The  man  went  back  to  his 
six  companions,  and  told  them,  "She  will  soon  come  here."  The  woman 
went  back  to  the  Crow  camp,  took  a  coal,  chewed  it,  rubbed  it  over  her  face, 
and,  where  a  number  of  men  sat  smoking,  said,  "This  sun  has  given  me 
seven  persons.  They  are  there  in  the  brush."  Some  of  the  men  said, 
"That  woman  is  crazy;"  but  some  believed  her.  She  continued  to  say, 
"The  sun  has  given  me  seven  persons.  They  are  there  in  the  brush,"  and 
she  painted  her  face,  and  rejoiced.  At  last  the  people  believed  her.  They 
went  and  surrounded  the  place  where  the  seven  men  were  hiding,  shot  at 
them,  and  killed  six.     But  the  man  himself  they  could  not  kill.     He  went 

1  From  informant  N.     Compare  the  preceding  version. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  121 

straight  to  the  Crow  camp-circle.  He  entered  the  largest  tent,  wliich  stood 
in  the  middle.  There  was  his  wife.  A  crowd  followed  him  in.  He  told 
his  wife,  "I  want  to  smoke  and  to  drink."  The  Crows  asked  her,  "What 
does  he  say?"  The  woman  said,  "He  says  you  are  to  dig  two  holes  and 
set  two  trees  into  them,  and  connect  them  at  the  top  by  a  pole.  Then  you 
are  to  hang  him  there  by  the  neck.  Stretch  his  arms  and  tie  them,  and 
leave  him,  moving  camp.  Thus  he  says."  Some  of  the  Crows  did  not 
believe  her.  But  the  woman  continued  to  say  the  same  until  they  all 
believed  her.  Then  they  dug  the  holes  and  stuck  up  the  poles,  and  hung 
the  man  and  left  him.  An  old  Crow  woman  pitied  the  man,  and  waited 
until  the  whole  camp,  including  even  the  dogs,  had  gone.  Then  she  un- 
loaded her  travois  in  the  brush,  went  to  the  man,  cut  him  down,  and  washed 
his  face.  She  cooked  dried  sliced  meat  and  gave  him  to  eat,  and  then 
took  him  along  mth  her  hidden  on  her  travois.  When  she  came  to  the 
Crow  camp,  she  put  up  her  tent  outside  of  the  circle,  brought  water,  and 
started  a  fire.  Then  she  called  her  sons  to  smoke  with  the  man.  She  called 
him  her  son.  The  men  said,  "If  you  pitied  him,  you  should  have  told  us." 
They  gave  him  clothes,  for  he  had  been  hung  up  naked.  Then  the  man 
said,  "I  will  go  back.  I  will  return  soon  with  all  my  people  in  order  to  get 
my  wife.  Always  camp  together  at  the  rear  of  the  camp-circle,  at  the  end 
which  is  in  the  direction  from  which  you  have  just  come.  If  the  tribe 
divides,  put  rocks  in  a  row  along  the  trail  which  that  part  of  the  people 
have  taken  with  whom  my  wife  is."  Then  he  asked  his  new  brothers, 
"What  kind  of  a  horse  does  this  woman  ride?"  They  told  him,  "She 
always  rides  a  black-painted  short-tailed  horse  which  is  very  fast."  Then  the 
man  went  back  to  his  people,  running  ceaselessly.  After  he  had  returned, 
he  cut  tobacco  into  little  pieces.  Young  men  took  these  to  the  Piegans, 
the  Blackfeet,  the  Bloods,  and  the  North  Piegans  (Sarcees).  Soon  all  the 
tribes  gathered,  and  joined  the  Gros  Ventre.  They  started  against  the 
Crows.  Whenever  they  stopped,  they  raced  their  horses  to  discover  who 
had  the  fastest.  They  came  near  the  Crows.  The  man  made  them  all 
stop  behind  the  hill,  and  went  alone  to  his  Crow  mother.  Then  she  called 
her  sons,  and  the  man  told  them,  "Take  all  your  property  inside  your  tent. 
Hobble  your  horses  close  by,  and  stay  indoors."  The  Crows  were  just 
breaking  camp.  They  asked  the  old  woman  and  her  sons,  "Why  do  you 
remain  encamped  there  ?"  They  answered,  "We  are  going  off  somewhere." 
When  the  Crows  had  begun  to  move,  the  war-party  attacked  them.  While 
they  were  fighting  and  killing  the  Crows,  the  man's  younger  brother,  mounted 
on  the  swiftest  horse,  was  only  looking  for  the  woman.  He  was  far  ahead 
of  the  fight.  Then  he  saw  the  black-painted  horse  with  the  short  tail,  and 
the  woman  on  it.     He  rode  after  her  and  caught  up  with  her.     He  took 


122  Anthwpolojical  Papers  American  Museut?i  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

her  bridle  and  turned  her,  and  went  back  with  her  to  the  camp  of  the  old 
Crow  woman.  On  the  way  the  woman  said,  "Let  me  kiss  you,  my  brother- 
in-law;  I  have  been  longing  for  you."  He  answered,  "There  will  be  time 
for  that  when  we  arrive  where  we  are  going."  As  soon  as  the  woman  was 
captured,  the  people  stopped  fighting  the  Crows.  The  old  Crow  woman 
began  to  sharpen  her  knife,  and  had  them  build  a  large  fire.  They  took 
the  woman  off  her  horse,  and  made  her  stand  up.  "I  know  what  to  do  to 
her,"  said  the  old  woman.  She  went  to  her,  seized  her  nose,  cut  it  off  and 
threw  it  in  the  fire.  Then  she  tore  in  two  her  bell-covered  dress,  and  threw 
it  on  the  fire.  Then  she  cut  off  her  breasts,  ejus  vaginae  labia,  and  her 
ears,  and  threw  them  in  the  fire.  Tlien  they  threw  the  woman  herself 
into  the  fire.  A  great  crowd  stood  about,  and  whenever  she  crawled  out 
on  one  side  they  threw  her  in  again.  Finally  she  was  burned.  They  all 
went  home  rejoicing.^ 

47.    The  Man  who  acquired  Invulnerability. 

There  was  a  poor  man.  He  wandered  about.  Then  he  found  snakes 
in  a  hole.  He  cut  his  flesh  and  fed  it  to  the  snakes.  He  cut  himself  all 
over.  He  gave  the  snakes  even  his  ears,  and  cut  off  his  little  finger  and  threw 
it  to  them.  Then,  before  he  should  bleed  to  death,  he  jumped  into  the  hole. 
All  the  snakes  retreated  from  him  as  he  lay  there.  Then  one  young  snake 
said,  "Why  do  you  draw  back?  I  pity  this  man.  I  will  give  him  power 
and  make  him  strong."  Then  its  father  and  mother  said,  "It  is  well  that 
you  pity  him.  We  will  help  you  to  do  something  for  him.  You  shall  go 
into  him  and  stay  in  his  body.  Then  he  will  be  unkillable."  Then  the 
young  snake  entered  the  man's  mouth  and  went  into  his  body,  and  the  two 
old  snakes  gave  him  each  a  rattle  from  their  tails.  The  man  got  up  and 
went  off.  But  now  he  no  longer  had  scars  on  him.  He  came  to  where 
the  people  were  shooting  bears  in  a  hole.  Again  he  cut  flesh  from  his  body 
and  fed  it  to  them.  Then  he  lay  down  in  the  den  in  order  to  bleed  to  death 
there.  A  young  bear  said  to  the  others,  "You  do  not  pity  this  man,  but  I 
will  help  him."  Then  his  father  and  mother  said,  "We  will  give  him  the 
strength  of  our  bodies,  and  he  will  be  invulnerable."  The  young  bear 
entered  the  man's  mouth,  and  the  two  old  ones  gave  him  each  one  of  their 
claws.  They  gave  him  the  longest  one  on  their  feet.  Then  the  man  went 
away.  A  certain  young  man  saw  a  bax'aa'\  He  told  the  man  who  had 
been  to  the  snakes  and  the  bears.  Then  the  man  went  to  the  river,  cried, 
cut  off  his  flesh  and  threw  it  in.     He  also  cut  his  little  finger  and  threw  it 

1  From  informant  N.     Not  Arapaho.     Compare  Grinnell,  Blackfoot  Lodge  Tales,  p.  39. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  123 

in  the  river.  Then  the  bax'aa"!  rose  up  out  of  the  water  halfway.  He 
hooked  the  water  ^\dth  one  of  his  horns,  and  where  the  man  had  been  lying 
on  the  bank,  bleeding  to  death,  he  was  now  riding  a  white  horse  and  carrying 
a  shield  and  spear,  and  was  beautifully  dressed.  Then  the  bax'aa"  hooked 
the  water  with  his  other  horn,  and  a  painted  horse  stood  on  the  bank.  "  You 
will  not  be  poor,"  said  the  bax'aa",  and  he  hooked  innumerable  horses  of 
different  colors,  and  much  property  of  different  kinds,  out  of  the  water, 
until  horses  were  standing  all  about  the  bank  of  the  river.  The  bax'aa^^ 
said  to  him,  "You  will  be  the  only  man  on  this  earth  rich  in  horses  (the 
richest  in  horses)."  After  this,  the  man  fed  liis  flesh  to  many  kinds  of  ani- 
mals. He  gave  himself  to  eagles,  to  jack-rabbits,  to  the  buffalo,  and  to 
horned  toads.  Then  the  snakes  told  him  to  take  six  poor  people  with  him. 
He  did  so  and  they  started  out,  seven  in  the  party.  They  reached  a  lake. 
They  saw  many  people  travelhng  toward  the  lake.  Then  they  went  into 
the  water  and  lay  down.  The  camp  arrived,  and  every  one  watered  his 
horses  at  the  lake.  An  old  woman  came  and  drove  her  horse  into  the 
water.  She  saw  a  mouth  in  the  water,  and  riding  out,  told  the  people, 
"I  have  seen  persons  in  the  water."  Then  these  people  killed  the  man's 
six  companions;  but  the  man  himself  they  could  not  kill.  Spears,  stones, 
and  aiTows  could  not  hit  him  or  hurt  him.  He  continued  to  sing  his  song. 
Then  they  cut  him  to  pieces,  and  scattered  the  pieces  about.  When  they 
moved  camp,  the  man  rose  up  alive.  He  went  to  where  they  were  camped, 
and  hid  in  the  brush.  A  woman  came  to  get  wood.  He  seized  her,  and 
with  a  large  knife  cut  her  to  pieces.  All  the  people  took  him  and  tried  to  cut 
and  stab  him.  They  cut  him  to  pieces  and  moved  camp.  He  rose  up  alive, 
and  again  went  to  where  they  had  camped.  Again  he  killed  a  woman 
who  was  gathering  wood.  Thus  the  people  would  Idll  him  and  move  camp; 
but  he  would  return  to  life,  follow  them,  and  kill  one  of  them.  Then  he 
killed  many,  because  he  felt  bad  that  this  tribe  had  killed  his  six  companions. 
He  continued  to  do  this  until  his  feet  became  too  sore  to  walk.  Then  he 
stole  horses  and  a  shield  and  robes,  and  returned  home,  driving  the  horses 
before  him.  When  he  came  back  to  his  own  people,  he  had  a  bundle  of 
scalps  hanging  at  his  side.  Thereafter  he  w^ould  go  to  war,  kill  a  man  or  a 
woman,  and  bring  back  a  herd  of  horses.  He  continued  to  do  this  until 
he  became  very  rich.  But  he  would  not  marry.  Then  he  went  off  again 
and  returned  with  horses.  While  he  was  away  and  the  people  were  hunting 
buffalo,  the  Cheyenne  attacked  them,  and  captured  and  took  away  a  small 
boy.  When  the  man  returned,  he  heard  about  this.  The  little  boy  had 
a  sister  who  was  pretty.  She  was  old  enough  to  be  married.  Then  the 
man  said,  "I  ^vill  go  to  bring  back  the  little  boy,  and  when  I  bring  him,  I 
will  marry  this  girl."     When  her  father  heard  this,  he  said,  "It  is  well:   if 


124  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

he  brings  back  the  boy,  he  can  have  my  daughter."  Then  the  man  started 
out,  accompanied  by  a  party.  They  killed  two  persons,  and  captured 
horses.  The  man  sent  all  the  rest  of  the  party  back  with  the  horses.  He 
himself  went  to  the  Cheyenne  camp,  looking  for  the  boy.  The  Cheyenne 
were  having  a  sun-dance.  The  man  looked  on.  Then  he  heard  a  sound, 
and  saw  the  boy  tied  to  the  centre  pole  of  the  lodge.  His  arms  were  drawn 
back  around  the  tree,  and  he  was  hanging  at  the  fork.  He  was  painted 
black.  The  man  looked  for  a  suitable  pole  among  those  extending  over 
the  lodge.  He  climbed  up,  went  along  it  to  the  tree  in  the  middle,  and  cut 
the  boy  loose.  As  the  boy  was  very  stiff,  he  took  the  cloth  that  had  been 
hung  at  the  top  of  the  lodge  as  an  offering,  wrapped  him  in  it,  and,  carrying 
him  as  a  woman  carries  her  child,  began  to  climb  down  again.  Before  he 
reached  the  ground,  a  Cheyenne  saw  him,  and  they  all  stopped  dancing. 
The  man  said  to  the  Cheyenne,  "Do  not  kill  me  until  to-morrow.  Who  is 
the  chief?  Where  is  the  largest  tent?"  Then  he  went  to  the  largest  tent 
and  staid  there  that  night.  Next  day  he  told  the  Cheyenne,  "Get  seven 
buffalo-skulls  and  place  them  in  a  row.  I  will  jump  from  one  to  another, 
and,  if  I  miss  or  stumble,  you  can  kill  me."  Then  they  put  the  seven  skulls 
in  a  row,  and  he  started.  He  jumped  from  one  to  another  like  a  rabbit, 
and  when  he  came  to  the  last  one  he  continued  to  leap  along,  carrying 
the  boy  with  him.  As  he  went,  he  turned  into  a  rabbit.  He  wished  for  a 
hole,  put  the  boy  into  it  and  covered  it  with  a  buffalo-chip.  Then  he  ran 
on  and  wished  for  another  hole,  went  into  it  and  covered  it  with  grass. 
The  Cheyenne  were  running  all  about,  looking  for  him  in  vain.  At  last 
the  man  came  out  of  his  hole.  He  looked  for  a  buffalo-horn.  When  he 
found  one,  he  washed  it  in  the  river,  and  brought  a  drink  to  his  little  brother- 
in-law.  He  told  the  boy,  "Wait  for  me,  and  I  ^\dll  bring  horses  and  meat." 
He  WTnt  again  to  the  Cheyenne  camp  and  took  two  spotted  horses,  some 
meat,  robes,  and  a  shield.  He  went  back  to  the  boy,  and  said  to  him, 
"Now  come  out."  He  tied  the  boy  on  a  horse,  and  they  started  off.  At 
a  stream  in  the  mountains  they  rested.  There  he  cooked  for  the  boy. 
Then  they  went  on,  resting  whenever  the  boy  was  in  need  of  it.  At  last 
they  returned  to  the  camp.  A  tent  had  been  set  up  for  him,  and  about  it 
stood  many  horses  of  different  colors;  and  he  married  the  girl.  She  wore 
a  dress  covered  with  elk-teeth,  and  rings  and  bracelets.  The  people  took 
the  man  for  their  chief.     His  name  was  Hat'uxu  (Star). 

The  people  were  camped.  Young  men  found  a  herd  of  buffalo,  and 
an  old  man  cried  out  that  they  would  hunt.  Hat'uxu  took  many  horses 
with  him.  He  wanted  to  kill  much.  He  told  liis  wife,  "Tie  all  the  horses 
abreast,  and  follow  me.  Give  away  none  of  what  I  kill."  Then  he  went 
ahead,  hunted,  killed  buffalo,  and  began  to  cut  them  up.     ^Nleanwliile  the 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  125 

enemy  came,  and  captured  liis  wife  and  her  horses.  When  Hat'uxu  had 
at  last  finished  cutting  up  liis  buffalo,  he  stuck  his  knife  in  liis  scabbard, 
and  went  back  to  where  he  had  left  his  wife.  She  was  gone,  but  he  saw  her 
tracks  and  those  of  the  people  who  had  captured  her.  He  followed  her  at 
once.  He  had  no  weapons  with  him  except  his  knife.  He  reached  the 
mountains  where  he  thought  he  would  be  able  to  intercept  the  enemy. 
He  tied  his  horses,  and  climbed  a  tree.  Soon  he  saw  the  enemy  coming, 
riding  in  file.  His  wife  was  among  them,  carrjdng  on  her  back  their  quiver 
of  large  arrows.  It  was  nearly  dark.  Hat'uxu  came  down  from  his  tree, 
and  went  to  where  the  enemy  had  camped  for  the  night.  He  threw  aside 
the  blanket  which  they  had  hung  up  as  a  door  for  tlieir  brush  hut,  and 
went  inside.  He  saw  his  wife  sitting  next  to  one  of  the  men,  who  had  taken 
her  for  his  -wiie.  He  killed  the  man.  Then  he  used  the  arrows,  which  his 
wife  had  been  carrying,  against  the  rest.  They  all  ran  off  into  the  brush. 
Then  he  cut  off  the  dead  man's  head  and  took  it  with  him.  He  told  his 
wife  to  carry  the  captured  arrows  and  to  collect  all  the  enemy's  horses. 
By  next  morning  he  was  back  at  the  camp.  Then  the  people  celebrated 
over  the  head  he  had  brought  back  with  him.     Thus  he  recaptured  his  wife.^ 

48.   The  ^Iax  who  recaptured  his  AYife. 

While  a  man  was  away,  the  enemy  captured  his  wife.  He  returned 
and  found  her  gone.  He  did  not  know  to  what  tribe  she  had  been  taken. 
Another  woman  had  been  captured  at  the  same  time,  but  returned.  Then 
this  man  called  her  to  him  and  asked  her,  "Where  is  my  wife?"  The 
returned  woman  said,  "I  know  where  she  lives,  for  I  went  to  visit  her  while 
I  was  a  captive.  She  has  two  husbands  who  dress  alike.  They  have  fine 
pipes,  and  tobacco-bags  fringed  with  bells,  and  pipe-stokers.  There  are 
many  fierce  dogs  among  those  people.  If  you  go  there,  first  kill  a  buffalo, 
and  carry  the  meat  with  you  to  throw  to  the  dogs."  Then  the  man  got  his 
brothers  and  his  brothers-in-law,  and  they  started  out.  They  came  to 
the  place  where  the  captured  woman  lived.  He  told  his  brothers  and 
brothers-in-law  to  stay  at  the  river.  He  liimself  went  on.  The  lodges 
stood  in  rows.  When  he  entered  the  village,  the  dogs  began  to  attack  him. 
As  he  Avent  along,  he  threw  each  dog  a  piece  of  meat.  They  became  quiet. 
He  came  to  the  lodge  in  which  lived  his  wife,  and  knocked  softly  at  the 
door.  She  put  out  her  head.  Then  he  said  to  her,  "I  am  your  husband. 
I  have  come  to  take  you  back.  Is  there  any  one  inside  with  you?"  She 
said,  "There  is  one.     He  is  sleeping."     Then  he  told  her,  "Lie  on  him, 

1  Told  by  informant  N. 


126  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

and  I  will  cut  his  throat."  Then  she  lay  on  him,  and  the  man  entered 
and  cut  his  throat.  He  took  the  dead  man's  clothes  and  a  dress  of  the 
woman's  that  was  covered  with  bells,  and  rolled  them  up  in  his  robe.  The 
woman  carried  the  bundle  in  one  hand  and  the  head  of  the  dead  person 
in  the  other,  and  they  went  out.  The  man  threw  meat  to  the  dogs  again. 
Then  they  ran.  They  came  to  his  brothers  and  her  brothers,  and  together 
they  all  fled  until  they  returned.     Thus  the  man  recaptured  his  wife.^ 

49.   The  Woman  who  married  the  Snake  Indian. 

There  was  a  camp.  A  man  who  lived  there  had  a  sister  that  many 
young  men  wanted  to  buy.  But  she  did  not  wish  to  marry.  Her  brother, 
also,  did  not  wish  to  sell  her.  He  left  the  camp  with  her  and  his  wife,  and 
went  toward  the  mountains.  There  he  camped.  A  Snake  who  was  in  the 
mountains  saw  his  camp.  He  saw  that  there  were  only  two  tents.  In 
the  evening  he  saw  a  man  and  a  woman  go  into  one  and  a  woman  go  into 
the  other.  At  night  he  came  down  from  the  mountains,  and  entered  the 
tent  into  which  he  had  seen  the  woman  go  alone.  In  the  morning,  before 
the  morning  star  arose,  he  went  out.  When  it  was  day,  the  man's  wife 
brought  food  to  her  sister-in-law's  tent.  But  the  girl  would  not  eat.  She 
would  not  speak.  She  thought  that  her  brother  had  slept  with  her.  AYhen 
the  man  heard  from  his  wife  that  his  sister  neither  ate  nor  spoke,  he  said, 
"Ask  her  if  she  wants  to  go  back  to  the  camp  of  the  people."  The  woman 
asked  her,  but  the  girl  said,  "No."  Then  she  asked  her  brother's  wife, 
"Did  my  brother  go  out  last  night?"  The  woman  said,  "No.  He  went 
to  bed  early,  and  slept  at  once."  Then  the  girl  said,  "To-night  tie  a  string 
from  inside  my  tent  to  your  wrist  in  your  tent."  Then  it  became  night. 
The  man  and  his  wife  were  half  asleep.  The  Snake  came  into  the  girl's 
tent  and  lay  down  with  her  as  if  he  were  with  his  wife  in  his  own  tent.  Then 
the  girl  pulled  the  string.  The  woman  in  the  other  tent  got  up,  made  a  fire, 
and  said  to  her  husband,  "  You  have  a  brother-in-law:  go  give  him  a  smoke." 
Then  she  went  to  the  other  tent  and  lit  the  fire  there.  Then  the  man  came 
in  too,  and  gave  the  Snake  liis  filled  pipe  to  smoke.  Then  they  gave  him 
food  to  eat.  The  man  gave  him  arrows,  a  gun,  horses,  a  panther-skin, 
saddle-blanket,  and  otter-skin.  At  first  the  Snake  feared  him  and  his  wife. 
x\fter  they  had  remained  camped  there  for  some  time,  he  feared  them  no 
longer.  Then  they  went  back  to  the  camp,  ^^'hen  they  arrived,  all  the 
people  tried  to  kill  the  Snake;  but  his  brother-in-law  w^ould  not  allow  them 
to  approach  him.     The  girl's  parents  gave  the  Snake  horses  and  clothing. 

1  Told  by  informant  N. 


1907.] 


Krocber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  127 


He  learned  to  talk  Gros  Ventre.     After  he  had  lived  with  the  Gros  Ventre 
a  year,  he  told  his  wife,  "I  will  take  you  with  me  to  the  Snakes."     She 
said,  "Very  well.     I  will  ask  my  relatives  if  they  will  allow  me  to  go  with 
you.'    I  will  ask  their  permission  in  order  that  they  may  give  us  clothes  to 
take  with  us."     Her  relatives  gave  their  consent,  and  presented  the  Snake 
and  his  wife  with  painted  horses  and  other  property.     When  everything 
had  been  arranged,  they  left,  talcing  mth  them  their  tent  and  all  their  gifts. 
Before  they  reached  tlie  Snakes,  they  stopped  in  the  woods,  dismounted, 
changed  their  clothes  for  some  that  were  old  and  dirty,  and  mounted  poorly- 
saddled,  miserable  horses.     Then  they  rode  toward  the  Snake  camp.     The 
Snakes  tried  to  kill  the  woman.     "Look  at  that  woman!"  they  said.     "He 
has  married  her,  and  see  how  poor  he  is!"     At  night  the  man  and  his  wife 
went  to  bed  without  any  blanket.     When  they  thought  everybody  was  asleep, 
they  went  to  the  woods,  put  on  their  best  clothing,  and  came  back.     The 
man  wore  a  fine  buckskin  shirt  and  leggings  fringed  with  weasel-skins, 
and  the  woman's  dress  was  fine.     They  rode  painted  horses  beautifully 
saddled.     When  they  returned  in  the  morning,  a  man  saw  them  coming. 
"Here  comes  the  man  whose  mfe  they  tried  to  kill!     Now  he  is  a  cliief!" 
he  cried.     Then  the  woman  brought  her  tent  and  began  to  put  it  up.     It 
was  very  large.     All  her  husband's  female  relatives  helped  her.     Then  they 
brought  her  and  her  husband  food.     The  man  told  the  Snakes  that  he  would 
take  his  wife  back  to  the  Gros  Ventre  the  next  summer.     Next  summer 
the  Snakes  made  fine  clothing,  and  gave  it  to  him  and  his  wife.     They 
also  gave  them  horses  and  many  other  things.     When  they  started  to  go 
back  to  the  Gros  Ventre  they  had  more  property  than  when  they  came. 
Then  thev  did  the  same  as  when  they  came  to  the  Snakes.     They  hid  all 
their  property  and  fine  clothing  in  the  brush,  and  put  on  the  dirty  clothes. 
When  they  reached  the  Gros  Ventre  camp,  the  people  tried  to  kill  the  man. 
They  saicl,  "Why  did  you  give  her  to  that  man?     He  is  poor;   his  clothes 
are  dirty;  'his  horses  are  bad."     At  night  the  man  and  his  wife  went  back 
into  the  brush  and  put  on  their  beautiful  clothes.     When  they  returned  to 
the  camp  in  the  morning,  a  man  cried  out,   "Look  at  the  man  we  tried 
to  kill'     He  is  dressed  finelv.     He  has  become  a  chief."     Then  the  Snake 
crave  presents  to  all  his  v.'iie's  relatives.     Then  the  Gros  Ventre  and  the 
Snakes  came  together  and  made  friendship,  and  no  longer  fought  each  other. 
The  Snake  lived  with  the  Gros  Ventre  ever  after.^ 


1  From  informant  N.     Not  Arapaho.     Compare  Grinnell,  Pawnee  Hero  Stories,  p.  25. 


,  128  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

50.   The  Woman  who  revenged  her  Brothers. 

Three  men  went  to  war.  Two  of  them  were  killed.  iVll  the  people 
cried  and  mourned  for  them.  The  father  and  mother  of  the  dead  men 
cut  their  hair  short,  and  gashed  themselves  on  the  legs  and  on  the  body. 
But  the  sister  of  the  two  dead  men  did  not  cry  and  did  not  speak.  The 
family  hid  all  their  knives  and  ropes,  for  they  thought  she  would  kill  herself. 
\  Then  her  husband  said  to  her,  "Pity  me.     Do  not  kill  yourself.     I  am 

/  V  accustomed  to  you.     I  do  not  want  you  to  kill  yourself."     She  said,  "I  will 

do  what  you  wish.  But  saddle  a  horse  for  me.  I  am  going  to  a  high  moun- 
tain to  sleep  there.  I  did  not  cry  or  speak  because  I  did  not  know  what 
to  do."  Then  her  husband  brought  her  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  There 
she  dismounted,  left  her  moccasins,  and  went  to  the  top.  She  slept  there 
four  nights,  fasting.  The  fourth  night  the  thunder  gave  her  a  short  spear. 
He  said  to  her,  "Go  home:  tell  your  husband  to  make  a  sweat-house.  Go 
into  tliis  alone.  Afterwards  go  to  the  creek  and  drink."  Then  she  went 
down.  Her  husband  came  to  meet  her.  She  said  to  him,  "Stop  at  once 
where  you  are."  Then  he  did  not  approach.  She  told  him,  "Go  back 
I  immediately,   and   have  the  young  men  build  a  sweat-house.     Let  only 

J;  young  men  make  it,  and  let  them  leave  the  entrance  open  for  me."     The 

man  went  back  and  told  the  young  men.  They  went  and  cut  willows. 
Soon  they  had  a  sweat-house  ready.  Then  the  woman  came,  very  thin 
from  fasting,  and  using  the  spear  to  support  herself.  At  times  she  fell 
from  weakness.  She  entered  the  sweat-house,  sweated,  went  out  to  the 
stream,  and  drank.  Then  she  told  her  relatives,  "I  "wdll  kill  an  enemy." 
After  some  days  she  said,  "We  are  going  to  hunt  for  the  one  who  Idlled  my 
brothers."     Then  her  husband  took  four  good  horses,   and  he  and  his 

),  wife  started  alone.     On  the  third  day  they  saw  tents  by  a  river  that  came 

out  of  the  mountains.  They  followed  the  river  up  towards  the  camp. 
It  was  near  sunset.  The  woman  bathed,  and  painted  herself,  and  perfumed 
herself.  Telling  her  husband  to  hold  the  horses  ready  in  the  brush,  she 
went  towards  the  camp.  As  she  went  she  found  pieces  of  her  brothers' 
bones.  Their  bodies  had  been  burned.  At  the  camp  the  people  had  begun 
•  i  I  to  dance  on  account  of  her  slain  brothers.     In'  the  bright  moonlight  the 

I    )  women  were  dancing  back  and  forth  in  a  row.     The  woman  went  among 

them  and  danced.  She  saw  a  man  fill  a  pipe  and  extend  it  to  the  other  men. 
She  knew  that  this  man  had  killed  one  of  her  brothers.  She  went  to  him, 
and  touched  him  on  the  back.  He  turned  around,  and  at  once  desired  her. 
He  turned  over  his  pipe,  knocked  out  the  ashes,  put  the  pipe  into  its  sack, 
and  followed  her.  She  walked  off  and  went  into  the  brush.  He  followed 
her.     She  stopped,  and  he  came  up.     She  took  hold  of  him  and  pushed 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  129" 

him  to  the  ground.  He  let  himself  fall  willingly  and  she  lay  upon  him. 
Then  she  took  her  knife  and  cut  his  throat.  She  cut  off  his  head,  took  off 
all  his  clothes,  wrapped  them  and  the  head  in  his  robe,  and  ran  to  her  hus- 
band. When  she  reached  him  she  said,  "I  bring  you  a  head."  He  struck 
it,  counting  coup.  Then  they  fled.  They  did  not  go  back  as  they  had 
come,  but  in  another  direction.  All  next  day  they  hid  in  the  brush.  There 
they  skinned  the  head,  and  kept  the  scalp.  Then  they  returned  home. 
When  they  arrived,  the  woman's  mother  ran  out  and  kissed  her.  The 
woman  said,  "I  bring  you  a  head  for  you  to  enjoy  yourselves  with."  Then 
all  the  people  took  charcoal  and  grease,  and  struck  the  skin  of  the  head; 
and  as  each  one  struck  it,  he  painted  himself.  So  this  woman  avenged  the 
death  of  her  brothers.  Then  the  enemy  came  in  order  to  obtain  revenge. 
They  attacked  the  camp.  The  woman  mounted  a  swift  horse,  took  her 
short  spear,  and  charged  the  enemy.  She  put  them  to  flight,  drove  them 
before  her,  and  overtook  and  killed  many.  She  ran  them  down  like  buffalo. 
Four  times  the  camp  was  attacked,  and  she  drove  off  the  enemy.  Then 
two  men  who  went  to  war  were  killed.  The  people  thought  she  would  go 
to  revenge  them.  But  she  fought  no  more.  After  the  four  fights  she 
ceased.^ 


1  Told  by  informant  N. 


130  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  1, 

ABSTRACTS. 

1.   The  Making  of  the  Earth. 

There  is  only  water.  A  person  sends  animals  to  dive.  A  turtle  brings  him  up 
mud,  from  which  he  makes  the  earth  and  the  mountains. 

2.    Origin  Myth. 

Nix'a'H  resolves  to  destroy  the  former  race.  He  takes  the  sacred  pipe,  and 
causes  a  flood.  He  floats  on  the  pipe,  accompanied  by  the  Crow.  He  unwraps  the 
pipe,  and  takes  out  the  Loon,  the  Small  Loon,  and  the  Turtle.  They  dive,  and  the 
Turtle  brings  up  a  little  earth.  Nix  'a.nt  drops  this  into  the  water,  and  it  expands 
sufficiently  for  him  to  sit  on.  Then  he  stretches  out  his  anns  and  the  land  extends. 
There  is  no  water,  and  he  is  thirsty.  He  cries.  His  tears  make  a  river.  He  makes 
men  and  women  and  animals  from  earth.  He  gives  men  the  bow  and  arrow,  and 
to  the  Gros  Ventre  the  sacred  pipe.     He  predicts  another  world. 

3.    Tebiaa'^'ta^,  the  Two  Women,  the  Bald  Eagle,  and  Nix'a^t. 

Two  women  who  live  alone  are  provided  with  game.  They  see  that  a  rolling 
head  brings  the  meat.  They  leave  awls  in  their  places,  and  flee.  The  head  comes, 
and  the  bones  speak  to  him  like  women.  He  pierces  himself  on  one.  He  pursues 
the  women.  As  they  flee,  they  successively  cause  a  fog,  a  swamp,  a  thorny  thicket, 
and  a  cactus-thicket  to  extend  behind  them.  The  head  crosses  all  obstacles,  and 
the  women  take  refuge  with  a  man  who  hides  them.  As  soon  as  the  head  has  gone 
by  them,  they  flee  to  the  Bald  Eagle,  who  takes  them  on  his  wings.  The  head  pursues 
the  Eagle,  and  nearly  overtakes  him.  Nix'a"t's  two  sons  see  the  contest  in  the  sky, 
and  tell  their  father.  He  builds  a  sweat-house  and  calls  to  the  Eagle  to  come  down. 
The  Eagle  flies  through  the  sweat-house.  "When  the  head  pursues,  the  sweat-house 
is  closed  around  him.     Then  steam  is  made  in  it,  and  the  head  is  killed. 

4.    Nix'a'^t  obtains  Summer  and  the  Buffalo. 

Nix'a"t  comes  to  a  camp  where  the  snow  is  perpetual  and  there  are  no  buffalo. 
He  tells  a  boy  to  cry  until  he  himself  asks  the  reason,  when  he  is  to  say  that  he 
wishes  to  see  bare  ground  and  to  eat  buffalo.  The  boy  does  this.  Nix'a^t  turns 
into  a  little  dog,  which  is  found  by  the  grand-daughter  of  the  old  woman  who  keeps 
the  buffalo.  The  girl  at  last  persuades  the  old  woman  to  allow  her  to  have  the  dog. 
The  dog  sees  the  old  woman  get  buffalo  from  an  opening  in  her  tent,  and  make  the 
snow  melt  with  the  contents  of  a  bag.  When  the  girl  takes  him  away  from  the  tent, 
he  turns  into  Nix'ai^t.  When  the  girl  cries  and  her  grandmother  comes,  he  runs, 
seizes  the  bag,  opens  the  hole,  and  drives  out  the  buffalo.  Clinging  to  the  last 
of  the  buffalo,  he  escapes  the  old  woman.  He  scatters  the  contents  of  the  bag, 
and  the  snow  disappears.  He  returns  to  the  camp.  Next  morning  it  is  summer 
and  the  buffalo  are  about. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  131 

5.    Nix'a^t  is  taught  to  call  Buffalo. 

Nix'a^t  learns  to  call  the  buffalo  by  singing.  They  overrun  him,  and  lie  upon 
him.  Lepus  ciun  eo  ano  copulat.  Nix'a"t  inquinans  lepores  ex  ano  parit.  Cum 
toga  eos  capere  conatur,  hanc  conspurcat. 

6.    Nix'a^'t  axd  the  Mouse. 

Xix'a^t  muri  suum  penem  trans  penem  ad  mulierem  ducere  persuadet.  Mus 
penem  ad  locum  asperum  ducit  et  Nix'a^t  se  Isedit. 

7.    Nix'a^'t  and  the  Mice's  Sun-dance. 

Nix  'a^t,  finding  mice  holding  a  sun-dance  in  an  elk-skull,  tries  to  look  in.  His 
head  becomes  fast  in  the  skull.  Wandering  along,  he  falls  into  the  river  and  drifts 
to  bathing  girls.  They  pull  him  ashore.  Unam  virginum  violat.  Matri  ut  filiam 
eripiat  venienti  persuadet  sibi  calvam  perfrangere.     Alcis  calva  liberatus,  discedit. 

8.    Nix'a^t  eats  Fat. 

Nix'a^t  postquam  pingue  in  flumine  innatans  invenit  ab  eo  est  donee  tantum 
inquinat  ut  quasi  excrementorum  lacu  circumdetur. 

9.    Nix'a^'t  e.\ts  Hiitceni. 

Nix'a^t  radices  est  qu£e  eum  crepare  faciunt.  Quandocunque  crepat  sursum 
jactatur. 

10.  Nix'a^t  and  the  Bird  with  the  Large  Arrow. 

Nix'a^t  taunts  a  bird  that  it  cannot  shoot  its  very  large  arrow.  At  last  the 
Bird  shoots  at  him,  and,  when  he  takes  refuge  behind  a  rock,  shoots  the  rock  on  him. 
The  Night-hawk  releases  him.     Nix'a'^t  spreads  its  bill. 

11.  Nix'a^t  loses  his  Eyes. 

Nix  'a"t  learns  from  a  l)ird  how  to  send  his  eyes  out  of  his  head.  After  a  time 
they  do  not  return.     By  borrowing  the  Mouse's  eyes,  he  recovers  his  own. 

12.  Nix'a^'t  kills  his  Wife. 

Nix'a^t  mourns  for  his  wife.  A  man  strikes  his  wife  and  doubles  her,  giving 
one  of  the  women  to  Nix'a'H.  Nix'a"t  strikes  his  new  wife  to  make  women  for 
widowers.     The  fourth  time  he  strikes  her,  he  kills  her. 

13.    Nix'a^t  and  the  Bear-Women. 

Nix  'a^t,  diving  for  the  reflection  of  fruit  in  the  water,  nearly  drowns.  He  comes 
to  Bear- Women,  and  sends  them  for  the  fruit.  He  cooks  their  babies.  When  they 
have  eaten  the  children,  he  flees.  Pursued  by  the  bears,  he  takes  refuge  in  a  hole. 
Emerging  at  the  other  end,  he  changes  his  appearance,  and  comes  to  the  Bear- Women. 
Persuading  them  to  enter  the  hole,  he  smokes  them  to  death. 


V' 


132  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

14.    Nix'a^'t  and  the  Dancixg  Ducks. 

Nix'ant  causes  ducks  and  other  animals  to  dance  about  him  with  closed  eyes. 
Then  he  kills  them.  ^Vliile  he  cooks  them,  he  sleeps.  The  wolves  devour  his  feast. 
In  punishment,  he  burns  himself. 

15.    Nix'a^'t's  Adventures. 

(a)    With  the  Mice's  Sun-dance. 

Nix'a^t  finds  mice  dancing  in  a  skull.  His  head  becomes  fast  in  the  skull, 
and  he  falls  into  the  river.  He  is  drawn  out  by  women,  of  whom  he  seizes  and 
violates  one.  He  flees,  pursued  by  the  women.  He  enters  a  hole,  emerges  on  the 
other  side,  changes  his  appearance,  returns,  persuades  the  women  to  enter  the  hole, 
and  smokes  them  to  death. 

(6)    With  the  Women  ^cho  loused  him. 

He  comes  to  two  women,  and  persuades  them  to  louse  him.  While  he  sleeps, 
they  put  burrs  in  his  hair.  He  cuts  his  hair,  pretending  that  he  has  been  told  that 
his  wife  was  dead. 

(c)    With  his  Daughters. 

He  pretends  to  die,  and  leaves  instructions  that  his  daughters  are  to  many  a 
one-eyed  man.  He  makes  it  appear  that  wolves  have  eaten  him,  covers  one  eye, 
and  returns  to  his  tent,  marrying  his  daughters.  The  girls  suspect  him,  and  at  last 
his  wife  discovers  him.     He  flees. 

(d)    With  the  Woinan  icho  crossed  the  River. 

Disguising  himself  as  a  woman,  he  travels  with  a  %Aoman  whom  he  meets. 
Psene  dum  flumen  transeunt  patefactus,  eam  violat. 

((')    With  the  Sleeping  Woman. 

Fseces  in  mulieris  dormientis  vestem  ponit  et  dedecus  patefacere  minatur  nis 
sibi  amorem  concedat. 

(/)    With  the  Buffalo  he  called  and  the  Rabbit. 

He  is  taught  to  call  buffalo  by  singing.  The  buffalo  fall  on  him.  Lepus  cum 
€0  ano  copulat.  Lepusculos  Nix'a^t  ex  ano  parit.  Hos  capere  conatus  togam 
conspurcat.     Ad  castra  currit  damans  Inquinantes  Pieganos  se  foedum  fecisse. 

16.    OxE-EYED  Owl  and  his  Daughter. 

A  man  pretends  to  die,  and  then  returns  disguised,  and  marries  his  daughter 
He  is  discovered  and  beaten  by  his  wife. 

17.    The  ]\Iax  who  wext  to  War  with  his  Mother-ix-law. 

A  man  persuades  his  wife  to  send  his  mother-in-law  to  war  with  him.  At  night 
he  throws  stones  at  her  shelter  until  she  thinks  there  is  a  ghost  about  et  petit  ut  cum 
•eo  dormiat.  Tum  se  pvibeni  frigere  queritur  vir,  et  mulieris  mater  permittit  ut 
penem  copulando  calfaciat. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  arid  Tales.  133 


18.    The  Kit-fox  and  the  Ghost. 

A  kit-fox  coming  to  a  corpse  says  that  it  stinks.  Wlien  the  dead  person  ap- 
proaches, the  kit-fox  declares  that  he  said  that  the  smell  was  sweet.  He  flees,  and 
as  the  ghost  pursues  him,  nms  into  a  hole,  but  has  the  end  of  his  tail  pulled  off. 

19.    Fouxd-ix-the-Grass. 

A  man  warns  his  wife  not  to  speak  to  any  one  who  may  come  to  the  tent  during 
his  absence.  After  a  time  she  disobeys  his  instructions,  and  a  person  enters.  He 
will  not  eat  the  food  she  offers  him  until  she  places  it  on  her  body.  Then  he  cuts 
her  open,  throwing  away  the  twin  boys  with  whom  she  is  pregnant.  Her  husband 
finds  her  dead  and  goes  off  to  mourn.  His  arrows  are  repeatedly  scattered  about 
his  tent.  He  watches,  and  finds  the  two  boys  playing.  He  catches  one  of  them. 
With  his  help,  he  succeeds  in  capturing  the  other.  The  boys  tell  him  to  put  their 
mother  into  a  sw'eat-house.  They  shoot  up  into  the  air,  and  their  mother  emerges 
from  the  sweat-house.  Their  father  warns  them  not  to  use  their  arrows  twice. 
After  a  while  the  younger  boy  is  tempted,  and  shoots  his  arrow  a  second  time. 
He  is  blown  away  by  the  wand.  He  is  found  in  the  grass  by  an  old  woman,  who 
takes  him  for  her  grandson.  A  man  announces  that  whoever  brings  a  porcupine 
may  marry  his  daughters.  Found-in-t he-Grass  persuades  the  old  woman  to  make 
a  trap  for  him.  He  catches  a  porcupine,  but  the  Crow  steals  it.  Found-in-the- 
Grass  finds  a  quill  in  his*  trap,  shows  it,  and  is  thereupon  given  the  younger  daughter, 
while  the  Crow  marries  the  older.  The  two  sisters  ridicule  each  other's  husbands. 
In  time  of  famine  the  Crow  announces  that  he  will  bring  buffalo,  but  fails.  Found- 
in-the-Grass  goes  out  and  brings  buffalo.  "\Mien  his  wife  carries  the  entrails  home, 
he  causes  the  blood  to  flow  over  her,  and  it  turns  to  red  clothing.  His  sister-in-law 
asks  to  have  the  blood  made  to  flow  over  her;   but  it  only  dirties  her. 

20.   Clotted-Blood. 

An  old  man  is  treated  badly  and  almost  starved  by  his  son-in-law.  He  finds 
and  hides  a  clot  of  blood,  which  in  the  kettle  turns  to  a  child.  The  child  is  swung 
on  four  sides  of  the  tent,  and  becomes  a  young  man.  WTien  the  son-in-law  again 
threatens  the  old  man,  Clotted-Blood  kills  him.  He  burns  his  body,  and  kills  all 
his  wives  but  one.  He  travels,  and  comes  to  a  tree  that  kills  people  by  falling  on 
them.  He  turns  to  a  feather  and  is  uninjured,  while  the  tree  falls  and  breaks. 
He  comes  to  a  bridge  which  sinks  with  people.  "\Mien  it  goes  down,  he  jumps  to 
the  other  shore,  and  the  bridge  does  not  emerge.  He  comes  to  a  wolf  which  sucks 
in  people.  He  allows  himself  to  be  drawn,  and  then  cuts  the  wolf's  heart.  He 
comes  to  a  woman  who  has  a  dish  which  draws  people  into  it  and  then  consumes 
them.  He  turns  into  a  feather,  which  l)lows  over  the  dish.  Then  he  causes  the  old 
woman  to  be  drawn  into  the  dish,  and  destroys  it.  He  comes  to  a  camp  which  is 
terrorized  by  a  bull  who  gambles  with  people.  Clotted-Blood  wins,  and,  as  they 
play,  the  Bull  tries  to  kill  him.  Clotted-Blood  turns  to  a  feather,  and  is  uninjured. 
Then  he  kills  the  Bull.  He  comes  to  a  camp  where  a  man  kills  people  by  making 
them  fall  from  a  swing  into  the  water.  Clotted-Blood  escapes,  and  causes  the  man 
to  fall  into  the  water,  but  cannot  make  the  water-monster  in  the  river  devour  him. 
He  allows  himself  to  be  swallowed  by  the  monster,  and  kills  it.     Then  he  kills  the 


/ 


/ 


\» 


134  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.         [Vol.  I, 

man.  He  comes  to  a  man  who  kills  people  by  kicking  them  with  his  sharp  leg. 
He  causes  him  to  stick  fast  in  a  tree,  and  leaves  him  to  starve.  He  comes  to  a  man 
who  accepts  young  men  as  his  sons-in-law,  and  then  gives  them  dangerous  tasks  to- 
perform.  Clotted-Blood  is  sent  to  get  the  morning  star,  and  brings  it.  He  is  sent 
to  a  thicket  where  there  are  bears,  and  kills  them.  He  is  sent  to  get  feathers  from 
the  thunder-birds,  and  abuses  the  Young  Thunders.  When  the  Old  Thunders  pur- 
sue him,  he  persuades  them  to  pull  his  elastic  arrow.  They  do  so,  and  are  dashed 
to  death.  Then  he  is  sent  to  kill  seven  bulls  for  their  sinews.  They  charge  him, 
and  break  their  horns.  He  allows  the  oldest  to  live,  but  kills  the  rest.  He  is  sent 
to  get  flint  from  a  falling  cliff.  He  turns  to  a  feather,  and  escapes.  He  is  sent  to 
get  water.  A  water-monster  draws  him  towards  it.  He  cuts  off  its  horns.  Then 
his  father-in-law  attacks  him,  but  cannot  hit  him.  Clotted-Blood  kills  the  old  man, 
and  burns  him. 

21.    Moox-Child. 

The  Sun  and  the  Moon  dispute  about  the  beauty  of  women.  The  Sun  marries 
the  Frog.  The  Moon  turns  to  a  porcupine,  and  induces  a  woman  to  climb  a  tree 
after  him.  The  tree  stretches  to  the  sky,  and  the  Moon  marries  her.  The  mother-in- 
law  of  the  two  women  gives  them  paunch  to  chew  to  see  who  can  make  the  most 
noise.  The. Frog  chews  charcoal,  but  is  discovered.  The  Moon  abuses  the  Frog, 
and  the  Sun  throws  her  on  the  Moon's  face,  where  she  still  remains,  and  takes  the 
Moon's  wife.  The  woman  has  had  a  boy.  She  looks  through  the  hole  in  the  sky, 
and  sees  the  earth.  She  makes  a  long  rope  of  sinew  and  lets  herself  down.  The 
string  is  too  short,  and  she  hangs  suspended.  The  Sun  sees  her.  and  drops  a  stone, 
which  kills  her.  Her  boy  remains  near  her  vmtil  he  is  foimd  by  an  old  woman. 
She  warns  him  not  to  go  to  a  tent  where  there  are  pretty  girls.  He  goes,  and  is 
well  received.  One  of  them  turns  to  a  snake  and  tries  to  enter  his  body,  but  is 
dashed  to  death  against  a  rock  under  his  seat.  When  the  girls  are  asleep,  he  kills 
them.  One  escapes  and  turns  to  a  snake,  which  threatens  revenge.  He  comes 
to  an  old  woman  who  wrestles  with  him.  She  nearly  pushes  him  into  the  fire,  but 
he  kills  her.  His  arrows  warn  him  of  the  approach  of  the  revengeful  snake,  but  at 
last  he  does  not  wake  up.  The  snake  enters  him.  He  lies  still  until  he  is  only  a 
skeleton.  The  snake  is  still  in  him.  At  last  he  asks  the  Moon  to  cause  a  cold  rain. 
The  snake  crawls  out.  He  gets  up  alive,  and  kills  the  snake.  His  mother  comes- 
to  life  at  the  same  time. 

22.    The  Boy  who  was  raised  by  the  Sevex  Bulls. 

A  girl  who  has  had  a  lover  abandons  her  child.  It  is  found  by  Seven  Bulls, 
who  pity  it  and  raise  it.  They  kill  buffalo  for  the  boy.  They  instruct  him  to  make 
a  bow  and  arrows.  When  he  is  a  young  man,  he  comes  to  the  herd  of  a  powerful 
Bull.  The  Cows  make  love  to  the  young  man,  and  the  Bull  attacks  him.  His  seven 
fathers  attempt  to  protect  him,  but  are  disabled.  The  Bull  charges  the  young  man, 
but  cannot  hurt  him,  because  he  turns  to  a  feather.  Then  he  shoots  the  Bull,  and 
cures  his  seven  fathers.  They  send  him  to  the  people  among  whom  his  father  and 
mother  live.  He  comes  to  the  camp,  and  recognizes  his  mother,  who  is  playing  ball. 
Her  parents  accept  him  as  their  grandson.     Then  he  finds  his  father. 


1907.]  Krocber,  Gros  Ventre  Myths  and  Tales.  135 


23.    White-Stone. 

Seven  brothers  go  out,  and  are  killed  one  after  the  other.  Their  sister  swallows 
a  stone,  and  gives  birth  to  a  boy  who  is  called  White-Stone.  She  swings  the  child 
on  four  sides  of  the  tent,  and  he  grows  up.  She  makes  him  a  bow  and  arrows.  He 
goes  where  his  uncles  have  gone,  and  kills  a  buffalo.  An  old  woman  claims  it  as 
hers,  and  orders  him  to  carry  it  to  her  tent.  Thus  she  had  done  with  his  uncles, 
and,  when  they  had  reached  her  tent,  she  had  killed  them  with  an  iron  cane.  White- 
Stone  makes  her  carry  the  bull,  and  then  kills  her  with  the  cane.  Putting  his  uncles 
into  a  tent,  he  shoots  upward,  and  they  emerge  alive.  He  travels,  and  comes  to  a 
camp  where  there  is  a  powerful,  jealous,  invulnerable  bull.  White-Stone  approaches 
his  wife,  and  the  bull  attacks  him.  The  bull  breaks  his  horns,  and  White-Stone 
kills  him  and  burns  him. 

24.    The  Women  who  married  the  Moon  and  a  Buffalo. 

Two  women  lying  outdoors  at  night  wish  for  the  moon  and  a  star  as  husbands. 
One  woman  sees  a  porcupine,  and  follows  it  up  a  tree  that  stretches  until  she  reaches 
the  sky.  There  the  Moon  marries  her.  She  is  told  not  to  dig  certain  roots,  but 
does  so,  and  sees  the  earth  below.  She  becomes  sad,  and  the  Moon  lets  her  down 
by  a  rope  of  sinew.  The  other  woman  is  taken  by  a  bull,  who  says  that  he  is  the 
star  she  wished  for.  A  Gopher  digs  a  long  hole,  and  rescues  the  woman,  leaving  her 
robe.  The  Bull  finds  the  empty  robe,  and  pursues  with  the  buffalo.  The  woman 
and  her  parents  have  fled,  and  climbed  three  cottonwood-trees.  The  Buffalo  cut 
down  two  trees,  but  on  the  third  break  their  horns. 

25.    The  Women  who  married  a  Star  and  a  Buffalo. 

Two  women  wish  for  stars  for  husbands.  One  of  them  is  married  by  a  star. 
The  other  is  taken  away  by  a  buffalo-bull.  Her  husband  cannot  rescue  her.  but  the 
Gopher  brings  her  back.  Together  with  her  husband,  she  takes  refuge  in  a  tree. 
The  buffalo  cut  down  the  tree,  and  kill  the  man,  and  take  her  back.  The  Badger 
recovers  her  again.  The  Bull  pursues.  As  he  is  invulnerable,  he  easily  recovers 
the  woman.     The  Bald  Eagle  seizes  her,  and  succeeds  in  flying  away  with  her. 

26.    The  Deserted  Children. 

A  camp  abandons  little  children.  The  children  come  to  an  old  woman.  At 
night  she  kills  them  all,  except  a  girl  and  her  little  brother.  The  girl  is  sent  to  get 
wood  and  water,  and  saves  her  life  by  bringing  the  kinds  desired  by  the  old  woman. 
Coming  out  of  the  tent  with  her  little  brother,  she  leaves  an  awl  in  her  place,  and 
flees.  The  two  children  cross  a  river  on  a  water-monster,  but  the  old  woman  is 
drowned  by  it.  The  children  return  to  the  camp,  but  are  left  tied  to  a  tree.  A 
dog  liberates  them,  and  gives  them  fire.  The  boy  kills  buffalo  by  looking  at  them. 
In  the  same  way  he  and  the  girl  cut  up  the  meat,  dress  the  skins,  erect  a  tent,  and 
make  clothing.  The  people,  who  are  starving,  come  to  the  children,  who  select 
wives  and  husbands  for  themselves,  and  then  kill  the  rest  of  the  people  by  looking 
at  them. 


I'. 


\ 


136  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.        [Vol.  I, 


27.    The  Girl  who  became  a  Bear. 

Children  are  playing.  One  changes  into  a  bear,  and  kills  all  except  her  little 
sister.  She  attacks  and  extenninates  the  camp,  but  allows  her  little  sister  to  live 
with  her.  Her  six  brothers  return,  and  find  the  camp  deserted.  They  meet  their 
little  sister,  and  tell  her  to  ascertain  from  the  Bear  how  she  can  be  killed.  The 
little  girl  throws  hot  fat  on  the  Bear,  and  flees  with  her  brothers.  The  Bear  pursues, 
but  is  killed  by  being  shot  in  her  little  finger  with  an  arrow  of  tendon.  The  brothers 
burn  her  body,  but  overlook  one  spark,  which  turns  into  the  Bear  again,  and  pursues 
them.  Each  of  them  makes  an  obstacle  to  delay  the  Bear.  They  make  successively 
a  swamp,  a  forest,  a  canyon,  a  river,  a  fire,  and  a  cactus-thicket.  When  the  Bear 
is  near  again,  the  little  girl,  by  kicking  a  ball,  causes  her  brothers  and  herself  to 
rise  to  the  sky  and  become  stars. 

28.    Shell-Spitter. 

Two  girls  come  to  marry  Shell-Spitter.  The  Loon  pretends  that  he  is  Shell- 
Spitter,  and  marries  them.  He  is  called  to  the  dance-lodge.  The  girls  follow, 
and  see  the  real  Shell-Spitter  sitting  in  the  lodge  and  the  people  dancing  on  the 
Loon.  The  Loon  kills  Shell-Spitter,  and  with  his  mother,  Badger-Woman,  escapes 
from  the  people. 

29.    Yellow-Plume  and  Blue-Plume. 


'  A  boy  follo\\"s  his  gaming-wheel  to  an  old  woman's  tent.     She  tries  to  smother 

him  in  her  tent,  but  fails.  She  sends  him  for  water.  He  is  supernaturally  instructed 
what  kind  of  water  she  desires,  and  the  old  woman  allows  him  to  live.  He  leaves, 
and  abuses  her.  When  she  tries  to  pursue  him,  she  steps  on  an  awl  which  he  has 
left.  Together  with  his  brother,  he  causes  the  water  to  rise,  and  drowns  the  old 
woman. 

30.   The  Swallows  and  the  Snake. 

A  snake  or  water-monster  kills  young  swallows.  The  swallows  bring  birds  of 
various  species  to  help  them,  but  the  snake  destroys  them  all.  At  last  the  thimder 
kills  the  snake. 

31.    The  Origin  of  the  Tsooyanehi  Degree  of  the  Dog-dance. 

A  dog  is  abandoned  by  a  camp.  An  old  man  finds  it  and  pities  it.  The  dog 
pities  the  old  man,  and  gives  him  the  highest  degree  of  the  dog-dance  to  introduce 
among  the  people. 

32.    The  Origin  of  the  Chief  Pipe. 

A  young  man  dies,  and  is  left  with  all  his  property  in  his  tent.  A  cloud  descends, 
and  takes  away  the  tent  and  the  property.  The  young  man  is  seen  alive,  and  beside 
him  is  the  sacred  pipe,  the  gift  of  the  thunder. 

33.    Separation  of  the  Tribe. 

As  the  people  cross  on  the  ice,  a  little  girl  persuades  her  grandmother  to  chop 
off  a  horn  that  projects  from  the  ice.  The  ice  breaks,  drowning  many  people,  and 
forever  separating  the  rest. 


1907.]  Kroeber,  Gros  Yejitre  Myths  and  Tales.  137 


34.   The  Cave  of  the  Buffalo. 

A  cave  in  a  hill  is  the  entrance  to  the  home  of  the  buffalo.  Two  men  enter  it, 
but  do  not  reach  the  end,  and  return. 

35.  The  Womax  and  the  Black  Dog. 

Juvenis  nocte  mulierem  cum  cane  nigro  copulantem  videt.  ISIulieris  virum 
certiorem  facit,  qui  earn  occidit. 

36.  The  Max  borx  from  a  Horse. 

Equa  parit  hominem  qui  quemdam  virum  patrem  sibi  esse  significat. 

37.    The  Woman  and  the  Horse. 

Two  young  men  see  a  person  running  with  a  herd  of  wild  horses.  The  people 
surround  the  herd,  and  capture  the  person.  She  tells  them  that  she  was  carried 
off  from  the  tribe  by  a  stallion  who  married  her,  and  that  she  has  become  a  horse. 
The  people  release  her. 

38.    The  Little  Girl  who  avas  married  by  a  Bear. 

As  a  camp  moves,  a  little  girl  is  left  Ijehind.  A  bear  marries  her,  and  .she 
becomes  rich.     The  people  are  starving,  and  she  gives  them  food. 

39.    The  Young  Man  who  became  a  Water-monster. 

Two  young  men  travel.  They  pass  through  a  hollow  mountain,  and  reach  the 
country  of  the  giants.  The  giants  are  attacked  by  birds,  which  overcome  them 
until  the  young  men  drive  off  the  birds.  When  the  young  men  return,  their  way 
is  blocked  in  the  cave  in  the  mountain  by  a  water-monster's  body.  They  burn 
through  it.  One  of  them,  though  warned  by  his  companion,  eats  of  the  meat. 
He  turns  to  a  water-monster,  and  goes  into  the  water.  His  friend  becomes  fortu- 
nate. 

40.    The  Woman  who  was  recovered  from  a  Water-monster. 

A  man  and  a  woman  sleep  outdoors.  A  water-monster  surrounds  them.  They 
try  to  jump  over  it,  but  the  woman  sticks  fast  and  is  carried  off.  The  man  brings 
his  child  to  the  water,  and  his  wife  rises.  When  the  water-monster  comes  to  the 
surface,  he  shoots  it.  His  wife  has  become  half  snake,  but  he  restores  her  to  human 
form  in  the  sweat-house. 

41.   The  Man  who  killed  H.vwks. 
A  man  kills  haA\ks  by  pointing  his  hatchet  at  them. 

42.    The  Man  who  was  killed  by  a  Bullet-hawk. 
A  man  goes  to  take  young  hawks,  but  is  killed  by  the  old  hawk. 


138  Anthropological  Papers  American  Museum  of  Xatural  History.        [Vol.  I, 

43.    The  Max  who  was  killed  by  a  Bald  Eagle. 
A  man  tries  to  catch  a  bald  eagle,  but  is  carried  up. by  it,  dropped,  and  killed. 

44.   The  Wo.man  who  tempted  and  betrayed  her  Brother-in-law. 

A  man's  wife  persuades  his  younger  brother  to  elope  with  her.  They  reach  a 
deserted  camp.  A  man  returns  to  the  camp  to  get  his  weapons  which  he  has  for- 
gotten. The  young  man  gives  him  a  smoke,  and  then  leaps  upon  him.  The  woman, 
instead  of  helping  her  lover,  tries  to  betray  him  to  the  stranger;  but  he  succeeds  in 
overcoming  and  killing  his  opponent.  He  returns  to  his  older  brother,  and  the 
woman  is  killed. 

45.    The  Woman  who  tried  to  betray  her  Brother-in-law. 

A  woman  tries  to  persuade  her  husband's  younger  brother  to  be  her  lover.  He 
flees,  and  she  follows  him.  They  come  to  a  deserted  camp,  to  which  a  Ute  returns. 
The  Gros  Ventre  gives  him  a  smoke,  and  then  attacks  him.  The  woman  tries  to 
betray  him  to  the  Ute.  He  succeeds  in  killing  the  Ute.  They  return  to  the  camp, 
and  the  woman  is  killed. 

46.    The  Bad  Wife. 

A  woman  is  taken  by  the  Crows.  Her  husband  goes  to  the  Crow  camp  with 
six  companions.  He  finds  his  wife,  and  she  persuades  him  to  wait.  Then  she 
betrays  him  to  the  Crows.  His  companions  are  killed.  His  wife  tells  the  Crows 
that  he  wishes  to  be  hung.  They  hang  him  and  abandon  him.  An  old  woman 
rescues  him  and  sends  him  home.  He  returns  with  his  tribe.  They  attack  the 
Crows,  who  flee.     The  woman  is  captured  and  killed. 

47.    The  Man  avho  acquired  Invulnerability. 

A  man  sacrifices  pieces  of  his  flesh  from  his  whole  body  to  snakes,  bears,  a 
water-monster,  eagles,  rabbits,  buffalo,  and  horned  toads.  He  becomes  invul- 
nerable and  wealthy.  He  goes  to  war,  and  his  companions  are  killed.  He  cannot 
be  killed.  He  is  cut  to  pieces  a  number  of  times,  but  always  comes  to  life  and 
kills  one  of  the  enemy.  At  last  he  returns  home.  A  boy  is  captured  from  the 
camp.  The  man  offers  to  rescue  him  if  he  can  have  the  boy's  sister  as  wife.  He 
finds  the  boy  tied  to  the  centre  pole  of  the  Cheyenne  sun-dance  lodge.  He  carries 
him  off,  but  is  caught.  He  persuades  the  Cheyenne  to  let  him  try  to  leap  along 
seven  buffalo-skulls  without  stumbling.  He  leaps  from  one  to  the  other,  and  con- 
tinues running.  He  hides  the  boy  and  himself.  Then  he  brings  him  back  to  his 
people,  and  marries  the  girl.  He  goes  to  kill  buffalo,  and  his  wife  is  captured  and 
carried  to  the  mountains.  He  follows,  armed  with  nothing  but  a  knife,  finds  the 
enemy's  camp,  kills  one,  drives  away  the  rest,  and  returns  with  his  wife. 

48.    The  Man  who  recaptured  his  Wife. 

A  man's  wife  is  captured.  He  enters  the  village  of  her  captors  at  night,  goes 
to  her  lodge,  and,  after  he  has  cut  her  new  husband's  throat,  flees  with  her. 


1907.]  Kropber.  Gros  Ventre  Mythfi  and  Tnies.  139 


49.    The  Woman  who  married  the  Snake  Indian. 

A  man  lives  alone  with  his  wife  and  his  sister.  The  girl  has  a  tent  to  herself. 
A  Snake  Indian  visits  her  at  night.  The  man  accepts  him  as  his  brother-in-law. 
The  Snake  lives  with  the  Gros  Ventre.  Then  he  takes  his  wife  to  visit  the  Snakes. 
He  appears  very  poor,  and  his  wife  is  abused  by  the  Snakes.  Next  day  he  shows 
himself  in  all  his  finery  and  wealth.  Then  he  returns  to  the  Gros  Ventre,  and  is 
abused  by  them  for  his  apparent  poverty.  The  next  day  he  reveals  his  increased 
wealth.     The  Gros  Ventre  and  the  Snakes  make  peace. 

50.    The  Woman  who  revenged  her  Brothers. 

Two  brothers  are  killed.  Their  sister  mourns.  She  goes  to  a  mountain  and 
fasts.  The  thunder  gives  her  power.  She  sets  out  with  her  husband  for  the  camp 
of  the  enemy.  She  entices  one  of  the  killers  of  her  brothers  away  from  the  camp, 
and  cuts  his  throat.  Then  she  flees  with  her  husband.  The  enemy  attack  the 
camp  four  times.     Each  time  she  drives  them  off.     Then  she  will  fight  no  more. 


( 


]>' 


\ 


H92     7. 


^J 


I^c 


t^• 


r- 


o'i 


> 
-^o. 


^O" 


^O 


feA''/-^<-  .v^*\-_;^§^-- \  .-**'  .>AX;- 


X 


-t'Sy.XK  *       aV 


.\^  -<: 


-<"^' 
5^% 


K 


f.^:^  ^^     ^^  '^S^^^ 


^^'\  °^w^*^  ^^  %^  '-m^s  j^'"^^^  ^mw:  .^^' 


''    :^Sa   %.^   »  JM'  %.^^  :;#&^ 


■s<j-' 


.^ 


<  o 


o  V'^ 


'<f^\ 


*^^^''.^'     ^^-^^^   ^.^^»: 


-^.  ^<i     :M 

^-  .0' 

^  o 


o  V 


O  w  o  '         .  0 


<^ 


%       "  .^"^       -.        °^r.    '°"°'      ^° 


V* 


A 


0' 


.V 


-^ 


0'     , 


.-*■"  . 


V 


^0 


'€kw^  .^' 


'f// 


^^  ^v^^/  >^  "^ 


-v-^-^ 
^^^, 


♦  O 


V 


,\' 


^V'T"     N.  MANCHESTER 
INDIANA 


