THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


CANADA 

DEPARTMENT    OF    MJDNES 

HON.  Louis  CODERRK,  MINISTER;  R.  W.  BROCK,  Dmptrrr  MINISTER. 


GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


MEMOIR  71 


No.  9,  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SERIES 


Myths    and    Folk-lore    of   the 

Timiskaming    Algonquin   and 

Timagami  Ojibwa 


BY 

F.  G.  Speck 


OTTAWA 
GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  BUREAU 

1915 

No.  1470 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

PAGE 

Myths  and  folk-lore  of  the  Timiskaming  Algonquin 1 

Introduction 1 

Wiske'djak  cycle 2 

(1)  Wirfke'djak  pursues  the  Beaver 2 

(2)  Wiske'djak  kills  the  Bear  and  gets  his  head   fastened 

in  the  skull 4 

(3)  Wiske'djak  invites  the  Ducks  to  a  dance 8 

(4)  Wiske'djak  anum  suum  urit  and  originates    rock- weed 
and  red  willow  from  the  scabs 10 

(5)  Wiske'djak  disguises  himself  as  a  Lynx 15 

(6)  Wiske-djak's  love  affair 16 

(7)  Cirjgabis 17 

(8)  Remarks  about  Wiske'djak 20 

Timiskaming  Algonquin  text 20 

Free  translation 21 

(9)  Further  comment  on  Wiske'djak 21 

Timiskaming  folk-lore 22 

(1)  Wi'ndigo 22 

(2)  Pa-'guk' 22 

(3)  Constellation  Ursa  Major 22 

(4)  Northern  Lights 23 

(5)  Rainbow 23 

(6)  Milky  Way 23 

(7)  White  animals 24 

(8)  Dwarfed  animals 24 

(9)  Partridge  breast-bone  as  omen 24 

(10)  Wings  of  birds  and  skulls  as  amulets 24 

(11)  Blue  bottle  flies 25 

(12)  Rabbits'  hair  thrown  into  fire 25 

(13)  Fish  bone 25 

(14)  Left-handed  people 25 

(15)  Bear  feast 25 

(16)  Legend  of  Iroquois  Falls 26 


CHAPTER  II. 

Myths  and  folk-lore  of  the  Timagami  Ojibwa 28 

Introduction 28 

Myths  and  tales 28 


PAGE 

(1)  Nenebuc,  the  transformer 28 

(a)  The  magic  birth  of  Nenebuc  and  his  four  brothers . .  28 

(b)  Nenebuc  tempers  the  wind 30 

(c)  Nenebuc  starts    travelling,   anum     suum    castigat 
for  deceiving  him,  changes  the  colour  of  the  Part- 
ridge family,  and  originates  rock  tripe  from  his 
scabs  for  the  benefit  of  the  people 31 

(d)  Nenebuc  prepares  a  feast  and  gets  caught  between 
two  trees,  while  the  animals  receive  a  distribution 

of  fat 33 

(e)  Nenebuc  gets  caught  in  the  Bear's  skull 33 

(f)  Nenebuc  wounds  the  Giant  Lynx,  disguises  himself 

in  a  Toad's  skin,  and  finally  slays  her 34 

(g)  The    Giant   Lynx   causes   the    World    Flood    and 
gathers  the  animals  on  a  raft;    Muskrat  dives  for 
earth,  which  Nenebuc  transforms  into  a  new  world .  36 

(h)  Nenebuc  sends  Crow  out,  for  disobedience  changes 
him  black  and  Gull  partly  black,  then  retires  to  the 

west,  until  he  will  return  again 37 

(2)  Nenebuc  fragment 38 

(3)  Nenebuc  transforms  the  Bear 39 

(4)  Wemicus 39 

(5)  Ciijgabis 47 

(6)  Beaver  gives  a  feast. 53 

(7)  Tcaka-bis 54 

(8)  Aniwo'ye,  the  Giant  Skunk,  and  the  origin  of  Skunks..  56 

(9)  The  man  who  transformed  a  doll  into  a  woman  and 
followed  her  into  the  world  above 57 

(10)  Ayas-e  and  the  origin  of  Bats. 62 

(11)  Origin  of  the  Constellation  Fisher  (Ursa  Major) 63 

(12)  The  young  Loon 64 

(13)  The  Giant  Pike 65 

(14)  Lynx  and  his  two  wives 67 

(15)  Story  of  Seal  Rock  in  Lake  Timagami 68 

(16)  Rabbit,  Lynx,  and  Fisher 68 

(17)  Snaring  the  Sun 69 

(18)  Homo  Excrementi 69 

(19)  The  origin  of  Snakes 71 

(20)  Muskrat  warns  the  Beaver 71 

(21)  .Story  of  a  hunter 72 

(22)  A  Timagami  story 73 

(23)  -Story  of  a  fast  runner 73 

(24)  The  hunter  and  the  seven  Deer 73 

(25)  Story  of  a  conjurer 74 

(26)  Legend  of  Obabika  lake 76 

(27)  Iroquois  pictographs 76 

(28)  An  Iroquois  legend 76 


PAGE 

Timagami  folk-lore 78 

(1)  Telling  stories  in  summer 78 

(2)  Foretelling  sex  of  child  to  be  born 78 

(3)  How  to  bring  rain 79 

(4)  Northern  Lights 79 

(5)  Milky  Way 79 

(6)  Rainbow 79 

(7)  Whippoorwill's  cry 79 

(8)  Rain  omens .- 79 

(9)  Killing  blue  bottle  flies 80 

(10)  Finding  a  live  mole 80 

(11)  Hiccoughing 80 

(12)  Children  born  feet  first 80 

(13)  Cooking  squirrels 80 

(14)  How  to  bring  on  a  snowstorm 80 

(15)  An  infant  warming  its  hands 80 

(16)  Red  sunset 81 

(17)  Whirling  buzzer 81 

(18)  Divining  what  game  id  to  be  killed 81 

(19)  Supernatural  creatures: — • 

Pa-g-ak 81 

Me'megwe'S'i 82 

Appendix:    Notes    on    Timagami    folk-lore,  by  Neil  C.  Fergusson 

(1)  Whisky  Jack  and  the  markings  on  birch  bark 83 

(2)  The  two  girls,  Hell-diver,  and  Loon 83 

Phonetic  key 86 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Map:     Hunting    territories  of  the  Timagami,  Tuniskaming, 

Kipawa,  and  Dumoine  bands in  pocket. 

Figure  1.  Night  set-line 66 

Figure  2.  Markings  on  birch  bark 83 


Myths    and    Folk-lore    of    the    Timis- 

kaming  Algonquin  and  Timagami 

Ojibwa. 


CHAPTER  I. 

MYTHS  AND  FOLK-LORE    OF    THE    TIMISKAMING 

ALGONQUIN. 

INTRODUCTION. 

A  few  fairly  typical  Algonquin  myths  relating  the  exploits  of 
Wiske'djak  were  taken  down  in  the  summer  of  1913  from 
Benjamin  Mackenzie  of  the  Timiskaming  band.  He  had 
learned  them  when  a  young  man  from  Algonquins  near  Dumoine 
lake1  at  the  head  of  Dumoine  river.  These  versions  are  also 
current  at  Timiskaming,  as  I  found  by  testing  a  few  incidents 
with  other  informants,  who,  however,  knew  only  of  fragments. 
These  myths  also  are  not  considered  entirely  complete. 

The  trickster-transformer  Wiske'djak  "meat  bird"  is  the 
personified  Canada  Jay  or  "Whisky  Jack"  (Perisoreus  sp.). 
He  is  not  in  the  least  altruistic,  though  he  seems  to  have  in  mind 
some  provision  for  the  Indians,  as  appears  more  particularly 
in  story  number  4.  For  the  most  part  his  transformations  are 
semi-accidental.  It  seems  hardly  worth  while  at  the  present 
time  to  comment  in  detail  on  the  transformer  concept  here,  as 
it  is  my  intention  to  pursue  investigations  further  in  this  general 


1  This  band  is  known  locally  as  Ki-we-'gomani'c»na'bi  "Turn  back  lake  Indiana."  Their 
rendezvous  was  at  Fort  William.  Their  range  extended  around  Lake  Dumoine  and  down 
Dumoine  river  to  the  Ottawa  river. 


2 

area,  in  which  the  transformer  appears  under  various  titles. 
At  Timagami,  for  instance,  he  is  called  Nenebuc  or  wi'ske'1; 
at  Mattagami,  he  is  We-'micuze^hwa  or  Nenebuc.  The  name 
Wiske'djak  and  its  variants  seem  to  be  more  or  less  charac- 
teristic of  the  Algonquin  bands,  in  which  respect  they  resemble 
the  Cree.1  A  secondary  hero  personage  here  is  Ci'Tjgabis,  the 
Horned  Grebe  (Colynibus  auritus). 

It  is  important  to  note,  in  dealing  with  myths  in  this  area, 
that  the  scenes  of  the  trickster-transformer's  adventures  always 
lay  in  well  known  localities  within  the  territory  of  the  band 
among  which  the  story  is  told.  These  vary  considerably,  so 
that  the  stories  have  to  be  gathered  independently  from  each 
band  before  any  thorough  comparison  can  be  attempted.  In 
these  myths  the  scene  of  action  commences  with  Dumoine  lake, 
Ki'we"'goma  "Turn-back  lake."  The  other  geographical  refer- 
ences are  as  follows.  The  beaver's  cabin  in  the  first  story  is  a 
high  round-topped  mountain  near  the  lake.  Then  came 
Coulonge  river  and  Pembroke  lakes.  The  Calumet  chutes 
are  below  Allumette  island  in  Ottawa  river;  they  are  called 
Apwa'ganibcfutdk  "Pipe  rapids,"  because  the  stone  at  that 
place  is  suitable  for  making  pipes  and  was  there  sought  by  the 
Indians  for  this  purpose.  The  big  river  referred  to  is  Ottawa 
river,  Ki'tciw'bi  "big  river,"  down  which  Wiske'djak's  course 
seems  to  have  been.  Other  general  qualities  of  the  transformer 
attributed  to  him  by  the  Indians  were  given  by  the  informant 
and  appear  at  the  end  of  the  cycle. 


WISKE-DJAK    CYCLE. 

(1)  Wiske'djak  Pursues  the  Beaver. 

Wiske'djak  was  travelling  about  looking  for  adventures.  He 
never  succeeded  in  anything  he  tried  to  do.  He  never  did 
well  and  was  always  hungry.  In  his  travels  he  came  to 
Krwe-'goma  "Turn-back  lake"  (Dumoine  lake).  Now  he  even 
had  no  canoe,  but  he  was  a  great  swimmer.  When  he  came  to 
Krwe-'goma,  he  found  it  even  too  big  to  swim,  so  he  started  to 


1  Cf.  A.  B.  Skinner,  Note»  on  the  Eastern  Cree  and  Northern    Saulteaux,  Anth.  Papers  of 
Amer.  Mus.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  N.Y.,  vol.  IX,  pt.  i,  1911. 


walk  around  it.  He  wanted  to  hunt  beaver.  On  one  side  of 
the  lake,  he  came  to  a  round,  high  mountain  that  looked  like 
a  beaver-lodge.  In  front  of  it  he  found  deep  water,  just  as  there 
is  in  front  of  a  beaver  lodge.  And  a  little  way  off  shore  was  a 
little  island  with  many  grasses;  just  as  the  beaver  provides  a 
winter  supply  of  greens  for  himself  near  his  lodge,  so  this  island 
he  supposed  to  be  the  beaver's  winter  supply  and  the  mountain 
his  lodge.  Wiske'djak  wanted  to  get  this  great  beaver,  but 
did  not  know  how  to  get  at  him.  Then  he  thought  of  draining 
the  lake,  so  he  went  way  around  to  the  lower  end  and  broke 
away  the  dam  so  that  the  water  would  run  off.  Soon  the  water 
began  to  go,  and  Wiske'djak  lingered  about,  waiting  for  it  to 
get  low  enough  to  get  at  the  beaver.  Pretty  soon  he  took  a 
nap.  When  he  woke  up,  it  was  rather  late  and  he  hurried 
back  to  the  mountain  only  to  find  that  the  beaver  had  gone. 
Now  he  thought  the  beaver  might  have  escaped  over  the  dam 
with  the  water,  so  he  started  back,  and  sure  enough  he  saw 
the  beaver  going  over  the  dam.  "Now,"  said  he,  "I  lost  my 
beaver."  He  followed  hard  after  him  and  had  lots  of  trouble  to 
keep  up. 

He  followed  him  past  Coulonge  river  and  Pembroke  lakes. 
But  when  the  beaver  reached  Calumet  chutes,  he  was  afraid 
to  go  through  and  took  to  the  portage.  Then  Wiske'djak  saw 
him  and  chased  him  harder  over  the  portage.  When  he  got  to 
the  lower  end,  he  lost  sight  of  the  beaver  and  started  back  up 
river  (Ottawa  river).  When  he  got  to  the  upper  end  of  the 
portage,  he  saw  fresh  tracks.  "Well,"  said  he,  "there  has  been 
somebody  here.  I  wonder  if  I  could  trace  him.  We  might 
have  something  to  eat."  Then  he  followed  the  track  to  the  lower 
end  of  the  portage  where  he  had  already  been,  but  nobody  was 
there.  So  he  went  back  to  the  upper  end  of  the  portage  and 
there  saw  more  fresh  tracks  leading  to  the  lower  end.  These 
he  followed  to  where  he  had  been  twice  before,  but  saw  no  beaver. 
He  then  discovered  that  they  were  his  own  tracks  he  had  been 
following  and  gave  it  up.  The  tracks  back  and  forth  can  be 
seen  plainly  to-day  imprinted  in  the  stone  of  Calumet  portage, 
which  the  Indians  call  Wiske-djak  tracks.  After  this  he  started 
off  on  another  trip. 


(2)    Wiske'djak  Kills  the  Bear  and  Gets  his  Head  Fastened  in 

the  Skull. 

Wiske'djak  was  always  in  trouble.  One  time  he  was  going 
along  the  shore  of  a  big  lake  carrying  a  big  pail.  He  felt  very 
hungry  and  was  looking  for  something  to  eat.  Pretty  soon  he 
saw  a  lot  of  clumps  of  high-bush  cranberries  and  commenced 
to  eat  from  one  little  clump  to  another.  Then  he  remembered 
his  pail.  Said  he,  "If  I  could  pick  my  pail  full,  I  would  have  a 
good  supply  to  last  me  a  long  while."  So  he  began  filling  his 
pail,  and  as  he  went  on  he  got  into  some  big  clumps.  Suddenly 
he  saw  a  big  Bear  sitting  down  among  some  bushes,  every  little 
while  rubbing  his  eyes  and  picking  out  his  paws  as  though 
something  was  hurting  his  eyes.  Wiske-djak  watched  him  a 
while  and  thought  how  nice  it  would  be  to  kill  him.  What  a 
big  supply  of  food  he  would  have  then  to  fill  his  pail  with!  So 
he  went  up  to  the  bear  and  said,  "Hello,  Bear!  What's  the 
matter  with  you?"  The  Bear  answered,  "Oh!  my  eyes  are  so 
sore,  and  I  can't  see  where  to  go.  I  just  wish  somebody  would 
help  me."  "Well,  come  along  with  me.  I  will  help  you.  I 
know  where  to  get  some  fine  medicine  that  will  fix  you  up  all 
right."  "Very  well,"  said  the  bear. 

Wiske'djak  led  him  off  to  a  big  bunch  of  cranberries.  There 
he  gathered  a  lot  of  berries  and  crushed  them  in  his  hands. 
Then  he  told  the  Bear  to  open  his  eyes  so  that  he  could  put  the 
medicine  on.  "It  may  hurt  you  when  I  put  this  medicine  in, 
but  it  will  cure  you,  so  don't  mind  it."  Then  Wiske'djak  began 
to  rub  the  cranberry  juice  into  the  Bear's  eyes.  The  Bear 
began  to  roar  and  tear  around  with  the  pain,  making  a  great 
time.  "But  never  mind,"  said  Wiske'djak.  "It  may  hurt, 
but  it  will  cure  you."  In  the  meantime  he  hunted  around  and 
got  two  big  stones,  and  while  the  Bear  was  blinded  with  the 
pain,  began  pounding  him  on  the  head  with  the  stones.  He 
had  a  hard  fight  all  over  the  berry-patch,  but  finally  succeeded 
and  killed  the  Bear.  Then  Wiske'djak  went  back  to  where  he 
had  left  his  pail  and  got  his  knife.  He  skinned  the  bear  and 
cut  him  up.  He  put  some  of  the  pieces  into  his  pail  to  make  a 
bouillon.  Then  he  got  sticks  and  made  a  fire  for  the  cooking. 
Next  he  got  some  birch  bark  peeled  off  and  cleaned  a  big  space 


near  the  fire,  spreading  the  birch  bark  to  put  the  meat  on.  He 
stuck  the  pieces  of  meat  on  sharp  sticks.  When  they  were  well 
roasted,  he  spread  them  on  the  bark  to  cool  off  before  eating 
them.  He  left  the  bear's  head  for  the  last,  then  he  began  to 
eat  lots  of  the  bear's  fat  and  the  meat.  He  had  a  great  big  pile 
of  it.  He  sat  down  to  enjoy  his  meal. 

Now,  just  as  he  was  ready  to  begin,  the  wind  began  to  blow  a 
little,  and  at  the  same  time  from  above  came  a  little  cry, 
"Whun!"  He  looked  around,  because  it  bothered  him,  but 
could  not  see  anything,  so  he  started  to  eat  again.  Then  the 
same  little  cry  sounded  again,  "Whun!"  and  he  stopped  to  look 
around,  but  couldn't  see  anything.  The  third  time  he  started 
to  eat,  the  same  cry  sounded,  and  then  he  got  up  and  hunted  for 
the  cause,  for  it  bothered  him  and  was  spoiling  his  good  time. 
When  he  looked  up,  he  saw  a  tree  that  had  been  blown  down, 
resting  in  the  crotch  of  another  tree  over  him  that  rubbed  when 
the  wind  blew  and  made  this  noise.  Said  Wiske'djak,  "You 
had  better  stop  that  noise  until  I  get  through  eating.  I  don't 
like  it  at  all."  "Oh!"  said  the  tree,  "I  have  to  do  it.  I  can't 
stop  it."  Whenever  Wiske-djak  started  to  eat  again,  the  wind 
blew  a  little.  Then  Wiske-djak  climbed  the  tree  and  put  his 
hands  in  between  the  tree  and  the  crotch  to  stop  the  rubbing, 
and  when  the  wind  blew  a  little  the  space  spread  and  closed 
again.  It  pinned  his  hands  in  the  crotch  and  held  him  fast. 
"Let  me  go!  Let  me  go!"  he  begged  of  the  tree.  "I  must  get 
down  to  my  meat."  But  the  only  answer  he  got  was,  "No," 
and  there  he  stayed. 

Pretty  soon  when  he  looked  down,  he  saw  a  Squirrel  come 
and  take  some  of  his  meat.  He  shouted  for  him  to  go  away 
without  any  success.  Next  came  the  Marten,  then  the  Fisher, 
then  some  Wildcats,  then  Ravens,  and  in  fact  all  kinds  of  animals 
came  and  began  to  eat  up  his  supply  of  meat.  He  tried  to  drive 
them  away,  but  couldn't.  The  more  he  shouted  at  them,  the 
more  they  danced  and  sang  and  ran  off  mocking  him.  They 
carried  away  all  his  pieces  of  meat  to  their  dens,  but  didn't 
touch  the  pail  of  grease.  By  the  time  all  the  meat  was  gone,  a 
little  breeze  arose  and  the  tree  let  him  go.  When  he  got  down, 
all  was  cleared  away.  There  were  not  even  bones  enough  for 

65977—4 


bouillon.  There  was  only  the  grease  in  the  pail.  "Well,"  said 
he,  "I'll  have  grease  anyway." 

The  Bear's  bladder  was  hanging  in  some  willow  trees  where 
he  had  thrown  it  when  he  had  cut  him  up.  And  he  went  over 
and  filled  the  bladder  with  the  grease,  so  that  he  could  cool  it. 
He  tied  the  neck  of  the  bladder  so  that  it  would  hold  the  grease. 
"Now,"  said  he  to  himself,  "even  if  they  have  taken  all  my 
meat  and  bones,  I'll  have  the  grease.  I'll  just  tie  it  by  a  string 
to  a  stick  and  let  it  float  in  the  river  until  it  is  cool,  and  then 
I'll  make  a  good  meal  of  that  anyway."  So  he  tied  the  bladder 
of  grease  to  a  stick  and  let  it  swing  in  the  current  of  the  river 
to  cool  it.  A  Muskrat  came  along.  "Kwe,  Muskrat!  Where 
are  you  going?"  said  Wiske-djak.  "Oh!  anywhere,"  answered 
the  Muskrat.  "Well,  then,  come  work  for  me,"  said  Wiske'djak. 
"Come,  tie  this  bladder  on  your  tail  and  swim  further  out  in 
the  deep  water  where  it  is  cold  and  cool  it  for  me.  Don't  swim 
too  fast  and  go  easy  or  you  might  break  the  bladder  and  spill 
my  grease."  "All  right,"  said  the  Muskrat,  "I  will  do  it  for 
you  and  you  will  tell  me  how  fast  to  go."  Then  Wiske'djak 
tied  it  to  his  tail  and  the  Muskrat  started  off  with  it.  He  made 
a  plan  meanwhile.  The  Muskrat  swam  way  out.  "Hold  on," 
said  Wiske'djak,  "you're  going  too  fast."  But  the  Muskrat 
swam  farther  and  when  he  got  far  enough,  he  snapped  the 
string  with  his  tail,  broke  the  bladder,  and  dove  out  of  sight. 
The  grease  spread  all  over  the  water.  Wiske'djak  cried  and  ran 
out  into  the  water  and  tried  to  scoop  up  the  grease  in  his  hands 
to  save  some  of  it,  but  it  all  escaped  him. 

When  he  had  lost  his  grease,  he  thought  of  his  bouillon,  and 
went  back  to  his  pail,  but  when  he  got  there,  he  found  that  the 
Wolverine  had  come  and  eaten  it  all  up.  Then  he  searched 
about  to  see  if  he  could  even  find  a  small  bone.  There  was  not 
a  thing  left.  After  a  while  he  saw  a  string  of  little  ants  going 
back  and  forth  from  under  a  log.  "I  wonder  what  they  are 
doing,"  thought  he.  "Maybe  they  have  something  hidden 
under  there."  He  followed  them  and  looked  under  the  log, 
and  there  were  the  ants  eating  away  on  the  Bear's  skull,  devour- 
ing the  brains.  "If  I  could  get  in  there  myself,  I  could  get 
some  of  those  brains,"  said  he.  He  tried  different  ways  to  reach 
in,  but  could  not  get  at  it.  "If  I  could  only  put  my  head  in 


that  hole,  I  could  eat  some.  I  wish  my  head  was  as  small  as  a 
snake's  head,  then  I  could  get  it  in."  Then  his  head  began 
to  get  small  like  a  snake's  head  and  he  poked  it  inside  the  skull 
and  began  eating  a  great  snack.  He  licked  the  skull  clean  and 
said,  "Well,  I  had  a  meal.  Now,  if  I  could  only  get  up  and  out, 
I  would  be  all  right."  But  when  he  tried  to  get  his  head  clear 
of  the  skull,  he  could  not,  because  his  head  had  turned  back  to 
its  original  size  and  was  fast  inside  the  skull.  He  couldn't  see 
where  he  was  going. 

Then  he  sat  down  on  a  log,  thinking  what  to  do  next.  "If 
I  knock  my  head  against  a  rock,  I  might  break  my  own  head." 
Then  he  thought  of  the  Indians  and  started  off  in  search  of  a 
camp  to  get  help.  He  was  blinded  by  the  skull  and  could  not 
see  where  he  was  going.  Soon  he  banged  against  a  tree.  "What's 
your  name?"  he  asked  of  the  tree.  "Maple,"  was  the  answer. 
"Well,  I'm  in  high  ground.  I  won't  find  any  people  camping 
way  up  here."  Soon  he  banged  against  another  tree.  What's 
your  name?"  he  asked.  "Beech,"  was  the  answer.  "I'm  still 
in  high  ground,"  said  he;  "I  must  strike  lower  ground."  Soon 
he  banged  against  another  tree  and  asked  its  name.  It 
answered,  "White-pine."  "Still  in  high  ground,"  said  he, 
"but  getting  lower."  The  next  tree  he  bumped  against  proved 
to  be  a  red  pine.  "Still  in  high  ground.  No  Indian  camp  here." 
At  last  he  banged  against  a  balsam  and  then  a  spruce.  "I  am 
getting  on  low  ground  now,"  said  he.  Pretty  soon  he  got  into 
ragged  bush  and  struck  a  rough-bark  tree.  "What's  your 
name?"  he  asked.  "Cedar,"  said  the  tree.  "Aha!  Now  I'm 
in  low  ground  and  may  strike  a  camp  at  last."  He  went  on 
and  soon  got  into  very  tight  bush  and  struck  an  alder.  "Aha! 
Now,  I  am  close  to  a  lake.  I  will  soon  find  a  camp."  Next 
he  got  tangled  up  in  knee-high  twigs.  He  asked  them  what 
their  name  was  and  they  told  him  willows.  He  said,  "Am  I 
near  a  lake?"  "Yes,"  they  answered.  "Can  you  see  people?" 
"Yes,  up  at  yonder  point  there  is  a  camp,"  they  answered. 
"Is  it  far?"  he  asked.  "No,  not  far,"  said  they.  So  he  went 
on  and  got  into  something  still  lower.  "What's  your  name?" 
he  asked.  "Grass,"  was  the  answer.  Now  he  walked  on  and 
got  into  water,  deeper  and  deeper.  "If  the  people  would  only 
see  me,  I  would  be  all  right,"  said  he.  Next  he  started  to  swim. 

65977— 4£ 


8 

He  splashed  about  and  made  a  noise  to  attract  the  people  if 
any  were  about.  Suddenly  he  remembered  about  the  skull 
on  his  head  and  said,  "If  the  people  see  me,  they  might  think 
that  I'm  a  bear  and  try  to  kill  me."  So  he  swam  on. 

Sure  enough  the  Indians  saw  him.  They  recognized 
Wiske'djak  by  his  antics  and  thought  he  was  trying  to  play 
some  trick  on  them,  so  they  laughed  about  it  and  quietly  paddled 
up  close  to  him.  They  pretended  they  thought  he  was  a  bear 
and  made  out  as  though  they  were  going  to  kill  him.  Wiske'djak 
swam  as  hard  as  he  could  for  his  life.  "Hand  me  my  axe," 
said  one  of  the  Indians,  "till  I  kill  him."  "Stand  aside  till  I 
shoot  him  with  my  arrow,"  said  another."  "Hurry  up,  paddle 
hard  or  we'll  lose  him,"  said  a  third.  They  all  kept  shouting 
and  making  a  great  pretence  to  get  after  him,  all  the  time 
laughing  at  Wiske'djak  and  splashing  with  their  paddles  as 
though  trying  to  keep  up  with  him.  Wiske'djak  all  the  time 
struggled  ahead  in  great  fear,  expecting  any  moment  to  be 
killed.  At  last  he  got  across  the  lake  on  the  other  shore  and  his 
feet  struck  bottom.  He  landed  on  a  flat  rock  with  the  Indians 
behind  him.  Suddenly  he  slipped  and  fell  on  his  head.  The 
bear  skull  cracked  and  fell  off  and  left  his  head  free.  Then  he 
saw  the  Indians.  "Don't  shoot!  Don't  shoot!  cried  he.  "I'm 
Wiske'djak."  Then  he  took  to  the  bush  and  escaped. 

(3)  Wiske'djak  Invites  the  Ducks  to  a  Dance. 

Wiske'djak  was  always  hungry.  One  time,  in  the  autumn  of  the 
year,  he  noticed  the  flocks  of  ducks  flying  south  and  how  fat 
they  were.  Then  he  made  up  his  mind  to  try  and  get  some  for 
a  good  supply  against  the  winter.  He  decided  to  make  a  big 
dance  among  the  birds  in  the  autumn  and  to  invite  all  the  ducks 
and  geese  to  come,  so  that  he  could  kill  them.  Then  he  set  to 
work  and  built  a  big  wigwam  and  cleaned  a  nice  place  around 
the  outside.  He  built  a  little  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  wigwam 
and  fixed  a  nice  space  all  around  it  for  the  dance  to  take  place. 
Then  he  made  his  door  of  birch  bark,  so  that  the  centre  stick, 
which  keeps  the  bark  spread,  extended  over  the  ends  of  the 
bark  and  kept  it  from  opening  inwards.  Now,  everything  was 
about  ready,  so  he  went  to  see  a  Duck  and  said  to  him,  "Soon, 


9 

now,  you  will  be  going  away  south  to  be  gone  all  winter  and  not 
to  come  back  until  next  spring.  It  will  be  a  long  time  before  I 
will  see  you  again,  so  I  want  to  get  up  a  dance  for  you  all.  You 
go  and  invite  all  your  friends — the  Ducks,  the  Geese  and  the 
others  who  go  south."  "All  right,"  said  the  Duck. 

So  he  got  ready  and  went  back  to  his  wigwam  to  wait  for  the 
company.  To  help  invite  the  birds,  he  sat  down  in  front  of  it 
and  got  his  drum  and  rattle  and  began  singing  a  song  of  invita- 
tion. 

As  the  ducks  came  flying  by  overhead,  they  heard  his  song  and 
came  down  to  join  the  party.  He  sang  his  song  and  told  them, 
"You  are  going  away  to  be  gone  until  next  spring,  and  I  won't 
see  you  for  a  long  time,  so  I  want  to  get  up  a  dance  for  you  all, 
before  you  go."  A  lot  of  them  came  down  and  he  gathered  a 
crowd  outside.  Then  he  said,  "Now,  let  us  go  inside  and  have 
our  good  time,"  and  he  opened  the  door  and  they  all  went  in. 
Then  he  fixed  the  small  fire  in  the  middle  so  that  it  would  just 
give  enough  light  to  see  a  little.  "Now,"  said  he,  "you  must 
obey  the  rule  of  this  dance  and  do  whatever  you  are  told  when 
you  hear  the  order."  He  sat  down  on  one  side  of  the  fire  near 
the  door  and  they  all  began  dancing  around.  They  got  well 
mixed  up  before  long — the  geese,  ducks,  loons,  and  all  kinds 
of  birds,  and  Ciijgabis1  was  there  too.  When  he  got  them  warmed 
up  to  the  dance,  they  all  got  mixed  up  and  soon  Wiske'djak 
said,  "Now,  you  must  all  close  your  eyes  and  not  open  them 
until  I  give  the  word."  Then  they  obeyed  and  kept  on  dancing 
with  their  eyes  closed.  Then,  while  their  eyes  were  closed, 
Wiske'djak  got  up  and  began  wringing  the  neck  of  one  after 
another.  The  noise  of  the  dancing  prevented  them  from 
hearing  what  he  was  doing. 

Pretty  soon,  CiTjgabis  began  to  suspect  that  Wiske'djak  was 
moving  around,  so  he  danced  over  into  a  dark  corner  where 
Wiske-djak  could  not  see  him  and  opened  one  of  his  eyes  a  little 
to  peep  out.  There  he  saw  Wiske'djak  going  among  the 
dancers,  wringing  their  necks,  and  he  called  out,  "Wiske'djak 
is  killing  you!  Fly!"  Then  they  opened  their  eyes  and  saw 
what  was  happening  and  took  wing  and  flew  away.  But  little 


1  Cirjgabis  is  the  grebe,  a  well  known  character  in  Ojibwa  mythology,  sharing  the  trickster 
exploits  of  Wiske'djak.  He  appears  again  as  the  quasi-hero  of  a  subsequent  story  in  this 
cycle. 


10 

Cirjgabis  was  way  up  in  the  corner.  When  the  birds  rushed 
for  the  door,  Chjgabis  got  there  last.  Wiske'djak  jumped  at 
him  and  gave  him  a  kick  behind  that  knocked  him  out  of  shape. 
Then  he  kicked  him  out  of  the  door  and  cried,  "Now  go,  you  little 
rascal."  Ci^gabis  flew  off.  Ever  since  then  he  has  been  out 
of  shape.  His  feet  are  so  far  back  that  he  cannot  walk  on  land. 
Wiske'djak  did  not  eat  the  ducks  he  had  killed  after  all.  He 
was  a  curious  lad,  that  Wiske'djak.  (I  wasn't  with  him  any 
longer.  I  left  him  there.)1 


(4)  Wiske'djak  Anum  Suum    Urit    and    Originates  Rock-weed 
and  Red  Willow  from  the  Scabs. 

Now  Wiske-djak  went  on  after  he  had  kicked  CiTjgabis.  He 
saw  the  flocks  of  birds  rising  in  the  sky  and  flying  overhead  for 
the  south  to  where  it  is  warmer.  When  he  lost  sight  of  them, 
he  went  back  into  his  wigwam  and  looked  over  what  birds  he 
had  killed.  He  wondered  how  he  could  cook  them  best,  so 
they  would  taste  good.  Then  he  made  up  his  mind  to  build  a 
big  fire  outside  his  wigwam.  When  he  got  the  fire  well  started, 
he  got  a  stick  and  sharpened  its  point;  then  with  this  he  loosened 
up  the  ground  all  around  and  under 'the  fire.  When  the  fire 
burned  down,  it  left  the  sand  red  hot  round  about,  and  the  holes 
too.  Then,  where  the  holes  were,  he  stuck  the  fowl  head-first 
with  their  feathers  all  on  just  as  he  had  killed  them,  leaving 
their  feet  sticking  out  above  the  ground.  Then  he  put  on 
more  fire  to  roast  them  well  in  the  hot  sand.  He  stayed  up 
part  of  the  night  tending  his  fire,  until  he  grew  drowsy.  "Now," 
said  he,  "I'll  take  a  little  sleep  while  my  birds  are  cooking  in  the 
sand."  But  he  grew  uneasy  lest  somebody  might  come  while 
he  was  sleeping  and  steal  his  birds.  Now  Wiske-djak  had  the 
power  to  make  anything  answer  him  when  he  spoke  to  it,  no 
matter  what  it  might  be.  So  he  decided  to  lie  down  in  a  clear 
space  facing  the  lake  where  people  would  come  in  a  canoe  if 
any  were  around.  He  lay  down  ano  suo  lacui  adverse,  resting 
on  his  knees  and  elbows.  "Now,"  declared  he,  "I'm  going  to 
have  a  little  sleep.  You  watch  and  tell  me  when  you  see  any 

1  Formal  way  of  ending  a  narration;    the  narrator  is  assumed  to  have  been  a  spectator. 
The  informant  temporarily  discontinued  his  story  here. 


11 

Indians,  if  they  should  come  in  a  canoe.  Wake  me  up  if  you 
see  anybody."  So  he  went  to  sleep.  After  a  while  anus  ejus 
clamavit,  saying  that  an  Indian  was  coming.  Wiske'djak 
jumped  up  and  looked  around  everywhere,  but  could  not  see 
anybody.  So  he  lay  down  again  and  ano  suo  idem  dixit  ut 
antea.  But  just  as  he  was  going  to  sleep,  anus  iterum  clamavit, 
saying  that  a  canoe  was  approaching  from  around  the  point. 
Wiske'djak  jumped  up  again  and  looked  all  around,  but  he 
could  not  see  any  canoe.  He  then  grew  angry  and  anum 
suum  vehementes  objurgavit  and  warned  it  not  to  tell  any 
more  lies,  as  he  wanted  to  go  to  sleep.  Then  he  lay  down  and 
fell  asleep  again. 

Now  this  time  there  were  some  Indians  coming  around  the 
point  in  a  canoe  and  they  saw  the  smoke  from  Wiske-djak's 
fire  on  the  shore  of  the  lake.  Seeing  something  strange-looking 
near  the  fire — they  could  not  well  make  out  what — they  paddled 
near.  As  they  drifted  quietly  in  shore,  looking  sharp  to  see 
what  curious  creature  it  might  be,  they  came  quite  close.  One 
of  the  Indians  said,  "Look  out,  it  might  be  Wiske'djak  up  to 
some  more  of  his  mischief."  So  one  of  the  men  went  ashore 
and  said,  "I'll  go  see  who  it  is  and  what  he  is  doing."  Then 
he  went  up  the  shore  to  where  Wiske'djak  was  crouching  asleep 
and  looked  at  him.  He  then  found  out  who  it  was,  Wiske'djak, 
and  saw  the  fire  burning,  but  couldn't  see  anything  cooking. 
But  at  last  he  examined  the  fire-place  and  saw  the  fowls'  legs 
sticking  out  of  the  sand  around  the  fire.  He  stepped  closer  to 
the  fire  and  saw  that  they  were  the  legs  of  all  kinds  of  ducks 
and  geese.  Then  he  went  down  to  the  water  and  told  the  rest 
of  the  men  what  he  had  found.  Said  they,  "We  will  all  go  up 
and  take  Wiske'djak's  ducks  and  geese  out  of  the  sand  and 
play  a  trick  on  him."  So  they  got  out  of  the  canoe  and  took 
their  paddles.  They  dug  up  all  the  fowl  with  the  paddles  and 
twisted  the  legs  off  them.  The  legs  they  stuck  back  in  the  sand 
just  as  Wiske'djak  had  placed  them.  They  then  took  the 
ducks  and  geese  and  started  off  as  fast  as  possible  before  Wiske'- 
djak should  wake  up  and  see  them. 

Pretty  soon  Wiske'djak  did  wake  up,  as  he  had  slept  enough. 
He  got  up  and  looked  about.  Nobody  was  around  and  things 


12 

looked  quiet.  "I  guess  my  food  is  pretty  well  cooked  by  this 
time,"  said  he.  Then  he  pulled  up  one  of  the  duck  legs  from  the 
sand,  and  ate  the  meat  on  the  shank.  He  went  all  around 
pulling  the  fowls'  legs  out  of  the  sand  and  eating  them.  "They 
are  very  well  done  to  pull  off  so  easily.  Oh,  they  must  be  nice 
and  tender!"  thought  he.  The  only  thing  he  noticed  was  that 
the  legs  came  very  freely  from  the  sand.  "They  must  be  very 
well  cooked  to  come  out  of  the  sand  so  freely."  He  took  a 
digging  stick  and  commenced  to  dig  them  out.  He  commenced 
shovelling  away  the  sand  where  one  of  his  ducks  was,  but  found 
the  hole  empty,  and  he  dug  all  around  in  the  sand  but  found 
they  were  all  taken  away.  He  could  not  find  one  bird.  At 
last  he  got  tired  of  searching  and  then  ano  suo  dixit,  "So  I 
thought  I  left  you  to  watch  for  me  while  I  was  asleep!"  Et 
anus  ^espondit,  "When  I  was  watching  for  you  and  woke  you 
up,  you  were  not  satisfied.  You  gave  me  a  scolding.  So  when 
the  Indians  did  come,  I  thought  I  would  leave  you  to  do  your 
own  watching." 

Then  Wiske'djak  grew  angry  and  planned  anum  suum 
castigare.  He  got  wood  and  made  another  big  fire.  He  got 
it  burning  well  until  there  were  a  lot  of  red  coals.  "Now, 
ano  suo  dixit,  "I'll  give  you  a  little  punishment  for  letting  my 
ducks  and  geese  go  to  the  Indians."  He  went  over  to  the  fire 
and  straddled  his  legs  over  the  fire-place,  sitting  over  the  red 
coals.  Anum  suum  paulum  urere  incepit  ut  eum  castigaret, 
but  he  stood  the  pain  the  fire  gave  him.  Soon  his  flesh  com- 
menced sizzling,  making  a  sputtering  noise  "Tsii!"  as  it  roasted 
nicely.  He  heard  it  squealing.  "You  can  squeal  all  you  like 
till  you  get  enough  of  a  scorching,"  ano  suo  dixit  Wiske'djak. 
When  he  thought  it  was  burnt  enough,  he  got  up  and  started 
walking  off.  He  started  off  to  look  for  something  else  to  do, 
ano  suo  maxime  dolente. 

He  wandered  across  swamps  and  mountains  and  around 
lakes,  suffering  with  his  burns.  All  at  once  he  came  upon  a 
little  flock  of  partridges  newly  hatched,  and  their  mother  was 
away.  "Kwe!"  said  Wiske'djak,  "What  are  you  doing  here?" 
"Nothing,"  said  the  little  Partridges,  "just  staying  here." 
"Where  is  your  mother?"  asked  Wiske'djak.  "Away  hunting," 
replied  they.  "What's  your  name?"  he  asked  of  one.  Each 

*   EJU3. 


13 

little  Partridge  told  him  its  name  until  he  came  to  the  last,  the 
youngest  one.  "What's  your  name?"  he  demanded.  "Kuck- 
uijge-'sjs,  suddenly  frightened!"  answered  the  little  Partridge. 
"Oh  you!"  said  Wiske'djak,  "what  can  you  frighten?"  Then 
he  took  a  lump  of  soft  mud  and  threw  it  over  all  the  young 
Partridges,  so  that  he  almost  covered  them  with  the  dirty  mud. 
"What  can  you  frighten  now?"  said  he.  Then  he  left  and 
walked  along  until  he  came  to  a  high  mountain.  He  was 
getting  very  sore  from  his  burns  and  anus  'maxime  doluit. 
When  he  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  mountain  he  found  a  nice 
breeze  blowing  across  it.  He  found  a  high  rock  swept  by  the 
cooling  breeze.  "Now,"  thought  he  to  himself,  "if  I  can  find 
a  nice  place  on  the  highest  of  these  rocks  I  can  rest  myself  and 
let  the  cool  breeze  cool  my  burns."  So  he  searched  around  the 
mountain  until  he  came  to  a  place  clear  of  trees  where  there  was 
a  great  chasm  below,  hundreds  of  feet  deep,  with  a  nice  cool 
breeze  coming  over.  Here  he  lay  down  right  on  the  edge  where 
most  of  the  breeze  was.  He  found  the  wind  very  good.  He  got 
relief  from  his  suffering  burns.  His  pains  had  been  so  bad 
and  he  had  walked  so  far  that  he  was  very  tired  and  sleepy. 
Soon  he  was  fast  asleep  on  the  brink  of  the  cliff. 

By  this  time  the  old  Partridge  had  got  home  to  his  young 
and  found  them  all  covered  with  black  mud.  The  old  Partridge 
said  to  his  young,  "What  has  happened  to  you?  Where  did 
you  go?  Anywhere?"  "No,"  they  answered,  "nowhere." 
"Well,  what  did  this?"  he  asked.  "Well,  Wiske'djak  came  along 
to-day  after  you  went  away.  He  commenced  asking  us  ques- 
tions and  we  answered  him  as  well  as  we  could.  He  asked  us 
our  names  and  we  all  told  him.  But  one,  our  youngest  brother, 
was  the  last  to  be  asked,  and  when  he  told  his  name  Wiske'djak 
got  angry  and  said,  'What  could  you  frighten?'  Then  he  got 
mud  and  threw  it  over  us  and  left  us  in  this  mess."  So  the  old 
Partridge  was  angry.  He  cleaned  the  young  ones  up,  washed 
and  dried  them,  and  gave  them  their  food  which  he  had  brought 
back  for  them.  Then  he  asked  them  which  way  Wiske'djak 
went  and  they  showed  him  the  direction.  Then  the  old  Part- 
ridge took  the  trail  the  little  ones  showed  him  and  followed 
Wiske'djak  across  the  swamps,  over  the  mountains,  and  around 
the  lakes.  He  tracked  him  to  the  big  high  mountains.  He 

~EJUB. 


14 

kept  on  until  he  reached  the  high  rock  of  the  cliff,  and  there  he 
saw  Wiske'djak  lying  on  the  edge  of  the  rock  sleeping  soundly. 
The  old  Partridge  went  alongside  of  him  on  the  upper  side  of 
the  rock,  above  him.  He  spread  his  wings  and  went  right  up 
close  to  Wiske'djak's  ears,  and  shouted,  screeched,  and 
clapped  his  wings.  Wiske'djak  woke  up  with  a  start  and  jumped 
up.  He  saw  something  above  him  making  a  terrible  noise  and 
took  such  a  fright  that  he  fell  over  the  edge  of  the  rock.  "Now," 
said  the  old  Partridge,  "you  will  know  better  what  Kuckurj- 
g&'sis  is  now." 

So  poor  Wiske'djak  tumbled  down  the  cliff,  banging  and  slid- 
ing on  his  hind-quarters,  and  scraped  all  the  scabs  off  his  burns. 
When  he  fell  to  the  bottom  of  the  rocky  cliff,  he  lay  stunned  for 
some  time,  but  after  a  while  he  arose.  He  started  to  crawl 
away  on  his  hands  and  knees.  Soon  he  saw  a  lake  at  the  bottom 
of  the  cliff.  His  sores  pained  him  very  badly.  Thought  he 
to  himself,  "There's  a  nice  lake;  now  I'll  go  down  there  and  cool 
myself  in  the  water."  He  started  crawling  toward  the  shore. 
Before  he  came  to  the  edge  of  the  water  there  were  a  lot  of  low 
willows  he  had  to  crawl  through.  As  he  went  over  them,  he 
looked  back  where  he  had  come  and  saw  all  his  blood  from  the 
sores  stuck  on  to  the  willow  twigs.  Then  said  he,  "Now  you 
young  willows  will  be  called  'red  willows'  from  this  time  on. 
And  when  the  Indians  get  short  of  tobacco  they  will  cut  you 
and  scrape  the  bark  off  you  and  dry  you  and  use  you  to  smoke 
for  their  tobacco."  He  looked  up  higher  toward  the  rocks 
where  he  fell  down.  There  he  saw  his  scabs  sticking  to  the  rocks 
where  he  had  stuck,  some  large,  some  small.  Said  he  to  the 
rocks,  "You  will  hold  on  to  these  scabs.  Don't  ever  let  go. 
And  when  the  Indians  are  hard  put  to  it  for  something  to  eat, 
you  will  give  them  some  of  my  scabs  and  tell  them  to  wash  them 
in  cold  water  and  boil  them  with  rabbit  meat  or  any  kind  of 
meat  or  fish.  It  will  furnish  them  with  fine  soup,  those  small 
ones.  And  now  the  biggest  scabs — you  can  tell  them  that  if 
they  have  any  kind  of  oil  they  can  oil  them  a  little  and  roast 
them  before  the  fire  and  that  it  will  give  them  good  nourishment 
when  they  are  hard  put  to  it  for  something  to  eat."  So 
from  that  time  the  Indians  have  used  red  willow  bark  to 
smoke  and  the  "rock  weed"  to  eat  when  they  have  needed 


15 

them.1     By  this  time  anus  Wiske'djaki  magnopere  doluit  and  he 
thought  he  would  go  into  the  water  for  a  while  and  cool  his  burns. 
So  I  had  some  travelling  to  do  and  I  left  him  there,  and  I 
don't  know  where  he  went. 


(5)  Wiske'djak  Disguises  himself  as  a  Lynx. 

One  time  in  winter  Wiske'djak  was  going  along  and  fell  upon 
an  Indian's  trail.  He  followed  the  tracks  of  the  snowshoes 
and  soon  came  to  a  place  where  the  Indian  had  set  his  rabbit 
snares.  Wiske'djak  saw  the  rabbits  in  the  snares.  He  followed 
on  and  finally  came  to  where  a  Lynx  was  caught  in  a  snare. 
He  thought  it  was  a  very  curious  looking  creature.  The  Lynx's 
eyes  were  bulging  out  from  being  choked  in  the  snare,  and  his 
teeth  showed.  Now  Wiske'djak  admired  the  Lynx's  bulging 
eyes.  "Don't  you  think  your  eyes  are  very  pretty?"  he  asked 
the  Lynx.  "No,  not  very,"  answered  the  Lynx,  because  every 
thing  living  or  dead  had  to  reply  when  Wiske'djak  asked  it  a 
question.  Wiske'djak  was  very  eager  to  get  pretty  eyes  like 
the  Lynx's,  so  he  made  a  fire  and  roasted  the  poor  Lynx  to  get 
its  skin  off.  Then  Wiske'djak  took  out  his  own  eyes  and  pulled 
the  Lynx's  skin  on  over  his  own  head,  so  that  the  bulging  eyes 
of  the  Lynx  fitted  into  his  own  eye  sockets. 

Then  Wiske'djak  went  on  his  travels,  very  well  pleased  with 
his  looks.  But  he  found  out  that  with  the  Lynx's  eyes  he  could 
only  see  well  at  night.  So  after  a  while  he  became  dissatisfied 
with  the  new  eyes,  but  he  had  thrown  his  own  away,  so  he  had 
to  make  the  best  of  it.  He  could  only  travel  at  night  on  account 
of  his  new  eyes.  So  he  had  to  make  his  living  on  rabbits,  stealing 
them  from  the  Indians'  snares.  They  were  all  he  could  get. 
One  day,  as  he  was  going  along,  he  stopped  and  looked  at  his 
tracks.  Then  he  discovered  that  his  paws  were  big  and  broad 
and  so  spread  out  when  he  walked  that  they  resembled  snow- 
shoes.  They  were  so  broad  that  he  could  walk  over  the  snow 
without  snowshoes.  So  he  went  on. 


1  The  Indians  often  use  the  red  willow  bark  to  mix  with  tobacco.  It  is  called  mssktpa'- 
M*  'my  "red  willow  tree."  The  yellow  spots  seen  on  the  red  of  the  bark  are  where  Wiske-djak, 
in  walking  over  them,  got  them  between  his  legs  and  left  yellow  matter  in  the  blood  from  the 
scabs.  The  "rock  weed,"  wa'kwund  (rock  tripe)  is  often  eaten  in  the  bush  when  other  foods 
fail.  It  is  scraped  off  the  rocks  with  a  flat  stick  into  a  blanket,  then  washed  and  boiled  and 
eaten.  The  water  becomes  a  little  slimy,  but  it  makes  a  nourishing  soup. 


16 

One  day  he  decided  to  watch  the  Indians,  so  he  sat  down  on 
a  log  near  a  hunter's  path  and  waited  for  someone  to  come  along. 
He  waited  all  night  and  part  of  the  day.  Finally  some  Indians 
came  along  the  path  to  visit  their  rabbit  snares.  As  they 
passed  they  found  the  rabbits  stolen  from  all  their  snares,  but 
they  did  not  mind  it  very  much.  Some  time  after,  one  of  the 
Indians'  little  children  came  along  the  trail  and  saw  Wiske'djak 
with  his  big  face  and  bulging  eyes  sitting  on  the  stump.  The 
child  ran  back  to  camp  and  told  his  parents  that  he  saw  a  big 
wildcat  with  bulging  eyes  staring  at  him  from  a  stump.  Then 
the  father  of  the  child  took  his  "arrow-head  club,"1  and  went  to 
where  the  child  said  he  saw  the  wildcat.  Then  he  started 
clubbing  Wiske'djak  to  kill  him.  The  fight  was  getting  pretty 
bad,  when  Wiske'djak  cried  out,  "Hold  on,  hold  on!  it  isn't 
a  lynx,  it  is  Wiske'djak  that  you  are  pounding  to  death!"  And 
Wiske'djak  tore  off  the  lynx  skin,  and  pitched  it  away.  Then 
he  took  to  the  bush.  That's  the  last  I  saw  of  him. 


(6)  Wiske'djak's  Love  Affair. 

Wiske'jdak  never  got  married  to  a  woman.  But  he  pretended 
to  get  married.  One  time  he  dressed  himself  like  a  woman, 
with  skirts,  and  tried  to  deceive  a  young  man,  so  that  he  thought 
Wiske'djak  was  his  wife.  Wiske'djak  pretended  to  be  jealous 
of  the  man  when  he  went  away.  The  other  people  knew  that 
it  was  Wiske'djak  all  the  time  and  laughed  to  themselves  and 
made  fun  of  the  pair.  The  young  man  lived  with  Wiske'djak 
for  some  time,  thinking  it  was  his  wife.  But  the  other  people 
made  fun  of  the  young  man  so  much  that  at  last  he  left  Wiske'- 
djak. Several  times  he  got  young  men  to  live  with  him  as 
their  wife,  but  at  last  they  all  left  him  and  he  went  away  by  him- 
self. He  was  a  queer  fellow,  that  Wiske'djak.  He  never  got 
married  because  he  would  not  be  bothered  with  a  woman,  as 
he  had  to  be  travelling  all  the  time. 


pugama'gan  "arrow-head  hammer,"  an  old  style  of  war  club  with  a  stone 
set  in  a  big  wooden  head  attached  to  a  handle  and  swung  by  a  thong  from  the  warrior's  elbow 
to  leave  his  hand  free. 


17 

(7)  Ci 


was  a  remarkable  fellow,  a  wonderful  diver  who 
could  stay  underneath  the  water  all  day  if  he  wanted  to.  He 
was  married  and  lived  with  his  wife's  people.  One  time  he  had 
some  kind  of  a  dispute  with  them  and  they  would  not  give  in 
to  him.  So  he  said  he  would  go  away.  As  it  was  winter  time, 
there  was  a  water  hole  in  the  ice  on  the  lake,  and  he  went  down 
and  slid  into  the  water  and  disappeared.  His  relatives  spent 
all  day  hunting  for  him  along  the  shores,  thinking  he  might  come 
up  along  the  edge,  but  he  did  not.  Then  they  went  home  and 
gave  him  up.  In  a  few  months,  when  his  wife's  brothers  were 
out  on  the  lake  in  their  canoe,  they  spied  a  little  duck  swimming 
a  long  way  off,  and  paddled  up  to  him.  This  was  CiTjgabis. 
When  they  got  near,  they  recognized  him  and  asked  him,  "Are 
you  not  Chjgabis?"  "Yes,"  said  he.  "We  thought  you  were 
drowned.  Are  you  coming  back  again?"  "No,"  said  he,  and 
fluttered  his  wings  and  sank  out  of  sight,  leaving  only  his  bill 
above  the  water,  which  they  could  not  see.  This  time  he  stayed 
under  all  day,  and  when  night  came,  he  left  the  country.  His 
wife's  people  thought  he  was  either  dead  or  gone. 

Then  Cirjgabis  travelled  to  another  village,  where  he  heard 
there  was  a  beautiful  girl.  When  he  saw  her  all  dressed  up  in 
fine  clothes,  new  and  beaded,  he  wanted  to  marry  her,  and  asked 
her  parents  for  her.  "Who  are  you?"  they  asked  him.  "I  am 
Cirygabis,"  said  he.  "Why,  we  heard  you  were  drowned,"  said 
they.  "It  is  not  true.  Here  I  am.  I  am  Ciijgabis  and  alive." 
"You  cannot  be  Cir/gabis,  because  there  is  only  one  Ciijgabis, 
and  we  heard  he  was  drowned.  But  if  you  are,  you  cannot 
marry  the  girl,  because  you  have  another  wife."'  Now  Cir/gabis 
wanted  the  girl  and  stayed  in  the  camp.  He  would  not  leave. 
So  that  night  they  put  one  of  the  girl's  brothers  to  sleep  alongside 
of  him,  so  that  he  could  not  secretly  get  to  the  wigwam  where  the 
girls  slept.  During  the  night  he  talked  with  the  brother  and 
told  him  that  he  would  show  them  how  he  could  stay  under  water 
if  they  would  give  him  the  girl.  The  next  morning  the  young 
man  told  his  parents  about  it  and  they  talked  it  over.  They 
thought  it  might  be  good  for  their  boys  to  know  how  to  stay 
under  water,  and  at  last  gave  their  consent.  So  they  gave 


18 

CiTjgabis  the  girl,  and  the  next  day  went  out  on  the  lake  to  see 
him  dive.  The  whole  family  got  in  the  canoe  and  they  paddled 
out  to  the  middle  of  the  lake.  "Now,"  said  he,  "let  me  out 
here."  Then  he  slid  into  the  water  and  with  his  body  stiff 
sank  slowly  until  he  was  out  of  sight.  Then  he  struck  out 
under  water  and  reached  the  shore  where  he  hid  under  some 
rushes,  just  leaving  his  bill  above  the  water.  His  nostrils  were 
at  the  end  of  his  bill,  so  he  could  breathe  with  only  a  bit  above 
water.  They  waited  for  him  half  the  day  and,  though  the  water 
was  calm,  could  not  see  him,  so  they  gave  him  up  and  went  home. 
That  night  he  came  back,  to  their  surprise. 

They  planned  to  go  out  again  the  next  day  and  see  him  dive 
again.  The  next  day  they  went  out  and  Chjgabis  dove  again 
and  swam  among  some  reeds.  He  got  under  one  lying  flat, 
and  pushed  it  just  a  little  above  the  water  so  that  his  nostrils 
were  out  of  water,  yet  covered  by  the  stem  of  the  rush.  There 
he  stayed  a  couple  of  hours  out  of  sight.  When  they  were  about 
to  leave  again,  CiTjgabis  shouted,  "He!  Here  I  am.  Can  you 
see  me?"  They  looked  all  around  but  could  not  see  him. 
Then  he  came  up  in  sight  and  went  back  to  the  canoe.  He 
explained  how  his  nostrils  were  out  at  the  end  of  his  bill  and  how 
he  got  under  the  reeds  and  hid  there.  Then  he  explained  how 
in  the  winter  time  he  could  dive  through  an  air  hole  in  the  ice 
and  swim  to  where  the  rushes  grew  up  through  the  ice,  pull 
down  one  of  the  stalks,  and  put  his  bill  in  the  opening  and  get 
all  the  air  he  wanted.  Said  he,  "I  can  stay  there  a  week  or  a 
month,  if  I  want,  only  I  get  hungry.  Then  I  dive  to  the 
bottom  and  eat  some  little  mussels  and  things  on  the  bottom 
and  come  up  to  the  hole  again.  In  that  way  I  can  get  along 
under  the  ice  all  winter  if  I  like."  That  is  how  he  did. 

Now,  before  long,  his  first  wife's  family  heard  that  Ci^gabis 
was  alive  and  living  with  another  woman.  They  got  angry 
and  began  to  conjure  to  bring  sickness  upon  his  new  wife  and 
her  family.  When  his  new  wife  and  her  people  heard  of  this, 
they  were  angry  at  Cirjgabis  and  wanted  him  to  go  away.  But 
he  would  not  consent.  At  last  he  made  an  offer,  because  his 
mother-in-law  wanted  her  daughter  to  leave  him.  He  told 
them  that  he  would  give  up  his  new  wife  and  her  family  if  they 
would  succeed  in  getting  her  away  from  him  unknown  to  him. 


19 

When  they  heard  this,  they  began  planning.  For  a  whole  year 
they  thought  of  different  plans.  At  last  the  old  mother-in-law 
said  she  had  a  plan,  and  told  everyone  in  the  family  to  help 
her  get  up  a  big  dance  and  invite  all  the  people  to  come. 
Cir/gabis  was  very  jealous  of  his  wife  and  had  his  camp  apart 
from  the  others,  lest  some  man  might  take  a  fancy  to  his  wife 
and  take  her  away.  His  jealousy  was  known  everywhere  and 
he  never  let  her  out  of  sight.  Knowing  this,  the  old  mother-in- 
law  made  her  plan.  She  sent  a  special  invitation  to  CiT/gabis 
and  his  wife  and  told  her  sons  to  try  to  get  him  to  come.  Now 
Cirjgabis  suspected  some  trick  and  told  his  wife  not  to  go  to  the 
dance.  "If  I  have  to  go,  you  must  stay  here  at  home  and  not 
move  away  from  the  wigwam." 

When  the  night  of  the  dance  came,  they  got  everything  ready — 
the  drum  and  rattles,  and  everybody  was  coming  from  every 
camp.  They  prepared  a  kind  of  drink  out  of  boiled  bark  and 
herbs  with  tobacco  juice  in  it,  that  would  make  people  dizzy 
when  they  drank  it.  Cbjgabis  did  not  want  to  go  to  the  dance 
at  first,  but  everybody  coaxed  him  until  he  started.  But  he 
told  his  wife  to  stay  at  home  and  not  leave  for  anything.  Now 
this  was  just  what  the  old  woman  depended  on,  because  she 
knew  how  jealous  Cirjgabis  was.  When  the  dance  began, 
everybody  began  drinking  some  of  the  strong  herb  liquor  and 
it  went  to  their  heads  and  made  them  feel  good,  and  dizzy. 
The  old  woman  told  her  sons  to  keep  Cirjgabis  well  supplied 
with  the  drink  and  not  let  to  him  leave  until  late.  She  then 
waited  until  the  dancing  was  well  started  and  everybody  was 
warmed  up  to  it.  Then  she  quietly  slipped  away  when  she 
saw  that  Cirjgabis  was  dancing  hard  and  feeling  good  with  the 
drink.  He  had  almost  forgotten  about  his  wife  and  what  might 
happen.  The  old  woman  went  off  into  the  woods  to  where  there 
was  a  dead  spruce  stump  that  was  full  of  ants.  She  cut  off  the 
stump  and  got  a  piece  about  the  length  of  a  person.  The  ants 
are  asleep  in  the  cold  of  night  and  will  not  rouse  when  disturbed. 
The  stump  she  took  with  her  to  CiTjgabis'  wigwam  and  quietly 
called  to  her  daughter  inside.  "Come,  daughter,  I  have  come 
to  take  you  home  away  from  CiTjgabis,"  she  whispered.  "You 
get  up  out  of  bed  and  leave  everything  as  it  is."  "All  right," 
said  the  girl,  and  she  packed  up  a  few  of  her  things  and  came  out. 


20 

Then  the  old  woman  took  the  stump  full  of  ants  in  and  put  it 
beneath  the  rabbi tskin  blanket,  covered  it  up  just  like  the 
girl's  figure  sleeping  there,  and  the  two  then  fled  to  the  mother's 
camp. 

Cirjgabis  stayed  late  at  the  dance.  He  drank  a  great  deal  of 
the  liquor  and  got  pretty  dizzy  before  he  thought  about  going 
home.  At  last  he  left  the  dance  and  started  for  his  wigwam. 
He  entered  quietly.  "Are  you  asleep?"  he  asked  of  his  wife. 
There  was  no  answer.  "Aha!  that's  good,"  said  he.  "I'll  let 
her  sleep  and  then  there  will  be  no  danger  of  her  being  carried 
away  tonight,  as  I  am  very  sleepy  with  my  weariness  and 
cannot  keep  awake  to  watch  her  tonight.  That's  good;  she  is 
sound  asleep."  And  he  felt  her  blanket  and  found  what 
he  thought  was  her  figure  beneath  the  rabbitskin.  Then  he 
lay  down  quietly  beside  her,  so  as  not  to  awaken  her,  and  pretty 
soon  was  fast  asleep. 

Before  long  some  of  the  ants  got  warmed  up  by  his  body  and 
began  crawling  over  him.  "Oh!  what's  that  crawling  over  me! 
Do  you  know  what  it  is  that  is  creeping  over  us?"  he  asked  his 
wife,  and  gave  the  stump  another  poke  with  his  elbow.  No 
answer.  "Well,  you  are  asleep  yet.  But  that's  good.  There 
won't  be  any  danger  of  your  walking  about  the  camp  attracting 
the  other  men  while  I  am  asleep.  But  oh!  how  those  things  bite. 
I  wonder  what  they  are!"  Then  he  dozed  off  again  and  was 
awakened  again  by  the  ants  stinging  him.  He  managed  to  bear 
it  all  night,  and  in  the  morning  woke  up  suddenly,  all  bitten  up. 
He  jumped  up,  threw  off  the  rabbitskin  blanket,  and  instead  of 
his  wife  there  lay  the  old  rotten  spruce  stump  swarming  with  ants. 

(8)  Remarks  About  Wiske'djak. 
Timiskaming  Algonquin  Text. 
wiske'djak       wr'egiskenda'go     zi'gobcm         igr'br 

Wiske-djak  was  always  doing  it  is  said,  in  his  lifetime 

mischief, 

wr'gipama'tazrmatc    anicana'bi    mo-'jak    ano'tcke-'gon 

living  among  the  Indians,  always  everything 

ogr'jinrgwuna'djran    wr'djinrcana'bin'     i'yanotc     mo''jak 

doing  what  he  could  his  countrymen  Everywhere         always 

teasing  Indians. 


21 

kr'b9ba'ma!'dazitc          e'jr      ani'canabe'ka'nik      ki'baba'nda 

going  about  during  wherever       there  were  Indians.  going  about 

his  life 

mi-'gucka'djiatc      wr'djanicana'bi      owPetenda'go      zi'gobon 

teasing  hia  countrymen.  He  was  funny,  it  is  said, 

sa'wrna'nawe  ryeja'nawe        ega  irjo'djrma'nas-ik 

at  the  same  time  for  all  that.  He  had  no  canoe; 

to  have  him  about 

mo-'jak       ki'gmita'z9ga''me'tc  kenowekwa'Ve  kr'baba  aye'ja 

always  he  walked  about  the  a  great  distance,  going  here  and 

land  about  there. 

ke'gat'    enigu'k'kami'ga'g1        ak'i'7/g  krno'ndaga'newe 

Almost  travelled  over  the  on  earth.  We  heard  tell  of  him 

whole  world 

kr'baba    mrgu'cka'dzitc      kaye'ga'k'i'nage'gon    ogr'g9ckrt*on 

going  doing  mischief.  He  had  everything  it  would 

about  so  that  answer  him 

tcra'n9mit'a'gw9t'o'tc       mi'ti'g'on'       nibi-'       awe"si'zaV 

when   he  spoke   to  it;  trees,  water,  animals, 

ano'tc       awi-'cm'       awe'gwe'n9c*9'n'       ogi''n9kwe"ta'gon' 

and  all  other  small  creatures  would  reply  to  him 

i-gano'nac  mi-'samini'k       teba'djrmofk        wiske'djak. 

when  he  spoke.  That  is  as  can  be  told  of  Wiske-djak. 

much  as 

Free  Translation. 

Wiske'djak  was  always  doing  mischief  in  his  lifetime  among 
the  Indians,  so  it  is  said.  He  was  always  doing  everything  he 
could  to  plague  his  countrymen,  the  Indians.  He  spent  his  life 
going  about  everywhere  where  there  were  Indians,  to  tease  them 
and  play  mischief  among  them.  Because  he  was  so  funny,  it 
was  thought  good  to  have  him  going  about  in  spite  of  his  mis- 
chief. He  had  no  canoe,  so  he  always  walked  about,  going  great 
distances  here  and  there  and  everywhere,  until  he  had  travelled 
almost  all  over  the  world,  where  he  was  heard  of  doing  his 
mischievous  pranks.  He  had  the  power  to  make  everything  in 
creation  answer  him  when  he  spoke  to  it;  trees,  water, 
animals,  and  all  the  other  little  creatures  would  reply  to  him 
when  he  spoke.  That  is  all  that  can  be  said  of  Wiske'djak. 

(9)  Further  Comment  on  Wiske'djak. 

Wiske'djak,  ''meat  bird,"  was  a  great  mischief  maker.     He 
was  always  a  roamer,  always  hungry.     He  used  to  visit  from  one 
65977—5 


22 

family  of  Indians  to  another,  but  he  never  liked  to  stay  long  with 
one,  so  soon  he  would  move  away  and  go  near  other  people. 
He  was  always  looking  for  trouble  and  got  it  too,  but  in  spite  of 
all  he  was  never  killed.  Indeed,  nobody  ever  wanted  to  kill 
him,  even  though  he  was  causing  so  much  mischief,  because  the 
people  liked  to  have  him  around.  So  he  never  came  to  an  end. 
All  of  Wiske-djak's  pranks  were  done  at  different  times  long  ago, 
not  all  one  after  another  at  one  time,  as  it  might  seem.  He  is 
still  living  somewhere,  but  he  is  very  quiet  now,  as  we  don't 
hear  of  him  doing  anything  new  nowadays. 


TIMISKAMING   FOLK-LORE. 

(1) 

Wi'ndigo:  a  man-eating  creature  who  roams  through  woods 
devouring  luckless  victims.  He  is  believed  to  have  commenced 
as  a  hunter  who  became  lost  in  the  bush,  and  lost  all  his  provi- 
sions and  clothing.  Then  he  preyed  upon  anything  he  could 
find,  like  an  animal. 

(2) 

Pcf'guk*:  a  creature  of  bones,  a  skeleton,  that  clatters 
through  the  forest,  making  a  great  rattling  and  squeaking  noise. 
When  this  is  heard,  it  is  understood  as  an  omen  that  some  friend 
will  be  lost.  P&'guk*  is  accounted  for  by  the  story  of  a  hunter 
who  got  starved  out  in  the  bush.  Before  he  died  he  wished  that 
his  life  and  the  strength  of  his  flesh  might  be  transferred  to  his 
bones.  He  got  his  wish,  and  his  strength  went  into  his  bones 
when  his  flesh  fell  away.  Whenever  he  wished,  he  could  fly 
through  the  air  as  though  on  wings. 

(3) 

The  constellation  Ursa  Major  (Great  Bear  or  Dipper)  is  called 
wddji-'g  "fisher"  or  "black  cat"  (Mustela  pennanti).  The  four 
main  stars  of  the  group  form  the  body  of  the  animal;  the  stars 
trailing  behind  (the  handle  of  the  dipper)  represent  the  fisher's 


23 

tail,  the  bend  showing  the  bent  tail  of  the  animal.  The  story 
accounts  for  the  presence  of  the  fisher  in  the  sky,  relating  how 
the  various  animals  tried  to  reach  the  north  star,  but  eventually 
froze  to  death.  The  fisher  is  still  trying  to  reach  it  and  he  is  the 
nearest,  but  he  only  keeps  going  round  and  round  it  (representing 
the  revolution  of  the  constellation  about  the  North  Star)  without 
being  able  to  get  there. 

(4) 

The  Northern  Lights  are  called  wa't'e  "illumination"  (redupli- 
cated wawa't-e  is  "lightning"  from  thunder).  They  are  caused 
by  the  waves  splashing  against  the  rocky  shores  of  the  northern 
seas  (James  bay),  which  produce  a  sort  of  reflected  glow.  The 
seething  noise  which  is  sometimes  heard  when  the  aurora  is 
visible  is  attributed  to  the  grinding  of  the  rocks  and  gravel 
along  the  shore  of  the  sea  driven  by  the  action  of  water  and  wind 
in  the  north. 

The  Indians  here  think  that  within  two  days  after  the  aurora 
is  seen  they  will  get  a  heavy  wind  storm.  They  also  state  that 
wild  geese  require  a  day  and  a  night  to  reach  Lake  Timiskaming 
from  James  bay  when  they  migrate,  thus  showing  the  speed  of 
the  wind  by  comparison. 

(5) 

The  Rainbow  is  called  wdda'gwanBbrsan*  "forms  from  the 
water,"  since  the  phenomenon  is  believed  to  be  caused  by  the 
mist  from  breakers  on  some  great  body  of  water,  just  as  a  rain- 
bow will  appear  above  the  spray  along  the  seashore  or  hanging 
in  the  mist  above  some  waterfalls. 

(6) 

The  Milky  Way  is  bine' sfimif  from*  'bird's  path,"  because  it 
is  by  the  Milky  Way  that  the  fowl  and  birds  follow  their  north- 
ward or  southward  course  in  their  migrations.  It  guides  them 
southward  in  the  autumn  and  back  again  in  the  spring.  Less 
frequently  the  Milky  Way  is  called  dji'ba'imrfcan*  "spirit  path" 
over  which  the  spirits  of  the  dead  are  thought  to  journey. 
65977— 5 


24 

(7) 

To  see  a  white  animal  is  a  sign  of  bad  luck  to  a  hunter.  "Once 
a  man  went  hunting.  After  he  had  been  travelling  all  day  and 
taken  a  few  animals,  he  saw  a  bear  that  was  half  black  and  half 
white.  Then  he  said  to  himself,  'I  must  not  hunt  any  more  this 
trip.  If  I  do,  some  harm  will  come  to  my  family.'  So  he  went 
home." — "If  a  hunter  sees  an  albino  animal  he  must  stop  hunt- 
ing or  evil  will  befall  him  or  some  member  of  his  family." 

(8) 

To  find  a  dwarfed  animal  is  an  omen  of  misfortune.  "Once 
two  men  were  out  on  a  long  hunting  trip.  Soon  after  they  had 
begun  trapping,  they  found  a  dwarfed  beaver  in  one  of  the  traps. 
It  was  not  small  because  it  was  young,  but  they  could  see  it  was 
an  old  one,  but  much  undersized.  When  the  older  of  the  two 
men  saw  this,  he  said,  'We  must  go  home  at  once  and  give  up 
hunting  because  something  is  wrong  at  home.'  Although  they 
had  been  gone  only  a  short  time,  they  turned  back,  and  when 
they  got  home,  they  found  that  one  of  his  sons  was  dead  and  that 
the  family  was  waiting  to  bury  him." 

(9) 

To  foretell  what  kind  of  animals  will  be  killed  the  next  day 
by  men  just  before  going  hunting,  a  partridge  breast  bone  is  burnt 
or  scorched  before  the  fire.  The  shape  of  the  scorched  portion 
suggests,  by  a  vague  resemblance,  the  form  of  some  animal. 


(10) 

The  tips  of  the  wings  of  birds  that  are  killed  for  food  are  pre- 
served about  the  camp  for  good  luck,  or,  as  they  say,  "to  ask  for 
more  luck."  Some  hunters  also  preserve  the  skulls  of  all  the 
game  they  kill.  "If  they  throw  these  parts  of  the  animals 
away,  they  won't  be  able  to  find  what  creatures  they  may  look 
for  afterward." 


25 

(11) 
If  blue  bottle  flies  are  killed  it  will  bring  rain. 

(12) 

If,  in  winter,  rabbit's  hair  is  thrown  into  the  smoke  of  a  fire, 
as  it  rises  in  the  heat  toward  the  sky,  it  will  cause  snow  the  next 
day.  Children  are  scolded  when  they  do  these  things  at  the 
wrong  time. 

(13) 

In  the  body  of  a  fish  are  various  bones  which  the  Indians  liken 
to  different  utensils  and  tools  in  the  hunter's  outfit.  There  is  a 
gun,  spear,  bow  and  arrow,  knife,  paddle,  sled,  snowshoe,  awl, 
etc.  This  is  merely  a  saying. 

(14) 

Another  idea  is  that  a  "left-handed  person  is  clever,  because 
he  fools  people  by  the  way  he  does  things." 

(15  )  Bear  Feast. 

The  following  description  of  the  ceremony  attending  the  eating 
of  a  bear  is  based  on  the  accounts  of  three  participants. 

When  a  bear  has  been  killed,  the  families  in  the  neighbourhood 
assemble  at  a  camp  conveniently  near.  The  hunter  who  has 
killed  the  bear  becomes  the  host  of  the  occasion,  which  is  called 
ma'gwace-'  "feast."  Slabs  of  birch  bark  are  spread  upon  a  clear 
space  of  ground  to  serve  as  a  sort  of  table.  The  carcass  is  then 
butchered,  the  head  being  cut  off,  including  the  first  vertebra, 
the  long  piece  of  breast  fat  is  also  cut  off  with  the  head,  so  that 
the  two  remain  together.  The  head  with  this  mass  of  breast 
fat  is  then  put  into  a  separate  cooking  vessel.  Then  the  birch 
bark  slabs,  often  12  feet  long,  forming  the  cover  of  some  wigwam, 
are  covered  with  the  cut  up  portions  of  the  meat.  Birch  bark 
dishes  are  placed  for  each  participant  on  the  bark,  with  extra 
dishes  for  the  gravy.  The  grease  from  the  cooking  vessels  is 


26 

then  collected  and  put  into  a  separate  vessel  to  cool,  so  that  it 
will  be  thick  enough  to  drink.  When  the  meat  has  been  boiled 
properly,  all  the  guests  are  seated  at  their  places  around  the  bark 
spread.  Often  they  have  a  dance  around  it  at  this  time.  Before 
they  begin  to  eat,  the  chief  goes  around  to  each  guest  and  with 
a  big  wooden  spoon,  holding  about  a  cupful  and  a  half,  gives 
each  a  spoonful  of  grease.  Then  they  begito  to  eat. 

When  the  feast  is  about  half  through,  the  chief  gets  up  and 
decorates  the  bear's  head  with  bright  coloured  ribbons  about  six 
inches  long  attached  to  little  cedar  sticks  about  four  inches  long, 
with  their  ends  split  to  hold  the  ribbons.  These  ribbon 
streamers  are  stuck  into  the  fat  and  about  the  head.  Then  the 
head  itself  is  impaled  on  a  stick  and,  carrying  this  in  his  hand, 
the  chief  dances  twice  around  the  company,  singing  a  tune  to  a 
burden  of  syllables.  After  this  performance  the  chief  plants 
the  stick  with  the  head  upon  it  in  the  middle  of  the  spread  before 
all  the  guests,  where  it  is  left.  Then  they  finish  eating. 

After  the  feast  the  oldest  and  most  venerable  man  in  the  camp 
is  presented  with  the  head  and  the  attached  breast  fat,  which  he 
may  either  take  home  or  distribute  over  again  to  the  company. 
After  the  feast  is  over  the  chief  must  go  around  and  consume 
what  grease  is  left.  This  is  to  demonstrate  his  capacity  as  a 
man  and  hearty  eater.  After  all  is  over,  the  lower  jaw  bone  is 
tied  to  the  skull  in  its  proper  position  and  black  stripes  are 
painted  on  the  skull.  This  is  then  put  on  the  stub  end  of  a  branch 
of  a  tree  facing  from  some  prominent  point  toward  the  river  or 
lake,  near  the  water's  edge.  Here  it  can  be  seen  by  passers  by 
as  a  reminder  of  the  place  and  occasion  of  the  bear  feast. 

The  Indians  themselves  can  give  little  comment  on  the  mean- 
ing or  reason  of  this  ceremony,  except  that  it  is  done  from  respect 
to  the  bear  and  satisfaction  in  securing  a  bountiful  supply  of 
meat.  It  belongs  to  the  variously  expressed  series  of  bear  rites 
widespread  among  the  northern  tribes. 

(16)  Legend  of  Iroquois  Falls. 

Once  long  ago  a  war  party  of  Iroquois  came  north  into  this 
country  to  fight  the  Indians  at  Abitibi.  On  the  way  they  cap- 
tured an  old  woman  and  took  her  with  them  to  guide  them. 


27 

When  they  were  on  Abitibi  river  they  drew  near  the  big  falls 
there  without  knowing  it.  The  old  woman  was  made  to  stay 
in  the  first  canoe.  When  she  knew  they  were  nearing  the  falls 
she  slowed  up  so  that  the  flotilla  of  canoes  became  bunched. 
The  approach  to  the  falls  is  very  much  concealed.  All  of  a 
sudden  they  found  themselves  upon  the  brink  of  the  falls,  and 
before  they  could  help  themselves  they  all  went  over.  The  old 
woman  was  lost  with  the  rest  in  saving  her  people  from  being 
massacred  by  the  Iroquois.1 


1  It  is  a  most  remarkable  thing  that  practically  the  same  legend  is  found  among  all  the 
northern  and  eastern  Algonkians:    Cree,  Montagnais,  Abenaki,  Penobscot,  Malecite. 


28 


CHAPTER  II. 

MYTHS  AND  FOLK-LORE  OF  THE  TIMAGAMI 
OJIBWA. 

INTRODUCTION. 

In  the  following  pages  are  presented  the  myths  and  items  of 
folk-lore  related  by  various  informants  through  Aleck  Paul,  the 
second  chief  of  the  Timagami  band  of  Ojibwa.  I  present  them 
without  any  comparisons  with  other  mythologies  at  this  time, 
as  we  may  expect  before  long  to  have  more  northern  Algonkian 
mythology  available  for  study  and  analysis. 

(1)  NENEBUC,  THE  TRANSFORMER. 

(a)  The  Magic  Birth  of  Nenebuc  and  his  Four  Brothers.1 

There  were  two  people  living,  a  man  and  his  wife,  who  had 
an  only  daughter.  When  she  was  twelve  years  old,  the  age  of 
puberty,  she  was  taken  over  a  hill  and  was  kept  there  in  a  camp 
alone  for  twelve  days,  neither  eating  nor  drinking,  in  order  that 
she  might  have  a  dream.2  If  she  should  eat  or  drink,  she  would 
have  no  dream.  If,  while  she  was  dreaming,  a  panther  came 
alone,  she  would  be  very  strong.  So  her  parents  kept  her  there. 
The  girl  dreamed  of  the  sun,  so  she  could  not  look  at  the  sun  any 
more,  for  if  she  did  so,  she  would  have  to  go  away  from  her 
parents  and  live  with  the  sun.  When  the  girl  had  had  this 
dream,  she  went  back  to  her  parents  and  her  father  asked  her, 
"What  have  you  been  dreaming?"  "I  am  very  sorry,  but  I 
have  dreamed  of  the  sun,  so  I  cannot  ever  look  at  the  sun  again," 
replied  his  daughter.  "Well,  now  it  is  too  bad,  but  you  mustn't 
look  at  the  sun,"  said  her  father.  "You  stay  here  all  the  time. 
Don't  look  at  the  sun,  that's  all." 

1  This  is  the  version  of  the  Kingfisher  clan  of  the  Timagami  band. 
*  This  refers  to  the  old  custom  of  seclusion  during  puberty. 


29 

The  girl  used  to  get  water  at  the  shore  and  stay  there  a  long 
time.  One  day  in  March,  she  went  to  the  water  hole,  broke  the 
ice  and  looked  into  the  water.  In  so  doing,  she  made  a  mistake, 
for  there  was  no  cloud  in  the  sky  and  the  sun  was  shining 
brightly  near  the  horizon,  so  that,  early  in  the  morning,  she 
looked  at  the  sun.1  She  brought  the  water  back  in  a  birch 
bark  pail  and  placed  it  inside  the  wigwam,  but  she  could  not  sit 
down.  "What  is  the  matter?"  said  her  father.  "Why,  I 
looked  at  the  sun,"  answered  his  daughter.  "Well,  good-bye, 
you've  got  to  live  with  the  sun  now,"  said  her  father.  Then  the 
girl  and  her  parents  shook  hands  and  she  went  away  to  live  with 
the  sun,  and  is  there  yet.  Before  she  went  away  she  said  to  her 
father,  "You  will  see  your  grandchildren  before  long."  Then 
she  told  him  to  put  his  wooden  dish  upside  down  before  the  fire 
and  to  leave  it  there  four  days  and  four  nights  and  to  look  under 
it  every  morning.  Then  she  went  to  live  with  the  sun. 

So  the  old  man  put  the  dish  upside  down  before  the  fire.  The 
first  morning  he  lifted  the  edge  of  the  dish,  looked  under,  and 
there  he  saw  Nenebuc,  the  child  of  the  sun,  sitting.  The  next 
morning  he  did  the  same  thing  and  he  saw  Nenebuc's  brother 
sitting  with  him.  He  kept  doing  this  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth 
mornings,  until  there  were  Nenebuc  and  his  four  brothers  all 
sitting  under  the  dish.  Then  the  old  man  picked  up  the  dish. 
One  of  the  brothers,  the  second  brother,  had  horns  on  his  head 
and  the  old  man  said  to  him,  "You  won't  stay  here.  You  go  to 
the  west."  Then  he  sent  one  brother  to  the  east,  one  to  the 
south,  and  one  to  the  north.  So  Nenebuc,  the  eldest  of  the  five, 
was  left.  The  old  man  told  him  to  attend  to  the  world  and  to 
keep  the  winds  going  just  right  lest  the  water  get  stagnant  and 
bad.  Then  Nenebuc  stayed,  and  his  four  brothers  started  to 
the  four  parts  of  the  earth. 

One  day  Nenebuc  asked  his  grandfather,  "Where  have  I  been 
born?  Had  I  a  mother  like  other  people?"  His  grandfather 
would  not  tell  him,  but  his  grandmother  told  him  that  he  had 
been  found.  This  appeared  queer  to  Nenebuc  and  he  thought 
to  himself,  "The  other  people  have  mothers,  but  I  have  none. 
I  must  find  out."  So  he  took  a  whetstone  and,  scraping  it  on  a 


1  By  doing  so  she  became  pregnant.     Magical  conception  occurs  in  the  culture-hero  story 
of  the  Algonkian,  Iroquoian,  and  Yuchi  tribes. 


30 

rock,  he  asked  it,  "Have  I  any  mother?"  "Yes,  you  have  a 
mother,"  replied  the  whetstone  and  then  it  told  him  his  story. 
Then  Nenebuc  told  his  grandfather,  "I  have  a  mother  and  four 
brothers  besides.  The  whetstone  told  me  so." 

Soon  Nenebuc  began  growing  larger  and  he  thought  it  strange 
that  he  had  not  been  sent  out  into  the  world  like  his  brothers, 
so  he  asked  his  grandfather  for  what  reason  he  had  kept  him. 
His  grandfather  told  him  that  he  had  kept  him  at  home  so  that 
when  he  became  old  and  feeble  Nenebuc  would  be  able  to  help 
him,  cut  wood  for  him,  and  hunt  for  him.  This  satisfied 
Nenebuc  and  he  used  to  help  his  grandfather  in  many  ways, 
spearing  fish  for  him  in  calm  days,  hunting  for  him,  and  doing 
many  other  things.  He  never  got  into  any  mischief  and  he 
grew  very  fast. 

(b)  Nenebuc  Tempers  the  Wind. 

One  summer  Nenebuc  was  unable  to  get  fish  for  the  whole 
summer  on  account  of  the  high  winds.  The  people  almost 
starved,  and  then  Nenebuc  became  very  angry.  He  did  not 
like  to  see  his  grandfather  starving  and  his  anger  was  aroused 
against  the  West  Wind  for  blowing  so  much.  So  he  told  his 
grandfather  that  he  was  going  to  kill  the  West  Wind  for  this, 
but  the  old  man  said  to  him,  "Don't  kill  him.  Make  him  let 
the  wind  blow  a  while  and  then  stop,  so  that  everything  will 
be  all  right,  but  don't  kill  him."  "Well,  I  won't  be  long  away 
and  I'll  punish  my  brother",  replied  Nenebuc. 

So  he  went  away  and  finally  met  his  brother,  the  one  with  the 
two  horns,  who  lived  in  the  west.  Nenebuc  hammered  him 
soundly  with  a  club  and  broke  one  of  his  horns.  This  hurt 
him,  but  did  not  kill  him.  Then  Nenebuc  said,  "Don't  blow 
so  hard  any  more.  You  don't  care  for  your  grandfather,  but 
I  do  and  I  fear  he  and  the  people  will  starve."  Then  he  arranged 
things  with  his  brother  and  went  back.  After  this  he  went 
fishing  and  found  it  calm  with  only  a  little  puff  of  wind  now  and 
then.  Then  the  West  Wind  told  his  three  brothers  not  to  blow, 
for  if  they  did  Nenebuc  would  come  and  kill  them.  The  winds 
became  frightened  at  this  and  did  not  blow  at  all,  and  because 
of  this  the  water  grew  thick  and  stagnant  and  Nenebuc  was 


31 

unable  to  fish.  Then  his  grandfather  said,  "We  are  going  to 
die.  There  is  no  wind  and  the  water  is  bad.  Did  you  kill  the 
West  Wind?"  "No,"  said  Nenebuc.  "I  will  go  and  see  him 
and  tell  him  to  send  the  wind  once  in  a  while,  not  too  often  but 
just  right."  So  Nenebuc  went  to  his  brother,  the  West  Wind, 
and  said  to  him,  "I  came  here  to  tell  you  that  I  want  a  little 
wind  once  in  a  while,  but  not  too  much."  Then  everything 
was  arranged  satisfactorily.  Shortly  after  this  Nenebuc's 
grandparents  died  and  were  heard  of  no  more.1 

(c)  Nenebuc  Starts  Travelling,  Anum  Suum  Castigat  for  Deceiving 

Him,  Changes  the  Colour  of  the  Partridge  Family,  and  Originates 

Rock  Tripe  from  his  Scabs  for  the  Benefit  of  the  People. 

Now  Nenebuc  grew  up  and  was  alone.  He  was  a  man  and 
began  to  travel.  He  knew  all  kinds  of  things  concerning  the 
trees,  the  world,  and  everything  which  his  grandfather  had 
taught  him.  He  set  out  on  his  first  journey  and  went  toward 
the  mountains.  In  one  day's  walk  he  climbed  over  three  great 
mountains,  something  that  no  man  could  do.  When  he  reached 
the  top  of  the  first  mountain  he  found  a  goose  and  killed  it.  In 
like  manner  he  killed  a  goose  on  the  tops  of  the  second  and  third 
mountains.  Then  he  went  down  to  the  lake  below.  He  was 
very,  very  tired  from  his  first  day's  journey.  He  made  a  fire 
with  his  bow-drill2  and  put  his  geese  in  the  sand,  which  he  had 
heated  to  bake  them  in.  He  buried  them  with  their  legs  sticking 
out.  He  lay  down  by  the  fire  and  ano  suo  dixit  to  watch  the 
geese  while  he  slept,  so  that  no  one  would  steal  them.  Just  as  he 
was  dozing  off  to  sleep,  anus  ejus  dixit,  "Somebody's  coming  for 
your  geese!"  and  Nenebuc  jumped  up.  Sed  anus  ejus  eum  deci 
piebat.  It  did  this  three  or  four  times.  At  last  Nenebuc  grew 
angry.  He  took  a  club  and  anum  suum  percussit  and  told  it 
not  to  do  that  again.  Then  he  went  to  sleep.  Some  people 
came  along  and  stole  the  geese,  but  left  the  legs  sticking  in  the 
same  place. 

When  Nenebuc  awoke,  anum  suum  interrogavit,  "Did  any 
one  come?"  "I  don't  know,"  anus  ejus  respondit.  "As  soon  as 

1  An  episode  strikingly  similar  to  one  found  among  the  Penobscot  and  other  Eastern 
Algonkians. 
*  Fire  drill. 


32 

you  fell  asleep,  I  slept.  I  don't  know."  Nenebuc  then  pulled 
up  the  legs  of  the  geese  and  found  nothing  else.  "It's  well 
cooked,"  said  he.  He  made  a  big  fire.  "Now  I'll  punish  you," 
ano  suo  dixit  and  he  held  it  over  the  fire.  "Tcj''jj!"  clamavit 
anus  ejus.  "You  can  cry  all  you  want  to.  I'll  punish  you," 
said  Nenebuc,  ano  suo  strepitum  urendi  faciente.  He  didn't  feel 
the  burns  then.  Then  he  started  walking. 

Next  day  he  felt  a  little  sick  and  anus  ejus  scabi  osus  fuit. 
In  walking  he  got  turned  around  and  saw  his  own  tracks. 
"Somebody's  passed  here,"he  said  to  himself,  when  he  saw  them. 
Then  he  saw  some  kind  of  meat  lying  on  the  ground,  and  he 
tasted  it.  "Somebody  had  some  meat  here,"  he  said.  Then  the 
little  bird  Gitcif'gi'*tci'gane'cicl  (Tom-tit)  cried  out,  "Nenebuc 
scabies  suas  edit!"  "Oh  no,  those  are  not  my  scabs.  Some 
old  woman  passed  by  and  left  some  dry  meat,"  said  he.  But 
at  last  he  discovered  se  scabies  suas  edisse,  but  even  then  he 
didn't  care.  He  kept  on  walking  and  felt  very  sick. 

By  and  by  he  came  upon  a  brood  of  young  partridges  and 
said,  "Where  is  your  mother?"  "Our  mother  is  away,"  said 
they.  "What's  your  names?"  They  answered  "Kotckuijge's-i" 
("Jump  out  and  frighten").  Nenebuc  turned  around  upon 
hearing  this  and  super  totam  familiam  defaecavit.  Up  to  this 
time  the  Partridges  had  been  white,  but  after  this  they  have 
always  been  brown. 

Then  Nenebuc  went  to  a  high  bluff  near  by.  He  was  tired, 
sick,  and  hungry,  and  he  lay  upon  the  bluff  sleeping.  Partridge 
came  home  and  said  to  his  young  when  he  saw  what  Nenebuc 
had  done  to  them,  "Who  did  this?"  "A  man  came  along  and 
asked  us  our  name  and,  when  we  told  him  'Kackurjge's'i,' 
super  nos  defaecavit.  He  said  he  wasn't  frightened  by  us." 
And  so  the  young  Partridges  told  their  father  where  Nenebuc 
had  gone.  The  old  Partridge  followed  his  tracks  until  he  came 
to  where  Nenebuc  lay  on  the  cliff.  He  saw  him  lying  right  on 
the  edge,  so  he  walked  up  slowly  to  him  and  then  suddenly 
buzzed  his  wings,  and  Nenebuc  jumped  up  and  fell  over  the  cliff. 
As  he  slid  down,  anum  suum  in  lapidibus  scabit  and  all  the  scabs 
rubbed  off.  As  he  lay  on  the  ground  he  saw  the  scabs  and  said, 

1  Onomapoetic  term  in  diminutive. 


33 

"These  Indians  will  call  this  wa-'kwani1  and  when  they  go  hungry 
they  can  make  soup  ;for  themselves,  these  Ojibwa,  forever." 
Then  he  was  cured. 

(d)    Nenebuc   Prepares  a  Feast  and  Gets  Caught   Between    Two 
Trees,  While  the  Animals  Receive  a  Distribution  of  Fat. 

After  this  Nenebuc  began  travelling  again.  One  time  he 
feasted  a  lot  of  animals.  He  had  killed  a  big  bear,  which  was 
very  fat  and  he  began  cooking  it,  having  made  a  fire  with  his 
bow- drill.  When  he  was  ready  to  spread  his  meat,  he  heard  two 
trees  scraping  together,  swayed  by  the  wind.  He  didn't  like 
this  notse  while  he  was  having  his  feast  and  he  thought  he  could 
stop  it.  He  climbed  up  one  of  the  trees  and  when  he  reached 
the  spot  where  the  two  trees  were  scraping,  his  foot  got  caught  in 
a  crack  between  the  trees  and  he  could  not  free  himself. 

When  the  first  animal  guest  came  along  and  saw  Nenebuc  in 
the  tree,  he,  the  Beaver,  said  "Come  on  to  the  feast,  Nenebuc  is 
caught  and  can't  stop  us."  And  then  the  other  animals  came. 
The  Beaver  jumped  into  the  grease  and  ate  it,  and  the  Otter  did 
the  same,  and  that  is  why  they  are  so  fat  in  the  belly.  The 
Beaver  scooped  up  the  grease  and  smeared  it  on  himself,  and 
that  is  the  reason  why  he  is  so  fat  now.  All  the  small  animals 
came  and  got  fat  for  themselves.  Last  of  all  the  animals  came 
the  Rabbit,  when  nearly  all  the  grease  was  gone — only  a  little 
left.  So  he  put  some  on  the  nape  of  his  neck  and  some  on  his 
groin  and  for  this  reason  he  has  only  a  little  fat  in  those  places. 
So  all  the  animals  got  their  fat  except  Rabbit.  Then  they  all 
went,  and  poor  Nenebuc  got  free  at  last.  He  looked  around 
and  found  a  bear's  skull  that  was  all  cleaned  except  for  the 
brain,  and  there  was  only  a  little  of  that  left,  but  he  couldn't 
get  at  it.  Then  he  wished  himself  to  be  changed  into  an  ant  in 
order  to  get  into  the  skull  and  get  enough  to  eat,  for  there  was 
only  about  an  ant's  meal  left. 

(e)  Nenebuc  Gets  Caught  in  the  Bear's  Skull. 

Then  he  became  an  ant  and  entered  the  skull.  When  he  had 
enough  he  turned  back  into  a  man,  but  he  had  his  head  inside 

Nenebuc 


hadth 


1  Rock-tripe,  an  edible  fungus  made  into  soup  and  eaten  in  time  of  famine, 
this  experience  on  a  ledge  near  the  eastern  shore  of  Smooth  water  lake  (see  map) . 


34 

the  skull ;  this  allowed  him  to  walk  but  not  to  see.  On  account 
of  this  he  had  no  idea  where  he  was.  Then  he  felt  the  trees. 
He  said  to  one,  "What  are  you?"  It  answered,  "Cedar."  He 
kept  doing  this  with  all  the  trees  in  order  to  keep  his  course. 
When  he  got  too  near  the  shore,  he  knew  it  by  the  kind  of  trees 
he  met.  So  he  kept  on  walking  and  the  only  tree  that  did  not 
answer  promptly  was  the  black  spruce,  and  that  said,  "I'm 
Se*'sefga*ndak"  (black  spruce).  Then  Nenebuc  knew  he  was 
on  low  ground.  He  came  to  a  lake,  but  he  did  not  know  how 
large  it  was,  as  he  couldn't  see.  He  started  to  swim  across. 
An  Ojibwa  was  paddling  on  the  lake  with  his  family  and  he 
heard  someone  calling,  "Hey!  There's  a  bear  swimming  across 
the  lake."  Nenebuc  became  frightened  at  this  and  the  Ojibwa 
then  said,  "He's  getting  near  the  shore  now."  So  Nenebuc 
swam  faster,  and  as  he  could  understand  the  Ojibwa  language, 
he  guided  himself  by  the  cries.  He  landed  on  a  smooth  rock, 
slipped  and  broke  the  bear's  skull,  which  fell  off  his  head.  Then 
the  Ojibwa  cried  out,  "That's  no  bear!  That's  Nenebuc!" 
Nenebuc  was  all  right,  now  that  he  could  see,  so  he  ran  off,  as 
he  didn't  want  to  stay  with  these  people. 


(f)  Nenebuc    Wounds  the  Giant  Lynx,  Disguises  Himself  in  a 
Toad's  Skin,  and  Finally  Slays  Her. 

He  had  his  bow  and  arrow  with  him,  and  as  he  went  along  he 
saw  a  great  snake.1  He  shot  it  with  his  arrow.  He  came  to  a 
big  lake  with  a  nice,  sandy  shore,  where  he  saw  Lions2  (mici''bi- 
zi'w  "giant  lynx").  He  couldn't  shoot  them  with  his  arrow  as 
they  were  too  far  away,  nor  was  there  any  place  where  he  could 
hide  himself  until  they  came  to  sun  themselves  by  the  shore, 
when  they  felt  too  cold  in  the  water.  Finally  he  hit  upon  a 
plan.  He  took  some  birch  bark  from  a  rotten  stump,  rolled  it 
into  a  hollow  cylinder,  and  placed  it,  like  a  wigwam,  near  the 
shore.  He  got  inside  and  made  a  little  hole  in  the  bark  through 
which  to  shoot  and  kill  the  Lions. 


1  This  big  snake  became  a  high  rocky  ridge  on  the  portage  south  of  Smoothwater    lake 
(see  map  above  referred  to). 


he  lake  is  Smoothwater    lake,  dtcawa'gami  "smooth  lake"  (see  map  above  referred 
to).     This  IB  the  scene  of  the  world  transformation. 


35 

When  the  Lions  saw  the  thing  on  the  beach,  they  grew 
curious  to  find  out  what  this  strange  thing  was  on  the  beach 
that  was  not  there  the  day  before.  So  they  sent  a  big  snake  to 
twist  around  it  and  to  try  to  upset  it,  but  the  snake  did  not 
succeed  in  doing  this,  for  Nenebuc  stood  too  firm.  So  the 
Lions  came  ashore  upon  the  sand  and  Nenebuc  shot  one  of  them 
with  his  arrow — a  she-lion,  the  wife  of  the  Lion  chief.  He  did 
not  kill  her,  but  wounded  her  badly  in  the  side,  and  the  flint 
arrow  point  stayed  in  the  wound.  She  was  very  badly  wounded 
and  went  back  to  a  hole  which  led  to  a  cave  in  a  big  rock  where  she 
lived.1  Nenebuc  was  sorry  that  he  had  not  killed  the  Lion 
queen. 

As  he  went  along  the  shore,  the  next  morning,  he  heard  some- 
one singing  and  shaking  a  rattle.  Nenebuc  stood  there  wonder- 
ing and  waiting,  and  pretty  soon  he  saw  an  old  woman  making 
the  song.  So  he  went  across  to  see  her,  and  when  they  met,  he 
asked  her,  "What  are  you  doing?"  ''I'm  a  doctor,"  she  answered. 
"The  queen  of  the  Lions  has  been  shot  by  Nenebuc  and  I  am 
going  to  cure  her."  She  didn't  know  that  it  was  Nenebuc  to 
whom  she  was  talking,  for  she  was  too  old.  So  Nenebuc  told 
her,  "Let  me  hear  you  singing.  Is  that  what  you  are  going  to 
do  to  cure  her?"  "Yes,  I  will  sing  and  then  pull  out  that  arrow." 
The  Lions  had  sent  for  her  at  the  foot  of  the  lake  to  cure  the 
queen.  Nenebuc  picked  up  a  club  and  killed  her,  saying,  "You 
are  no  doctor  (mackrki-'winini'k'we  'medicine-person  woman') 
at  all."  Then  he  discovered  that  she  was  no  person  at  all,  but 
a  big  toad  (oma'kak'iS).  So  he  skinned  her  and  put  on  the  skin. 
The  skin  had  a  hole  in  the  groin,  and  as  he  had  no  needle  to  sew 
it  up  with,  his  scrotum  hung  out  when  he  put  it  on  himself. 
This  did  not  worry  Nenebuc,  for  he  thought,  "It  will  be  all 
right,  unless  they  notice  me  too  closely."  So  he  walked  past  the 
cave  in  which  the  Lions  lived  and  kept  singing  and  rattling  all 
the  time. 

When  the  young  lions  heard  him,  they  said,  "There's  the  old 
medicine  woman  coming."  They  were  very  glad  to  think  that 
their  mother  would  be  cured.  So  they  opened  the  door  in  the 
rock  and  Nenebuc  went  in,  and  one  of  the  daughters  came  to 


1  The  cave  is  in  a  high  bluff  on  the  west  shore  of  Smoothwater  lake.       On  the  eastern 
shore  is  where  Nenebuc  fell  down  the  rocks  and  made  wa'kwan. 


36 

meet  him  and  said,  "Come  in,  old  woman."  They  were  very 
much  pleased.  Nenebuc  said,  "Don't  shut  the  doors.  Leave 
them  open,  as  the  queen  needs  plenty  of  fresh  air!"1  Then  he 
said,  "I'm  hungry.  I've  had  a  long  walk  and  I'm  tired."  Then 
they  gave  him  a  good  meal  first.  While  he  was  eating,  he  sat 
with  open  legs  and  the  children  cried  out,  "Look  at  the  old  woman 
with  testicles  hanging  out!"  But  the  older  ones  told  them  to  be 
silent,  as  they  thought  some  old  women  had  testicles. 

When  he  had  finished  eating,  Nenebuc  said,  "Don't  watch 
me.  I'm  going  to  pull  out  the  arrow  point.  You  will  hear  her 
suffering  and  me  singing,  but  don't  look  until  you  hear  her  stop 
suffering.  Then  she  will  be  cured,  and  the  arrow  point  will  be 
out.  So  don't  look,  for  I  am  going  to  cure  her."  Then  he 
began  rattling  and  singing,  and,  as  he  did  so,  he  shoved  the  arrow 
point  farther  into  the  wound  of  the  queen  in  order  to  kill  her. 
When  she  yelled,  her  people  thought  that  the  hurt  was  caused  in 
pulling  it  out.  At  last  one  of  the  little  lion  children  peeped  and 
saw  Nenebuc  pushing  the  arrow  farther  in.  He  told  his  sister, 
"That's  Nenebuc  himself  inside!"  Then  Nenebuc  ran  outside 
and  the  Queen  Lion  was  dying.  Nenebuc  had  difficulty  to  clear 
himself.  He  pulled  off  the  toad  skin  and  tried  to  climb  up  the 
rock. 

(g)  The  Giant  Lynx  Causes  the  World  Flood  and  Gathers  the  Animals 
on  a  Raft;  Muskrat  Dives  for  Earth,  which  Nenebuc  Transforms 
into  a  New  World. 

As  soon  as  the  queen  died,  a  giant  stream  poured  out  of  the 
cave  and  the  lake  began  rising.  "That  is  going  to  flood  the  world 
and  be  the  end,"  said  Nenebuc.  So  he  cut  trees  and  made  a 
kind  of  raft.1  So  he  had  his  raft  ready,  and  the  end  of  the  world 
came.  He  couldn't  see  any  trees,  water  covered  everything, 
and  he  made  the  flood.  He  saw  all  kinds  of  animals  swimming 
toward  his  raft  and  he  took  them  on.  "Come  on,  come  on,"  he 
cried,  "and  stay  here."  For  he  wanted  to  save  them,  so  that 
after  the  flood  there  would  be  all  kinds  of  animals.  The  animals 
stayed  on  the  raft  with  him  for  a  long  while.  Some  time  after 

1  The  medicine  people  always  do  that  now. 

J  Abi-ndasa'gan  "something  to  sit  or  lie  on  the  water  with."  The  event  occurred  near  the 
previously  mentioned  cave. 


37 

this  he  made  a  rope  of  roots  and  tied  it  to  the  Beaver's  tail, 
telling  him  to  dive  and  to  try  and  reach  the  land  underneath. 
He  knew  the  water  would  get  lower  afterwards.  The  Beaver 
couldn't  reach  the  land  and  he  came  up  to  the  surface  of  the  water 
again. 

Seven  days  after  this  he  allowed  the  Muskrat  to  try  and  bring 
the  land.  Muskrat  dove  and  they  waited  for  a  long  time,  but 
he  didn't  come  up.  This  Muskrat  doubled  up  and  put  his  nose 
into  the  hair  of  his  breast  which  enabled  him  to  breathe  by  the 
bubbles  clinging  there.  By  doing  this  he  could  rest  and  dive 
still  deeper.  At  last  he  used  up  all  the  air  in  his  breast  hair  and 
could  only  grab  a  little  piece  of  mud.  Then  he  started  up  to  the 
surface  of  the  water,  but  drowned  before  he  reached  the  raft. 
Nenebuc  pulled  the  Muskrat  in  and  he  still  was  holding  the  mud. 
Nenebuc  said,  "I  am  going  to  dry  this.  As  soon  as  it  is  dry, 
you  can  all  run  around  again  and  have  this  world."  So  he  dried 
it,  but  not  entirely,  and  that  is  the  reason  why  some  parts  of  the 
world  are  swampy  and  wet,  while  others  are  dry  like  this.  So 
the  animals  had  the  earth  again  and  the  world  was  made. 

(h)  Nenebuc  Sends  Crow  Out,  for  Disobedience  Changes  Him 
Black  and  Gull  Partly  Black,  then  Retires  to  the  West,  until  he 
Will  Return  Again. 

Nenebuc  knew  the  world  was  round  like  a  ball,  but  he  didn't 
know  how  large  it  was.  He  was  sitting  down,  tired.  So  he  said 
to  Crow,  "Go  fly  around  the  world  and  don't  eat  until  you  come 
back  again.  If  you  do,  we  will  know  it."  Crow  at  that  time 
was  white.  Crow  had  to  do  as  he  was  told,  because  Nenebuc 
was  chief  of  all  men  and  animals.  So  Crow  started  and  flew 
and  flew  along  the  salt  water  beach.  Soon  he  became  very  hungry 
and  wondered  how  far  he  was  away  from  Nenebuc.  One  morn- 
ing he  was  flying  along  the  shore  and  he  saw  an  old  dead  fish. 
He  was  so  hungry  that  he  tasted  a  little  bit  of  it,  and  finally 
made  a  meal  of  it.  When  he  finished  eating,  he  found  he  had 
turned  black.  This  is  the  way  Crow  became  black. 

When  Crow  reached  the  place  from  which  he  started  out,  he 
found  Nenebuc  and  all  the  animals  waiting  for  him.  He  told 
Nenebuc  that  he  had  eaten,  and  then  Nenebuc  said  to  Gull, 
65977—6 


38 

"You  go  try.  Do  the  same  and  don't  eat  until  you  come  here." 
So  Gull  went.  When  he  got  to  the  same  place  at  which  Crow 
had  felt  hungry,  Gull  felt  hungry.  One  morning  he  saw  the 
same  dead  fish.  He  thought,  "Well,  I  musn't  eat  it,  for  if  I  do, 
I'll  be  as  black  as  Crow."  He  took  one  mouthful  and  started 
flying.  When  Gull  returned,  Nenebuc  could  see  a  little  black 
on  his  wings,  so  he  said,  "Gull  has  had  a  mouthful  too." 

Then  he  told  Owl,  "You  go  and  try  to  go  around  the  world 
this  time.  If  you  eat,  you  won't  change  colour  but  remain  the 
same  colour  as  you  are  now.  But  if  you  eat,  you  won't  come  back 
here."  So  Owl  started  flying.  He  came  to  the  same  lake,  saw 
the  dead  fish  and  finished  it.  He  ate  a  good  meal  and  never 
returned.1  But  he  didn't  change  colour. 

Then  Nenebuc  let  all  the  animals  go  from  the  raft.  He 
started  west  and  is  there  yet,  lying  on  his  back,  singing  and 
hammering  at  his  wigwam  poles,  in  place  of  drumming,  all  the 
time.  He  will  stay  there  until  he  gets  up  again  three  years 
before  the  end  of  the  world,  when  he  will  travel  all  over  the  world 
to  see  the  animals  and  the  Ojibwa  again.  He  will  not  die  until 
the  end  of  the  world. 


(2)  NENEBUC  FRAGMENT. 2 

Once  the  Goose  met  Nenebuc  and  gave  him  two  wings.  He 
told  him  that  if  he  flapped  them  he  could  fly  with  them,  but  that 
he  must  not  look  downwards  while  he  flew.  So  Nenebuc  took 
the  wings  and  began  flying.  When  he  got  very  far  up,  he  won- 
dered how  high  he  was  and  looked  down.  Then  he  tumbled 
down  and  down  until  he  fell  into  a  big  hollow  stump  where  he 
couldn't  get  out.  Soon  two  girls  came  along  with  an  axe  to 
get  some  wood  and  began  cutting  at  the  hollow  pine  in  which 
Nenebuc  was.  They  cut  a  hole  and  Nenebuc  kept  quiet,  for  he 
was  hoping  they  would  free  him.  When  they  looked  in  the  hole, 
they  saw  his  belly  and  they  pulled  out  a  hair.  They  went  back 
to  camp  and  told  their  father,  "Here  is  a  porcupine  quill  we 

1  This  is  called  Koko'kowikwe-'tuak  "Owl  bay,"  now  known  as  Kokoko  bay,  the  north- 
eastern arm  of  Lake  Tiruagami  (see  map).  The  event  occurred  on  the  western  shore  of  the 
bay. 

1  This  fragment  has  probably  come  from  some  neighbouring  band  of  Ojibwa,  possibly 
Mattagami. 


39 

found  in  a  tree."  The  old  man  looked  at  it  and,  laughing,  said, 
"That's  not  a  porcupine  quill,  that's  a  hair  from  Nenebuc's 
groin!" 

(3)  NENEBUC  TRANSFORMS  THE  BEAR.1 

Nenebuc  in  his  tracks  encountered  the  great  Bear  that  killed 
and  ate  the  Indians — so  many  of  them  that  they  feared  they  would 
all  be  killed.  So  Nenebuc  went  to  the  Bear  and  said,  "You  are 
eating  so  many  of  the  Indians  that  they  will  all  be  gone  soon. 
Now  I  am  going  to  make  you  small  and  harmless."  Then  he 
made  him  into  the  Squirrel  and  turned  the  Squirrel  into  the 
Bear,  and  the  Bear,  now  in  Squirrel's  shape,  felt  so  badly  that 
he  cried  until  his  eyebrows  turned  grey.  That  is  the  reason 
why  to  this  day  squirrels  have  grey  eyelids. 

"Now,"  said  Nenebuc,  "what  will  you  eat?"  The  Bear,  now 
a  Squirrel,  said  he  would  continue  to  eat  people,  but  he  was  so 
small  that  he  could  not  do  anything.  "That  is  good,"  said 
Nenebuc.  "Now  you  can't  do  any  harm  to  the  Indians.  But 
you  had  better  change  your  food.  Just  run  up  that  black- 
spruce  tree  and  taste  the  acorn  seeds  and  then  see  whether  you 
want  to  eat  people  any  more.  You  are  too  small  to  eat  people 
as  you  used  to  do."  So  the  Squirrel  ran  up  the  black-spruce 
tree  and  tasted  the  sweet  seed  of  the  cone.  He  liked  it  so  well, 
it  tasted  so  sweet,  that  he  chose  this  for  his  food  and  said  that  he 
would  not  want  anything  better  any  more.  That  is  his  food 
to-day. 

(4)  WEMICUS. 

Wemicus  had  a  very  large  family.  Many  of  his  children  had 
married  the  different  animals  who  lived  in  various  parts  of  the 
surrounding  country.  By  and  by  he  had  nearly  all  kinds  of 
animals  for  his  sons-in-law,  and  there  were  still  a  great  many 
children  left  in  his  family.  When  winter  came,  Wemicus  was 
unable  to  support  his  family,  as  there  were  too  many  of  them. 
They  were  all  living  in  one  wigwam. 

One  day  Wemicus  said  to  his  wife,  "We  are  all  very  hungry. 
I  might  go  and  see  one  of  our  sons-in-law;  he  might  have  some 

1  This  is  a  fragment  of  the  culture-hero  cycle  of  the  Mattagami  band  of  Ojibwa,  which  has 
become  known  among  the  Timagami  people,  but  does  not  form  a  part  of  their  own  version. 

65977— 6£ 


40 

food."  Next  morning  he  started  out.  Wemicus  always  tried 
to  imitate  the  actions  of  everybody  he  saw.  When  he  reached 
the  home  of  his  son-in-law  Ninicip  (Black  Duck)  he  saw  that  he 
also  had  a  large  family.  Ninicip  was  inside  of  his  wigwam,  and 
when  he  saw  Wemicus  coming,  he  told  his  wife,  "You  had  better 
begin  to  get  ready  for  company  and  boil  water  in  the  stone 
pail."  Then  he  jumped  up  upon  the  cross  poles  in  his  wigwam1 
and  in  vas  lapidum  sub  se2  defaecavit,  telling  his  wife  to  stir  up 
the  contents  of  the  pot.  Wemicus  apparently  saw  nothing  of 
this.  Then  one  of  the  children  of  Ninicip  took  spoons  and, 
dipping  them  in  the  pot,  said,  "Soup,  soup,  soup,  rice  soup." 
Wemicus  tasted  the  soup,  thought  it  tasted  good,  and  decided 
that  after  this  he  would  make  soup  in  the  same  manner. 

The  next  morning,  when  Wemicus  started  for  home,  he  was 
given  some  rice  soup  to  take  home  to  his  children.  Before  leaving 
the  wigwam  of  Ninicip,  however,  Wemicus  had  purposely  left 
behind  one  of  his  mittens.  One  of  the  children  saw  the  mitten 
and  Ninicip's  wife  sent  the  child  to  return  it,  bidding  him  not 
to  go  too  close  to  Wemicus  but  to  throw  him  the  mitten.  The 
child  did  the  bidding  of  his  mother  and,  when  the  mitten  was 
thrown  to  Wemicus,  he  said,  "Ask  your  father  to  come  and  see 
me,"  and  he  named  a  certain  day.  On  the  way  back  home 
Wemicus  thought,  "I  wonder  what  this  soup  tastes  like  when  it 
is  cold.  I  must  try  it.  My  children  don't  need  any  of  it,  so  I 
might  as  well  eat  it  all."  So  he  ate  all  of  the  soup.  When  he 
reached  his  wigwam  he  said,  "Ninicip  and  his  family  are  starving 
also.  To-morrow  he  will  come  to  see  us  and  perhaps  he  will 
bring  us  something.  We  had  better  fix  up  our  wigwam."  Then 
they  fixed  up  the  wigwam  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  Ninicip. 
The  next  day  Ninicip  came  and  they  gave  him  the  best  place. 
Wemicus  said  to  his  wife,  "We'll  get  ready  to  eat  now.  Put 
some  water  in  the  stone  pail."  "There  is  no  use  putting  any 
water  in  the  pail,"  answered  his  wife,  "we  have  nothing  to  cook." 
"Well,  bring  the  pail,  anyway,  and  get  some  spoons,"  said 
Wemicus.  When  the  water  began  boiling,  Wemicus  jumped 
up  on  the  cross-poles,  in  vas  defaecavit,  all  over  his  children  and 
the  inside  of  the  wigwam.  Then  Ninicip  went  out.  His  wife 

1  Every  wigwam  has  horizontal  poles  crossing  near  the  smoke  hole.  This  is  a  drying  rack 
and  support  for  the  pot  hook. 

*  The  Ojibwa  formerely  cooked  in  stone  vessels  as  well  as  in  birch  bark. 


41 

scolded  Wemicus,  saying,  "You  always  do  something  like  that. 
You  must  have  seen  someone  do  that."  Then  Wemicus  kept 
quiet  and  everything  had  to  be  cleaned  up.  The  wife  then 
invited  Ninicip  to  come  in  again  and  he  told  her  that  he  would 
fix  up  the  meal.  Igituo  interum  in  vas  defaecavit  and  they  had 
good  rice  soup,  and  everyone,  even  Wemicus,  had  a  good  meal. 
The  following  morning  Ninicip  made  soup  for  the  family  again 
and  then  went  home.  Soon  Wemicus  and  his  family  were  starv- 
ing again  and  Wemicus  said,  "I  must  go  and  see  my  son-in-law, 
Muskrat.  He  lives  not  far  away."  "All  right,"  said  his  wife 
and  Wemicus  set  out.  When  he  had  almost  reached  Muskrat's 
home,  the  little  Muskrat  children  called  out,  "Our  grandfather 
is  coming."  Wemicus  told  Muskrat  that  he  was  starving  and 
Muskrat  said  to  his  wife,  "You  had  better  make  a  fire  in  the  hot 
sand."  So  the  fire  was  made,  and  Muskrat  went  out  with  a  big 
sack  made  out  of  hide  and  returned  with  the  sack  full  of  ice, 
which  he  dumped  into  the  hot  ashes.  Wemicus  expected  that 
it  would  explode  but  it  only  cooked  nicely.  Wemicus  wondered 
what  it  was.  Soon  Muskrat  said,  "We  are  ready  now,"  and  they 
took  off  the  sand  and  there  were  a  lot  of  nicely  baked  potatoes. 
Wemicus  thought  that  was  an  easy  way  in  which  to  live — just 
to  get  ice  for  potatoes. 

Next  morning  Wemicus  started  out  for  home  and  left  his 
mitten  behind  as  he  had  done  with  Ninicip.  Muskrat's  wife 
sent  a  child  after  him  and  told  the  child,  "Don't  go  too  close  to 
Wemicus.  He's  always  in  mischief."  Everything  happened  as 
before.  The  child  threw  the  mitten  to  Wemicus  and  Wemicus 
sent  an  invitation  to  Muskrat  to  come  to  his  home  the  next  day. 
As  Wemicus  went  on  his  way  he  had  some  potatoes  which 
Muskrat  had  given  him  for  his  family.  Half  way  home  he 
rested  and  thought  he  would  eat  the  potatoes,  as  they  looked 
very  good.  So  he  ate  every  one.  "I  am  the  one  who  works 
hard,"  he  said  to  himself.  "My  family  can  wait  until  Muskrat 
comes."  When  he  reached  home  he  told  his  wife,  "Muskrat  is 
also  starving.  I  brought  nothing.  Muskrat  is  coming  tomorrow 
to  see  us."  Next  day  Muskrat  came  and  they  put  him  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  wigwam.  Wemicus  said,  "We  have  nothing 
much,  but,  wife,  make  a  fire  in  the  hot  sand."  The  wife  ans- 
wered, "I  suppose  you  saw  somebody  else  do  something.  Don't 


42 

you  try  any  more  mischief."  But  he  made  his  wife  make  the 
fire.  He  then  went  out  and  returned  with  the  sack  full  of  ice, 
which  he  dumped  on  the  fire.  The  sack  blew  up  all  over  every- 
body and  put  out  the  fire.  Then  his  wife  said,  "I  suppose  you 
saw  someone  do  that  again."  She  made  another  fire  and  Musk- 
rat  said,  "Give  me  that  bag."  He  went  out  and  brought  back 
the  sack  full  of  ice,  dumped  and  buried  it  in  the  fire,  and,  after 
a  while,  they  got  the  potatoes.  All  of  them  had  a  good  meal. 
The  next  morning,  before  Muskrat  left,  he  got  them  another  bag 
of  potatoes. 

Wemicus  does  not  work,  although  his  family  is  so  large.  Well, 
pretty  soon  the  whole  family  was  starving  again.  Then  said 
Wemicus,  "I  must  go  and  see  Meme  (pileated  woodpecker), 
my  son-in-law."  He  went  into  the  bush  and  when  he  reached 
Meme's  wigwam  he  found  a  large  white  pine  in  back  of  it.  He 
noticed  that  Meme  had  a  sharp  pointed  nose.  He  saw  that 
Meme  had  not  much  to  live  on,  but  nevertheless  Meme  told  his 
wife  to  get  the  cooking  pail  ready.  Then  Meme  began  climbing 
the  pine  tree,  which  was  at  the  back  of  his  wigwam,  and  began 
pecking  in  the  trunk  with  his  nose.  Pretty  soon  he  came  down 
with  a  raccoon.1  When  Wemicus  saw  this,  he  thought,  "That 
is  a  great  thing;  I  must  try  it."  Meme  burned  off  the  hair  and 
cleaned  the  raccoon,  and  shared  the  meat  on  a  stick  to  each 
one.  Wemicus  received  the  best  part,  as  he  was  the  grandfather. 

The  next  morning  they  had  another  raccoon  to  eat.  Then 
everything  happened  as  before.  Wemicus  was  given  a  raccoon 
to  take  home.  He  left  his  mitten  behind,  and  sent  an  invitation 
to  Meme  to  visit  him  the  next  day.  On  the  way  home  Wemicus 
thought  to  himself,  "I  wonder  how  this  raccoon  tastes  cold." 
So  he  ate  the  entire  raccoon.  When  he  got  home,  he  told  his 
wife  that  Meme  was  starving  but  that  he  was  coming  to  visit 
them  the  following  day.  They  put  the  wigwam  in  order  and 
Wemicus  fixed  up  a  big  pine  like  that  belonging  to  Meme  and 
cut  two  pieces  of  wood,  which  he  pointed  and  shoved  into  his 
nose  to  imitate  Meme.  When  Meme  came  along  he  saw 
Wemicus  sitting  there  with  sticks  in  his  nose.  Wemicus  told 
his  wife,  as  usual,  to  prepare  for  supper,  and  she  told  him  that 
they  had  nothing.  When  she  had  the  water  boiling  in  the  pail, 

1  A  very  scarce  animal  in  northern  Ontario. 


43 

Wemicus  climbed  up  the  tree  and  pecked  upon  it  in  imitation 
of  Meme.  He  fell  down,  however,  and  drove  the  sticks  into  his 
head.  He  fell  into  the  fire,  but  after  a  while  he  gained  con- 
sciousness. Then  Meme  stepped  out  of  the  wigwam,  climbed 
the  tree,  and  brought  down  a  raccoon.  And  then  the  whole 
family  had  a  good  supper.  Next  morning  Meme  got  another 
raccoon  and  left  it  for  the  family,  and  then  went  home. 

Still  Wemicus  did  nothing  and  the  family  was  again  in  a 
starving  condition.  Then  said  Wemicus,  "I  have  some  more 
sons-in-law  and  one  is  close.  I  will  go  and  see  him;  he  will  help 
me  until  open  water.1  I  will  go  and  see  Skunk."  So  he  set  out 
to  visit  Skunk.  Wemicus  was  pretty  hungry  and  Skunk  was 
farther  off  than  the  rest  of  the  sons-in-law,  but  he  finally  reached 
his  home.  Wemicus  found  Skunk's  water  hole2  and  saw  a  great 
quantity  of  oil  in  it.  He  knew  that  Skunk  must  have  killed  a 
great  deal  of  game.  So  he  went  into  Skunk's  wigwam  and  saw 
a  great  quantity  of  food.  Skunk  said,  "We  don't  have  much. 
It  is  long  since  I  hunted.  But  come  outside."  There  Wemicus 
saw  a  piece  of  ground  fenced  in.  Skunk  then  produced  a  little 
birch  bark  horn3  and  said,  "What  will  you  have?"  Skunk  now 
blew  on  his  horn  and  all  kinds  of  game  came  inside  the  enclosure. 
Skunk  deinde  pepedit  and  killed  whatever  kind  Wemicus 
wanted.  They  then  skinned  what  he  killed  and  fried  it  for 
supper. 

In  the  morning  Skunk  said  to  Wemicus,  "I'll  give  you  three 
shots  and  a  horn.  You  can  make  a  fence  for  yourself.  This 
horn  will  last  forever,  as  long  as  you  don't  lose  it.  If  you  do,  it 
will  be  bad."  Then  Skunk  gave  Wemicus  three  shots  to  be  used 
in  the  future,  and  he  did  this  urinando  super  eum  to  load  him 
up  three  times.  He  did  not  give  him  any  food,  because  he  would 
be  able  to  get  enough  for  himself.  Then  Wemicus  thought, 
"Now  I  am  going  to  do  something."  As  Wemicus  was  on  his 
way  home  he  said  to  himself,  "I  wonder  if  it  will  go  off!"  So, 
just  as  he  was  passing  a  tree  stump,  pepedit  at  the  stump  and 
blew  it  up.  "That's  fine,  but  I  have  only  two  more  shots  left," 
said  he.  Later  he  tried  the  same  thing  and  then  only  had  one 

1  The  Indians  often  had  much  trouble  to  get  food  in  the  winter  and  looked  forward  eagerly 
to  spring,  when  the  ice  leaves  the  rivers,  making  "open  water,"  thus  enabling  them  to  seek 
new  hunting  places. 

1  An  opening  in  the  ice  near  the  camp  for  the  supply  of  water  in  winter. 
1  An  affair  resembling  a  megaphone  or  moose  call. 


44 

left.  A  little  while  after  this  he  saw  a  big  pine  tree,  and  thought 
he  would  try  a  shot  at  this.  So  he  blew  up  the  pine  tree,  and  so 
used  up  all  his  shots. 

When  he  reached  his  wigwam,  he  showed  his  wife  the  horn 
which  Skunk  had  given  him,  saying,  "Skunk  gave  me  that." 
Then  he  built  a  large  fence  of  poles.  He  told  his  wife  to  hold 
the  horn  and  stay  near  by,  while  he  got  a  club  to  kill  the  game 
with.  Then  he  blew  on  the  horn  and  the  fence  was  filled  with 
bear,  deer,  and  all  kinds  of  animals.  Although  he  had  no  shots 
left,  Wemicus  managed  to  kill  one  caribou,  and  his  wife  was  very 
happy.  He  cut  the  fat  from  the  breast  of  the  caribou,  made  a 
fire,  and  got  some  grease  from  it.  He  then  spilled  the  caribou 
grease  in  his  water  hole  in  order  to  deceive  Skunk  and  make  him 
believe  that  he  had  a  great  quantity  of  meat.  Not  long  after 
this  Skunk  started  out  to  visit  Wemicus  and,  on  his  way,  he 
passed  the  three  stumps  which  Wemicus  had  blown  up  and  knew 
that  he  had  no  more  shots  left.  When  he  rached  Wemicus's 
water  hole  he  said,  "I  guess  he  got  one  any  way."  When  he 
came  to  the  wigwam,  he  found  that  Wemicus  and  his  family  had 
hardly  any  meat  left,  so  he  said  to  Wemicus,  "Come  out  and  let 
me  see  your  fence."  They  went  out  and  Wemicus  blew  his 
horn,  and  inside  the  fence  it  became  full  of  game.  Skunk 
pepedit  and  killed  all  of  them,  and  then  Wemicus  and  his  family 
had  plenty.  Skunk  stayed  over  night  and  departed  the  next 
morning. 

Wemicus  had  another  son-in-law  who  was  a  man.  This 
man's  wife,  the  daughter  of  Wemicus,  had  had  a  great  many 
husbands,  because  Wemicus  had  put  them  to  so  many  different 
tests  that  they  had  been  all  killed  off  except  this  one.  He, 
however,  had  succeeded  in  outwitting  Wemicus  in  every  scheme 
that  he  tried  on  him.  Wemicus  and  this  man  hunted  beaver  in 
the  spring  of  the  year  by  driving  them  all  day  with  dogs.  The 
man's  wife  warned  him  before  they  started  out  to  hunt,  saying, 
"Look  out  for  my  father;  he  might  burn  your  moccasins  in 
camp.  That's  what  he  did  to  my  other  husbands."1  That 
night  in  camp  Wemicus  said,  "I  didn't  tell  you  the  name  of  this 
lake.  It  is  called  'burnt  moccasins  lake.'  "  When  the  man 


to  death. 


1  By  doing  this  he  would  prevent  them  from  travelling  and  cause  them  to  freeze  or  starve 

natlt 


45 

heard  this,  he  thought  that  Wemicus  was  up  to  some  sort  of 
mischief  and  was  going  to  burn  his  moccasins.  Their  moccasins 
were  hanging  up  before  a  fire  to  dry  and,  while  Wemicus  was  not 
looking,  the  man  changed  the  places  of  Wemicus'  moccasins  and 
his  own,  and  then  went  to  sleep.  Soon  the  man  awoke  and  saw 
Wemicus  get  up  and  throw  his  own  moccasins  into  the  fire. 
Wemicus  then  said,  "Say!  something  is  burning;  it  is  your 
moccasins."  Then  the  man  answered,  "No,  not  mine,  but 
yours."  So  Wemicus  had  no  moccasins,  and  the  ground  was 
covered  with  snow.  After  this  had  happened  the  man  slept  with 
his  moccasins  on. 

The  next  morning  the  man  started  on  and  left  Wemicus  there 
with  no  shoes.  Wemicus  started  to  work.  He  got  a  big  boulder, 
made  a  fire,  and  placed  the  boulder  in  it  until  it  became  red  hot. 
He  then  wrapped  his  feet  with  spruce  boughs  and  pushed  the 
boulder  ahead  of  him  in  order  to  melt  the  snow.  In  this  way 
he  managed  to  walk  on  the  boughs.  Then  he  began  to  sing, 
"Spruce  is  warm,  spruce  is  warm."  When  the  man  reached 
home  he  told  his  wife  what  had  happened.  "I  hope  Wemicus 
will  die,"  she  said.  A  little  while  after  this,  they  heard  Wemicus 
coming  along  singing,  "Spruce  is  warm,  spruce  is  warm."  He 
came  into  the  wigwam  and,  as  he  was  the  head  man,  they  were 
obliged  to  get  his  meal  ready. 

The  ice  was  getting  bad  by  this  time,  so  they  stayed  in  camp 
a  while.  Soon  Wemicus  told  his  son-in-law,  "We'd  better  go 
sliding."  He  then  went  to  a  hill  where  there  were  some  very 
poisonous  snakes.  The  man's  wife  warned  her  husband  of 
these  snakes  and  gave  him  a  split  stick  holding  a  certain  kind  of 
magic  tobacco,  which  she  told  him  to  hold  in  front  of  him  so 
that  the  snakes  would  not  hurt  him.  Then  the  two  men  went 
sliding.  At  the  top  of  the  hill  Wemicus  said,  "Follow  me,"  for 
he  intended  to  pass  close  by  the  snakes'  lair.  So  when  they 
slid,  Wemicus  passed  safely  and  the  man  held  his  stick  with  the 
tobacco  in  it  in  front  of  him,  thus  preventing  the  snakes  from 
biting  him.  The  man  then  told  Wemicus  that  he  enjoyed  the 
sliding. 

The  following  day  Wemicus  said  to  his  son-in-law,  "We  had 
better  go  to  another  place."  When  she  heard  this,  the  wife  told 
her  husband  that,  as  it  was  getting  summer,  Wemicus  had  in 


46 

his  head  many  poisonous  lizards  instead  of  lice.  She  said, 
"He  will  tell  you  to  pick  lice  from  his  head  and  crack  them  in 
your  teeth.  But  take  low-bush  cranberries  and  crack  them 
instead."  So  the  man  took  cranberries  along  with  him.  Wemi- 
cus  took  his  son-in-law  to  a  valley  with  a  great  ravine  in  it. 
He  said,  "I  wonder  if  anybody  can  jump  across  this?"  "Surely," 
said  the  young  man,  "I  can."  Then  the  young  man  said, 
"Closer,"  and  the  ravine  narrowed  and  he  jumped  across 
easily.  When  Wemicus  tried,  the  young  man  said  "Widen," 
and  Wemicus  fell  into  the  ravine.  But  it  did  not  kill  him,  and 
when  he  made  his  way  to  the  top  again,  he  said,  "You  have 
beaten  me."  Then  they  went  on. 

They  came  to  a  place  of  hot  sand  and  Wemicus  said,  "You 
must  look  for  lice  in  my  head."  "All  right  father,"  replied  the 
son-in-law.  So  Wemicus  lay  down  and  the  man  started  to  pick 
the  lice.  He  took  the  cranberries  from  inside  his  shirt  and  each 
time  he  pretended  to  catch  a  louse,  he  cracked  a  cranberry  and 
threw  it  on  the  ground,  and  so  Wemicus  got  fooled  a  second 
time  that  day.  Then  they  went  home  and  Wemicus  said  to  his 
son-in-law,  "There  are  a  whole  lot  of  eggs  on  that  rocky  island 
where  the  gulls  are.  We  will  go  get  the  eggs,  come  back,  and 
have  an  egg  supper."  As  Wemicus  was  the  head  man,  his  son- 
in-law  had  to  obey  him. 

So  they  started  out  in  their  canoe  and  soon  came  to  the  rocky 
island.  Wemicus  stayed  in  the  canoe  and  told  the  man  to  go 
ashore  and  to  bring  the  eggs  back  with  him  and  fill  the  canoe. 
When  the  man  reached  the  shore,  Wemicus  told  him  to  go 
farther  back  on  the  island,  saying,  "That's  where  the  former 
husbands  got  their  eggs,  there  are  their  bones."  He  then 
started  the  canoe  off  in  the  water  by  singing,  without  using  his 
paddle.  Then  Wemicus  told  the  gulls  to  eat  the  man,  saying 
to  them,  "I  give  you  him  to  eat."  The  gulls  started  to  fly  about 
the  man,  but  the  man  had  his  paddle  with  him  and  he  killed 
one  of  the  gulls  with  it.  He  then  took  the  gulls'  wings  and 
fastened  them  on  himself,  filled  his  shirt  with  eggs,  and  started 
flying  over  the  lake  by  the  aid  of  the  wings. 

When  he  reached  the  middle  of  the  lake,  he  saw  Wemicus 
going  along  and  singing  to  himself.  Wemicus,  looking  up,  saw 
his  son-in-law  but  mistook  him  for  a  gull.  Then  the  man  flew 


47 

over  him  and  defecated  in  his  face,  and  Wemicus  said,  "Gull's 
excrement  always  smells  like  that  when  they  have  eaten  a  man." 
The  man  flew  back  to  camp  and  told  his  wife  to  cook  the  eggs, 
and  he  told  his  children  to  play  with  the  wings.  When  Wemicus 
reached  the  camp,  he  saw  the  children  playing  with  the  wings 
and  said,  "Where  did  you  get  those  wings?"  "From  father," 
was  the  reply.  "Your  father?  Why,  the  gulls  ate  him!"  Then 
he  went  to  the  wigwam  and  there  he  saw  the  man  smoking. 
Then  Wemicus  thought  it  very  strange  how  the  man  could  have 
gotten  home,  but  no  one  told  him  how  it  had  been  done.  Thought 
he,  "I  must  try  another  scheme  to  do  away  with  him." 

One  day  Wemicus  said  to  his  son-in-law,  "We'd  better  make 
two  canoes  of  birch-bark,  one  for  you  and  one  for  me.  We'd 
better  get  bark."  So  they  started  off  for  birch-bark.  They  cut 
a  tree  almost  through  and  Wemicus  said  to  his  son-in-law, 
"You  sit  on  that  side  and  I'll  sit  on  this."  He  wanted  the  tree 
to  fall  on  him  and  kill  him.  Wemicus  said,  "You  say,  'Fall  on 
my  father-in-law,'  and  I'll  say,  'Fall  on  my  son-in-law',  and 
whoever  says  it  too  slowly  or  makes  a  mistake  will  be  the  one  on 
whom  it  will  fall."  But  Wemicus  made  the  first  mistake,  and 
the  tree  fell  on  him  and  crushed  him.  However,  Wemicus  was  a 
manitu1  and  was  not  hurt.  They  went  home  with  the  bark  and 
made  the  two  canoes.  After  they  were  made,  Wemicus  said 
to  his  son-in-law,  "Well,  we'll  have  a  race  in  our  two  canoes,  a 
sailing  race."  Wemicus  made  a  big  bark  sail,  but  the  man  did 
not  make  any,  as  he  was  afraid  of  upsetting.  They  started  the 
race.  Wemicus  went  very  fast  and  the  man  called  after  him, 
"Oh,  you  are  beating  me."  He  kept  on  fooling  and  encouraging 
Wemicus,  until  the  wind  upset  Wemicus'  canoe  and  that  was  the 
end  of  Wemicus.  When  the  man  sailed  over  the  spot  where 
Wemicus  had  upset,  he  saw  a  big  pike  (krny,'je)  there,  into 
which  Wemicus  had  been  transformed  when  the  canoe  upset. 
This  is  the  origin  of  the  pike. 

(5)  CITJGIBIS. 

At  the  time  of  which  my  story  speaks  people  were  camping 
just  as  we  are  here.  In  the  winter  time  they  used  birch  bark 

1  Magic. 


48 

wigwams.  All  animals  could  then  talk  together.  Two  girls, 
who  were  very  foolish,  talked  foolishly  and  were  in  no  respect 
like  the  other  girls  of  their  tribe,  made  their  bed  out-of-doors, 
and  slept  right  out  under  the  stars.  The  very  fact  that  they 
slept  outside  during  the  winter  proves  how  foolish  they  were. 

One  of  these  girls  asked  the  other,  "With  what  star  would 
you  like  to  sleep,  the  white  one  or  the  red  one?"  The  other  girl 
answered,  "I'd  like  to  sleep  with  the  red  star."  "Oh,  that's 
all  right,"  said  the  first  one,  "I  would  like  to  sleep  with  the  white 
star.  He's  the  younger ;  the  red  is  the  older."  Then  the  two 
girls  fell  asleep.  When  they  awoke,  they  found  themselves  in 
another  world,  the  star  world.  There  were  four  of  them  there, 
the  two  girls  and  the  two  stars  who  had  become  men.  The 
white  star  was  very,  very  old  and  was  grey-headed,  while  the 
younger  was  red-headed.  He  was  the  red  star.  The  girls 
stayed  a  long  time  in  this  star  world,  and  the  one  who  had 
chosen  the  white  star  was  very  sorry,  for  he  was  so  old. 

There  was  an  old  woman  up  in  this  world  who  sat  over  a  hole 
in  the  sky,  and,  whenever  she  moved,  she  showed  them  the  hole 
and  said,  "That's  where  you  came  from."  They  looked  down 
through  and  saw  their  people  playing  down  below,  and  then  the 
girls  grew  very  sorry  and  very  homesick.  One  evening,  near 
sunset,  the  old  woman  moved  a  little  way  from  the  hole.1 

The  younger  girl  heard  the  noise  of  the  mite' win  down  below. 
When  it  was  almost  daylight,  the  old  woman  sat  over  the  hole 
again  and  the  noise  of  mite' 'win  stopped;  it  was  her  spirit  that 
made  the  noise.  She  was  the  guardian  of  the  mite' win. 

One  morning  the  old  woman  told  the  girls,  "If  you  want  to 
go  down  from  where  you  came  from,  we  will  let  you  down,  but 
get  to  work  and  gather  roots  to  make  a  string-made  rope,  twisted. 
The  two  of  you  make  coils  of  rope  as  high  as  your  heads  when 
you  are  sitting.  Two  coils  will  be  enough."  The  girls  worked 
for  days  until  they  had  accomplished  this.  They  made  plenty 
of  rope  and  tied  it  to  a  big  basket.  They  then  got  into  the  basket 
and  the  people  of  the  star  world  lowered  them  down.  They 
descended  right  into  an  Eagle's  nest,  but  the  people  above 

\  The  hole  is  a  circle  composed  of  seven  stars  (Pleiades).  This  was  the  first  mite' win  or 
"conjuring"  ^lodge.  Seven  poles  are  necessary  to  build  this  lodge.  Unless  seven  are  used, 
the  conjurer's  tent  will  not  rock.  The  old  woman  tends  the  mite'win.  When  she  moves  from 
the  hole,  there  is  sure  to  be  mite'win  somewhere  here  below.  The  stars  form  the  rim  of  the 
bole  through  which  she  lowered  the  two  girls. 


49 

thought  the  girls  were  on  the  ground  and  stopped  lowering  them. 
They  were  obliged  to  stay  in  the  nest,  because  they  could  do 
nothing  to  help  themselves. 

Said  one,  "We'll  have  to  stay  here  until  some  one  comes  to 
get  us."  Bear  passed  by.  The  girls  cried  out,  "Bear,  come 
and  get  us.  You  are  going  to  get  married  sometime.  Now  is 
your  chance!"  Bear  thought,  "They  are  not  very  good-looking 
women."  He  pretended  to  climb  up  and  then  said,  "I  can't 
climb  up  any  further."  And  he  went  away,  for  the  girls  didn't 
suit  him.  Next  came  Lynx.  The  girls  cried  out  again,  "Lynx, 
come  up  and  get  us.  You  will  go  after  women  some  day!" 
Lynx  answered,  "I  can't,  for  I  have  no  claws,"  and  he  went 
away.  Then  an  ugly-looking  man,  Wolverine,  passed  and  the 
girls  spoke  to  hin.  "Hey,  Wolverine,  come  and  get  us."  Wol- 
verine started  to  climb  up,  for  he  thought  it  a  very  fortunate 
thing  to  have  these  women  and  was  very  glad.  When  he 
reached  them,  they  placed  their  hair  ribbons  in  the  nest.  Then 
Wolverine  agreed  to  take  one  girl  at  a  time,  so  he  took  the  first 
one  down  and  went  back  for  the  next.  Then  Wolverine  went 
away  with  his  two  wives  and  enjoyed  himself  greatly,  as  he  was 
ugly  and  nobody  else  would  have  him.  They  went  far  into  the 
woods,  and  then  they  sat  down  and  began  to  talk.  "Oh!"  cried 
one  of  the  girls,  "I  forgot  my  hair  ribbons."  Then  Wolverine 
said,  "I  will  run  back  for  it."  And  he  started  off  to  get  the  hair 
ribbons.  Then  the  girls  hid  and  told  the  trees,  whenever 
Wolverine  should  come  back  and  whistle  for  them,  to  anwser 
him  by  whistling.  Wolverine  soon  returned  and  began  to 
whistle  for  his  wives,  and  the  trees  all  around  him  whistled  in 
answer.  Wolverine,  realizing  that  he  had  been  tricked,  gave 
up  the  search  and  departed  very  angry. 

The  girls  continued  through  the  woods  until  they  came  to  a 
big  marsh,  late  in  the  afternoon.  There  they  saw  a  big  birch 
bark  house.  Everything  around  the  house  was  very  clean,  the 
poles  were  scraped  clean  of  their  bark  and  were  perfectly  white, 
while  there  was  neither  smoke  nor  ashes  to  be  seen  anywhere. 
The  girls  looked  at  this  and  said,  "The  person  who  lives  here 
must  be  very  clean;  we  have  never  seen  such  a  clean  house." 
There  was  no  dry  or  green  wood  lying  around,  but  inside  the 
house  they  saw  a  fire-place  and  plenty  of  hay.  One  girl  said 


50 

to  the  other,  "We'd  better  cut  a  little  wood."  So  they  cut 
wood  and  made  the  fire  in  case  the  man  came  home  late.  By 
this  time,  the  ice  was  beginning  to  break.  Late  in  the  evening 
they  heard  someone  crying  out,  "Who  spoiled  my  wigwam? 
Who  made  smoke  and  ashes?"  The  owner  of  the  wigwam 
didn't  know  who  had  done  this,  so  he  came  in  and  looked  at  the 
two  girls.  He  then  cut  all  the  wood.  This  man  was  Wood- 
pecker (Meme  "pileated  woodpecker").  Woodpecker  made  a 
fire  of  the  hay,  which  was  beaver  hay.  It  gave  no  smoke  to  stain 
the  wigwam  and  burned  as  well  as  wood.  He  brought  in  two 
nice  beavers  which  belonged  to  him,  and  gave  one  to  the  girls, 
saying,  "You  can  have  this."  He  then  cooked  the  other  one 
for  himself.  He  showed  the  girls  where  to  sleep  and  since  the 
place  where  they  were  to  sleep  was  not  near  him,  they  knew  that 
he  would  not  marry  either  of  them. 

Next  morning,  after  breakfast,  he  said  to  them,  "Go!  Don't 
stay  here.  You  go  that  way  and  you  will  find  a  big  river. 
There  you'll  find  lots  of  people  and  maybe  you'll  get  married." 
So  the  girls  went  on.  They  left  Woodpecker  and  he  is  there 
yet.  They  came  to  the  big  river  and  beheld  canoes  and  all 
kinds  of  people  passing.  First  they  saw  White  Duck  (wa'bdcrp) . 
He  was  a  good  looking  man,  and  as  he  passed  them  in  his  canoe, 
the  girls  said  to  him,  "Put  us  in  your  canoe,  you  are  going  to  get 
married  sometime."  White  Duck  answered,  "My  canoe  is  too 
small.  Other  people  are  coming;  they  will  marry  you."  And 
he  passed  on.  Next  came  Fish  Duck  (azi'k},  a  good  looking 
man.  They  cried  out,  "Put  us  in  your  canoe,  you  are  going  to 
get  married  anyway."  "No,  my  canoe  is  too  small,"  replied 
Fish  Duck.  A  great  many  people  passed,  but  all  of  them  said 
that  their  canoes  were  too  small,  so  the  girls  had  to  stay  where 
they  were.  The  people  were  passing  to  the  mouth  of  the  creek 
where  the  village  of  the  chief  was.  At  last  came  Black  Duck 
(ni'nicip).  He  was  also  nice  looking.  "Come  over  and  get  us; 
you  will  get  married  sometime,"  cried  the  girls.  "No,  My  canoe 
is  too  small.  Chjgibis  is  coming  soon  and  he  will  marry  you." 
He  was  going  to  be  the  last  person  to  pass.  At  last  Ci?7gibis 
came  along. 

When  they  saw  him,  one  of  the  girls  said,  "He  is  a  very  ugly 
man,  but  we  will  go  in  his  canoe  and,  when  we  get  to  the  village, 


51 

we'll  get  rid  of  him."  So  they  called  out  to  him,  "Come  over 
and  get  us;  you  will  get  married  anyway."  Cir/gibis  was  very 
glad  to  have  two  wives,  so  he  paddled  over  and  got  the  two 
girls.  They  said,  "Your  canoe  is  a  very  small  canoe."  "Oh 
no,"  said  Cir/gibis,  "my  canoe  is  a  magic  canoe.  It  is  enough." 
So  the  girls  got  into  the  canoe  and  they  went  down  the  stream. 
By  and  by  one  girl  said,  "I'm  getting  hungry."  "Well,"  said 
CTyigibis,  "not  far  down  is  a  nice  rock  and  there  we  will  have 
lunch.  You  can  pull  roots  for  lunch."  So  CiTjgibis  and  the  two 
girls  went  ashore  and  pulled  roots  and  made  a  string  out  of 
them.  "That's  enough,"  said  Cb/gibis  to  one  of  the  girls. 
"Tie  the  string  to  my  leg  and  I'll  dive  for  something  to  eat. 
When  you  see  the  string  jerk,  pull  me  up."  They  did  this, 
and  he  dove  into  the  water.  When  the  girls  saw  the  string  jerk, 
they  pulled  him  up  and  he  brought  with  him  a  big  beaver. 
They  skinned  and  cooked  the  beaver  for  lunch;  then  Cir/gibis 
and  his  two  wives  continued  their  journey.  Soon  Cirjgibis  said, 
"Well,  we  are  not  far  from  the  village  now.  I  am  going  to  place 
my  caribou  snare."  He  meant  rabbit  when  he  said  caribou. 
So  he  placed  his  snares.  He  then  told  the  girls,  "At  the  village 
your  sister-in-law  will  come  down  to  see  you.  Ma?;g  (Loon)  is 
the  name  of  the  chief  of  the  village.  But  we  won't  camp  near 
them;  we'll  camp  a  little  to  one  side."  They  went  down  the 
river  until  they  came  to  the  mouth,  and  at  that  point  they  saw 
the  wigwams. 

All  the  people  yelled  when  they  saw  Chjgibis,  for  he  was  a 
great  man,  although  he  was  the  ugliest  one  among  them.  They 
cried,  "Ee  Cirjgibis!  He  has  two  wives."  So  they  all  laughed 
and  the  sister  of  Ci^gibis  came  to  shake  hands  with  his  two 
wives.  Then  Cir/gibis  pitched  his  wigwam.  Soon  a  man  who 
was  a  second  chief  came  to  Cbygibis  and  said,  "Chief  Mar;g 
wants  to  see  you.  He  is  going  to  have  a  dance  tonight."  Cir/- 
gibis  said  to  his  wives,  "Stay  here  and  don't  go  to  the  dance. 
There  are  too  many  nice-looking  men  there."  On  account  of 
this  the  two  wives  became  angry  with  him.  Ci^gibis  put  on 
his  best  clothes  and  went  to  the  dance. 

By  and  by  the  wives  heard  drumming  and  fine  voices  singing. 
So  they  decided  to  go  and  peep  in  at  the  dancers  if  Chjgibis 
should  not  see  them.  They  did  this  and  peeped  in  through 


52 

the  bark,  and  there  they  saw  Loon  singing.  He  was  a  fine-look- 
ing man  with  a  fine  voice  and  fine  clothes.  Cir/gibis  was  beside 
Loon,  looking  exceedingly  ugly  in  contrast  to  him.  The  wives 
said,  "It  is  a  shame  that  Loon  is  so  good-looking."  They  then 
went  back  to  camp  and  put  two  stumps  in  the  place  where  they 
were  to  sleep,  covered  them  with  blankets  and  ran  off. 

Ci^gibis  came  back  from  the  dance  and,  thinking  that  he  was 
sleeping  with  his  two  wives,  he  lay  down  between  the  two  stumps 
and  fell  asleep.  But  his  two  wives  went  to  sleep  with  Chief 
Loon.  By  and  by  ants  began  to  bite  Ci^gibis  and  he  scolded 
his  wives,  saying,  "Don't  do  that."  At  last  he  discovered  the 
stumps  and  threw  them  out.  At  daybreak  he  went  to  the 
chief's  wigwam  and  there,  sleeping  with  the  Chief,  he  saw  his 
two  wives.  "You  are  a  dead  man  for  this!"  said  Ci^gibis. 

He  then  went  to  his  grandmother.  "What  do  you  want?" 
asked  she.  "I  want  a  chisel  and  a  flint."  "What  do  you  want 
with  them,  grandchild?  Are  you  going  to  be  in  mischief 
again?"  said  the  grandmother.  However,  she  gave  them  to 
him,  and  Cirjgibis  tied  two  flints  to  his  feet  and  placed  the  chisel 
in  the  fire  to  make  it  red  hot.  Then  he  asked  for  some  eagle 
feathers  (but  this  was  a  wiske'djak  (Canadian  Jay)  feather). 
He  got  them  and  placed  them  on  his  head.  When  the  ice 
chisel  became  red  hot,  the  old  grandmother  said,  "Say,  Cbjgibis, 
don't  do  any  mischief  again,"  but  Cirjgibis  picked  up  the  chisel 
and  ran  away  with  it  to  the  wigwam  of  Loon. 

Loon  always  slept  with  his  mouth  open.  When  Ci^gibis 
reached  the  wigwam,  he  found  every  one  in  it  asleep.  He 
shoved  the  chisel  into  Loon's  open  mouth,  killing  him,  ran  off 
to  his  canoe,  jumped  into  it,  and  paddled  away  to  his  snares. 
He  did  this  so  that  no  one  would  suspect  that  he  had  killed  their 
chief.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Loon  always  has  a  black 
mouth — from  where  he  was  burned.  Cirjgibis  found  a  rabbit 
in  his  snare.  He  placed  the  blood  of  the  rabbit  in  some  hay  and 
tied  the  hay  to  his  stomach. 

When  he  returned  to  the  camp,  the  people  were  mourning  for 
Loon.  Cir/gibis  came  in  slowly.  The  second  chief  said, 
"Cigrjibis  will  be  very  sorry  when  he  hears  that  Chief  Loon  is 
dead.  He  was  his  great  friend.  We  must  tell  him  before  he 
arrives."  Then  the  people  called  to  Cirjgibis,  "Ee  Ci?7gibis,  the 


53 

chief  is  dead."  "What!"  said  CiTjgibis,  "the  chief  is  dead!" 
Then  he  drew  out  his  knife  and  pierced  the  hay  full  of  rabbit 
blood.  The  blood  ran  out  and  all  the  people  thought  that  he 
had  killed  himself.  Cirjgibis  then  dived  into  the  water  and  the 
people  came  out  in  their  canoes  to  look  for  him.  They  saw  the 
rabbit  blood  upon  the  water  and  gave  up  looking  for  him. 
After  a  few  days,  they  made  another  chief,  Goose  (nixka'), 
since  both  Loon  and  Cir;gibis  were  dead. 

Ten  days  after  this  had  happened,  early  in  the  morning  the 
people  heard  somebody  singing  near  the  shore  three  times, 
"Who  killed  our  chief?  I  am  the  one."  They  awoke  Chief 
Goose  and  he  exclaimed,  "I  was  thinking  that  that  Chygibis  was 
in  all  kinds  of  mischief.  So  we  must  try  to  kill  him."  Accord- 
ingly he  sent  all  the  men  after  him  in  canoes.  When  Cbjgibis 
dived,  they  could  only  see  his  feathers  which  his  grandmother 
had  given  him,  but  they  could  not  catch  him.  Ciijgibis  said  to 
them,  "You  are  all  spirits.  Drink  all  this  water  and  you  will 
get  me."  Then  the  Ducks  and  Geese  drank  all  the  lake  dry  and 
chased  Ci^gibis  among  the  rocks,  and  thought  that  they  would 
catch  him.  "No,  no,"  laughed  Cirjgibis,  "I  know  some  more 
tricks  yet."  So  he  ran  about  and  kicked  the  rocks  with  the 
flints  his  grandmother  had  given  him,  which  were  fastened  to 
his  feet,  and  water  began  flowing  out  and  finally  covered  every- 
thing. The  people  who  were  pursuing  him  had  to  swim  for  their 
lives.  They  all  became  ducks.  This  is  the  origin  of  all  the 
ducks.  When  the  people  left  their  canoes,  they  were  obliged  to 
swim  and  so  they  are  swimming  yet. 

(6)  BEAVER  GIVES  A  FEAST. 

All  the  animals,  once  upon  a  time,  were  camped  together — 
the  Beaver,  the  Otter,  the  Muskrat,  and  the  others.  Their 
chief  was  Beaver.  Every  once  in  a  while  he  would  give  a  big 
feast,  build  a  big  wigwam,  and  invite  all  the  men  and  women  to 
come  in  and  eat  with  him.  He  would  tell  them,  "Well,  I  want  to 
give  a  feast."  Then  they  would  come  in,  sit  around  the  inside 
of  his  big  wigwam  and  pass  the  food  around  from  one  to  the  other, 
He  would  provide  lots  of  grease  in  birch-bark  dishes.  Now, 
one  time,  when  he  gave  one  of  his  feasts,  Beaver  cut  his  grease 
65977—7 


54 

supply  into  cakes  which  he  served  around  to  his  guests.  Every 
time  he  passed  a  cake  to  a  guest,  pepedit.  Indeed,  every  time 
he  moved,  pepedit,  or  when  he  would  go  and  cut  a  new  block 
of  grease.1  Now  every  time  the  Beaver  broke  wind,  the  Otter 
laughed.  He  did  not  seem  to  know  that  this  would  offend  the 
Beaver,  because  he  was  a  little  foolish.  The  other  guests  told 
the  Otter,  "You  mustn't  laugh  when  Beaver  does  that;  he  is 
our  chief."  Despite  this,  every  time  they  went  to  a  feast, 
castore  pedente,  the  Otter  laughed  at  him. 

So  one  time  the  Beaver  sent  a  man  to  invite  all  the  people  to 
another  feast.  He  sent  the  messages  all  through  the  camp. 
Now  the  people  told  the  Otter  this  time,  "You  must  not  come; 
you  never  keep  your  mouth  shut;  you  always  laugh.  If  you 
only  knew  enough  to  keep  still  like  the  rest  of  us,  it  would  be  all 
right,  but  you  had  better  stay  home."  "Oh  well,  all  right," 
said  the  Otter,  "I'll  stay  back."  All  went  to  the  feast  except 
the  Otter.  But  he  asked  the  others,  "You  will  have  to  bring 
my  share  to  me,  since  I  can't  come.  Tell  the  chief  to  send  me 
my  share."  The  others  agreed  and  went  to  attend  the  feast; 
but  they  asked  him,  "How  big  a  piece  of  grease  do  you  want?" 
The  Otter  replied,  "Bring  me  a  piece  the  size  of  my  forearm. 
(The  otter  has  a  very  small  forearm.)  When  the  guests  arrived 
at  the  feast,  the  Beaver  chief  saw  that  the  Otter  was  not  with 
them.  Said  he,  "Where,  indeed,  is  Otter?  I  like  him  because 
he  is  so  funny."  They  informed  him  that  the  Otter  had  not 
come,  but  that  he  wanted  the  chief  to  send  him  a  piece  of  grease 
as  large  as  his  forearm.  The  Beaver  cut  a  piece  that  size  and 
sent  it  to  the  Otter;  that  is  all  the  Otter  got.  He  did  not  get 
very  much  because  he  had  such  a  short  forearm.  That  is  the 
end  of  my  story. 

(7)    TCAKA'BJS. 

Tcaka'bjs  lived  with  his  grandmother.  One  time  he  made  a 
long  journey  and  was  away  for  quite  a  while.  He  came  to 
where  there  were  some  giant  women  who  were  scraping  frozen 
beaver  skins,  "kpc,  kg,c"  He  returned  home  and  told  his 
grandmother,  "I  heard  the  giant  women  scraping  beaver  hides." 

1  Etiam  hodie  castor  saepe  pedit. 


55 

"Don't  go  near  them,"  said  his  grandmother.  And  she  repeated 
this  warning  often  to  Tcaka'bjs. 

However,  one  day  he  returned  to  where  he  had  heard  the  giant 
women,  and  when  he  reached  the  lake,  there  they  were,  chasing 
beaver  on  the  ice.  When  he  came  up,  they  knew  him  and  cried 
out,  "Ee,  come  on,  come  on,  Tcaka'bjs!"  So  he  went  over  to 
them  and  they  said,  "There  is  a  beaver  here  and  you  must  pull 
him  up."  Tcaka'bjs  was  small  and  they  thought  the  beaver 
would  pull  him  through  the  hole  into  the  ice.  But  he  caught 
hold  of  the  beaver's  tail  and  pulled  him  through  all  right. 
Then  they  asked  him  to  stay  with  them,  but  he  went  away  after 
he  had  stolen  the  big  beaver  tail,  six  feet  long,  and  went  back  to 
his  grandmother.  When  he  got  home,  he  showed  her  the  tail, 
and  she  asked,  "Did  you  steal  it?"  "No,  no,"  answered  he. 
Then  he  made  a  door  for  their  wigwam  out  of  the  tail. 

Soon  the  giant  woman  came  to  where  he  lived  and  called. 
"Tcaka'bjs,  you  are  a  dead  man!"  They  came  for  the  purpose 
of  eating  Tcaka'bjs  and  his  grandmother.  Then  the  grand- 
mother said,  "I  told  you  not  to  go  there.  Now  they  say  you 
are  a  dead  man."  But  Tcaka'bjs  said,  "Don't  be  afraid,  grand- 
mother. I  will  take  care  of  you."  Then  he  took  his  witch 
stone1  and  threw  it  up  inside  the  wigwam,  and  the  whole  wigwam 
turned  to  stone  except  a  little  hole  in  the  top  for  the  smoke  to 
come  through.  The  stone  was  so  thick  that  they  were  unable 
to  hear  the  giant  women  pounding  on  the  outside.  Then  the 
giant  women  went  away  and  Tcaka'bjs  lay  inside  of  the  wigwam 
in  safety.  But  he  felt  a  little  sick,  because  he  had  eaten  too 
much  beaver  fat. 

Some  time  after  this,  Tcaka'bjs  went  back  again  to  the  giant 
women  and  found  them  pounding  up  and  boiling  moose  bones 
to  make  soup.  As  he  came  up,  one  of  the  giant  women  seized 
him  and  threw  him  into  the  pot.  There  he  stayed  for  a  long 
time,  boiling  and  circling  round  and  round  in  the  pot,  but  still 
he  was  alive.  At  last,  when  the  giant  women  needed  grease, 
they  dipped  up  Tcaka'bjs  with  a  wooden  spoon  and  threw  him 
outside.  Then  Tcaka'bjs  went  back  to  his  grandmother.  He 
was  very  thin,  because  he  had  been  boiled  so  long,  nothing  but 
skin  and  bones.  That's  the  end;  he  was  a  small  fellow. 

1  Kcki-'man,  a  magic  fetish  which  will  secure  the  owner  his  wish. 

65977— 7£ 


56 

(8)  ANIWO'YE,1  THE  GlANT  SKUNK,  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SKUNKS. 

Aniwo'ye  was  the  monster  Skunk.  He  used  to  travel  all 
over  this  world,  trying  to  find  the  Ojibwa.  He  hunted  them  to 
kill  them.  He  often  took  the  form  of  a  man.  Whenever  he 
would  encounter  people,  he  would  approach  them  et  pepedit 
towards  their  camp  with  his  back  to  them,  killing  the  people 
malo  ejus  odore.  In  those  days  there  was  no  other  sickness. 
That  was  the  only  sickness  which  people  had  to  kill  them. 

Once  upon  a  time  in  a  camp  where  there  were  lots  of  people, 
hunters  of  a  big  band,  they  beheld  the  tracks  of  Aniwo'ye  near 
one  of  their  trails.  It  was  winter  time.  When  they  saw  these 
tracks,  they  turned  back  from  their  object  because  they  were 
afraid  Aniwo'ye  would  see  their  own  tracks  and  follow  them  to 
camp  and  kill  all  their  people.  On  this  account  they  started  off 
in  every  direction  in  order  to  lead  Aniwo'ye  away  from  the  camp 
and  so  save  their  own  people  and  possibly  themselves.  Said 
they,  "We  will  go  to  Big  Fisher  lake,  where  the  Big  Fisher 
lives."  So  they  started  off.  But  there  was  one  old  woman 
who  could  hardly  see.  She  could  not  travel  with  them,  so  they 
had  to  leave  her,  as  nobody  could  carry  her. 

Soon  Aniwo'ye  found  their  trails  and  followed  them,  and  soon 
he  came  to  the  wigwam  in  which  the  people  had  left  the  old 
woman.  He  looked  in  the  door  and  saw  her  sitting  near  the 
fire.  "Where  are  all  your  people?"  he  asked  her.  "They  have 
gone  away,"  she  answered.  "They  saw  Aniwo'ye's  track  and 
departed.  But  I  am  too  old.  I  can't  see,  I  can't  walk;  so  they 
left  me  here."  This  poor  old  woman  thought  it  was  a  young 
man  who  spoke  to  her;  she  did  not  know,  indeed,  that  it  was 
Aniwo'ye  himself.  Then  Aniwo'ye  spoke,  "If  you  can't  walk,  I 
can  cure  you,  so  that  you  will  be  as  well  and  strong  as  you  ever 
were."  So  he  turned  his  back  to  her  et  pepedit.  He  blew  the 
wigwam  and  the  old  woman  all  to  pieces. 

Then  Aniwo'ye  followed  on  the  trail  of  the  people.  When  he 
had  tracked  them  to  Big  Fisher  lake,  he  could  see  right  across 
the  lake,  because  there  was  no  island  in  the  way,  and  there,  on 
the  other  side,  he  saw  where  Big  Fisher  lived.  The  people 
had  arrived  here  after  a  hard  trip  and  begged  Big  Fisher  for 

1  Also  called  Mici-'ci-ga'k  "Monster  Skunk". 


57 

protection  from  Aniwo'ye.  So  fast  had  they  travelled  that  some 
of  the  old  people,  unable  to  keep  up  with  the  younger  ones,  had 
died  of  their  efforts  to  hurry.  Those  who  had  reached  Big 
Fisher's  camp  kept  watching  for  Aniwo'ye  to  appear  across  the 
lake  on  their  tracks.  At  last  they  saw  him  emerge  on  the  lake 
and  come  towards  them.  All  the  way  along  this  pursuit,  when 
he  had  found  the  people  who  had  died  on  the  march,  he  pulled 
at  them  to  see  if  they  were  dead.  Now,  when  Aniwo'ye  appeared 
Big  Fisher  said  to  the  people,  "We  will  go  to  meet  him.  You 
men  go  ahead  and  I  will  hide  behind  you.  So  we  will  approach 
him  until  we  get  almost  within  his  range.  Do  not  let  him  see 
me,  sed  cum  anum  suum  nobis  verteret,  spread  apart  and  let  me 
pass  you  to  the  front.  While  his  back  is  turned  to  us,  we  will 
fix  him."  They  did  as  they  were  told,  and  the  band  started 
forward  to  meet  Aniwo'ye,  who  also  approached  them  slowly. 
When  they  were  near  enough  ut  odore  ejus  attingerentur, 
Aniwo'ye  turned  slowly.  When  his  back  was  toward  them, 
et  cum  pediturus  esset,  they  opened  ranks  and  Big  Fisher  ran 
forth  et  prius  anum  Aniwo'yei  cepit  quam  hie  pedere  posset. 
He  pinched  anum  ejus  dure.  "Ayu!"  exclaimed  Aniwo'ye. 
"Ayu,  ayu!  Let  go  of  me!  Non  iterum  pedam!"  But  Big 
Fisher  held  on  and  would  not  let  go.  They  struggled  for  some 
time,  but  Big  Fisher  held  fast,  and  at  last  Aniwo'ye  died  because 
he  could  not  discharge.  He  died  and  they  were  all  exceedingly 
glad,  rejoicing  that  he  was  done  for.  So  they  cut  him  up  into 
small  bits  and  scattered  the  bits  all  about.  Immediately  these 
turned  into  little  skunks  which  ran  off  into  the  bush.  That 
was  the  end  of  Aniwo'ye,  the  Monster  Skunk,  but  there  are 
plenty  of  small  skunks  now. 

(9)  THE  MAN  WHO  TRANSFORMED  A  DOLL  INTO  A  WOMAN  AND 
FOLLOWED  HER  INTO  THE  WORLD  ABOVE. 

There  was  once  a  man.  He  was  hunting.  He  had  his  own 
wigwam,  where  he  lived  with  an  old  man  and  an  old  woman 
who  called  him  grandchild.  He  did  not  even  know  his  father 
and  mother.  He  had  never  seen  young  people,  so  when  he  be- 
came about  twenty  years  old,  he  began  to  think  that  he  ought  to 
get  himself  a  wife.  So  he  started  out  and  travelled  all  over, 


58 

but  could  not  find  one.  At  last,  one  day,  he  took  a  piece  of 
wood  and  tried  to  carve  for  himself  a  big  doll.  He  worked  hard 
and  after  a  while  he  made  it  so  nearly  perfect  that  it  could  speak 
a  little.  It  was  a  female,  but  it  did  not  seem  to  be  complete 
quite  yet. 

Said  the  doll  to  him,  "Put  me  in  your  wigwam,  cover  me  up, 
and  do  not  look  at  me  for  three  days.  Be  sure  not  to  look, 
because  if  you  do,  I  won't  be  here." 

"All  right,"  said  he;  and  placed  his  doll  in  his  wigwam. 
To  remove  himself  from  the  temptation  of  breaking  her  rule  he 
went  away  by  himself  and  stayed  the  first  night.  The  next 
afternoon  he  came  back  and  began  wondering  to  himself.  "If 
I  sleep  here,"  thought  he,  "I  might,  indeed,  be  tempted  to  look." 
The  more  he  pondered,  the  more  he  weakened.  At  last,  he 
decided  to  take  a  little  look.  He  peeped  inside  the  wigwam 
and  saw  a  very  nice-looking  young  girl  seated  there.  Then, 
gaining  control  of  himself,  he  hurried  away  and  camped  again 
that  night  alone.  The  third  day  he  came  back  again  to  look  at 
his  wife.  When  he  came  near  the  camp,  he  went  to  the  water- 
hole.1  There  he  saw  a  woman's  track  going  away  from  the  water- 
hole.  Thought  he  to  himself,  "Alas!  my  wife  has  gone." 
He  walked  up  to  the  wigwam,  looked  in,  and  found  that  the 
woman  had  actually  gone.2 

He  now  decided  to  follow  her.  He  went  to  the  woods,  cut  a 
piece  of  cedar,  and  made  himself  a  bow  and  a  lot  of  arrows. 
The  next  day  he  started — this  was  two  days  after  the  woman 
had  left.  Then  he  walked  very  fast,  starting  early  in  the  morn- 
ing. Soon  he  came  to  a  small  lake  lying  still  and  frozen.  When 
he  reached  the  edge  of  the  ice,  he  shot  an  arrow  across,  then  he 
sped  so  fast  that  he  reached  the  other  side  of  the  lake  before  the 
arrow  got  there.  Before  noon-time  he  came  to  where  a  camp 
was  located,  and  going  up  to  it,  beheld  an  old  woman  cooking 
there.  "Oh,  my  grandchild,"  said  she,  "don't  stand  there 
looking  in  the  door.  Come  in  and  eat."  So  he  went  in.  Then 
he  asked  her  whether  she  had  seen  a  woman  pass  there.  She 
answered,  "Yesterday,  about  noon."  And  the  old  woman  gave 
him  a  mess  of  corn  and  said,  "My  dear  grandchild,  it  is  very  hard 

1  In  winter-time,  the  Indians  keep  a  hole  chopped  through  the  ice  near  their  camp  for  the 
water  supply. 

*  If  he  had  obeyed  her  and  not  looked  until  the  third  day,  she  would  still  have  been  there. 


59 

where  you  are  going.  Many  people  have  tried  to  go  where 
your  road  leads;  but  they  have  never  gotten  there,  for  many 
creatures  are  seeking  their  lives.  But  I  will  help  you."  Then 
she  gave  him  a  leg-bone  of  a  lynx.  "When  you  are  in  trouble, 
you  may  need  this,"  she  told  him.  Then  he  started  on,  following 
the  tracks  of  his  woman.  Every  time  he  came  to  a  lake,  he 
shot  an  arrow  across  and  sped  before  it  as  he  had  done  at  first. 
He  was  fast  indeed. 

Soon  he  came  to  another  wigwam  and  peeped  into  this  as  he 
had  done  into  the  first.  An  old  woman  who  was  cooking  inside 
spoke  to  him,  as  had  the  first,  and  invited  him  to  come  in  and 
eat.  Then  he  asked  her  when  she  had  seen  the  woman  pass  by. 
"A  little  after  noon  time,"  she  replied.  Now,  by  this,  he  knew 
that  he  had  not  gained  very  much.  As  before,  he  ate  a  little 
snack  of  corn  and  the  old  woman  said  to  him,  "Where  you  are 
going  will  be  a  very  hard  trip  for  you.  Many  people  try  it, 
but  never  succeed.  They  die."  And  she,  too,  gave  him  a  lynx 
bone  and  told  him,  as  the  other  had  done,  that  it  would  help  him 
in  time  of  need  on  his  journey;  and  he  started  on  again,  doing 
the  same  at  every  lake,  until  it  began  to  grow  late  in  the  day. 
He  had  been  going  so  fast  that  he  felt  very  tired. 

By  and  by  he  came  to  another  camp  and  peeped  in,  as  before, 
asked  the  same  question,  and  was  received  in  the  same  way. 
After  he  had  eaten  here,  the  old  woman  gave  him  a  squirrel's 
tail  to  help  him  overcome  the  dangers  which  she  warned  him 
against.  Said  she,  "From  now  on  you  won't  see  any  more  camps. 
Walk  very  fast  now.  Soon  you  will  see  a  big  tree  with  a  square 
trunk,  which  will  reach  very  far  up  into  the  sky.  Now  you  won't 
see  any  trail,  but  look  carefully  around.  That  is  where  your 
wife  climbed  up.  There  are,  indeed,  steps  cut  into  the  trunk, 
but  you  will  not  be  able  to  see  them.  To  you  it  will  look 
smooth." 

So  he  proceeded  on  his  way  and  soon  came  to  the  place  she 
had  spoken  about.  There  was  the  big  tree,  but  no  tracks  were 
in  sight.  Around  the  base  he  saw  lots  of  bones,  bones  of  people 
who  had  tried  to  climb  but  had  fallen  down  and  died.  He  was 
bewildered.  Then  suddenly  he  recollected  the  bones  the  old 
women  had  given  him.  Taking  one  in  each  hand,  like  a  pick, 
he  began  climbing  up  the  great  tree.  At  last  he  ascended  so 


60 

high  that  the  bones  began  to  wear  away.  When  they  were  so 
short  that  he  could  hardly  use  them,  he  looked  down.  He  had 
gone  so  high  that  he  could  neither  see  the  world  beneath  nor  the 
end  of  the  tree  in  the  sky  above.  Now  his  bones  were  too  short 
to  help  him,  but  he  had  his  bow  on  his  back.  He  could  hardly 
hold  on  any  longer,  so  he  cried  and  yelled  for  help,  but  nobody 
could  hear  him.  Soon  he  heard  a  spirit  nearby  which  mur- 
mured to  him,  "Close  your  eyes  and  look  through  the  tree. 
You  will  see  steps  to  climb  on."  Then  he  did  as  the  voice  said 
and  perceived  steps.  He  placed  his  feet  in  them  and  started 
running  up.  But  now  he  made  another  mistake,  he  did  not 
keep  his  eyes  closed.  When  he  looked,  lo!  he  found  himself 
back  to  where  he  had  begun  to  climb  the  steps,  holding  on  with 
his  worn-out  bones.  Then  he  bethought  himself  of  the  squirrel's 
tail,  and  at  the  same  moment  found  himself  transformed  into  a 
squirrel.  He  found  that  he  could  run  up  the  great  tree  by  tapp- 
ing his  tail  on  the  trunk  at  each  step.  At  last  he  came  to  a  hole 
in  the  sky,  in  the  middle  of  which  the  great  tree  protruded.  A 
wide  space,  however,  surrounded  the  tree,  separating  it  from  the 
edge  of  the  sky.  It  would  be  necessary  for  him  to  jump  across 
from  the  trunk  to  this  edge.  He  made  a  great  effort  and  sprang 
for  the  edge,  but  he  just  managed  to  catch  on  at  the  line  of  his 
waist;  his  upper  parts,  which  reached  above  the  edge,  at  once 
became  human;  his  lower  parts,  extending  below  the  edge, 
remained  in  the  form  of  the  squirrel. 

Then  he  beheld  his  wife  coming  across  the  surface  of  this 
upper  world  toward  him.  Said  she,  "You  should  not  have 
come  here,  because,  after  all  your  trouble,  you  will  die  anyway." 
She  took  hold  of  him  and  made  shift  to  raise  him.  Then  she 
pulled  him  out  after  teasing  him  a  little  while.  "Now,"  she 
said  to  him,  "we  always  play  ball  up  here.  There  are  men  here 
whom  you  will  meet.  They  are  your  brothers-in-law.  They 
will  want  you  to  play  ball.  If  they  beat  you  in  the  game,  they 
will  kill  you;  but  if  you  beat  them,  you  will  survive." 

Then  she  led  him  away  to  a  village,  where  they  saw  a  lot  of 
great  White  Bears.  This  was  the  great  White  Bear's  home  and 
his  family.  Now  the  old  Bear  arranged  a  contest  for  the 
stranger.  Said  he,  "You  take  this  ball  and  go  around  the  edge 
of  this  world,  running.  One  of  these  Bears  will  race  with  you, 


61 

to  see  who  gets  back  here  first."  So  they  started.  The  Bear 
took  the  ball  in  his  mouth  and,  as  soon  as  he  started  running, 
the  man  jumped  upon  his  back  and  shook  his  ears, which  made  the 
Bear  drop  the  ball.  Then  he  threw  the  ball  ahead.  In  this 
way,  repeating  the  trick,  they  went  around  the  world,  and  the 
man  succeeded  in  getting  back  first.  When  he  reached  the 
starting  point,  the  Bears  said,  "You  seem  to  be  a  pretty  good 
man;  but  there  are  still  more  tricks  for  you  to  perform.  If 
you  win,  you  can  stay." 

And  they  all  went  out  together  and  came  to  a  big  rock.  One 
of  the  White  Bears  tried  to  move  this  rock,  and  with  a  great 
effort  he  succeeded  in  moving  it  a  little.  "Now,  you  try," 
said  they,  "and  if  you  can't  move  it,  you  are  a  dead  man." 
Then  the  man  took  his  bow  and  arrow  and  shot  it  at  the  rock. 
The  rock  immediately  broke  into  fragments.  "Indeed,  you  are  a 
great  man,  our  brother-in-law,  and  can  stay  here  and  hunt  and 
live  with  us,"  said  the  old  White  Bear.  Then  the  old  Bear  told 
him,  after  a  while,  that  he  had  better  go  and  hunt,  or  he  would 
grow  lonesome  in  his  new  life.  By  this  time  they  had  grown 
to  like  him  very  much 

One  afternoon,  late,  he  started  off  to  hunt.  Everything  that 
he  met  seemed  strange  to  him  in  this  new  world.  Soon  he  came 
to  a  lake  with  a  little  ice  on  it,  and  when  he  walked  out  he 
beheld  tracks  of  some  animal.  Soon  he  came  to  a  place  where  a 
big  wooden  mallet  lay  on  the  ice.  He  thought  to  himself  that 
somebody  had  lost  this  mallet.  Then  he  took  it  by  the  handle 
and  hammered  on  the  ice.  Immediately  the  hammer  fell 
through.  Up  from  the  hole  in  the  ice  a  red  otter  emerged. 
He  killed  the  red  otter.  Then  he  went  on  with  the  hammer  to 
another  place.  There  he  tried  again,  and  this  time  got  a  blue 
otter.  He  tried  again  at  another  place  and  got  a  black  otter, 
which  was  like  the  otters  of  this  world.  So,  taking  his  load  of 
otters,  he  went  home  to  display  what  he  thought  was  a  pretty 
good  hunt.  He  carried  his  game  in  a  bag  of  leather.  When 
he  got  to  his  wigwam,  he  shoved  his  bag  in  the  entrance  ahead 
of  him,  so  that  his  wife  could  open  it  and  see  what  he  had 
brought.1  Thought  she  to  herself,  when  she  saw  the  game-bag, 

a  for  a  hunter  retomiac  to  hand  hk  came-bag  to  his  wife  before  he 
t  fpeakinc.  »o  that  rite  c*o  *ee  for  benetf  whether  he  ha* 


62 

"I  wonder  if  he  will  show  himself  to  be  a  good  hunter."  She 
saw  some  blood  on  the  bag.  Opening  it,  she  beheld  the  otters, 
Now  the  man  had  made  a  mistake,  for  these  were  tame  otters 
and  belonged  to  the  Bears.  She  went  out  crying  to  her  people, 
"This  man  has  killed  our  otters!"  When  the  old  White  Bear 
heard  about  the  news,  he  said  to  his  family,  "We  should  have 
told  this  man  about  our  otters,  because  he  didn't  know.  On 
this  account  it  is  all  right."  He  said  no  more,  because  he  was 
afraid  of  the  magic  possessed  by  his  new  son-in-law. 

(10)  AYAS'E  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  BATS. 

The  Ayas'e  family  was  a  large  family.  They  lived  in  a  camp. 
Very  often  they  used  to  go  picking  berries,  for  their  country  was 
a  rocky  country  where  berries  abounded.  Very  often  some 
of  the  berry-pickers  would  get  lost  and  never  be  found  again. 
It  was  thought  that  some  creature  made  a  prey  of  them  and  ate 
them. 

One  time  one  of  the  Ayas'e  men  was  travelling.  On  his  way 
he  came  across  a  kind  of  cabin  of  rock,  from  the  top  of  which 
smoke  was  rising  and  in  front  of  which  a  number  of  human 
skulls  hung  in  the  opening.  Now  this  Ayas'e  managed  tc  enter. 
By  being  very  careful  and  not  touching  the  skulls,  he  gained  the 
inside  of  the  rock  house  without  making  any  noise.  These 
skulls  were  put  there  to  rattle  when  anybody  tried  to  pass. 
When  Ayas'e  got  inside,  he  beheld  two  old  blind  women.  As 
soon  as  they  became  aware  of  his  presence,  one  of  them  said, 
"We  had  better  begin  to  cook  something  and  we  will  find  out  if 
Ayas'e  is  passing  here."  Now  these  old  women  had  some 
grease  in  a  bark  dish  and  one  of  them  put  some  of  the  grease 
in  a  cooking  pail.  When  she  did  this,  Ayas'e  pulled  it  out  with 
his  hand  and  ate  it.  Then  she  took  the  spoon  to  taste  her 
grease,  but  found  it  gone.  So  she  put  another  lump  in  the 
dish.  Ayas'e  took  this,  and  when  she  started  to  dip  it  up,  it, 
too,  was  gone.  This  happened  three  or  four  times.  At  last 
the  old  woman  said,  "Ayas'e  must  have  passed;  somebody 
told  us  that  Ayas'e  was  going  to  pass.  He  must  have  passed 
now."  Then  she  took  a  stick  which  she  used  to  poke  the  fire 
with  and  began  feeling  all  around,  poking  in  the  corners  of  the 


63 

wigwam  to  find  if  Ayas'e  were  there.  Every  time  she  came 
near  poking  him,  he  moved  to  another  part  of  the  wigwam,  so 
she  could  not  reach  him.  Pretty  soon  she  touched  him  with  the 
poker  and  then  he  took  off  his  coat  of  fisher-skin  which  he  was 
wearing  and  threw  in  into  the  door-way.  The  old  women 
jumped  up  and  when  they  felt  the  fur  coat  they  thought  it 
was  Ayas-e  trying  to  escape  through  the  door.  Now  these  old 
women  had  a  sharp  pointed  bone  at  each  elbow.  With  this 
pointed  bone  they  began  stabbing  the  fur  coat  in  their  haste  to 
kill  Ayas  -e,  and  pretty  soon  in  their  blind  fury  they  fell  to  stabb- 
ing each  other,  each  one  thinking  she  was  stabbing  Ayas'e. 
They  killed  each  other.  One  of  the  old  women  said  before  she 
died,  "I  believe  you  hit  me  by  mistake."  It  was  too  late;  they 
both  died. 

Now  Ayas'e  in  the  wigwam  sat  down  and  looked  at  them  a 
long  time.  Then  he  dragged  them  outside  and  looked  at  them 
a  long  time.  All  around  the  wigwam  he  saw  the  men's  and 
women's  bones,  the  bones  of  the  victims  of  these  two  old  blind 
women.  Then  he  knew  that  all  of  his  lost  people  had  been 
killed  by  the  old  women  and  eaten.  They  were  cannibals  in 
the  shape  of  monster  bats,  large  enough  to  kill  and  eat  people. 
Then  Ayas'e  took  their  bodies  and  cut  them  up  into  small 
pieces.  These  he  threw  into  the  air  and  they  sailed  off,  trans- 
formed into  small  bats  as  we  see  them  to-day.  I  did  not  see  any 
more. 

(11)  ORIGIN  OF  THE  CONSTELLATION  FISHER  (URSA  MAJOR). l 

The  Fisher  (mustela  pennanti)  was  living  somewhere  in  this 
world.  Nobody  knows  where.  Now  in  those  times  they  had 
no  summer.  It  was  winter,  winter  all  the  time.  They  knew 
that  summer  existed  somewhere,  but  it  never  came  to  them, 
although  they  wanted  it  very  much. 

Now,  once  upon  a  time  a  man  captured  some  little  birds 
which  are  called  nr&araVe  "summer  (guardian)  birds."  He 
tied  them  in  bundles  and  kept  them  with  him  all  the  time. 
That  was  the  reason  why  it  was  continually  winter,  for  so  long 
as  he  held  these  birds,  they  could  not  bring  summer  to  the 

1  The  constellation  Ursa  Major  is  called  watci-'gan-arjg  "Fishing  Star."  The  story 
accounts  for  this  constellation  name. 


64 

North  Country.  The  people  pondered  very  much  how  to  go 
about  freeing  these  birds  from  the  creature  who  kept  them. 
At  last  somebody  discovered  where  this  creature  lived,  and  they 
decided  that  some  one  would  go  and  try  to  free  the  Summer- 
birds.  Now  the  Fresh-water  Herring  lived  in  the  same  wigwam 
with  the  man  who  kept  the  Summer-birds. 

The  Fisher  at  last  decided  to  go  and  free  the  birds,  so  that 
summer  would  come.  He  travelled  a  long  while  and  reached 
the  wigwam  where  the  captor  and  the  Herring  lived.  When 
he  went  in,  he  found  the  Herring  alone.  He  captured  the 
Herring  and  put  some  pitch  on  his  mouth,  so  that  he  could  not 
cry  out.  Then  Fisher  took  the  bundles  of  birds  and  tried  to 
break  the  bindings,  so  that  he  could  free  them.  Using  his  teeth 
at  last  he  tore  open  the  bundles  and  the  Summer-birds  flew  free 
into  the  air.  Then  the  pitch  broke  from  the  Herring's  mouth 
and  he  cried  out,  "Fisher  breaks  the  bundle!  The  Summer- 
birds!  Fisher  breaks  the  bundles  with  his  teeth!  The  Summer- 
birds!"  Two  or  three  times  he  cried  out,  until  their  captor 
heard  him.  Then  he  came  up  running,  but  when  he  arrived, 
the  Fisher  and  the  Summer-birds  were  already  far  away. 

The  Fisher  ran  very  fast  to  save  himself.  His  pursuer  had 
a  bow  and  arrow  with  which  he  was  going  to  kill  him,  but  the 
Fisher  sprang  into  the  sky  and  climbed  way  up,  with  the  hunter 
following  behind  him,  still  trying  to  shoot  him  with  his  bow  and 
arrow.  All  he  succeeded  in  shooting,  however,  was  his  tail, 
which  is  broken  where  it  was  wounded.1  Although  they  chased 
him  continually,  they  never  got  him. 

(12)  THE  YOUNG  LOON. 

Once  in  the  autumn  of  the  year,  when  the  birds  were  ready  to  fly 
to  the  south  for  the  winter,  a  young  Loon  was  unable  to  fly  far 
enough  to  go  with  the  rest  of  the  birds.  So  he  said  to  his 
mother,  "I  cannot  go  back  south  with  you,  as  I  am  not  strong 
enough.  But  I  will  stay  here  all  winter  in  this  place,  and  in 
the  spring,  when  you  come  back,  I  will  meet  you  here  at  this 
very  spot.  When  you  come  back  and  find  me  here,  it  will  be 
on  a  misty  morning."  So  they  all  flew  away  to  the  south,  and 

1  This  is  the  bend  in  the  handle  of  the  Great  Dipper.     The  small  star  Alcor  in  this  con- 
stellation is  the  wound. 


65 

the  young  Loon  was  left  behind  for  the  winter.  The  mother  was 
very  sad  because  she  had  to  leave  him  and  because  he  was  not 
strong  enough  to  go  with  them. 

In  the  spring  time,  when  the  ice  is  breaking  up  in  the  lake,  and 
it  becomes  misty,  the  Indians  say,  "The  Loon  is  coming  back 
from  her  winter  sojourn  in  the  South." 

(13)  THE  GIANT  PIKE. 

At  that  time  there  were  two  people  living  who  got  married 
and  had  some  daughters  and  sons.  These  grew  up  and  married. 
One  of  the  sons  married  and  had  children,  two  sons.  The  grand- 
father of  these  died.  Then  the  father  and  mother  died,  and 
left  the  children  with  only  their  grandmother  to  look  after  them. 
At  this  time  they  were  big  enough  to  shoot  bows  and  arrows 
and  to  go  in  a  canoe  with  their  grandmother  to  set  the  night 
lines1  for  fish.  They  lived  only  by  fishing,  because  the  grand- 
mother was  too  old  to  do  anything  else. 

So  these  two  boys  used  to  play  around,  shooting  bows  and 
arrows  for  fun,  just  as  the  Ojibwa  boys  do  now.  They  used 
to  play  near  a  lake.  Then  their  grandmother  would  say  to  them, 
"Don't  swim  in  that  lake.  There  is  a  big  pike  in  there  and  he 
might  swallow  you."  The  older  boy  believed  his  grandmother, 
but  the  younger  did  not.  So  one  day,  while  they  were  playing, 
the  younger  boy  by  mistake  shot  his  arrow  out  in  the  lake. 
He  could  see  it  floating  on  the  surface,  so  he  took  off  his  clothes 
to  swim  to  it.  But  his  brother  said,  "You  know  what  grand- 
mother told  you.  The  big  pike  might  swallow  you."  But  the 
boy  started  to  swim  nevertheless,  saying,  "Koga'miko"  ("swal- 
lowed in  the  water")  with  each  stroke  that  his  arms  took. 
When  he  called  this  out,  the  big  pike  came  and  swallowed  him. 

His  brother  began  crying  and  ran  back  to  his  grandmother 
in  the  wigwam,  saying,  "My  little  brother  is  koga'miko,  'swal- 
lowed in  the  water'."  Then  his  grandmother  began  crying 
and  the  two  were  crying  together.  Soon  after  this  they  again 


1  Night  lines  are  set  for  lake  fish.  The  hook  of  bone  formerly  was  fastened  into  a  shank 
of  wood  and  this  tied  to  a  line  by  a  leather  leader  which  the  teeth  of  the  fish  could  not  sever. 
Then  the  line  was  fastened  to  another  line  adjoining  the  two  float  sticks  by  a  knot  and  wrapping, 
which  would  pay  out  after  a  little  jerk.  The  float  sticks  were  anchored  by  a  stone.  The  bait 
was  tied  to  the  hook,  which  later  was  kept  horizontal  by  a  line  running  from  the  leader  to  a 
pin  stuck  in  the  bait.  This  ingenious  device  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  As  the  storyjmentions,  when 
the  float  sticks  are  together  it  is  a  sign  that  a  fish  is  on  the  hook. 


66 


set  their  night  lines.  When  they  looked  toward  the  lake,  three 
days  later,  they  saw  the  float  sticks  together  and  the  boy  said, 
"We  have  a  fish."  But  the  grandmother  cried  and  would  not 
look  toward  the  lake  where  her  grandson  had  died.  But  soon 
she  went  along  in  the  canoe,  crying,  and  pulled  in  the  line. 
At  the  end  was  a  very  large  fish,  and  they  could  see  that  his 
stomach  was  full  of  something.  He  was  so  large  that  they 
could  scarcely  pull  him  into  the  canoe.  However,  they  managed 


Figure  1.  Night  set-line. 

to  get  him  in  and  then  they  paddled  to  the  shore  and  dragged 
the  fish  to  a  place  where  they  could  conveniently  clean  it. 
They  cut  his  belly,  which  was  distended,  and  out  jumped  the 
younger  brother.  "I'm  scalded  with  the  intestines!  (Nin- 
babe'nds,yn  he  cried.  "I'm  scalded.  I've  been  here  three 


1  Archaic  form. 


67 

days."  He  was  already  beginning  to  be  digested.  The  grand- 
mother was  very  glad  to  get  her  grandson  back  again.  That  is 
the  end. 

(14)  LYNX  AND  His  Two  WIVES. 

There  was  a  time  when  Lynx  had  two  wives,  the  one  a  Rabbit 
and  the  other  a  Marten.  The  three  lived  in  a  wigwam.  At 
this  time  Lynx  drove  beaver  during  the  winter  time.1  Rabbit 
was  a  very  good  hunter.  But  Lynx  this  winter  had  very  poor 
luck  and  they  became  very  hungry.  Lynx  beat  his  wives 
because  they  couldn't  find  the  beaver.  He  said  to  them,  "If 
you  don't  get  some  beaver  for  me,  I'll  eat  both  of  you."  At 
this  they  became  very  much  frightened.  So  Rabbit  went  to  a 
beaver  place,  and  putting  a  stick  in  the  hole,  she  felt  a  beaver  in 
it.  Then  Rabbit  went  home  and  told  Marten,  and  they  both 
were  glad  to  get  a  beaver  and  save  their  lives.  Then  they  both 
went  ba<fk  to  the  hole.  While  Rabbit  was  pulling  the  beaver 
out  of  the  hole  and  had  hold  of  his  hind  quarters,  Lynx  came 
along  and  tickled  Rabbit,  so  that  she  let  go  and  the  beaver 
escaped.  Lynx  was  bent  on  mischief.  He  said,  "If  you  don't 
get  some  beaver,  I'll  kill  you  tonight." 

Rabbit  and  Marten  went  home  and  burrowed  a  tunnel  in  the 
snow,  inside  the  wigwam.  Then  they  both  went  into  a  hole  to 
hide  and  closed  the  hole  behind  them.  When  Lynx  reached 
home,  he  was  unable  to  find  his  wives,  but  he  knew  they  were 
somewhere  near.  So  he  began  to  pull  up  testes  suos  in  se  and 
then  he  began  dancing.2  He  said  to  himself,  "When  they  hear 
this  funny  thing,  they  will  laugh."  Pretty  soon  Marten 
laughed,  and  Lynx,  digging  her  out  of  the  hole,  killed  and  ate 
her.  Soon  he  grew  hungry  and  tried  the  same  trick.  But 
Rabbit  was  very  much  afraid  and  would  not  laugh.  Lynx 
kept  on  doing  this  for  some  time  and  finally  gave  it  up.  He  sat 
near  the  fire  and  cut  his  belly  open,  taking  out  some  of  his 
intestines  which  he  roasted  and  ate.  At  last,  when  he  had  eaten 
all  his  intestines,  he  came  to  his  heart.  When  he  pulled  at  this, 
"Huk,  huk"!  it  made  a  noise.  At  last  he  jerked  and  pulled 

1  To  drive  beaver  is  to  bunt  them  by  driving  them  from  their  cabins  beneath  the  ice. 

2  At  this  time  Lynx  testes  habuit  just  like  those  of  animals,  but  now  they  are  like  those  of 
the  cat,  invisible. 


68 

at  it  so  hard  that  he  died.     This  is  the  end.     But  all  the  grand- 
children of  Lynx  have  testicles  as  they  are  to-day. 

(15)  STORY  OF  SEAL  ROCK  IN  LAKE  TIMAGAMI. 

Once  upon  a  time,  on  a  small  island  in  Lake  Timagami,  some 
people  went  ashore,  and  one  of  the  women  left  her  baby  in  a 
cradle-board  on  a  rock,  while  she  went  a  short  distance  off. 
When  she  came  back,  the  baby  was  gone;  it  had  been  taken  by 
a  big  manitu  (magic)  seal  who  lived  in  a  rock  and  he  had  taken 
the  child  inside  with  him.  The  child's  father  was  also  a  manitu, 
so  he  began  burrowing  and  digging  into  the  rock  for  his  baby 
and  he  dug  a  channel.  This  hole  is  there  yet.  When  he  reached 
the  baby,  it  was  dead,  and  the  seal  was  gone.  It  had  dived 
and  crossed  two  miles  under  water  to  Seal  island  and  gone  into 
a  big  rock  there.  He  dove  and  followed,  as  he  was  mrte~'  and 
came  to  the  big  rock  where  the  seal  had  gone  in.  With  his 
chisel  he  split  the  rock,  but  the  seal  escaped.  The  rock  is  there 
yet,  split  down  the  centre. 

(16)  RABBIT,  LYNX,  AND  FISHER. 

At  the  time  of  which  my  story  speaks  Lynx  and  Fisher  had 
the  same  sharp  nose  and  face.  Fisher  used  to  jump  right 
through  a  big  boulder  as  high  as  a  man  whenever  he  wanted  to. 
One  day  he  told  Lynx  to  try  to  beat  him  and  jump  through. 
So  Lynx  tried  to  do  it  and  smashed  his  face  flat,  as  it  is  now. 
He  went  away  very  sore.  Soon  he  met  Rabbit.  "Kwe,  kwe," 
Lynx  asked  Rabbit,  "where  are  you  going?"  Rabbit  answered, 
"I  am  going  to  the  short  flat-faced  country."  Lynx  did  not 
understand  the  joke,  and  he  let  Rabbit  pass. 

Lynx  went  on  and  came  to  a  stream  into  whose  waters  he 
looked,  and  saw  some  flints.  He  tried  to  reach  some  to  pick 
them  up  and  beheld  himself  in  the  water.  He  discovered  how 
ugly  he  was.  "I'm  so  ugly.  That  is  what  Rabbit  meant  when 
he  met  me.  I'll  fix  him."  So  he  went  back,  struck  Rabbit's 
trail,  and  followed  him.  So  he  followed  the  trail  until  it  went 
into  a  hole  in  the  snow  under  a  bush.  Lynx  looked  in  and  saw 
Rabbit  sitting  there,  reading.  He  asked  Rabbit,  "Has  anybody 


69 

been  passing  here  lately  Hee!"  Rabbit  made  no  answer. 
Lynx  asked  this  question  twice  and  at  last  Rabbit  spoke,  "Tsc 
tsc,  it's  Sunday  to-day."  Lynx  asked  the  same  question  again 
and  received  the  same  reply.  Then  Rabbit  said,  "Why  don't 
you  go  around  and  find  his  track?".  When  Lynx  went  around, 
Rabbit  ran  out  and  off.  When  Lynx  saw  him  run,  he  chased 
him  and  caught  him. 

"Can  you  talk  English?"  said  Lynx.  "Yes,"  answered 
Rabbit.  "Well,  can't  you  talk  white?"  "Yes,"  answered 
Rabbit.  "Well,  if  you  don't  talk  white,  I'll  kill  you."  So 
Rabbit  had  to  talk  white.  "Well,  what  do  you  call  'fire'  in 
English."  "Waycfkabi-'te"  (people  sitting  around  a  fire), 
answered  Rabbit.  "How  do  they  say  'axe'  there?"  ''Me'ma- 
towes'irjg"  ("noise  of  chopping").  "What  do  you  call  knife?" 
asked  Lynx.  "Taya'tacki''w9gis'e"  ("sliced  meat"),  answered 
Rabbit.  "You  are  a  liar",  said  Lynx.  "Ki'nirjgwa'zdm,  you  are 
a  liar."  And  he  killed  Rabbit. 

(17)  SNARING  THE  SUN. 

There  was  once  a  boy  who  used  to  set  his  snares  for  his  living. 
One  day  he  saw  a  track  where  the  snow  was  melted,  and  after  a 
while  he  decided  to  set  his  snares  there  and  catch  the  animal  that 
made  the  tracks.  So  he  set  his  snare  and  went  away.  That 
track  was  the  sun's  track,  and  when  the  sun  came  by  next  day, 
it  got  caught.  The  sun  didn't  rise  the  next  day  and  there  was 
steady  darkness.  The  people  began  to  be  puzzled.  "Where 
did  you  set  your  snare?"  they  asked  him.  He  told  them,  and 
they  went  to  look.  There  they  saw  the  sun  caught,  but  no  one 
could  go  near  enough  to  loosen  it  A  number  of  animals  tried 
to  do  this,  but  they  all  got  burned.  At  last  the  Beaver-mouse 
managed  to  cut  it  with  his  teeth  and  freed  it.  But  his  teeth 
got  burned  with  the  heat,  and  so  they  are  brown  to  this  day, 
but  the  sun  is  here  and  we  have  the  daylight. 

(18)    HOMO    EXCREMENTI. 

There  were  a  number  of  people  camping,  and  one  man  was 
camping  by  himself.     He  was  a  young  man  and  he  tried  to  get 
65977—8 


70 

his  neighbour's  daughter  to  marry  him,  but  she  wouldn't  have 
him,  saying  that  he  was  not  good  enough.  And  so  the  young 
man  went  back  and  forth  trying  to  get  a  wife. 

Then  the  people  went  away  to  another  place  to  camp,  as  it 
was  getting  spring,  but  the  young  man  stayed  back.  He  was 
full  of  mite' 'win.1  He  planned  to  have  revenge  upon  the  girl 
who  would  not  have  him.  He  collected  omne  excrementum 
quod  invenire  potuit  and  made  it  into  the  shape  of  a  man.  He 
was  determined  to  settle  with  the  girls  who  had  refused  him, 
for  he  was  full  of  revenge.  When  he  had  made  the  man  alive, 
he  sent  him  to  where  the  girls  were  camping.  The  new  creature 
was  frozen  nice  and  hard,  he  was  nice-looking,  and  he  could 
talk. 

And  so  Homo  excrementi  came,  early  in  the  morning,  crunch- 
ing through  the  snow  to  where  the  girls  were  in  camp.  When 
they  saw  him  coming,  they  cried,  "Somebody's  coming.  Make 
a  fire."  And  when  he  reached  the  camp  every  one  received 
him  in  fine  style,  as  he  was  such  a  nice  fellow.  "Where  do  you 
come  from?  Who  is  your  father?"  they  asked  him.  "Hump- 
back," said  he.  "Who  is  your  mother?"  "Flat-set  excre- 
mentum," answered  he.  But  the  old  people  did  not  understand 
him.  He  was  unable  to  stay  near  the  fire  long,  for  fear  he  would 
melt.  They  wished  him  to  stay  at  the  camp,  but  he  couldn't, 
so  he  hurried  away. 

Then  one  of  the  girls  who  had  refused  the  young  man  in 
marriage  followed  him  and  he  led  her  a  long  chase.  She  began 
to  feel  it  grow  warmer  (it  was  April)  and  soon  she  found  one  of 
his  mittens  and  later  his  hat.  At  last  it  became  so  warm  that 
she  came  to  the  place  where  he  had  melted  altogether  et  ibi  erat 
agger  excrementi.  When  she  examined  the  hat,  internum  ejus 
excrementi  illitum  invenit.  So  she  went  back  home  saying, 
"Good  for  him,  he's  melted.  I'm  glad  he  is  melted."  She 
couldn't  catch  him  anyway,  so  she  was  angry. 

So  young  girls  should  not  try  always  to  get  a  nice-looking 
man,  but  take  the  man  selected  for  them.  The  old  people  tell 
them  this  story  for  a  lesson,  lest  they  lose  a  good  man,  though 
not  so  handsome,  to  get  a  "stinker." 


1  Conjurer's  magic. 


71 

(19)  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SNAKES. 

A  man  was  one  time  walking  along  and  came  to  a  lake  which 
he  wanted  to  cross.  But  he  had  no  canoe,  and  so  he  walked 
along  the  shore  until  he  saw  a  big  Snake  lying  in  the  water  with 
his  head  on  the  shore.  "Will  you  carry  me  across?"  asked  the 
hunter.  "Yes,"  answered  the  Snake.  "But  it  looks  cloudy 
and  I  am  afraid  of  the  lightning,  so  you  must  tell  me  if  it 
thunders  while  we  are  crossing."  The  hunter  got  on  the 
Snake's  back  and  they  started  to  swim  across  the  lake.  As 
they  went  along,  thunder  began  rumbling,  "kax  kax,"  and  the 
lightning  flashed.  "Mah,  mah,  listen!"  said  the  Snake  in  fear. 
"I  hear  something."  Just  as  they  reached  the  shore,  when  the 
hunter  could  leap  to  safety,  a  stroke  of  lightning  hit  the  Snake 
and  broke  him  into  numberless  pieces,  which  began  swimming 
about  and  finally  came  to  land.  The  great  Snake  was  not 
killed,  but  his  pieces  turned  into  small  snakes  which  we  see  all 
about  to-day. 

(20)  MUSKRAT  WARNS  THE  BEAVER. 

The  Muskrat,  Beaver,  Dog,  and  some  Ojibwa  were  com- 
panions and  hunters.  They  were  real  people  who  could  talk  to 
one  another.  They  started  out  one  day  and  came  to  a  small 
lake  and  there  they  saw  Beaver  houses  and  families.  It  was 
early  in  the  winter.  They  said,  "That's  a  good  lake  to  drive 
the  beaver,  as  it's  all  rocky  and  they  can't  escape.  The  season 
is  right,  so  we  will  come  tomorrow  with  dogs."  The  Beavers 
were  in  their  houses  and  they  saw  the  Indians,  but  they  couldn't 
hear  the  talking.  The  Muskrat  heard,  however,  and  went  to 
the  Beaver  and  told  them.  "You  must  look  out  for  yourselves, 
uncles.  Those  Indians  say  you  are  very  easy  to  catch."  Now 
the  Muskrat  had  stayed  outside  the  Indians'  wigwam  and 
listened  to  what  they  were  saying,  until  his  feet  got  so  cold  that 
he  could  stay  no  longer.  So  that  this  was  all  that  he  had  heard 
to  tell  his  uncle  the  Beaver. 

The  next  morning  the  Indians  came  to  the  lake  and  broke  the 

Beaver's  houses,   and  the  big  Beaver  told  the  young  ones, 

"When  you  see  a  dog  passing,  whistle."     So  the  young  Beavers 

went  to  different  places  under  the  ice  and  when  they  saw  a  dog 

65977— 8£ 


72 

passing,  they  whistled  and  all  were  thus  caught  and  killed  by 
the  men.  But  the  big  Beaver  didn't  whistle,  and  he  escaped. 
The  Indians  said,  "Where's  the  big  Beaver?"  Then  they  went 
back  and  had  a  big  feast  on  those  they  had  caught.  In  those 
days  people  used  to  cut  a  flat  bone  from  the  hind  foot  of  the 
beaver  and  throw  it  into  the  water,  so  that  the  dogs  wouldn't 
get  it.  These  hunters,  however,  made  a  mistake  and  forgot  to 
save  that  bone.  They  lost  it.1 

So  the  Indians  had  their  feast,  and  when  they  threw  the  bones 
into  the  water,  one  of  the  little  Beavers  came  back  to  life  and 
went  back  to  his  parents.  He  said  to  them,  "I  had  a  fine  time, 
father.  They  hung  me  over  the  fire,  and  I  danced  for  them." 
Shortly  all  the  Beavers  came  back,  but  one  of  them  said,  "I'm 
very  sick,  father.  They  didn't  use  me  right."  This  was  the 
Beaver  whose  bone  from  his  hind  foot  the  hunters  had  lost. 
He  was  very  sore  and  disgusted  and  showed  his  father  the  fresh 
mark  of  his  foot  where  the  flat  bone  was  lost,  when  they  asked 
him  what  was  the  matter.  The  Beavers  did  not  like  this  and 
they  became  angry.  So  nowadays  the  Indians  tell  the  young 
boys  neither  to  talk  about  the  Beavers,  nor  the  prospects  of  a 
hunt  before  attacking  a  beaver  colony,  lest  the  Muskrat  hear 
them  and  tell  the  Beaver.  And  also,  when  the  hunting  dogs 
suddenly  go  off  from  camp  and  run  over  the  ice,  the  hunters  say 
the  dogs  hear  the  beavers  whistling. 

(21)  STORY  OF  A  HUNTER. 

There  were  two  men  living  in  a  camp  with  two  women  and 
the  rest  of  the  band.  On  a  cold  day  in  winter  one  of  the  men 
said  he  was  going  to  track  a  moose,  and  left  on  his  snowshoes. 
He  said  he  would  be  back  by  night.  He  was  gone  all  day  and 
by  night  he  had  not  returned,  so  his  wife  began  to  think  that 
possibly  he  had  shot  a  moose,  but,  as  he  had  taken  his  axe  with 
him,  he  might  have  cut  himself  in  some  way.  They  waited 
until  morning  and  then,  taking  up  his  trail,  they  tracked  him  to 
where  he  had  shot  a  moose  and  farther  on  to  where  he  had 
skinned  it.  The  meat  was  there,  but  the  skin  was  gone.  Look- 

1  They  used  to  suspend  the  beaver  by  a  swinging  string  and  roast  him,  saving  all  the  bones 
from  the  dogs  in  order  to  throw  them  into  the  lake,  as  they  thought  that  there  would  be  just 
as  many  beavers  there  again  in  the  autumn  as  the  number  of  bones  thtown  in.  This  story  ex- 
plains the  ceremonial  treatment  of  beaver  remains. 


73 

ing  around  they  saw  a  fire  not  far  off.  When  they  reached  the 
fire  they  discovered  that  the  hunter  had  rolled  himself  up  in 
the  green  hide  to  sleep,  and  during  the  night  it  had  frozen 
around  him  and  he  had  been  unable  to  get  out.  They  thawed 
out  the  skin  and  all  went  back  to  camp. 

(22)  A  TIMAGAMI  STORY. 

Once  there  were  a  man  and  his  wife  living  in  a  bark  wigwam. 
The  wife  grew  very  fond  of  another  man  et  voluit  copulare 
cum  eo  sine  cognitione  mariti  sui.  They  finally  hit  upon  a 
plan.  She  cut  a  small  hole  in  the  bark  near  her  bedding  ut  ille 
cum  ea  nocte  copulare  posset.  She  slept  near  the  hole  et 
omne  bene  factum  est,  sed  maritus  tandem  invenit  quid  fieret. 
So  one  night  he  ordered  his  wife  to  change  places  with  him  when 
they  slept,  et  cum  venisset  amator,  maritus  penem  ejus  abs- 
cidit  per  orificium  positum.  Tune  membrum  virile  cepit, 
without  telling  his  wife  what  had  happened,  and  went  off  on  a 
moose  hunt.  He  killed  a  moose  and  took  its  intestine  end 
[described  like  an  appendix],  secuit  penem  in  fragmenta,  mixed 
these  with  fat,  and  made  a  smoked  sausage  out  of  the  whole.1 
Then  he  went  home  and  gave  it  to  his  wife  to  eat.  When  she 
had  eaten  it,  he  said,  "Nunc  edisti  penem  amatoris  tui." 

(23)  STORY  OF  A  FAST  RUNNER. 

Once  a  hunter  was  so  quick  of  foot  that  when  he  shot  his 
arrow  at  a  beaver  plunging  into  the  lake  from  the  shore,  he  would 
run  down,  catch  the  beaver  by  the  tail  before  the  arrow  got  to 
it,  and  hold  it  until  the  arrow  struck.  He  was  a  fast  runner, 
indeed. 

(24)  THE  HUNTER  AND  THE  SEVEN  DEER. 

There  once  was  a  hunter  who  lived  in  a  camp.  The  summer 
had  been  very  dry  and  the  whole  country  was  on  fire.  He 
stayed  in  his  camp,  however,  although  the  smoke  was  so  thick 
that  no  one  could  see  any  distance.  One  day  he  saw  seven  deer 
walking  along,  each  holding  the  other's  tail  in  its  mouth.  The 


1  This  intestine  sausage  is  a  great  delicacy  among  the  Indians. 


74 

leader  alone  could  see,  and  he  was  guiding  the  others.  So  he 
killed  the  leader  and  then  took  hold  of  the  second  deer's  nose, 
and  so  lead  them  all  to  his  camp  alive,  where  he  butchered 
them. 

(25)  STORY  OF  A  CONJURER. 

There  was  a  conjurer  (mrte'w),1  whose  name  was  Gitcikwe'we 
("buzzing  noise"),  his  wife  Prdje"kwe2  and  their  children,  camp- 
ing at  a  lake  in  a  wigwam.  There  was  a  large  lake  to  the  west 
of  where  they  were  camping  full  of  islands.  It  was  a  long 
portage  from  the  wigwam  to  this  lake. 

One  evening,  while  Gitcikwe'we  was  sitting  in  his  wigwam, 
he  became  very  much  frightened.  He  saw  nothing  in  particular 
that  frightened  him,  but  on  account  of  his  mrte'w  feeling  he 
became  afraid  and  knew  that  something  was  coming.  At  dusk 
he  gathered  up  his  blankets  and  jumped  into  his  canoe  with  his 
family,  and  they  floated  on  the  lake  beside  the  camp,  all  night 
long.  When  he  went  back  to  the  wigwam  in  the  morning,  he 
found  that  a  Windigo3  had  been  there  and  had  smashed  his 
wigwam. 

Then  the  family  started  to  take  the  portage  which  led  across 
to  the  big  lake  containing  the  islands.  When  Gitcikwe'we 
took  the  portage,  he  sent  his  wife  and  children  ahead  and  told 
them  to  hurry  on  as  fast  as  they  could,  while  he  would  follow 
behind  with  the  canoe.  He  said,  "When  you  hear  'Meat  bird' 
(Wiske'djak4)  flying  above  you,  that  means  'Hurry',  for  the 
Windigo  is  coming  behind  to  catch  you.  That  will  be  your 
warning."  They  reached  the  other  end  of  the  portage  and  got 
into  the  canoe  and  paddled  out  to  one  of  the  islands  to  a  place 
where  the  end  of  the  portage,  from  which  they  had  just  come 
out,  was  lost  to  view.  They  were  safe  there,  as  the  Windigo, 
having  no  canoe,  could  not  cross.  After  Gitcikwe'we  put  up 
his  camp,  he  said  to  his  wife,  "I  am  not  yet  satisfied.  I  must 
beat  that  Windigo,  because  he  will  bother  us  all  winter,  and 
then  we  will  starve,  for  I  cannot  hunt  while  staying  at  camp  all 
the  time,  watching  out  for  you  and  the  children." 

1  One  of  the  ranks  of  shamans. 

1  Mi'&'kwe,  "medicine  woman". 

*  A  cannibal  monster. 

4  Gitcikwe'we  intended  to  assume  this  guise. 


75 

Then  he  made  his  mi'te'o  wigwam  with  its  seven  poles  and 
covered  it  with  bark.1  He  went  into  it  and  it  began  to  work 
and  move,  while  a  band  of  spirits  could  be  heard  singing  inside.2 
Then  Windigo  came  there  and  Gitcikwe'we  said  to  his  wife, 
"We  will  clinch  him  and  take  him  away  out  west  where  he  came 
from."  When  he  clinched  him,  the  conjuring  wigwam  shook 
and  made  a  noise  like  thunder,  and  the  children  fainted  from 
fright,  for  they  knew  their  father  was  inside.  When  they 
recovered  consciousness,  everything  was  still  in  the  wigwam, 
and  their  father  had  gone  out  west,  taking  his  captive  with 
him.  A  little  while  after  this  the  wigwam  started  to  move 
again  and  Gitcikwe'we  was  back  again  from  his  trip  out  west. 
He  said  to  his  family,  "We  will  be  all  right  now.  I  took  him  back 
west.  He  is  very  sick  from  his  fright  but  he  will  stay  there  now." 

There  was  another  mi'te'  Indian  one  day's  journey  from 
where  Gitcikwe'we  was  camping.  This  Indian  was  so  full  of 
mi'te'  also  that,  while  he  was  asleep,  he  heard  Windigo  passing 
overhead  with  a  great  moaning  noise  as  if  he  were  in  pain.  No 
other  people  heard  it  except  this  man,  because  they  were  not 
mi-te'. 

Next  morning  Gitcikwe'we  awoke  and  found  that  it  was  a  fine 
day  with  no  wind  to  bother,  and  the  whole  family  was  happy 
to  think  of  passing  another  winter.  Shortly  after  they  had 
gotten  up,  they  heard  a  great  noise  of  shouting  in  the  direction 
of  the  end  of  the  portage  from  where  they  had  come  and  which 
was  just  lost  to  view.  When  Gitcikwe'we  heard  this,  he  loaded 
his  flint  lock  gun  to  shoot  Windigo,  for  he  thought  he  had  come 
back  and  was  making  the  noise  and  concluded  that  that  was  the 
only  way  to  get  rid  of  him.  He  and  his  wife  got  into  the  canoe 
for  this  purpose.  When  they  turned  the  point,  they  saw  a 
young  man  standing  right  in  the  portage.  It  was  Gitcikwe'we's 
wife's  nephew.  He  had  left  his  canoe  at  the  other  end  of  the 
portage,  as  it  was  so  long  to  carry  it,  and  he  was  expecting  his 
aunt  to  take  him  across  in  her  canoe.  So  he  got  into  the  canoe 
and  the  three  of  them  returned  to  camp.3 


1  Seven  poles  are  always  required  for  this  kind  of  a  wigwam.     See  story  of  Cirjgibia. 

2  The  usual  procedure  of  the  conjurer. 

*  This  is  related  as  a  true  story.     One  of  Gitcikwe'we's  daughters  is  still  living  in  the 
Timagami  band;  she  is  known  as  Pi-dje"hwe. 


76 

(26)  LEGEND  OF  OBABIKA  LAKE. 

Obabika  lake  is  called  Ma'nitu  Pi-pa' gi",  "Spirit  Echo."  On 
the  eastern  shore  of  this  lake  is  a  great  rock  where  a  Manitu  is 
believed  to  live.  Whenever  anyone  makes  a  noise  in  the  vici- 
nity, the  Manitu  becomes  angry  and  growls.  His  plaints,  the 
Indians  believe,  can  be  clearly  heard  when  he  is  offended. 
The  Ojibwa  never  go  near  there  when  they  can  avoid  it;  and 
they  seldom  throw  a  stone  in  the  lake,  splash  their  paddles,  or 
shoot  their  guns  near  its  shores. 

(27)  IROQUOIS  PICTOGRAFHS. 

"The  Iroquois  used  to  come  here  to  fight  the  Ojibwa  because 
the  Americans  had  driven  them  from  their  homes  in  the  States 
and  the  Iroquois  had  to  seek  new  countries  beyond  the  settle- 
ments in  the  North.  In  their  excursions,  when  they  got  far 
from  home,  they  cut  and  painted  pictures  in  the  rocks  on  river 
or  lake  shores,  so  that  their  friends,  if  they  ever  penetrated  so 
far,  would  know  that  their  own  people  had  been  there  before 
them.  The  characters  of  these  pictures  would  tell  what  had 
happened,  so  that  if  the  advance  party  never  returned  to  their 
people,  some  record  would  at  least  be  left  behind  of  their 
journey."1 

The  Ojibwa  attributed  nearly  all  pictographs  to  the  Iroquois. 
On  Lady  Evelyn  lake  are  a  number  of  such  figures,  showing 
animals  and  men  in  canoes. 


(28)  AN  IROQUOIS  LEGEND. 

At  that  time  there  were  people  living,  four  in  number:  a 
woman,  a  young  baby  who  could  hardly  walk,  and  two  sons 
who  were  grown-up  men.  Their  father  had  died  and  the  family 
lived  together  in  a  wigwam.  It  was  winter  and  the  sons  had 
two  rabbit  snares'  trails,  one  to  the  east  and  the  other  to  the 
north,  and  they  went  to  different  lines  on  different  days.  The 
mother  would  attend  to  the  snares  and  leave  the  baby,  wrapped 
in  a  rabbit  skin  blanket,  alone  in  the  camp,  while  the  two  sons 

1  Quoted  verbatim  from  Chief  Aleck  Paul. 


77 

would  hunt  and  look  around  for  game,  having  only  bows  and 
arrows. 

When  they  came  home  in  the  evening,  they  would  sometimes 
bring  with  them  spruce  partridge  and  other  kinds  of  partridge. 
Their  mother  used  to  bring  home  partridges  also,  but  she  had 
no  bow  or  arrows,  and  the  men  wondered  how  she  did  it,  because 
she  often  brought  home  as  many  as  ten  birds.  They  could 
not  understand  how  she  was  able  to  do  better  than  they,  so 
they  asked  her,  "What  did  you  do  it  with?"  They  never  went 
with  their  mother  to  where  she  had  her  snares,  but  they  were 
continually  asking  her  how  she  caught  the  partridges.  She 
answered,  "I  cut  a  pole,  put  a  string  there  on  the  end,  and  catch 
them  by  the  neck,  since  I  have  no  bow."  But  they  didn't 
believe  her,  as  they  often  saw  arrow  wounds  in  the  partridges' 
breasts.  They  looked  at  these  wounds  and  said,  "Somebody 
must  have  shot  them  for  you.  Was  it  not  the  Iroquois?"  "No," 
answered  the  mother,  "I  caught  them  with  a  pole  snare  and 
poked  them  with  a  stick  in  order  to  bloat  them  with  blood,  so 
they  will  make  more  bouillon."  But  still  they  didn't  believe 
her  and  they  said  to  each  other,  "Mother  doesn't  like  to  tell  us. 
Some  Iroquois,  I  guess,  are  going  to  kill  us.  We'll  fool  our 
mother  and  these  Iroquois.  When  we  go  to  bed,  we'll  sleep 
with  our  baby." 

So  that  night  they  said  to  their  mother,  "We  want  to  sleep 
with  our  brother  the  baby,  on  his  side  of  the  wigwam."  They 
dried  their  moccasins,  put  them  on,  and  also  put  on  rabbit  skin 
blankets,  for  they  were  preparing  to  run  out  during  the  night. 
They  had  discovered  a  place  the  day  before  where  trees  had 
fallen  down  and  snow  had  covered  them,  thus  making  a  tunnel. 
So  that  night  they  rolled  their  little  brother  up  in  a  blanket  and 
left  early  in  the  night,  unknown  to  their  mother.  When  they 
left,  the  Iroquois  were  getting  closer.  The  mother  awoke  and 
cried  out,  "Madja'wak  they  are  going!"  She  did  this  to  help 
the  Iroquois  find  them.  The  Iroquois  followed  them  on  snow- 
shoes,  but  the  sons  made  a  great  number  of  branch  trails  in 
order  to  deceive  them. 

The  three  finally  reached  their  windfall  tunnel  and  there  they 
stayed  and  waited  for  the  Iroquois.  At  daylight  the  Iroquois 
took  up  the  trail  and  followed  until  they  finally  reached  them. 


78 

The  three  in  the  cave  could  hear  the  Iroquois  talking  above 
them.  One  of  the  Iroquois  dug  a  hole  in  the  snow  above  the 
tunnel  and  peeped  down  to  see  if  the  three  were  there.  As 
one  by  one  the  Iroquois  looked  through  the  hole,  the  sons  shot 
them,  the  arrow  falling  back  through  the  hole  so  that  they 
could  use  it  again.  They  killed  nearly  all  of  them,  and  at  last 
no  more  Iroquois  faces  appeared  above  the  hole,  but  the  sons 
could  hear  crying.  Finally  they  decided  to  come  out,  and  9ne 
of  the  sons  went  out  first  to  look  around,  but  he  could  see  no 
one.  They  then  started  back  to  the  wigwam,  following  the 
Iroquois  tracks,  but  they  only  saw  two  trails.  One  of  the  sons 
went  a  little  ahead  and  the  other  followed  behind  with  the  baby. 
When  they  reached  their  wigwam,  they  found  it  smashed  to 
pieces  and  the  poles  flattened  out.  Their  mother  was  killed 
and  the  Iroquois  had  cut  off  her  breasts  and  made  babiche 
strings1  of  it.  These  two  Iroquois  who  were  left  had  made  a 
tripod  of  sticks  and  had  wound  the  skin  all  the  way  around  it. 
Then  they  had  gone  and  were  never  seen  again.  The  mother 
had  agreed  with  the  Iroquois  that  they  were  not  to  kill  her  if 
she  didn't  tell  her  sons  of  their  whereabouts. 


TlM AG AMI    FOLK-LORE. 

(1) 

It  is  not  proper  to  tell  stories  in  summer,  lest  one  die;  but,  if 
stories  are  told,  they  must  be  told  for  ten  successive  evenings 
in  order  to  prevent  the  evil. 

(2) 

In  order  to  foretell  the  sex  of  the  child  about  to  be  born,  the 
first  vertebra  of  a  moose  or  deer  may  be  used.  The  appearance 
of  one  side  of  this  bone  resembles  a  man's  face,  while  the  other 
resembles  a  woman's.  The  seeker  for  information  may  place 
this  bone  on  top  of  his  head  and  let  it  drop  to  the  ground. 
Whichever  face  turns  upward  like  a  die  indicates  the  sex  of  the 
child.  This  bone  is  called  uta'backo'k-e  "back  neck-bone". 

1  Thongs  of  rawhide. 


79 

(3) 

A  little  device  to  bring  rain:  suck  the  flat  side  of  a  green  leaf 
until  it  snaps,  or  slap  one  hand  with  the  palm  of  the  other,  holding 
the  leaf  in  the  fist  of  the  first. 

(4) 
Northern  Lights:    Wase'tibik'an,  "light  of  night." 

(5) 

Bine''s-i'wi'mr'k^an,  "birds'  path".  This  is  the  Milky  Way, 
which  is  believed  to  be  the  guide  to  the  birds  in  their  spring  and 
autumn  migrations. 

(6) 

Wdta'gwanobv's-an  "mist  from  the  water"  (?).  This  is  the 
rainbow,  which  is  thought  to  be  caused  by  mist  generated  in 
the  air  by  waves  of  some  great  sea. 

(The  Matachewan  Indians  of  Montreal  river  call  the  rainbow 
Ani'miki'unujea'bi  "thunder's  legging  string"!. 

(7) 

The  whippoorwill  (wa'hone^s-i)  is  very  rarely  heard  in  Bear 
island,  although  the  bird  frequents  some  parts  of  the  lake. 
Its  cry  is  considered  an  omen  of  ill  fortune  or  of  death.  Another 
idea  connected  with  the  whippoorwill's  cry  is  that  it  is  the 
signal  cry  of  the  Iroquois  (Ma'djina'dowes'i  "bad  Iroquois," 
referring  to  the  tribes  of  the  League  as  distinct  from  those  of 
Caughnawaga)  and  that  it  indicates  the  proximity  of  enemies. 

(8) 

When  robins  (gwi-'ckwe)  sing  noticeably  during  the  day  it  is  a 
sign  of  coming  rain.  The  toad's  (oma'k'dki)  song  in  the  daytime 
has  the  same  portent. 


80 

(9) 
To  kill  blue-bottle  flies  will  bring  rain. 

(10) 

If  anyone  finds  or  sees  a  live  mole  it  is  a  sign  that  some  member 
of  the  family  will  die  soon.  Moles  are  very  rare  in  the  Tima- 
gami  neighbourhood  and  quite  a  stir  is  raised  when  one  is  encoun- 
tered. 

(11) 

Hiccoughing  is  a  sign  that  the  victim  has  been  stealing  some- 
thing. If  it  is  true  and  the  victim  is  accused  of  it,  he  will  stop 
hiccoughing  from  fright. 

(12) 

If  a  child  is  born  feet  first  he  is  gifted  with  curing  powers  for 
people  with  sore  backs.  They  let  him  jump  on  the  patient's 
back. 

(13) 

The  method  of  cooking  squirrels  (djr'to'mo)  has  an  influence 
upon  the  weather  forces.  Squirrels  are  usually  cooked  by 
splitting  the  carcass,  after  it  has  been  skinned,  and  roasting  it 
in  the  flames  until  done.  Should  the  animal,  however,  be 
boiled  instead,  it  will  bring  rain.  When  rain  is  needed,  squirrels 
are  boiled  purposely  to  bring  it. 

(14) 

To  bring  on  a  snowstorm  an  infant  is  allowed  to  make  its 
moccasin  print  in  the  snow. 

(15) 

If  an  infant  warms  its  hands  before  the  fire,  it  is  a  sure  sign  of 
cold  weather  coming. 


81 

(16) 
A  red  sunset  with  red  clouds  is  a  sign  of  wind. 

(17) 

A  whirling  buzzer,  made  by  spinning  a  bone  or  wooden  disk 
on  a  string  operated  by  the  two  hands,  will  cause  the  wind  to 
rise. 

(18) 

A  divination  device  is  used  before  the  hunt  to  foretell  what  kind 
of  game  is  going  to  be  killed.  It  is  as  follows.  The  metacarpal 
bone  of  a  beaver's  hind  leg,  with  its  sinew  covering,  is  taken  and 
cut  nearly  through,  so  that  it  will  break  easily. 

This  is  stuck  upright  in  the  ground  near  the  fire  and  a  series 
of  lines  radiating  from  it  are  traced  in  the  ashes  or  ground,  each 
line  being  named  for  some  game  animal :  moose,  beaver,  caribou, 
deer,  bear,  otter,  martin,  fisher,  etc.  Then,  as  the  heat  shrinks 
the  sinew,  it  breaks  the  bone  at  the  cut  and  the  upper  piece 
points  along  one  of  the  lines  marked.  This  answers  what 
kind  of  game  is  going  to  be  gotten.  The  lines  sometimes  also 
are  used  to  denote  the  direction  to  be  followed  to  get  the  animals 
designated. 

(A  variation  of  this  operation  was  noted  from  the  Mattagami 
band.  Here  a  stick  is  used  instead  of  a  beaver  bone  and  the 
base  of  the  stick  is  burned.  When  this  falls,  it  denotes  the 
direction  to  be  taken  to  secure  game). 

(19)  Supernatural  Creatures. 

Pa^'gctk.  This  is  a  personification  of  a  human  skeleton 
without  the  flesh,  which  wanders  about  the  country.  When 
he  travels,  he  goes  as  fast  as  he  thinks.  When  he  wishes  himself 
to  be  in  a  place,  he  is  there  as  soon  as  he  thinks  of  it.  When 
he  is  heard  by  the  people,  it  is  a  sign  that  someone  will  die.  It 
is  thought  that  he  is  heard  occasionally  three  times  in  succession, 
making  his  peculiar  noise,  once  at  the  horizon,  once  at  the 
zenith,  and  again  at  the  opposite  horizon. 


82 

Me''megwe'*sfi.  A  species  of  creature  which  lives  in  the  high 
remote  ledges.  They  are  small  and  have  hair  growing  aj  over 
their  bodies.  The  Indians  think  they  are  like  monkeys,  judging 
from  specimens  of  the  latter  they  have  seen  in  the  picture-books. 
These  dwarf-like  creatures  have  ugly  faces  and  seek  to  hide 
them  when  they  meet  with  people.  A  little  narrative  of  a 
meeting  with  these  creatures  is  told  by  some  Timagami  Indians 
who  had  been  to  Lake  Timiskaming.  The  Indians  were  passing 
the  high  ledge  of  rock  a  few  miles  below  Haileybury,  where  the 
water  was  very  deep  and  where  they  had  set  their  nets.  They 
found  that  somebody  had  been  stealing  fish.  They  proceeded 
to  watch  the  nets  and  soon  saw  three  Me-rmegwe''s'i  come  out 
astride  of  an  old  log  for  a  canoe,  using  sticks  for  paddles.  The 
Indians  pursued  them,  the  fairies  meanwhile  hiding  their  faces. 
Finally  the  Indians  caught  one.  Then  one  Indian  said,  "Look 
behind!"  When  the  fairy  turned  quickly  they  got  a  glimpse 
of  how  ugly  he  was.  The  Indians  then  took  a  knife  from  this 
fairy  and  the  rest  disappeared,  riding  their  log  through  the  rock 
wall  to  the  inside,  where  they  could  be  heard  crying,  as  this 
was  where  they  lived.  The  Indians  then  threw  the  knife  at  the 
rock  and  it  went  right  through  to  the  inside  to  its  owner. 


Figure  2.    Markings  on  birch  bark. 


65977— p.  83. 


83 


Appendix:  Notes  on  Timagami  Folk-Lore. 

(By  Neil  C.  Fergusson.) 

[Note. 

Under  date  of  August  30,  1913,  Mr.  Neil  C.  Fergusson,  Tima- 
gami Fire  Ranger,  wrote  from  Bear  island,  Lake  Timagami: 
"While  at  Bear  Island  I  met  Mr.  Speck,  who  was  gathering 
Indian  lore  and  legends  for  the  Victoria  Memorial  Museum. 
His  work  interested  me  greatly."  He  then  proceeds  to  com- 
municate some  folk-lore  material  which  he  had  himself  collected 
from  Timagami  Indians.  This,  kindly  put  by  Mr.  Fergusson 
at  the  disposal  of  the  Geological  Survey,  is  here  added  as  a 
supplement  to  Dr.  Speck's  own  data. 

E.  SAPIR.] 

(1)  Whisky  Jack  and  the  Markings  on  Birch  Bark. 

"One  Indian  told  me  a  few  incidents  about  Whisky  Jack 
(Anglicised  form  of  native  Wiske'djak)  and  ended  by  saying 
that  he  had  seen  the  outline  of  that  strange  personage  imprinted 
on  a  rock  along  the  Ottawa  river.  He  said  that  the  markings 
on  the  birch  bark  were  caused  by  Whisky  Jack  when  he  struck 
the  bark,  which  was  once  clear,  with  a  balsam  bough  and  then 
threw  a  bird  at  the  tree.  Hence  the  knots  give  the  appearance 
of  a  bird  with  outstretched  wings,  as  seen  on  the  enclosed  piece 
of  bark  (see  Figure  2)." 

(2)  The  Two  Girls,  Hell-Diver,  and  Loon.1 

Once  upon  a  time  two  girls  who  were  out  in  the  woods  climbed 
a  tall  spruce  tree,  but  when  they  wanted  to  descend,  they  found 
that  it  was  impossible.  Just  then  a  Moose  passed  near  the  tree 


1  Mr.  Fergusson  writes:  "Another  Indian  told  me  some  stories  that  he  had  heard  from 
his  grandmother,  who  could  speak  the  Ojibwa  tongue.  I  will  write  out  the  one  that  I  thought 
most  interesting."  The  story  given  by  Mr.  Fergusson  is  evidently  a  close  variant  of  the 
second  part  of  No.  5  of  Dr.  Speck's  Timagami  series. 

E.  SAPIB. 


84 

and  both  girls  called  to  him  for  help.  The  Moose,  however, 
passed  on  without  aiding  them.  Likewise  a  Deer,  an  Otter, 
and  a  Lynx  all  went  by,  but  from  none  did  they  receive  any 
help.  At  last  a  Wolverine  came  along  and  listened  to  the  girls' 
entreaties.  He  finally  climbed  the  tree  and  brought  the  girls 
safely  to  the  ground,  after  which  all  three  walked  along  together. 
The  girls  didn't  wish  the  Wolverine  as  a  companion,  so  one  of 
them  said  that  she  had  dropped  her  hair-ribbon  near  the  spruce 
tree  and  asked  the  unwelcome  companion  to  go  back  for  it, 
saying  that  they  would  wait  where  they  were  until  he  returned. 
The  kind  Wolverine  went  off  on  his  errand,  and,  as  soon  as  he 
was  out  of  sight,  the  two  girls  made  their  departure.  So  the 
Wolverine  came  back  and  saw  no  girls.  He  heard  a  whistle  and 
went  in  that  direction.  Then  he  heard  another  whistle  behind 
him,  and  so  on,  but  still  he  failed  to  find  the  girls,  for  the  trees 
were  whistling  one  after  another  in  order  to  fool  the  poor 
Wolverine.  The  Wolverine  went  his  own  way,  feeling  very  much 
grieved. 

The  girls  walked  on  swiftly  until  they  came  to  a  little  wigwam 
built  in  the  bush.  It  was  a  very  pretty  wigwam  and  looked  so 
inviting  to  the  tired  girls  that  they  went  inside  to  rest.  Soon  a 
Bird,  who  was  the  owner,  came  along  and  demanded  their 
business  in  his  wigwam.  They  told  him  that  they  had  lost 
their  way,  so  he  gave  them  a  cup  of  tea  and  directed  them  on 
their  journey.  The  girls  travelled  on  and  came  at  last  to  a 
river  at  the  end  of  which  was  a  lake.  A  Beaver  was  paddling 
his  canoe  down  the  stream,  but  wouldn't  take  the  girls  in. 
Next  a  Loon,  who  was  the  king  of  all  water  animals,  came  along 
in  his  canoe,  but  he  also  refused  to  take  them  with  him.  Finally 
a  "Hell-diver"  came  paddling  by.  He  was  very  kind  and  took 
the  two  girls  down  to  the  lake  where  he  dwelt  and  told  them 
that  they  might  sleep  in  his  wigwam  that  night.  He  gave 
them  some  blankets  and  then  went  out  on  business. 

The  girls,  however,  couldn't  go  to  sleep,  for  they  heard  music 
and  knew  that  a  dance  must  be  going  on.  They  got  out  of 
their  bed  and  went  to  the  house  where  they  heard  the  music. 
Looking  in  at  the  window,  they  saw  the  Loon  playing  the  fiddle 
and  all  the  dancers  enjoying  themselves,  so  they  returned  to 
their  bed  and  placed  two  logs  under  the  blankets  to  deceive 


85 

their  kind  friend,  the  "Hell-diver,"  into  thinking  that  they 
were  still  where  he  had  left  them. 

While  the  two  girls  were  dancing,  the  "Hell-diver"  returned 
and  lay  down  under  the  blankets,  but  the  logs  happened  to  be 
partly  rotten  and  were  filled  with  ants,  so  that  it  wasn't  long 
before  he  discovered  the  trick  that  had  been  played  on  him. 
At  once  he  went  to  the  Loon's  house,  thinking  that  the  girls 
had  been  to  the  dance.  All  was  dark  in  the  house,  as  the 
dancers  had  left,  but  he  could  see  that  the  two  girls  and  the 
Loon  were  lying  there  asleep.  The  Loon  was  snoring  with  his 
mouth  wide  open.  The  "Hell-diver"  was  seized  with  anger 
and  went  swiftly  back  to  his  wigwam,  where  he  heated  a  piece 
of  iron  until  it  was  red  hot.  He  hastened  with  this  to  the 
Loon's  house  and  crammed  it  down  the  sleeper's  mouth. 

Knowing  that  he  had  killed  the  Loon  and  that  the  murder 
would  soon  be  discovered  on  the  next  day,  he  made  ready  to  go 
on  a  hunting  trip  and  told  his  old  grandmother  that  he'd  be  back 
on  the  following  evening.  When  the  murdered  Loon  was 
discovered,  his  murderer  was  far  away  in  the  bush  and  had 
already  caught  one  deer  in  his  trap.  He  filled  a  portion  of  its 
entrails  with  blood  and  hung  it  around  his  neck,  then  started 
for  home.  As  his  canoe  neared  the  village  in  the  evening,  all  the 
people  ran  down  to  the  water's  edge  and  cried,  "Our  chief  is  dead!" 
The  "Hell-diver"  pulled  his  knife  and  cut  the  bladder  of  blood 
which  hung  about  his  neck,  upsetting  the  canoe  at  the  same  time. 
The  people  lamented,  saying,  "We  shouldn't  have  told  the 
'Hell-diver,'  for  he  has  killed  himself  from  grief." 

But  far  out  in  the  middle  of  the  lake  the  "Hell-diver"  came 
swimming  to  the  surface  and  called  aloud.  "It  was  I  who 
killed  our  king,  the  Loon."  Revenge  took  hold  of  all  the  people 
and  they  at  once  gave  chase,  but  were  unable  to  catch  the 
murderer,  and,  as  darkness  was  upon  them,  they  said,  "We  will 
build  a  dam  and  in  the  morning,  when  the  lake  is  dry,  we  will 
catch  him."  In  the  morning  the  lake  was  dry  and  all  the 
villagers  went  in  pursuit.  The  chase  was  a  long  one  and  the 
'Hell-diver'  was  in  the  last  stages  of  fatigue  when  he  ran  to 
the  dam  and  quickly  kicked  it  down.  The  waters  came  running 
in  and  all  the  people  were  turned  into  water  animals,  but  became 
friends  with  one  another. 

65977—9 


86 


Phonetic  Key. 

a,  as  in  father,  of  medium  length ;    a  ,  lengthened. 
e,  open;  e',  long  as  in  North  German  Bar. 
e~,  longer  than  e  and  close  in  quality. 
i  and  r,  short  and  long  close  vowels, 
o,  close  and  of  medium  length. 

0',  longer  than  o  and  with  lips  more  protruded,  almost  like  au 
of  English  taut. 

a,  dulled  form  of  short  a,  like  u  of  English  but. 
9,  short  obscure  vowel  of  uncertain  quality. 


b-p,  bilabial  stops  varying  between  true  sonant  and  inter- 
mediate surd-sonant. 

d-t,  alveolar  stops  varying  between  true  sonant  and  inter- 
mediate surd-sonant. 

g-k,  medial  palatal  stops  varying  between  true  sonant  and 
intermediate  surd-sonant. 

s  and  2,  surd  and  sonant  dorsal  sibilant  pronounced  with  tip 
of  tongue  deflected  to  lower  alveolar  (applies  only  to  Timiskam- 
ing  Algonquin;  in  Timagami  Ojibwa  s  and  z  are  normal). 

c  and  j,  surd  and  sonant  sibilant  corresponding  respectively 
to  English  sh  and  z  of  azure. 

tc  and  dj,  surd  and  sonant  sibilant  affricative  corresponding 
respectively  to  English  ch  and  j. 

x,  voiceless  palatal  spirant  like  ch  of  German  Bach. 

m,  as  in  English. 

n,  as  in  English. 

v),  palatal  nasal  like  ng  of  English  sing. 

w,  as  in  English. 

y,  as  in  English. 

h,  as  in  English. 


87 


'  nasalized  vowel. 

',  aspiration  following  vowel  or  consonant. 

',  denotes  that  preceding  vowel  or  consonant  is  long. 

',  main  stress. 

',  secondary  stress. 


LIST  OF  RECENT  REPORTS  OF  GEOLOGICAL 
SURVEY 

Since  1910,  reports  issued  by  the  Geological  Survey  have 
been  called  memoirs  and  have  been  numbered  Memoir  1,  Memoir 
2,  etc.  Owing  to  delays  incidental  to  the  publishing  of  reports 
and  their  accompanying  maps,  not  all  of  the  reports  have  been 
called  memoirs,  and  the  memoirs  have  not  been  issued  in  the 
order  of  their  assigned  numbers  and,  therefore,  the  following 
list  has  been  prepared  to  prevent  any  misconceptions  arising 
on  this  account.  The  titles  of  all  other  important  publications 
of  the  Geological  Survey  are  incorporated  in  this  list. 


11 


Memoirs  and  Reports  Published  During  1910. 

REPORTS. 

Report  on  a  geological  reconnaissance  of  the  region  traversed  by  the 
National  Transcontinental  railway  between  Lake  Nipigon  and  Clay  lake, 
Ont.— by  W.  H.  Collins.  No.  1059. 

Report  on  the  geological  position  and  characteristics  of  the  oil-shale 
deposits  of  Canada— by  R.  W.  Ells.  No.  1107. 

A  reconnaissance  across  the  Mackenzie  mountains  on  the  Pelly,  Ross, 
and  Gravel  rivers,  Yukon  and  North  West  Territories — by  Joseph  Keele. 
No.  1097. 

Summary  Report  for  the  calendar  year  1909.     No.  1120. 

MEMOIRS— GEOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  1.  No.  1,  Geological  Series.  Geology  of  the  Nipigon  basin,  Ontario 
—by  Alfred  W.  G.  Wilson. 

MEMOIR  2.  No.  2,  Geological  Series.  Geology  and  ore  deposits  of  Hedley 
mining  district,  British  Columbia — by  Charles  Camsell. 

MEMOIR  3.  No.  3,  Geological  Series.  Palaeoniscid  fishes  from  the  Albert 
shales  of  New  Brunswick— 4>y  Lawrence  M.  Lambe. 

MEMOIR  5.  No.  4,  Geological  Series.  Preliminary  memoir  on  the  Lewes 
and  Nordesnkiold  Rivers  coal  district,  Yukon  Territory — 
by  D.  D.  Cairnes. 

MEMOIR  6.  No.  5,  Geological  Series.  Geology  of  the  Haliburton  and  Ban- 
croft areas,  Province  of  Ontario — by  Frank  D.  Adams  and 
Alfred  E.  Barlow. 

MEMOIR  7.  No.  6,  Geological  Series.  Geology  of  St.  Bruno  mountain,  prov- 
ince of  Quebec — by  John  A.  Dresser. 

MEMOIRS— TOPOGRAPHICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  11.  No.  1,  Topographical  Series.  Triangulation  and  spirit  levelling 
of  Vancouver  island,  B.C.,  1909 — by  R.  H.  Chapman. 

Memoirs  and  Reports  Published  During  1911. 

REPORTS. 

Report  on  a  traverse  through  the  southern  part  of  the  North  West 
Territories,  from  Lac  Seul  to  Cat  lake,  in  1902 — by  Alfred  W.  G.  Wilson 
No.  1006. 

Report,  on  a  part  of  the  North  West  Territories  drained  by  the  Winisk 
and  Upper  Attawapiskat  rivers — by  WT.  Mclnnes.  No.  1080. 

Report  on  the  geology  of  an  area  adjoining  the  east  side  of  Lake  Timiska- 
ming — by  Morley  E.  Wilson.  No.  1064. 

Summary  Report  for  the  calendar  year  1910.     No.  1170. 

MEMOIRS— GEOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  4.  No.  7,  Geological  Series.  Geological  reconnaissance  along  the 
line  of  the  National  Transcontinental  railway  in  western 
Quebec — by  W.  J.  Wilson. 


Ill 

MEMOIR  8.  No.  8,  Geological  Series.  The  Edmonton  coal  field,  Alberta — 
by  D.  B.  Dow  ling. 

MEMOIR  9.  No.  9,  Geological  Series.  Bighorn  coal  basin,  Alberta — by  G.  S 
Malloch. 

MEMOIR  10.  No.  10,  Geological  Series.  An  instrumental  survey  of  the 
shore-lines  of  the  extinct  lakes  Algonquin  and  Nipissing  in 
southwestern  Ontario — by  J.  W.  Goldthwait . 

MEMOIR  12.  No.  11,  Geological  Series.  Insects  from  the  Tertiary  lake 
deposits  of  the  southern  interior  of  British  Columbia,  collect- 
ed by  Mr.  Lawrence  M.  Lambe,  in  1906 — by  Anton  Hand- 
lirsch. 

MEMOIR  15.  No.  12,  Geological  Series.  On  a  Trenton  Echinoderm  fauna  at 
Kirkfield,  Ontario — by  Frank  Springer. 

MEMOIR  16.  No.  IS,  Geological  Series.  The  clay  and  shale  deposits  of  Nova 
Scotia  and  portions  of  New  Brunswick— by  Heinrich  Ries 
assisted  by  Joseph  Keele. 

MEMOIRS— BIOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  14.  No.  1,  Bioligocal  Series.  New  species  of  shells  collected  by 
Mr.  John  Macoun  at  Barkley  sound,  Vancouver  island, 
British  Columbia— by  William  H.  Dall  and  Paul  Bartsch. 


Memoris  and  Reports  Published  During  1912. 

REPORTS. 

Summary  Report  for  the  calendar  year  1911.     No.  1218. 
MEMOIRS— GEOLOGICAL  SERIES. 


MEMOIR  13. 
MEMOIR  21. 


MEMOIR  24. 


MEMOIR  27. 
MEMOIR  28. 


Southern   Vancouver  island — by 


geology  and  ore  deposits  of 
British  Columbia — by  O.  E. 


No.   14,   Geological  Series. 

Charles  H.  Clapp. 
No.  15,  Geological  Series.    The 

Phoenix,  Boundary  district, 

LeRoy. 
No.  16,  Geological  Series.     Preliminary  report  on  the  clay  and 

shale  deposits  of  the  western  provinces — by  Heinrich  Ries 

and  Joseph  Keele. 
No.  1 7,  Geological  Series.     Report  of  the  Commission  appointed 

to  investigate  Turtle  mountain,  Frank,  Alberta,  1911. 
No.  18,  Geological  Series.    The  Geology  of  Steeprock  lake, 

Ontario — by  Andrew  C.  Lawson.     Notes  on  fossils  from 

limestone  of  Steeprock  lake,  Ontario — by  Charles  D.  Wal- 

cott. 


Memoirs  and  Reports  Published  During  1913. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

Museum  Bulletin  No.  1 :  contains  articles  Nos.  1  to  12  of  the  Geological 
Series  of  Museum  Bulletins,  articles  Nos.  1  to  3  of  the  Biological  Series  of 
Museum  Bulletins,  and  article  No.  1  of  the  Anthropological  Series  of  Museum 
Bulletins. 

Guide  Book  No.  1.  Excursions  in  eastern  Quebec  and  the  Maritime 
Provinces,  parts  1  and  2. 


IV 

Guide  Book  No.  2.  Excursions  in  the  Eastern  Townships  of  Quebec  and 
the  eastern  part  of  Ontario. 

Guide  Book  No.  3.  Excursions  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Montreal  and 
Ottawa. 

Guide  Book  No.  4.    Excursions  in  southwestern  Ontario. 

Guide  Book  No.  5.  Excursions  in  the  western  peninsula  of  Ontario  and 
Manitoulin  island. 

Guide  Book  No.  8.  Toronto  to  Victoria  and  return  via  Canadian  Pacific 
and  Canadian  Northern  railways:  parts  1,  2,  and  3. 

Guide  Book  No.  9.  Toronto  to  Victoria  and  return  via  Canadian  Pacific, 
Grand  Trunk  Pacific,  and  National  Transcontinental  railways. 

Guide  Book  No.  10.  Excursions  in  Northern  British  Columbia  and 
Yukon  Territory  and  along  the  north  Pacific  coast. 

MEMOIRS— GEOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  17.  No.  28,  Geological  Series.  Geology  and  economic  resources  of 
the  Larder  Lake  district,  Ont.,  and  adjoining  portions  of 
Pontiac  county,  Que. — by  Morley  E.  Wilson. 

MEMOIR  18.  No.  19,  Geological  Series.  Bathurst  district,  New  Brunswick — 
by  G.  A.  Young. 

MEMOIR  26.  No.  34,  Geological  Series.  Geology  and  mineral  deposits  of 
the  Tulameen  district,  B.C. — by  C.  Camsell. 

MEMOIR  29.  No.  82,  Geological  Series.  Oil  and  gas  prospects  of  the  north- 
west provinces  of  Canada — by  W.  Malcolm. 

MEMOIR  31.  No.  20,  Geological I  Series.  Wheaton  district,  Yukon  Territory — 
by  D.  D.  Cairnes. 

MEMOIR  33.  No.  SO,  Geological  Series.  The  geology  of  Gowganda  mining 
Division — by  W.  H.  Collins. 

MEMOIR  35.  No.  29,  Geological  Series.  Reconnaissance  along  the  National 
Transcontinental  railway  in  southern  Quebec — by  John  A. 
Dresser. 

MEMOIR  37.  No.  22,  Geological  Series.  Portions  of  Atlin  district,  B.C. — by 
D.  D.  Cairnes. 

MEMOIR  38.  No.  81,  Geological  Series.  Geology  of  the  North  American 
Cordillera  at  the  forty-ninth  parallel,  Parts  1  and  II — by 
Reginald  Aldworth  Daly. 

Memoirs  and  Reports  Published  During  1914. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

Summary  Report  for  the  calendar  year  1912.     No.  1305. 

Museum  Bulletins  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  5,  7,  and  8  contain  articles  Nos.  13  to  22 
of  the  Geological  Series  of  Museum  Bulletins,  article  No.  2  of  the  Anthro- 
poligical  Series,  and  article  No.  4  of  the  Biological  Series  of  Museum  Bulletins. 

Prospector's  Handbook  No.  1:  Notes  on  radium-bearing  minerals — by 
Wyatt  Malcolm. 

MUSEUM  GUIDE  BOOKS. 

The  archaeological  collection  from  the  southern  interior  of  British  Colum- 
bia—by Harlan  I.  Smith.  No.  1290. 

MEMOIRS— GEOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  23.  No.  23,  Geological  Series.  Geology  of  the  Coast  and  islands 
between  the  Strait  of  Georgia  and  Queen  Charlotte  sound 
B.C. — by  J.  Austen  Bancroft. 


MEMOIR  25.     No.  21,  Geological  Series.     Report  on  the  clay  and  shale  de- 
posits of  the  western  provinces  (Part  II) — by  Heinrich 

Ries  and  Joseph  Keele. 
MEMOIR  30.    No.  40,  Geological  Series.    The  basins  of  Nelson  and  Churchill 

rivers — by  William  Mclnnes. 
MEMOIR  20.     No.  41,  Geological  Series.    Gold  fields  of  Nova  Scotia — by  W. 

Malcolm. 
MEMOIR  36.     No.  S3,  Geological  Series.     Geology  of  the  Victoria  and  Saanich 

map-areas,  Vancouver  island,  B.C. — by  C.  H.  Clapp. 
MEMOIR  52.     No.  J$,  Geological  Series.    Geological  notes  to  accompany  map 

of  Sheep  River  gas  and  oil  field,  Alberta — by  D.  B.  Dowling . 
MEMOIR  43.     No.  36,  Geological  Series.    St.  Hilaire  (Beloeil)  and  Rougemont 

mountains,  Quebec — by  J.  J.  O'Neill. 
MEMOIR  44.     No.  37,  Geological  Series.    Clay  and  shale  deposits  of  New 

Brunswick — by  J.  Keele. 
MEMOIR  22.     No.  27,  Geological  Series.    Preliminary  report  on  the  serpentines 

and  associated  rocks,  in  southern  Quebec — by  J.  A.  Dresser. 
MEMOIR  32.     Wo.  25,  Geological  Series.     Portions  of  Portland  Canal  and 

Skeena  Mining  divisions,  Skeena  district,  B.C. — by  R.  G. 

McConnell. 
MEMOIR  47.    No.  39,  Geological  Series.    Clay  and  shale  deposits  of  the 

western  provinces,  Part  III — by  Heinrich  Ries. 
MEMOIR  40.     No.  24,  Geological  Series.    The  Archaean  geology  of  Rainy  lake 

— by  Andrew  C.  Lawson. 
MEMOIR  19.     No.  26,  Geological  Series.    Geology  of  Mother  Lode  and  Sunset 

mines,  Boundary  district,  B.C. — by  O.  E.  LeRoy. 
MEMOIR  39.     No.  85,  Geological  Series.    Kewagama  Lake  map-area,  Quebec 

—by  M.  E.  Wilson. 
MEMOIR  51.     No.  43,  Geological  Series.   Geology  of  the  Nanaimo  map-area — 

by  C.  H.  Clapp. 
MEMOIR  61.     No.  45,  Geological  Series.     Moose  Mountain  district,  southern 

Alberta  (second  edition) — by  D.  D.  Cairnes. 
MEMOIR  41.     No.  38,  Geological  Series.    The  "Fern  Ledges"  Carboniferous 

flora  of  St.  John,  New  Brunswick — by  Marie  C.  Stopes. 
MEMOIR  53.     No.  44,  Geological  Series.    Coal  fields  of  Manitoba,  Saskatche- 
wan, Alberta,  and  eastern  British  Columbia  (revised  edition) 

— by  D.  B.  Dowling. 
MEMOIR  55.     No.  46,  Geological  Series.    Geology  of  Field  map-area,  Alberta 

and  British  Columbia — by  John  A.  Allan. 


MEMOIRS— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  48.     No.  2,  Anthropological  Series.    Some  myths  and  tales  of  the 

Ojibwa  of  southeastern  Ontario — collected  by  Paul  Radin. 
MEMOIR  45.    No.  3,  Anthropological  Series.    The  inviting-in  feast  of  the 

Alaska  Eskimo — by  E.  W.  Hawkes. 
MEMOIR  49.     No.   4,   Anthropological  Series.     Malecite   tales — by   W.   H. 

Mechling. 
MEMOIR  42.     No.  1,  Anthropological  Series.    The  double  curve  motive  in 

northeastern  Algonkian  art — by  Frank  G.  Speck. 


MEMOIRS— BIOLOGICAL  SERIES. 

MEMOIR  54.  No.  2,  Biological  Series.  Annotated  list  of  flowering  plants 
and  ferns  of  Point  Pelee,  Ont.,  and  neighbouring  districts — 
by  C.  K.  Dodge. 


65977-10 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


.IHIRL 


SEP  3  0 

*EC'D  LD-URl 

iKSEP.27 

SEP  7  0  *»  ' 


I II  Illlll  111!  1111 II  Illil!  Illl  II 


3  1158  00105  6422 


