
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



VEHRI 




TOZZER LIBRARY 

{Gift ofl 

George Grant MacCurdy 



n-.G. Mii'tJurdy 



ANTHROPOLOGICAL PAPERS 



OF THE 



American Museum of Natural 
History. 



Vol. II. 



NEW YORK: 

Published by. Order of the Trustees. 

1909. 






r 



C-'- 



J 



EDITOR. 

CLARK WISSLER. 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 



Part I. Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians. By Clark Wissler and D. C. 

Duvall. September, 1908 1 

Part II. The Northern Shoshone (Plate I). By Robert H. Lowie. January, 

1909 165 

Part III. Notes on New Collections (Plates II to XXIII). Edited by Clark 

Wissler. March, 1909 307 

Index 366 



ANTHROPOLOGICAL PAPERS 

OP THE 

.American Museum of Natural History 

Vol. II, Part I. 



MYTHOLOGY OF THE BLACKFOOT INDIANS. 
By Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall. 

CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Introduction 5 

I. Tales op the Old Man 19 

1. The Making of the Earth 19 

2. Languages confused on a Mountain 19 

3. Order of Life and Death 19 

4. Why People die Forever 21 

5. The First Marriage 21 

6. Old Man leads a Migration 22 

7. Old Man and the Great Spirit 23 

8. Old Man gambles 24 

9. Old Man and the Rolling Stone 24 

10. Old Man roasts Squirrels in Hot Ashes 25 

11. Old Man makes a Drive, and loses Meat in a Race .... 27 

12. Old Man sees Berries in the Water 29 

13. Old Man loses his Eyes 29 

14. Old Man and the Fire-Leggings 31 

15. Old Man frightens a Bear 32 

16. Old Man gets fast in an Elk-Skull, and loses hb Hair ... 32 

17. Old Man cooks Two Babies 33 

18. Old Man's Escape 34 

19. Old Man deceived by Two Women . 35 

20. Old Man sees Girls picking Strawberries 36 

21. Old Man penem trans flumen mitt it 36 

22. Old Man makes Buffalo laugh 36 

23. Adventures of Old Man 37 

IL Star Myths 40 

1. The Twin-Brothers, or Stars 40 

2. Blood-Clot, or Smoking-Star 53 

3. The Fixed-Star 58 

a) 



2 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Page. 

4. Scar-Face 61 

(a) Version by a Piegan Man 61 

(6) Version by a Piegan Woman 65 . 

5. Cuts- Wood . 66 

6. The Seven Stars 68 

7. The Bunched Stars 71 

8. The Moon- Woman 72 

III. Ritualistic Origins 74 

1. The Beaver-Medicine 74 

(a) Northern Blackfoot Version 74 

(6) Blood Version . . . . . . . ... .75 

(c) North Piegan Version 76 

(d) Piegan Version 77 

2. Otter- Woman 78 

3. Tobacco-Seeds and Beaver-Medicine 79 

4. Crow Indian Water-Medicine 80 

5. Scabby-Round-Robe 81 

6. The Elk- Woman 83 

(a) Blood Version 83 

(6) Piegan Version 84 

7. The Bufifalo-Rock 85 

(a) Piegan Version 85 

(6) Northern Blackfoot Version .87 

8. Origin of the Medicine-Pipe S9 

9. The Worm-Pipe 91 

10. A Pipe from the Seven Stars 91 

11. The Black-Covered Pipe 91 

12. The Otter-Lodge 92 

13. The Bear-Lodge 92 

14. The Horse-Lodge 94 

15. Black and Yellow Buflfalo-Painted Lodges 94 

16. The Crow-Painted Lodge 95 

17. The Bear-Knife 95 

18. The Smoking-Otter 98 

19. The Medicine-Shields 99 

20. Never-Sits-Down's Shield 102 

21. The Eagle-Head Charm 103 

22. The Pigeons 105 

23. The Mosquitoes 105 

24. The Braves 106 

25. Dog-Chief 107 

26. Has-Scars-All-Over 109 

27. Scabby-BuU 112 

28. The Horns and the Matoki 117 

(a) Blood Version 117 

(6) North Piegan Version 119 

29. The Kit-Fox 121 

30. The Catchers 121 

31. The Bufifalo's Adopted Child 121 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 3 

Page. 

IV. Cultural and Other Origins 126 

1. The Whirlwind-Boy 126 

2. The Bladder Story 127 

3. The Water-Bull 128 

4. Red-Head 129 

5. The Meeting in the Cave 132 

6. Why Dogs do not Talk 133 

7. Why Women are able to stick the Poles into the Holes of the Ears 

of the Lodge after Dark 133 

8. Contest between the Thunder-Bird and the Raven .... 134 

9. The Raven Rescues People 134 

10. Why Grasshoppers Spit 134 

11. How Medicine-Hat got its Name 135 

V. Miscellaneous Tales 138 

1. The Lost Children 138 

2. The Woman who got Meat from the Cliff 141 

3. Bear-Moccasin, the Great Medicine-Man 143 

4. The Split Feather 147 

5. The Treacherous Wives 148 

6. The Woman who Married a Snake 150 

7. The Woman who Married Filth 151 

8. The Woman who Married a Horse 152 

9. The Woman with a Sharpened Leg 153 

10. The Woman without a Body 154 

11. The Man Cut in two below the Waist 154 

12. The Ghost- Woman 155 

13. Fed by a Ghost 156 

14. Fed by a Coyote 156 

15. Riding the Buffalo . 157 

16. The Kutenai Black-Tail Deer-Dance 157 

17. The Horned-Toad and the Frog 159 

18. Turtle goes to War 160 

19. The Warrior's Dilemma . 160 

20. A Warrior's Duty and his Love 162 

21. The Wolverene- Woman 162 

22. Seven-Heads 163 

23. The Sand Hills 16a 



INTRODUCTION. 

This collection of narratives was made among the several divisions of 
the Blackfoot Indians during the years 1903-07. Unless othenv'ise stated, 
the translations were made by D. C. Duvall, and revised by Clark Wissler. 
The usual method was to record literal oral translations, which were in turn 
rendered with some freedom, though the translator's idiom has been retained 
wherever feasible. In every case, however, both the translator and the 
editor have sought to reproduce the narrative with the original sequence of 
incidents and explanatory ideas. In narration the Blackfoot often repeat 
sentences at irregular intervals, as if they wished to prevent the listener 
from forgetting their import. Naturally such repetitions were eliminated 
in the translations. A few narratives were recorded as texts. While texts 
will be indispensable for linguistic research, the present condition of Black- 
foot mythology is such that its comparative study would not be materially 
facilitated by such records. Each narrator has his own version, in the 
telling of which he is usually consistent ; and, while the main features of the 
myths are the same for all, the minor differences are so great that extreme 
accuracy of detail with one individual would avail little. The method 
pursued with the most important m^ths was to discuss them with different 
individuals, so as to form an opinion as to the most common arrangement 
of incidents; a statement of such opinions being given as footnotes to those 
narrations in which great variations w^ere observed. This variable condi- 
tion may be interpreted as a breaking-down of Blackfoot m}thology, but 
there is another factor to be considered. M}^hs are told by a few individuals, 
who take pride in their ability and knowledge, and usually impress their 
own individuality upon the form of the narrative. Thus it seems equally 
probable that the various versions represent individual contributions, and, 
in a certain sense, are the ownership-marks of the narrators. Once when 
discussing this matter with a Blood Indian, the venerable old man pulled 
up a common ragvveed, saying, **The parts of this weed all branch off from 
the stem. They go different ways, but all come from the same root. So 
it is with the different versions of a m\th." Hence, to say that any one 
version of these mvths is correct would be preposterous, because they have 
not now, and probably never did have, an absolutely fLxed form. The only 

(5) 



6 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol.11, 

rational criterion seems to be the approximate form in which the m^th is 
most often encountered. So far as practicable, we have made this the 
basis of selection ; but doubtless many narratives containing unusual features 
have passed into our collection unobserved. In some instances we have 
given exceptional versions, because they contained important cultural data, 
exercising due care by duplication or otherwise that no essential incidents 
should be omitted. In a few cases we have given versions from the various 
divisions of the Blackfoot. So far as our observation goes the differences 
between versions from these divisions are no greater than between individ- 
ual versions within a single division. 

While the greater part of these narratives were collected among the 
Piegan in Montana, the North Piegan, Blood, and Northern Blackfoot in 
Canada are well represented. As may be expected under conditions just 
stated, the contributors were relatively few, — twenty-one in all. No claim 
for completeness is made. Our effort has been to present narratives in 
which the tone of the m\thical age predominated, or in which the super- 
natural was the main interest. In a future paper we hope to present some 
typical tales of adventure, and a collection of esoteric narratives in con- 
nection with a discussion of certain aspects of Blackfoot culture. We made 
no effort to collect ordinary humorous tales (of which there are a great 
number, chiefly obscene), because none of those encountered contained 
mythical or supernatural elements. 

A number of Blackfoot myths have been recorded elsewhere. The first 
to mention the subject seems to have been the younger Henrv', whose journal 
(1808), together with that of Thompson's, contains a brief though somewhat 
confused statement of the Old Man, the Moon, and the Sun.^ In 1884 
Clark reported briefly some observations on nn-thology in his well-known 
work ^ on the sign language. A year or two later appeared a collection of 
traditions from various Canadian tribes by Father Petitot,^ in which a few 
references were made to Blackfoot m^-thology. The next observer appears 
to have been John Maclean, who from time to time published abstracts 
and versions of various myths.* By far the most complete collection was 
made by George Bird Grinnell, containing in all something over thirty 
narratives.^ A few m}'ths have been publislied by R. N. Wilson.® So far 
no other publications giving first-hand data have come to our attention. 

1 New Light on the Early History of the Greater Nortliwest. Edited by EUiott Coues, 
1897. p. 528. 

2 Indian vSipn Lanpuape. 1885. 

3 Traditions Indieiuies dn Canada Nord-onest. 1886. 

* Journal of American Folk-Lore ^Vol. III. 1.S90. p. 296; Vol. VI, 1893. p. 165); The 
Indians of Canada, 1892; Canadian Savape Folk. 1896. 

* Hlackfoot Lodge Tales. 1892, revised 1903; Journal of American Folk-Lore cVoL VI, 
1893. p. 44). 

6 The .\merican .Antiquarian, Vol. XV. 1893. pp. 149. 150. 200-203: Report of the British 
Association for the Advancement of Science, Vol. La VII. 1898, pp. 788. 789. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 7 

The narratives collected by us contain incidentally and otherwise a 
great deal of important data on the culture of the Blackfoot Indians, which 
we expect to use in the future. Accordingly the senior author has classified 
and arranged them to facilitate such use. Those of our readers interested 
solely in comparative mythology will doubtless not be hampered by this, 
if they ignore the main headings. Proceeding from the point of \dew just 
stated, it appears that according to association, content, and function, the 
narratives fall into four groups, — Tales of the Old Man, Star M}'ths, 
Ritualistic Origin, and Cultural or other Origins. To this may be added a 
miscellaneous collection in which, for the most part, each narrative is its 
own excuse for being. A brief discussion of these groups may serve as a 
characterization of Blackfoot mythology. 

The Old Man, or Napiw*, has been given the first place in our collection. 
The collection of Grinnell contains several adventures not found in ours. 
One of these is characterized by the following: 

Old Man goes out to hunt with the wolves. When sleeping with them at night, 
he is kept warm by lying under their tails. The next day, Old Man disregards an 
injimction against opening his eyes, and is hit on the nose with a bone. Later he 
retaliates, and kills the wolf who threw the bone. In this story, also occurs the only 
known case in which Old Man becomes an animal. By request he is transformed 
into a wolf; but this seems to be lost sight of in the course of the narrative, where he 
appears in his true form. Later he encounters Chief Bear, and shoots arrows into 
him and several other bears. Then he meets Frog going for medicine, takes Frog's 
skin, puts it on, and, so disguised, goes in and kills the bears.* 

This last incident bears a striking similarity to part of an Algonkin m\i;h 
recorded among the Sauk and Fox by Dr. William Jones .^ Grinnell also 
records an incident in which Old Man plucks the hair from a fox and sends 
him out to attract buffalo. The buffalo are killed with laughing at the 
antics of the fox. WTiile Old Man is butchering, it becomes cold and the 
fox freezes stiff. The buffalo laughing himself to death occurs in our col- 
lection, but b due to the Old Man's acts. 

According to Maclean, the Old Man was a party to the stealing of bags 
containing summer and winter.' 

Petitot says that by tradition the three divisions of the people — Northern 
Blackfoot, Bloods, and Piegan — are the respective offspring of the Old 
Man's three sons.* 

The creation of the world from mud brought to the surface by a diving 



» Blackfoot Lodge Tales, op. cit., p. 149. 

2 Culture-Hero Myth of the Sauks and Foxes (Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XIV, 
p. 225). 

» Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. VI, p. 166. 

* Petitot, Traditions Indiennes du Canada Nord-ouest, p. 493. 



8 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11, 

animal is a frequent incident in the mythology of central North America. 
In addition to the fragment in our collection, Blackfoot versions have been 
recorded elsewhere. Maclean makes use of them in several publications, 
one of which runs as follows: — 

"The aged men of the camps tell us of the time when there was nothing but 
water, and the Old Man was sitting upon a log, with four animals. Pondering over 
his situation, he thought that there must be something under the water, and, anxious 
to learn what might be there, he sent the animals down after each other, till the last 
to descend was the muskrat, and he alone retiuned to tell the story of his explora- 
tions, bearing in his mouth some mud, which the Old Man took, and rolling it in the 
palm of his hand, it grew rapidly and fell into the water. Soon it assumed such 
dimensions that he stepped upon it, and placing there a wolf, this animal ran swiftly 
over the plastic matter, and wherever he stepped an indentation was made, which 
became a valley, and where he placed not his foot the plains and mountains 
appeared. The water rushed into some of the indentations, and these became 
lakes." 1 

In confirmation of this the following may be noted : — 

"At a certain time, it happened that all the earth was covered with water. The 
'Old Man' (Napiw) was in a canoe, and he thought of causing the earth to come up 
from the abyss. To put this project into execution he used the aid of four animals, 
— the duck, the otter, the badger and the muskrat. The muskrat proved to be the 
best diver. He remained so long under water that when he came to the surface he 
was fainting, but he had succeeded in getting a little particle of earth, which he 
brought between the toes of his paw. This particle of earth the "Old Man" took, 
and blowing on it he swelled it to such an extent as to make the whole earth of it. 
Then it took him four days to complete his work, and make the mountains, rivers, 
plants, and beasts." * 

The myth was also known to the Sarcee in the same form as above .^ 
The writer once asked a well-informed old Piegan man if such a story w^as 
known to his people. His reply was to the effect that he had heard of it, 
but regarded it as a white man's tale. This may be an error, for Henry 
wrote about a century ago as follows : — 

"At first the world was one body of water inhabited by only one great white man 
and his wife, who had no children. This man, in the course of time, made the earth, 
divided the waters into lakes and rivers," * etc. 

Thus there seems no reason to doubt but that this myth was known to 
the Blackfoot in the same general form as was current among the numerous 
tribes of the Algonkin group. It may not have been current among the 

* Canadian Savage Folk, p. 51. 

2 Hale, Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1886, p. 704. 

3 Wilson, Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1889, p. 224. 

* New Light on the Early History of the Greater Northwest, p. 528. 



1908.] Wisaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 9 

Piegan, since Henry was among the Northern Blackfoot (from whom our 
version was obtained), and Maclean seems to have secured his data from the 
Bloods. That the Blackfoot formerly had a well-defined creation myth, 
in which the Old Man took the initiative in producing and transforming 
the world, is indicated by several writers. Those noted above give more 
or less in 'detail a running account of the peopling of the earth and the in- 
struction of mankind in the art of living. While these incidents do not occur 
in detail in the Old Man myths recorded in this paper, they are occasionally 
implied. Such origins are at present often assigned to the Old Man without 
the formality of a myth. It will be noted that the greater part of the tales 
collected by us recite the absurd, humorous, obscene, and brutal incidents 
in the Old Man's career. No ritualistic or ceremonial practices appear to 
be based upon any of these narratives, though it may have been otherwise, 
in the past. On the other hand, connected with them are the suggestions of 
origins for many aspects of material culture, such as the buffalo-drive, 
the making of weapons, methods of dressing skins, ^tc. A considerable 
number of places and topographical features were associated with his ad- 
ventures; as Old Man's River, Tongue Flag River, Old Man's Gambling- 
Place, Old Man's Sliding-Place, Rolling-Stone Creek, etc. In fact, there 
seems a tendency to give all of his adventures a definite location in what 
is now^ Alberta. 

From the accounts of all observers, it appears that confusion exists in 
assigning some myths. Thus Grinnell records as adventures of the Old 
Man our myths containing the incident of the dog and the stick (p. 52), 
the placing of the crow in the smoke-hole (p. 51), the woman with a snake- 
lover (p. 150), and the rolling head (p. 154). We found differences of 
opinion on these and other tales, but have in our list the ones rarely if ever 
challenged. Taking into consideration all the data at hand, we are of the 
opinion that there has been a disintegration of the creative and cultural 
origin myths concerning the Old Man. This opinion is partly based upon 
the agreement of these myths with those attributed to similar characters 
among the Cree, Ojibwa, Fox, and other divisions of the Algonkin stock, 
for which a common origin is assumed, and also partly on the present attitude 
of the Blackfoot themselves toward these myths. 

For several decades at least, the Blackfoot have considered the Old Man 
as an evil character, in most respects trivial, who long ago passed on to other 
countries. Whenever the writer asked if the Old Man was ever prayed to, 
the absurdity of the question provoked merriment. The usual reply was, 
that no one had enough confidence in him to make such an appeal. In 
daily conversation his name is often used as a synonyme for immorality. 
However, it must not be implied that he is regarded as an evil spirit. His 



10 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

name is esp)ecially associated with things obscene, and pertaining to sexual 
immorality. I have heard the Piegan say that so and so '*must be trying to 
be like the Old Man; he cannot be trusted with women." 

We have occasionally noted a tendency to assign modem obscene anec- 
dotes to this character, and it may well be that many of the tales long 
attributed to him have been accumulated by the laws of &sociation. 
The unfortunate human tendency to appreciate keenly the humor in such 
anecdotes seems sufficient to account for their survival and accumulation 
long after behef in and respect for the Old Man as a creator, teacher, and 
transformer, has passed the verge of extinction. 

Certain differences of opinion among former obsen^rs make it desirable 
to reconsider our assumption that these m^ths are survivals from a much 
, lai^r group constituting the ancient basic beliefs of the Blackfoot. The 
first account we find bearing upon this point was written by Alexander 
Henry in 1809.^ He speaks of '*one first great white man and his wife" 
to whom all things are due, but states that he went to live in the sun and is 
called Nah-toos, while his wife went to the moon. Unfortunately, Henry 
is not sufficiently specific for the identification of the "one first great white 
man." Among the present Blackfoot people, Natos refers to the Sun-Man, 
whose consort is the Moon- Woman, a character regarded as distinct from the 
Old Man. The term used by Henry is probably a translation; for, in his 
comparative vocabularies, "Nappeekoon" is given as the equivalent of 
"white man," the term still applied to members of our race. This of itself 
makes it probable that Napiw* is the character referred to in the above. 

Later, about 1874, R. P. Lacombe writes that Napiw*^ went to live in 
the Sun.^ M. Lacombe is quoted by Hale (1885) to the effect that Napiw* 
and Natos are distinct, and that the former is a secondary character.' 
Maclean also states that Napiw* is a secondary character.* Grinnell 
(1892) expresses the opinion that Napiw* and Natos are the same and that 
the latter is a more recent conception.^ It is of interest to note that the earher 
writers are disposed to treat Natos, the Sun, as the home of the Old Man, 
while the later ones make each a character. My own information is em- 
phatic in indicating a present distinction between the two. This is supported 
by the following statement from a man for many years an interested observer 
of Blackfoot customs : — 

" The Sun is then the principal deity .... Equally erroneous is the view that they 
addressed prayers to, or in any manner worshipped, *Napi,' the Old Man of the 
legends, the blunderer, the immoral mischief-maker." ^ 

* New Light on the Early History of the Greater Northwest, op. cit., pp. 527, 528. 
2 Petitot, op. cit., p. 504. 

» Hale, op. cit., p. 704. 

* Canadian Savage Folk. p. 52. 

* Grinnell, op. cit., p. 258. 

fi K. N. Wilson, Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1898, 
p. 789. 



1908.] Wissler and Dvvall, Blackfoot Mythoh^. 11 

There are several obvious ways in which the different statements recorded 
above can be interpreted. It may be reasonable to assume that the later 
writers w^ere better informed, and therefore able to distinguish between two 
m)1;hical characters ha\ing some things in common. On the other hand, 
the observations may be of equal weight, and so represent a change of belief. 
While the means are not at hand for the solution of this question, it may be 
noted that the m}ths so far recorded are quite consistent with the modern 
Blackfoot belief that Xapiw^ and Natos are distinct characters. For 
example, in Grinneirs version of the theft of the fire-leggings, Napiw* 
steals them from Natos. Again, the Old Woman, or Moon- Woman, is 
practically always associated with Natos as his respected and honored con- 
sort ; while mention of such a character seldom occurs in the myths of the 
Old Man group. Further, in ceremonies Natos is often addressed as 
Napiwa, but, so it was stated to us, in the sense of old and venerable man. 
This suggests that the sole difficulty may be due to verbal confusion in the 
native tongue, obscuring a former distinction between Napiw* and Natos. 
However this may be, the import of the preceding seems to be, that, for a 
number of years at least, the Old Man has been a secondary mythological 
<;haracter. The problem is, then, to determine whether this secondary 
relation is due to gradual displacement by intrusive beliefs, or to the fact that 
the belief in the Old Man is in itself of recent introduction. 

While we have no intention of making a comparative study of these 
myths, a few statements may not come amiss. The Old Man of the Thomp- 
son Indians, is, like the Old Man of the Blackfoot, a secondary character, 
though relatively less prominent, and, according to Boas, he is not made 
an object of prayer, and not held in particular reverence.^ In the Plains, it 
appears that the Old Man of the Crow% Nih'a"ca" of the Arapaho, Nix'a"t 
■of the Gros Ventre, and Napiw^ of the Blackfoot, have a great deal in com- 
mon. They w^re in certain respects creators, but also tricksters; and 
many vile pranks were common to all. The general impression one gets 
from comparative reading of all these tales is that the Blackfoot and the 
Crow stand in close relation as opposed to the Arapaho and the Gros Ventre. 
However, the collections from the Crow and Gros Ventre are not complete. 
It is interesting to note that the Arapaho Nih'a"(;'a" is the word for "white 
man," as is also the Cheyenne Vihuk and the Blackfoot Napiw^. The 
Arapaho Hixtcaba Nih'a"(;'a" (Above-^\^lite-^Ian, God) is identical in 
meaning with Spo'^toom Napiwa. Again, the statement of Kroeber, that 
**in none of the Arapaho myths is there the slightest trace of any animal 
or spider-like qualities attributed to Nih*a"<^a"," ^ applies equally well to 



» Thompson River Indian Traditions, p. 7. 

2 George A. Dorsey an<l Alfred L. Kroeber Traditions of the Arapaho. (Field Columbian 
Museum Publication 81. 1903. footnote, p. 7). 



12 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

Napiw*, also entirely human. This is certainly in contrast to many of the 
surrounding tribes in whose mythologies similar antics are attributed to a 
rabbit, coyote, or spider-like person. Thus we have another of those fre- 
quent suggestions that the Algonkin tribes of the Plains themselves consti- 
tute a sub-group. 

It is unfortunate that so little Cree mythology has been recorded, as the 
few narratives published by Russell ^ suggest the closest relation to those 
of the Blackfoot so far encountered. Similarities to Fox and Ojibwa myths 
seem much more numerous among the Blackfoot than among the Arapaho, 
Gros Ventre, or Cheyenne. Thus, the wide distribution of these charac- 
teristics among the various Algonkin speaking tribes of the Missouri-Sas- 
katchewan area, seems to favor the view that the Old Man myths represent 
the older basic beliefs of the Blackfoot. In this connection the failure to 
find in the present mythological beliefs evidence of the identity of the Old 
Man and the Sun, justifies the assumption that the secondary character of 
the former is due to the intrusion of the latter. 

According to the testimony of many writers, the Blackfoot Indians 
took great interest in the heavens, and possessed considerable astronomical 
knowledge. However that may be, this collection contains an unusual 
number of Star Myths. We have considered them as such because the chief 
characters either appear as heavenly bodies (though sometimes in disguise), 
or become such at the end of their earthly careers. In many cases this 
transformation forms no essential part of the narrative, being a mere inci- 
dent, or as it were an afterthought by the narrator. This is especially notice- 
able in the Twin-Stars, or Brothers, where we find an elaborate myth com- 
posed primarily of the widely distributed Found-in-the-Grass. The same 
may be said of Blood-Clot or Smoking-Star. On the other hand, we find 
the Morning-Star as an important character in a number of myths, where 
he appears as the son of the Sun and Moon. In Blackfoot religion these 
three are in many respects a sacred trio to whom prayers are addressed 
individually and collectively. Again, in the Morning-Star myths we find 
the well-known incident of a woman marrying a star, in this case the Morn- 
ing-Star himself, whose son by this union becomes the Fixed-Star. Taking 
the entire eight Star Mjths as a whole, but three appear to be original with 
the Blackfoot, — Cuts-Wood, Scar-Face, and the Bunched-Stars. 

A large number of mj^hs function as ritualistic origins, the rituals them- 
selves being in part dramatic interpretations of the narratives. Yet, while 
the rituals are fixed and rigidly adhered to, the m>ths show the same wide 
variations in detail as those of other groups. This is contrary to expectation. 



Frank Russell, Explorations in the Far North, 1898, pp. 201-220. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 13 

We cannot at present decide whether this is best explained by assuming 
these myths to be secondary popular accounts of the ceremonies composing 
the rituals, or otherwise. In most ceremonies the origin of the ritual is 
regarded as the result of a personal relation between its first owner and its 
supernatural giver; each ceremony, or demonstration of the ritual, being a 
reproduction of this formal transfer. Thus the myths are, in a sense, pre- 
ludes to the rituals; yet, when one asks for the reason or significance of a 
specific part of a ritual, he is referred at once to the myth. Thus the great 
variation in these narratives b difficult to interpret. 

In passing, one important aspect of this group deserves attention. It 
will be seen that these narratives can be placed in two divisions, according 
to the relation between the incidents and the rituals associated therewith. 
In many cases the relation is primary, or the myth itself recounts the inci- 
dents leading directly to the transfer. Also this transfer is the main incident 
or climax of the narrative. In other cases the myth stands apart, having 
its own culminating incident, after which we are informed, parenthetically 
as it were, that one of the characters came into the possession of a ritual. 
Rarely are we told in such cases that a definite relation exists between the 
origin of this ritual and the incidents composing the narrative, though some 
kind of relation is always implied. In this collection there are twenty myths 
bearing the primary relation, and eleven bearing the secondary. I'o be 
exact, five of the Star Myths show ritualistic functions, one of which may 
be considered primary,^ and four secondary'. Thus, in a total of thirty- 
six ritualistic m}'tlis, twenty-one appear to bear the primary relation, and 
fifteen the secondary. Thus we are safe in assuming that at least a third 
of all Blackfoot ritualistic origin myths belong to the secondary division. 
As may be anticipated, the character of the m\ths in one division differs 
considerably from that of the other. Those of the secondary type are 
decidedly classical, and show greater art in composition than those of the 
primary. The people seem to appreciate them for the sake of their power 
to charm, while the sacred associations of the primary myths are sufficient 
to make them respected. 

The most suggestive difference, however, appears when a comparative 
view of these divisions is made. Those in the priniary group are not often 
found in the m^'thologies of other tribes : in fact the incident of a woman 
with beaver-children is the only certain exception we have so far encountered. 
On the other hand, many m\ths of the secondary division are widely dis- 
tributed among other tribes. Here we find the well-known Blood-Clot, 
Found-in-the-Grass (Twin-Stars), The Woman-who-Married a Star, The 
Girl with a Dog for a Lover (No. 25), The Woman who Married a Bull 
(Nos. 26, 27), The Buffalo-Boy (No. 28), The Child Reared by the Buffalo 



14 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II,. 

(No. 31), The Brother on the Desert Island (No. 18), not to mention minor 
incidents of these and other narratives. 

There are, however, exceptions, the chief of which are Scar-Face and 
Scabby-Round-Robe, to which we have so far found no parallels. The 
natural inference from the foregoing is, that in the primary division the 
myths and the rituals had a common origin, while in the secondary they 
have come into association, by accident or otherwise, long after their respec- 
tive forms became fixed. ^ The intrusion of rituals practised by other tribes 
may have been the occasion of many such associations. Thus we find that 
the secondary character of the Origin M^ths for the societies of high rank — 
as the Bulls, Horns, Dogs, etc. — is most pronounced in those societies 
derived, according to Blackfoot tradition, from other tribes. That the 
traditions in these instances are founded upon fact is rendered exceedingly- 
probable by the peculiar distribution of these same societies among the 
tribes of the Missouri basin. ^ With one exception, the m\i;hs associated 
with the sun-dance are also secondary. While there are no traditions 
indicating foreign origin for this ceremony as a whole, its general distribu- 
tion makes such an origin probable. Yet it is with this ceremony that the 
highly original Scar-Face myth is secondarily associated. This exception 
in the case of a very important myth indicates that the cause of the secondary 
association cannot be w^holly due to a tendency to assimilate foreign tales. 
Such inference is sustained by the presence of a considerable number of 
foreign tales without ritualistic associations of any kind, and by the entire 
absence of such associations in the Old Man group, which we have shown 
to be a very important part of the older Blackfoot mjthology. 

The discussion of this problem would carry us into a study of the rituals 
themselves, a subject we propose to take up in a future publication. W^e 
may, however, offer a tentative interpretation of the preceding peculiarities. 
Assuming the tales of the Old Man as older and fundamental, the absence 
of rituaUstic associations among them may be due to the more recent devel- 
opment of the present ceremonies. The beaver-medicine, seemingly one 
of the oldest rituals, and apparently the creation of a single shaman, set the 
type to which all other rituals tended to conform. In this case the myths 
still tend to the primary association, or to conserve the type. Later rituals 
w^ere brought in from other tribes and adjusted to the prevailing type, even 
to the introduction of new m^ths, that would also tend to be foreign, though 
not necessarily. Further, according to our data, rituals originating in sha- 
manistic dreams have sometimes been attributed to heroes in wTll-known 



» For an example of a myth incorporated in a ritual, see Franz Boas, The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians, 1897, p. 662. 

2 A. h. Kroeber in the Proceedings of the International Congress of Americanists, 1906, 
Vol. II, pp. 53-64. 



1908.] WUsler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 15 

m\^hs, the hero having appeared and transferred the ritual. Thus we have 
the functioning of a well-known factor in primitive speculative thought. 
The tendency to find a mythical origin for every important ceremonial 
practice is common to all peoples, as is also the tendency to conventionaUze 
the kind of associations formed. 

Another characteristic of this group is the frecjuency with which a woman 
plays an important part in the transfer of rituals and other powers, — the 
Elk-Woman, the Otter-Woman, the Woman-who-Married-thc-Buffalo, 
the W^oman-who brought-the-Pipe, etc. In almost every case the woman 
has sexual relations with a male being from whom, or by virtue of whom, 
the ritual or power comes, and such grant is often manifestly to appease a 
wronged husband or parents. However, this may be a more or less con- 
ventional mode of constructing a m\th, based upon the same human interests 
that make the love-passion the core of all novels. 

Now we may consider m\ihs of cultural and other origins. In the first 
place, these narratives are such as account for certain conditions in humanity 
and nature, and certain folk-practices. In the second place, the origins 
and transformations are primary rather than secondary parts of the narra- 
tives, in which respect they stand in opposition to a large part of the preceding 
group. Such a distinction is by no means absolute, and some of the narra- 
tives in this group will doubtless impress the reader as not quite within the 
bounds of the above characterization; yet he should not forget that we have 
also been influenced in the selection by the attitude of the narrators and 
others toward the tales themselves.^ One of the chief points of note in this 
group is the lack of correspondence to the mythology of the Plains. In 
most cases the narratives seem to be original with the Blackfoot, yet this is 
relative, since here and there are suggestions of parts of other myths. Again, 
these narratives are relatively few in number, and in most cases lack the 
classical ring of other groups. 

The miscellaneous group contains various elements. Some are recog- 
nizable as Plains and Eastern tales; while others, again, seem to be original. 
The definite intrusion of what are regarded as Kutcnai m\ths is a matter 
of interest, because the narrator, a Piegan, is credited with the chief responsi- 
bility of their introduction in association with the Black-Tail deer-dance. 
Narratives Nos. 19, 20, deser\'e special mention, because they are told as 
ethical puzzles usually exciting discussion, different persons having more or 
less fixed opinions about the matter. So far as known to the WTiter, such 
narratives have not been reported by other observers. A large part of this 



1 In the case of the Medicine-Hat tale, the ori^n of the name is to a degree secondary; but 
the real significance of the narrative is that it accounts for the origin of a special method for 
trapping eagles. 



16 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

miscellaneous group is made up of narratives for children, though all tales of 
the Old Man are told even to the youngest children, and often recited as 
lullabies for infants. 

No effort has been made to determine the place of the Blackfoot in the 
mythology of the Plains; but in the various footnotes, references to such 
parallels among neighboring tribes as came to our notice have been made. 
Many of the m\ths generally distributed throughout the central parts of 
North America appear in our collection and among the works of other 
writers. Some rather striking exceptions are the well-known Imitations of 
the Host, Vaginal Teeth, and The Dancing Ducks. All of these appear in 
the Arapaho collections, and, with the exception of the second, in the Gros 
Ventre. By inquiry we found individuals who claimed to have heard the 
following narratives, but were unable to render them : The Dancing Ducks, 
Vaginal Teeth, The Man who Received a Flageolet from an Elk, The Man 
who Played Dead and Deceived a Bear,^ The Recovery of Water by Stealing 
the Vessels in which it was Concealed, and the Wounded Man Carried 
Home by a Bear. Among those for which no recognition was observed 
may be mentioned the Imitation of the Host, Raven Creating the World 
and People, The Tar-Baby and the Recovery of the Daylight by Theft. 
However, without going into details, certain tentative similarities may be 
noted between the mythology of the Blackfoot and that of neighboring 
tribes, though the material at hand is very unsatisfactory. There is the 
appearance of close similarity to the mythology of the western Cree and an 
almost equal degree of similarity to that of the Crow. To come to a definite 
conclusion on this point, we need larger collections from these tribes, and 
also data on the mythology of the Assiniboine, who were allied with the 
western Cree living along the edge of the forest. Again, the similarities in 
Gros Ventre mythology are numerous, though, as may be expected, the 
myths of this tribe bear much greater resemblance to those of the Arapaho. 
On the other hand, there are a number of similarities between the Blackfoot 
and the Arapaho not paralleled in the Gros Ventre. However, our collec- 
tion from the latter is probably not so complete as from the former. While 
these similarities taken together include many of the more widely distributed 
North American myths, they include others apparently restricted to these 
three tribes. In this connection we need more data from the Cheyenne, 
Kiowa, and Shoshone, especially the former, who are members of the Plains 
Algonkin group. There are also a number of Blackfoot similarities to 
Arikara incidents, that seem less definite among the collections from other 
Caddoan tribes. Perhaps these Arikara incidents are characteristic of 
Upper Missouri mythology. Here we need data from the Hidatsa. 



1 Dorsej' and Kroeber, Traditions of the Arapalio, op. cit., p. 451. 



1908.] Wisaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 17 

It may not be out of place to give our impression of the position these 
tales occupy in Blackfoot culture. While their mythology certainly stands 
for a part of what we know as the literature of a people, it does not by 
any means comprise the larger part; for historical, militar}% adventurous, 
ceremonial, and other fonns of narratives there are in profusion. It will 
be noticed that the narratives in our collection correspond in general style 
to what we recognize as fiction. The attitude of the Blackfoot people 
toward these narratives is difficult to reduce to accurate statement, but 
one gets the impression that they are often valued more for their aesthetic 
factors than othen^ ise. Yet the active elements of this mythology seem to 
function in mythical characters so firmly fixed in folk-thought, that each 
may be regarded as a reality. One also gets the impression, after some 
famiUarity with the serious life of these people, that mythical characters 
are generally accorded the same reality as pertains to a deceased friend. 
The most venerated of these are Sun-Man, Moon-Woman, Morning-Star, 
the Thunder, Scar-Face, the Seven-Stars, the Pleiades (Bunched stars), 
Otter-Woman, Elk- Woman, the Old Man, Blood-Clot, Scabby-Round- 
Robe, the Woman-who-Married-the-Star, and the Woman-who-Married 
the-BuflPalo. All are regarded as having made at least some important 
contribution to the welfare of the people. Naturally, not all are of equal 
rank; the Sun, Moon, Thunder, and Morning-Star being of very great 
power and supernatural significance. An exhaustive collection of Blackfoot 
narratives would doubtless contain numerous and various versions of the 
doings of these and other minor characters. Taken collectively, these char- 
acters give the sanctions for many practices and beliefs. That they are 
strictly moral sanctions is doubtful, since they seem to have prescribed the 
formal parts of ceremonies and worship rather than ethical procedure. 
Anyway, to the present Blackfoot mind, the moral lives of these characters 
are not always exemplar}'. The Old Man is held in contempt, and one may 
hear such expessions as "I do not hold Scar-Face in esteem, because, while 
he did a great thing, he did it for spite." However, a full discussion of 
these characters must be deferred until we have presented the details of 
ceremonial practices and beliefs. 

So far as we know there are no restrictions against the telling of m}'ths at 
certain times of the year. There is no detailed myth which can be narrated 
only to select audiences, as among the Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Dakota, — 
myths that have so far not been recorded. Neither are their mj'ths peculiar 
to women or men, as the case may be, any one being at liberty to render 
any myth whatsoever. However, persons not versed in a ritual are often 
reluctant to narrate the myth accounting for its origin, because in a general 
way it is improper for one to speak in detail of medicines concerning which 



18 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

they have httle knowledge. As women take important parts in most rit- 
ualistic ceremonies, such restrictions are not correlated with sex differences. 
Then, again, all elderly persons are assumed to have had considerable 
experience in ritualistic ceremonies; hence young people usually hesitate 
to narrate myths in deference to the rights of their elders. 

Clark Wissler. 
New York City, 
July 11, 1908. 



1908.] Wissler ami DumU, Blackfoot Mythology. 19 

I. TALES OF THE OLD MAN. 

1. l^E Making of the Earth. 

During the flood, Old Man was sitting on the highest mountain with 
all the beasts. The flood was caused by the above people, because the baby 
(a fungus) ^ of the woman who married a star was heedlessly torn in pieces 
by an Indian child.^ Old Man sent the Otter down to get some earth. 
For a long time he waited, then the Otter came up dead. Old Man examined 
its feet, but found nothing on them. Next he sent Beaver down, but after 
a long time he also came up drowned. Again nothing was found on his 
feet. He sent Muskrat to dive next. Muskrat also was drowned. At 
length he sent the Duck (?). It was drowned, but in its paw held some 
earth. Old Man saw it, put it in his hand, feigned putting it on the water 
three times, and at last dropped it. Then the above-people sent rain, and 
ever}thing grew on the earth.' 

2. Languages confused on a ^Jountain. 

After the flood. Old Man mixed water with different colors. He whistled, 
and all the people came together. He gave one man a cup of one kind of 
water, saying, *'You will be chief of these people here." To another man 
he gave differently colored water, and so on. The Blackfoot, Piegan, and 
Blood all received black water. Then he said to the people, '*Talk," and 
they all talked differently; but those who drank black water spoke the 
same. This happened on the highest mountain in the Montana Reservation 
[Chief Mountain ?V 

3. Order of Life and Death. 

There was once a time when there were but two persons in the world. 
Old Man and Old Woman. One time, when they were travelling about. 



1 In rendering these narratives explanatory matter supplied by the narrator is indicated 
by parenthesis, that supplied by the translator or editor is indicated by brackets. 

2 See Narrative of the Fixed Star, p. 58. 

3 A North Blackfoot version, collected by Dr. R. H. Lowie. For another version, see 
Maclean, Canadian Savage Folk^. 51; Also Hale, Report of the British Association, 1886, p. 
704. For a Sarcee version, see Wilson, Report of the British Association. 1889, p. 224. For 
note on the distribution of this myth, see G. A. Dorsey and A. L. Kroeber, Traditions of the 
Arapaho (Field Columbian Museum Publication 81, p. 20). 

* A North Blackfoot version, collected by Dr. R. H. Lowie. In this connection note the 
following: "Au commencement, on habitait sur une montagne, et tous Ifs hommes parlaient 
la m6me langue." — Petitot, op. cit., p. 383. See also pp. 130 and 332. For a second mention 
of this incident in our collection, see p. 23. 



20 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Old Man met Old Woman, who said, "Now, let us come to an agreement of 
some kind; let us decide how the people shall live." **Well," said Old 
Man, " I am to have the first say in ever}^hing." To this Old Woman 
agreed, provided she had the second say.^ 

Then Old ^lan began, **The women are to tan the hides. WTien they 
do this, they are to rub brains on them to make them soft ; they are to scrape 
them w^ell with scraping-tools, etc. But all this they are to do very quickly, 
for it will not be xery hard work." **No, I will not agree to this," said Old 
Woman. "They must tan the hide in the way you say; but it must be made 
very hard work, and take a long time, so that the good workers may be 
found out." 

"Well," said Old Man, "let the people have eyes and mouths in their 
faces; but they shall be straight up and down." "No," said Old W^oman, 
"we will not have them that way. We will have the eyes and mouth in the 
faces, as you say; but they shall all be set crosswise." ^ 

"Well," said Old Man, "the people shall have ten fingers on each hand." 
"Oh, no!" said Old Woman, "that will be too many. They will be in the 
way. There shall be four fingers and one thumb on each hand." 

"Well," said Old Man, "we shall beget children. The genitals shall be at 
our navels." "No," said Old Woman, "that will make child-bearing too 
easy; the people will not care for their children. The genitals shall be at the 
pubes." 

So they went on until they had provided for ever}^hing in the lives of 
the people that were to be. Then Old Woman asked what they should do 
about life and death; should the people always live, or should they die? 
They had some difficulty in agreeing on this; but finally Old Man said, 
"I will tell you what I will do. I will throw a buffalo-chip into the water, 
and, if it floats, the people die for four days and live again; but, if it sinks, 
they will die forever." So he threw it in, and it floated. "No," said Old 
Woman, "we will not decide in that way. I will throw in this rock. If it 
floats, the people will die for four days: if it sinks, the people will die forever." 
Then Old Woman threw the rock out into the water, and it sank to the 
bottom.^ "There," said she, "it is better for the people to die forever; 
for, if they did not die forever, they would never feel sorr\' for each other, 
and there would be no sympathy in the world." "Well," said Old Man, 
"let it be that way." * 

1 See Hale, Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. 1886. p. 705. 

2 "Old Man made some women .... As the mouths of the women were opened vertically, so 
he closed them up again and cut them anew." — Maclean. Canadian Savage Folk, 1896, p. 62. 

3 This part of the myth is analogous to a Cheyenne version, for which see Kroeber, Journal 
of American Folk- Lore, Vol. XIII. i>. 161. For a similar incident, in which the stone is thrown 
by Nih'a^ca", see Dorsey and Kroeber. op. cit., pp. 17. 81. 

•• For a comparative statement of mythical accounts of the origin of death, see Dorsey and 
Kroeber, op. cit., p. 20. 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology, 21 

After a time Old Woman had a daughter, who died. She was very sorry 
now that it had been fixed so that people died forever. So she said to Old 
Man, " Let us have our say over again." "No," said he, ** we fixed it once.'* 

4. Why People Die Forever. 

One time Old Man said to Old Woman, "People will never die." 
"Oh!" said Old Woman, "that will never do; because, if people live always, 
there will be too many people in the world." ^ "Well," said Old Man, 
"we do not want to die forever. We shall die for four days and then come 
to life again." " Oh, no!" said Old Woman, "it will be better to die for- 
ever, so that we shall be sorry for each other." "Well," said Old Man, 
"we will decide this way. We will throw a buffalo-chip into the water: 
if it sinks, we will die forever; if it floats, we shall live again." "Well," 
said Old Woman, "throw it in." Now, Old Woman had great power, and 
she caused the chip to turn into, a stone, so it sank. 

So when we die, we die forever.^ 

5. I'he First Marriage. 

Now in those days, the men and the women did not live together.' The 
men lived in one camp and the women in the other. The men lived in 
lodges made of skin with the hair on; the women, in good lodges. [The 
idea is, that the women dress the skins, hence the men could not live in 
dressed-skin lodges.] One day Old Man came to the camp of the men, 
and, when he was there, a woman came over from the camp of the women. 
She said she had been sent by the chief of the women to invite all the men, 
because the women were going to pick out husbands. 

Now the men began to get ready, and Old Man dressed himself up in 
his finest clothes: he was always fine looking. Then they started out, 
and, when they came to the women's camp, they all stood up in a row. 
Now the chief of the women came out to make the first choice. She had on 
very dirty clothes, and none of the men knew who she was. She went along 
the line, looked them over, and finally picked out Old Man, because of his 
fine appearance. Now Old Man saw many nicely dressed women waiting 
their turn, and, when the chief of the women took him by the hand, he 

» See Dorsey and Kroeber, on. cit. p. 17. 

2 This version was received from a North Piegan, For a third version, see Grinnell. Black- 
foot Lodsre Tales, pp. 138-139. 

3 Rev. E. F. Wilson writes, "The Sarcee have a tradition similar to that of the Blackfoot 
about men and women being first made separately, and then being brought together through 
the action of the mythical being *Napiw."' — Report of the British Association, 1889, p. 244. 



22 Anthropological Papers American Mttsevm of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

pulled back and broke away. He did this because he thought her a very 
common woman. When he pulled away, the chief of the women went back 
to her lodge and instructed the other women not to choose Old Man. Wliile 
the other women were picking out their husbands, the chief of the women 
put on her best costume. \Mien she came out, she looked very fine, and, 
as soon as Old ^lan saw her, he thought, **OhI there is the chief of the 
women. I wish to be her husband." He did not know that it was the same 
woman.^ 

Now the chief of the women came down once more to pick out a hus- 
band, and, as she went around, Old Man kept stepping in front of her, 
so that she might see him; but she paid no attention to him, finally picking 
out another for her husband. 

After a while all the men had been picked out, except Old Man. Now 
he was very angry; but the chief of the women said to him, "After this you 
are to be a tree, and stand just where you are now." Then he became a 
tree, and he is mad yet, because he is always caving down the bank.^ 

6. Old Man Leads a Migration. 

The first Indians were on the other side of the ocean, and Old Man de- 
cided to lead them to a better place. So he brought them over the ice to 
the far north. WTien they were crossing the ice, the Sarcee ^ were in the 
middle and there was a boy riding on a dog travois. As they were going 
along, this boy saw a horn of some animal sticking up through the ice. Now 
the boy wanted this horn, and began to cry. So his mother took an ax and 
cut it off. As she did so, the ice gave way and only those on this side of the 
place where the horn was will ever get here.* 

1 Arapaho Tale No. 51 (Dorsey and Kroeber. op. cit.) has a few of the minor characteris- 
tics of this tale, but the plot is different. 

a For another version of this incident, see No. 23. The following was collected among the 
Northern Blackfoot by Dr. R. H. Lowie: — 

Women were living on one side of Little Bow River, the men on the other side (northwest 
of Calgary). The5' killed coyotes, using skins for blankets. Old Man came to the women's 
buffalo-drive. The women asked, '* Whence come you? " "From men's camp." The women 
told Old Man to go there and tell the men to come. "We'll choose husbands," they said. "The 
women asked for the chief's color. Old Man said, "He wears a wolf blanket with the tail on." 
The men arrived at the women's buffalo-drive. The chieftainess wearing bad clothes went out 
to the men. She selected Old Man; but he did not want her on account of her ugly appearance. 
Then the chieftainess said to the women, "You see that tall man; don't choose him." She 
then put on eood clothes, and Old Man tried to get her; but she chose another. He was left 
unchosen. He stamped his foot, and made the earth fill the enclosure of the buffalo-drive. 

3 The following version was found among the Sarcee, — Another Indian told us how the 
Sarcee were at one time one people with the Chipewyans. and gave us the myth wliich accounts 
for their separation. "Formerly," he said, "we lived in the north country. We were many 
thousands in number. We were travelling south. It was winter, and we had to cross a big 
lake on the ice. There was an elk's horn sticking out of the ice. A squaw went and struck the 
horn with an axe. The elk raised himself from the ice and shook his head. Tlie people were 
all frightened and ran away. Those that ran toward the north became the Chipewyans, and 
we who ran toward the south are the Sot^nna or Sarcee. — Rev. E. F. Wilson, Report of the 
British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1889, p. 243. 

* This is said to have happened on a lake in Alberta, called Buffalo Lake by the Indians, 
because its shape is like a buffalo lying down. See Kroeber, Gros Ventre Myths and Tales 
(Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. I, Part III, p. 112). 
Also known to the Arapaho and Cheyenne. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 23 

Now Old Man led these people xlown to where the Blood Reserve now 
is, and told them that this would be a fine country for them, and that they 
would be very rich. He said, "I will get all the people here." All the 
people living there ate and lived like wild animals; but Old Man went among 
them and taught them all the arts of ci\ilization.^ (\Vhen crossing the ice, 
only about thirty lodges succeeded in getting across, and among these were 
the representatives of all the tribes now in this country. At that time the 
Blackfoot were just one tribe.) When he was through teaching them, he 
did not die, but went among the Sioux, where he remained for a time, but 
finally disappeared.^ He took his wife with him. He had no children. 

7. Old Man and the Great Spirit. 

There was once a Great Spirit who was good. He made a man and a 
woman. Then Old Man came along. No one made Old Man; he always 
existed. The Great Spirit said to him, "Old Man, have you any power?" 
"Yes," said Old Man, "I am very strong." "Well," said the Great Spirit, 
"suppose you make some mountains." So Old Man set to work and made 
the Sweet-Grass Hills.' To do this he took a piece of Chief Mountain. 
He brought Chief Mountain up to its present location, shaped it up, and 
named it. The other mountains were called blood colts. "Well," said the 
Great Spirit, "you are strong." 

"Now," said Old Man, "there are four of us, — the man and woman, 
you and I." The Great Spirit said, "All right." 

The Great Spirit said, "I will make a big cross for you to carry." Old 
Man said "No, you make another man so that he can carry it." The Great 
Spirit made another man. Old Man carried the cross a while, but soon got 
tired and wanted to go. The Great Spirit told him that he could go, but he 
should go out among the people and the animals, and teach them how to 
live, etc. 

Now the other man got tired of carrying the cross. He was a white 
man. The Great Spirit sent him off as a traveller. So he wandered on 
alone. The man and woman who had been created wandered off down 
towards Mexico, where they tried to build a mountain in order to get to the 

» See Griiinell, op. cit., p. 139. The following fragment also, from the Northern Blackfoot, 
was collected by Dr. R. H. Lowie, — On the other side of the High River, the Blackfoot were 
living on grass. Old Man saw them, and saw buffalo driving them. "What are you doing? " 
he aslked. "The buffalo kill and eat us," they said. " You are foolish; you ought to eat buffalo," 
he replied. So he made arrows for them with which to shoot the buffalo. The Indians now 
made buffalo-drives. 

The idea that buffalo formerly ate men is found in Cheyenne Myths, Kroeber (Journal 
of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XIII, p. 161). 

2 See Macean, Canadian Savage Folk, op. cit., p. 444. 

» See Grinnell, op. cit., p. 137: also the Old Man and the Cojote, Teit, Traditions of the 
Thompson River Indians of British Columbia, 1898, pp. 48, 109. 



24 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

sky to be with their children; but the people got mixed up until they came 
to have many different languages.^ 

8. Old Man gambles. 

Far up in the north there is a place known as Old Man's GambUng- 
Place.^ There is where Old Man played the game of the arrows and the 
rolling wheel. Once when he came to this place, he found some people 
playing at the game. He joined them, and lost his robe and moccasins. 
As soon as he took them off, the robe became back-fat, and the moccasins 
buffalo-tongues. As the winner had no use for such things, he gave them 
back at once. Then Old Man put the tongues on his feet, and they became 
moccasins, and, putting the back-fat on his shoulders, it became a robe. 
So he gambled again and again, always with the same result. 

9. Old Man and the Rolling Stone. 

One time Old Man went out with the Fox. This Fox was his little 
brother, or chum. It was a very hot day, and, when they came to a large 
rock, Old Man took off his robe and threw it over the rock, saying, "Here,, 
brother: I make you a present of this robe." Then Old Man went on, but 
presently saw a heavy cloud coming up : so he sent his little brother back to 
get the robe. So he went back to the rock, and said, "Rock, Old Man wants 
his robe." "No," said the Rock, "he gave it to me as a present. I shall 
keep it. You tell him that he cannot have it." So the Fox went back and 
told Old Man what the Rock had said. Theji Old Man said, "My little 
brother, you go back and tell him again. Tell him I must have that robe.'' 
So the Fox went back to the Rock, and said, "Rock, Old Man sent me for 
his robe." The Rock replied, "No, no! Rocks never give back presents. 
If you give anything to a Rock, you cannot take it back." So the Fox 
returned to Old Man and told him what the Rock had said. Now Old 
Man was very angry. He said, "Now there is that Rock. It has been 
there for years and years with nothing over it ; but it refuses to let me have 
my robe." So he rushed up to the Rock and snatched off the robe, saying, 
"I need this for myself." 

Then Old Man started on, but presently, hearing a great noise behind 
him, said to the Fox, "My little brother, you go back and see what is making 

1 See p. 19. 

2 Old Man's home "was in the Rocky Mountains near the source of Old Man's River, in the 
provisional district of Alberta." — Maclean, Canadian Savage Folk, op. cit., p. 435. 



1908.] Wi88ler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 25 

that noise." Then the Fox returned, saying, "Let us hurry, for that Rock 
is after us." When Old Man looked back, he saw the Rock coming. It 
was rolling along. So they both ran; but all the time the Rock was getting 
closer. As he went along. Old Man saw some bears, and called upon them 
for help. The Bears went to fight the Rock; but they could do nothing, 
for it rolled over them, crushing them. Again as Old Man was running^ 
along, he saw some Buffalo-bulls and called upon them for help. "Here," 
he said, "this Rock is chasing me. I want you to stop it." So the Bulls 
rushed upon the Rock; but the Rock crushed them. Then as he went on 
he saw some Night-hawks, and called upon them for help. "Here," he 
said, " is a Rock chasing me, I want you to stop it." Then the Night-hawks 
flew down and discharged flatus at the Rock, and each time they did so, 
pieces flew off. Finally it was broken to pieces.^ 

Then Old Man went on, and finally came to a nest of Night-hawks ► 
There were young ones in it. Going up to the nest, he said, "Where are 
your parents?" "They have gone for some meat," replied the young ones. 
"Well," said Old Man, "I guess your parents are the ones that spoiled my 
fun. I was having a lot of fun with a Rock that was running after me, 
and they spoiled it: ' so I am going to tear your mouths out." So he took 
hold of their bills, and split their mouths back to their necks. 

Now, after Old Man had gone on, the Night-hawks came back to feed 
their young ones. They said to them, "You have been eating. Where did 
you get the meat that made your mouths bloody?" Then the young 
Night-hawks told them how Old Man had been there, and how he had 
treated them. Then the Night-hawks went in pursuit of Old Man. When 
they overtook him, they flew around overhead, defecating on his robe. 
Each time they did so, he cut off the soiled portion and threw it away. As 
the robe became smaller, the filth fell upon his body. At last he sought 
relief by plunging into the river. In this way he lost his robe.' 

10. Old Man roasts Squirrels in Hot Ashes. 

One time as Old Man was going along, he came to a place where there 
were many Squirrels. These Squirrels were playing in hot ashes. Some 
of them would lie down in the ashes, while the others would cover them 

1 A similar incident occurs in the Gros Ventre myth of the Bird with the Large Arrow, 
Kroeber, op. cit., p. 70. Also see a Cree tale, Russell, Explorations in the Far North, p. 210. 

2 A similar sentiment is expressed in a Gros Ventre myth, Kroeber, op. cU., p. 70. 

* For other versions see Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge Tales, p. 165, and Maclean, Journal of 
American Folk Lore, Vol. Ill, p. 296. A simUar incident is known to the Arapaho, Dorsev and 
Kroeber, op. cit. pp. 66-70. The incidents in the Arapaho tale agree quite closely with the 
preceding version and also with an Arikara version, Dorsey, Traditions of the Arikara, p. 147.. 
Also see Ute Tales. Kroeber, Journal of American Folk- Lore, December, 1901, p. 261. 



26 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

over. When it became so hot that they could stand it no longer, they would 
call out to the others, who would take them out at once. Old Man watched 
the game a while, and then insisted that he be allowed to try. He asked 
them if he could be baked first. "No," said the Squirrels, **we are afraid 
you do not know how to play, and that you will be burned. Let us be baked 
first to show you how.*' Old Man asked them again, but they still refused. 
Finally Old Man agreed, provided they would let him cover up all the 
Squirrels at once. At last this was agreed to. Then Old Man began to 
cover up the Squirrels in the hot ashes. One of the Squirrels, who was 
about to become a mother, begged so pitifully not to be put into the ashes 
that Old Man said, "Well, you may go." When they were all covered up 
with the ashes, some of them became too warm, and called out to Old Man 
to take them out; but, instead of doing this, he heaped on more ashes as fast 
as he could, and finally the Squirrels were roasted to death. ^ 

Then Old Man took some red willows and made a scaffold upon which 
to put his squirrel-meat. On this he laid the roasted squirrels. This 
made the willows greasy, and this is why the red willow is greasy even to 
this day.^ Now Old !Man had so much meat that he could not eat all of it. 
So he ate what he could, and, being tired, he lay down by a tree to rest. He 
had a little brown eye [anus] that always watched for him when he slept. 
So when he lay down to sleep he told Little BrowTi-Eye to keep watch, and 
to wake him if anything came around. Just as Old Man was about asleep, 
Little Brown-Eye gave the warning note (flatus). Old Man got up and 
looked around, but saw only a crow on a tree near by. This disgusted him 
so that he went to sleep at once. Not long after this a lynx came around. 
Old Man was now sound asleep. Little Brown-Eye roared away, but he 
could not wake him up. So the lynx ate up all the squirrels on the scaffold. 
After a while. Old Man woke up and went to his scaffold to eat. WTien 
he found that the meat was all ^one, he was very angry, and said, "Little 
Brown-Eye, I told you to wake me up if anvihing came around. Here you 
let a lynx eat all of my meat." With that he caught up a stick from the 
fire and rubbed it into Little Brown-Eye.^ The wood was a kind of willow, 
and ever since that time this willow has been called "stinking wood." 

Then Old Man started out to trail the lynx. He could follow him easily 
because his tracks were greasy. At last he found him asleep on a large flat 
rock. Old Man rushed up, caught him, and said, "You are the thief who 
stole my meat. Now I am going to punish you." So he broke off a part 



1 See a Crow tale, Simms, Field Columbian Museum Publication 85, p. 285. 

2 A similar version by Grinnell, op. cit., p. 155. 

8 See Arapaho tale, Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 60, footnote; also a parallel in the Gros 
Ventre, Kroeber, op. cit., p. 71. A similar incident occurs in a Dakota myth, Riggs, Contribu- 
tions to North American Ethnology, Vol. IX, p. 114; Jones, Fox Texts, p. 289; and Russell 
Cree Myths, op. cit., p. 213. 



1908.] Wisaler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 27 

of his tail and threw it away. Then he stood on the hind legs, and, pulling 
by the fore legs, stretched the lynx out to a great length. Next he took the 
lynx by the ears, and bumped his nose against a rock until it became flat. 
Then he jerked a handful of hair from the pubes, which he stuck on his 
nose for whiskers. He took up the Ivnx, and, holding him over a fire, 
scorched him on the sides. This is how the lynx came to have his present 
form.^ 

Now I-ittle Brown-Eye had been badly burned by the stick, and was 
very sore. When Old Man lay down to rest, he happened to turn Little 
Brown-Eye toward the wind, and as the wind blew it cooled it, making him 
comfortable. Yet Little Brown-Eye was still painful, and Old Man called 
on the wind to blow harder. It did so; but as there was yet pain he called 
out again and again. Then a terrible storm came up. It blew harder and 
harder, and finally began to carry Old Man away head over heels, down 
the hills and over the mountains. As he was going tumbhng along, he 
caught hold of everything he passed ; but all the bushes and trees gave way 
before the terrible wind. At last Old Man caught hold of the birch .^ Now 
the birch is very tough, and will not break easily. Old Man held on to it 
while the wind tossed him up and down, up and do^Ti. At last the wind 
died down. Old Man got down from the birch-tree and became very angry. 
He said, "Here, you old birch-tree! You spoiled all my fun. I was hav- 
ing a fine time playing with the wind. We were running over the hills and 
the mountains and through the woods, until you caught hold of me. Now 
I am going to punish you." So Old Man took out his knife, and gashed 
savagely at the tree. Now the marks you see on the birch-tree at the present 
time are the scars made bv Old Man's knife.' 



n. Old Man makes a Drh^e, and loses Meat in a Race. 

Now Old Man went on and came to a place where deer and elk were 
playing a game called "Follow your leader." Old Man watched the game 
a while. Then he asked permission to play. He took the lead, sang a 
song, and ran about this way and that, and finally led them up to the edge 
of a cliff. Old Man jumped down and was knocked senseless. After a 
while he got up and called to the rest to follow. "No, we might hurt our- 
selves." "Oh!" said Old Man, "it is nice and soft here, and I had to sleep 



1 This incident and some other parts of the tale bear some resemblance to Arapaho Tales 
Nos. 24, 26, and 27. Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit. Also the incident of changing the form of 
an animal is found in Ute Tales, Kroeber, op. cit., p. 268. 

a See a Crow Tale, Simms, op. cit., p. 287. 

* This version is in general agreement with one by Grinnell. op. cit, p. 171. The differences 
in the details are doubtless due to the popular nature of the publication m which they are found. 



28 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II,. 

a while." Then the elk all jumped down and were killed. Then Old Maa 
said to the deer, **Now, you jump." **No," said the deer, "we shall not 
jump down, because the elk are all killed." "No," said Old Man, "they 
are only laughing." So the deer jumped down and were all killed. Now, 
when the elk were about to jump over, there was a female elk about to be- 
come a mother, and she begged Old Man not to make her jump, so he let 
her go. A few of the deer were also let go for the same reason. If he had 
not done this, all the elk and deer would have been killed.^ 

Old Man was now busy butchering the animals that had been killed by 
falling over the cliff. When he was through butchering, he went out and 
found a place to camp. Then he carried his meat there and hung it up to- 
dry. When he was all alone, a Coyote came to him. This Coyote had'a 
shell on his neck, and one leg was tied up as if badly hurt. The Coyote 
said to Old Man, "Give me something to eat." Old Man said to the Coy- 
ote, "You get out of here, or I will take up my genitals and beat you over 
the head." ^ 

But Coyote did not go away. Old Man said to him, "Give me that 
shell on your neck to skim the soup, and I will give you something to eat.'' 
"No," said Coyote, "that shell is my medicine." Then Old Man noticed 
that the Coyote had his leg tied up, and said, "Well, brother, I will run you a 
race for a meal." "Well," said Coyote, " I am hurt. I cannot run." " That 
makes no difference," said Old Man, "run an^^'way." "Well," said Coyote, 
"I will run for a short distance." "No," said Old Man, "you have to run 
a long distance." Finally Coyote agreed. They were to run to a distant 
point, then back again. Coyote started out very slow, and kept crying for 
Old Man to wait, to wait. At last Coyote and Old Man came to the turning- 
point. Then Coyote took the bandage off his leg, began to run fast, and 
soon left Old Man far behind. He began to call out to all the coyotes, the 
animals, and mice, and they all came rushing up to Old Plan's camp and 
began to eat his meat. It was a long time before Old ]Man reached the 
camp; but he kept calling out, " I^ave me some meat, leave me some meat."* 

Now, Old Man had hung all the tongues of the animals on poles, and 
when he got to the camp he saw them still hanging there; but, when he took 
them down, he found that they were nothing but shells, for mice had eaten 
out the inside.^ The place where this happened was on Tongue Flag River 



1 For another version of thepreceding, see Grlnnell, op. cit., p. 158. A somewhat similar 
tale is given by Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 60. 

2 Old Man's genitals are also spoken of as a lariat. The rainbow is often designated as such, 
using either term apparently at random. However, the usual idea is, that his genitals are used 
as a lariat to rope the clouds. 

» For a similar Incident, see Grinnell, op. cit., p. 157. Also Maclean, Journal of American 
Folk-Lore, Vol. III. p. 297. 

* See Grinnell, op. cit., p. 158. 



1908.] Wisaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 29 

and Old Man had three names; Old Man, Painted-Dried-Meat, and 
Fooled-a-Little [meaning the opposite].^ 

12. Old Max sees Berries in the Water. 

One day Old Man, standing on the bank of a stream, saw in the water 
some reflections of berries growing on the bank. He thought them to be 
real berries: so he dived into the water, but could find no berries. As soon 
as he was back upon the bank again, he saw them: so he dived one time 
after another, and finally tied rocks to his legs, that he might stay down 
longer. Then he nearly drowned. At last he was very tired, and, finding 
a shady place under a bush, he lay down to rest. Now, looking up, he 
saw the berries hanging over his head. Now he was very angry. He picked 
up a club and beat the berry-bushes until there was but one berry left. This 
is the reason why the people to this day beat berries from the bushes.' 

13. Old Man Loses his Eyes. 

Once there was a bird that had power to throw its eyes into a tree and 
call them back again. Now, Old Man came along one day and saw the 
bird throw its eyes up into a tree and call them back again. He said, **I 
should like to do this." So he began to cr^', and asked the bird for some 
•of its powTr. At last the bird took pity on him. It told him that, when he 
came to straight standing trees, all he had to do was to wish his eyes to go 
up, and then to wish them down again. However, he was warned not to 
wish it when among crooked trees. 

Then Old Man went on and came to some nice straight trees. Then he 
wished his eyes up in the tree, and at once they were up there. Then he 
wished they were back again, and at once they were back again. Now, 
Old Man was greatly pleased. Then he came to some thick brush, and he 
said to himself, **Now I wonder how it will work if I try it on this brush. 
I wonder why the bird told me not to send my eyes into crooked trees.'* 
So out of curiosity he wished his eyes in the brush, and as he did so they 
went down into the brush and disappeared. All his wishing would not 
bring them back again. Now Old Man could, not see, and he went along 
making signs for some one to come to his aid. Finally a coyote who w^as 

» For a similar tale, see Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 62. 

2 An incident closely agreeing? with this is found in combination with an .\rapaho tale in 
which Nih'ft^ca" cooks babies, Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 101. It is interesting to find the 
Arapaho sequence of these incidents in a Cegiha myth, J. O. Dorsey, Contributions to North 
American Ethnology, Vol. VI, p. 562. 



30 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

passing that way came up and looked at Old Man. The coyote saw that 
his eyes were gone. Now this coyote had a festered foot, and he held this 
up to Old Man's nose. **My/' said Old Man, "that smells like a buffalo- 
drive. I must be near a camp." Then the coyote stole away, leaving 
Old Man humming on.^ 

After a while, as Old Man was walking along, a girl saw him, and, as 
he was making queer signs, she went toward him. "What do you w^ant?" 
she said. \Mien Old Man heard the voice, he said, "I want you to come 
over here." Now Old Man tied up his eyes, and, when the girl came over, 
he said, "I wish you to lead me, for my eyes are sore." They went on until 
they came to some thick brush. Then Old Man said, " I will make a camp 
here." So he set up some poles as if to make a lodge. Then he went after 
more poles but, being unable to find the ones just set up, he started another 
shelter, and so on. Finally the girl said, "What are you doing?" Old 
Man said, "I am making several lodges, so you can have your choice."^ 
After a while he began to tie a rattle, made of hoofs, to the girl's dress- 
"WTiat are you doing now?" she said. "Oh," said he, "I am putting 
preventive medicine on you." Then they camped together. Old Man 
had hung the hoof-rattles on the girl to act as a bell, so that he could hear 
her and follow her. One day the bandage came off his eyes, and the girl 
saw that he had no eyes. WTien she found this out, she tried to run away 
from him. Old Man followed her by the sound of the rattles; but, when 
she discovered this, she took them off and threw them out from a steep 
bank over the river. Then Old Man followed the rattling that they made, 
and fell head first into the water .^ 

Now Old Man met Coyote, and said to him, "Brother, you loan me one 
of your eyes, and I will go and get some meat for both of us." Coyote 
agreed to this, and gave Old Man one of his eyes. Then Old Man went 
into a camp where there were people; but when they saw that one socket 
was empty, they were frightened and began to run away. Old Man ran 
after them, calling, "I will not hurt you; come back." But this only 
frightened them the more. At last, finding that he had scared the people, 
he was ven^ angry, and, going back to Coyote said, "Here, you are to blame 
for this. You* only gave me one eye, and scared all the people away." Sa 
then he took the other eye from Coyote.' 



1 For a similar version, see Grinnell. op. cit., p. 153. 

2 See Maclean, Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. VI. p. 168. 

3 See Grinnell, op. cit., p. 154. In the Arapaho tale, Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., pp. 
60-52. Niira'^ga" loses his eves in the same greneral manner as indicated above, but borrows^ 
ev'es from small animals. l*he adventures with the ^irl and the coyote do not occur. In the 
Gros Ventre tale the incidents are somewhat similar to the Arapaho; Kroeber, op. cit., p. 70. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 31 

14. Old Man and the Fire-Leggings. 

One day Old Man was going along. He came to a lodge standing all 
by itself, and when he looked in he saw a great deal of dried meat. Looking 
around he saw hanging up a pair of leggings, which were made of rough 
buffalo-hide with many crow-feathers on the sides. Then he saw the owner ^ 
of the lodge, and said to him, '*My friend, give me those leggings." "No,*' 
said the stranger, **I will not give them to you." "Yes, I must have them," 
said Old Man. " No," replied the stranger, "these old leggings are of no use 
to you." "Well, then," said Old Man, "let me sleep here." "Well," 
said the stranger, "you may do that." Now, that night, when the man 
was asleep, Old Man watched his chance, stole the leggings, tied them on 
his back, and ran off as fast as he could. He ran and ran until he was a 
great way off. "Now, then," thought he, "I am so far away that they can- 
not overtake me: so I will Ue down and sleep." All this time the leggings 
were on his back. After a while he woke up, and when he looked around, 
he saw that he was back in the lodge again. 

It seems that the owner of the lodge, on awakening in the morning, 
saw Old Man sleeping with the leggings on his back: so he called to his 
wife and told her about it. The woman cooked some food, and, when all 
was ready, the man called out, "My friend, get up and eat!" Now, when 
Old Man awoke, he was surprised to find himself back where he started 
from. The man said, "Oh, my friend, what are you doing with my leggings 
on your back ?" Old Man got up, felt on his back, and, finding the leggings, 
said, "Well, I don't know how they came there, unless it is because your 
leggings like me." So he took the leggings oflf and gave them back to the 
man.^ 

Now Old Man wanted those leggings very much, so he decided to try 
again. The next night, as soon as every one in the lodge was asleep, he 
took the leggings, tied them on his back, and travelled as fast as he could 
until morning; then he lay down to sleep. After a while, he heard some 
one calling, and, when he looked around he was again back in the lodge. 
"Here," said the man, "what are you doing with my leggings on your 
back?" Now Old Man felt around in apparent surprise, and said, "Well, 
I do not know how they got there, unless your leggings like me so well that 
they get on my back during the night." "Well," said the man, "if the 
leggings like you so well I will give them to you. But they are not ordinary 
leggings: they are medicine-leggings. You must not wear them every day, 



1 In a version by Grinnell, the leggings were said to belong to the Sun. op. cit., p. 167. 

2 For a similar incident with Turtle and the magic robe, see Jones, Fox-texts, p. 301 ; also 
a magic quiver, Russell, op. cit., p. 215. 



32 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [\'^ol. II, 

but take them out vnih you when .you go to hunt. WTienever you find game 
in the brush, put on these leggings and run round and round. As you do 
this, the brush will take fire; but I warn you that you must never wear them 
except when* you have use for them." 

Now Old Man was greatly pleased, so he took his leggings and started 
out. After a time he came to the camp of the Piegan. All the people were 
watching him. So he began to dress himself up to look fine. He said to 
himself, "Now, here are those leggings. I think I will wear them." So 
he put them on. Now he stftrted out, and at the first step, fire started in the 
grass. This frightened him very much, and he began to run, setting fire 
to everything. The faster he ran, the more fire there was. The people 
began to call out that Old ^lan was trying to bum them up. He ran as 
fast as he could, and at last succeeded in getting the leggings off. He threw 
them down on the ground, where they burned up. Then the fire went out. 

So Old Man lost his leggings. 

15. Old Man frightens a Bear. 

One day, as Old Man was going along, he saw a bear digging roots. 
Then he hid behind a hill where the bear could not see him, and called out, 
"You dirty anus bear!" When the bear looked up, he saw nothing, and 
went on digging roots. Then Old Man called out again, "Oh, you dirty 
anus bear!" This time the bear looked around quickly and saw Old Man 
get behind the hill. He took after him at once. Old Man ran away as 
fast as he could with the bear at his heels. Finally he came to a large tree, 
and began to run round the tree with the bear after him. They kept on 
around the tree so long that a deep trail was worn in the ground. At last 
a buffalo-horn was uncovered in the trail. WTien Old Man saw thb, he 
picked it up, held it on his forehead, and, turning, rushed at the bear. This 
frightened the bear so much that he turned to run, and as he did so he 
defecated all over Old ]Man.^ 



16. Old Man gets fast in an Elk-Skull, and Loses his Hair. 

One day Old Man was going along, when he came to an elk-skull on the 
ground. Inside of it were some white mice dancing. Old Man began to 
cr}% because he wanted to go in and dance with the mice. The Mice told 
him that he was too big to get in to dance, but that he could stick his head 



1 For another version see Grinnell. op. cit., p. 157. A similar incident occurs among the 
Arikara, Dorsey, op. cit., p. 139, and the Cree, Russell, op. cit., p. 210. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 33 

inside, and shake it which would be the same as dancing. "However," 
they said, "whatever you do, you must not go to sleep." So Old Man stuck 
his head into the skull; but he forgot and went to sleep, and, while he slept, 
the Mice chewed all his hair oflF. WTien Old Man awoke, he could not get 
the skull oflf his head, so he went into the river and swam along with the 
antlers sticking out of the water. In this way he passed a camp of Indians. 
Then he made a noise like an elk. The people shot at him, went into the 
water and dragged him out ; but when they had him on shore they saw that 
it was Old Man. Then they took a stone and broke the skull, that he might 
get his head out again. ^ 

17. Old Man cooks Two Babies. 

Old Man came to a lodge in which there were some old women and two 
babies. The women asked him to get some meat for them. So he went out 
into the brush. He pulled hair out of his robe and scattered it around. 
Then he rubbed his buttocks on the snow until they bled, making the snow 
bloody. Then he returned to the lodge and told the women that he had 
killed something, and asked them to go out and bring in the meat. So they 
started out, leaving their babies in the cradles. 

As soon as the women had gone. Old Man took out his knife, cut off the 
heads of the babies, and put their bodies into the pot. Then he put their 
heads back into the cradles, and fixed them as before. 

When the women came back they said, "We cannot find the meat. The 
5now was all bloody, with hair scattered around. The coyotes must have 
eaten it." 

"Oh," said Old Man, "while you were gone, I got an antelope. It is 
<x)oking in the pot. Now be careful; don't wake the babies. I shall go 
after some wood." So Old Man went out, gathered a pile of wood, and 
blocked the door with it. Then he called out to the women, "Your babies 
are cooking in the pot." 

The women rushed to the cradles and found it was true. Now they were 
very angry, and tried to get out by the door; but the wood was in the way. 
Old Man ran off .^ However, the old women soon got out of the lodge, and 
pursued him. WTien they were about to overtake him, he ran into a hole in 
the ground. Then the women sat down and cried. 

While they were crying. Old Man came out of another hole, disguised 



1 Similar tales are known to the Arapaho (Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., pp. 107-111). 
The Gros Ventre version is similar only in the main incident of the mice dancing in the skull 
<Kroeber, op. cit., p. 68). The Arikara have a similar tale (Dorsey, op. cit., p. 137). 

> This incident is found among the Gros Ventre (Kroeber, op. cit., p. 71). 



34 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

himself, and came aromid to the women. "Well, my grandmothers," said 
he, "why are you sitting here?" Then the women related to him all that 
had happened. Then Old Man appeared to be very angry, and said, "I 
will go into that hole and kill him." Then he went into the hole, and while 
he was inside he made a great noise, as if a terrible fight was going on. At 
last everything was quiet, and after a time Old Man came out, saying, "Now 
he is dead." 

Then Old Man requested the women to go down into the hole to bring 
out the body; but, as soon as they were under, he stopped up the entrance, 
made a fire, and suffocated them with smoke.' 

18. Old Man's Escape. 

Old Man came to a camp of the Piegan. He went up to a lodge. It 
was a chief's lodge. IxK)king in he saw no one but a giri asleep. He stole 
up and put excrement on her dress. The smell of it wakened her, and she 
requested Old Man to remove it.^ 

"Well," said Old Man, "I must have pay. I do not work for nothing." 

The girl offered bows, arrows, and everything in the lodge; but Old 
Man refused each offer. Then she offered him her mother, sisters, etc.; 
but still he refused. Then she offered him her robe, her leggings, mocca- 
sins, etc. ; but he refused each in turn. Finally she had nothing but herself 
to offer. Old Man said he would be satisfied with that. 

When the girl saw the size and length of Old Man's lariat, she was 
troubled, and asked him to tie a stick across it, near the end. This he did. 
While they embraced, he removed the stick. The girl was torn in pieces.^ 

Then Old Man went into the lodge of some old women. He tied up his 
head and pretended to be very sick. They cared for him. 

When the chief returned to his lodge, he found his daughter dead, and 
from her condition knew that Old Man must have been there. He searched, 
and found him with the old women. When Old Man was accused, he 
pleaded sickness as a proof of innocence. Now the chief was suspicious. 
He decided to try an ordeal. Every one was to be required to jump a ditch, 
and the one who failed was to be considered guilty of the crime. As they 
were going out to the place of trial, Old Man met a bird, and induced it to 
exchange genitals with him.^ Then they went on to the place. When it 

1 This tale aprees generally with two Arapaho versions (Dorsev and Kroeber op. clt., pp. 
101-105). A general statement of its distribution is given in a footnote, ibid. p. 103. llie 
last incident is found in a Gros Ventre tale (Kroeber, op. cit., p. 43). 

2 See Gros Ventre version (Kroeber, op. cit., p. 74). 
« See note p. 28. 

< According to a Northern Blackfoot version, he concealed his guilt by placing them In the 
sky as a rainbow. See footnote p. 28. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 35 

came the turn of the bird, he could not jump because of the unusual weight 
he carried. So he fell into the ditch. When they were about to execute 
the bird, he told what had been done. Then they were about to kill Old 
Man, but he offered to bring the giri to life again. The chief agreed to give 
him a trial. ^ 

When all was ready, Old Man placed two women at the door of the lodge, 
one on each side. They held stone mauls in their hands. On the outside 
he placed two men with spears. The other people were sitting around inside 
of the lodge. Then Old Man put two pieces of fat on the fire, and when 
they were hot he took one in each hand and whirled about, causing the hot 
grease to fly into their eyes. Then he sprang out of the door. As he passed, 
the women with mauls struck at him, but killed each other. The same 
thing happened to the two men with spears. 

Old Man ran, but he was pursued by the men of the camp. After a time, 
the chase led by a place where some women were dressing hides. They 
caught him. Now Old ^lan was good at promising. He promised them 
elk-teeth, and they let him go. Soon the chase passed some young men 
playing the wheel-game. They caught him. He told them that he was not 
being pursued, but was running a race for some arrows. So they let him go. 
At last he got away.^ 

19. Old Man deceived by Two Women. 

Now all the women knew that Old Man was a very bad character, and 
they always tried to avoid him. One day two women out picking berries 
saw Old Man coming, but saw no way to avoid him. So they decided to 
play dead. As Old Man was going along, he saw the two women lying on 
the ground, stopped, and said, "Poor women! These are nice women. It 
is too bad they are dead." Then he touched one of them, *'Oh, they have 
just died! They are still warm; something must have killed them. I 
wonder what it was." So he turned them over and over, but found no 
wounds. Then he began to remove their clothes, examining their bodies 
carefully. Finally he saw the vulva. **Oh!" said he, "no wonder they 
died. Here are the wounds. They have been stabbed by a dagger." Then 
he put his finger in one of the wounds, took it out and smelled it. "No,** 
he said, "it was not by a dagger that they were killed. They were shot by 
a gun, because I smell the burnt powder. Well," said he, "I pity these 
poor women. They were too young to die. I must try to doctor them 



* For a tale almost identical with the preceding see Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit, p. 73. 
2 For another version, see Grinnell, op. cit., p. 159. 



36 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

back to life again." So he took one of them on his back to carry her away 
to the doctoring place. One of her arms hung over his shoulder, and as 
she pretended to be dead, she allowed it to swing freely so that, as they went 
along, her hand beat his nose, making it bleed. At last, when Old Man 
came to a suitable place for doctoring, he put the woman down, and started 
back for the other one; but when he was halfway, both women jumped up 
and ran away. Then Old Man called out, **Oh, I thought you were dead! 
Don't run away. Come, play dead again."^ 

20. Old Max sees Girls picking Strawberries. 

One day as Old Man was going along, he saw some giris picking berries 
at a distance. So he insinuated his long lariat along under the ground and 
up among the strawberries, the juice of which stained the protruding end.' 
As the girls were picking, one of them came to the protruding part, and 
exclaimed, "Oh, here is a big one!" She tried to pick it, but it could not 
be moved. The she called her companions to her aid, but without avail. 
They tried to eat it. At last one of them sat on it. Suddenly she was raised 
up and killed.^ 

21. Old Man pexem trans flumen mittit. 

Old Man went on. After a time he saw a female beaver on the other 
side of the river asleep. He called the muskrat, and requested him to carry 
his lariat across and place it to the beaver. He directed the muskrat to 
pinch the end when properly placed. Now the muskrat began to swim 
across with his burden. The current was swift, and carried him down. 
At this Old Man scolded harshly, which made the muskrat very angry; 
so when he landed, he sought out a thicket of thorns in which he deposited 
his burden and did as directed. Old Man thrust with all his might. He 
ploughed out a deep trail.* 

22. Old Man makes Buffalo laugh. 

Old Man looked from Red Deer River over to Little Bow River. He 
saw some buffalo. He tied up his hair in knots, and crawled along on hands 



1 Parts of this tale are known to the Crow (Simms, op. cit., p. 284). 

* See part of a Crow tale (Simms, op. cit., p. 284). 
« See note p. 28. 

* For similar tales, see Dorsey and Kroeber, Arapaho Myths, op. cit., pp. 63-64. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfooi Mythology. 37 

and knees. The sight made the buffalo laugh. One of them laughed 
himself to death, and the Old Man butchered him.* 

23. Adventures of Old Man. 

As Old Man was travelling along, he saw a rock, and said, **Now I shall 
give you this robe." So he took off his robe and put it over the rock.^ 
Now Old Man was travelling with his little brother the Fox, and as they 
went on it began to look Uke rain, so Old Man sent his little brother back to 
get the robe. But when Fox came to the rock, and said that Old Man sent 
him for the robe because it was going to rain, the Rock said, "No, he gave 
it to me." Then Fox returned, and reported to Old Man. This made 
Old Man very mad. He hurried back to the rock, and jerked off the robe, 
saying, "You have been here many years without a robe, and now you will 
not give it back to me when I need it." Then Old Man went on. Presently 
he heard thunder. After a time Fox looked back and saw the rock rolling 
after them. Then they began to run. They ran as fast as they could. 
Presently Old Man saw some buffalo-bulls, and called on them for help. 
The bulls tried to stop the rock, but they were crushed. Then Old Man 
saw some bears, and called to them for help, but the bears could not stop 
the rock. Then Old Man saw some night-hawks, and called out to them for 
help. Then the night-hawks flew down, and each time they came near the 
rock they discharged their flatus, causing pieces to fly off. Finally the rock 
was broken to pieces, and from the inside came a bear and a bull [buffalo].' 

Now old Man came to a river where he saw some young night-hawks 
in a nest. "Oh, yes!" said he, "it was your father and mother who spoiled 
all my fun. They broke to pieces the rock that was chasing me. Now I 
shall tear your mouths." So he widened their mouths. When the old 
birds came back, the young ones told them what Old Man had said. So 
they pursued him. When they overtook him, they circled around and 
defecated over him. 

As Old Man ran to escape them, he met a man with leggings made of 
calf-skin. Old Man called out to him for help. Now those leggings were 
medicine, and the owner caused them to make a fire, which frightened the 
night-hawks away. Then the two men sat down. Old Man said, "Stranger, 
give me your leggings." "Well," said the man, "I will give them to you in 
winter. You will not need them in summer." Old Man insisted, and 



1 Recorded among the Northern Blaekfoot by Dr. R. H. Lowie. For another version see 
Grinnell, op. cit., p. 170. 

2 This account is in the form of a continuous narrative, repeating most of the incidents 
contained in the preceding tales. It was narrated by a North Piegan Indian. 

3 This incident does not occur in other versions. 



38 Anihropologieal Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. IT, 

finally the man said he would give them to him after a while.* "Well," 
said Old Man, "I am going over to the lodges you see yonder." 

Now when Old Man came to the lodges, he said to the people, **Let us 
have a game." (This is a game in which the players move in a row. The 
leader carries a stick one end of which is on fire, and he strikes the stick, 
causing the sparks to fly around.) Now in this game Old Man led, and 
carried the stick. The people who were playing were deer and elk people. 
Then Old Man suggested that they play another game, *'\Mierever the 
leader goes." [In this game the players all follow the leader.] They played 
this until night. Finally they came to a very high bank. Now Old Man 
played a trick. He said, **Wait!" and crept down at another place; then, 
running up to the foot of the cliff, called out, ** You have not heard me for a 
while because I have been laughing. I found a nice soft place when I 
jumped down." So all the animals jumped down and were killed. There 
were some females among them about to become mothers, who begged Old 
Man to be allowed to go. At last he granted their request. 

Then Old Man dried the meat and kept it. After it was all eaten up, 
he travelled on again. Finally he came to a place where some squirrels 
were playing at a game. The squirrels would be covered up by one of them 
with hot ashes. Old Man asked them to let him play, but they declined. 
At length they agreed. Finally Old Man requested that he be allowed to 
cover them all up at once. Now there was one female squirrel who was 
about to become a mother, and she begged so pitifully of Old Man to let 
her go, that he consented. As he did so he said, **I will do this that there 
may be more squirrels in the world." Then he covered all the squirrels 
with the ashes, and when they became too hot, they called out to be uncovered; 
but Old ^lan paid no attention to this. So they died. Then Old Man 
brought some red willows and made a scaffold upon which to put his meat. 
Hence, the red willow is greasy to this day. When he had put all the squir- 
rels out on the scaffold, he began to eat. Finally he could eat no more, 
but there were still many squirrels left. Now he went to sleep, and said 
to his anus, **If any one comes along, you make a noise and wake me up." 
So, whenever a bird or an insect came along, the anus made a noise, waking 
Old Man. This made him tired. Finally he was so sound asleep that he 
did not waken when the noise was made. Then a lynx came. He soon 
found the squirrels, and began to eat them. 

Now when Old Man awoke, he was hungry, but found his meat gone. 
Then he was very angry. So he followed the tracks of the 1\tix, and soon 
found him sleeping on a flat stone. He caught the hiix, and tried to tear 



1 Comparison with the preceding: narrative (No. 14) will show how the story of the fire- 
leggings is made a part of tlie plot in this continuous narrative. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 39 

him in two by pulling on his front and hind legs, but did not succeed. Then 
he banged his nose on the rock, so that the lynx has a flat nose even to this 
day. Then he pulled out a bunch of hair from the pubes, and put it on the 
nose of the lynx for whiskers. Now Old Man was mad at his anus for all 
this. So he took a stick from the fire and rubbed it. This wood smells bad 
to this day. 

Then Old Man started out but the bum was painful and he went up on 
a hill that the wind might fan it. There was no wind, so he rolled buffalo- 
chips down the hill in order to produce wind. At last the wind began to 
blow very hard, and he was carried along, bouncing up arid down. He 
caught hold of bushes and trees, but none of them were strong enough to 
hold him. At last he caught hold of the birch. This did not break, but 
held him bouncing up and down. When the wind went down. Old Man 
was very angry. He scolded the birch for being so strong. Then he took 
out his knife and slashed the bark. [The cause of the markings on the bark.] 

Now the man who promised the leggings to Old Man came with them. 
He said, "You must not use them every day. Do not put them on unless 
you want to set things on fire. Wear them on the ice, and when you are 
hungry, dance and sing, and up will come food. But you must not do these 
things often." Old Man paid no attention to what was said, took the 
leggings, put them on, and began to dance, and when he* did so they took 
fire; so he took them off as quickly as he could, and gave them back to their 
owner. 

At this time the women and the men were not married, and Old Man 
came to a place where the women were going to pick out husbands. Old 
Man stood among the men, but no one picked him out. This took place 
in a buffalo-drive. When Old Man found that he had not been chosen, he 
was very angr}'. He began to tear down the cliff; then he turned into a 
pine-tree, and has been there ever since. 



40 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

II. STAR MYTHS. 

1. The Twin Brothers, or Stars.^ 

A long time ago there was a man by the name of Smart-Crow. When 
he travelled, he always went by himself. One day after he was married 
he told his wife that in the future two children would be bom to them, 
both boys. He predicted that one of them would be an outlaw ( ?) and the 
other a good man. Smart Crow knew this, because a Crow had given him 
the information in a dream. This Crow also told him, that, before his two 
children were bom, an evil man >vould try to kill their mother. The Crow 
told the man that he must wam his wife. It said, '*This man will come to 
the lodge when you are away, and ask to come inside. Your wife must say 
nothing to him. He will repeat the visit four nights."" The next time 
Smart-Crow went out to hunt, he told his wife about this dream, and warned 
her not to speak to the strange man. 

While Smart-Crow was away, the strange man came and stood before 
the lodge. After a while the woman thought to herself, "Why does not this 
man come in ?" Now, the stranger had great power. He read the woman's 
thoughts, and, as soon as she thought this, the man answered by saying, 
*'I will tell you why." So he entered the lodge and sat down, saying as he 
did so, '*I knew you wished me to come in." Now the woman began to 
cook some meat for the stranger, and when it was ready, she put it in some 
wooden bowls, and placed it before him. There were four kinds of bowls 
in the house. Some were made of hard knots of wood; some, of bark; 
some, of buflfalo-hom; and some, of mountain-sheep hom. After the 
woman had cooked the meat, she placed it before the stranger in a wooden 
bowl. The stranger looked at it and said, "That is not the kind of bowl 
from which I take my food." Then the woman took the food, and, putting 
it into a bark bowl, offered it to him again. "No," he said, "I do not take 
my food from bark." So the woman took the food, placed it in a bowl of 
buffalo-horn, and offered it to him for the third time. Again he refused » 
saying that he did not take food from homs. The woman took back the 
food, and, putting it in a bowl of sheep-horn placed it before him; but he 
refused to take food in such a dish. Now the woman was troubled, and 
looked about the lodge for something in which to serve the food. Finally 
she saw a piece from the hom of a moose, and offered him food upon it 



» Sometimes spoken of as the Origin of the Four-Tail Lodge; also spoken of as the Dusty- 
Stars, or Puff-Bails. The Blackfoot have a curious belief that certain kinds of fungi are asso- 
ciated with the stars. Sometimes these fungi are spoken of as the "fallen stars." See pp. 19,. 
42. 44. 60. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Black/oot Mythology. 41 

This he refused ako. As she looked about for something else, she hap- 
pened to see a blanket. **That will not do, either," said the stranger. 
Then she offered her dress. "That is nearer the kind I must have," he 
said. Then the woman said, **Oh, well, I will put the meat on my 
belly." "All right," said the stranger. The woman then lay down on her 
back, and placed the meat on her belly. She was heavy with child. The 
stranger had a white stone knife, which he sharpened and began to cut the 
meat. Three times he cut the meat; but the fourth time he said, "I came 
near cutting you." The fifth time he cut the woman open. Then twin 
boys came out. 

Thus the boys were bom. They were twins. The stranger took one 
of them, put him down near the ashes, and as he did so said, "You shall 
be called Ashes-Chief." Then he took the other, stuck him behind the 
lining of the lodge, and said, "You shall be called Stuck-Behind." Then 
the man went away. He carried a small lodge, with the skin of the running- 
fisher, for a flag.^ 

After a while Smart-Crow returned from his hunt^ bringing much buffalo- 
meat. As he came over the hill near his lodge, he saw no smoke rising 
from the smoke-hole. "Now," he said to himself, "I know what has hap- 
pened. I knew that woman would invite the stranger in." When he 
entered the lodge, he saw Ashes-Chief lying by the fire. While he was look- 
ing at his wife's body he heard the other infant crying behind the lodge-lining. 

Now Smart-Crow was very angry, and rushed out in pursuit of the 
stranger. He followed his trail and soon overtook him. As he came up, 
he said to the stranger, "Now I shall kill you." "My friend," said the 
stranger, "I will restore her to }'ou." "I do not believe you," said Smart- 
Crow. "My friend, I tell you I will restore her," repeated the stranger. 
"I cannot beUeve it," said Smart-Crow. "My friend," said the stranger, 
"I will restore her to you." "You are a liar," said Smart-Crow. Then 
the stranger began to sing a song. The words of this song were as follows: — 

" I am a great medicine [powerful]. 
Everything in the ground hears me. 
Everything in the sky hears me." 

WTien Smart-Crow heard this song, he beUeved in the promise of the 
stranger. Then the stranger took the bundle from his back, and said, "I 
give you this lodge and the running-fisher skin." The stranger set up the 
lodge. There were four buffalo-tails hanging to hs sides. Two of these 
were cow-tails, and two were bull-tails. One of each hung in front, and 

1 The medicine object for a painted lodge is often spoken of as a flag: i. e., an emblem hung 
from a pole. 



42 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

also behind. This lodge was called the Four-Tail Lodge. The stranger 
told Smart-Crow that the hanging of the buffalo-taik on the lodge would 
make the buffalo range near it, so that the people would always have meat. 
The stranger transferred this lodge to Smart-Crow. He sat down upon a 
stump, explained the ritual to him, and also taught him the songs. Among 
other things he said, "The punk which you use to make fires is made of 
bark, and does not kindle quickly; take puff-balls (fungus) instead, for they 
are much better. They are the Dusty Stars. You are to paint these stars 
around the bottom of the lodge. At the top of the lodge you are to paint 
the Seven Stars on one side and the Bunch Stars on the other. At the back 
of the lodge, near the top, you must make a cross to represent the Morning 
Star. Then around the bottom, above the Dusty Stars, you shall mark the 
mountains. Above the door, make four red stripes passing around the 
lodge. These are to represent the trails of the buffalo." 

When Smart-Crow had received all of the instructions belonging to the 
new lodge, and had learned all the songs, he went away with it and returned 
to his own lodge. He picked up Ashes-Chief, and said to a large rock lying 
near by, "I give you this child to raise." Then he pulled down the lining 
of the lodge, picked up Stuck-Behind, and called out to his friend the beaver, 
** I give you this child to raise." So the rock and the beaver took the boys 
away. 

The boys grew up. When they were about fifteen years old, Smart- 
Crow began to wish that he might have them with him again. He went 
out to get them back; but the boys were wild, and knew nothing about 
people. So, when the boys saw him coming, Ashes-Chief ran into the 
rock and Stuck-Behind into the beaver's house. Then Smart-Crow took 
some arrows from his quiver, laid them down near the rock, and concealed 
himself in the bushes. After a while, Ashes-Chief came out, saw the arrows, 
and looked curiously at them. As the boy was about to pick them up, 
Smart-Crow sprang out and caught him. Now Ashes-Chief had been 
raised by the rock, and was so strong for his age that Smart-Crow was scarcely 
able to hold him. He saw that his son would soon break away; so he said, 
*' Ashes-Chief, lick my hand, and you will know that I am vour father." 
Then Ashes-Chief licked his hand, stopped struggling, and said, "Yes, you 
are my father, and I will go with you*" 

Now Smart-Crow was anxious to secure Stuck-Behind, and ad\'ised with 
Ashes-Chief as to how to proceed. Finally they decided to draw him out 
of the beaver's house by playing the hoop-game. Smart-Crow concealed 
himself near the house while Ashes-Chief began to roll the hoop back and 
forth hear the door. Stuck-Behind became curious to know about the 
hoop, and ventured out to play. WTien he was outside, Smart-Crow sprang 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 43 

upon him, and held hira fast. Now, Stuck-Behind had been raised by the 
beaver, and for that reason was very hard to hold. Smart-Crow said to 
him, "Lick my hand, and you will know that I am your father." He did 
so, and recognized his father. 

When the boys were at home with their father, their names were changed. 
Ashes-Chief was now called Rock, and Stuck-Behind was called Beaver. 
Rock was the e^^l ( ?) one, and Beaver the good one, as the Crow had told 
their father in the dream. One day Rock said to his father, **Make me a 
bow and two arrows." **\\Tiat do you want with bows and arrows?" said 
Smart-Crow. "Well," said Rock, "Beaver and I wish to go out to hunt 
buffalo. While we are gone, you must go back to our old lodge where the 
bones of our mother lie, and cut a stick such as she used for stirring the 
meat when cooking. W^ait there for us until we bring the meat." Then 
Rock and Beaver went on their way to hunt. 

Now, at this time, the people cooked in pots of clay. These were shaped 
•out of mud by the hands, and put in the sun to dry; then the kettle was 
rubbed all over with fat inside and out, and placed in the fire. When it 
was red hot, it was taken out, and allowed to cool. Such a pot was good for 
boiling. Rock told his father to take one of his mother's pots, fill it with 
water, and put it over the fire so that it might be ready for his mother to boil 
meat. 

After a while the boys came up to their mother's lodge, where her skele- 
ton lay.^ They had a great deal of meat with them. Rock said, "Now, 
I shall take a little meat from each part of the buffalo, boil it in the pot, and 
then make medicine to put over the skeleton of our mother." Beaver said, 
"I shall help mother with the heart, the brains, and the marrow." Rock 
took up the tongue, blew his breath on it four times, and put in into the 
pot. Then he took up the other parts, one at a time, and did the same. 
The brains and marrow, however, he laid to one side, and did not put them 
into the pot. Rock said to Beaver, " I will help mother in two things 
and you may help her in the other two things." Now Smart-Crow was 
lying down in bed. The boys took his robe, and covered their mother's 
bones. Then the pot began to boil more than ever, and Rock said to his 
father, "Get up, call mother, arid tell her that her pot is about to boil over." 

The father arose from his bed, went over to the place where the robe lay, 
and said, "Get up, woman! Your pot is about to boil over." The bones 
did not move. Then Beaver called, "Mother, get up quick! Your pot is 
boiling over." At this there was a little movement under the robe. Then 
Rock called out, "Mother, get up quick, and feed us!" At this there was 



1 In former times the deati were often left in the lodge, while the whole camp moved to 
-another site. 



44 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II,. 

much movement under the robe, and parts of the woman's feet could be 
seen beneath the edge. Now Beaver called to her, which made the fourth 
time, saying, ** Mother, get up quick! I have a heart, brains, and marrow 
for you to eat.*' 

The woman sat up and drew a deep breath. **I have had a long sleep," 
she said. "I am very hungry: I shall eat." The boys gave her some of 
each part of the buffalo to restore her to life. For eyes, they gave her the 
inside of the eyes; for brains, they gave her the brains; for tongue, part of 
the tongue; for heart, part of the heart, and so on. When she had eatea 
all of these, she got up and set food before her children and Smart-Crow, 
as she had always done. 

Then Smart-Crow said to his wife, " Let us move from this place, it is 
an unlucky place for us. Let us leave this lodge here and take the new one 
given me by the stranger. When this new lodge is up in a new place, make 
a sweat-house, that I may go through it, for we have a medicine-lodge now. 
I did not kill the stranger, because he promised to restore you to me, and 
gave me this new lodge. After all I have seen, I believe that this lodge is 
very powerful. You have been asleep for a long time. Your bones were 
bleached, now you are alive; and it is the power of this lodge that made you 
so. When we are old, we will give this lodge to Beaver; he is a good man. 
Rock, on the other hand, is no good, and he will not live long." 

This happened out in the far north, when the Piegan lived there. 

When the mother had put up the new lodge in a new place, she made a 
sweat-house. Smart-Crow put the skin of the running-fisher around his 
shoulders, painted his face, took off his breech-cloth and moccasins, and 
was ready to go through the sweat-house. Then he covered the sweat- 
house with the skin of the new lodge, that it also might be purified. When 
he came out of the sweat-house, he painted his wife and children, and, 
taking up the lodge, put it in place. When all this was arranged, the woman 
looked at the lodge, admiring it. **What are those round things at the 
bottom?" she said. 

** Those," said Smart-Crow, "are for two purposes. They will help 
us to live long and to make fire quickly." When they had gone inside of 
the lodge, Smart-Crow said to his wife, "Now I shall teach you how to use 
the smudge." Then he took some moss from the pine-tree and laid it upoa 
the fire, singing a song. "You are to do this," he said, "every morning and 
every night. Also you must sing two seven-songs [fourteen] that I shall 
teach you." 

Now all this time Smart-Crow had been away from his people ; but now 
he returned with his family and the new lodge. This created a great sensa- 
tion. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 45 

Now the hoop that was used in catching Beaver was the big game-hoop. 
Rock and Beaver often played at this game. One day their father told 
them that they must not roll the hoop in the same direction as the wind. 
Then they went out to play. Now Rock said to Beaver, '* There is no 
reason why we should not roll this hoop with the wind. Nothing will happen 
if we do." "Oh," said Beaver, **our father requested us not to do this, 
and we should obey him." However, Rock paid no attention to what he 
said, and started the hoop in the direction of the wind. Now, the hoop 
continued to roll and roll. It would not stop, and as the boys followed 
along, waiting for it to fall, they were brought near a rock lodge. As the 
hoop rolled by, an old woman came out, took it in her hands, and invited 
the boys inside. They both went in.^ 

Now this old woman had some kind of power. She killed p)eoplc by 
suffocating them with smoke. As soon as the boys were seated, she took 
out a large pipe with a man's head for a bowl. Then she placed a great 
heap of wood on the fire, and, after shutting the door and the ears [smoke- 
hole] of the lodge, lighted the pipe and made a great smoke. Then the old 
woman said to the boys, ** Smoke with me." **No," said Rock. "You 
must," said the old woman, "because it is the custom for the guest to smoke 
with the head of the lodge." 

Now this old woman was a cannibal, and the boys knew it. So Rock 
said to the old woman, "Well, I will smoke wuth you." But Beaver refused. 
Then the old woman gave back the hoop, which Beaver took and put over 
his head. Rock took out a yellow plume and tied it to his hair. Now 
both of these things had power. The hoop kept the smoke away from Bea- 
ver's head, so that his head was in a hollow place surrounded by thick smoke. 
The plume in Rock's hair whirled in the air, and kept the smoke from his 
face. Now the smoke was so thick at last that the old woman could not 
see. She did not know that the boys had such great power. It became so 
thick at last that she was almost suffocated herself. "Oh!" she said, "there 
is too much smoke." She tried to rise to open the door, but fell down dead. 
Then the boys went outside of the lodge, and called out as if talking to the 
old woman. In this way they made all manner of fun of her great power. 
Looking around, they found themselves near the rock that had raised Rock. 
Then Rock took an arrow from his quiver, spit upon the point, dipped it 
into the water, and, pointing toward the rock, asked it for help, sa\'ing, 
"Make the arrow do what I wish." Then he threw the arrow at the lodge 
in which the old woman lived. It struck at the bottom, making a hole 
from which the water began to flow. The stream continued to increase in 



» See Kroeber, Gros Ventre, op. cit., p. 109, where this incident appears as a separate tale. 



46 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

size until it carried the lodge and rock away. Then the boys went home. 
Rock told his father everything that had happened, and laughed a great deal. 

There was a tall tree upon which grew some fine berries. The father 
said to them, "You must not eat those berries." Some time after, when the 
boys were out by themselves, Rock looked up at the tree, and said to Beaver, 
**Come, let us get some of those berries.'' But Beaver said, "No. Every 
time father requests us to do a thing, you do the opposite." But as Rock 
insisted upon getting the berries, Beaver consented. Now, beneath this 
tree Uved a monstrous snake with a large horn in the middle of his head. 
When they came near the tree, Beaver was afraid, and said to Rock, "I da 
not wush to climb the tree. You get the berries." Then Rock began to 
climb the tree, and, when he was up in the branches, the snake came out of the 
bushes and began to climb the tree. When the snake came within reach, 
he tried to hook Rock; but, missing, his horn struck the tree and stuck 
fast. Then Rock broke the tree and twisted the trunk, which pulled out 
the snake's brains. This snake always killed people who came to gather 
berries. Then the boys took some of the berries and went home. Rock 
related the adventure to his father, and laughed as if it were but an incident. 

Once they WTre forbidden to shoot at the morning-bird. Now the 
morning-bird was a very powerful creature; every one was afraid to do 
anything to him. One day when the boys were out, they saw this bird, 
but could not get at him as he was high in the air. Later they saw the bird 
near the ground, and Rock suggested to Beaver that they send an arrow 
after it. Again Beaver tried to persuade Rock to heed the commands of 
their father; but tvithout success. So Rock shot an arrow into the bird. 
It fell into the branches of a tree, almost within their reach. Rock stood 
upon a log and tried to reach the bird; but every time he tried, the bird got 
a little higher. Then he got upon a limb, and finally into the tree itself. 
Then, as he climbed the tree, the bird went higher and higher, and the tree 
became taller and taller, until Beaver, who stood upon the ground, could not 
see them. Now Beaver felt very much ashamed that he had yielded to his 
brother's folly. He did not feel like going home to tell his father, so he sat 
down by the tree and began to cry. When this happened, the boys were men, 
but Beaver cried so much at the foot of the tree that he became a dirty little 
ragged boy again. 

At this time the Piegan were out looking for buffalo, but could find none. 
They w^re forced to live upon such berries as they could find. One day 
an old woman w-as out gathering berries when she heard a child crying.* 
Looking around, she found Beaver at the foot of the tree. He was almost 



See Arapaho incident (Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 347). 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 47 

starved. The old woman felt sorry for him, picked him up and took him 
home.^ She gave him to her daughter to care for, saying, **Here is my 
grandson. When he grows up, he will run errands for us. You jnust feed 
him." Now, as they had no meat from which to make soup for the child, 
the daughter gathered some old bones around the camp and boiled them in 
a kettle. A few days after this the chief of the camp, who had two beautiful 
daughters for whom there were many suitors, made a pubUc announcement. 
He said, "To-morrow morning a [prairie] chicken will sit upon a tall tree 
near the camp, and all the young men are to shoot at it with bows and 
arrows. The man who hits it first shall receive my eldest daughter for a. 
wife." 

Now Beaver was a very dirty little fellow, he even defecated in bed, 
and every one in the camp talked about his uncleanness. When he heard 
what the chief said, he said to the old woman who found him, "Make me 
some arrows and I will try to hit the bird." "Oh, you dirty thing I" said 
the woman in disgust. "You are a disgrace to the camp; you would 
nauseate everybody. The girl would not have you anyway." The boy 
insisted that the arrows should be made for him; and, the fourth time he 
made the request, she made a bow and four arrows. All were very poorly 
constructed. 

WTien the time came for the young men to try their skill at shooting, 
the little boy came among the crowd, wearing an old piece of skin for a 
robe. He was pot-bellied. His eyes were sore and dirty. The people 
made fun of him. "What can you do?" they said. "What brought you 
anj'way ?" So they threw dirt at him and mocked him. Then the shooting- 
began. One after the other, the young men discharged their arrows at the 
bird; but no one made a hit. Beaver looked at the bird in the tree, then 
discharged one of his arrow^s, which came near hitting the bird. 

Now there was a man in the crowd called Crow- Arrow, who had never 
been able to get a wife. He observed that the boy had some kind of power, 
and envied his success. Then'he got his bow ready to discharge an arrow 
at the same time as the boy, and, in case the bird was hit, he would dispute 
the ownership of the arrow. W'hen the boy discharged his second arrow, 
Crow-Arrow discharged his also. The boy's arrow struck the bird, and it 
fell to the ground. Crow-Arrow, who was very swift, ran at once to the 
spot, pulled out the boy's arrow and put in his own. The people, who 
were all looking on, said, "No, it was the boy who hit the bird." Then 
they all went before the chief, and announced to him that the little dirty boy 



J This incident in connection with part of the preceding is a version of the widely distrib- 
uted Found-in-the-Grass Myth. For a similar rendering, see Kroeber, Gros Ventre Myths,. 
op. cit., p. 77. 



48 Anthropological Papers American Mvseum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

had won; but Crow- Arrow insisted that it was his arrow that killed the 
bird. The chief looked at the small dirty boy with disgust, and said to 
himself, '*I cannot have him for my son-in-law, even if he did hit the bird." 
Then he said to the people, ** Since there is a dispute about this, we will 
try something else. All the young men shall set wolf-traps, and whoever 
gets a black one or a white one shall be my son-in-law." 

Beaver went home and asked his grandmother to make him a wolf-trap. 
The grandmother said, **Oh, you get away from here, you dirty boy! No 
wolf would ever go into a trap you touched." But as Beaver insisted, she 
fixed up a trap just back of the lodge. In the evening, Beaver went out to 
fix his trap, and when morning came there was both a black and a white 
wolf in his trap. Now Crow-Arrow had set a trap also, and in the morning 
found a black wolf in his trap. Crow-Arrow hurried to the chief with his 
prize; but when he got there he found Beaver with two wolves, one black 
and one white. "Well," said the chief, "there is no dispute about it this 
time. The little dirty boy must be my son-in-law." 

So the eldest daughter was dressed up, her face painted, and taken over 
to the lodge where Beaver lived. 

Now Beaver always defecated and urinated in his bed. WTien the girl 
saw him she was disgusted, for his eyes were dirty and his abdomen was 
very large; but she gave him some food. He ate, and immediately defe- 
cated in the bed. His grandmother cleaned him, and scolded. After a 
while the girl and Beaver went to bed, but he dirtied the bed as usual. When 
the girl awoke, the condition of the bed caused her to vomit. The girl said 
she would not live with such a husband as this, and went over to five with 
Crow-Arrow. WTien the chief heard this, he was yery angry, because he 
knew that the little dirty boy possessed some kind of power, for which reason 
his daughter should have kept her promise. So, to make amends, he sent 
his youngest daughter over to be the wife of Beaver. Now this girl was 
rather bashful, and when she came to the lodge where Beaver lived, she got 
behind the old woman, and, peeping out at him, whispered to the old woman, 
"I think that boy is very pretty. I shall stay with him because he is so 
nice, and I see no reason why my sister left him." Then she went to bed 
with Beaver. He did as before, but the girl got up and asked the grand- 
mother for a piece of robe to clean the bed. She was cheerful and kind. 

Now all this time the people had been without meat, and the chief sent 
out the young men in ever\' direction to look for buffalo, but none were 
seen. Beaver said to his wife, "You are to go home to-night and stay with 
your mother until I send for you." He said to his grandmother, "You also 
must go away from this lodge and not return until I call you. You must 
leave me alone here." As soon as they were gone, Beaver took some yellow 



1908.] Wissler and DuvdU, Blackfoot Mythology. 49 

paint, put it in the hollow of his hand, mixed it with water, and painted his 
entire body. Then he took hold of his hair, pulled it down and painted it. 
At once be became a man, as before. Before him stood the Four-Tail 
Lodge of his father. In it was a dress covered with elk-teeth for his wife, 
also a fine white robe for himself. There were beds and other furniture in 
the lodge. Then Beaver sent out for the old woman, his grandmother, and 
when she came up directed her to wait outside of the door. Then he brought 
out a fine dress covered with elk-teeth, and told her to put it on. As soon 
as she did this, she became a young woman again. Then he sent the grand- 
mother over to the lodge of the chief to call his wife. The young woman did 
not recognize the grandmother, but followed her as requested; and when 
she came to the strange lodge she also failed to recognize Beaver. Beaver 
explained to her what had happened, and told her that she was to be re- 
warded for her kindness to him when he was such a dirty little boy. He 
brought out to her a fine dress covered with elk-teeth, and, rubbing paint 
upon her hair, pulled it gently until it became very long. Then he sent 
his wife to her father. When she came in she said, ** Father, my husband is 
about to go out to drive the buflfalo over into the enclosure. There will be 
one white buffalo in the herd, and my husband requests that no one shoot 
it, but that it be roped and then knocked on the head so that no injury be 
done to the skin, for it is to be made into a robe.'' 

All the young men of the camp went out with Beaver to drive the buffalo. 
Crow- Arrow also went. Beaver took a white rock and placed it near the 
edge of the enclosure, then he took up a rock colored like the beaver, and 
placed it on the other side. Then he directed the young men to lay rows 
of rocks spreading outward from these two. Then they laid down between 
them some buffalo-chips. As they were putting down the last Beaver 
shouted four times. Everybody looked around. They saw a herd of 
buffalo, a white one and a beaver-colored one in the lead. Then the men 
hid behind the rocks. This was a buffalo-drive.^ 

When the people were going out with Beaver to prepare the buffalo- 
drive, Crow-Arrow came upon an old buffalo-carcass. He cut out some 
of the spoiled meat, aiid carried it back to the chief to make him believe 
that he had the power to get meat first. WTiile Crow- Arrow was on his way 
back, he heard the shouting and the noise of the buffalo going over. He 
ran up as quickly as he could, and saw the white buffalo already roped and 
about to be knocked upon the head. Looking around, he saw the beaver- 
colored one and shot it. WTien the buffalo were killed, Beaver called to his 
wife, directed her to take his arrows, rub them over the skin of the white 



» See Arapaho incidents CDorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., pp. 349, 355, 374, 386). 



50 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II , 

buffalo, and throw them away. These arrows were feathered with eagle- 
tails. As the woman threw them from her, all the young men fought for 
them, because they were regaided as very good medicine. When Crow- 
Arrow saw this, he directed his wife to take his arrows and do likewise with 
the skin of the beaver-colored buffalo. Crow-Arrow*s arrows were made of 
crow-feathers. Now when Beaver's wife rubbed the arrows over the skin 
of the white buffalo, it was made smooth and clean; but when the wife of 
Crow-Arrow rubbed the skin of the beaver-colored buffalo, it did not change. 
So when she threw her arrows away, no one seemed anxious to pick them up. 
Now the wife of Crow-Arrow, the same one who deserted Beaver, felt 
ashamed. She came close to Beaver, and said, **I wish you would give me 
some of your arrows to clean the skin." "No," said Beaver. *'Once I 
married you, but you refused to live with me or to clean me: now I shall 
not help you clean skins." When Crow-Arrow saw^ what had happened 
he was very angry, and went home with his wife. He was very angry be- 
cause Beaver seemed to have greater power than he. Now Crow-Arrow 
was a great medicine- man, and so he transformed himself and his family 
into crows, and they flew out at the top of their lodge. Then the crows 
flew around all of the lodges, and called out to the people in crow-language, 
"We shall starve you; we shall take all the buffalo away from you, and 
starve you to death." 

After this no buffalo were seen in the country, because the crows took 
the buffalo over the mountains.^ Beaver and his people were soon driven 
to starvation; but the crows returned, flew around over their lodges and 
mocked them. So Beaver called the people together in council and said 
to the young men, "What can you do? Has any one power to bring back 
the buffalo ?" No one seemed to have such power. This was in the winter. 
Then Beaver said, "Let two young men go to the place where the beaver 
lives, cut a hole in the ice, build a fire and try to smoke the beaver out. 
Then I shall transform myself into a beaver and lie by the hole as if dead." 
The young men did as directed. During the night, Beaver went dow^n to 
the place, transformed himself into a beaver and lay down upon the ice as 
if dead. Part of the skin was pulled away, and his entrails could be seen. 
While he was lying there, Crow-[ Arrow] flew up, looked down, and said, 
"Oh, yes! I know your game. I know you. It is no use for you to try 
to get me in this way. Your people will starve. You think you are very 
smart, but you cannot get me. It is no use to try me .in that way, because 
I know too much." None of this made any impression upon Beaver, who 



1 From this point forward, the narrative is similar to tlie Dog and the Stick (Grinnell, op. 
cit., p. 145). In that tale, Napiw«, or the Old Man, takes the part played by Beaver in the above. 
The incident occurs among the Arapaho as a detached story (Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 
459). 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 51 

looked precisely like a corpse. Then Crow said to himself, "Well, after 
all, I believe it is a real dead beaver/* He came down and looked closely 
at the corpse, and pecked at the breast and eyes. They were all frozen 
hard: he could not make a dent in them. So the Crow took up a piece of 
fat from the entrails. He flew to a place and began to eat. Then he said, 
** Yes, it is a real beaver." Then Crow went back to the corpse and began 
to eat. Beaver lay still for a while, but suddenly transformed himself into 
a man, sprang upon the Crow and caught him. As he struggled, the Crow 
cried, "Let me go! let me go! I will get buffalo for you." "No," said 
Beaver, " you are a liar. I shall hold on to you this time. I shall surely 
punish you." So he broke the wing of the Crow, tool^ him home and tied 
him to the smoke-hole of the lodge. Then Beaver gathered a lot of birch- 
wood and threw it into the fire, making a very black smoke. Now, up to 
this time, all crows were white ; and while Crow was crying in the top of the 
lodge, "Oh, let me go! let me go! I will bring you buffalo surely," the 
smoke made him black, and crows have been black ever since. After Crow 
was as black as he could be, Beaver consented to let him go if he would call 
the buflFalo. Crow promised, but, as soon as he was released, he flew to the 
top of the lodge and called back, "I shall let you starve, I shall let you 
starve. I was just fooling." 

Then the people of the camp scolded Beaver. They said, "You knew 
that he was a liar. You knew that he would not keep his word. You 
should have kept him fast until he produced the buffalo." "Well," said 
Beaver, "I will get the buffalo myself." One of the men said, "I should 
like to go with you." "What kind of power, have you?" said Beaver. 
"Well, I have some power," said the man. "I can transform myself into 
a swallow, a pup, and a spider." "Well, you have some power," said 
Beaver, "but I have greater power. I can transform myself into anything, 
but you may come with me." 

Now, the name of this man was Little-Dog. He transformed himself 
into a swallow, and Beaver became a prairie-chicken. Then they started 
out to look for buffalo. As they went along, Little-Dog saw Crow's camp 
in the distance. Then he transformed himself into a spider, and, coming 
up to a man belonging to Crow's camp, inquired of him the whereabouts 
of Crow. The man informed him that he had gone over the mountain 
to live, and that there was a very high cliff behind them. Then Little-Dog 
transformed himst^lf into a swallow, and Beaver into a horse-fly. Together 
they flew over the cliff. Here they saw Crow's camp. While they were 
looking. Crow's people moved their camp. Then Little-Dog transformed 
himself into a spider, and Beaver became a pine-tree. Now the two watched 
a long time for the buffalo; but they saw no trace of them around Crow's 



52 Anthropological Papers American Mvseum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

camp. One day they saw Crow go away. Then they went to the place 
where the camp was first seen, and Beaver transformed himself into a 
digging-stick, and Little-Dog became a pup. After a while the young 
daughter of Crow came out to look around the old camping-place. She 
found the digging-stick and the pup, and carried them home ^ith her. 
When she came up to her lodge, her mother was tanning a hide. The girl 
said to her, ** Mother, these things were left behind when we moved camp." 
So the woman thought no more of it, and the girl took the two into the 
lodge to play. Now the girl was very fond of the pup, and carried it about 
in her arms, with the digging- stick stuck on her back in the way that 
women carry babies. While the girl was placing with the pup, as children 
do, she raised up the edge of the bed. There was a deep hole under it, 
and, holding the pup over it, she said, "Pup, do you see that deep hole? 
Do you see all the buflFalo down there?" Now Little-Dog and Beaver 
looked down into the hole and saw where the buffalo were hidden. As 
the girl was looking over, the digging-stick slipped from her back into the 
hole, and pup grew into a large dog, so large that he slipped down of his 
own weight. The girl was very much frightened, but went away vs-ithout 
saving anything to her mother. 

So Beaver and Little-Dog fell down into the hole. Beaver transformed 
himself into a man, and Little-Dog became a monstrous dog. At once he 
began to bark and chase the buffalo, and the man ran after them shouting. 
This frightened the buffalo so much that they dashed up through the hole 
and out upon the earth. There were so many buffalo that it took them a 
long time to get out; so that Crow returned while Beaver and Little-Dog 
were still driving buffalo. Crow knew who was driving them out, and took 
his station by the side of the hole, waiting to kill them. However, they 
were not to be caught so easily. Beaver caught hold of a buffalo, trans- 
formed himself into a stick, and concealed himself in the long hair of the 
neck. Little-Dog became a pup once more, and fastened his teeth in the 
long hair of the breast of a buffalo. Thus they were carried out, unobsen-ed 
by Crow. 

Now the buffalo were running over the earth, they were restored to the 
people once more.^ 

After this, Beaver returned to his people. One day he told his wife 
that she must never put sagebrush on the fire as it was against his medicine ; 
but one day his wife forgot this, and threw the sagebrush into the fire while 
Beaver was away. When Beaver came in, he knew what had been done. 
He said to his wife, "Now, since you have used the sagebrush for the fire. 



» The confinement of buffalo in a cave is an incident often found in the mythology of the 
buffalo area. For its recurrence in this collection see pp. 123, 124. 



1908.] Wiasler and DuvaUy Blackfoot Mythology. 53 

I must leave you and go to my brother. You will never see me here again." 
Then he took his white robe and a plume. He blew the plume up into the 
air and rose to the sky. His brother had been carried to the sky on the 
branches of a tree, and Beaver went up to him. Now they are both stars. 
Every night we see two large stars side by side : these are the two brothers, 
Ashes-Chief and Stuck-Behind. 

2. Blood-Clot, or Smoklng-Star. ^ 

Once there was an old man and woman whose three daughters married 
a young man. The old people lived in a lodge by themselves. The young 
man was supposed to hunt buflPalo, and feed them all. Early in the morn- 
ing the young man invdted his father-in-law to go out with him to kill buflFalo. 
The old man was then directed to drive the buffalo through a gap where 
the young man stationed himself to kill them as they went by. As soon as 
the buffalo w^ere killed, the young man requested his father-in-law to go 
home. He said, "You are old. You need not stay here. Your daughters 
can bring you some meat." Now the young man lied to his father-in-law; 
for when the meat was brought to his lodge, he ordered his wives not to give 
meat to the old folks. Yet one of the daughters took pity on her parents, 
and stole meat for them. The way in which she did this was to take a piece 
of meat in her robe, and as she went for water drop it in front of her father's 
lodge. 

Now every morning the young man in\dted his father-in-law to hunt 
buffalo: and, as before, sent him away and refused to permit his daughters 
to furnish meat for the old people. On the fourth day, as the old man was 
returning, he saw a clot of blood in the trail, and said to himself, "Here at 
least is something from which we can make soup." In order that he might 
not be seen by his son-in-law, he stumbled, and spilt the arrows out of his 
quiver. Now, as he picked up the arrows, he put the clot of blood into the 
quiver. Just then the young man came up and demanded to know what it 
was he picked up. The old man explained that he had just stumbled, and 
was picking up his arrows. So the old man took the clot of blood home and 
requested his wife to make blood-soup. When the pot began to boil, the 
old woman heard a child crying. She looked all around, but saw nothing. 
Then she heard it again. This time it seemed to be in the pot. She looked 
in quickly, and saw a boy baby: so she lifted the pot from the fire, took the 
baby out and wrapped it up. 



» This is a widely distributed tale, and very popular among Plains tribes. A footnote to 
an Arapaho version (Dorsey and Kroeber, op. clt., p. 298) gives its general distribution The 
version given here is in close agreement with a Gros Ventre rendering (Kroeber, op. cit., p. 82). 



54 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. f\'ol. II, 

Now the young man, sitting in his lodge, heard a baby cning, and said, 
**Well, the old woman must have a baby." Then he sent his oldest wife 
over to see the old woman's baby, sa\ing, ** If it is a boy, I will kill it." The 
woman came in to look at the baby, but the old woman told her it was a girl. 
When the young man heard this, he did not believe it. So he sent each 
wife in turn; but they all came back with the same report. Now the young 
man was greatly pleased, because he could look forward to another wife. 
So he sent over some old bones, that soup might be made for the baby. 
Now, all this happened in the morning. That night the baby spoke to the 
old man, saving, **You take me up and hold me against each lodge-pole in 
succession." So the old man took up the baby, and, beginning at the door, 
went around in the direction of the sun, and each time that he touched a pole, 
the baby became larger, ^\^len halfway around, the baby was so hea\y that 
the old man could hold him no longer. So he put the baby down in the 
middle of the lodge, and, taking hold of his head, moved it toward each of 
the poles in succession, and, when the last pole was reached, the baby had 
become a very fine young man. Then this young man went out, got some 
black flint [obsidian] and, when he got to the lodge, he said to the old man, 
"I am the Smoking-Star. I came down to help you. When I have done 
this, I shall return." 

Now, when morning came, Blood-Clot (the name his father gave him) 
arose and took his father out to hunt. They had not gone very far when 
they killed a scabby cow. Then Blood-Clot lay down behind the cow and 
requested his father to wait until the son-in-law came to join him. He also 
requested that he stand his ground and talk back to the son-in-law. Now, 
at the usual time in the morning, the son-in-law called at the lodge of the old 
man, but was told that he had gone out to hunt. This made him very angry, 
and he struck at the old woman, sa\ing, **1 have a notion to kill you." So 
the son-in-law went out. 

Now Blood-Clot had directed his father to be eating a kidney when the 
son-in-law approached. Wien the son-in-law came up and saw all this, he 
w^as very angry. He said to the old man, *'Now you shall die for all this." 
**Well," said the old man, **you must die too, for all that you have done.'' 
Then the son-in-law began to shoot arrows at the old man, and the latter, 
becoming ' frightened, called on Blood-Clot for help. Then Blood-Clot 
sprang up and upbraided the son-in-law for his cruelty. **Oh," said the 
son-in-law, *'I was just fooling." At this Blood-Clot shot the son-in-law 
through and through. Then Blood-Clot said to his father, **We will leave 
this meat here: it is not good. Your son-in-law's house is full of dried 
meat. Which one of your daughters helped you ?" The old man told him 
that it was the youngest. Then Blood-Clot went to the lodge, killed the 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfooi Mythology. 55 

two older women, brought up the body of the son-in-law, and burned them 
together. Then he requested the younger daughter to take care of her old 
parents, to be kind to them, etc. ^ *'Now," said Blood-Clot, '' I shall go to 
y\sii the other Indians." 

So he started out, and finally came to a camp. He went into the lodge 
of some old women, who were very much surprised to see such a fine young 
man. They said, "Why do you come here, among such old women as we? 
Why don't you go where there are young people?" "Well," said Blood- 
Clot, **give me some dried meat." Then the old women gave him some 
meat, but no fat. "Well," said Blood-Clot, "you did not give me the fat 
to eat with my dried meat." "Hush!" said the old women. "You must 
not speak so loud. There are bears here that take all the fat and give us the 
lean, and they will kill you, if they hear you." "Well," said Blood-Clot, 
"I will go out to-morrow, do some butchering, and get some fat." Then he 
went out through the camp, telling all the people to make ready in the morn- 
ing, for he intended to drive the buffalo over [the drive]. 

Now there were some bears who ruled over this camp. They lived in a 
bear-lodge [painted lodge],^ and were very cruel. When Blood-Clot had 
driven the buflfalo over, he noticed among them a scabby cow. He said, 
**I shall save this for the old women." Then the people laughed, and said, 
**Do you mean to save that poor old beast? It is too poor to have fat." 
However, when it was cut open it was found to be very fat. Now, when the 
bears heard the buffalo go over the drive, they as usual sent out two bears 
to cut off the best meat, especially all the fat; but Blood-Clot had already 
butchered the buffalo, putting the fat upon sticks. He hid it as the bears 
came up. Also he had heated some stones in a fire. When they told him 
what they wanted, he ordered them to go back. Now the bears were very 
angry, and the chief bear and his wife came up to fight, but Blood-Clot 
killed them by throwing hot stones down their throats. Then he went 
down to the lodge of the bears and killed all, except one female who was 
about to become a mother. She pleaded so pitifully for her life, that he 
spared her. K he had not done this, there would have been no more bears 
in the world. The lodge of the bears was filled with dried meat and other 
property. Also all the young women of the camp were confined there. 
Blood-Clot gave all the property to the old women, and set free all the young 
women. The bears' lodge he gave to the old women. It was a bear painted 
lodge. 



1 The preceding is similar to a version by Maclean, The Indians of Canada, 1892, p. 169. 
This author passes over the other parts of the story with "Kutoyis eninloyed all his time in 
driving the evil out of the world.' See, also, the same author, Journal or American Folk-Lore, 
Vol. VI. p. 167. 

> For a note on these lodges, see p. 92. 



56 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

"Now," said Blood-Clot, "I must go on my travels." He came to a 
camp and entered the lodge of some old women. When these women saw 
what a fine young man he was, they said, "Why do you come here, among 
such old women? Why do you not go where there are yoimger people?" 
"Well," said he, "give me some meat." The old women gave him some 
dried meat, but no fat. Then he said, "Why do you not give me some fat 
with my meat?" "Hush!" said the women, "you must not speak so loud. 
There is a snake-lodge [painted lodge] here, and the snakes take everything. 
They leave no fat for the people." "Well," said Blood-Clot, "I will go 
over to the snake-lodge to eat." "No, you must not do that," said the old 
women. "It is dangerous. They will surely kill you." "Well," said he, 
" I must have some fat with my meat, even if they do kill me." Then he 
entered the snake-lodge. He had his white rock knife ready. Now the 
snake, who was the head man in this lodge, had one horn on his head. He 
was lying with his head in the lap of a beautiful woman. He was asleep. 
By the fire was a bowl of berry-soup ready for the snake when he should 
wake. Blood-Clot seized the bowl and drank the soup. Then the woman 
warned him in whispers, "You must go away: you must not stay here." 
But he said, "I want to smoke." So he took out his knife and cut off the 
head of the snake, saying as he did so, "Wake up! light a pipe! I want to 
smoke." Then with his knife he began to kill all the snakes. At last there 
was one snake who was about to become a mother, and she pleaded so piti- 
fully for her life that she was allowed to go. From her descended all the 
snakes that are in the world. Now the lodge of the snakes was filled up with 
dried meat of every kind, fat, etc. Blood-Clot turned all this over to the 
people, the lodge and everything it contained. Then he said, "I must go 
away and visit other people." 

So he started out. Some old women advised him to keep on the south 
side of the road, because it was dangerous the other way. But Blood-Clot 
paid no attention to their warning. As he was going along, a great wind- 
storm struck him and at last carried him into the mouth of a great fish.^ 
This was a sucker-fish and the wind was its sucking. WTien he got into the 
stomach of the fish, he saw a great many people. Many of them were dead, 
but some were still alive. He said to the people, "Ah, there must be a 
heart somewhere here. We will have a dance." So he painted his face 
white, his eyes and mouth with black circles, and tied a white rock knife 
on his head, so that the point stuck up. Some rattles made of hoofs were 
also brought. Then the people started in to dance. For a while Blood-Clot 
sat making wing-motions with his hands, and singing songs. Then he stood 

1 For a similar incident, see J. O. Dorsey, op. cit., p. 34. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 57 

up and danced, jumping up and down until the knife on his head struck 
the heart .^ Then he cut the heart down. Next he cut through between 
the ribs of the fish, and let all the people out. 

Again Blood-Clot said he must go on his travels. Before starting, the 
people warned him, sa\nng that after a while he would see a woman who was 
always challenging people to wrestle with her, but that he must not speak to- 
her. He gave no heed to what they said, and, after he had gone a Uttle way, 
he saw a woman who called him to come over. **Xo," said Blood-Clot. 
"I am in a hurry." However, at the fourth time the woman asked him to- 
come over, he said, ** Yes, but you must wait a little while, for 1 am tired. I 
wish to rest. When I have rested, I will come over and wrestle with you.'*^ 
Now, while he was resting, he saw many large knives sticking up from the 
ground almost hidden by straw. Then he knew that the woman killed the 
people she wrestled ^ith by throwing them down on the knives. When 
he was rested, he went over. The woman asked him to stand up in the 
place where he had seen the knives; but he said, *'No, I am not quite ready^ 
Let us play a Uttle, before we begin." So he began to play with the woman, 
but quickly caught hold of her, threw her upon the knives, and cut her in two. 

Blood-Clot took up his travels again, and after a while came to a camp 
where there were some old women. The old women told him that a little 
farther on he would come to a woman with a swing,^ but on no account 
must he ride with her. After a time he came to a place where he saw a 
swing on the bank of a swift stream. There was a woman swinging on it. 
He watched her a while, and saw that she killed people by swinging them 
out and dropping them into the water. When he found this out, he came up 
to the woman. "You have a swing here; let me see you swing," he said. 
"No," said the woman, "I want to see you swing." "Well," said Blood- 
Clot, "but you must swing first." "W^ell," said the woman, "Now I shall 
swing. W^atch me. Then I shall see you do it." So the woman swung out 
over the stream. As she did this, he saw how it worked. Then he said ta 
the woman, "You swing again while I am getting ready; " but as the woman 
swung out this time, he cut the \dne and let her drop into the water. This 
happened on Cut Bank Creek.' 

"Now," said Blood-Clot, "I have rid the world of all the monsters, I will 
go back to my old father and mother." So he climbed a high ridge, and 
returned to the lodge of the old couple. One day he said to them, "I shall 



» This is regarded as the origin of a ceremony known as the "dance of the spirits of the 
dead," or "ghost dance." The knife tied on the head is said to glisten or give off light, like a 
halo (smoke), hence the name Smoking-Star. 

2 For a different rendering, see Grinnell, op. cit., p. 37. However, the swing is found among 
the Gros Ventre (Kroeber, op. cit., p. 87) and the Fox (Jones, op. cit., p. 103). 

« Grinneirs version contains another Incident. After this adventure. Blood-Clot is eaten 
four times by a cannibal. In each case the bones are restored to life by a little girl. After 
the fourth restoration Blood-Clot kills the cannibal (op. cit., p. 37). 



58 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [\'ol. II, 

go back to the place from whence I came. If you find that I have been 
killed, you must not be sorry, for then I shall go up into the sky and become 
the Smoking-Star." Then he went on and on, until he was killed by some 
Crow Indians on the war-path. His body was never found; but the moment 
he was killed, the Smoking-Star appeared in the sky, where we see it now. 



3. The Fixed Star. 

One summer night when it was very hot inside the lodge, two young 
women went outside to sleep. They woke up before daylight and were 
looking up at the sky, when one of them saw the Morning Star. She said 
to her companion, **That is a very bright star. I should like him for a 
husband." She soon forgot what she had said. In a few days these two 
young women went out from the camp to gather wood, ^\^len they had 
made up their packs and were drawing them up on their shoulders vnth 
the pack-straps, the strap broke that belonged to the girl who said she wished 
the Morning Star for her husband. Every time she made up her bundle 
and raised it to her back, the strap would break. Her companion, who 
was standing by her side with her pack on her shoulders, began to grow 
weary. She said, " I shall go on with my load: you can follow." 

When the young woman was left alone, and had made up her bundle 
again, a handsome young man came out of the brush. He wore a fine 
robe made of beaver-skins, and had an eagle-plume in his hair, ^\^len 
the young woman started to go on, he stepped in front of her. ^\^lichever 
way she turned, he headed her off. Finally she said to him, '*^\^ly do you 
head me off?" The young man replied, **You said you would take me for 
your husband." '*No," said the young woman, **you must be mistaken. 
I never had anything to. do with you. I do not know you." **I am the 
Morning Star," said the stranger, "and one night, when you looked up at 
me, you said that you wished me for a husband. Now I have come for 
you." "Yes, I did say that," said the young woman. So she consented 
to go away with him. Then Morning Star put an eagle plume in her hair, 
and told her to shut her eyes. Then they went up into the sky. 

Now the Sun was the father of the Morning Star and the Moon was his 
mother. When they came into the lodge, Morning Star said to his parents, 
**I have brought a wife with me." The parents were pleased with what 
their son had done. Moon gave the young wife four berries and a few 
drops of water in a little shell. These were given to her to eat and to drink. 
Though the young woman was very hungry, she could neither eat all of the 
berries nor drink all of the water, because these berries were all the food 



1908.] Wissler and Durall, Blackfoot Mythology. 59 

there was in the world and the shell contained all the water there was in the 
ocean (?). 

After a time, Moon said to her daughter-in-law, **Xow I shall give you a 
root-digger, and you may go out to dig roots ; but you are not to dig that big 
turnip there, because it is medicine [natoji'wa]." So the young woman went 
about the sky country digging roots for their food. She often looked at 
that fine large turnip growing there, and was curious to know why she was 
forbidden to dig it up. In course of time she gave birth to a child. One 
day, when it was old enough to sit alone» she said to herself as she went out 
to dig roots, '' Now no one will know about it if I do dig it up." So she stuck 
her digging-stick into the ground under the turnip; but, when she tried to 
raise it, the stick would not move. WTien she found that she could not get 
the stick out, she began to cry. Then two large white cranes flew down; 
one was a male and the other a female. The young woman prayed to them 
for help to get her root-digger out of the ground. Then the Crane- Woman^ 
said, **When I married I was true to my vow. I never had anvthing to do 
with any other man than my husband. It is because of this that I have 
power to help you. Your mother ^ gave you this digging- stick. Now I shall 
teach you the songs that go with it.** Then Crane-Woman made a smudge, 
took the hands of the woman into her own, and, while she sang the songs, 
placed them upon the digging-stick. Then Crane- Woman pulled out the 
stick, and, marching around in the direction of the sun, made three move- 
ments toward the turnip, and with the fourth dug it out. Now the young 
woman took the digging-stick and the turnip home with her. When they 
saw what she had, they reprimanded her. Morning Star said to her, **\\Tiat 
did you see when you dug out this turnip ?'* The woman replied, ** I looked 
down through the hole and saw the earth, the trees, the rivers, and the lodges 
of my people." 

'*Now," said Morning Star, **I cannot keep you any longer. You must 
take the boy with you and go back to your people; but when you get there 
you must not let him touch the ground for two-seven [fourteen] days. If he 
should touch the ground before that time, he will become a puff-ball [a 
fungus], go up as a star, and fit into the hole from which you dug the turnip. 
He will never move from that place, like the other stars, but will always be 
still." 

Sun said to her, "I shall call in a man to help you down to the earth." 
After a while a man came with a strong spider-web, to one end of which he 

1 In all Blackfoot narratives where animals take important parts in medicine procedure, it 
is assumed that they are persons in diss:iiise, and "become as people." 

a In all ceremonial ^fls or transfers, the ^iver is spoken of as a father or mother, according 
to the sex; hence the thoui?ht is, that this digging-stick was not an ordinary gift, but carried 
with it ceremonial obligations. 



60 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [V'^ol. 11^ 

tied the woman and the boy, and let them down through the hole from which 
the turnip was taken. The woman came down over the camp of her own 
people. The young men of the camp were placing at the wheel-game. 
One of them happened to look up into the sky, where he saw something^ 
coming down. Now this young man had very poor eyes, and, when he told 
his companions that something was coming down from the sky, they looked, 
and, seeing nothing, made sport of him. As he still insisted, they, in derision, 
threw dirt into his eyes. But after a while they, too, saw something coming- 
down from the sky. As the woman reached the ground in the centre of the 
camp, some one, recognizing her, called out, "Here is the woman who never 
came back with her wood." Then all her friends came out to meet her, 
and her mother took her home. 

Now, before the woman left the sky, Morning Star told her, that, since 
she had made one mistake in digging up the turnip, she would no doubt 
make another mistake, and allow the child to touch the ground before the 
time was up. So he adnsed her to make the sign of the Morning Star on 
the back of her lodge, so that she might be reminded daily of her duty. 
(The doors of the lodges at that time faced the sun, and the sign of the 
Morning Star was to be made upon the back of the lodge, because he always 
travels on the other side from the sun.) 

The young woman kept careful watch over the boy for thirteen days. 
On this day her mother sent her out for water. Before going out, the young^ 
woman cautioned her mother to keep the child upon the bed, and not allow 
him to touch the ground. Now the grandmother was not so careful, be- 
cause she did not understand the reason for watching the child; and while 
her back was turned he crawled out upon the ground, ^\^len she saw him, 
she caught him up, putting him back on the bed as quickly as she could. 
This seemed to make the child angr>% for he pulled the robe up over himself. 
The grandmother paid no further attention to him. 

Now, when the boy's mother came back, she looked around, and said, 
"WTiere is my child?*' "Oh, he covered himself up with a robe,'* said the 
grandmother. The young mother rushed to the bed, pulled back the robe, 
and found nothing but a puff-ball [fungus]. She caught this up, and carried 
it in her bosom all the time. 

That evening when the stars came out, she looked up into the sky. A 
new star stuck in the hole from which she pulled the turnip. Then she 
knew what had become of her child. 

This is the way the Fixed Star came to be. 

After this the woman painted circles around the bottom of her lodge to 
represent the puff-ball, or the Fallen Star [the one that came down]. She 
had already painted the Morning Star on the back of her lodge. This is 



1908.] Wiasler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 61 

why the people paint their lodges in the way that you see them. Also this 
woman brought down the turnip and the digging- stick. Crane-Woman 
taught her the songs that go with them and their use in the sun-dance. This 
was the beginning of the medicine-woman [leader in the sun-dance]. 

Many years after, this woman, while holding the sun-dance, made another 
mistake. She took some of the offerings from the sim lodge. ^\Tien she 
did this, she died.^ 

4. Scar-Face. 

(a) Version by a Piegan Man. 

Once there was a very poor young man who lived with his sister. He 
had a chum. In the camp was a very fine girl, the daughter of a chief, 
with whom all the young men were in love. Now the poor young man was 
in love with her also, but he had a long, ugly scar on his cheek. One day 
he asked his sister to go over to the chiefs lodge to persuade the girl to marry 
him. Accordingly, the sister went over; but when the girl found out what 
she wanted, she said that she was willing to marry Scar-Face whenever 
that ugly scar disappeared. She made all manner of fun of Scar-Face. 

Now the sister returned and told Scar-Face what the girl had said. He 
was very much hurt, and decided to go away to seek some one who could 
aid him in removing the scar. Yet, though he travelled far, no one could 
tell him where to go for aid. At last he decided to go to the Sun. So he 
travelled on and on, and the farther he went, the blacker the people became. 
As he went along, he inquired for the Sun's house. Always he was told to 
go on until he came to a very high ridge where some people lived who could 
tell him the whereabouts of the Sun's house. At last Scar-Face came to 
this ridge. There he saw a nude man with very black skin and curly hair. 
Scar-Face called to him, "Where is the Sun's lodge?" **It is at the end of 
this ridge," said the black man. **But go back! go back! You will be 
burned very badly!" Scar-Face said, *'Well, I shall go on anyway; it is 
better to die than to go back." " Look at me!" said the black man. "You 
can see how I have been burned black. You had best take my advice and 
go no farther." "Where do you live?" asked Scar-Face. "I have a cave 
to live in," replied the black man. "I stay in this cave when the sun is hot, 
otherwise I should be burned up." (It was just about sundown that Scar- 
Face met the black man.) The black man advised him to travel only at 
night. 



* The account of the woman who married a star as the result of a wish occurs in the mythol- 
ogy of many tribes. Its general distribution having been staled in the traditions of the Arapaho 
^Dorsey and Kroeber, on. cit.. p. 338). This version agrees fairly well with the Dalcota 
rendermg recorded by Riggs, op. cIt., p. 83. 



62 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Now Scar-Face went on towards the place where the Sun lived. Pres- 
ently he saw a young man standing alone. The young man called to Scar- 
Face, **\\Tiere are you going?*' "I am going to the Sun," said Scar-Face. 
"Oh!" said the young man. **Sun is ifiy father, this is his house." (This 
young man was Morning Star.) **My father is not a good* man. He is 
not at home now, but when he comes in the morning he will surely kill you. 
However, I will talk with my mother, who is a good woman and will treat 
you kindly." Then Morning Star took Scar-Face up to his father's lodge, 
and addressed his mother, saying ** Mother, I have brought a strange young" 
man here. I wish him for a companion. He has come a long way to find 
us, and I wish you would take pity on him, that I may enjoy his company."^ 
"Well," said his mother, "bring him in. We will talk to your father when 
he returns; but I fear we shall not be able to keep the young man." 

When Scar-Face was taken into the lodge, he saw on the ground a kind 
of earthen square, some cedar-brush, and buffalo-chips. This was the 
Sun's smudge-place. After a time the old woman, who was Moon, said to 
Scar- Face, "Is there an>thing that you especially care for?" "Yes," 
answered Scar-Face, "I want this scar taken from my face." "Well,"^ 
replied Moon, "it is about time for my husband to come in. If he take 
pity on you — well, we shall see." In a little while Moon said, "Now he is 
coming." Then she took Scar-Face to one side of the lodge and covered 
him up with cedar. Now Scar-Face began to feel very warm, because Sun 
was approaching. He began to shift about under the cedar, but Moon 
whispered that he must be quiet. So he lay very still, but became very hot 
as Sun came up. Finally Moon said to Scar- Face, " Now Sun is at the door." 
Sun looked into the lodge and said, "Oh, my, this lodge smells bad!'* 
"Yes," Moon replied. "Morning Star has a chum here." "Well," said 
Sun, "make a smudge with cedar." 

After this had been done. Sun entered the lodge. Now Scar-Face was 
very hot. Finally Sun said, "Where is that young man?" "We covered 
him up," said Moon. "Come," said Sun, "get up." Then Scar-Face 
came out from under the cedar. He could not look Sun in the face. As 
Sun looked upon him, he knew that this was a poor unfortunate boy, and 
took pity on him. The heat then grew gradually less. 

Now it seems that Morning Star was out on one of his journeys, and Sun 
waited for his return. When Morning Star came into the lodge and sat 
down in his usual place, Sun addressed him, saying, "My son, do you wish 
this young man for a companion?" Then Morning Star said that he did 
very much, as he wished for a companion to go about with him. He was 

J The idea is. that he was firm, and not moved by pity or sympathy. 



1908.] Wissler ami DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 63 

lonesome on his journeys. "Well," said Sun, "you must make a sweat- 
house." Then Morning Star went out and prepared a sweat-house. When 
all was ready, Sun went out. He had a disk of metal at the back of his 
head. This disk looked like brass. Then Sun went into the sweat-house 
and began to wipe off the metal disk. Then he brought Morning Star and 
Scar-Face into the sweat-house. When they were in, the covers were closed 
down. At last, when all was ready, the covers were raised and the light let 
in. The two boys now looked alike. 

Now, Moon came out, and Sun said to her, "Which is Morning Star?'* 
Moon looked at them for a moment, then pointed at one; but she made a 
mistake, for she pointed at Scar-Face. "Oh!" said Sun "you are a foolish 
woman! This is the star you mistook for Morning Star. After this, his 
name shall be The-one-you-took-for-Moming Star." 

Now Scar-Face staid with his new companion at Sun's house. Sun told 
him that he could go anj'where in the sky-land except straight west or 
straight down: he could go in any other direction. One morning, when 
Morning Star and Scar-Face were out together, Scar-Face said, "Let us 
go that way," pointing to the west. "No," replied Morning Star. "It is 
dangerous. My father said we must not go there." "Oh," said Scar-Face, 
"let us go anvway." Morning Star refused, but at the fourth request he 
said, "All right, let us go." So the two boys went in the forbidden direction, 
and presently they came to a place where there were seven large white 
geese. At once the birds attacked them. Morning Star ran, calling out, 
"Now you see." Scar-Face did not run, but killed the seven geese with 
his club, and ran home. Before he reached home, he overtook Morning 
Star, and said to him, "There is no danger now. I killed all of these birds." 

WTien they reached home. Morning Star told his mother what Scar-Face 
had done, but she said to Scar-Face, "I will not believe you until you get 
their heads." So the boys returned and took the heads of the seven birds. 
(This is supposed to be the origin of scalping, and no one will believe that 
an enemy is killed until his scalp is produced.) 

Some time after this, Scar-Face and Morning Star went out together as 
before, and Scar-Face said, " Let us go that way again." "No," said Morn- 
ing Star. " It will be more dangerous than before." Scar-Face insisted, and 
at the fourth request. Morning Star consented. As they were going along, 
they saw seven cranes. When the cranes saw the boys, they took after them. 
Morning Star ran as fast as he could. These cranes were terrible looking 
birds, and Scar-Face w^as badly frightened; but he took off his robe and 
held it in front of him. As the cranes came up, they began to peck at the 
robe, whereupon Scar-Face struck them one by one with his club. 

Now when Scar-Face reached home, Sun was there and asked where he 



64 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [V'ol. II, 

had been. Scar-Face said that he was walking along when some large 
cranes took after him, and that he had killed them all with his club. " Oh I" 
said Sun, **I will not believe it until you have shown me their heads." So 
Scar-Face returned to the scene of his conflict, and brought away the heads 
of the cranes. When Sun saw the heads, he believed him. Sun was greatly 
pleased at the courage of Scar-Face, and brought out a bundle. "Here," 
said he, **are some clothes for you, — a shirt and leggings. These I give 
you because you have killed some very dangerous and troublesome birds." 
Then Sun took up the leggings, and painted seven black stripes on them, 
saying, " I make these here as a sign that you killed enemies. All your people 
shall wear black stripes on their leggings when they kill enemies." Then 
Sun sang some songs which were to go with the clothes. 

After a time, Scar-Face said to Sun, "Now I should like to return to mv 
people. I have been here long enough." "All right," said Sun. "You 
may go." Then Sun took Scar-Face out, put a hoop or ring of cedar around 
his head, and, as soon as the hoop was on, Scar-Face found that he could 
see down to his people. "Now," said Sun, "shut your eyes." Scar-Face 
shut his eyes. WTien he opened them, he found himself down by the camp 
of his people. Now in the camp at that time there were some Indians who 
were playing at the wheel-and-arrow game; and one of the players, looking 
up, saw a black object coming down from the sky. He called out, "Oh, 
look at that black thing!" Then all stopped to look. They saw the object 
coming closer and closer. At last it reached the ground, some distance 
from them. It appeared to be a person. Then the old chum of Scar-Face, 
who was among the young men playing at the wheel-game, recognized 
Scar-Face, and rushed up to him; but, as he approached, Scar-Face said, 
"Go back! Go back! Do not touch me. You must get some willows, 
and make a sweat-house out here from the camp." 

Then the chum went back to the people of the camp and explained to 
them. A sweat-house was prepared. When all was ready, Scar-Face went 
into the sweat-house with the bundle cont-aining the suit of clothes given 
him by the Sun. When the bath had been taken, Scar-Face came out, 
carrying the bundle in his arm. He said to his chum, "My friend Sim gave 
me a suit of clothes: now I will give them to you." ^ 

Now this is why our people say that the sweat-house came from the sun. 



^ A different version is given by Grinnell, op. oit., p. 93. The writer heard this story a 
numl)er of times in approximately the form g:iven above. For an abstract witli comments by 
R. N. Wilson, see Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1897, p. 
789. This tale has not come to our notice among the collections from other tribes, though there 
are suggestions of it in Arikara and Pawnee renderings of the Woman who married a Star 
(Dorsey, op. cit., p. 45, 58) where we find the child destroying animal monsters. However, 
these incidents are about equally similar to the adventures of Blood Clot in our collection. 
The Micmac character, Oochigeaskw. seems to have nothing in common with the Scar-Face 
of the Blackfoot. See Rand. Micmac Legends, p. 101. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. . 65 

The medicine-lodge we make at the sun-dance is the lodge of the sun where 
Scar-Face had been. The weasel-tail suit which Scar-Face brought to his 
chum was just like those you see to-day. There was a disk on the back and 
one on the front. There were seven black stripes on the sleeves. These 
were for one group of seven birds that Scar-Face had killed. Sometimes 
the feet of these birds are painted on the shirt. The seven bands on the 
leggings are for the seven other birds that Scar-Face killed. Scar-Face 
directed that only such persons as performed great deeds were to be allowed 
to wear such a suit. After a time Scar-Face went back and became a star. 



(6). Version by a Piegan Woman, 

There was once a poor young man who wished to marry a girl of the 
camp; but every time he approached her she drove him away with contempt. 
So he left the camp and went out by himself, looking for power. He had a 
scar on his face, and when the girl refused him she said that she would not 
marry him until the scar was taken off his face. Now, as the young man was 
wandering about, he came to the place where the Sun Uved. Here he saw 
some swans, who at once attacked him, but he killed them. This boy's 
name was Scar-Face. Just as he had killed the birds, he looked up and saw 
a fine young man. "Oh!" said the young man, "how did you manage to 
kill those birds ? They are very dangerous, and have killed many people." 
" Oh," said Scar-Face, "it was no trouble for me : it was very easy." * * Well," 
said the stranger, "I am Morning Star. I invite you to come to our house." 

Then Scar-Face went with Morning Star towards Sun's house; but, as 
they approached. Morning Star said, "You stay outside." Then Morning 
Star went into the house, and, as he did so. Sun said, "My, something smells 
badl" Then Morning Star explained that he had found and brought home 
a young man who had killed the dangerous birds. He begged Sun to per- 
mit the stranger to live with them. Finally Sun consented to this, and told 
Morning Star to bum incense over Scar-Face and make him tolerable. 
When Morning Star had done this, he brought Scar-Face into the lodge. 
Then Sun took Scar-Face and put him through the sweat-house four times. 
When he came out, Scar-Face looked exactly like Morning Star. His 
scar was entirely gone. 

"Now," said Sun to Scar-Face, "you are to go back to earth and take 
revenge on that woman who refused to marry you, I will make you a great 
medicine-man." So Sun gave Scar-Face a forked stick, and cedar for the 
smudge, and some feathers, and explained to him how to put up the medi- 
cine-lodge. Sun also told him to go to the Elk- Woman and get her bonnet 



66 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II , 

to use in the ceremony. The killing of the swans represents the taking of 
scalps from enemies, and that is why coups are counted at the sun-dance.^ 

5. Cuts-Wood. 

Once there was a very poor boy who was an orphan, and he went down 
to the side of a stream, where he sat and cried. He was very lonesome, 
and mourned over his hard lot. As his sister was now married, he had no 
relations in the world. Now Morning Star took pity upon him, and, chang- 
ing himself into a boy, came down. Morning Star came up, and said, 
"What are you crying for?" The poor boy said, **I am feeling very badly 
because I have no relatives. I am poor and hungry." "Well," said Morn- 
ing Star, "I will show you a way to get food. Finally you will become the 
leader of the camp. I will get another boy, then there will be three of us to 
play together." 

Morning Star went away, and soon returned with another poor boy. 
Then all went into the brush, where they began to play. Morning Star 
made a little sweat-house of one hundred willows. Then he made a medi- 
cine-woman's lodge. Then he went to the other side, and made a small 
sun-lodge. When this was complete, he dug a hole for the fire, and made 
the booth for the weather-dancers. Then, all being complete, they sang 
the medicine-lodge dance-songs. Then they went out to kill some birds 
and squirrels, and put them on top of the centre pole as offerings to the sun. 
Now the two poor boys did not know that their companion was the Morning 
Star. After they had played a while, he said, "I will go home and get some 
food for you." So he went into the brush, and came out with food. After 
this they played here every day, and the strange boy brought food for them. 
They did not know who it was. The boys learned the play, and spent 
most of their time at it. 

One day, as the brother-in-law of the orphan was sitting in his lodge, 
he said to his wife, "I wonder how it is with that little brother of yours. 
We never see him eat an}thing, and he is out from the camp the whole day. 
We must watch him. There is something mysterious here." So the next 
day the brother-in-law went to the top of a hill overlooking the camp to 
watch the orphan. He noticed that he had a companion, and that they 



1 Another narrative in our collection differs from the preceding versions in that Scar- Face 
went out and killed two cranes, after which the Sun gave him a buffalo-skin with hair frin^s to 
Indicate that he had killed an enemy. He also took the cranes' bills back with him to use m the 
sun-lodge as digging-sticks. It also stated that the Sun gave Scar-Face a flageolet with four 
holes, with which to charm the girl he wished to marry, telling him, that when this was played 
she would not be able to resist the temptation to join nim. 

For a discussion of a similar use oi the flageolet with origin myths, see Wissler, Journal of 
American Folk- Lore. Vol. 18, pp. 262-4; also an Arikara myth, Dorsey, op. cit., p. 188. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU^ Blackfoot Mythology, 67 

went into the brush at a certain place. Then he stole quietly to the place 
and saw that there were three boys. He heard them singing, and saw the 
small medicine-lodge. Then he went quietly home and meditated. After 
a while he invited some of the head men into his lodge, told them what he 
had seen, and suggested that they all go out at night to look at the place 
where the boys played. They all saw it, and wondered much. However, 
they said nothing about it, for it appeared to be medicine. 

One day after the orphan-boy had grown up, his sister and his uncle 
advised him to make up that play; but the young man said, "It is powerful 
and medicine. I cannot make up a big one." They kept on talking to him, 
however, until he said, "Well, I will make it up; but my sister must be the 
woman to take a place in it, and she must make a confession." Then his 
sister asked him w^hat kind of a confession she must make. He explained 
that in the first place she must have led a good life, not guilty of stealing, etc., 
and that if any man not her husband had accosted her to invite her to commit 
adultery with him, she must tell all of the detaik in the presence of the 
people; but if at any time she had been so accosted, and yielded to the 
temptation, she could neither make the confession, nor take part in the 
ceremony. His sister said that she had never made a mistake or done any 
great wrong in her life, and that she could make the confession. Then the 
orphan-boy promised her -that she could go ahead and give the medicine- 
lodge, after which everybody would live long and be happy. Also the sun 
and moon would heed her prayers. 

Now at this time the Indians of the camp had a buffalo-drive, and col- 
lected a hundred and fifty tongues. The orphan requested an old woman 
to get these tongues, and invite all the young married women to come to her 
lodge, but that only those should accept the in\itation who had been true 
to their marriage- vows. When all these women were assembled, the orphan 
told them that they must confess, and that if they kept anything back their 
relations would die off. He told them that they had been invited there to 
slice all the buffalo-tongues, and that if, in slicing them, any one should 
cut a hole in a slice, or cut her fingers, it was a sign that she had made a 
mistake in her life, and had lied in making the confession. Then he painted 
one tongue black, and gave it to his sister. She sliced it. She did not cut 
it or her fingers. Then the other women sliced the remaining tongues and 
everyone had good luck. After this they put up the centre pole in the sun- 
lodge and did everything as they do now. After the sun-dance was over, 
the orphan went on the war-path. Now the next season, another woman 
in the camp wanted to make the medicine-lodge. So she got the tongues 
and did everything as before; and after the sun-dance was over, the orphan 
'went on the war-path again. Every time he went on the war-path, he 



68 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11, 

cut a stick and painted it black. He left these with his sister, asking 
her to watch these counting-sticks. (This is the way he got the name of 
Cuts-Wood.) 

One time after the sun-dance, while Cuts- Wood was out on the war-path, 
his sister noticed that one of the sticks was missing. Then she knew that 
something was wrong. So she went over to the lodge of the woman who 
gave the last sun-dance and said to her, "You must be a bad woman, because 
one of the sticks is gone." The sister laid the blame on this woman. After 
a while a war-party came to the top of the hill. The people watching saw 
them throw a robe away. Then the sister began to cn% and when the 
war-party came in, the people heard that Cuts- Wood had been killed. 

6. The Seven Stars. 

Once there was a young woman with many suitors; but she refused to 
marry. She had seven brothers and one little sister. Their mother had 
been dead many years and they had no relatives, but lived alone with their 
father. Every day the six brothers went out hunting with their father. It 
seems that the young woman had a bear for her lover, and, as she did not 
want any one to know this, she would meet him when she went out after 
wood. She always went after wood as soon as her father and brothers went 
out to hunt, leaving her little sister alone in the lodge. As soon as she was 
out of sight in the brush, she would run to the place where the bear lived. 

As the Uttle sister grew older, she began to be curious as to why her 
older sister spent so much time getting wood. So one day she followed her. 
She saw the young woman meet the bear and saw that they w^ere lovers. 
When she found this out, she ran home as quickly as she could, and when 
her father returned she told him what she had seen. WTien he heard the 
story he said, **So, my elder daughter has a bear for a husband. Now I 
know why she does not want to marry." Then he went about the camp, 
telling all his people that they had a bear for a brother-in-law, and that he 
wished all the men to go out with him to kill this bear. So they went, found 
the bear, and killed him. 

When the young woman found out what had been done, and that her 
little sister had told on her, she was very angry. She scolded her little sister 
vigorously, then ordered her to go out to the dead bear, and bring some 
flesh from his paws. The little sister began to cry, and said the was afraid 
to go out of the lodge, because a dog with young pups had tried to bite her. 
'*Oh, do not be afraid!" said the young woman. ** I will paint your face 
like that of a bear, with black marks across the eyes and at the comers of 
the mouth; then no one will touch you." So she went for the meat. Now 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 69 

the older sister was a powerful medicine- woman. She could tan hides in a 
new way. She could take up a hide, strike it four times with her skin- 
scraper and it would be tanned. 

The little sister had a younger brother that she carried on her back. 
As their mother was dead, she took care of him. One day the Uttle sister 
said to the older sister, "Now you be a bear and we will go out into the 
brush to play." The older sister agreed to this, but said, "Little sister, 
you must not touch me over my kidneys." So the big sister acted as a 
bear, and they played in the brush. While they were playing, the little 
sister forgot what she had been told, and touched her older sister in the 
wrong place. At once she turned into a real bear, ran into the camp, and 
killed many of the people. After she had killed a large number, she turned 
back into her former self. Now, when the little sister saw the older run 
away as a real bear, she became frightened, took up her Uttle brother, and 
ran into their lodge. Here they waited, badly frightened, but were very 
glad to see their older sister return after a time as her true self. 

Now the older brothers were out hunting, as usual. As the little sister 
was going down for water with her little brother on her back, she met her 
six brothers returning. The brothers noted how quiet and deserted the 
camp seemed to be. So they said to their little sister, "Where are all our 
people?" Then the little sister explained how she and her sister were 
playing, when the elder turned into a bear, ran through the camp, and 
killed many people. She told her brothers that they were in great danger, 
as their sister would surely kill them when they came home. So the six 
brothers decided to go into the brush. One of them had killed a jack-rabbit. 
He said to the little sister, "You take this rabbit home with you. When it 
is dark, we will scatter prickly-pears all around the lodge, except in one place. 
When you come out, you must look for that place, and pass through." 

When the Uttle sister came back to the lodge, the elder sister said, "Where 
have you been all this time?" "Oh, my little brother mussed himself and 
I had to clean him," repHed the little sister. "Where did you get that 
rabbit?" she asked. "I killed it with a sharp stick," said the little sister. 
"That is a Ue. Let me see you do it," said the older sister. Then the 
Uttle sister took up a stick lying near her, threw it at the rabbit, and it stuck 
in the wound in his body. "Well, all right," said the elder sister. Then 
the Uttle sister dressed the rabbit and cooked it. She offered some of it to 
her older sister, but it was refused: so the little sister and her brother ate 
aU of it. When the elder sister saw that the rabbit had all been eaten, she 
became very angry, and said, "Now I have a mind to kiU you." So the 
little sister arose quickly, took her little brother on her back, and said, "I 
am going out to look for wood." As she went out, she followed the narrow 



70 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. f\^ol. II, 

trail through the pricklv-pears and met her six brothers in the brush. Then 
they decided to leave the country, and started off as fast as they could go. 

The older sister, being a pow:erful medicine-woman, knew at once what 
they were doing. She became ven' angry and turned herself into a bear 
to pursue them. Soon she was about to overtake them, when one of the 
boys tried his power. He took a little water in the hollow of his hand and 
sprinkled it around. At once it became a great lake between them and the 
bear. Then the children hurried on while the bear went around. After 
a while the bear caught up with them again, when another brother threw a 
porcupine-tail [a hairbrush] on the ground. This became a great thicket; 
but the bear forced its way through, and again overtook the children.* 
This time they all climbed a high tree. The bear came to the foot of the 
tree, and, looking up at them, said, "Now I shall kill you all." So she 
took a stick from the ground, threw it into the tree and knocked down four 
of the brothers. \Miile she was doing this, a little bird flew around the 
tree, calling out to the children, '* Shoot her in the head! Shoot her in the 
head!" Then one of the boys shot an arrow into the head of the bear, and 
at once she fell dead. Then they came down from the tree. 

Now the four brothers were dead. The little brother took an arrow, 
shot it straight up into the air, and when it fell one of the dead brothers came 
to life. This he repeated until all w^re alive again. Then they held a 
council, and said to each other, "WTiere shall we go? Our people have all 
been killed, and we are a long way from home. We have no relatives Uving 
in the world." Finally they decided that they preferred to live in the sky. 
Then the little brother said, **Shut your eyes." As they did so, they all 
went up. Now you can see them every night. The little brother is the 
North Star ( ?). The six brothers and the little sister are seen in the Great 
Dipper. The little sister and the eldest brother are in a line with the North 
Star, the little sister being nearest it because she used to carry her little 
brother on her back. I'he other brothers are arranged in order of their 
age, beginning with the eldest. This is how the seven stars [Ursa major] 
came to be.^ 



1 Traditions of the Skldi Pawnee, p. 115. 

2 For another v^-rsion of this narrative, see The Ainerioan Antiquarian, Vol. XV, pp. 200- 
203. In this case the incident of the hcar-lover doe.s not occur. Tlie writer has heard several 
versions, and that gi\ t-n here is the usual form ilioutrh in some renderings the seven brothers 
became Ursa major. For simihir talcs in whole or in part, see Dorsey and Kroeber's Arapaho, 
op. cit., pp. ir>2. 227, and 2;j.S: Simms, Crow, op. cit.. p. 312; J. O. Dorsey, Cegiha, op. cit., p. 292; 
Jones, lox Texts, p. 161; Krotbcr. Gros Ventre, op. cit. p. 108. It appears that the Black- 
foot rendering combines two incidents often found separated in other parts of the continent, 
the woman witli a bear-lover and the pursuit of childivii who become stars though both occur 
na Dakota myth, <,Jouriuil ol American Fulk-Lore. Vol. XX, p. 195). 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 71 

7. The Bunched Stars. 

In a camp of our people there was a family of six boys. Their parents 
were very poor. Every spring the people went out to hunt for buffalo. At 
this time of the year, the buffalo-calves are red, and their skins are much 
desired for children's robes. Now as the parents of these children were very 
poor, and not able to do much hunting, these boys had to wear brown robes 
or those made of old buffalo-skins. As the children grew up, they were 
constantly reminded of the fact that they had no red robes. The other 
children of the camp sometimes made fun of them because of this. So one 
day one of the boys said to his brothers, "Why is it that we never get any red 
robes ? If we do not get any next spring, let us leave the camp and go up 
into the sky." Then the boys went out to a lonely place to talk the matter 
over. Finally they agreed that, if they did not get red robes in the following 
spring, they would go up to the sky country. The spring hunting-season 
passed, but no red robes came to the boys. Then the oldest brother said, 
"Now I shall take you all up to the sky." The fourth brother said, "Let us 
also take all the water away from the people, because they have been bad 
to us." 

Then the oldest brother took some weasel-hair and placed a little on 
the backs of his brothers. Then he took another bunch of hair, put it first 
into his mouth, then rubbed it on his palm. " Now shut your eyes," he said. 
Then he blew the weasel-hair up, and, when the brothers opened their eyes, 
they foimd themselves in the house of the Sun and Moon. The Sun, who 
was an old man, and the Moon, who was his wife, said, "Why have you 
come?" "We left the earth," said the oldest brother, *' because the people 
never gave us red robes. All the other children had red robes to wear, 
but we had only brown ones. So we have come to you for help." "Well," 
said the Sun, "what do you want?" The fourth brother said, "We should 
like to have all of the water taken away from the people for seven days." 
Now the Sun made no answ er to this ; but the ^loon took pity on the poor 
boys and said, "I will help you; but you must stay in the sky." The Moon 
pitied the boys so much that she cried. She asked the Sun to aid her in 
taking away the water from the people; but the Sun made no answer. She 
asked him seven times. At last he promised to aid her. 

Now the next day on the earth was very hot. The water in the streams 
and lakes boiled, and in a short time it all evaporated. The next night was 
very warm and the moonlight strong. When the water was gone, the people 
in the camp said, "Let us take two dogs with us out to the river-bed." 
When they came to the bank of the river, the two dogs began to dig a hole in 
the side of the bank. When they had dug a long time, water came out of the 



72 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Naiural History, [Vol. II , 

hole like a spring. This is the way springs were made. Even to this day, 
all the people have great respect for their dogs because of this. The days 
were so hot that the people were forced to dig holes into the hills and crawl 
into them. They would have died, if they had remained on top of the 
ground. When the water in the springs gave out, the dogs made other 
springs. Now the leader of the dogs was a medicine-dog. He was old 
and white. On the seventh day, the dogs began to how^l and look at the 
sky. The leader of the dogs was praying to the Sun and the Moon. He 
explained to the Sun and Moon why it was that the boys got no red robes. 
He asked them to take pity on the dogs below. (This is why dogs some- 
times howl at the moon.) On the eighth day the Sun and Moon gave the 
people rain. It was a great rain, and it rained for a long time. 

The six boys remained in the sky, where they may be seen every night. 
They are the Bunched Stars [Pleiades].* 

8. The Moon-Woman.' 

Once there was a woman with two children. She had a black birth- 
mark on the calf of her leg. One day the woman disappeared, and she 
could not be found anywhere. After a time, her husband married again. 
Now the woman had been enticed away by a man who Uved in the moon. 
This man had met her as she was going for wood. After they had lived in 
the moon a while, the woman said to her new husband, "I am anxious to 
see my children again. Suppose we go down and \isit them." So the 
woman disguised herself in men's clothing and they both went to her former 
husband's lodge. They told him that they were Cree Indians, but that they 
could speak Piegan. The father and the two children took the strange 
men into the lodge and treated them kindly. The smaller of the two 
strangers seemed much interested in the children, kissed them, played with 
them, etc. The father of the children took notice of this and grew suspicious. 
At night, when it came time to go to bed, he also noticed that one was very 
slow and cautious in taking off his leggings. The next day, when both of 
the strangers were out of the lodge, one of the children said, "Father, that 
young man has teeth and eyes like those of my mother. Somehow he makes 
me think of mother." The father said to himself, '*I believe that stranger 
is my former wife in disguise. I shall watch my chance and find out if this 
is true." 



1 See American Antiquarian, Vol. XV, p. 149, for another version. 

2 While this is not strictly a star myth, it may be considered as such since it is sometimes 
said that the husband of the woman was a star. In some versions the woman went up into 
the sky and became the moon. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 73 

The father now set about discovering the identity of the strangers. He 
began to make arrows for himself, and gave some of the material to each of 
the strangers. As he did so, the taller stranger said, "My friend is not 
good at making arrows." But the father insisted that they all make arrows, 
which they did. He noticed that the arrows made by the smaller stranger 
were very poor indeed. This stranger also kept an otter-skin drawn closely 
over his forehead, and in eating kept his mouth closed as much as possible. 
The next night the father kept the strangers up very late, telling them stories 
so that they might get very sleepy, and sleep so soundly that he could look 
at their legs without waking them, and so discover whether or not one of 
them had the black birth-mark of his former wife. When they were all 
sound asleep, he took a stick, put some grass and bark around the end, 
stuck it into the fire, and, using it as a torch, cautiously raised the robe 
covering the smaller stranger, and discovered the familiar mark on the leg. 
He also saw that her breasts were bound down to make her look Uke a man. 
Then he put out the light, for he knew that the stranger was really his 
former wife. 

When morning came he invited the strangers to get up and eat; but 
before doing so he directed his children and their stepmother to go outside 
of the lodge. When the strangers arose, he stood at the door with a white 
rock knife in his hand, and informed them of his discovery. He addressed 
his former wife, upbraiding her for her conduct, and her impertinence in 
returning to his lodge in disguise. "Now," he said, "I shall kill you both; 
for you cannot get out except through the top of the lodge." Then the 
woman began to plead for her Ufe, but to no purpose. Just as the angry 
husband was about to execute this threat, the strange man, with the woman 
following, rushed out through the smoke-hole like shooting-stars. As they 
passed out, the man threw his rock knife at the woman, striking one of her 
legs and cutting it ofF.^ 

The woman and her new husband went up in the sky to live in the moon 
as before, and this is why the woman we now see in the moon has but one leg. 



' See Henry and Thompson's Journal, op. clt., p. 528. 



74 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



III. RITUALISTIC ORIGINS. 

1. The Beaver-Medicine. 
(a). Northern Black foot Version, 

There was a man who always went out hunting for deer and antelope. 
He was camping near a big lake fringed ^-ith bushes. He had two wives. 
One day the older took a pail to fetch water. She saw a young man, Beaver, 
who invited her to his tent. She went. When the man returned, he asked 
his younger wife for the older one's whereabouts. "I don't know. She 
went to the lake for water. When I looked for her, I could not see her trail, 
but only saw the pail." The man was sad, thinking his wife had gone to 
another camp. He went to another camp, but failed to find her, and 
returned. Then, after a night's sleep, he went to hunt early in the morning. 
The younger woman went for water. She saw the older wife rising from the 
water. The women kissed each other. The older said, "If my husband 
wishes, I will obtain for him the beaver-bundle which Beaver will give him 
for taking me away. He must bum sweet grass. All the creatures in the 
w^ater will come to his tent. He is to prepare a feast for them. Then he 
is to pray to the Sun, Moon, and Morning-Star, begging them to come to 
him also." The man did as he was bid. The Sun and Moon came down 
and sat in this order: — 

Sim Man Moon Woman 

Then the Sun burnt sweet-grass, and sang. He said to the man, " Give 
me some eagle-tail feathers." These were in payment for the first ritual 
5ong. Then the Sun sang again and asked the man for hawk-tail feathers. 
The third time he sang for black-fox hides. The fourth time he said, 
*'01d man wants black-coyote skins." The man's second wife fed the visi- 
tors. Then they untied the beaver-bundle. Sun took paint, rubbed it on his 
hands, gave it to the man, and the man prayed to Sun for long life. The 
Sun sang all night, gi^ing the songs to the man. Before sunrise, he left to 
rise in the east. After four nights' singing, the beaver-bundle was given to 
the man. The Sun said, ** Your people shall always have the beaver-bundle. 
Every spring, when the leaves are coming out, you shall put seed [tobacco] 
in the ground, and dance. Make a vessel of buffalo-hide. At sunset go 
into a large tent and feed all the Indians. You, the owner of the beaver- 
bundle, and the old men shall dance [tobacco-seed dance]." 

After the feast the man was told to take a stick, dig a hole in the ground 
and insert the seed, to make the oblong [altar], put dry sticks in th^ centre 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfooi Mythology. 75 

and burn them. The next morning he was to rake the ashes, and have 
the Uttle boys stand there and pray to the Sun and the beaver-bundle man to 
let the tobacco-seeds grow. After a month and a half, he was to send a 
young man with sweet-grass to look at the tobacco: the youth must bum the 
sweet-grass in each corner of the oblong, take out some tobacco and return 
it to the owner of the bundle. No one was allowed to look before. The 
next morning all the old men were summoned, the tobacco w^as dried and 
mixed with kinnikinnick. All prayed, then smoked. Each old man was 
to have his own tobacco. The bundle-owner examined the seeds, saying, 
**You have a good crop" or **you have only a small crop." The man who 
had the smallest grieved.^ 

(6). Blood Version. 

You say you have heard the story of Scabbv-Round-Robe; but he did 
not first start the beaver-medicine, because it is said in the story that there 
was such a medicine before his time. The story I now tell you is about the 
origin of the beaver-medicine. 

Once there was a man and his wife camping alone on the shore of a 
small lake. This man was a great hunter, and had In his lodge the skins of 
almost every kind of bird and animal. Among them was the skin of a white 
buffalo. As he was always hunting, his wife was often left alone. One 
day a Beaver came out of the water and made love to her. This went on 
for some time, until finally she went away with the Beaver to his home 
in the water. Now when the man came home, he looked all about for his 
wife, but could not find her anv-where. As he was walking along the shore 
of the lake, he saw her trail going down into the water. Now he knew what 
had happened. He did not break camp, but continued his hunting. After 
four days, the woman came up out of the water and returned to her lodge. 
She was already heavy with child. When her husband returned that 
evening, he found her in her usual place and she told him all that had 
occurred. 

In the course of time the woman gave birth to a beaver. To keep it 
from dying, she put it in a bowl of water which she kept at the head of her 
bed. In the evening her husband came in as usual, and after a while, hear- 
ing something splashing in water, he said, *'What is that?" Then the 
woman explained to him that she had given birth to a beaver. She brought 
him the bowl. He took out the little beaver, looked at it and put it back. 
He said nothing. As time went on he became very fond of the young 
beaver and played with him every evening. 



1 He<orded by Dr. R. H. Lowie. 



76 Anthropologiccd Papers American Museum of Natural History. [VoL II, 

Now the Beaver down in the water knew everything that was going on 
in the lodge. He knew that the man was kind to the young beaver and so 
was not angry with him. He took pity on the man. Then the father of 
the young beaver resolved to give the man some of his medicine-songs in 
exchange for the skins of birds and animals the man had in his lodge. So 
one day, when the woman went down to the lake for w^ater, the Beaver came 
out and instructed her to request of her husband, that whatever he [the 
Beaver] should ask in his songs, that should be done. He also stated 
the time at which he would come to the lodge to be received by her husband. 

At the appointed time the Beaver came out of the lake and appeared 
before the lodge, but, before he entered, requested that the lodge be purified 
[a smudge]. Then he entered. They smoked. After a while the Beaver 
began to sing a song in which he asked for the skin of a certain bird. When 
he had finished, the man arose and gave the bird-skin to him. Then the 
Beaver sang another song, in which he asked for the skin of another bird, 
which was given him. Thus he went on until he secured all the skins in the 
man's lodge. In this way the man learned all the songs that belonged to 
the beaver-medicine and also the skins of the animals to which the songs 
belonged. 

After this the man got together all the different kinds of bird and animal 
skins taken by the Beaver, made them up into a bundle, and kept the 
beaver-medicine. 

(c). North Piegan Version. 

It was about a hundred years ago a man pitched his camp away from 
the other people. He was somew^here in the vicinity of St. Mary's Lake. 
Now the man and his wife went out in different ways. They separated. 
As the woman was going along, she came to the place where Beavers were 
at work. The Beavers came out and invited her down to their lodge. When 
the man came home that night, he missed his wife and set out to find her. 
At last he discovered her tracks leading down into the water at the place 
where the Beavers were at work. Now he watched every day for her to 
appear. Every night when he was in the lodge he could hear dancing and 
singing. He could only hear it when inside of the lodge, but whenever he 
went outside he ceased to hear it. One evening when he came back from 
hunting, he found his wife at home in the lodge. She was burning incense. 
She had cleared a small spot back of the fire for this purpose. The man 
saw a large bundle at the back of the lodge, and as he looked at it the woman 
said, **That was given by the Beavers." 

Now that night, when the man was sleeping, he dreamed about the 
Beavers. In his dream he saw the Beavers come into his lodge, and one of 



1908.] Wissler and LhivaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 77 

the Beavers addressed him, sa\ing, '* Now, my brother, you have the bundle 
and the medicine things; so you must learn the songs and how to paint." 
Then the Beavers taught him the songs, how to open the bundle,^ how to 
paint, etc. All the directions for the ceremony were given by the Beavers 
at this time. This was just as you will see it now, because we are about to 
open this bundle. 

There was also another dream about this medicine. In this dream 
it was explained that the only women who can take part in the medicine- 
lodge are those who have been true to their husbands. In this dream a 
head-dress was given for the woman who makes a vow to give the sun-dance. 
This was dreamed by the same man who received the medicine-bundle 
from the Beaver. Afterwards he had another dream, in which the elk gave 
him a robe. This robe was to be used by the woman who gave the sun- 
dance. Now, after this man had the dream about the elk, he took the robe 
and gave it to his wife, beause she now had the head-dress that is worn in the 
sun-dance. She took the robe and wrapped it around the bundle in which 
the head-dress was kept. 

Tobacco is kept in the beaver-medicine bundle, and this tobacco must 
be planted every year. The woman who plants the tobacco puts on the 
head-dress and carries a digging-stick. Songs are sung when the tobacco 
b planted. This is the way to raise the tobacco to be used in the beaver- 
medicine. 

Now we must begin, and, if you watch, you will see w hat the beaver- 
medicine is. 

. (d) Piegan Version. 

Once an old woman and her little son were crossing the Yellowstone 
River when the waters were very high. They had made a raft with the 
skin covering of a lodge. The little boy was sitting on this raft and the 
old woman was swimming along at the side, holding by one hand. The raft 
itself was tied to the horse's tail by a rope. The husband of the woman 
was guiding the horse. The current was so swift that the rope broke and 
the raft began to float down stream. The man reached the shore and 
climbed up on the bank, following the floating raft. At last the woman 
tried to climb upon the raft, but it filled and sank. Then the man went on 
to the other Indians, and told them that the woman and the boy had been 
drowned in crossing the stream. Two da\^ after this, he came back to look 
for the bodies, but found the old woman and the boy sitting upon the bank. 
They had been under water for two days. The old woman said that when 

1 To open the bundle requires an elaborate ceremony. This narrative was given as a pre- 
lude to the opening of this ceremony. 



78 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

they sank the Beaver pulled them into his lodge. When they got into the 
lodge, they were safe. When they looked around, they saw a great many 
other animals there. Then the Otter said, **Here is a woman. Let us kill 
her and eat her." But the Beaver said, *'No, this is a poor woman and a 
boy that were drowning. I took pity on them and brought them here." 
*'Well," said the Otter, "they are people; they deserve to die. Let us kill 
them." So they argued for a long time; but at last the Beaver prevailed 
over all the other animals, and thus saved the lives of the woman and her 
child. This shows that the Beaver had some sort of power, at least power 
to save people. Then the Beaver told the woman that she would have great 
power, that she would live long, and that he would give her some songs. 
Now when this woman returned to her people, she started the Crow-water 
medicine. She is still li\ing among the Crows and the first beaver-skin that 
came into her hands she kept for medicine. 

Now when the man came up and found the old woman and the boy on 
the bank, he was going to shake hands with her; but she told him not to 
come near her, that first he must make four sweat-houses. When all was 
ready, the woman entered the first sweat-house. When she came out, 
they saw in it a great deal of sand and lake-grass. Each time the woman 
went through a sweat-house, they found sand and lake-grass in it. Thus 
the sweat-houses were to get the sand out of her body. 

2. Otter-Woman. 

It was in the north. Very far north, at a place called The-Place-to-fall- 
off-without-Difficulty. Some people were camped there. Among them was 
Chief-Level-Head, (other name, Buffalo-Lodge-Pole) who was trapping 
beaver. This man was a great hunter and trapper. He spent most of his 
time in this way. He had camped there before. His relatives wanted him 
to stay with them, but he would not; and, taking his wife, he went away 
and camped by himself. His wife was Otter- Woman. One day he went 
out to hunt, and, on reaching camp with his meat on two dog-travois, he 
called his wife to come out and get the meat. No one came. Then he 
called several times, but received no answer. Then he, himself, took off 
the meat, untied the dogs, and went to look for her. As he went along he 
said, **I wonder if an^-thing could have happened to her. Did she go off 
with some young man? Did she get scared and run away, or did she get 
lonesome and go back to the camp?" All this time he was tracking her 
along. At last he came to the place where she got water, and there he found 
her robe. There also was the pail made of paunch, her wooden cup, and 
bundle of wood. Now he knew what had happened. He saw tracks going 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 79 

down to the water. It w^as very deep. The man went into the water to- 
follow the tracks, but lost them. He saw a beaver's house. It was a big 
house. Then he made a raft of four poles and followed up the tracks in 
clear water. He saw that these tracks led up to the beaver house. Then 
he knew for sure what had happened. Then he went home and cried. He 
made up his mind that the Beaver had run off with the woman; but he still 
cried and cried. He was there seven days, crying all the time. On the 
seventh day he thought to himself, "To-morrow I will go home''; but thai 
night he cried as before. But a man came to him, saying, ** I have been sent 
to you. You are to fix up a lodge, for your wife is coming to-morrow. 
You must not look out when she comes." He heard the man sing, '*Our 
walking is powerful, the man says," etc. '*My old home I am looking for 
it. It is powerful." (This means that the woman looked for her home.) 
Now while the woman was coming up, the strange man sang many such 
songs. These are the beaver-songs. When the woman came out of the 
lake, she wore a medicine-bonnet, and some head men [beavers] came out 
with her to help with the songs and to transfer the bundle. This party 
went into the lodge and transferred the bundle and the medicine-bonnet to 
the woman and her husband. The tobacco-plant and everything else was^ 
given with it. It took seven days to transfer the medicine. 

Then the man and his wife went home, and the next summer he went out 
and planted his tobacco-seeds as the Beavers had directed. That year it 
grew well. Then he transferred the bundle to another man, and this man 
called in a friend to help him get it. 

"Now it has boiled over." ^ 

3. Tobacco-Seeds and Beaver-Medicine. 

Once there were some men who owned a beaver-bundle. One of them 
went away on a journey and requested that the others await his return before 
planting the tol^acco-seed. They did not wait. So when he returned he 
was very angry and aggrieved. He went out alone on the prairie, cr\dng to 
himself. At last a Lizard came up and asked him what the trouble was. 
When he told the Lizard what had happened, it promised to help him. It 
directed him to go into the woods. As he went along, he met a very old 
man. When he had explained his troubles to him, the old man called to- 
gether a great many quadrupeds and birds. These animals set to work to- 
prepare the ground for planting the seed. The Antelope and the Snow-bird 
offered to give him the power of their dung to make the plants grow. As 



^ This expression is often used to indicate the end of a narrative. 



80 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

they had no tobacco-seed, three birds volunteered to go to the sun for a 
supply. So they started oflf to the sky, and when the first cloud was reached, 
one of them gave out; but the cloud turned him yellow. When the next 
cloud was reached, another gave out; but he became red. The other bird 
went on alone until he finally reached the sun, and became black. This 
one brought down the seed. Now all the animals assembled, and proceeded 
to plant the new tobacco-seed. They sang many songs, and performed all 
the parts of the ceremony. When the seed was finally planted, they fenced 
in the plot with rocks and sticks, after which they all went away. The man 
now returned to his people with many new songs, and whenever he heard 
beaver-men singing, he would go into the lodge and sing his new songs, the 
number of which far surpassed the others. 

At the end of the season, when it was time for all the people to go out to 
gather their tobacco, it was found that the only tobacco growing was that 
planted by the animals. In every other plot the buffalo had trampled everj-- 
thing into the earth. The man gathered his tobacco and took it home. 
His friends were very much disappointed over the failure of their planting. 
After a time, he in\'ited them all to his lodge and gave them some of his 
tobacco. Then they transferred to him the other beaver-bundles and he 
put them together, so that now the tobacco-planting songs are a part of the 
beaver-medicine. 

4. Crow Indiax Water-Medfcixe. 

Once a Crow^ Indian had a son killed in war. He was in mourning: 
so he took his lodge into the mountains and camped there that he might 
have dreams in which power would be given him to revenge the death of his 
son. He slept in the mountains ten nights. At last as he was sleeping, he 
had a dream, and in this dream he heard drumming and singing. Then a 
man appeared and said, ''Come over here: there is dancing." So he fol- 
lowed the man. They came to a lodge in which there were many old men 
and women. There were eight men with drums. He also saw weasel- 
skins, skins of the mink and otter, a whistle, a smudge-stick, some wild 
turnip for the smudge, and some berry-soup in a kettle. One old woman 
had an otter-skin with a weasel-skin around it like a belt. So the man 
staid there, learned the songs which these people sang, and when he came 
back to his people he started the Crow-water-medicine. Since that time he 
has had other dreams: and the skins of the beaver, the muskrat, all kinds 
of birds, etc., with many songs for each, have been added. 

This medicine has great power. If any one wishes a horse, he calk in 
some of the Crow-water-medicine people. ITien they pray, sing, and dancfe. 



1908.] Wisaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 81 

The power of this medicine is such that after a while a man may come along 
and say, "I have had a bad dream. You must paint me, that the dream 
may not come true." Then he gives a horse as a fee. The medicine has 
power also in treating the sick. The people who have this medicine meet 
at regular times, — on Sundays and at the time of the new moon. They 
paint their faces with a broad red stripe across the forehead, and one across 
the mouth and cheeks. A rectangle of red is also painted on the back of 
each hand. Some wear plumes. 

5. SCABBY-RoUND-ROBE. 

In the olden times, when Indians danced, it was the custom for a woman 
who had a lover to dress in his clothes and dance before the people, telling 
what deeds she would do in war; it being understood, of course, that it was 
the man, her lover, who intended to do these deeds. 

Now there was in the camp a very poor young man named Scabby- 
Round-Robe, who had very few clothes, and who was in love with a young 
married woman. Her husband had another wife, but she was very old. 
He also had a bundle called the water-bundle [beaver-bundle]. One time 
when the women in the camp were about to dance, he said to the young 
wife, "Why do you not dance? Surely you must have a lover, almost 
every woman has one. Why do you not dress up, dance before the people, 
and show who he is?" He did this because he was jealous of the young 
wife. 

Scabby-Round-Robe always wore a strip of skin around his head with 
two magpie-feathers stuck up behind. His robe was very badly tanned and 
the comers had been cut off. That was the reason he was called Scabby- 
Round-Robe. He was very poor himself, but he had a chum who was very 
rich. Now one day he was out with his chum far from the camp. At this 
time the women were about to dance. When they began, there appeared 
among them the young woman wearing some of Scabby-Round-Robe's 
clothes. The people looking on said, "Who is that woman wearing those 
queer things?" Then some one called out, "Oh, those are Scabby-Round- 
Robe's clothes! That must be his girl." Then the people laughed and 
derided. Some time before this, Scabby-Round-Robe had been taken away 
by the Beavers, and had lived with them one whole winter. By this means 
he obtained some of their power. One day he said to the young woman, 
"If you ever do dance with the women, you must tell the people that when the 
waters are warm,^ you will go on the war-path and kill an enemy." 



In the spring of the j^ear. 



82 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Now, as the people were mocking, the young woman came forward and 
said, "Wait, I wish to speak." WTien they were quiet she said, "When 
the waters are warm, I shall go on the war-path and kill an enemy.'* 
Now the people laughed all the more at the thought of poor Scabby- 
Round-Robe going on the war-path and killing an enemy. WTiile 
Scabby-Round-Robe and his chum were walking along, they heard a great 
uproar in the camp. His chum said, "Let us go to see what is going on." 
They came up just in time to hear the chief and the people make fun of 
Scabby-Round-Robe. Scabby-Round-Robe was very much hurt and went 
home at once. He said to his chum, "I shall go out on the hills, and sleep 
and wander about until the waters are warm. Then I shall return." 

Now it happened that a Snake Indian had killed a Piegan; hence the 
people must go to war in the spring. So when spring came, nearly aU the 
men of the camp went out on the war-path. Scabby-Round-Robe and his 
chum followed along behind, out of sight. Scabby-Round-Robe always 
carried a stick he had from the Beavers. From time to time the war-party 
drove them back, but every time Scabby-Round- Robe and his chum would 
follow again. They were driven back repeatedly, but persisted in following. 
Finally it was reported to the chief that two boys were always following the 
scouts, upon which he gave orders that they should remain behind. At last 
the scouts reported that enemies were seen on the other side of a river, the 
waters of which were very high, and difficult to cross. So the Pi^an moved 
up to the edge of the stream and looked over at the hostile camp. Scabby- 
Round-Robe and his chum went up stream above the camp of their people. 
Scabby-Round-Robe said, "Now I shall kill a chief." He looked across 
the river and saw the chief of the Snakes talking to his people. Then he 
said to his chum, "You stay here upon the bank. I will cross over and 
bring a chief." Then he went into the water until it reached his arms, 
when he dived under, coming up in the middle of the stream. When he 
came up, his people saw him, and called out, "That is one of our people 
crossing!" Scabby- Round-Robe dived again, and came out near the 
opposite shore with his stick in his mouth. As he came up this time, the 
Snakes saw him; and their chief said, "I will go out and kill that fellow." 
So the chief waded out into the water with a long spear. Scabby-Round- 
Robe backed away until the water reached his breasts. Then he held the 
stick in front of him and sang a song. The chief approached and struck 
at him; but the spear stuck into the stick. Then Scabby-Round-Robe 
took the spear, killed the chief, took him by the hair, and dived. He came 
up in the middle of the stream, in plain view of his people, as if he meant 
to come ashore among them. Then he dived again, but came out at the 
place where his chum sat. He immediately scalped the chief, and gave his 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 83 

chum half the scalp, saving, **Take this quick, before the others get here." 
The whole camp rose up as quickly as they could, and began the race to 
count coup on the dead chief. 

Now the Piegan started home. 

The young woman who had danced for Scabby-Round-Robe was out 
in the brush picking rosebuds for soup, when a war-party was announced. 
A runner came into the camp and said, "Where is that girl who danced for 
Scabby-Round-Robe?" The people said, *'She is out in the brush picking 
rosebuds for soup." Then they called her. She at once threw down the 
rosebuds and ran out to meet Scabby-Round-Robe. WTien she met him, 
he kissed her and gave her the scalp for the woman's scalp-dance. After 
the war-party had come in, the husband of the woman, who was a chief, 
took Scabby-Round-Robe to his lodge, and said, "I will give you this lodge, 
the woman, and my bundle of beaver-medicine: they are all yours." So 
Scabby-Round-Robe lived with the woman. Afterwards he taught the 
people some of the things he had learned from the Beavers, and you will 
remember that in the beaver-songs, they often say that diving is safety.^ 

6. I'HE Elk-Woman. 
(a) Blood Version, 

This medicine-bonnet was given to a woman who was camping near the 
Mountains. One day while her husband was away she heard an Elk 
whistling in the woods. At another time when her husband was away, a 
man came to the lodge and asked her to go away with him. He told her 
that he was the Elk that she had heard, and that, if she would go away with 
him, he would give her some medicine. To this promise she finally con- 
sented and went with him into the brush, where he explained to her the 
whole ceremony.^ He told her all about the medicine-bonnet, calling in 
many animals to help give the woman some power. Among these was the 
Crane, who offered the use of his bill to dig the medicine-turnip. He said 
his bill was to be carried on the back like the bunch of feathers on his own 
neck. Then the Crane proceeded to dig with his bill, and as he did so he 
sang a song, **I wish to be on level ground." 

A robe made of elk-skin, used by the woman in the ceremony, is to repre- 
sent the Elk himself. The bunches of feathers placed around the bonnet 
are to represent the prongs of the horns. There are about six bunches in all. 

J Another version is given by Grinnell, op. cit., p, 117. Clark gives a brief abstract (Sign 
Language, p. 7n. 

2 A similar incident is given by the Arikara (Dorsey, op. cit., p. 127). 



84 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

In front is hung a doll with quill- work upon it. A white-rock arrowpoint 
and some ear-rings are hung on the side. There are also two little dolk 
tied on near the feathers. Weasel-tails hang do\\Ti by the side. Feathers 
of the owl are used in making up the bunches on the side of the bonnet, while 
behind is hung the skin of a woodpecker ( ?) and part of the tail of a >\'ildcat. 
There should also be part of the tail of a white buffalo tied on somewhere. 
All of these parts were contributed by the animals called together by the man 
who took the woman into the brush, and each of these animals sang a song 
as they gave them. The buffalo was there also, and gave its hoofs, which 
were tied to the end of the digging- stick. 

You vnll see all these things upon the medicine-bonnet; but the present 
one used by the Blood Indians is a little different from that used by the 
Piegan.^ 

(h) Piegan Version, 

You are asking me about the badger and the medicine-bonnet? Well, 
the badger-skin is used as a case in which to put the bonnet, but the badger- 
skin is a new addition to this. It was dreamed not so very long ago. This 
badger-skin should always be painted red, and it is necessary to go through 
a ceremony when it is painted. But now I must tell you about the bonnet. 

There was once an Elk who was deserted by his wife. When he found 
that she was gone, he went out to look for her, and finally saw her in the 
thick woods. He was very angry and wished to kill her: so he walked 
toward her singing a song. Now this was a medicine-song, and he intended 
that its power should kill his wife. He had great power. The ground 
was very hard; but at every step his feet sank deeper into it. Now his 
wife was frightened; but she had some power also. She began to sing a 
song, and as she did so she turned into a woman. In her new form she 
wore a medicine-bonnet, a robe of elk-hide over her shoulders, and elk- 
teeth on her wrists. The song that she sang when she became a woman 



was: 



"My wristlets are elk- teeth; 
They are powerful." 

TTien the woman moved toward a tree, moved her head as if hooking at 
the tree, and it almost fell. Now when the Elk saw what she was doing. 



1 By way of comment, the narrator said that the Elk did not teach the woman all that 
there was to be learned about it, but that later it was learned that the bonnet was to be used 
in making a vow, and was to be worn by virtuous women only. Once, after this woman had 
received the bonnet, the people were attacked by an enemy while they were camping in a 
ravine. The woman remembered the song, ** I want to be on level ground." She went up under 
the fire of the enemy, and, when out on tlie level plain, began to dig with a digging-stick while 
she sang this song. This gave her people power over their enemies, and saved them from 
destruction. 



1908.] Wis8ler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology, 85 

he stopped in great surprise at her power. He did not kill her as he had 
intended. 

This was Elk-Woman. In the sun-dance a tree or post is put up in the 
centre of the sun-lodge and the woman who wears the bonnet makes hooking 
motions at the pole, as did the Elk- Woman in the first part of the story. 

7. The Buffalo-Rock. 
(a). Piegan Version} 

Now listen. I suppose you are asking about the iniskim [buffalo-rock], 
about the way we first came to get it. At a place called Elbow-on-t he- 
Other-Side [in Canada] it was found. The woman who found it was very 
poor. Her name was Weasel- Woman, and her husband's name was Chief- 
Speaking. Well, now you will hear the true account. 

At a curved cut bank called the Place-of-the-Falling-oif-without-Excuse 
it was found. This woman was walking around there among fallen timber 
[logs]. Her people were all about to die of starvation. She had come out 
for wood, and was walking around picking up pieces of bark. Then she 
came to some berry-bushes on all sides of a log and began to pick white 
berries. Now she heard something singing. The first that she heard was 
"Ho-o-o-o!" as if some one were making the wing-like movement.^ Near 
her was a log pointing toward the setting sun. The singing was in the log. 
An iniskim was sitting in a broken- out place at the end on a bed of shedded 
buffalo-hair and sage-grass. She could just hear it sing. She stood with 
her head to one side, listening for a time. Then she began to pick berries 
again. Now she heard it: — 

"Yonder woman, you must take me. 
I am powerful. 

Yonder woman, you must take me, 
You must hear me. 
Where I sit is powerful." 

Now that is the way it sang to her. As she was walking towards the 
place from which the sound came, she saw that the object sitting in the 
broken place was the one that did it. Then it said, "Ky-ja, this is where it 
is singing." She did not know what kind of a thing it was. She thought 
that perhaps it was a mouse or a bird. As she slowly removed the shedded 



» Taken as a text by Dr. Clark Wissler. Tliis myth is the major part of the ritual for the 
iniskim and is in general a typical Blackfoot ritual. For a narrative of the origin of this ritual 
in the usual form of myths, see Grinnell, op. cit., p. 125. 

2 A ceremonial gesture said to symbolize a bird. See also p. 104. 



86 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

hair that covered the place, she saw it. It was a rock, a buffalo-rock. As 
she was standing over it, it said, "Do not take me yet. Go back and then 
walk slowly towards me." [It is now teaching her the songs and ceremonial 
procedure.] \Miile she was approaching, it sang a song for the woman. 

"A buffalo-rock, I am looking for the place where he is sitting. 
Now I have found him. [Takes it up.] 
He is powerful. 

A buffalo-rock, I have taken him up. 
He is powerful." 

This is the song when she went forward to take it up. This is the time 
when it told her that she should sleep out in the brush for four nights. It 
said, "I will show you everything about it. You, I have taken pity on you. 
Now you will be out four nights, and in eight nights you will get something 
to eat, you will sit down with great abundance." 

Now when she came home again she stood outside and said to her hus- 
band, "Do not be angr\'. I have received something [medicine-power]. 
We shall have something to eat. Chief-Speaking, do not think I am double 
married [committed adultery]. The reason I have been sleeping out is that 
I have received something. It is not valuable [meaning the reverse], but it 
is to be the only thing [medicine] you are to live by." Her husband said, 
"Now where is it?" Then he saw it. "Now," he said, "she slept out- 
side, and this one [the rock] sang for her." Then she came into the lodge. 
Her husband was a beaver-bundle man, and there was always a crowd of 
men in the lodge. He said to his head wife, " Give that woman your clothes, 
she who is very poor." 

Now Weasel-Woman expected to receive tallow. They looked about 
for fat or grease, but every kind that was offered her was refused. At last 
they offered her some kidney-fat. Then she said, "That will do." She 
put it down there, then she sang. She was going to feed them all with it. 
She told the men to get their rattles ready. Then she sang: — 

''This man says, 
'Kidney-fat, I want to eat it.'" 

Then she sang about herself: — 

" Woman says, 
' Kidney-fat to eat, I want to eat it.' " 

In the circle was a young unmarried man who had been chosen to lead the 
buffalo over [the drive]. She said to him, "You sit here at the head of the 
lodge. I shall paint your face first. You are going to eat first, for you are 
to drive the buffalo." Then he sat by her. Now she was painting his face. 
She was going to give him something to eat, and, changing the words of the 



1908.] Wisder and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 87 

song, teach him the way he should sing it when the buffalo were being driven 
up; also tell him how he should stand at the edge of the declivity where the 
buffalo are to fall over. He was to sing four times : — 

"I want to fall [them]. 
Kidney-fat, I want to eat it." 

The reason for all this was that the people might be fed. 

"Now," she said to her husband, "you are to handle this iniskim. Men 
are always better at it than women. Such things are not in keeping with 
the way we live. It will give you dreams [visions]. We will use it for a 
long time [live long]." "Yes, you are right," said her husband. 

Now she painted the young man's face. Now he was about to hear the 
song. Her husband was making the medicine-smoke. She took the young 
man's hand. 

''Man says, 'Woman, iniskim, man. 
They are powerful.' 

Man says, 'Those rocks, I move them around. 
It is powerful. 

Woman says, 'Those rocks, I move them around.* 
It is powerful.' " 

"Good running of buffalo. 
The driver is coming with them. 
We have fallen them. 
We are happy." 

(6). Northern Blackfoot Version? 

The first people, those are the ones that found the buffalo-rock. Nearly 
starved were all the people. A man said to his wife, "Get some wood and 
build a fire." She said, "I am not strong enough; I am nearly staned." 
^'Go on," said he. "There is no firewood here." Then she arose, sa\ing, 
^'I shall go after firewood." She came to a place where there was wood, 
and, standing beside it, picked it up slowly. She was so weak that the 
exertion was painful. Then she heard singing, and looked around. At 
last she saw it. On the cut-bank's side she sat down. The thing doing 
the singing was the buffalo-rock. The earth was sliding down: that is 
how she came to see it. While it was singing, the rock said, "Take me, I 
am powerful." On buffalo-hair it was sitting for a bed. It stretched out 
its arms. In order that food might be obtained is the reason she saw it. 



1 Rocks marking the lines leading up to the bufTalo pound, or drive. 

2 Taken as a text by Dr. R. H. Lowie. 



88 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II , 

She took it up, wrapped it in the hair and put it inside her dress. Now she 
knew some food would be obtained. She went back to the camp. She 
went to her husband's lodge. She went inside. She said to her elder sister, 
"Tell our husband that I shall make medicine." So the elder one said 
to him, **My younger sister is about to make medicine." He said, "I have 
faith. Let her make medicine that we may have food." Then he called 
out, inviting the camp. All came to the lodge, — men, women, and children, 
— all came inside. ** There is going to be medicine," he said. To the 
women and children he said, '*Sit here" [the rear]. ** Gret some tallow,'' 
said he, "just a little." Then every one looked for it. A long time they 
had to hunt before finding any. 

Then the woman rubbed the fat on the rock. It began to sing when she 
did it. It sang to the woman, "Take me, I am powerful." The people 
all saw it. The woman passed it to them, and all kissed it. "You shall 
have food," she said. Then she began to sing and then to dance. AU 
joined in the dancing. They made a noise like the buffalo. The woman 
sang, "A hundred shall I lead over" [the drive]. She said, "When you 
sing, do not say more than a hundred." Now a man said when he sang, 
"Over a hundred shall I lead over" [the drive]. The woman said, "We 
have made a mistake now. So many will go over, that the enclosure will 
be burst; they will jump out of it. There will be a solitary bull wandering 
through the camp to-night. It will be a mangy bull. No one shall kill it. 
Some one must go up the hill to watch in the morning. Look-Backwards, 
you are to go; buffalo you will see. The-One-We-Made-Look-There, 
also watch. From there you will see buffalo. If that bull comes to-night, 
we shall all be saved. If this rock fall on its face, then you will all be happy. 
There will be plenty of food." All went out. They were happy, because 
they were to receive food. The woman slept where the smudge was made. 
That rock made her powerful. 

He came through the camp, the one she said was coming, — the mangy 
bull. They all knew him. They all said, "Ah-a-a! don't kill him. Rub 
his back with firewood." In the morning all were happy because the mangy 
bull came at night. They did not kill him, the one that was said to come 
at night. When the woman looked out, that rock fell over on its face. 
Then she told them to be happy, because they would have something to 
eat. "It would be so, if it fell on its face," she said. Looking up, the 
people saw many buffalo close to the camp. Then the swift young men 
went out and led the buffalo, many of them. They worked them into the 
lines. I'hey frightened them to make them run swiftly. Then all ran over 
into the enclosure. Now the people ran there. Inside were the buffalo. 
So many were there, that the enclosure was broken dowTi. Over a hundred 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 89 

were there. That is why they broke down the fence. Not many of them 
were killed. All the buffalo were bulls. That is why they broke down the 
fence. 

The woman's husband took all the ribs and back-fat, saying, "Wi'.h 
these shall a feast be made. Again my wife will make medicine." The 
people were somewhat happy as the number killed was small. "For a 
little [while] we are saved. We have a little meat," said the man. 

The next night it was called out again that the woman was to make 
medicine. This time she gave orders that only the women were to dance, 
so that cows might come to the drive. So the women danced. The men 
tried not to make another mistake. In the morning they looked from the 
hill again. They were made glad by the rock falling again on its face. 
Again the young men went out, and all was as before. Now all in the en- 
closure were cows. They were all killed with arrows. None of them got 
out. 

The people were happy now. They had plenty of meat. Every one 
now believed in the power of the rock. The woman who found the rock 
was respected by her husband. 

8. Origin of the Medicine-Pipe. 

The Blood Indians have had medicine-pipes for a very long time. There 
is one pipe among them that is so old that no one has any recollection of 
ha\ing heard of its being made by any one. So this pipe must be the real 
one handed down by the Thunder, for all medicine-pipes came from the 
Thunder. 

Once there was a girl who never could marry, because her parents could 
not find any one good enough for her. One day she heard the Thunder 
roll. "Well," she said, "I will marry him." Not long after this she went 
out with her mother to gather wood. When they were ready to go home, 
the girl's packstrap broke. She tied it together and started, but it broke 
again. Her mother became impatient; and when the strap broke the 
third time, she said, "I will not wait for you!" The girl started after her 
mother, but the strap broke again. WTiile she was tying it together, a 
handsome young man in fine dress stepped out of the brush and said, *'I 
want you to go away with me." The girl said, **Why do you talk to me 
that way? I never had anything to do with you." ** You said you would 
marry me," he answered; "and now I have come for you." The girl began 
to cry, and said, "Then you must be the Thunder." 

Then he told the girl to shut her eyes and not look, and she did so^ 



90 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

After a while he told her to look, and she found herself upon a high moun- 
tain. There was a lodge there.^ She went in. There were many seats 
around the side, but only two people, — an old man and woman. When 
the girl was seated, the old man said, "That person smells bad." The old 
woman scolded him, saying that he should not speak thus of his daughter- 
in-law. Then the old man said, **I will look at her." When he looked up, 
the lightning flashed about the girl, but did not hurt her. Because of this, 
the old man knew she belonged to the family. At night all the family came 
in one by one. The Thunder then made a smudge with sweet-pine needles, 
one at the door of the lodge, and one just back of the fire. Then he taught 
his daughter-in-law how to bring in the bundle that hung outside. This 
was the medicine-pipe. After a time the daughter-in-law gave birth to a 
boy, later to another boy. 

One evening the Thunder asked her if she ever thought of her father and 
mother. She said that she did. Then he asked would she like to see them. 
She said, "Yes." So he said, "To-night we will go. You may tell them 
that I shall send them my pipe, that they may live long." When the time 
came, he told the woman to close her eyes, and once more she was standing 
near the lodge of her people. It was dark. She went in and sat down by 
her mother. After a while she said to her mother, "Do you know me?" 
"No," was the answer. "I am your daughter. I married the Thunder." 
The mother at once called in all of their relations. They came and sat 
around the lodge. The woman told them that she could not stay long as 
she must go back to her lodge and her children, but that the Thunder would 
give them his pipe. In four days she would come back with it. Then she 
went out of the lodge and disappeared. 

In four days the Thunder came with the woman, her two boys, and the 
pipe. Then the ceremony of transferring the pipe took place. When it 
was finished, the Thunder said that he was going away, but that he would 
return in the spring, and that tobacco and berries should be saved for him 
and prayed over. Then he took the youngest boy and went out. A cloud 
rolled away, and as it went the people heard one loud thunder and one faint 
one [the boy]. Now, when the Thunder threatens, the people often say, 
"For the sake of your youngest child," and he heeds their prayers. 

When the Thunder left the woman and elder child behind, he said that 
if dogs ever attempted to bite them, they would disappear. One day a 
dog rushed into the lodge and snapped at the boy, after which nothing was 
seen of him or his mother, and to this day the owner of a medicine-pipe is 
afraid of dogs. 



1 It is often said tliat the Tliunder steals or seduces women. For another version of 
medicine-pipe ori^n, see Grinnell. op. cit., p. 113. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 91 



9. The Worm-Pipe. 

Now a man was out hunting. One evening he returned to his camp and 
was sitting on his bed smoking. A large decayed piece of wood was burning 
in the fire. As he was sitting there he saw a worm crawling along the stick 
of wood. Then he heard singing. Now the worm became a person holding 
a pipe with a straight [tubular] bowl. The stem was decorated. It was a 
medicine-pipe. The person had an eagle-plume tied in his hair. He 
shook the pipe-stein, and began to sing, " The fire is my medicine." 

Then the worm-person transferred the pipe to the man.^ 

10. A Pipe from the Seven Stars. 

The same man who got the pipe from a worm went out to hunt. After 
a time he decided to go up on a mountain-top to fast and sleep. He had 
been there four days when he heard singing from above : — 

"The Seven Stars say, 
' My pipe is powerful.' " 

"Old man says, 
*My pipe is powerful.' 
He hears me." 

Looking up, he saw that the smallest one of the Seven Stars was singing. 
Then it became a person, and gave him a medicine-pipe. 

11. The Black-Covered Pipe. 

Once a man was camping out alone. It was when the leaves were turn- 
ing yellow, and the elk are often heard to whistle. It was in the foothills of 
the mountains. He had been hunting here and killed four elk. Once, just 
after he killed an elk, he heard a Coyote call, *' Wa-wa-woo-oo-oo!" Then 
he heard some one singing: — 

"Fine meat. 
I want to eat it." 

Now he saw what it was that was singing. It was a Coyote carrying a 
thorn-stick wrapped in his own skin. Then said the man, **I will give 
you this elk." 

After this the Coyote gave him a medicine-pipe. 



Grinnell (op. clt., p. 127) gives a different account of the origin of this pipe. 



92 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 



12. I'he Otter-Lodge. 

Man-with-acWoman-Inside-of-Him when a young man went out to a 
lake far in the north. This was known as Round Lake. It was very deep. 
He slept on the shore, but had no dreams. Then he made a raft and lay 
upon it. While he slept the wind carried it far out from shore. Then a 
Mink appeared in his dreams, and said, "Come to my father's lodge!" 
He heard drumming down under the water. Now the man awoke, but could 
not go to the lodge because of the water. So the Mink came up again and 
told him to shut his eyes. He shut his eyes, and upon opening them found 
himself under water in a lodge.* The otter was lying at the back of the fire 
in a large pile of grass from the shore of the lake. Then the Otter became 
as a person, and spoke to the man. He said that he would give him some 
power. He took up some of the grass and made a smudge, at the same 
time singing a song in which the following ideas were expressed : — 

"This is my lodge. 
It is a medicine-lodge. 
I will give it to you. 
The water is my lodge. 
It is medicine." 

The Otter sang seven songs and at the last took up an otter-skin, held it ii> 
his hands and sang: — 

"I will have a dream when I sleep." 

Then the Otter made a smudge and held his hands in the smoke. Then he 
took hold of the man's hand and placed the otter- skin in it. The wife of the 
Otter who had aided him in signing and handling the bundles, now trans- 
ferred a mink-skin to the man in the same way. 

The man staid with these people until he learned many songs and the 
ways of handling the bundle. 

13. The Bear-Lodge. 

In the old days, before the Blackfoot had horses, they were mo\-ing camp 
with dog-travois. A little boy was strapped to a dog-travois. The dog 
went to get a drink of water. He passed through some bushes. The travois 
was untied and fell off with the child. The dog ran off, while the boy 
remained sleeping on his travois. The dog caught up with the camp. 



* The several divisions of the Blackfoot have a large number of ceremonial teepees to 
which belong bundles and rituals. The teepees are painted with designs symbolizing parts of 
these rituals. For a general description of teepees of this type, see Grinnell, The Lodges of the 
Blackfoot (American Anthropologist, N. S., Vol. Ill, pp. 660-668). 



1908.] Wisaler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 93 

The boy's mother saw the dog without his travois, and went back to look 
for the boy. She failed to find him. The next day she said, "I shall find 
my boy this night." But though she searched for him, she could not find 
bim. 

The child cried at night. The Bear heard him and went to see what 
was the matter. He took the child to his cave. When inside, the boy 
looked up. He thought it was a tent, for the Bear had painted his cave on 
►the outside with his own figure. His hind-feet were marked about the tent 
in front, and there were painted wings on the roof. Bear said to the boy, 
"You are to stay with me all winter. I shall make food for you." The 
child staid there all winter, and Bear transformed buffalo-chips into meat 
ivhich he gave the boy to eat. He made ripe berries for him out of saska- 
toon-sticks. The boy grew very fast during the winter. Next fall, when 
the leaves were turning yellow, the Blackfoot went back near the Bear's 
cave. Bear, going outside, saw the Indian camp. He returned and 
•ordered the little boy to return to his people. The boy's parents were no 
longer looking for him, thinking he was dead. Bear told the boy that his 
name was Big-Bear. He gave his name and tent to the boy, telling him to 
paint his lodge in the same way as his cave. He also gave him a large 
knife, called the "bear-knife."^ Then he gave him some medicine. He 
said, "You will be an old man, for your enemies cannot hurt you. You 
have nothing to be afraid of." Then the Bear said, "Now go home to 
your father. Take this medicine, and whenever you want something you 
will be able to get it." 

The boy went home. WTien he reached camp, he painted his body and 
face. People saw the boy, but did not recognize him. Having lived with 
the Bear so long, he was \Qr\ wild. He said to the people, "I am the boy 
you lost." Then his parents knew him. He said, **I shall not hurt you, 
for I pity you." He staid with his parents, but grew wilder and wilder. 
He was a great fighter, and took away other Indians' wives. The people 
were afraid of him. One day they held a council and decided to kill him. 
They took their bows, arrows, and stone knives. Big-Bear sent his parents 
to the bush. Then he attacked his enemies. The people shot at and hit 
him; but he just rubbed his body, and there was no wound. He killed 
many Indians. At last they said, "We cannot kill you." Then he bade 
his parents go home, saWng, "They are afraid of me. Let us go home." 

They went home, and the people never again tried to kill him. Big- 
Bear now was kind to everybody. He painted his lodge and was called 
Big-Bear. He became a great chief. Whenever he fought, he killed many 



See narrative No. 17. 



94 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Xatural History. [Vol. II, 

of the enemy without getting hurt himself. When there was lack of water, 
he merely scrunched the earth, and produced water for his parents. He 
lived very long. All his children were as strong as he. The tent and the 
knife are still here.^ 

14. The Horse-Lodge. 

Once there was a poor man who had just one horse, a mare. It was 
white. The man was married. He had also a white stud colt. The 
colt grew to a fine size. This story is not an account of a dream, but a 
statement of things that really happened. In course of time the man be- 
came rich, and owned many horses. He did not ride the white mare then,, 
but took good care of her. One day he led her down to water. While 
drinking, she spoke to him, much to his surprise. She said, "Father, I 
shall give you a lodge. To-morrow morning, when you go out to tend your 
horses, you will see a lodge." 

The next day, when the man went out to look for his horses, he came 
to a lodge, on the right side of which stood his old white mare and on the 
left side the colt. The White Mare said to him as he came near, "You are 
to paint this lodge as I direct." The man brought paints, water, and buffalo- 
fat, and painted the lodge as the WTiite Mare directed. On the right side 
he painted with white clay, the picture of the old white mare. On the other 
side he painted with the same kind of clay the picture of the colt. Around 
the top he painted the seven stars, the bunch stars and the morning star. 
Around the bottom he painted in red the earth and the hills, and in white 
the fallen stars. When the painting was finished, the old ^Miite Mare 
took her master into the lodge, where she taught him the songs and the 
ritual. Then the man took the lodge home with him and showed it to the 
people. This man was a Piegan. After a time he transferred the lodge 
and the ritual to a Blood, who transferred it to a Northern Blackfoot. 
Finally it was transferred back to a Piegan, its pnvsent owner, who has made 
use of its power for thirty years. WTien it was transferred to him, he gave 
away ten horses. 

15. Black and Yellow Buffalo-Painted Lodges. 

One time two men were sitting on a rock by the side of a river, making 
arrows. As they looked down into the water they saw a lodge standing on 
the bottom. One of the men said, **I believe I will enter this lodge." So 



Kecorded by Dr. U. H. Lowie. 



1908.] Wtssler and DamU, Black foot Mythology. 95 

he diyed down into the water. When he got into the lodge he found no 
water on the inside. A great deal of medicine was hanging up in this lodge, 
and when the man came out he told all his people what he had seen. At 
another time the same men were camped at a place where some people saw 
another lodge down in the water. WTien this man heard about it, he dived 
down and entered, as before. Here, again, he saw a great deal of medicine 
hanging up. 

Now this was the beginning of the black-and-yellow buffalo-lodges. 
While the man was on the inside, he was taught the whole ceremony. And 
when he came up, he got together all the medicine, and painted the lodges 
as you see them now. These two are the most powerful painted lodges 
we have.^ 

16. The Crow^-Painted Lodge. 

There is another painted lodge known as the Crow Lodge. It came 
about in this way. One man was catching eagles on a hill. He had made 
a hole in which he was hiding. After a while he went to sleep. He dreamed 
that a Crow came to him sa}ing, "This is my lodge. Now I shall give it to 
you with the medicine and songs." So the Crow transferred the lodge to 
the man, taught him the songs and the ceremony. 

17. The Bear-Knife. 

Once in the winter-time, just one month before summer, or on the sixth 
moon, a Sarcee was out hunting when a bHzzard came down upon him. 
This Sarcee was of mixed blood, for his father was a Piegan. Now in the 
bUzzard he lost the direction, because he could not see. He was feeUng 
around in the brush and timber for shelter. He was nearly frozen, but 
finally he felt on the ground a warm spot. This was a bear's den. As he 
went in, it got warmer and warmer. Presently he heard a Bear begin to 
growl. Then he stopped and began to pray to the Bear. Now the Bears 
had a young one, a young male. And this Bear said to his father, "I pity 
this young man. Do not harm him!" Then the father said, *'Well, all 
right," and the mother said the same. Then the father said to his son, 
"You give him some of your power first." 

So the son told the young man to come in. Wlien the man was inside, 
he saw it was a lodge, painted and decorated, with a bearskin for a door. 



* For a more complete version of this myth, see Grinnell (Lodges of the Blackfeet, op. cit.. 
p. 668). The same article (p. 663) contains a brief narrative concerning the origin of another 
ceremonial teepee. 



96 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Now he was in the lodge. At the back of the lodge he saw a rawhide bag 
and a lance, and on the sides were four persons and four drums. The son 
said to the man, "You sit at the head of the lodge" [that is where the guests 
are seated]: "I will sit by you." In front of the man was a pile of thorn- 
bushes with very sharp thorns. "Now," said the young Bear, "I will give 
you my knife." "All right," said the man. Then the Bear mixed some 
red paint in a cup of water, and said to the young man, "Now you must take 
off your clothes." The man did so, and sat there naked. Now the Bear 
took up a big turnip, and, taking some fire, put it down upon the ground 
before him, singing a song as he did so: — 

"On the earth I want to sit. 
It is powerful." 

Then he took down the knife, held it to his breast and in the smoke, singing 
all the while a kind of dancing-song in which were the words, "The ground 
where I sit is holy," and making the sound of a bear. All this time the knife 
was in the bag. Now he began to sing another song, which Ls called the 
"Untying Song." Then he put the knife dowTi. Now he made another 
smudge, took up the knife, and then mixed some paint in his hand. And 
as he sang: — 

"The ground is our medicine." 

He rubbed the red paint on his hands and then over his face, afterwards 
scratching it with his fingers. Then he took up black paint and made the 
marks representing the bear-face. Then he took claws, and put one on each 
side of the head. Then he took paws ( ?) and put them on for a necklace. 
But before he put the necklace on he held them in the smoke and smudge, 
and sang: — 

"Bear-man says, *It is medicine, 
I want it.'" 

As he put it on his head he sang: — 

"Bear is looking for something to eat." 

Then he caught the person next to him, as if about to eat him. (Everything 
that was done was accompanied with bear actions.) Then he took up the 
knife, held it over the smudge, and took some eagle-tail feathers for a head- 
dress. All this time they were sitting near the thorns and the Bear had aU 
his regalia on. Then the Bear took up the knife, and as he sharpened it 
sang: — 

"My children, on the other side of the hill is a big noise. 
You get into the brush. 
I will be safe. 
I have power." 



1908.] Wisaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 97 

At the last words of the song he thrust the knife into the earth, and, holding 
it by the handle, sang: — 

"I am looking for some one to kiU." 

Then with the knife he pretended to be about to stab the man, and, catching 
hold of him, threw him upon the thoms on his breast, and holding him there 
painted him. Then the Bear took him up again and dressed him in his 
own regalia. Then taking the hand of the man in his own, and both holding 
the paint, he began to sing, touching the paint to the man's wrist, elbow, 
breast, and head.^^ Then he laid the man down on his breast, and slapped 
him on the back with the flat part of the knife. This he did four times with 
the man turned in each of the four directions. Then the Bear said, ''Now 
you must sleep out in the timber for seven days. Whenever you pursue an 
enemy you must sing this song, and make the movements I do: — 

*I will run after him. 
He wiU fall. 
I will stab him.' 

If the enemy shoot at you, do not dodge; if you should do this, you will be 
killed. Do not turn back, but keep on. If you turn back, sores will break 
out on your body, and they will be fatal." 

Now a long time after the man had gone back to his people, he was out 
on the war-path and in battle against the Assiniboine. One of the enemy 
came up to him, put his gun against him, pulled the trigger, but it missed 
fire. Then the man took the Assiniboine by the hair, and stabbed him with 
the knife. As years went on, he killed many enemies with his knife in that 
way. It was very strong medicine. This knife is still among our people, 
but there are two of them.^ 

Now it was the turn of the father-bear to give the man something, so he 
gave him a lance with an otter-skin hanging down decorated with feathers. 
Bear's claws were hung to it for bells [rattles]. The shaft of this lance was 
wrapped with elk-skin, and a head-dress of bear-claws went with it. 

There was one thing I forgot to tell you about the bear-knife, and that 
is, when a man is to receive the knife, the knife is thrown at him. If he 
catches it, it is all right; but if he does not catch it, he cannot receive the 
medicine. 

Then the Bear took up the lance, painted it and made a smudge as before, 
singing, "Bear above, says the earth is our lodge." Then he mixed the paint 
and pamted his face as before. Then he sang another song, and as he did 



» When the bear-knife is transferred, the ceremony is the same as performed by the bear in 
this narrative. The transfer of the Icnife is so rough, that no one will talce it, unless forced to do 

80. 



98 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

SO struck the lance into the ground. While singing another song he took up 
the lance in the same manner as the knife, then threw the man upon the 
thorns, and painted him as before. The words in this song were: — 

"Underneath is a bear; he has sun power." 

Now the lance was thrown at the man and he caught it. If he had failed, 
he would not have received it. Then the Bear gave him the same instruc- 
tions as for the bear-knife.^ 

Now it was the old w^oman's turn to give the man something, and she 
gave him a painted lodge. This lodge is still among the Northern Blackfoot. 
On it is a picture of a bear. The owner of the lodge wears bear-claws for 
anklets, wristlets, and ornaments on his head. He also wears a feather 
head-dress and a bear-robe. The smudge song for^the bear-lodge is as 
follows: — 



The next song: — 



'The earth is our home. 
It is medicine." 



"My lodge I give it to you. 
It is powerful." 



Then she took up the paint and sang as she painted him: — 

*Be not afraid. 
Never turn back. 
Think of the one you kill and eat." 

The woman told the man that no one must spit inside of the lodge, but he 
must raise up the side, and spit on the outside. (Same is true of the medi- 
cine-lodge.) The medicine-bundle for this lodge was the robe and the other 
objects to be worn by the man. It must also have a bearskin for a door, 
for this is the lodge in which the man found the bears. 

18. The Smoking-Otter. 

Once there was a white man and his wife who had for a friend a young 
Indian who was not married. The white man took the Indian off to a 
great water. They went out to a lonely island which was the nesting- 
ground for many kinds of birds. The ground in many places w^as covered 
with feathers. They camped there for a while. After a time the white 
man began to be suspicious of his Indian friend on account of his wife. 



1 The lance was buried several years ago with the body of its last owner. During the^ 
ceremonies the wife of the recipient of the ritual was also thrown down upon the thorns. Once 
an indecent exposure of the woman occurred when this part of the ceremony was reached, the 
narration of which afterwards came to have a definite place in the transfer proceedings. 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 99 

He thought that she was in love with the Indian. Now the days on the 
island were very hot, and one day the Indian said that he was going down 
on the shore on the other side of the island to take a swim. As soon as he 
was gone, the white man put his wife into a boat and rowed away as fast as 
he could. When the Indian came back, he looked around for his friends. 
Seeing the boat in the distance he knew what had happened. He watched 
the boat out of sight. Then he began to cry. As the man and his wife 
had taken everything with them, the young Indian made a bed of feathers, 
crawled into it, and mourned all night. So he lived on the island alone, 
sleeping in feathers, and digging roots.* 

One day the Indian saw an Otter and a white Swan swimming toward 
the shore. As they came up, they spoke to him, saWng, **My son, do not 
be frightened, for we have come to take you to the shore; but you must shut 
your eyes, and not open them again until we tell you. We will get to the 
shore yet before the white man does." Then the swan began to sing songs. 
The words were as follows : — 

"The man says, 'The wind is my medicine. 
The rain is my medicine, 
The hail is my medicine.' " 

Then the Otter sang a song. First he dipped his fingers into the water 
four times, rubbed them on his hair, blew his whistle four times, and sang: — 

"Wherever I lie, I hear. 
The water is my medicine.** 

This is the way the Smoking-Otter medicine came to be among the 
Indians. When the Indian was brought back to his people, he took an otter- 
skin and a swan-skin for his medicine. Whenever the owner of this medicine 
begins to smoke, he shakes the bells on the otter four times. Then he takes 
some smoke, blows it into the hollow of his hand, and rubs it on the otter- 
skin. Then he blows one handful to the otter, one to the bells, one to the 
owner's heart, and one to the ground. This last is because the otter runs on 
the ground. There is power in this, because the otter is supposed to have 
long life. 

19. The Medicine Shields. 

Once there was a man named Always -Talking and a woman named 
Stepped. This woman was the wife of Always-Talking; but she fell in 
love with a younger man. When her husband discovered this, he killed her. 

> To this point in the narrative we have what seems a version of a Dakota myth, RipKS» 
op. cit., p. 130; also Wissler, Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XX, p. 196. It is interesting 
to find a fragment of this myth among the Blackfoot accounting for the origin of a medicine- 
bundle. 



100 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. fV^ol. II, 

Then he went about and around the camp, telling all the people what he had 
done, and that they should move camp at once. This was according to 
the custom of that time, when women who committed this offence were 
killed and their bodies left unburied. So the people moved their camp far 
to the north, where they crossed a large river. This was early in the spring 
and the water of the river got very high, so high that they could not cross 
back again. Always-Talking had two wives left, but he mourned for his 
other wife, and was sorry that he had killed her. 

Many buffalo were roaming about on the side of the river where the 
woman's body lay. There were eight buffalo who travelled by themselves, 
one was a cow and seven were bulls. ^ The Cow always led the bunch. As 
they were going along one day, they came to the body of the dead woman. 
They stopped, stood around and looked at it. The Cow said, "For this 
woman I am sorry. I pity her. You must doctor her." To this the others 
replied, "We are sorry too. We will do what we can for the poor woman." 
One of the bulls was the husband of the Cow and he said to her, "You go 
over to the herd and pick out seven cows to aid us in doctoring the woman." 
The Cow went away and came back with seven others. Now all the buffalo 
knew what was going on and gathered around in a large crowd. 

The woman had been dead a long time, and nothing remained except her 
bones. As the buffalo stood around, they all became people, painted and 
dressed in fine clothes. They had seven drums and other medicine things. 
Then they began to sing a song. The words were, "We want buffalo to 
come to life." Then they all walked around the skeleton and pawed until 
it was covered with dirt and grass. They sang many other songs. Then 
the Cow and her husband approached the place where the skeleton was 
covered up, and each hooked at the place twice. Then the other buffalo 
did the same in their turn. Then the husband of the Cow led the buffalo 
around to one side and brought them up toward the feet of the skeleton. 
Then they hooked as before ; then back again and up toward the right side 
of the skeleton; then toward the head. As they came toward the head of 
the skeleton, the husband of the Cow rushed at the heap of dirt, and the 
woman came to life and stood up. Then the woman took the lead of the 
procession and all the buffalo fell in behind. The husband of the Cow 
came directly behind the woman. He had great power. He would blow 
through his nose and all the different colored paints would come out. He 
blew these paints upon the woman. The other buffalo carried seven drums, 
and sang this song: — 



See footnote p. 122 



1908.] Wiasler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology, 101 

'^Buffalo is going to drink. 
Water is my medicine. 
Buffalo is going to eat. 
Grass is my medicine." 

The meaning of this song was, that when the woman should drink and eat 
she would be fully restored to life. As the procession approached the river, 
they stopped three times, and a fourth time at the edge of the river. While 
they stopped there, they sang this song: — 

"Our road is powerful. 
We look for a powerful road." 

Now the woman had been dead so long that she had to be given the 
power to drink and to eat. So the husband of the Cow put her mouth to 
the water with four movements, and directed her to drink by licking the 
water four times. Then he took a buffalo horn spoon, painted it red and 
yellow, and gave the woman water from it. Then he took some dried meat, 
rubbed it in his hands, making four movements toward the woman's mouth, 
and gave it to her to eat. Now the woman was restored to life. The 
husband of the Cow gave her some buffalo-hair and said, "When you cross 
this river, go into the lodge of your husband, and if he is still angry at you, 
throw this hair at him, and he will die of the small-pox. If he treat you well, 
make him a shield, and one for each of your two brothers." The river 
was now very deep, and in order that the woman might cross, the buffalo 
made a bridge of shields over the river. The Cow told the woman to shut 
her eye5, and began to lead her across. She said to the woman, "When you 
have reached the other side, the buffalo will give you your choice of three of 
these shields. There are three medicine-shields here, — the first one upon 
which you shall step, the fourih, and the one in the centre of the bridge. 
You choose these, and when you get back make them." When the woman 
was safely across, the husband of the Cow placed all the shields before her 
in a row that she might choose some of them. She picked out the three 
shields as directed by the Cow. The Bull advised her to take others. He 
said, "Those you have selected have no power. The other shields are 
medicine-shields." But the woman still insisted upon taking her first 
choice, and after refusing the others four times, she w^as permitted to take 
them. Now one of the shields she took belonged to the husband of the Cow. 
He said to the woman, "My shield must never be put down in the house, 
but must hang upon a tripod. The face of the shield must always point 
toward the sun, and it must be moved on the tripod to follow the sun." 

Now the woman started to return to her people. WTien she came in 
sight of the camp, she concealed herself until it was dark, and then went to 
the lodge of her husband. "Is my husband at home?" j^he said. "He is," 



102 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

a man replied. Always-Talking recognized his wife and gave her a hearty 
welcome. He forgave her all the past. After a time the woman told Always- 
Talking that he should kill three large bulls and give her the skins. WTieti 
the skins were brought to her, she made three shields. She gave one to 
Always-Talking, and one to each of her brothers. She said to them, ** \Mien 
you go out on the war-path, you must take these three shields. You must 
never turn back until you meet enemies. If you do so, you will surely die." 
This is the way the people got medicine-shields. 

20. Never-Sits-Down's Shield. 

Somewhere on the other side of the mountains a Piegan was sleeping 
in lonely places. One night he slept in a buffalo-wallow and had a dream. 
Next day he returned to his people and entered his father's lodge. The 
next day he asked his father to cut a piece of skin from the belly of a bull 
and shrink it by heating over a fire. This done, he was to cut it round like 
the sun, and paint the picture of a bull and a cow on one side; also to put 
a fringe across the middle of the shield to represent the beard of the bull. 
In the centre of the piece he was to tie the head of a jack-rabbit. Then he 
was to take a piece of elk-horn, bend it into a hook, and tie it across the 
middle. Wristlets were to be made from the skin of the buffalo's nose, and 
dew-claws were to be tied to them. Armlets were to be made from the skin 
taken from the throat where the hair is long. A strip of skin from the 
buffalo's mane was to be taken for a necklace. Finally his father was 
requested to get a white horse with red ears, and to bob his tail like that 
of the rabbit. The horse should be made to look as much like the rabbit 
as possible. A whistle was to be used to imitate the noise made by the 
rabbit. 

When the boy's father had done all this, he was directed by his son to 
hang the shield upon a pole on the back of the lodge, then to ride round the 
camp and tell all the people to stake down their lodges. "\Mien this is 
done," said the boy, '*I shall sing a song, and if nothing happens, we shall 
destroy this shield." So the boy's father rode round the camp, calling out 
to all the people and telling them to stake down their lodges and send a 
swift runner to assist his son. The whole camp knew that some powerful 
medicine was about to work. The women hurried out to stake down thejr 
lodges. When the father returned to his lodge, the boy dug up some dirt 
at the side of his bed, and scattered some light-colored dust in the hole. 
** This," said he, *' is to represent the place where the buffalo do their pawing." 
The young man directed the runner to go out by the left side of the lodge 
and run around very fast, take the shield down from the pole as he ran, 



1 908.] Wiasler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 103 

and bring it into the lodge without stopping. WTiile the runner was doing 
this, the boy sang a song. He was sitting down with a buffalo-robe, hair- 
fiide out, drawn around him. When the runner came in with the shield, 
the boy put it on by putting his feet through the carrjing-strap and pulling 
it over his shoulders. Then he fell over into the hole he had dug, rolled in 
the dust he had scattered there, and grunted like the buffalo. Then he got 
up and shook himself. Immediately a great storm came. It blew the dust 
the boy shook from himself straight up into the air. It did not blow down 
the lodge in which the shield was; but every other lodge in the camp was 
blown over, notwithstanding the fact that they had been staked down very 
tight. In this way, the great medicine-power of this shield became known 
to th^ people. 

Once, a long time after this, the enemy attacked the camp, and the 
Piegan were driven back among their lodges. The boy who owned the 
shield sat quietly in his lodge and let them fight. His people called him to 
come out, but he sat still. Finally he sent for a number of young men, and 
when they arrived he requested them to get a number of young cotton- 
wood-trees and put them against his lodge. WTiile the young men were 
bringing the trees, the boy had his horse brought in. The young men soon 
came back, and brought so many trees that they almost broke down the 
lodge, llien the boy put on his wristlets, his armlets, his necklace, took 
the shield, sang a song, rolled in the dust and shook himself, as before. This 
time, however, he shot straight up in the air and came out at the top of the 
lodge, breaking some of the cottonwood-trees, and came down astride his 
horse. The horse jumped four times, like a rabbit. All this time the enemy 
were shooting at him. As the horse jumped the fourth time, the enemy ran. 
The boy pursued them, striking them with the hook of elk-horn that hung 
upon the shield, and every man struck fell dead. 

The shield takes its name from its owner, who always sat down; but the 
people speak of him, according to their way, as he who never-sits-down. 

21. The Eagle-Head Charm. 

One day a man came to a tall tree in the top of which was an eagle's 
nest. The nest was made of sticks, and was very broad. The man looked 
up at it. He saw a buffalo-calf standing up there. "These birds have 
some great power," he said. "I will sleep here [at the foot of the tree] to 
see if I get some power." So he put his robe over his head, lay down 
under the tree and slept. He awoke, hearing a puff of wind. He uncovered 
his head and found himself up in the nest. The buffalo-calf, frightened, 
was jumping about snorting. Looking up, the man saw two eagles circling 



104 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

around the tree. They were very high and were sounding their whistles 
[screaming]. There was a wind. The eagles came down. The man was 
afraid. He took two young eagles up in his arms and cried. The female 
eagle said, " Let us do something for this man : he takes pity on our children." 
Then the male eagle struck the buffalo-calf, knocking him off the nest, and 
also knocking off a dead calf that was there. Then he became a person 
and stood before the man. The eagle-person sang songs. He had a straw 
in the bunch of hair at the top of his head. He told the man that this was 
to make him as hard to hit [in a fight] as a straw. 

First Song. 

"I don't want them [enemy] to kill me. 
These here [the straw, etc.] I shall fight with." 

Second Song. 

"This here, my head-top, wear. 
It is powerful. 
Guns for me are fun [easy to overcome]." 

Third Song. 

"That there I am looking for. 
Guns [are] my medicine." 

While singing the third song, the eagle-person waved his arms as if flying 
around, and moved his head as if searching for the guns. At the end of it 
he blew his whistle four times and took the man down to the ground. 

Fourth Song. 

"Gun I want to eat [capture]." 

Fifth Song. 

"Now let me eat a gun." 

While singing the fifth song, the eagle-person flapped his arms, and at the 
end blew his whistle. Then he said to the man, "I will give you some 
power." He took a feather from his tail and threw it through the body of 
the calf, saying, "So you can do to enemies." The man said to himself, 
"I do not want such power as this, to kill people." The female eagle said, 
"Do not give him such a power as that. Give him some other power." 
So the male eagle said, "Well, you will get long life and good luck." 

Soon after, the man came to a place where some young men were shoot- 
ing at white-headed eagles. He watched them. They killed one. He 
asked for the head and a wing-bone. When they were given to him, he tied 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 105 

the head on to his hair and made a whistle of the bone. The man soon went 
on a raid and got many horses. He went into many fights, but always got 
out safely. When a very old man, he transferred the charms and formula 
to a young man, its present owner, who attributes his long, life and safety 
to its power. 

22. The Pigeons. 

Opee an old man was in mourning for a son who had been killed on the 
war-path. He had gone out to the place where the body had been found. 
Then he went up on a high hill. This was a very lonesome place; but there 
were many pigeons there. The name of this man was Changes-His-Camp. 
The place was in the direction of the Crows. He himself was a Piegan. 
Now it was the fall of the year, and the old man was crying for his son. 
While he was doing this, he heard the turtle-doves innting each other. 
He went over and joined them. They said that they would give him a 
society. They said that he had mourned a long time and that now he was 
about to get revenge. That he would move camp a few times and three 
Crow Indians would be killed. Then they danced, and showed him the 
whole thing. When he came back, he started the Pigeons.^ 

23. The Mosquitoes. 

Once a Piegan lived in the woods in the far north. This was a long 
time ago. One day he was out hunting in timber in which there were a great 
many insects; but the insects were all in their holes because it was raining. 
The man wore a buckskin shirt, leggings, and moccasins. After a while 
the day cleared off, and at once the insects began to fly. They swarmed 
around the man so thick that he could not push them away. At last they 
got under his clothing. They bit him all over until he was almost dead. 
At last he was exhausted, and fell down upon the ground. Now the insects 
settled on his face, and began to w ork their way into his eyes, nose, and ears. 
His whole head was covered with them. Before he became unconscious, 
he heard a voice calling out, ** Mosquitoes, mosquitoes, get together, get 
together! Your friend is nearly dead." Then the mosquitoes got together 
and came out in single file. The man saw that four of them were painted 
yellow with blue stripes across the eyes, nose, and cheeks. ITie others were 



> The Blackfoot maintained a series of related societies for men similar to the military socie- 
ties of the Arapaho, Cheyenne, Hidatsa, etc. The names given them by Grinnell are Little- 
Birds, Pigeons, Mosquitoes, Braves, All -Crazy (?) Dogs, Raven- Bearers, Dogs, Tails, Horns 
Kit-Foxes, Catchers, and Bulls. Our collection of narratives contains origin myths for a num- 
ber of these. See Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge Tales, op. cit., pp. 104, 221. 



106 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [WoX. II, 

painted red. These four were called the "yellow mosquitoes/' and wore 
eagle-tail feathers in their hair. The others wore plumes and a long feather 
hanging down from the head. They had a leader who wore a feather on 
his head, and had his face painted yellow with red bands cross it. Also 
four of them carried a piece of rawhide with the hair on it, upon which they 
beat time. They wore moccasins and breech- cloths. All the members 
wore eagle-claws on their wristlets, the strings of which were wrapped with 
porcupine- quills. They all sat down in a circle while a song was sung. 
Then all danced around in the direction of the sun four times, and, springing 
up, they dashed upon the insects, quickly driving them away. 

24. The Braves. 

Once a boy was out hunting squirrels with bow and arrows. He chased 
a squirrel into a hole, and lay near by waiting for it to come out. He waited 
so long that he fell asleep with his head resting on the bow. After a while 
he heard shouting and then a war-whoop. This caused him to wake up. 
He could hear the shouting, but could see nothing. Finally he looked up 
into the sky, where he saw many men coming down. Behind the main 
body were two side by side, and in the rear one man. Their robes were 
turned hair-side out, and buffalo-hoofs hung from the comers. One of the 
men carried a stick with plumes fastened to it. The men in the front row 
had their faces painted black. One in the centre of the front rank wore a 
fine suit trimmed with weasel-tails and a feather in his head. All the others 
wore robes. Tl.is leader carried a rattle in his hand, half of which was 
painted yellow and half red, with a hawk-feather hanging from the end. 
His face was painted half red and half yellow. Then the men all fell into 
single file. In the rear were four men painted black, and wearing black 
robes. Each carried a lance wrapped in black cloth trimmed with four 
bunches of crow- feathers. Their faces were painted with white streaks 
across the nose. Some of them carried water- vessels made of buffalo- 
stomachs, on their backs. All of them carried whistles. The leader was 
painted red, wore a red robe, and carried a spear with feathers of many 
colors. Their faces were painted. There were four other men, all painted 
white with black circles on their faces and four marks below their eyes. 
They carried spears with four bunches of eagle-tail feathers on them. Sage- 
grass was tied around the spears. One man wore a buckskin suit trimmed 
with weasel-tails and his body was painted white. There were two men 
wearing robes with the hair-side out. They wore shirts and red moccasins 
cut full of small holes. Their bodies were painted red with black marks 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 107 

•on the faces. Their robes were kept in place by bearskin belts, and they 
wore arm-bands of bearskin. Each carried a red bow and four arrows, 
two blunt and two pointed. There was a man in the rear called Brave- 
Willow. He wore a robe tanned on both sides. His face was painted red 
with a black mark across the nose. Buffalo-hoofs were tied to the corners 
•of his robe and a plume fastened at the back. He carried in his hand a 
willow painted red with plumes on each of the branches. 

This is the way the Braves were first found out. The men with arrows 
were called Brave-Bears. 

25. Dog-Chief. 

Once there was a very nice girl the daughter of a head man, and many 
young men sought her for a wife. One of the men in the camp owned a 
very large dog. It was a brindle. One time this girl borrowed this dog, 
hitched him to a travois, and went out for wood. After this she borrowed 
him many times, and he became used to her. WTienever became about she 
always fed him and petted him, and whenever she went for water he went 
with her. One day as the girl was going along she said aloud, **I wish you 
were a young man, then I would marry you." Now the dog heard and 
understood. That night he turned himself into a man and went to the 
lodge where the girl was sleeping. She awoke and found some one kissing 
her. She put out her hand, felt the man, and noted that his hair was fine 
and that he had finely shaped limbs. When he went away she wondered 
who it could be. She never had anything to do with other men. She had 
two brothers, and for that reason she did not wish to say anything about it. 
She thought the person might have been one of her suitors. So she thought 
to herself, "If he comes, next time I will mark him." So that evening she 
took some white earth, mixed it with water in a cup, and stirred it with a 
stick-weed.* That night the strange visitor came again, and, as he caressed 
the girl, she rubbed some of the white earth on his hair, on his robe, and on 
his back. 

Now the next day there was a dance in the camp, and while it was going 
on, the girl went out and looked around. Though she could see every man 
in the camp, none of them wore the marks of her paint. Now she wondered 
who he could be. As she turned away, she saw a dog in the distance. It 



1 For a note on the wide distribution of this myth see Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 209. 
The punishment of a maiden regarded by herself or her parents as of too ereat worth to oe the 
wife of even the best young man in camp, is a favorite thenie among tlie Blacivfoot storj'-tellers. 
Her humiliation usually takes the same form, slie marries a man of extraordinary promise, 
who turns out to be a creature equally disgusting. For another example in this collection, see 
p. 151. 



108 Anthropological Papers American Mtiseum of Natural History. [Vol.11;. 

was her travois dog, and as he came up she saw stripes of white paint on him^ 
just as she had marked her strange visitor. Now she thought to herself, 
**It can't be the dog; but surely that is the paint. Now to-night he will 
come again, and I will try it once more." That night the man came again. 
This time she took his middle finger, and, putting it into her mouth, bit it 
very hard so as to cut it through with her teeth. Now she was the daughter 
of the chief of the tribe. The next day there was to be a dance, and she 
requested her father to order the young men to dance holding up their hands. 
Her father did this, and as they danced she looked closely, at all their hands, 
but saw no bruises on them. As she looked away, she saw the travois dog 
again. As he came up, she noticed that he was lame, and when she examined 
his foot, she found that one of his toes was nearly cut in two. Then she 
went to the man and asked him for the loan of the dog to go for water. 
She put him to the travois and went. When out of sight of the camp, she 
took the dog into the brush, turned to him and said, "Here, it is you that 
visits me at night.'' The paint was on him yet, and he was very lame. 

Then the dog became a man, took off the travois and stood up. He 
was a fine young man. He said to the girl, "Well, it was your fault, you 
wished it." Then the dog-man took her into the brush. The girl said, 
'*Let us go far away from the camp. This is a disgrace to me." **WeIl,"^ 
said the man, **I will be a dog again, and you may drive me home with the 
water; but to-night, when all the people are asleep, we will leave the camp- 
and no one will ever know about this." So they took the water home, and 
the girl got all her things together, some food and some moccasins. When 
it was dark, she told her mother that she was going out for a while. When 
she was out of sight, the dog-man appeared and they went away together. 
The next morning the chief called out about the camp, asking if any one had 
seen the girl. Then the man who owned the dog called out about the camp, 
saying, "My large travois dog has gone. Has any one seen him ?" 

The dog-man and the girl went far off. They were gone four years. 
They had two children, a boy and a baby-girl. The children were real' 
people, for the dog-man was now a person. They all returned to the camp: 
of the girl's people, and the dog-man called at the lodge of his former owner. 
^Vhen he came to the door he said, "Can I stay here a while?" "Yes," 
said the owner. The dog-man had ten dogs with him. One day the man 
said to him. "To what tribe do you belong ?" "Well," said he, "I belong 
to a tribe living far away." "Then how is it," said the man, "that you 
speak our language?" The dog- man replied, "Because our people speak 
the same language as you." Now the dog-man always wore his moccasins, 
and whenever he had occasion to change them, he went outside, where no- 
one could see him. About this the people became suspicious. Whenever 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 109 

his wife would cook a meal, he would say that he would eat outside; and 
50ine of the people who watched him saw that he ate his meat raw. So one 
day his former owner said to his wife, "I beUeve he is not a person. Sup- 
pose we look at him when he has his moccasins off." So one time, when 
the dog-man was asleep, they saw his foot sticking out of the bed. He had 
feet like a dog. During this time the parents of the girl began to see a 
resemblance in the wife of the dog-man to their lost daughter. They began 
to have suspicions also. Now the dog-man thought to himself, "I guess 
they know all about it." So one day he said to his former owner, " Do you 
know that I am a dog?" "Yes," said the man. **Well," said the dog- 
man, **I am your old brindle." Now the girl went over to her parents and 
told them the stor}\ She explained eventhing as it had happened. 

No^^ when the news was spread in the camp, all the men stood around 
and began to make remarks. They said, **Now, you see all the fine young 
men refused her: so she married a dog." The dog- man was very angry 
because of this abuse, so he requested his wife's people and the people of his 
former owner to move camp that night. So they moved. WTien they had 
camped again, not far away, the dog-man began to call out like a dog, and 
all the dogs in the camps joined him at once. Now the people were all 
afoot because they had no travois dogs. So they held a council, and sent 
four men over to the dog-man's camp to get the dogs back; but when they 
came there the dog-man barked, and all the dogs jumped upon the four men 
and killed them. Then the people begged of him to give up the dogs. At 
last he consented. So they got their dogs back. 

Now this dog-man had a dog-skin for a medicine, which he gave to his 
wife's brother. This man called in a number of young men, and organized 
a society. This society was called "llie Dogs." After a time the son of 
the dog-man became a chief, and, like his father's ancestors, he was a great 
runner. He led the buffalo over the drive, and pursued enemies in battle. 
His sister became a good woman, a great worker, economical, etc. These 
children were real persons. There were no traces of dog in them. 



26. Has-Scars-All-Over. 

Once when the people were in camp the young men were out chasing 
buffalo. They were trying to drive them over, but did not succeed. The 
people of the camp were very hungry, as they had been out of meat for a 
long time. One day while the young men were out after buffalo again, 
two young women went out from the camp to gather wood. When they 
were out in the brush, they heard a noise over in the camp. Some one in a 



110 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

loud voice was telling the people to be quiet and keep close to the camp, 
because the young men were now driving up the buffalo. The young 
women heard what was said. One of them said aloud, in the presence of her 
companion, "Leader of the buffalo, if you will lead the herd into the enclasure 
so that my people may have plenty of meat, I will take you for my husband." 

When the young women had their bundles of wood ready to draw up on 
their backs with the pack-straps, they heard a great noise. The buffalo 
were going over. The companion of the girl who made the vow to marry 
the buffalo said, **Listen, the buffalo went over. Hurr}'!" Every time 
the other woman raised her bundle of wood to her back, the strap would 
break and the wood fall to the ground. WTien this had happened four 
times, her companion, who was very anxious to get to the camp, left her. 
When the young woman was alone, making up her bundle for the fifth 
time, she heard some one say, "I have come for you. I want you to go 
with me." The young woman looked up in surprise. She saw a hand- 
some young man finely dressed. She was frightened. She said, '*No, 
I do not have to go with you. You have nothing to do with me." To 
this the young man replied, '*! have killed all my people on account of you. 
You said you would marry the leader of the buffalo if he led them over. 
I was the leader of that herd, and you know from what you have just heard 
that I have done my part." Then the young woman began to cry and said, 
"Yes, I did say that. I must keep my vow. I will go with you." 

Now all the people of the camp were busy butchering, and no one noticed 
the absence of the young woman for a long time. At last her husband and 
her relatives began to ask about her. Finally they learned that she and 
the other woman had gone into the brush to gather wood just before the 
buffalo were driven over. WTien the companion of the missing girl was 
questioned, she told them of the promise made in her hearing, and that she 
left the woman in the brush because her wood kept falling down. Then 
she asked the people if any of the bulls had escaped from the enclosure. 
Then the watchers remembered that they saw the leader of the herd spring 
over the fence and run away. Now every one was sure that the missing 
woman had gone away as the wife of the leader of the buffalo. 

The husband of the woman began to make many arrows. He gathered 
all the different kinds of rock he could find to make arro^^oints. He 
made many arrows. Then he started out to find his wife. He travelled 
many days. One day about noon he came to the place where the buffalo 
lived. While he was scouting, he saw a woman going down to the river 
for water. As he watched her he recognized his wife. He took off his 
clothing and painted himself with buffalo dung and urine.* Then he hurried 



1 So that he miglu not be discovered by the scent of his body. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. Ill 

to the river, where he met his wife. He said to her, "I have come to take 
you home." The woman had a buffalo-hom in which she carried water 
to her buffalo-lover. Her husband was thirsty, and said to her, "Give me 
the horn that I may take a drink." Before she could answer, he took the 
horn from her hands and drank with it. Then she said to him, "You must 
wait here until the middle of the afternoon. That is the time when my 
lover takes a nap. When he is sound asleep I will steal away, meet you 
here and go home with you." Then the woman filled the horn with water 
and carried it to the Bull. When he was about to drink, the horn made a 
peculiar loud noise. He stopped, looked sharply at the woman, and said, 
" Some one met you and talked with you." The woman said quietly, **Well, 
one of your young men came down to the river, took the horn from my 
hands and drank from it." "Oh! all right," said the Bull as he put the 
horn to his mouth and drank. ^ When he had fallen asleep the woman stole 
away, met her husband at the river, and they started home. They went 
as fast as they could. When the Bull awoke and missed the woman, he 
called together his herd, and ordered them to look for her. They soon» 
found the trail of the man and woman by the scent. Then the whole herd 
followed rapidly. 

As the man and woman were running along, they looked back and saw 
the whole herd following them. The woman said that the leader of the 
herd was a very f>owerful medicine-man. He had been shot many times, 
but nothing seemed to kill him. He has so many scars on his body, that the 
buffalo named him Has- Scars- All-Over. WTien the herd came near them, 
the woman threw down her robe. The whole herd stopped to hook and 
trample it. In this way they gained a start. Just before the buffalo over- 
took them again, they reached a forest. The man and woman cUmbed 
into a very large tree. When they were safely seated in the branches, the 
woman reminded the man again that the leader of the herd was a powerful 
medicine-man. The man said to her, "Do you know what will kill him?" 
The woman replied, "I have heard him say that white flint rock is the only 
thing of which he is afraid." The man looked over his arrows and took 
out five that were tipped with this rock. While he was doing this, he heard 
the buffalo come to the tree. As they lost the trail, the whole herd passed 
by, except one old scabby bull. He was so old that he could not keep up 
with the others. \Mien he got to the tree, he stopped to rub his sides against 
it. While they were watching him from the top of the tree, the woman said, 
"I have a notion to spit on that bull." "No!" said the man. "None of 
them have seen us, and if you keep still they will not find us." The woman, 



1 To this point the incidents are similiar to those in the Origin of the Bull Band, Grinnell^ 
op. cit., p. 104. 



112 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11, 

however, took no notice of what he said, but leaned over and spat upon the 
bull. At once he looked up, saw the people in the top of the tree and 
bellowed loudly. The whole herd came back at once. The bulls began 
to butt the tree. The man took his arrows and shot the buffalo down one 
after the other. He killed so many that they lay in heaps. Now the leader 
of the herd was a^ powerful medidne-man. He began to roll in the dust. 
After he had rolled over four times, he got up and shook himself. As he 
did so the dust shot straight up into the air. Then he charged upon the 
tree, and as his horns struck it, a large piece flew off. As he did this the 
man in the tree shot a common arrow at him; but it rebounded from his 
side without doing him any harm. The woman said, "About the fourth 
time he strikes the tree, it will fall." When the leader of the herd charged 
the second time, the man shot a white-pointed arrow at him. It entered 
his head, but did not stop him. When he struck the tree, one of his horns 
passed through the trunk and stuck fast. However, this split the tree, 
causing it to fall. The moment he struck the ground, the man shot another 
white-pointed arrow into him. He died instantly. When the buffalo saw 
their leader fall, they ran away as fast as they could. 

The woman came up and stood looking at the dead bull. She began 
to shed tears. The man looked at her in great surprise. He said, '*Did 
you really love that buffalo?" **Yes," replied the woman.^ When she 
said this, the man took out his white-rock knife and killed her at once. 
He returned to his people, and founded the society known as the "Front 
Tails." They were known by this name because each member wore a 
buffalo-tail upon his belt, which was hung in such a way as to be seen from 
the front. 

27. Scabby-Bull. 

Once there was a married woman. This was in the olden times. One 
year the buffalo would not go over the drive. Every time they were brought 
up, they broke through the lines. Then, the old men consulted each other. 
One said, "It is curious how the buffalo act. Some one must be making 
power secretly." Now the husband of this woman was a head man. One 
day when he was talking about the strange acts of the buffalo, one suggested 
that they question the young men who formed the lines of the buffalo-drive 
as to what they observed. As they could tell nothing, they were directed 
next time to watch carefully, to note the leader, his age, and all his char- 



» A similar tale has been found among the Crow Indians (Slmms, op. clt., p. 322) and 
among the Arapaho (Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 423). 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 1 13 

acteristics. "Perhaps," said one, "you young men stick your heads up 
too quickly." After the next attempt to drive the buffalo, the young men 
reported that a young bull led the herd. Some said that he was middle- 
aged, and one young man said that he was an old bull. 

Now this woman was a fine-looking person. At one time she was the 
belle of the camp. She was \'irtuous and industrious. About this time 
the leader of the herd spoke to her. He said, " If you will go off with me, 
I will lead the herd over. Then I will get out and join you in the brush." 
Now the woman thought it over and said to some one, "If I had no children, 
it would be with me like the woman who married a star." * (The bull had 
appeared to her in a dream.) After thinking it over, she decided to promise 
to marry him because of her people. They were very hungry, and it seemed 
her duty to make the sacrifice on their account. So after a while she said 
that she would marry the bull. She really just thought it, she did not 
speak it. She was thinking of her children as she went out after wood. 
Presently she saw the brush where she slept when dreaming of the bull. As 
she was starting home with the wood, she saw the buffalo go over the drive. 
She went back with her wood as quickly as she could. 

After the buffalo were in, one bull got out. He was scabby and lame. 
He ran right through the camp, and as he passed the woman she noticed 
red on his head. Now the woman started out for more wood. As she 
went out of the lodge she saw two ravens sitting close by. "Now," she 
thought, "this is strange that they should be there." As she started down, 
the ravens began flving around her head, telling her that the buffalo-man 
was coming. Now this man always had many animals and birds around 
him, — swallows, small birds, canary-birds, etc.; and while the woman 
was making up her bundle of wood many birds were flying round her head. 
Then she heard the brush crack, and a man stepped out. "Hold on!" 
he said. "I am in a hurry," the woman replied, "I must get back to do 
my butchering." All this time the birds were flying swiftly around her 
head, and she lost her presence of mind, being unable to go on. **Well," 
said Scabby-Bull, "you promised to marry me in your mind. I killed all 
my relations on account of you." Then the woman consented, and they 
went off together. 

All this time the people were butchering. The husband looked every- 
where for the woman, and after a few days began to mourn for her as lost. 
He cried, and called upon ail living things to help him to get back his wife, 
to tell him where she was, etc. As he was going about crying, he came to a 
bluebird's nest in a broken tree. He cried beside the tree, and took up 



1 This refers to the narrative of a woman who went to the sky to become the husband of 
the Morning Star, pp. 38-61. 



1 14 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

some of the young ones in his hand, still crying. Then the Bluebird said to 
him, **What are you doing this for?*' Then the man told the Bluebird all 
that had happened. **We know who it is," said the Bluebinl. "It is 
Scabby-Bull. He is a powerful medicine-man. You cannot kill him. 
We can do nothing for you. None of your arrows will kill him. You must 
take a blunt arrow, paint it yellow, and shoot him on the crown of the head. 
That will make him crazy. Then you can shoot him again. That will 
kill him. Then you must cut him open. A canary-bird will fly out, and 
you must kill it also. Now go over to the other brush you see yonder. In 
a forked branch you will find a nest of young blackbirds. Take up one of 
the young ones, and begin to cry." The man found the nest as directed, 
and, holding one of the young ones in his hand, began to cry. After a while 
the male Blackbird said, "What are you doing that for?" "Well," said 
the man, "I have heard Scabby-Bull ran off with my wife. I have children 
at home like yours, and need help to get my wife back." "Well," said 
the Blackbird, "I can help you in one way. I can give you power to fool 
him. I have that power when around hawks, eagles, etc. Scabby-Bull is 
the leader of the buffalo herd and is protected by a number of birds. You 
go on to the next brush, where you will find an ant-hill. Upon it is a white 
stick on which an ant is sleeping. Give him food, and ask him for help." 
The man went on until he came to the Ant, when he did as directed. He 
explained all his troubles to the Ant, who promised to help him. The Ant 
said, "Go on to the next brush. You vaW find a couple [man and wife] 
down there. Take some of these willows for them to eat [use]. Call on 
them for help. These people have the power of arrows." Then the man 
went on. Presently he came up to an old couple, from whom he got some 
power. The old man said, "You take two blunt arrows. Scabby-Bull 
is afraid of them. You can kill him with such arrows." The old man gave 
him medicine, leggings, and a shirt worked in porcupine-quills. He said, 
"Your arrows will be as many as your quills, and will stick and hurt like 
quills. In the next brush you ^ill find a very quick person. Call on him 
for help." The man went on. When he came to the next brush, he found 
a Prairie-chicken with his wife and children. So the man took some grass- 
hoppers and fed the chicks. "What are you doing that for?" said the 
Prairie-chicken. Then the man ex-plained to him that he had lost his wife, 
etc. "I know all about Scabby-Bull," said the Prairie-chicken. "He is a 
very smart person, guarded by many birds and animals, and very hard to 
approach. I will help you all I can. I can scare anything that Uves. 
[This refers to the noise as a prairie-chicken suddenly takes wing.] I will 
scare Scabby-Bull. You will find him by a spring. I can take you there. 
Now go back to the old man and ask for your arrows." When the man 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 115 

returned with his arrows, the Prairie-chicken said, **You must go back to 
the Ant and feed him again. He should give you more power. He may 
give you the power to turn into an ant This Ant is the same one as the 
flying-ant. The buffalo and birds pay no attention to flying-ants. Scabby- 
Bull is protected by all sorts of things, and a flpng-ant is about the only 
thing that can approach him." So he went back and got the power to turn 
into an ant. The Ant said to him, " Now Scabby-Bull is abusing your wife, 
because I have been there to see." \Mien the man got back, the Prairie- 
chickeh and he started out. After a time they saw Scabby-Bull in the dis^ 
tance. "Now shut your eyes," said the Prairie-chicken. At once the man 
became a prairie-chicken, and was flying along with the other. They saw 
all the birds fl\ing around the herd. Then they alighted and began to feed 
with the other birds. **Look," said the Prairie-chicken, **see that herd of 
buffalo! Scabby-Bull and your wife are there. Over yonder is the spring 
where they drink." Then the Prairie-chicken said again, **Shut your eyes I" 
At once the man became a winged-ant. **Now," said the Prairie-chicken, 
"you can fly around and not be noticed." As he flew around, he saw Scabby- 
Bull lying with his head on the woman^s lap. The woman was picking lice 
from his head while he was shaking his tail. Scabby-Bull was very jealous 
of this woman. After a while he said to her, "I shall go away, but you 
are to work some moccasins for me in quills. If you have not finished them 
by the time I return, the buffalo will dance upon you and kill you." 

Then the woman set to work on the moccasins. She called upon the 
worms [probably ants] for help.^ They asked her to sing a song while they 
W'orked. In this way the work was soon done. They were very fine indeed. 
By this time the Ant and the Prairie-chicken were back at the spring. 
Scabby-Bull came back to the woman, took off his left horn and sent her to 
the spring for water. As she took the horn, Scabby-Bull told her that if 
any one spoke to her the horn would make a noise. \Mien the woman 
reached the spring, her former husband, who was now an ant, alighted on 
her ear and explained everything to her. He told her how the children 
at home were crying for her. That he needed her very much. Then the 
w^oman told him that she would go back to Scabby-Bull, and after he had 
gone to sleep she would nm off. Now when she got back with the horn of 
w^ater, and Scabby-Bull was about to drink, the horn made a noise. At 
once he accused the woman of having met some one; but she said cjuietly, 
"No, the birds were all telling me not to look." Then Scabby-Bull asked 
the birds. They said that they had done so. 

Now, Scabby-Bull went to sleep and the woman met her husband as 
she had promised. Then he said, "Shut your eyes!" At once the woman 



1 This seems to be a part of the R^l-Head narrative, pp. 129-132. 



116 Anlhropologiccd Papers American Mtiseum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

became a winged-ant. Then they flew away. The buffalo herd was so 
large that they were flying over buffalo until sunset and even the next day. 
About sundown the next day was the time the Ant had stated that he would 
withdraw his power. Now, as they were flying about over the herd, the 
birds and animab guarding the buffalo noticed these ants fl}'ing along; 
but when the Ant withdrew his power, they became prairie-chickens, and 
so they flew along day after day. At last they were clear of the buffalo, and, 
becoming human beings, walked on foot. As they were going along, the 
bluebird was flying over their heads, calling out that the buffalo were gaining 
on them. Looking back, the man and woman saw them coming. Then 
the woman threw off one moccasin. WTien the buffalo came up to the place, 
they stopped to lick it. After a time they gained on them again, and the 
woman threw off her other moccasin, which delayed the buffalo as before. 
The next time she threw away one of her leggings, then the other legging, 
then one garter, and then the other garter. Then she threw off her robe, 
then her belt, and then her dress. Each time, the buffalo stopped, but 
gained on them again. Now they came to a tree and climbed into the top. 
The buffalo were following on their trail. All passed by but one. In the 
rear was a scabby, lame bull who stopped to rub his back on the tree. While 
he was doing this, the woman said, **I have a mind to spit on him." **Xo, 
you must not do that!'' said the man. **The buffalo have not se#n us yet." 
**Oh!" said the woman, **he is such an old bull that he will not notice it." 
So she spat on him. Then the bull looked up, saw them in the tree and 
began to call the herd. Then the man began to shoot them with his arrows. 
He had flint-points, white-rock points, etc. All this time the buffalo were 
knocking pieces off the tree, and by the time he l.ad killed all the buffalo, 
the tree began to tremble. Now the man had but ten arrows left, and Scabby 
Bull began to make medicine to charge upon the tree. When he charged, 
he knocked off a large piece. Then as he charged again, he said, **I shall 
get you this time!" All this time the man was shooting his arrows at him, 
but they made no wounds. At last he took up the medicine- arrow, shot 
Scabby-Bull in the forehead, which brought him to his knees, and with the 
fourth arrow he was killed. Then the man came down, scalped Scabby- 
Bull, and burned the scalp. 

Now the woman began to cry. *'WhatI" said the man, "did you love 
that bull?" *' Yes," was the reply. Then the man upbraided her, remind- 
ing her of the dangers he had gone through to rescue her and the ill treatment 
she had received from the bull. Then he knocked her down, cut off her 
breasts and her genitals; then those of the bull, which he thrust down her 
throat.^ So she died. 



1 That such outrages were in a way conventional is made probable by an incident noted 
by Henry, op. cit., p. 262. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 117 

28. The Horns and the Matoki. 

(a) Blood Version, 

Once a young man went out and came to a buffalo-cow fast in the mire. 
He took advantage of her situation. After a time she gave birth to a boy. 
When he couJd run about, this boy would go into the Indian camps and 
join in the games of the children, but would always mysteriously disappear 
in the evening. One day this boy told his mother that he intended to 
search among the camps for his father. Not long after this he was playing 
with the children in the camps as usual, and went into the lodge of a head 
man in company with a boy of the family. He told this head man that his 
father lived somewhere in the camp, and that he was anxious to find him. 
The head man took pity on the boy, and sent out a messenger to call in to his 
lodge all the old men in the camp. When these were all assembled and 
standing around the lodge, the head man requested the boy to pick out his 
father. The boy looked them over, and then told the head man that his 
father was not among them. Then the head man sent out a messenger to 
call in all the men next in age; but, when these were assembled, the boy said 
that his father was not among them. Again the head man sent out the 
messenger to call in all the men of the next rank in age. When they were 
assembled, the boy looked them over as before, and announced that his 
father was not among them. So once again the head man sent out his 
messenger to call in all the young unmarried men of the camp. As they 
were coming into the head man*s lodge, the boy ran to one of them, and, 
embracing him, said, **Here is my father." After a time the boy told his 
father that he wished to take him to see his mother. The boy said, "When 
we come near her, she will run at you and hook four times, but you are to 
stand perfectly still." The next day the boy and his father started out on 
their journey. As they w^ere going along they saw a buffalo-cow, which 
immediately ran at them as the boy had predicted. The man stood perfectly 
still, and at the fourth time, as the cow was running forward to hook at him, 
she became a woman. Then she went home with her husband and child. 
One day shortly after their return, she warned her husband that whatever 
he might do he must never strike at her with fire. They lived together 
happily for many years. She was a remarkably good woman. One evening 
when the husband had invited some guests, and the woman expressed a 
dislike to prepare food for them, he became very angry, and, catching up a 
stick from the fire, struck at her. As he did so, the woman and her child 
vanished, and the people saw a buffalo cow and calf running from the camp. 
Now the husband was very sorry and mourned for his wife and child. 



118 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natvral History. [Vol. II, 

After a time he went out to search for them. In order that he might ap- 
proach the buffalo without bi»ing discovered, he rubbed himself with filth 
from a buffalo-wallow. In the course of time he came to a place where 
some buffalo were dancing. He could hear them from a distance. As he 
was approaching, he met his son, who was now, as before, a buffalo-calf. 
The father explained to the boy that he was mourning for him and his mother 
and that he had come to take them home. The calf-boy explained that 
this would be xery difficult, for his father would be required to pass through 
an ordeal. The calf- boy ex-plained to him that, when he arrived amon^ the 
buffalo and inquired for his wife and son, the chief of the buffalo would 
order that he select his child from among all the buffalo-calves in the herd. 
Now the calf-boy wished to assist his father, and told him that he would 
know his child by a sign, because, when the calves appeared before him, 
his own child would hold up its tail. Then the man proceeded until he 
came to the place where the buffalo were dancing. Immediately he was 
taken before the chief of the buffalo-herd. The chief required that he first 
prove his relationship to the child by picking him out from among all the 
other calves of the herd. The man agreed to this and the calves were brought 
up. He readily picked out his own child by the sign. 

The chief of the buffalo, however, was not satisfied with this proof, 
and said that the father could not have the child until he identified him four 
times. ^ WTiile the preparations were being made for another test, the 
calf-boy came to his father and explained that he would be known this time 
by closing one eye. \Mien the time arrived, the calves were brought as 
before, and the chief of the buffalo directed the father to identify his child, 
which he did by the sign. Before the next trial the calf- boy explained to 
his father that the sign would be one ear hanging down. Accordingly, 
when the calves were brought up for the father to choose, he again identified 
his child. Now, More the last trial, the boy came again to his father and 
notified him that the sign by which he was to be known was dancing and 
holding up one leg. Now the calf- boy had a chum among the buffalo- 
calves, and when the calves were called up before the chief so that the father 
might select his child, the chum saw the calf-boy beginning to dance holding 
up one leg, and he thought to himself, "He is doing some fancy dancing." 
So he, also, danced in the same way. Now the father observed that there 
were two calves giving the sign, and realized that he must make a guess, 
lie did so, but the guess was wrong. Immediately the herd nished upon 
the man and tram])le<l him into the dust. Then they all ran away except 
the calf-bov, his mother, and an old bull. 



> Tales of ft ImfTalo-rhihl and similar tests occnr in other tribes. See Simms (Crow, op. 
cit., p 319) and J. O. Doisty (Ce^diia, op. cit., p. 140;. 



1908.] Wissler and DutaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 119 

These three mourned together for the fate of the unfortunate man. 
After a time the old bull requested that they examine the ground to see if 
they could find a piece of bone. After long and careful search they suc- 
ceeded in finding one small piece that had not been trampled by the buffalo. 
The bull took this piece, made a sweat-house, and finally restored the man 
to life. When the man was restored, the bull explained to him that he and 
his family would receive some power, some head-dresses, some songs, and 
some crooked sticks, such as he had seen the buffalo carry in the dance at the 
time when he attempted to pick out his son. 

The calf-boy and his mother then became human beings, and returned 
with the man. It was this man who started the Bull and the Horn Societies, 
and it was his wife who started the Matoki.^ 

(6) North Piegan Version. 

Many Indians were in camp where they had made a buffalo-drive, but 
they could find no buffalo. They sent out two boys to look for the buffalo, 
and these two boys traced them to the south. Now one of the boys had the 
power of a crow and went ahead to look for the buffalo. He discovered 
that a person named White-Crow had driven all the buffalo away. Then 
one of the boys became a black crow, and when they came back to camp 
and told the people that White-Crow had driven all the buffalo away, the 
chief said, "Black-Crow, go up and talk with White-Crow, and lead him 
off somewhere, and, while he is away, steal the buffalo.** So Black-Crow 
went out and began to talk with White-Crow to lead him off, but White- 
Crow was suspicious and wanted to go back. Then Black-Crow told him 
that he would go out himself to look for buffalo. WTien Black-Crow was 
out to where the men of the camp were, he advised them only to travel by 
night, and in the daytime to cover themselves up with grass. Then Black- 
Crow went back to lead White-Crow away. 

Now the young men travelled along by night and finally they heard 
buffalo, but morning came before they reached them: so they hid again 
until night. Now one young man had the power of the buffalo and turned 
himself into a buffalo. As it was about travelling-time, Black-Crow re- 
turned and saw the buffalo in the distance bunching up, so the young man 
asked him to go out to see what they were doing. When Black-Oow came 
to the buffalo, he found that they were dancing. When he returned and 



1 Several informants amon^ the Bloods claimed that manv of the functions formerly 
exercised by the Bulls have been incorporated with the ritual of the Horns. The origin mvth 
for the Bulls as recorded by Grinnell (op. cit.. p. 104) closes with the same incidents as noted 
above, but opens with the initial event in the Scabby-Bull narrative, p. 112. 



120 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

told the young men what he saw, they told him to go back and let them 
know when they danced and they would go down to see them. 

The buffalo were now scattered out all around their hiding-places. 
One of the young men became a buffalo and the other a crow. Then they 
went out to see the dance. There they saw White-Crow flying around the 
buffalo to herd them. Then the young man who had turned into a buffalo 
told the crow to go back, saying, "I will stay here and become a cow, have 
a calf, and try to lead the buffalo away." 

Now in the buffalo-dance there are two bonnets of white swanskin, one 
having two horns on it, and the other one horn. Then the Cow told the 
Calf that when the dancers hung the one-hom bonnet on a stick he could 
grab it and run to her. Now the Calf expressed a desire to sit by the buU 
with the one-hom bonnet. The others tried to keep him from sitting there, 
but finally he was permitted. After a time the bull with the bonnet painted 
the Calfs face and said, **Next time they dance, you put it on." So the 
Calf took the bonnet, put it on, and led the dance. He danced around in a 
circle. Finally, when they were all through, they sat down. Then the Calf 
sat down. It was his intention to run away the next time they danced. 

Now Black-Crow came back and said to the Calf, ** Go on with the dance; 
for I want to steal the dance-stick that is wrapped with swan's down." 
The calf wanted to steal the leader's bonnet so that all the buffalo would 
follow. There was still another stick, wrapped with otter-skin, and the 
Cow was to steal this. Now the Cow and Black-Crow succeeded in getting 
hold of the dancing-sticks in the same way that the Calf got hold of the 
bonnet. Now they all danced and the Calf led the dance, and, of course, 
the dancers all followed their leader. Then the Calf ran and all the herd 
ran after him ; but the two with the sticks became tired, and stuck the sticks 
in the ground. Then all the buffalo lay down to rest. When the sticks 
were pulled up again, all the buffalo followed. In this way they travelled 
four nights and four days. On the fourth night, the Calf, Black-Crow, 
and the Cow had dreams in which the buffalo gave them power with the 
sticks. 

This is the way in which the Horn Society came to be. All dancers 
must have wives, for the buffalo had wives. In every medicine-dance 
there are three people, — the man, his wife, the young man. The young 
man is the crow [messenger].^ 



1 This narrative seems to be an adaptation of parts of the Twin-Brothers, pp. 50-52. For 
an account of a mother and son runninp away with ceremonial objects in a similar manner^ 
see Crow Myths. Simms, op. cit., pp. 289-294. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 121 

29. The Kit-Fox. 

Once two men were out on the war-path alone. They came to a prairie- 
dog town. They saw the dogs standing up, but, as they went near, the dogs 
went into their holes. Then they saw a woman sitting there, and one of 
them said, ** There is a woman." So they approached her. The woman's 
face was painted red, with a design made by scratching with the finger. 
She had no dress on, but just a robe around her. She wore a plume on her 
head, and held a prairie-turnip in her mouth. As the men came up she 
said, "You are in\ited." Now they did not know how to get down into the 
holes, so the woman said, "Shut your eyes." Then in a moment they 
heard some one say, "Oki!" When they opened their eyes, they found 
they were by the side of a lodge, and when they went in they saw the Kit- 
Fox Society sitting around. There were many men dressed like the woman. 
This was the Kit-Fox Society, and a Kit-Fox man was showing the others- 
how to perform the ceremony. He directed them through the whole ritual. 
This is how the men learned it. 

30. The Catchers. 

There was once a man called Chief-Speaking. It was his wife who found 
the buffalo-rock. One day she said to her husband, "You take the rock, 
for there will be another dream. You are to sleep on the buffalo-drive hill. 
It will be better for you to do this and have the dream, because you are a 
man and can handle medicine better than I." Now the man went out to- 
the place arid staid many nights, but he had no dream. So he thought to- 
himself, "I think my wife has deceived me." Yet after he had been there 
seven days, he heard some one singing a song, and, looking round, he saw a 
procession. There were two men leading, each carrying a pipe. The others 
carried clubs with hoof rattles on them. This procession was coming down 
from the sun. 

After this, the man organized the Catchers Society, but his wife put some 
of the buffalo-rock songs into the ritual. 

31. The Buffalo's Adopted Child. 

A long time ago, we don't know how many years ago, the daughter of a 
Blackfoot Indian chief was a very handsome looking girl. She was a very 
true girl. Many young men who had asked her to marry them were refused. 
Now this girl had not been with any man at any time. All at once she 



122 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

became in a family-way, and. when her time came to give birth to a child, 
she went out away from the camp, for she was very much ashamed. Then 
she gave birth to a baby-boy which she buried in the earth. Then she went 
back to camp. The next day, four buffalo-bulls came along where she had 
buried this child.^ They saw it. One of the bulls said to the others, "We 
will bring this child to Hfe again, and keep him for our own." The others 
all agreed to this. They had the power to restore life. One of the bulls 
began to paw and hook the dirt away from the child until it was uncovered. 
The second bull hooked the child around until it came to life and started to 
crawl away. The third hooked the child until it was a half- grown boy. 
The last did the same until the boy became a full-grown man. Now the 
Bulls said to the young man, " You can go and visit your people, and when 
you are through you may return to us." 

So this young man went on his way to the camp. WTien he came to 
his people, they did not know him. He told them his story, and they gave 
him clothes, a horse, and a bow with arrows. '*Now," he said, **I must go 
and visit some of the other Indians." Then he got on his horse and rode out. 
After he had travelled a long way, he saw a hawk and a rabbit. The hawk 
was pursuing the rabbit. When the Rabbit saw this man, it ran up and 
stopped at the horse's feet, saying to the man, "Brother, help me! Don't 
let that hawk get me. The hawk wants to kill and eat me. Help me, 
brother, save me from that hawk! I will give you some of my power. You 
will be able to run as fast as I can whenever you wish to do so." While the 
Rabbit was talking to the man, the hawk was flving around overhead, 
waiting for a chance to get the Rabbit. Now the Hawk spoke to the man, 
saying, **I will give you my power. You will be able to run as fast as I can 
fly, if you will k»t me have that Rabbit." Now the man said to the Hawk, 
"I will not let you eat this Rabbit, but I will get something else for you to 
eat." So he took the Rabbit with him and turned it loose in the thick timber, 
where he knew it would be safe from the Hawk. Then he began to look 
for something to kill for the Hawk. He had not been looking ver}- long 
when he saw a squirrel, killed it with his bow and arrows, took it out to 
where the Hawk was sitting, and laid it down near the bird, saving, "You 
can have this squirrel to eat." The Hawk was very nuich pleased with 
this and told the man he could have the power which he had promised him 
before. 

Now this man got power from both of them, the Hawk and the Rabbit. 
Then he went on his way again. He had not gone a great distance when 
he saw a buffalo-bull. As soon as the bull saw him, it took after him, and 

» In a siiiiiliar lalf uiin)ii;,' ih»* Arapalio aii»l (;r()s Venne tlu'ie are seven bulls. Also in 
this collect ion, \v<' find m'v»mi hulls re-^tonn^ life to the woman who hrouglit the medicine 
.vhicUls, p. 100. The Crow rcndciiuir. liowcxtT. j,'ivcs the number ol hulls taking pari in the resto- 
ration of life as four (JSinims, op. cii. \). 319.) 



1908.] Wissler and DuixiU, Blackfoot Mytholoffy. 123 

as soon as he knew the bull was after him, he began to whip his horse away 
from the bull; but, as the bull was a much faster runner than the horse, it 
kept gaining on him until it was almost within reach of his horse. Then 
the man began to use his bow and arrows, but the arrows would not faze him. 
The bull was nearly within reach of his horse, when the man thought of the 
Rabbit and called on him for help. As soon as he called on the Rabbit, the 
horse ran much faster, and left the bull far behind. The bull followed, 
however, and after the man had gone some distance his horse began to get 
weaker, and the bull began to gain on him as before. Again he called on 
the Rabbit for power, and his horse could go so much faster that he left 
the bull far behind. He called on the Rabbit four times; then its power 
gave out. Then he called on the Hawk for power, and it helped him four 
times. Then the bull overtook him, and hooked his horse over. The 
man was thrown into a washout in a coulee. Then the bull began to hook 
at the man, but could not reach him on account of the narrow ditch-like 
place he was in. Now the bull kept hooking away the earth around the man 
and had almost reached him with his horns, when the man saw some hawks 
flying around. Then he called on the hawks, saying, ** Brothers, help me 
before this bull kills me." The hawks heard the man, flew down, and 
pecked out the bulFs eyes. 

Then the bull was helpless and could not see the man any more. Then 
the Bull said to the man, "Brother, give me back my sight, and I will give 
you my power, which is greater than that of all the buffalo.*' Then the 
man said to the Bull, **If you will bring my horse back to life, and will not 
harm me any more, I will restore your sight." The Bull promised to do so. 
Then the man told the hawks to help the Bull. The hawks flew around 
the Bull's head, and when they left him he could see as well as before. Then 
the bull went around the dead horse pawing the earth up over his back 
until the horse came to life again. Then the man got on his horse and told 
the buffalo-bull that he was going home where his fathers were. 

The young man travelled many days before he found the four buffalo- 
bulls that adopted him. They told him that they would take him to their 
home. They told him that the buffalo had a big cave near the mountains, 
and that this cave was another country where all the buffalo lived, had 
lodges, and became as human beings, just like his own people. They told 
him that when the buffalo came out of the cave they would be buffalo, but 
that when they went in they became as people. They also told him about 
their chief. They said, "Our chief is a strong medicine-man. All the buf- 
falo are afraid of him, and he is also very jealous of his wife. If a man even 
talk to her, he will kill him." Whvn they got through telling him about this, 
they all started for the buffalo cave. When they reached the place they 
met many buffalo. They all went in, and the young man was surprised 



124 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

when he saw that his fathers were as men Uke himself, that there were so- 
many people, such nice big lodges, and such nice land. Then his fathers 
took him into their lodge. Now, after he had staid there some time, he 
was down by a spring where all the people went for water, when the chiefs 
wife passed by. He looked at her. She went to her lodge and told her 
husband that this young man was looking at her. When the chief heard 
this, he was very angry, w^nt over to the young man's lodge and was going 
to kill him. Then the fathers of this young man said to the chief of the 
people, "We will fight you first; and when you kill us, then you can kill 
our son." Now the chief was willing to do this, for he was not afraid of 
any of them. Then they all turned into buffalo-bulls and went out to fight. 
It was not long before the chief bull had killed the four. Then he went 
after the young man. The young man turned into a bull, fought the chief, 
and killed him. Then the people said to the young man, **Now, since you 
have killed him, you have become our chief and may tell us what to do.'^ 
The young man told them that he wanted all of them to go out of this place, 
never to return again, and that they would be buffalo from then on and 
never like people again. Then he drove them all out, and went to his own 
tribe. This is the reason the buffalo cannot talk any more.^ 

When the young man came to his own people, he went into an old 
couple's lodge, told them that as they were poor with no one to look after 
them, he would live with them and take care of them. The old man and 
woman were glad to have him. Now after he had been here a while, the 
Indians were very hungry for the buffalo were far away. One day the young 
man asked his grandmother what she would ike to eat. The old woman 
said she wished a buffalo-calf. Just then the young man pulled off one of 
his moccasins and threw it down by the old woman's side. As he threw it, 
it turned into a buffalo-calf. The old woman began to cut it up to cook. 
They all ate of it. The young man did this several times. The children 
of the camp would come around and the old woman would give them some 
meat to take home with them. 

Now the people began to wonder how this old woman got her fresh meat 
when the rest of them had none. 

The chief had two daughters who used to come to see the old woman. 
She always gave them some meat. Now the chief thought of having this 
young man for a son-in-law, for he knew that he was a medicine-man. So 
he asked his oldest daughter to go over to live with this man, but she refused. 
Then he asked the youngest daughter. She went and married the young 
man. After the young couple had lived together for a while, the young man 
said to his wife, "Go ask your father to tell the people to get ready and 



> For previous mention of a cave containing buffalo, see p. 62. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaUy Blackfoot Mythology. 125 

go out to the lines, for I shall make a buffalo-drive." Now, as I said before, 
the buffalo were far away, but this young man had power to bring them 
back to the drive. So all the people went out to the lines and waited for 
liim. The young man was not gone very long when they saw a great herd 
•of buffalo falling over into the enclosure. After everybody got through 
butchering, they went home. 

Now the next day the young man said to his wife, "Go tell your father 
that I shall give a buffalo-dance. This dance is called the * Bull's Dance,' 
and have him put up three or four lodges together so as to have a place to 
dance in, and to have the lodges close to the brush." The woman went 
over and told her father what her husband had said. The chief called out 
to the people, and the lodges were put up. Four lodges were joined to- 
gether forming a long wall, or wind-break, open on one side near the brush. 
After the people had assembled the young man went there with his wife. 
He told the men who were going to take part in the dance what to do and 
also the songs. Now the young man said to his wife, while the rest were 
listening, "I am going into the brush, and when I come out I will show up 
as a buffalo- bull. I shall prance about through the crowd as if about to 
hook some one. WTien I do this, you must try to catch me by the horns. 
I will pretend to hook you, but do not be afraid of me, for I will not hurt 
you. I shall run into the brush and come out four times; and if you don't 
catch me at any of these times, especially at the fourth time, I shall run 
away for good and be a real buffalo. While I am doing this, the singing 
and dancing must go on. At first, when I come out of the brush, I shall 
be a buffab-calf. The second time I shall be a two-year- old bull; the 
third, a three-year-old bull; the fourth time, a four-year-old bull." So the 
dance went on and the young man went into the brush. When he came 
•out he was a buffalo-calf prancing around as if tr\ing to hook some one. 
Then the woman tried to catch the calf, but it made a jump at her as if to 
hook, when she ran away. The calf went back into the brush and came 
out again. This time it was a two-year-old bull. He did the same thing, 
and the woman got out of his way. Then he went back and came out as a 
three-year-old bull, and as the woman did not catch him this time, he went 
back into the brush. Now the girKs father said to her, "This is your last 
chance. You must try to catch him, for he is not a real buffalo, he is your 
husband. If you don't catch him now, you will never see your husband 
again." So when the bull came out of the brush this time he was much 
larger; but the woman made for him and caught him by the horns, when 
he turned back into a man, and the dance stopped. 

This was the starting of the Bull's Dance.^ 

' This narrative is sometimes called "The Iron Horns." It accoimts for the origin of the 
Bull Society ceremony. It was recorded by D. C. Duvall. 



126 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II , 

IV. CULTURAL AND OTHER ORIGLXS. 
1. The Whirlwixd-Boy. 

Once there was a woman who had given birth to many children, but all 
of them died in infancy. At last the woman said, **I will have no more 
children: if any more are bom to me, I will kill them at once. I cannot 
bear to see them die as the others; and, am^way, it is no use to let them live."^ 
Now long after this, one time when the woman went out after water, she saw 
a small whirlwind going along. She watched it. It came directly toward 
her, and in tlie center of the dust-whirl she saw a very small boy running 
along. The boy said to her, ** Mother, I know what you said about not 
having any more children; but it will be different with me. I shall be your 
next. When I am bom, you must cut off a piece of my navel-cord, put with 
it sweet-grass, wrap them up, and hang the packet around my neck. Then 
I shall not die.'* When the boy finished speaking, the woman stooped over 
and picked him up. He was so small that she held him in the hollow of 
her hand, but in a moment he turned into a caterpillar.* 

Then the woman was with child. When the time came, she went out 
to be delivered. It was a boy. The woman who attended her cut off a 
section of the navel-cord and dried it. At first they wrapped it up with the 
baby, but aften^^ards they put it in a buckskin bag and tied it on the baby's 
back. This baby did not die. He grew up, and when a boy of ten or 
twelve years (the mother had no more children), a friend of the family had 
a child that was always cr}nng. There seemed no way to make it stop 
cr\nng. One day this boy told his mother to take one of the bones from 
the right front-foot of the buffalo. She did so. When they gave it to the 
child, it ceased crying. Now this same woman had another child. It was 
a boy. He cried also, even more than the other. One day the Whirlwind- 
Boy requested his mother to rub some yellow paint upon the baby's forehead, 
then to go out and paint one of the buffalo bones yellow. When they gave 
this to the child, he also stoj)ped crying. From that time on, a crying male 
child was always given a yellow-painted bone from the right front-foot of a 
buffalo, and had his forehead painted yellow. After a time the same 
woman had another child, this time a girl; and, like the others, it cried 
all the time. One day the Whirlwind-Boy requested his mother to take a 
bone from the left hind-leg of the buffalo and paint it red. Also to paint 



* For a discussion of the i)eruliar association between the whirlwind and a moth see 
Journal of American Folk- Lore, Vol. XVIIl, pp. 258-261. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 127 

the baby's forehead red. When this had been done, the baby ceased to 
cry.^ This is the way children are kept from crying, even to this day. 

Now Whirlwind-Boy would sometimes take the right hind-leg of the 
buffalo and paint one side yellow. Then he would go out and wander 
about the prairie, repeating to himself, **This bone says all the buffalo will 
go down the drive and over the cliff.'* Then he would throw the bone out 
in front of him. If it fell with the yellow side up, it would be as he said. At 
another time he would take a bone, lay a stick across it, and then drop a 
braid of sweet-grass. If the braid fell on the stick hanging, the buffalo would 
go over.^ These things people do even to this day. When Whirlwind-Boy 
was a man and his mother very old, he said to her one day, "Mother, I 
think I shall go away before you die. I do not care to be here when that 
happens." His mother asked him not to go, but he was not easily moved. 
At last, however, he agreed to take her with him. So he called the people 
of the camp together and requested all to watch. He took his mother over 
to the top of a high cliff; then he went back some distance and became a 
whirlwind. W^hen the whirlwind reached the place where the mother sat, 
she disappeared. No one ever saw them again.' 

2. The Bladder Story. 

Once there was a very poor boy who lived with his mother. His father 
was dead. One day his mother was ill and was about to die, but the boy 
said, **My mother will come to life again." She had been gored by a buffalo 
and was almost dead. She had been gored in the head. The little boy 
said, "Give me a bladder." WTien it was brought to him, he blew it full of 
air. His mother was lying with her head towards him. He put the bladder 
on her head and placed some charcoal on it. Then he said to his uncle, 
"You must be ready to shake the lodge four times." Then he painted his 
mother, — a black spot on her right hand, one on the back of each wrist, 
and one on her forehead. On himself he made a circle at each place where 
he had painted a dot on his mother. Now the woman was dead. The 
boy took a calf robe with the hair-side up, and beat time on it as he sang, 

1 At this point the narrator explained that a favorite game among children was the taking 
by the boys of a bone from the left hind-foot of the buffalo, and going among the girls to induce 
them to laugh. A boy would shake the bone near the girl's face, and in as comical manner as 
possible say, "I know you are going to have a lover! I know it! I know it!" Now if the 
girl laughed, it was a sure sign that she would be a bad [unchaste] woman. If she did not lauph, 
she would become a great medicine-woman, true, virtuous, etc. In a similar manner, girls 
would test boj's, but with a bone from the left front-foot. 

* The braid of grass hanging across the stick was explained as symbolizing meat hanging 
up to dry, in turn the symbol of plenty. 

3 This story accounts for some of the practices in the care of children. The navel-cord 
amulet for boys is in the shape of a snake; for girls, in the shape of a lizard or a horned toad. 
It was explained that the reason why Whirlwind-Boy picked out these forms was that these ani- 
mals were never sick, and enjoyed long life. 



128 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

^*If the bladder will not move, she will die for good." Then he said, 
** Mother, get up!" His uncle shook the lodge four times, the bladder 
moved, the woman shook her head four times and then got up. She was 
well i^ain. "Now," said the boy, *'you see this bladder. Whatever it 
is placed upon and charcoal put on it, that object will move when the lodge 
is shaken." 

One time there was a young man in the camp with warts all over his 
head, face, and body. So he went to the boy with the bladder and asked 
to be cured. **A11 right," said the boy. Then he took some charcoal, 
sang the same song as before, rubbed the charcoal over the man, and said, 
"In three nights all your warts will be gone." And it was as he said. 
Then the boy told all the people that warts should be cured this way, and so 
it is done to this day. 

Now there was an old woman in the camp whose son-in-!aw had been 
gone a long time. So she was left without support. She asked the boy 
with the bladder to use his power to get her son-in-law back. The boy 
took a sinew from the leg of a cow [buffalo] with part of the muscle attached. 
He laid it on the ground and fastened the end of the sinew with a stick. 
ITien he put some yellow paint on the sinew, near the stick. Then he put 
a live coal on the painted spot, and began to sing, "Come here, come here!" 
etc. The fire caused the sinew to draw up, and this pulled the muscle 
towards the stick.* Now the son-in-law, in a distant camp, felt something 
within drawing him back to his wife*s people. So he determined to return. 
People are still brought back in this way. 

3. The Water-Bull. 

This is a story of the water-buffalo. There was a girl who lived in the 
water, and it was the time when the Blackfoot got the painted buffalo- lodge. 
This girl was rich, for her father was a chief. One time the girl went down 
to the river to bathe with the others, but when they returned they noticed 
that she was missing. The chief sent some one about the camp to look for 
her, but the last place at which she was seen was the bathing-place. Now 
the chief told all the people that when the time came for them to move 
camp, he would stay until the water was low so that he might find her body. 
So he staid. 

One day the children who were playing near the stream saw the girl put 
her head out of the water. She called to them, "Tell my father that I shall 

' For a similar use of sinew, see Wissler, Dakota Myths (Journal of American Folk-Lore» 
Vol. XX, p. 128;. 



1908.] Wisaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 129 

come ashore to-night." Now, when they told the chief, he did not beUeve 
them, but in the evening they heard a noise down by the river. There was 
a great roaring, and a voice called out asking them to make a smudge. 
So they made a smudge in the chiefs lodge. Then the giri came in. Tljey 
offered her food, but she refused, saying, ** I cannot eat that food now, as 
I am used to other food." She then told them that her husband Uved in 
the water. So her father gave her all her clothes and other property. 
^*Now," said the girl, "my husband will give you food. The buffalo, he 
will drown them for you, but they will be of two colors, brown and white. 
Of these the white must be given back to him.^ I will visit you every time 
you camp here." Now they watched her as she went out and saw her go 
down into the water. That night while the buffalo were crossing the river 
a great many were drowned and thrown upon the shore. The people found 
them of two colors. So they butchered them and fixed up the robes. 

Now the chief said to a boy, **Go to the camp of our people and in^ite 
them to come back." When they came in, he told them what had happened, 
and that they all must give something to his daughter. They must throw 
the gifts into the water. This they did. That night the girl came out of 
the water again and called all the people together. They gathered around 
and looked into the lodge where she sat. She invited one of her friends to 
go down into the water with her. This friend and another went down. 
She gave them a black rock to hold so that they would not float. When 
they were in the water, the girl said, "Now shut your eyes and do not look 
until you hear some one say, 'Oki'!" So they went down. Some one said, 
^*Oki!" and upon looking round they found themselves in a lodge. They 
were not wet and did not seem to be in the water. It was a fine place. 
There was a man in the lodge who sang them a medicine-song, and explained 
to them that whenever crossing a stream they should throw something into 
the water as an offering to the water-people. 

When the women returned, they told what had happened, and to this 
day our people still throw things into the water. 

4. Red-Head.^ 

Once there was a man who lived alone with his mother, far from other 
people. It is not known that he had any other relations in the world. 
Around this lodge and in it were many Uve birds and animals. The man 
himself had a head [hair!] as red as blood. 



1 To sacrifice skins of albino buffalo was the custom among many tribes 
a Translated by Mrs. Joseph Kipp. 



130 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Once a young woman made a long journey alone. At last she came 
to a lodge. It was Red-Head's lodge. She raised the door-flap and saw 
that the lodge was well furnished with bedding and other objects made of 
buckskin. This young woman had just been created. She came out of 
the ground. She did not know how to eat, to drink, or in fact to do anything. 
When Red-Head came home he found her in the lodge. He told her to go 
out and leave him alone. The young woman was very much afraid of him. 
So she went to an ant-hill and began to talk to the Ants. Then she cried, 
and called upon the Ants for help. She begged for some kind of power 
to enable her to live with Red-Head and secure his good will. At last the 
Ants took pity on her; and one of them said, "You get us two strips of buck- 
skin from the lodge." The young woman returned to the lodge, and stood 
outside until Red-Head went out. Then she went in and cut the strips of 
buckskin from a hide she found hanging there. She hurried away to the 
ant-hill and laid the strips of buckskin on it. The Ants said to her, *'Now 
go away and do not come near us for one day. Leave us ! " The next day, 
about the same hour, the young woman went to the ant-hill. She was 
greatly surprised to find the strips of buckskin beautifully embroidered with 
porcupine-quills. This was the first time quill-work was ever seen by the 
people. The Ants were the first quill-workers.^ The Ants said to her, 
"Now, you go (o the lodge and bring us the robe of Red-Head's mother. 
Spread it out for us on the ground where you stand, then leave us for another 
day. Do not come near us. Take the strips of buckskin we have worked 
for you and hide them. No one must see them now." When the young 
woman returned on the following day, she found the robe worked in broad 
stripes of porcupine-embroidery. The Ants said to her, "Take the robe 
with you. Sew the strips of quill-work we gave you upon the leggings of 
Red-Head's mother. When you have done this, put the robe and the leg- 
gings at the place where, the old woman usually sits, so that she and Red- 
Head may see them. You are to do this when no one is in the lodge. As 
soon as you have put them down, go out into the brush. We shall help you 
again.*' 

Red-Head came into the lodge carrying some meat. He saw the robe 
and the leggings lying in his mother's place. When his mother came in, 
he said to lier, "Mother, you do very nice work." " What do you mean," 
she replied. Red-Head pointed to the robe and the leggirgs. His mother 
was greatly surprised to see them. She had never seen anything like them 
before. She declared she knew nothing about it. "That young woman 
must have done it," said Red-Head. "Find her and ask her to come in. 

1 See Simms, Crow Myths, p. 309. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaUy Blackfoot Mythology, 131 

I should like her to make some moccasins for me. Feed her and ask her 
to make some moccasins for me." The next day the old woman invited 
her into the lodge. When she entered, Red-Head asked her if she had 
made the robe and leggings that lay at his mother's place. The young 
woman told him that she had. Then Red-Head requested her to make 
him a pair of moccasins in the same way. The young woman told Red- 
Head that the making of quill-work was her medicine, and that no one 
might watch her while she did her work. If any one should look on, the 
power to do such work would be lost forever. The young woman took a 
pair of Red-Head's moccasins and left the lodge. As soon as she got into 
the brush, she hurried to the ant-hill. She laid the moccasins down and 
went away. When she returned the next day, she found them ready. She 
took them to the lodge. Red-Head was out hunting. She laid the moccasins 
on his bed. Red-Head's mother was curious to know how the work was 
done, but the young woman carefully guarded her secret. 

When Red-Head came back in the evening, he saw the moccasins and 
was pleased with them. He requested his mother to tell the young woman 
to embroider his buckskin shirt. She called the young woman, who was 
out in the brush. The young woman came to the door of the lodge, but 
refused to enter. WTien she heard what Red-Head desired, she told them 
to hand out the shirt. This was in the evening. When the young woman 
took the shirt to the Ants, requesting them to work a disk on the front and 
back, and strips over the shoulders and on the sleeves, they said that they 
could not work in the dark, and that she must wait until the next day. The 
young woman went away as before, and, when she returned, found the 
work complete. The shirt was very beautiful. She took it to the old woman 
that she might carry it to Red-Head. WTien Red-Head received the shirt 
from his mother he was greatly pleased. 

Now, the circles that had been worked upon the shirt represented the 
sun. This was due to the fact that this woman also had the power of the 
sun. A weasel gave the young woman the instructions as to the designs 
that wxre to be worked upon the shirt, robe, and moccasins. The stripes 
on the robe represented the trails of the weasel. The bands on the moccasins 
represented the place where the weasels tramped down the snow. 

Red-Head was greatly pleased with the work of the young woman. He 
wished very much to make her his wife, but the Weasel told the young 
w^oman not to marry him. The Weasel told her to take a bone and to 
scrape one of the ends to a sharp point. Then to watch her chance, and kill 
Red-Head with it as he slept. She did as directed. Then she ran away to 



132 Anthropological Papers American Mvseum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

the Piegan. She lived with them, and taught them how to make quillwork. 
This is the way the people learned how to do it.^ 

5. The Meeting in the Cave. 

Once a Snake [Indian] and a Piegan went out into the same country to 
hunt buffalo. Their camps were far apart. In this country there was a 
kind of cave in which scouts and hunters often spent the night. The Snake 
and the Piegan were in the habit of sleeping there, but neither had met the 
other. One winter evening the Snake arrived at the cave and put up for 
the night. After a while the Piegan came along and began to grope his way 
into the cave, for it was now dark. The Snake was asleep. As the Piegan 
was groping around, he felt a person. He took the hand of the stranger 
and began to shake it. Then the Snake asked him to what tribe he belonged. 
The Piegan took the hand of the Snake in his own, and moved it around on 
his cheek in a small circle. [This is the sign for Piegan, or the people with 
small robes.] Then the Snake took the hand of the Piegan and made the 
sign for Snake. [The sign is to move the pointing finger as if drawing a 
waving trail in the dust.] Then the Piegan took the hand of the stranger 
again and told him by signs that to-morrow they would play the stick-game. 
To this the Snake replied, "Yes." When morning came, they played the 
stick-game, and the Piegan was the winner. First he won the weapons 
of the Snake, and then all his clothes. Then the Snake wagered his hair; 
and the Piegan won this also. "Now," said the Snake, "we will stop." 
So he tied a string around his head across the forehead. The Piegan said, 
"I shall cut the hair close." The Snake said, "No, you won in this game; 
you must scalp me." So the Piegan took his scalp. The Snake bled a 
great deal and became very weak. The Piegan left him and started home. 
As he approached his camp, he came over the hills singing. 



» It appears from some versions tliat the weasel told the young woman how to make the 
various articles of clothing, and what designs to place upon them. However, she did not do 
the work herself, but delivered it over to the ants. In other accounts the weasel instructed her 
as to the making of a man's suit. Such suits are called weasel suits because the fringes of the 
leggings and the sleeves are made of weasel -skins. The weasel also gave her directions as to how 
war-bonnets should be made. In most of the accounts it is stated that the stripes on the robe 
were to represent the trails of the weasel. The moccasins were decorated with a single stripe 
extendiiig from the instep to the toe. This represented the track made by the weasel in tne 
snow. The circular design upon the front of the shirt represented the sun; the one upon the 
back represented the moon. 

It seems, from all the accounts, that Red-Head was a kind of Blue Beard. He killed all of 
the women who came to his lodge, but also all of the men with whom he came in contact. In 
one version he was killed by a man who changed himself into a woman. The birds around Red- 
Head's lodge kept warning him by saying. "The woman has man eyes." Red-Head paid no 
attention to this, because lie wished to keep the young woman (as he supposed his guest to be), 
since she appeared to have great skill in"porcupine-quill work. The name of the woman is 
usually given as Woman-After-Wonian. Tliis name was given her because she was believed to 
have lived many lives. By this is meant that, whenever she was killed, she came to life again. 

Some informants say that this woman was Scar-Face (See p. 61) in disguise, who was 
sent down by the Sun to kill Red-Head. To otTset the warning given by the birds around the 
lodge, he hit upon the expedient of quill-work made by the ants and designed by the weasel. 
This conforms generally to the above narrative, since the woman was regarded as mysteriously 
created and as having power from the Sun. 



1908.] WUaler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 133 

After a time, the Snake in the cave re\dved and went horae to his people. 
He explained to them what had happened, telling them that he had lost his 
scalp in a game. Ever since that time the people often speak of gambling 
as fighting.^ 

6. Why Dogs do not Talk. 

Once a man owned a very large dog. One day when his wife went out 
to gather wood, the dog followed her into the brush. Now it seems that this 
woman had a lover who often met her when she went after wood. The dog 
saw what was going on. That night, when the woman's husband returned, 
the dog told him what he had seen. This made the dog's master so angry 
that he beat his wife, finally knocking her down with a piece of wood. Then 
he went away. After a while the woman got up and began to scold the dog. 
Then she beat him, and heaped all manner of abuse upon him. She took 
up human excrement and made him eat it. She was a medicine- woman, 
and used her power in such a way, that, after this, dogs could not talk. 
They still have the power to understand some words, but not many. 

7. Why Women are able to stick the Poles into the Holes 
OF THE Ears of the Lodge after Dark. 

Once, when a woman named Pi'nostsTssI was out from the camp picking 
berries, she saw a burial-place. The body had been placed in a tree, but 
the bones had fallen down. She carefully picked them up and put them 
vback in their places. As she did so, she said to herself, **I do not know who 
you are. I do not know your name. I do not know when you died. But 
I will put you back again. I will feed you berries. Yes, I will feed you," 
etc. She kept talking all the time she was at it. Now, the next time she 
went out for berrit^s, she took some pemmican with her and gave it to the 
body. Twice again she did this. Now the ghosts^ threw the woman into 
a faint, or put her to sleep, as ghosts do. Wliile she was in this condition, 
she saw a girl ' coming up to her. The woman was frightened, and called 
out to the girl, ** Sister, now I helped you. You should do something for 
me. You can do much for me." Then the girl said, "I will help you in 
your work." She meant by this the tanning of hides, gathering of wood 
and water, etc. Some time after this the woman was married, and every 

» This tale is part of a lonp narrative of adventure recorded by Grinnell, op. cit., p. 63. In 
a brief account by Clarlv (Sij?n Language, p. 71) Old Man is the hero of this adventure. 
2 The dead are usually spoken of as ghosts. 
' This was the ghost belonging to the bones she had replaced. 



134 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [\'ol. II, 

time she had hides to tan she would call on the ghost-girl, and the work was 
soon done. One dark night the lodge-poles came out of the holes in the 
ears of the lodge, and the woman went out to put them in. As it was very 
dark, she poked the poles about without finding the holes. Then she called 
upon the ghost-woman for help, and found the hole at once. After this, 
every time she went out at night to put the poles in the ears of the lodge, she 
called on the ghost-woman, poked at a hole, and always hit it. 

This is the way women do to-day when the poles ^sill not go into the holes 
in the ears of the lodge: they call on the ghost- woman to help them. They 
even call upon her for help when things are lost. 

8. Contest betw^een the Thunder-Bird and the Raven. 

Once the Thunder-Bird and the Raven tried their respective powers. 
The Thunder-Bird carried off the wife of the Raven and refused to release 
her upon the Raven's demand. Then the Raven made medicine. He 
caused winter with a great snowfall. It was so cold that the only way in 
which the Thunder-Bird could keep from freezing was by constantly flashing 
his lightning. Yet the power of the Raven was so great that the Thunder- 
Bird could barely keep a hole melted out large enough for his body to rest in. 
At last he was forced to give up Raven's wife. Now, when there is much 
snow or a cold wave, the people go out and call to the Raven to take pity on 
the people.* 

9. The Raven Rescues People. 

Once some people were stranded on an island. They were in great 
danger there. For want of food they were almost starved. They ate grass. 
Raven took pity on them. So he rescued them. He brought them to the 
mainland. Now the descendants of some of them are a tribe of Indians 
living far to the west, on the shores of the big water [the Pacific Ocean].' 

10. Why Grasshoppers Spit. 

Once a child saw one grasshopper hohling another in its embrace. He 
picked them up and looked at them curiously. Then he said, "It would 
be better if you bled at the nose; it would be better if you bled at the nose,'* 
etc. He kept sanng this over and over for a long time. So it came to pass 
that grasshoppers now spit, or bleed at the nose. 

1 See Grinnell (op. cit., p. 114) for an allusion to the raven's power over the thunder. 

2 This is a mere abstract of a story formerly known among the Piegan. However, it is 
«iven as told. 



1908.] Wisder and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 135 

11. How Medicine-Hat got its Xame.^ 

Once there was a man named Spider whose wife ran away with a man 
named Eagle-Bull. The woman's name was Badger- Woman. Eagle-Bull 
took the woman to a place on Elk River. They went down this river to 
a place where there was a bend in the channel, and on one side was a cut 
bank with a projecting point. Near by they made a shelter of logs. After 
a while the man told the woman that he was going to dig a pit for an eagle- 
trap: so he went up on the point. When he came back, he told her that he 
had finished the hole for the pit. Then he took some meat from the neck 
of an animal and went up to the trap. Then he fixed everjthing, put the 
meat on top, and went down into the trap. Now there were a great many 
eagles about, but every time one was about to alight on the trap, there was 
a sound as if some people were riding around, and at once the eagles would 
fly up. When the man came back home, he told the woman that he had had 
no luck, because some one made the eagles fly away when they were about to 
alight. The next day he tried again, but the same thing happened. Then 
he prayed to this mysterious presence, asking it to take pity on him and to 
permit him to catch some eagles, promising that he would give it some of the 
feathers. Then he went down to another place to make a trap; and when 
he was in this trap he heard some one singing in the old trap. Looking 
in that direction, he saw a medicine head-dress sticking up.^ He could 
just see it. The song that he heard was, "I have power to call eagles to this 
place," etc. Now, while this was going on, the man heard two eagles alight 
near his trap, but some one scared them up as before. He staid in the 
trap a long time, but, not having had any luck, he went to sleep. Now in 
his sleep he dreamed he heard some one say, " If you kill your wife and use 
her for bait, it will be better." W^hen he awoke he thought to himself, 
**Well, I suppose I may as well do it, for I want to catch eagles." So he 
went home to his camp; but the woman came out to meet him, and her 
manner changed his mind. He thought to himself, **Now I ran away with 
her, and I do not like to do this.^ " He had a little bob-tailed dog, so he de- 
termined to use it for bait. He killed it, and carried some of the meat to 
the trap again. Now, while he was waiting, the dream-person spoke to him 
again, telling him that he did not eat dog-meat, and asked again for his 
wife. Now, when the man went home, he made up his mind to get sight of 



1 The name of a place in Alberta near the present site of Medicine-Hat, the name of the 
town having been derived from the aboriginal designation. A different narrative will be found 
in Skinner's Myths and legends beyond our Borders, (1899). In this account the name is taken 
from a war-tale of a Blackfoot chief who lost a medicine head-dress and with it his power in a 
fight with Cree Indians. It will be observed that our narrative accounts primarily for the 
origins of eagle-trapping. 

» This was a feather war-bonnet of the Dakota type. 



136 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

this mysterious person. So when he awoke in the morning he got up, 
went out at once and looked around. He saw many birds, some perched 
and others walking around. By watching them, he discovered that it was a 
raven that had spoken to him. This raven became a person. It was a 
woman, and she wore the head-dress he had seen sticking from the trap. 
Now this woman appeared before him and said, "I have been trying to help 
you. My man here wants a woman to eat." 

Now Eagle Bull was very much discouraged. He did not know what to 
do about it. So he passed by the camp and down over the ridge, looking 
for buffalo. Once when he turned back, he saw an Assiniboine. He 
approached him, and finally they met. The Assiniboine was nearly starved. 
He had been looking for buffalo, but failed to find any. Eagle-Bull pre- 
tended to take pity on him, and invited him to his camp, saying, "I have 
plenty of meat. I can feed you." The Assiniboine said, "All right, but first 
I must get a drink." So they went to the water, and when the Assiniboine 
stooped down to drink, Eagle-Bull knocked him on the head with a stone 
and killed him. Then he butchered him. When he came home, he said 
to his wife, ** Now I have some bait for the trap." When he went out again 
to the trap, he put half of the bait on the old trap, saying, as he did so, 
"Here is human flesh for bait." Then he went into the other trap and 
placed bait upon it. The eagles flew down. Finally the pit was full of 
birds. So he called his wife over and told her to take them to camp, and 
all day she kept taking them over. Now all this time he could hear the 
dream-person in the other trap singing, as if he were greatly pleased. The 
words of the songs were, "I am eating a person. I give you all the eagle- 
trap power." Once the dream-person said to him, "You are to trap four 
days, and then quit. Put all the eagles around your camp; but the catch 
of the last two days you are to put around in the inside of the lodge." 

Now the husband of the wife was looking for her. He knew what had 
happened. He followed their trail, found their camp, and watched from a 
distance. He had another wife, whom he told of his discovery, and prom- 
ised her that he would not kill the runaways, but steal up and catch them. 
The runaway woman had taken a young child. This was the reason he 
hunted for her. So he stole quietly up to the camp and saw that they were 
cooking meat. He came quietly to the door and stood there looking in. 
Then he spoke, saving, "You have many eagles." At this, Eagle-Bull 
and the woman sprang up badly frightened; but he called to them, "Do 
not run. I shall not do you any harm. You, my wife, can have this person 
for your husband; but I want the child." Then Eagle-Bull said to him, 
"My friend, if you want your wife back for a time, it is all right with me. 
Then she can come to me again." "No," he replied. "Well," said Eagle- 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 137 

Bull, "you see there are a great many eagles inside and outside. Take 
your choice." The man chose those on the outside. "Now," said Eagle- 
Bull, " I will give you this power also." So he transferred it to him. He 
said, "You must kill a coyote and use it for bait; when so used, you must 
turn the head to the sun and the feet to the north. (Before this time, ante- 
lopes were used.) Before you go into the trap, you must sing my song, 
and, standing on the south side, call out, in\iting the wolf to eat and smoke; 
also the ravens, the crows, the magpie, the eagle, and other birds, to come 
and get something to eat.*" Now when Spider did all this he caught many 
eagles.' 

Now, some time after this, Spider got power from a magpie.^ He fed 
the magpie's children, and they told him to go to that place to trap. So 
the next year he said to his wife, "We shall go back to the place and trap 
eagles and feed the magpie-children." So they started. The All-Comrades 
tried to stop him, but he told them that he was only going after some arrows 
and would soon come back. As soon as he was out of sight, he went over 
to the place, caught many eagles, and returned to camp. Tt\^o days after 
he had done this, he was caught by a man who wished to sell a medicine- 
pipe.* The object of his selling was to find out where the man caught his 
eagles. Spider had many good horses; so he said, "There are my horses 
and some good travois-dogs, you can have them for the pipe." "Oh!" 
said the seller, "I do not want such things for the medicine-pipe. I do not 
want anything like that. I will just give it to you. But there are two 
things I want to know. I want to know where eagles are caught, and how 
to get them. I just want to know something about them. Don't give me 
all the power for eagle-catching; keep some of it for yourself. You may 
need it, I should like to know the place for three years." "Well," said 
Spider," you can use it four years." "All right," said the man. 

So when autumn came Spider showed the medicine-pipe man the place, 
how to catch eagles, and fixed him up. They stole out of camp so that no 
one would follow them. "Now," said he, "you must feed the magpie- 
children. They are the ones that helped me. If they are gone, you must 
put food for them an}'\vay. In the winter you must put food in the brush 
to feed their children." 

Now the ridge where this happened is called "Praying for Medicine" 
(si'kapfe'tani). 



^ The names given lo the birds in this invitation call are descriptive of their feathers, and 
not the usual names of the birds. A similar mode of speaking is often employed in prayers to 
the spirits of former medicine-men and other distinguished men. 

* Ea^le-Bull just saw the medicine head-dress. It was not given to hira because he did 
not kill his wife, as directed. He did offer some of the woman's skin after the dog was refused. 
I forgot to tell you that at the time. — Narrator's Note. 

« This was given as an additional incident, and does not refer to the incident from which 
Medidnc-Hat in said to have received its name. 

* This refers to a ceremonial procedure by which a man is forced to receive by transfer im- 
portant medicine-bundles. 



138 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

V. MISCELLANEOUS TALES. 
1. The Lost Children. 

In the time when the Indians had no horses, and travelled on foot and 
with dog-travois, many boys and girls went out on the prairie near the camp 
to play. One small boy who was the son of a medicine-pipe man passed 
some shells. The children greedily grabbed them, lea\'ing none for him. 
As they would give him none, he cried, and on reaching home compkined 
to his father. Now the father was an important man in the camp, and it 
made him &ngry to think that his child had been treated in this way. So he 
ordered all the people to move camp quickly while the bad children were 
out at play, thus learing them behind. 

In the evening these children returned to the camp. Some of the larger 
girls were carrying babies on their backs. When they came in sight of the 
former camp, no lodges were to be seen. They looked about on the ground, 
each at the place where their parents* lodges had stood, picking up the tools 
and other small objects that had been left behind in the haste. The children 
said among themselves, **They have only gone a little way, lea\'ing these 
things for us to carry." So they followed along the trail of the moving camp, 
shouting every now and then that their parents might know they were coming. 
After a while they heard an old woman calling to them. They went over 
to her lodge. She lived by herself. She in\ited the children to stay with her, 
telling them that their people must have deserted them. WTien night came, 
the old woman directed them to sleep with their heads toward the fire. 
She said they must do this, else the mice would come in during the night 
and eat their hair. Now this old woman was a cannibal. One of the 
girls had a little brother who had always shown some kind of power. She 
directed him to watch the old woman during the night, and if he saw any- 
thing suspicious to bite his sister^s ear. During the night the old woman 
arose, took a large knife, and began to cut off the heads of the children. 
Then the baby bit the ear of his sister, causing her to wake up. The sister 
took the baby in her arms, and begged the old woman to spare their lives. 
She promised to be a slave to her if she would spare them. The old woman 
finally agreed to this. After a while the old woman asked the girl to go for 
water. *'I will take my brother with me," said the girl. '*No, leave him 
with me," said the woman. **Xo," said the girl, **I must take him along 
with me, because he needs washing." **Well, all right," said the woman, 
**but be quick about it." 

^^^len the girl came to the edge of the river, she saw^ an Elk's Head 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mytholoffy. 139 

[skull] lying there. She said to the Elk's Head, ** You repeat over and over 
these words, I am cleaning my little brother." He was to do this so the 
old woman in the lodge would think that the girl was trnng to get through 
as soon as possible. Then the girl saw a Water-Bull moving along in the 
stream. She called to him, sa\ing, **Will you please take us to the other 
side?" "I will," replied the Water-Bull, *'if you will pick the lice from 
my head, and kill them with your teeth." "Well," said the girl, **I will 
do that, if you will take us across." Then the Water-Bull came to the shore 
and laid his head in the girFs lap. At once she began to louse him. She 
took some beads, put them into her mouth, and, each time she picked a 
louse from his head, she bit on a bead so that the noise made by crushing 
them might deceive the Water-Bull. In this way she succeeded in making 
him believe that she killed the lice with her teeth. WTien the lice had been 
picked from his head, the Water-Bull placed the children upon his back 
and swam toward the other shore. All this time they could hear the old 
woman in the lodge calling out, ** Hurry up, girl! I need that water." 
Each time the old woman said this, the Elk's Head would answer, "I am 
busy cleaning my little brother." When the W^ater-Bull reached the other 
side of the river, the children found themselves near the camp of their people. 

Now the old woman got very angr\' because the girl did not bring the 
water, but kept calling out that she was busy cleaning her little brother. So 
she ran down to the river to see what the trouble was. When she came there, 
she saw nothing but an Elk's Head hing on the ground, which kept saving 
over and over, "I am busy cleaning my little brother." "Oh, it's only 
you!" said the woman, "that makes all this noise." With that she took a 
stone hammer and smashed the skull to fragments. Then she looked 
out into the river, and, seeing the Water-Bull swimming along, called out to 
him, "Take me across the river ?" " I will, if you will pick the lice from my 
Tiead," said the Water-Bull, "and kill them with your teeth." "Yes, I 
will do that," said the woman, "if you will hurry, for I must catch those 
children." So the Water-Bull put his head in the old woman's lap, and 
she began to louse him, killing the lice with her teeth. "They have a bad 
taste," she said to him. "You are a dirty, miserable beast! This is a 
very disagreeable thing you made me do. Now hurry and get me across 
this river." The Water-Bull took her upon his back, but, by the time he 
reached the middle of the stream, he became very angry at the old woman 
because she had spoken of him as a dirty beast. So he dropped her into 
the stream and she was drowned. 

Now, when the sister with her little brother saw the camps of her people, 
she was afraid to go among the lodges. So she waited until the middle . 
•of the night, then, with her baby-brother upon her back, searched for her 



140 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

mother^s lodge. When she found it, she went to the side of the sleeping, 
woman, and, putting her hand on her face, said, "I have come." Now the 
mother of the children was afraid, because the medicine-pipe man had 
ordered all the people to have nothing to do with the bad children. So she 
pretended not to know her children. She called out as if she were frightened, 
saying, **Some strange children will not let me sleep. They are not my 
children. I never had any children." When the father of the children 
heard his wife*s remarks, he also called to the chief of the camp, telling him 
that some strange children were disturbing the camp. The chief ordered 
the children tied to a tree, and the whole camp to move away at daylight, 
lea\ing them to die. Now there was a poor old woman in the camp, who- 
lived alone in a little ragged lodge. She had a dog with very long hair, and 
for this reason he was called Shaggy. When the old woman heard what 
had been done to the poor children, she was very much troubled. She called 
Shaggy to her side, and said to him, **My dog, when the camp is about ta 
move, hide yourself in the brush, and do not make a sound, or pay any 
attention to me when I call you. When the people are out of sight, untie 
the poor children bound to that tree." The next morning, while the people 
were busy breaking camp, the poor old woman was running about looking 
for her dog Shaggy. She called him, and looked everywhere. She asked 
everybody she met, if they had seen her dog Shaggy. At last everybody was 
ready, and the chief said to her, "Come on, grandmother! Do not trouble 
yourself about your dog. He will surely follow on our trail." So the old 
woman went on with the people, mourning all the time for her lost dog 
Shaggy. Now, Shaggy waited in the brush until the sound of the mo\ing^ 
camp could no longer be heard. Then he came out, went up to the children, 
gnawed away the thongs with which they w-ere tied, and hurried on to over- 
take the camp. 

Now the sister knew that it would be useless to follow her people. Sa 
she remained at this place to care for her little brother. The little brother 
became the object of some kind of power, and in a single day grew up to be 
a young man. As they had nothing to eat, the young man said to his sister, 
**I will make a buffalo-drive. You must stay in your lodge and not look 
out. If you look out, I will leave you." So the young man went away. 
After a time the sister, sitting in her lodge, heard a great noise. The sounds 
reminded her of people driving buffalo. In her surprise, she looked out. 
She saw no one except her brother standing there. **Did I not tell you to- 
keep inside of the lodge?" he said. The sister took back her head, and 
did not look out again. She heard the same noise as before. After a while 
she heard her brother call, asking her to come out. WTien she looked around, 
she saw dead buffalo evervwhere. *'Now sister," said the young man,. 



1908.] Wissler and Ehivall, Blackfoot Mythology, 141 

** you must hurry with your meat. You must drj' as much as you can. Also 
take some of the meat and lay it around on the places where the people 
camped. Put some of it down where each lodge stood. Do not forget to 
put a large piece on the spot where the old woman's lodge stood.*' The 
young man started on a journey, lea\'ing his sister busy with the meat. 
After a time he came to the camp of his own people. In the evening he 
walked through the camp-circle until he came to the lodge of the poor old 
woman. When he entered, he found Shaggy asleep and the old woman 
almost starved. He gave a piece of meat to each of them. The old woman 
told him that the people of the camp had had nothing to eat for a long time. 
The next morning the young man went out among the people and invited 
them over to his camp. He told them that he lived alone with his sister, 
but that he had enough meat for all of them. No one except the old woman 
and Shaggy knew who the young man was. The people were very glad to 
receive this invitation, and moved back to their old place at once. They 
found meat ever^-where. At the place in the camp-circle where each lodge 
was to be, they found meat enough for a whole family. But there was one 
place where no meat was to be found. This was the place for the lodge of 
the young man's father and mother. Every one had meat except them. 
The young man invited his parents into his lodge. When they came in, 
they saw many pieces of fat hanging over their heads. *'Now I shall cook 
some meat for you," he said, as he put a very tough hard piece into the pot. 
*'In the meantime you may lick the fat hanging over your heads." When 
the meat had cooked for a long time, and had become harder than ever, 
he took it out of the pot, and said, "Now you shall have some meat." Then 
he threw the meat at his parents, striking them, and killing both. 
After this the young man and his sister lived with their people.^ 

2. The Woman who got Meat from the Cliff. 

Once there was an old woman who was very poor, and she slept out in 
the open for want of shelter. One night she slept by a cliff with a piece of 
dried meat and fat for a pillow. WTiile she was sleeping, the rats came down 
and ate all her meat. WTien the old woman awoke and wished to eat, she 
found her meat was gone. The meat had been wrapped in cloth, and she 
saw some of the wrapping at a hole in the rocks. So she sat down there to 
find out who took her food. She said, **I wonder who stole this dried meat. 
I needed it very much. The people in the camp will not give me an\thing. 



^ For another version, see Grinnell. op. cit., p. 50. For a Gros Ventre renderinp, see 
Kroeber, op. cit., p. 102. Also an Arapalio tale, given with a note on its distribution, Dorsey 
and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 293. 



142 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

and now I must starve. I wonder who could be so mean as to take this/' 
etc. Then she began to cry, and finally went to sleep. Now the woman-rat 
down in this hole took pity on the old woman and began to scold the man- 
rat. She said, **Now it was you who took the old woman's meat, and you 
must feed her." "Well," said the man, **that is easy. We will fix it so 
that she will get food, and so that the people will be her friends, because some 
day they will need her." Now the rat's nest was made of shedded buffalo- 
hair, and the man-rat gave this to the woman, saying, **Take a small piece 
of this, put it under any flat rock, and when you turn it over you will find 
dried meat." So the old woman took the nest, put it into her bosom, and 
went to her own camp. She went to the fireplace and made a fire. Then 
she took a bit of buffalo hair, put it under a flat stone, turned it over, and 
found her dried meat. Then she began to cook it. Now some of the chil- 
dren saw her, and said, **Let us go over and see what that poor old woman 
is doing. Let us see if she is starving. Our mothers said we must not go 
over there, because she must be dead by this time." When the children 
came up to the old woman, they saw that she had a great deal of dried meat. 
There were four of the children, the oldest one a girl. The old woman 
said to them, **Sit down here and I will feed you." So she gave them a 
great deal of dried meat, with fine back-fat. The children could not eat it 
all. So the old woman said, **Take it home with you." When the children 
came home, their mother said, **What have you been doing? You must 
have been eating dried meat." Then they told her all about it. 

A few days after this the children said among themselves, "Let us go 
over to that old woman again." As they came up they saw her cooking 
dried meat. The old woman asked them to sit down, and gave them more 
meat than before. When they came home with what they could not eat, 
their mother was much surprised, and said, "Why do you not invite that 
old woman to Uve with us?" The old woman came over and lived with 
this family. They always got food from her. She became very old, and 
one day they went away and left her again. Now she had a little bag of 
calfskin, which was always full of dried meat and fat. She fed the children 
all they could eat, for the bag never became empty. Now, when the people 
went away and left her, she was angry. She waited until the camps were 
seventeen days away. Then she made medicine so that the people could 
find no buffalo. In a short time they were star\ing. One night the old 
woman put the calfskin bag down in front of her, opened it and began to 
sing, " Children, come here, 1 will give you food. I will give you pemmican." 
That night all the children ran back to the old woman. They got there in a 
single night. They said, "We are hungr\\ We heard your voice and we 
came back." They all sat around eating, but the calfskin-bag was never 
empty. The children said, "Now all the people will come after us." 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 145 

The next day, when the people awoke in the camp, a man called out, 
"All the children have gone back. We must follow them. That old woman 
must have called them." So the people all went back. The woman gave 
each child a small bunch of buflfalo-hair, and told each one to go up to the 
cHff and put it under a rock, and then come back to her, as they must get 
meat ready for their parents. Then she sent the children back. When 
they turned over the rocks, they found large packs of meat. The children 
took their meat and put it around in the places where their parents' lodges 
always stood. Now some of the people were coming over the hill. The 
children met them, and told them that the old woman gave them some 
meat. After this, the people were afraid to go away and leave the old 
woman. She said, **If you leave me again, you will stane to death." So,, 
when they moved, they always took her with them, carrying her on a dog- 
travois, with a very strong dog. Finally the woman died, and left her meat- 
bag with a woman, and also her power. This woman was lucky with it. 
She was the girl who first in\'ited the old woman over to live with her. 

3. Bear-Moccasin, the Great Medicine-Man. 

There was once a man named Bear-Moccasin, who had a chum called 
Chief-Old-Man. The reason why the former was called Bear-Moccasin 
was that he wore bearskins on his feet. He also wore a bear's ear on the 
head and a claw, but he gave them and some paint to Chief-Old-Man. 
Now Bear-Moccasin had powerful dreams. He said to Chief-Old-Man. 
"The reason I am going to do this is because you are a good friend of mine, 
I know you will help me. You will have a dream on account of having done 
this." "Well," said Chief-Old-Man, "whatever it is, I will do it." Then 
Bear-Moccasin told him what to do if anything should happen. Bear- 
Moccasin put his robe down on the ground, saying, "Let this robe be the 
same as myself." Then Bear-^Ioccasin took up some paint and began to- 
paint himself, saying as he did so, "If I am killed, paint me in this way, 
and put the robe over my body." Then Bear-Moccasin explained the use 
of the pipe and the bear-claw and taught Chief- 01d-!Man the songs. When 
all thb was done, Bear-Moccasin took a loaded gun, told Chief-Old-Man 
that an e\dl spirit gave him great power, and that it came from above. Then 
he shot himself. Now Chief-Old-Man did as directed. He painted the 
body, sang the songs, held the pipe to the corpse, and Bear-Moccasin came 
to life. Now Bear-Moccasin had a dagger, and, painting it, he planted 
it point up, in the ground. Then he began singing, and threw himself 
down upon the knife. Chief-Old-Man sprang upon his back and jumped 
up and dowTi until the knife came through. Now he was dead again ^ 



144 Anthropological Papers American Mtisevm of Natural History. [\'ol. II, 

Then Chief-Old-Man sang the songs, took the pipe, and did as before. 
Bear-Moccasin sprang up again all well. There was not even a scar. Now 
Bear-Moccasin took the knife and handed it to Chief- Old-Man. Then he 
painted his neck. Chief- Old-Man cut off his head and threw it down upon 
the ground. Then Chief-Old-Man took the head, fitted it to the body, 
covered it with the robe, sang the songs as before, took a gun, painted it and 
the bullet, and shot Bear-Moccasin in the head. Then he got up. In the 
next trial, Chief-Old Man shot seven arrows into Bear-Moccasin, and as he 
fell he broke some of them. Then the robe was placed over the corpse and 
the pipe placed in its mouth, Chief-Old-Man sa\ing as he went away, 
** Well, this is your smoke." As Chief-Old-Man was going along, he looked 
back and saw Bear-Moccasin following him, smoking. As he came up, he 
showed Chief-Old-Man all the arrows, telling him that two had been broken. 
Now, in the next trial, Chief- Old-Man took a stone hammer and an elk- 
horn whip-handle, and with these he beat Bear-Moccasin to death. Then 
he covered up the body with the robe, sang the songs, and put the pipe to 
his mouth as before. This time Bear-Moccasin came to life, but the upper 
part of his body was Uke that of a bear. In the next trial, Chief-Old-Man 
took a new sharp axe and a new lance. With the lance he stuck Bear- 
Moccasin through and through, and cut him up with the axe. (Bear- 
Moccasin had told him before this to scratch his left foot with a bear-claw, 
but to get his horse ready and go quickly to the top of the hill, and not to 
come back again until he was called.) Now Chief-Old-Man held his bridle 
in one hand, scratched the left foot of the corpse, leaped on his horse and 
rode off. Bear-Moccasin sprang to his feet, made a noise like a bear, wrestled 
with the trees, etc. After he had been a bear for a while, he lay down and 
became a man, calling for Chief-Old-Man to come down again. The tests 
were now finished. Bear-Moccasin told Chief-Old-Man that if at any time 
he should be killed, and a piece of his body, however small, could be found, 
he could be brought to life again. So they went home. 

After a time they went out with a party of their people to hunt buffalo. 
While they were chasing buffalo, some white men came along with a party 
of Snake Indians. They pursued the Piegan. Now Bear-Moccasin had 
a gun and arrows. The others were not well armed. So he told them to 
run. All this time he was butchering a buffalo, and said, "I will finish this 
before I run." lie was soon surrounded by the enemy, all of whom were 
shooting at him. But he kept on with his butchering and paid no attention 
to them. Then a white man came up with a sword and thrust it into Bear- 
Moccasin; but he rose up and killed the white man, and then went on with 
his butchering. Now there was a Piegan woman with the Snakes who 
explained to them who this man was. Then they realized that it was useless 



1908.] Wisaler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology, 145 

to attack such a man, and went their way. Now the party that was with 
Bear-Moccasin went home, because they thought he must have been killed. 
After a while they went back, and, while they could see nothing of their 
enemies, they could see Bear-Moccasin still at his butchering. When 
they went up to him, they saw that he had no woimds, and the Only thing 
he said was, "Here, I have killed this white man." 

Now Bear-Moccasin had great power, and he could take a woman from 
any man. No one dared to talk against it, and every one was afraid of him. 
So he raped and seduced at will. One day he saw a very nice woman in 
camp, and decided to try her. Now his friend, Chief-Old-Man, said, "Do 
not bother with that woman, for she is the wife of our chief." Bear-Moccasin 
repUed, "I must have her." To this Chief-Old-Man said nothing, but he 
was not pleased. Now, when this woman went out for wood, Bear-Mocca- 
sin met her. There was an old woman with her. Bear-Moccasin took 
hold of the young woman and asked her to go with him. As he was pulling 
and coaxing her, the old woman said, "Now you ought not to do this. This 
is a terrible thing for you to do, because she is the wife of the chief. You are 
a very powerful man, but this you ought not to do. If you must do this, 
you can have me for the sake of letting her go." "No," said Bear-Moccasin. 
Then the young woman spoke up and said, "Well, I suppose he must have 
his way, but first let me tie this horse up." Then, with Bear-Moccasin 
standing by, she began as if to hobble her horse, talking to the other woman, 
telUng her to get some wood ready to take to camp, but not to mention to 
any one what had happened, because of the disgrace. Then she said to 
Bear-Moccasin, "You go on into the brush and I will follow." As soon as 
Bear-Moccasin started into the brush, the young woman sprang upon her 
horse and rode away. Now Bear-Moccasin was very quick. He caught 
hold of the travois; but the horse had a good start, and he was not able to 
hold on. The woman galloped to the camp, and told her husband, the 
chief, what had happened. 

Now, after a while the men in the camp went out to hunt, and the chief 
saw Bear-Moccasin go with them. Then the chief went out also, and as he 
was coming home he saw Bear-Moccasin butchering. He rode up quietly, 
shot Bear-Moccasin full of arrows, then shot him with a gun, and finally 
cut him to pieces. Now no one in the camp was angry. In a short time, 
Bear-Moccasin walked into the chiefs lodge, saying, "Here, I bring you 
some of your arrows." Then the chief thought him a great medicine- man 
indeed. 

Bear-Moccasin had another friend, whom he also adnsed what to do 
in case he was killed. However, this friend went to the chief and said, "If 
you ever kill Bear-Moccasin again, take out his canine-teeth and bum them." 



146 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

One day the same two women were out again for wood when they saw 
Bear-Moccasin coming. As he came up to them, he said to the young 
woman, "You got away once, but I shall Ue with you just the same." Now 
everything happened as before, and the young woman agreed to go with 
Bear-Moccasin. He took hold of her sleeve to lead her along; but she took 
out her knife, quickly cut the sleeve and ran away. As she ran, she called 
out that she would tell the chief. Bear-Moccasin said that he would wait 
there for him. So she told her husband, the chief. Now the chief was 
very angry. He began to make medicine for loading his gun, and when he 
got it ready he set out, the woman carrying an axe and a hatchet. Soon they 
came up to the place. Bear-Moccasin was lying down by the brush as if 
asleep. The chief shot him, then took out his canine-teeth, and cut his 
body into small pieces. Then he burned up the canine- teeth. Now the 
friend of Bear-Moccasin came to restore him to life, but, when he saw that 
the canine-teeth were gone, he said, ** I will not try to bring him to life again. 
He may do much harm. He has done much harm already, and the blame 
must rest with him.'' Now Bear-Moccasin was dead for good. 



There is another story which seems to be a version of this, or the reverse. 
Once a young man had a dream that he came to life again after being dead. 
He explained the dream to his chum, and requested him to try it in case he 
should die. Then, to test his power, he tried to rape the wife of the chief 
in full view of the camp. The people called out, the chief ran out with his 
knife, and killed him. His body was cut up and burned. The people 
took care to bum up everything. So, when the fire was out, the chief ordered 
them to move camp, and everybody to march over the ashes, so that every 
trace of the young man might be wdped out. Now, after the camp had 
moved some distance, the chum of the dead man hid in the brush. The 
chief, however, watched the place to see if any one should come; but, as 
no one came all day, in the evening he went away. As soon as the chief 
was gone, the chum came out of the brush and hunted through the ashes. 
At last he found a very small piece of bone. He painted the bone, put the 
robe over it, and put a pipe there. Then taking four arrows, he shot an 
arrow up so that it would fall on the robe. Each time he did this, he shouted, 
**Look out! the arrow will hit you;" and each time the robe would move to 
one side. As he shot the last arrow, he ran away, but the dead man rose up 
and chased him. Then the young man who had been dead went on to the 
camp. It was now night. He went into the lodge of his mother. He 
sent her over to the lodge of the chief to get some food. She was to ask the 
chief for some of the food that was for him only. This puzzled the chief. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 147 

for all the food he sent over was refused. At last he understood that it was 
the woman that was asked for. This he refused. Then the young man 
went over, killed the chief, cut up his body and burned it, and marched the 
people over the ashes. After that he took the chief's wives, and became 
the chief himself. 

In still another version, the chief was forced to go around kissing all the 
dogs in camp, and, as it was very cold, he froze to death. 

4. l^E Split Feather. 

A long time ago, when the buffalo and deer were plenty, the Blackfoot 
Indians made their living by hunting. As the Indians usually camped at 
one place for many weeks, game would become scarce so that the hunters 
must ride for two or three days before they could find an}^hing to kill. 
This medicine-paan was very fond of hunting, and the greatest part of his 
time was spent in this way. He always left his wife at the camp. Now 
this man had the power of a feather, of which no one knew. He began to 
think that his wife had not been true to him, that she had been going with 
some other man. As he had the power of a feather and could use it in this 
case, he thought he would try it on his wife. So he got up early one morn- 
ing, and told his wife that he was going out for another hunt, and would not 
return for two or three days. His wife got up and went out to get some 
wood to cook his breakfast for him. While she was out, he took this feather, 
split it down to about its middle, and placed it under their bedding. His 
wife came in and made the fire. After he had eaten the meat which she had 
cooked for him, he started out, riding one horse, and leading another which 
he used for a pack-horse. When night came, his wife sent word to her 
lover, who was a young single man. This young man came over to her^ 
and she told him that her husband had gone away that day and would be 
gone for two or three days, so he could visit her that night as he had done 
before. The young man agreed to this. They occupied the bed under 
which the feather had been placed. 

The next morning, before the sun was high, nearly everybody in the camp 
had gathered around this woman's lodge. Those unable to get inside were 
standing around the outside of the lodge. It was learned that the man and 
woman were fast together, and all night they had tried to separate. No 
one could assist them. The father of the young man was running about, 
calling on the big medicine-men of the tribe for help; but they could do 
nothing, as it was beyond the range of their powers. Some of the older men 
ad\dsed the father to bring out his best horses and weasel suits [buckskin 



148 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

suits decorated with strips of white-weasel fur], and make ready for the 
return of the woman's husband, so that he might meet the wronged man, 
tell him what had happened, give him presents to pay for what his son had 
done, and beg for his life. 

The old man went home and got four of his best horses and the best 
things he had. These he brought to the lodge. Nearly everybody staid 
at the lodge, waiting for the hunter to return. They wanted to see what he 
would do when he came back. It was late in the afternoon when the hunter 
came in sight of the camps. He knew right away what had happened, 
because he saw so many people around his lodge. Now they ad\*ised the 
old man to go out and meet him, and tell him about it before he reached the 
camp. So he got his horses and things and started out. He told the wronged 
husband all about the trouble. \Mien he got through with his storj', the 
husband said he would take the horses and things, and that he would not 
kill the young man. Then they both went to the lodge. The husband 
got off his horse and w^ent inside. He saw his wife still lying in bed with the 
young man. He asked some of the men standing by to lift the couple off 
the bed. When this was done, he lifted the bedding, picked up the split 
feather, held it up so that all might see, then pulled it in two and threw the 
pieces into the fire. At once the young man and the woman were released, 
^rhe young man went out with his robe over his head and face, for he was 
much ashamed.^ 

5. The Treacherous Wives. 

Once a man had two wives of whom he was very jealous, so jealous that 
he pitched his lodge far out from any camp. He had a habit of sitting upon 
a buffalo- skull on the top of a high hill. Naturally his wives became very 
lonesome, and wished to get back to their people. So they decided to make 
way with him, and one day they dug a pit on the top of the hill where he 
usually sat, covered it with willows and turf, put the buffalo skull back in 
its place, and arranged ever\lhing as it was before. The next day the man 
went out to the top of the hill as usual, and sat down upon the buffalo-skull. 
As he did so, the cover of the pit gave way and he fell to the bottom, beneath 
the brush and earth. The women watched from the camp, and, when they 
saw him fall, took down their lodges and moved back to the camp. \\Tien 
the people saw them coming in, they said, *' Where is your husband?" 
They replied, that, as he had been gone eight days, he must have been killed. 

1 Recorded by D. C. Duvall. In some versions a piece of sinew tied in a knot was used 
instead of tlie feather. For an Arapaho rendering of this narrative, see Dorsey and Kroeber, 
op. cit., p. 458. 



1908.] Wissler and Duvcdl, Blackfoot Mythology. 149 

Now the man was at the bottom of the deep pit, and unable to get out. A 
gray wolf happened to pass by, and, hearing some one in the ground, spoke 
to him. The man explained to the wolf how he had been deceived by his 
wives, and begged to be released from the trap. The gray wolf promised 
to help him out if he could. So he set to work digging a tunnel toward the 
bottom of the pit; but, when he had almost reached the man, he went out 
and called together all the wolves and coyotes. WTien they were all as- 
sembled, the old gray wolf had a talk with them, explaining that a man 
was caught in a deep hole, and that he had taken pity on this man. He 
wished to have him dug out, and promised to give him as a son to the first 
one to reach him by tunnelling. The gray wolf himself promised that he 
would wait until all the other wolves and coyotes were in their holes to their 
tails before he began to dig. As soon as the wolves and coyotes began to 
dig, the old gray wolf went to the hole which he had already dug, and, as 
soon as the others were in to their tails, he rushed down into his own hole, 
soon reaching the man. Then he drew him out, set hiin down upon the 
ground, and called in a loud voice, **Ho-o-oI Hoo-o! Wolves and coyotes, 
you need not wear out your nails digging for the man, because I have him 
out already." This gray wolf had great power for he was the chief of the 
wolves, so the man became his son and went away with the pack.^ 

Now the people in the camp always set traps and snares around the 
buffalo-drive to catch wolves. They had done this always, but now they 
began to notice that all the traps and snares would be sprung and the bait 
taken, without catching a single wolf. The reason was, that the man (wha 
was now a wolf) would go around to all the traps and snares and spring 
them, after which the pack would eat the bait. The people knew nothing- 
of this. Sometimes when the people heard the wolves at night, they noticed 
a strange voice among them, and, as they listened from night to night, they 
thought it sounded more and more like a person. They began to talk about 
it, and said, "There must be a person with the wolves who throws our 
traps." When they came to this conclusion, they decided to keep watch 
during the night until they found out why the traps were thrown. One night 
the watchers saw a large wolf go to the traps and throw them, after which 
the pack came up and ate the bait. Then the people decided to capture 
this man-wolf. When he came the next night to throw the traps, a large 
number of men surrounded him and roped him. He fought and bit viciously, 
but they succeeded in dragging him into a lodge. When they made a light, 
they saw that he was a man with wolf hair and claws. Then they began to 
consider whether any of their people were missing, and at last they remem- 



1 A similar incident occurs in an Arikara tale, Dorsey, op. cit.. p. 102. 



150 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

bered the husband of the two women, and noticed that the wolf had eyes like 
this man. They called in his two wives, who recognized him at once. Now 
the people kept the man with them, and gradually got him back to human 
ways. At last he became to all appearances a man again. After a time he 
again took his wives out from the camp, where they lived alone; One day 
he went out to visit the chief of the wolves. Now the wolves and coyotes 
became as people and lived in a large camp. The chief of the wolves invited 
the man to move over and camp with them. There were a great many 
arrows lying on the ground around the camp of the wolf-people, and the 
chief of the wolves warned the man as follows, **^Iy son, you must not pick 
up any of the arrows you see on the ground around here, for they are mine." 
One day, a long time after, the man forgot the warning of the chief of the 
wolves, and picked up one of the arrows. Immediately it became coyote- 
dung; and all the camp, except the man and his wives, became wolves and 
coyotes again. Now the man was very sony, and went to the chief of the 
wolves to make amends. He finally offered his two wives to them. Then 
the wolves and coyotes set upon the two women and ate them. Thus they 
were punished for their e\i\ doings.* 

6. The Woman who Married a Sxake. 

Now, in the olden times the Indians were travelling near the Sand-hills. 
One man had two wives, one of them very beautiful. The whole camp was 
moving. The horse ridden by the handsome woman was dragging lodge 
poles. Some of the poles slipped out and were lost. As they rode out of 
some brush and small cotton-wood-trees near the hills, she noticed that some 
of her poles were missing. So she said to the others, "I have lost some of 
my poles. You go on while I go back to find them." So she rode back 
and soon found the poles. As she was picking them up she saw her people 
disappear through a gap in the hills. As she started on, a young man met 
her. He wore a buffalo-robe with the hair-side out and a yellow plume in 
his hair, and his face was painted yellow. He was nicely perfumed. As she 
tried to pass on, he headed her off, and, whichever way she turned, he stepped 
in front of her. **\Vhat are you doing this for?" she said. She did not 
know him, and thought he must belong to another tribe. "I want you for 
my wife. I am a widower," said the young man. Then the woman began 
to feel dizzy, and very soon became unconscious. WTien she came to her- 
self, she was in a lodge. It was a kind of underground hollow place. Chil- 



> For another version, see Grinnell. op. cit., p. 78. An Arapaho rendering occurs in Dorsey 
and Kroeber. op. cit., p. 447. 



1908.] Wi88ler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 151 

dren were crawling around ever)n\'here. "These are my children," said the 
young man. Now she saw that they were all snakes. One little snake 
crawled up to the woman. She picked it up tenderly, and began talking 
baby-talk to it. So she staid there. After a time she had two children, — 
a boy and a girl. Now, when the Snake took her, her horse went on and at 
last overtook her people. When the people saw the horse come back, they 
knew something had gone wrong. They followed back on the trail, specu- 
lating as they went along as to what could have happened. At last they 
came to the place where she had tied up her poles. Then they found her 
trail, but soon lost it. They looked all around, but could find no trace of 
her. Then they found another trail, but could not follow it. The chief 
said, **We shall camp here five days in order to search for the woman. Let 
the young men look carefully out in the brush; let everybody look for her." 
So they began to hunt. 

Now, on the morning of the second day, the snake-man told the woman 
she could go home. He gave her some medicine. He said to her, "You 
must not Ue with your husband. You must never pack meat, neither must 
you pack wood. Whenever you pass this place you must bring me some 
tripe, berries, and intestines." Then she started home. As she came up 
from below, the people of the camp saw her. To the first man she met she 
said, "I shall go out some distance from the camp. Tell my husband to 
make a sweat-house outside." When the sweat-house was ready, she w^ent 
in. When she came out of the sweat-house, they noticed that there was 
water in it. Then she told the people what had happened to her. She 
explained to them what the snake-man had forbidden her to do. After this 
she lived with her husband; but, whenever she passed that place, she spent 
a few days with the snake-man. Now, one time when her people had killed 
a great many buffalo, she forgot her promise and packed some meat on her 
back. As soon as she started to carry it, she remembered, threw it down 
and ran to her lodge. She became very ill at once, and soon died. They 
buried her; but her body disappeared. She went back to the snakes.^ 

7. The Woman who Married Filth. 

Once there was a young woman veVy much sought by young men. She 
was quite a belle. One day as she went out for wood, she saw some human 
excrement. It was most extraordinary. "Bah!" she said, "That is a pile. 
I wonder who could have done it." This was in the fall. It was frozen 
hard. 



> A part of this tale appears in a conglomerate Sun and Moon Myth recorded by Grinnell 
<Journal of American Folk-I.ore, Vol. VI, p. 46). There is also a slight resemblance to an 
Arapaho narrative, Dorsej' and Kroeber, op. cit., p. 441. 



152 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

Next day when she went after wood, she smelled something sweet and 
pleasant, and as she was looking around she saw a handsome young man. 
He wore a white buffalo-robe. She fell in love with him at once and thought 
to herself, "I shall marry him." So she asked him to stop. "Why?" said 
he, but kept on going. Every time she said this, he repeated the question, 
without stopping. She ran after him, caught hold of him, and began to 
embrace and kiss him. All this time she was saying, "I will marry you. 
I like a handsome man." (At first sight of him she was nauseated.) "All 
right," said the man. She went home alone and told her father and mother 
to go out of the lodge, for, she said, "I am married to a man. I shall bring 
him here. He suits me : at last I have found one that will do." 

The next day all the men of the camp went in to see her husband. They 
thought him very fine indeed. They congratulated her. She lived with 
him all winter and kissed him all the time. When spring came, he com- 
plained of not feeling well. Now she was frightened, and wished to call in 
a medicine-man, but he would npt consent. He said that it would be of no 
use, because he was going to die. While they were talking, a man in the 
camp saw a black cloud in the west, and called out, "Ho-o-o-o-I We shall 
have a big Chinook." When the husband heard this, he kissed his wife 
farewell, telling her that he must die. They had a child: it was a boy, and 
still in her womb. He said to her, "Let us go out to walk, away from the 
camp." As they went along he caressed her, telling her to take good care 
of the child he should never see. When they were out from the camp he 
said, "I shall go into the brush." The woman called after him. She said, 
"I want to see you again." He turned back to look. As she hurried up, 
she said, "I love you, I cannot let you go," etc. She tried to kiss him, but 
he smelled bad. Then he ran. He was thawing out. The woman pur- 
sued him. After a while, she saw him fall. Now it was thawing. There 
was water everywhere. When she got to the spot there was nothing but 
excrement. The child became a chief. His name was Excrement Chief. 

8. The W^oman who Married a Horse.^ 

One time when the camp was mo\ing, one of the women walked behind 
with a travois. Some of her lodge-poles came loose and fell out on the 
ground. She stopped to fLx them as the main body of her people disappeared 
over a hill. While she was tying up the poles, a very handsome young man 
approached her. She started on, but he stopped her by getting in front of 
her. "Why do you stop me?" she said. "I have never had anything to 

» The narrator claimed to have this from the Crows, but it was known among the Piegan 
as an old tale. For a Gros Ventre rendering of this tale see Kroeber, op. cit„ p. 114; see, aIso» 
Dorsey and Kroeber op. cit., p. 437. 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 15S 

do with you." "Well," said the man, "I want you to go with me." So the 
woman had to go with him. When the people camped, they missed the 
woman, and, not being able to find her, concluded that she had been lost 
or captured. A long time after this, these people were camped again near 
the place where the woman was lost. Some of the people saw a large herd 
of wild horses near a small lake, and they noticed a person among the herd. 
When this was reported to the camp, all the men mounted horses and went 
out to investigate. They surrounded the herd, cut out the. horses, and roped 
the person. It was a woman. She had no clothing, and her body was 
covered with hair like that of a horse. She was very wild, and st niggled 
in the rope. As the herd of horses ran away, they heard a colt among them 
neighing as if for its dam. The men took the woman back to the camp, 
where some of her relatives recognized in her the woman that had been lost 
some time before. She was very wild, had lost the power of speech and the 
knowledge of all human things. They kept her in the camp a while, but 
finally her former husband gave up all hopes. ** It is of no use to keep her,"^ 
he said. "The only thing we can do is to send her back to the horses." 
That evening they turned her loose, and she was never seen again. 

9. I'^E Woman with a Sharpened Leg. 

There were two women married to the same man. One of them was very 
jealous of the other. She went into a near by lodge and staid there alone^ 
The lodge belonged to them. The family heard her pounding on something. 
All this time she was cutting down and sharpening her leg. At last she 
made it very sharp. While she was pounding, the children cried out, 
"What are you doing?" "Oh!" she said, **I am hacking a bone." After 
a while, the man said to the other woman, "That woman has been pounding 
quite a while. Go over and see what she is doing. There are no bones 
over there for her to pound on." So the woman peeped in and saw what 
she was doing. She came back and said to her husband, "She has sharp- 
ened her leg." Now this frightened them, and the whole family ran out of 
the lodge. The woman with the sharpened leg called out, "Hold on! let 
us have a kicking-game." But they ran as fast as they could, the woman 
following. At last they came to another camp, and, as they ran by, a mai> 
came out. The woman with the sharpened leg said to him, " Now we kick." 
So they played the game. When the woman kicked a hole in his stomach, 
the people all scattered and ran. The woman pursued them, killing many 
by kicking. At last a warrior came up and struck her down with a war- 
club. Then they burned the body.^ 



1 For an Arapaho parallel of a man with a sharpened leg, see Dorsey and Kroeber, op. cit.,. 
p. 258. 



154 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

10. The Woman without a Body. 

Once there was a woman whose husband had cut her head off, but the 
Head bounced along on the ground following him, sa\ing, **You are my 
husband. I will follow you wherever you go." So the Head went on with 
him, and when they stopped, it fixed up the lodges and the camp just as 
before. The head was a fast worker, but when dressing hides it did it under 
cover. Yet it was done very quickly. ITie Head told the man that no one 
must watch her while doing this. Now there was a boy in the camp who 
was very curious, and one day he looked in. The Head always kept her 
digging- stick with her and, when she saw the boy, she picked up the stick, 
saying *' You have done wrong." Then she chased him, overtook him, and 
beat him to death. WTien the people saw this they all ran. She pursued 
them. They fled across the river. The Head jumped in, and floated 
down with the current.^ 

11. The Man Cut in two below the Waist. 

A long time ago, two war-parties started out, one many day's before the 
other. Then the other party went out, and after travelling for several days 
came to a river where they camped for the night. One of the young men 
went after some water. As this man was about to dip for the water, some 
one spoke to him. Looking all around, he saw a man without any legs. 
This crippled man said that he was one of those who started out first, and 
that all of his party were killed off except himself. He promised to pay the 
listener well if he would take him home. To this the young man agreed, 
picked up the crippled man, and packed him to camp. WTien the others 
learned of this, they all made up their minds to go back: so the next morning 
they all started for home. The young man carried his crippled friend on his 
back. The other men tried to keep the young man from taking the cripple 
home. They said that he would scare all the children in the camps if they 
saw him. Now when they would feed this crippled man, his food would 
drop through to the ground. At last they came to a big river which they 
had to swim, so they put the cripple on a raft, and all the rest swam. Soon 
they all got tired, and, dropping the ropes of the raft, swam to the shore. 
Then the crippled man and his raft floated down the river. The end.^ 



> There Is in this the suggestion of an incident in a Sun and Moon myth recorded bv Grinnell 
(Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. VI. p. 47); further we are reminded of the Rollinsr Head 
foimd among various Indian tribes. See Dorsey and Kroeber (op. cit., p. 70), Also Wissler, 
Dakota Myths (Journal of American Folk-Lore, vol. XX, p. 196). 

2 Recorded by D. C. Duvall. 



1908.] Wissler and DvvaU, Blackfoot Mythology, 155 

12. The Ghost-Woman. 

One time a young man travelling alone was sitting by his camp-fire at 
night eating. When he had finished, he took oflF his old worn moccasins, 
and, thinking to himself how it would be if he were at home, he threw them 
to one side, saving, **01d woman, mend them for me." After a w^hile he 
looked around for his moccasins, but they were gone. Then after a while 
he saw them again, and noticed that they had been mended. "Now," he 
thought to himself, "this is strange. I will try it again." So he said, "Old 
woman, get a lot of wood. The fire is about to go out." After a time some 
wood was piled up in the lodge. After a while he said, "Old woman, I am 
going out. You get some bedding and fix up a bed while I am gone." 
When he came back, he saw a bed made up of sage-grass. He lay down as 
if to go to sleep, but determined to watch to see who this person was. Now, 
when the fire was out, he heard a person come in. This person said, "At 
which side shall I sleep?" He repUed, "At the side next to the lodge." 
This person was a woman and she seemed very nice. Now he had a wnfe. 
In the morning the woman said, "Now I shall get up and make a fire, but 
you must not look at me." After a while, when the fire was burning, the 
woman said, "Now you get up and cook." After a while the man was 
ready to get up, but he saw no one. Then he said, "Old woman, get some 
water." And, although he saw no one, the water was soon there. 

Then the man started home, but when night came, he camped. He 
said, "Old woman, fix up a w ar- lodge. " ^ Then he lay down to wait. 
When this was done, he said, "Old Woman, make a fire and cook." After 
a while, when the fire was ready, some one said, "Now the fire is ready. 
You can cook." WTien the man had cooked, he offered some meat to the 
woman, but she said, "No, I shall not eat yet." Then the man asked the 
woman to get wood and make a bed. Ever%ihing happened as before. 
The next day they went on, and camped as usual. On the fourth night the 
man was to see her for the first time. She said, "In the morning I shall 
eat." Now, when morning came, the man looked around the lodge, and 
saw a very handsome woman sitting there. The woman said, "I shall live 
with you, but you must never strike at me with fire." ^ So he went back to 
his people, and all went well with them. He lived with the woman for a 
long time, but one day he became very angry at her, and, taking a stick from 
the fire, made as if to strike her. As he did so, the woman pulled her robe 
over her head. Then the man remembered what she had said, and quickly 



1 A strong shelter of poles for security against a night attaclc. 

2 A similar caution occurs in a tale recorded by Grinnell, op. cit., p. 131. 



156 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

raised the robe. There was only a skeleton beneath it. Then he wra;pped 
up the bones and buried them. Now it has boiled over. 

13. Fed by a Ghost. 

Once a man was camping alone [with his family]. He had gone out to 
hunt by himself. In the night they heard a voice sa\ing, **My mother 
wants to use your pail." Then the man said to his wife, ** Woman, let them 
have it." After a time the pail was brought back into the lodge, and they 
heard a voice saying, "Yoii can eat what is in it. It is meat." Now when 
they looked into the pail they found a piece of an old lodge-cover that had 
been boiled. After a while the Ghost came again and said, "You did not 
eat it. I wdll give you something else." "No," said the man, "we do not 
need anything else. We ate it." He said this because they had hidden it. 
"Well," said the Ghost, "I want to borrow the pail again." So the man 
said, "Woman, let him have it." After awhile the Ghost brought the pail 
filled, and said, "Here are some ribs and tripe." Now, when they looked 
into the pail, they found some very old bones and sticks of wood, with no 
meat. The man said, "I am hungry, but I cannot eat that." "Well," 
said the Ghost, "I shall send out a young man to kill some game." Now 
the next morning, as the man was going out of the lodge he heard some one 
say, "Here is meat." On looking around he saw a buffalo-cow lying on 
the ground. Then he began to butcher. Now he was happy because he 
had something to eat. Now it has boiled over. 

14. Fed by a Coyote. 

Once a young man and his Uttle brother were travelling, and got lost 
on the prairie. They were out of food and were star\'ing. One day they 
saw a Coyote eating. They approached him. Both of them were thin, 
nothing but skin and bone. The young man spoke to the Coyote and said, 
"Give my httle brother something to eat, and when I hunt I will always 
leave the entrails for you to eat." All right," said the Coyote, "you will be 
safe." Now the Coyote had very little left when the young man came up : 
so he said to them, "You stay here and eat until you are strong, then I will 
take you home." There was a ridge near by, and the Coyote said, "I will 
see that you get more food, but you must not watch me. Now shut your 
eyes." After a while they heard the Coyote singing, "I am looking to the 
west for something to eat." [This is sung in a low soft chant, Kke all songs 
in children's stories.] "Now come over here," said the Coyote. So they 



1908.] Wissler and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 157 

opened their eyes and went over. The Coyote had a buflfalo-calf . He cut 
it open, butchered it, and then they ate. So it went on from day to day. 
The Coyote travelled along the ridge toward their home. Whenever the 
Coyote looked toward the west and sang his song, meat would fall over the 
ridge toward them. Thus the Coyote took them home. 

15. Riding the Buffalo. 

Once there was a white man who was a rancher. He had a great many 
tame buffalo, some of which he rode as if they were horses. One day his 
unmarried daughter found a skeleton on the river-bank. It had been washed 
out during the high water. She took the skeleton home and requested her 
father to make a sweat-house and doctor the skeleton. She said, '*If the 
skeleton comes to life, and it is a man, I shall marry him. But if it is a 
woman, I shall have her for a chum." Her father finally agreed to try his 
power. The skeleton came to life as the result of his doctoring. It proved 
to be a Piegan Indian. So the girl married him. Now these white people 
lived upon frogs and turtles. As the Piegan could not eat such meat, they 
asked him what he would Uke. He told (hem that his people always ate 
buffalo. So his white father-in-law killed some of his tame buffalo for him 
to eat. Now, after a time, the Piegan began to long to see his people. So 
lie asked his father-in-law if he might go. His request was granted. So 
he set out with some of the tame buffalo. He rode one of them, and his wife 
another, while the other buffalo followed behind. As he came near the 
<;amp of his people, some one called out, "Buffalo are coming!" When they 
looked out, they said, "People are riding upon them." When they came 
near, some one said, "That looks like the man who went away and never 
came back." Now, the Indian staid with his people a while, and then 
decided to go back to his wife's father and mother. He took his old father 
4ind mother with him, and the Piegan never saw them again. ^ 

16. The Kutenai Black-Tail Deer-Dance. 

This story came from the Kutenai Indians.^ Long ago in their camp 
one of them died. The one that died was a man true and good. After he 
died, his spirit went away to the land of the dead to find out what was there. 



* For a similar tale, see Grinnell, on. cit., pp. 25-28. 

* For many years the Blackfoot ana Kutenai Indians have visited each other and exchanged 
41 few ceremonies. The most important one acquired by the Blackfoot seems to have been the 
Black-Tail Deer- Dance, a ceremony to aid in hunting deer. The narrator was the chief director 

«of this dance among the Piegan. 



158 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11^ 

When he had been there a while, the spirit told him to return to his people 
and tell them what was there. He had been dead seven days, and his body 
was badly deeomposcd ; but the spirit of the dead took his spirit down to its 
body and he came to life. He came to life in the midst of his friends. Now 
it was this way: the watchers around the body heard a noise inside of the 
corpse, but all the while the spirit of the dead man was sitting near, sajnng 
that he was trying to sing. So they quickly unwrapped the body. Then 
the man opened his. eyes, and, looking at them, said, **I have come from 
the land of the dead. I have come to teach you more songs and prayers.'*^ 
Then he rose and picked up a small bell. Now all the people were very 
hungr}', for they had nothing to eat for a long time. The man said, **Xow 
we will dance." So he led the dancers round in a circle, and, keeping time 
with the bell, sang the songs he had learned when in the land of the dead.. 
A\Tien the dance was over, the people rested while he prayed for them. 
Then they danced again. They all slept that night, and when they awoke, 
the man who had been dead said, "I know all about power. I saw it in my 
dream. You can believe that there is such a place." Then the men went 
out to hunt and brought home a great deal of meat, and after that the danc»e 
was called the ** Black-Tail Deer-Dance." Now every one takes part in 
this dance before he goes out to hunt. They dance in the evening and at 
night they can see in dreams where game is to be found. 



Once again when a Kutenai Indian was out in the mountains, he was 
buried in the snow, but his dog got him out. The man, however, was dead. 
The dog went home and by his action induced the man's w4fe to follow. 
The man had been dead four days. The woman carried the body home. 
There were two children in the family and they had nothing to eat. The 
woman said to the children, **Now your father is dead. We shall starve. 
We cannot get away." Now that night the woman remembered the story 
of the man who went to the land of the dead, that he came to life again by 
singing songs, etc. Then she prayed that her husband might be brought 
to Hfe and food given them. While she was doing this, two young men 
came in suddenly and told her that the spirits would help her. They said, 
*'lM us have a dance that your husband may get back his life." So they 
began to dance, and danced all night. When daylight came, they stopped- 
One of the young men stood at the head of the corpse and the other at the 
foot. The one at his head covered the face of the corpse with a black cloth. 
The one at the foot touched the dead man on the breast. Then the one at 
the head took off the black cloth and the corpse opened his eyes. Then one 
of the young men walked on his chest until he became alive. One of the 



1908.] Wissler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 159 

young men gave him a cross and directed him to pray to it and never to part 
with it. Now in the Black-Tail Deer-Dance they sing the same songs they 
sang that night. 



Again, in very ancient times there was a woman who had the skin of an 
otter with the skull fastened to it. She was a medicine- woman. One 
day she challenged the others as to whose medicine was the strongest. She 
said, **Let us see who can kill others by touching them." Then the woman 
took a small pail of water, put in some earth, and, taking a mouthful of the 
mixture, sprinkled it upon the head of the otter. Then she stood by the 
door where the people were dancing, and, holding out the otter-skin, spat 
water from her mouth towards the dancers, and whoever was struck fell 
down dead. When they were all dead, she took some branches of the 
pine-tree, placed them on coals of fire, and held the otter-skin in the smoke. 
Then she rubbed the otter-skin and the people all came to life again. 



One time last winter [1902] I visited the Kutenai Indians. I was dancing 
the Black-Tail Deer-Dance with them. One of the dancers said to me, 
"Now look at my body." So I watched his body, and as he danced a large 
cross appeared on his breast and a similar one on his back. As soon as he 
stopped dancing, the cross disappeared. Then we began to dance again. 
This time he said to me, ''Now look above and below." When I looked 
down at his feet, I saw the cross on the ground : when I looked at his head, 
I saw the cross above, with rays like the sun. 

17. The Horxed-To.\d and the Frog. 

There were two lakes near each other. A Horned Toad was going from 
one of them to the other to see his girl. His girl was a Frog. At last he 
got to the lake and coaxed the Frog to go back with him. So they started 
off. The Frog went very fast and the Horned-Toad was panting behind 
calling out, **Wait! Wait!" All this time it was raining very hard. After 
a while the Frog said, "Let us go back. It is too far. We shall never get 
there." "No," said the Horned-Toad, "it is not far." When they were 
about halfway over to the lake, it stopped raining. Then the sun came 
out very hot. It was very, very hot. The Horned-Toad began to give out. 
He seemed about to have a sunstroke. So the Frog passed water over his 
back. This revived him for a little while, but soon he began to weaken; 



160 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. 11, 

and the Frog did as before. In this way they managed to get along until 
the Frog reached her limit. Now the Homed-Toad was nearly dead. 
The Frog was holding him up, and struggling along, crying. When they 
were nearly dead, it began to rain again. Then they started on much 
refreshed. At last they reached the lake. Then they were married. Now 
it has boiled over. 

18. Turtle Goes to War. 

Once there was a lake with many camps on its shores. This was a long 
time ago. One day a Turtle came to the shore. He went up to a lodge, 
crawled into it, and found a woman asleep. AMien the man came home, 
he saw his wife's head in the centre of the lodge. Her head had been 
cut off by the Turtle. He saw the Turtle trying to pull it toward the back- 
rest, but it was too heavy for him. As he pulled he sang, "Turtle has hair 
(head]." The Turtle held the head by the braids. 

Now, the people laid hold of the Turtle. One of them said, "We will 
make a big fire and bum him in it." Then they began to make a big fire. 
All this time the Turtle was trying to get away from the people who were 
holding him, to get into the fire. Then the people said, "He must belong 
in there. The fire must be his place." Then some one said, "Let us 
smash him between two rocks." When the Turtle heard this, he ran and 
got upon a rock himself. When the people saw this, they said, "He must 
have come out of the rock. He is too willing. Let us hang him." So 
they brought a piece of sinew and made a loop; but the Turtle took it out 
of their hands and put it around his neck. Then the people said, "He is 
too willing. We cannot kill him that way." Then some one suggested 
throwing him into the deep water. As soon as the Turtle heard this, he 
began to cry and pull back. The people said, "Now we have it. We have 
found out what will kill him." So they threw him into the deep water. 
When the Turtle was in the centre, he came to the surface, floated on his 
back and then on his breast, singing, "Turtle has a scalp! turtle has a 
scalp!" ' 

19. The Warrior*s Dilemma. 

One time when a war-party went out, they sent a young man ahead to 
scout. It was dark. As he was going along he saw a lodge all by itself. 
He went up quietly and looked in. There was no one in the lodge except 
a man, his wife, and a little child. The little child could just walk and was 
amusing itself by dipping soup from the kettle with a small horn-spoon. 



» This is a common myth In the Mississippi bi\sin. See Ceeiha Myth, J. O. Dorsey, p. 271; 
Wissler, Dakota My I lis, (Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XX, p. 126). 



1908.] Wisder and DuvaU, Blackfoot Mythology. 161 

The man and his wife were busy talking and paid no attention to the child. 
Now the child happened to look up and saw the man peeping through the 
hole, and at once toddled over to the kettle, dipped up some soup in the 
spoon and held it to the man's Ups. He drank it and the child returned to 
the kettle for more. In this way the child fed him for many minutes. Then 
he went away. As he was going along down to his party, he thought to 
himself, "I do not like to do this, but I must tell my party about this lodge. 
When they know it, they will come and kill these people. Now this Uttle 
child fed me, even when I was spying upon them, and I do not like to have 
it killed. Well, perhaps I can save the child; but then it would be too bad 
for it to lose its parents. No, I do not see how I can save them, yet I cannot 
bear to have them killed," etc. So he sat down and thought it over. After 
a while he went back to the lodge, went in and sat down. While the man 
was getting the pipe ready, the child began to feed him again with the spoon. 
After he had smoked, he told the man all about it. He explained to him 
how he had come as a scout to spy upon them, and that he was about to 
bring up his war-party, but that they had been saved by the little child. 
Then he directed the man to go at once, leaving everjrthing behind him 
in the lodge. 

Now, the man was very thankful, and offered to give him a medicine- 
bundle and a suit of clothes; but the young man refused, because he knew 
that his party would suspect him. Then the man suggested that he might 
place the bundle near the door, behind the bedding. When the war-party 
came up and dashed upon the lodge, he could be the first to capture it. 
(All the important property of the lodge is always kept at the back, opposite 
the door, and, when a war-party rushes in, the swiftest runs to this place.) 

Now the young man went back to his party, told them he had found 
a lodge, but that he had not been up to it or seen any one. Then they 
started out at once, and, when they came near the lodge, they set up a 
whoop and rushed upon it. Now the man kept to the rear, and as his com- 
panions were counting coup on the various objects in the lodge, he stood at 
the door looking around. At last he picked out the bundle and counted 
coup on it. Now his companions were suspicious, and they said, **Oh! 
we know how you did this. You warned the people so that they went away, 
and then you hid these things by the door, that you might get them." They 
accused him and threatened him, but still he denied any knowledge of the 
people, or as to how the bundle came to be there. Yet the people were 
always suspicious of him, and he was always looked upon as the man who 
betrayed his war-party in order to make a capture.^ 



1 This narrative and the one that follows usually provoke a discussion, in which some 
condemn all or parts of the scout's acts, while others defend them. Such tales are looked upon 
as ethical puzzles to which no satisfactory answers can be given. So far nothing of this kind 
among other tribes has come to our notice. 



162 Anihropological Papers American Museum of \aiurai History. f\'oL II, 

20. A Wakrior's Duty and his Love. 

Onr-e a sc-out going out from his party saw a camp. There were just 
two lodges. He stole up, and in the smaller one he saw a woman alone. 
She was beautiful, and struck his fancy. He went back and waited. At 
midnight he crept into the lodge and spent the night iJ^-iih her. In the 
morning he went away. 

He was the leader of the war-party, and on one pretext and another 
kept them under cover while he made nightly \vs\ls to the woman. He did 
this for four nights. ITien his feeUng for the woman began to assert itself. 
He thought of plans to save her. He might lead her away and kill the 
others; but they were doubtless her relations and she would mourn for 
them. Then, if he married her, they would be his relations. Yet he was 
the leader of a war-party, and had discovered an enemy. At last he brought 
the woman and her relations to the camp of the war-party, telling them that 
he had married the woman. Then they went home, and though she was 
of hostile tribe, they lived together. 

21. The Wolverene- Woman. 

These Indians have a belief that there are animab with jK>wer to change 
into human beings. Of these the wolverene is one. It often happens that 
when a man is out hunting, or sitting alone by his campfire, a very hand- 
some woman will come up. Now if he offers her some of the entrails from 
his butcherin^j, she will take them daintily between the thimab and the 
forefinger and then throw them away. This is the sign by which she may 
be known. Should the man take up his gun, the woman will run away as a 
wolverene. On the other hand, should he allow her to come into camp and 
engage in familiarities, evil mil follow. As soon as he gets home and smells 
the fire of the lodges, he will fall do^Ti dead. Sometimes he ^-ill only faint 
when he smells the fire of the lodges; but even then he will never be the 
same person again. WTien men go out to hunt, they are often reminded to 
keep a lookout for the Wolverene- Woman, ^^^len a woman is out alone, 
the Wolverene- Woman will appear as a fine young man. If the woman 
permits herself to be seduced, it will Ik* bad for her. As a rule, her people 
will never hear of her again; but, should she start back to camp and smell 
the fire of the lodges, she will surely die.* 

' For another example of the effect of camp-smoke, ser» Grinnell. op. cit., p. 133. This is 
not a formal narrative. While the wolverene is a well-known mythical character, there are no 
si>ecific myths in which it appears. The Deer-Woman of the Dakota, and the Wolf-W^oman 
of th** Pawnee, described by Bush Otter, seem to embody the same conception a.*» is expressed 
in the above (Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 480, 481). 



1908.] Wiasler and Duvall, Blackfoot Mythology. 163 



22. Seven-Heads. 

These Indians have a myth of a seven-headed person who made a busi- 
ness of devouring young women. One time a man came along where some 
animals were disputing over a piece of meat. The man settled the quarrel, 
and in return they gave him some power. With this power he went and 
killed Seven-Heads, after which he married a princess. Then the thunder 
stole her, but he rescued her by killing a lion, then an eagle which flew out 
of the lion, then a rabbit which came out of the eagle, then a dove which 
came out of the rabbit, etc. This story is believed by the Indians to have 
been brought in by the French.^ 

23. The Sand Hills. 

Once a man was hunting buffalo near the Sand Hills. That is where the 
dead go. He killed a buffalo, and when he went up to butcher it, he saw 
a man come towards him, whom he knew to be a dead man. He was very 
much afraid so he said to the dead man, "Now I will divide up this buffalo 
with you, but first I must go back here and bring up my pack-horses. You 
can go on with the butchering." The man lied, for as soon as he reached 
his horse he mounted and galloped away. A long time after this, (he man 
was back in the same part of the country, and thought to himself, " I will go 
to get the arrow-points I left at the place where I killed the buffalo." When 
he came to the place, he found the skeleton of the buffalo and also his arrow- 
points. As he looked up, he saw the same man he had seen before. The 
man spoke to him, and said, *'My friend, where have you been? I have 
been waiting for you all this time." This frightened the man so much that 
he sprang upon his horse and galloped away at great speed. Shortly after 
he returned to his camp, he took sick and died.^ 

» The above abstract was recorded by D. C. Duvall. For note on the distribution of this 
narrative, see Kroeber, Gros Ventre Myths, p. 57. It is interesting to note that our Blackfoot 
informant expresses the same opinion as to the origin of this myth as attributed to Mrs. La 
Fl^che, an Omaha, J. O. Dorsey, op. cit., p. 126. 

2 See Grinnell, op. cit., pp. 125, 132. 



ANTHROPOLOGICAL PAPERS 

OF THE 

American Museum of Natural History 

Vol. II, Part II. 



THE NORTHERN SHOSHONE. 

By Robert H. Lowie. 

CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Introduction 169 

I. Ethnology '171 

History and Geography 171 

Material Culture 173 

Stone, Bone and Shell Implements 173 

Preparation of Hides . " 175 

Pottery ,. . 177 

Embroidery and Weaving 177 

Clothing and Personal Decoration 179 

Dwellings 182 

Economic Life 184 

Hunting 185 

Fishing 185 

Food 187 

Transportation and Trade 189 

Warfare 191 

Games 195 

Art 199 

Decorative Art 200 

Music 206 

Social Organization 206 

Terms of Relationship 209 

Marriage 210 

Various Customs 211 

Names 211 

Salutiition 211 

Smoking 212 

Menstrual Lodge 214 

Burial 214 

Dances 216- 

165 



166 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural HieUyry, [Vol. II, 

Page 

Religion ; .• . 223 

The Soul 226 

Ghosts 227 

Medicine 227 

Charms 229 

Conceptions of the Universe 230 

Miscellaneous 232 

II. Mythology 233 

1. The Creation of the Shoshone 236 

2. Wolf and Coyote 239 

3. The Theft of Fire 244 

4. The Theft of Pine-nuts 246 

5. The Flood 247 

6. Coyote and his Dau^ters 248 

7. Iron-Man 251 

8. The Sun 252 

9. The Bear and the Deer 253 

10. The Weasels and the Giants 254 

11. Dzoavits and the Weasels 257 

12. Dzoavits and Mosquito 259 

13. The Weasel Brothers 260 

14. Dzoavits and the old Woman 261 

15. Dzoavits 262 

16. Coyote and the Rock 262 

17. The Bungling Host 265 

18. Porcupine and Coyote 267 

19. Skunk 268 

20. Skunk and Coyote 270 

21. Skunk and the Mountain-Lion 271 

22. The Bull-frog and the Elk 271 

23. Coyote Tales 272 

24. Lodge-Boy and Thrown-Away 280 

25. The Boy's Travels and the Water- Youths 283 

26. The Boy who visited his Grandfathers 285 

27. The Disobedient Brother 287 

28. The Sheep-Woman 288 

29. Thunder 290 

30. The Bad Medicine-Man 290 

31. Cannibal Stories 291 

32. The Buffalo who Stole an Indian Girl 293 

33. The Stolen Wife 293 

34. The Horse- Woman 294 

35. The White Man and the Monster-Bu-d 294 

36. The Poor Boy and his Horse 295 

37. The Bear's Son 298 

38. Ghost Stories 299 

39. Enga-g\^'acu's Experiences in the Underworld .... 301 

BiBUOGRAPHY 303 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone. 167 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Plates. 

I. Moccasins. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 50-6403 B), length 25 cm.; Fig. 2 (50-1141 A), 

length 14 cm.; Fig. 3 (50-6402 B), length 25 cm.; Fig. 4 (50-6409 A), length 
25 cm. 

Text Fiqures. 

Page 

1. Steatite Cup 174 

2. Hide tied to a Frame for Tanning . . 175 

3. Arrangement for Smoking a Tanned Hide 176 

4. Loom for Bead-weaving 177 

5. Outlines of Shoshone Basket-forms 178 

6. Pattern of a Shoshone Moccasin 180 

7. Bead Necklace 182 

8. Sahnon-gig 186 

9. Lemhi Hearth and Drill. Wind River Drill 189 

10. Cradle-board 190 

II. Set of Dice 197 

12. Buckskin Ball 198 

13. "Spreading Design" on Moccasins 201 

14. Beaded Strip on Dance-legging 202 

15. Beaded Strip on Dance-legging 202 

16. Parfleche Decoration 203 

17. Parfleche Decoration . 204 

18. Parfleche Decoration 205 

19. Designs on a Wind River Drum 207 

20. Musical Instrument 219 



INTRODUCTION. 

In the spring of 1906, the writer left New York on a Museum expedition 
to the Shoshone of Lemhi Agency, Idaho. As there were rumors that the 
Lemhi people had already been removed to Fort Hall in the southeastern 
part of the state, it was necessary to stop ofif on that reservation in order to 
obtain authentic information on this point. After a few days* delay at 
Inkom, Pocatello and Ross Fork, I proceeded to Lemhi and remained there 
for the remainder of the summer, the removal of the Indians having been 
postponed until the following spring. While at Lemhi, I enjoyed the kind 
hospitaUty of Mr. Eugene Duclos, the superintendent of the reservation. 
To Dr. Murphy, the government physician, to Mr. J. P. Sherman of Owyhee, 
Nevada, and to Mr. Faukner, a half-breed Shoshone from Fort Hall, whom 
I met in New York, I am indebted for a few details. Some facts of com- 
parative interest were revealed in a conversation with Mr. H. H. St. Clair, 
who had visited the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, and I have also 
drawn on the notes obtained by Mr. St. Clair in connection with specimens 
collected for the Museum. Professor Franz Boas kindly offered me the use 
of the Shoshone texts recorded by Mr. St. Clair; it merely proved practica- 
ble, however, to call attention to some points of comparative interest re- 
vealed by this additional material. As much of the material culture of the 
Shoshone has disappeared, it seemed advisable to utilize the information 
buried in older Uterature and to weld it, together with my field-notes, into 
a somewhat systematic, though necessarily brief, account of the Northern 
Shoshone. Mr. Herbert J. Spinden's paper on The Nez Perci Indians 
(Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, Volume II, Part 3, 
pp. 165-274) appeared too late to be adequately used for comparative pur- 
poses. 

The majority of the myths were told by old informants and taken down 
from the translation of my interpreters. Several stories were told in the 
Shoshone-English jargon of a middle-aged Indian sufficiently conversant 
with English to make himself understood. The tales of Iron-Man, the 
Bear and the Deer, and some of the Dzo'avits and minor Coyote stories 
were recorded as texts. The footnotes to the myths are not exhaustive, 
calUng attention only to striking similarities and to homologies of compara- 

169 



170 AfUkropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol, II, 

tive interest. In order to facilitate both comparative studies and a survey 
of the incidents of each story, every paragraph has been furnished with 
head-lines in marginal indentations. Though the representation of tales 
by such skeletal outlines as suggested by Mr. Joseph Jacobs at the Inter- 
national Folk-Lore Congress of 1891 did not prove practicable in the present 
stage of the catchword movement, the superiority of even the headlines 
here presented over the conventional abstracts appended to collections of 
North American tales will, I think, be conceded. 

As the time at my disposal permitted but a very superficial consideration 
of linguistic questions, no attempt is made in the following paper to render 
with more than approximate accuracy the intricacies of Shoshone phonetics. 
A constant error, which, however, it was not deemed advisable to remedy 
by wholesale correction, is the substitution of surds for sonants pronounced 
with surd force. Thus, p in pi'a does not represent the English sound, 
but a medial, and the same applies to t and k. 

a, e, i, o, u have their continental sounds. 

a, 6, ii, are approximately the modified German vowels. 

E an obscure vowel. 

^ whispered final vowel. 

V Spanish b. 

r ''Shoshone r,'' related to d. 

dz intermediate between English dz and j in judge. 

X Grerman ch in ach. 

c English sh. 

Robert H. Lowie. 
New York, 
December, 1908. 



1909.] Lotvie, The Northern Shoshone, 171 



I. ETHNOLOGY. 

HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY. 

The Shoshone, or Snakes, constitute the northernmast division of the 
Shoshonean family. They occupied western Wyoming and Montana, central 
and southern Idaho, northern Utah and Nevada, and all but the western- 
most part of Oregon. Offshoots of the tribe fished on the Des Chutes 
every spring,^ and were even found on the upper Willamette (Multnomah);' 
so that the boundaries customarily assigned to Shoshone territory must be 
extended rather considerably towards the west. In Utah, most of the 
settlements were north of Great Salt Lake in Weber, Bear and Cache 
Valleys and in the neighborhood of Goose Creek Mountains. In Nevada, 
several bands roamed from Humboldt River to a hundred miles south, the 
chief of one of them living near Honey Lake, California.' In Wyoming, 
the special territory of the Shoshone was on Green and Sweetwater Rivers; 
and they are said to have extended eastward as far as the North Platte.* 

The earliest notice of a meeting with the tribe is due to Lewis and Clark, 
who sighted the first Shoshone in southwestern Montana, and, after crossing 
the divide, visited the village on Lemhi River in August, 1805. From ex- 
plicit statements on the part of natives as well as from their riding-gear, 
they gathered that there had already been intercourse with Spanish traders.* 
From early accounts it is clear that the only constant allies of the Snakes 
were the Datcl'ba (Tushepaws), a subdivision of the Flathead, who joined 
their fishing-parties and accompanied them on their hunting excursions 
into the Plains.* The Bannock, though never hostile, do not seem to have 
afforded their congeners any protection against their eastern foes in the 
early days. Largely on account of their comparative lack of firearms, 
perhaps partly on account of their natural timidity, the Shoshone were 
warred upon and despoiled of their possessions by the majority of Plains 
tribes. Thus, in the summer of 1805, the Atsina had deprived them of 
their skin-lodges and stolen many of their horses.^ On their westward trip 
Lewis and Clark met a number of tribes which were in the habit of harassing 
the Snakes. The Mandans were preparing an expedition against them. 



1 Lewis and Clark, III, 147; IV. 366. 

2 Ibid., IV, 280. 

« Burton, 474; Schoolcraft, V, 201. 

* Schoolcraft. V, 199. 

« Lewis and Clark, IV, 74, 77. 

Ibid., Ill, 27; Irving, (b) I. 274. 

7 Lewis and Clark, II, 383; III. 38. 



172 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

the Hidatsa had captured Shoshone women, the Arikara professed to have 
learned the bead-making industry from Shoshone prisoners,* the Blackfoot 
and Crows were dreaded enemies,^ though the former were occasionally 
repelled by both Bannock and Shoshone.* The Wyoming Shoshone had 
to suffer from the depredations of the Cheyenne and Arapaho.* In the 
south the Shoshone had to contend against the Ute until a treaty of peace 
was concluded under the influence of Brigham Young.^ Practically all 
the Columbian tribes, such as the Nez Perc6, Cayuse and Walla Walla, 
were hostile;' but against some of these the Shoshone seem to have held 
their own.^ Some of the western bands were at war with the Klamath.^ 
Of course, practically none of these statements as to tribal relations applies 
rigorously to all the local Shoshone groups, or to any one group at all periods. 
In some cases friendship and hostiUty alternated irregularly. Thus, the 
Crow in 1806 were temporarily at peace with the Snakes,* ousted them from 
the upper Missouri region in 1822,*® were allies in 1842 against the Gros 
Ventres, Ogallala and Cheyenne," and in still later times formed a confedera- 
tion with Snakes, Bannock and Nez Perc6 against the Blackfoot, Sioux, 
Cheyenne and Arapaho." Similarly, the Ute, who in 1834 were reported 
as at war with the Shoshone,** were found at other times at peaceable rendez- 
vous on Green River with Shoshone, Nez Perc6, and Flathead Indians." 

While the Bannock have occasionally given the government cause for 
forcible intervention, the relations of the Shoshone to the whites, with the 
exception of local disturbances,** have been almost uniformly amicable. 
The friendship of the Lemhi was tested in 1877, when they remained neutral, 
refusing to join the Nez Perc6 under Chief Joseph. The Shoshone are now 
confined to three reservations. Fort Hall, Idaho; Wind River Reservation, 
Wyoming; and Western Shoshone Reserv^ation, Nevada. The Lemhi 
were moved to Fort Hall in 1907. The total population is probably about 
3300, corresponding to an estimated total of 4000 in 1847 for Shoshone and 



1 Lewis and Clark, I, 210, 220, 249. 272, 283. 

a Ibid.. II, 252; V. 270. Wyeth, 206-7. Irving, (b) II, 159. 

3 Ross. I, 226. Townsend, 242. 

* Fremont, 127. 

* Remy, I, 291. 

« Lewis and Clark, IV, 280, 331. 362; V. 6. 24. 106. Ross. I. 223, et passim. 

7 Lewis and Clark, III, 145, 149. 168. 
• 8 Gatschet. 28. 

» Lewis and Clark. V. 273. 
»o Schoolcraft. V. 198. 
" Fremont. 41. 59, 146. 
« Clark, 14. 
18 Ibid., 338. 
" Parker, 80, 83. 
ifi Bancroft, 247, 259-60, 433. 515-16. 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone. 173 

Bannock combined.^ Lewis and Clark's estimate of over 13,000* and 
Ross's of 36,000 ' are of course purely conjectural. 

While by community of habitat and frequent intermarriage the Shoshone 
are most closely affiliated with the Bannock, they belong linguistically to 
the same subdivision as the Comanche, who are commonly regarded as a 
rather recent offshoot from the Wyoming Shoshones.* 

The theory has been put forward that the Shoshone formerly occupied 
the Plains country and were driven westward by the attacks of Prairie 
tribes. According to Brinton,* all the Shoshoneans once inhabited the area 
between the Great Lakes and Rocky Mountains. In a recent paper, 
Professor Kroeber finds this view "highly improbable on account of the 
general* distribution of dialectic groups" and "without support on Unguistic 
grounds."* This conclusion is corroborated by the complete absence of 
migration legends among the Lemhi and Nevada Shoshoneans, and by a num- 
ber of cultural traits. The old type of Shoshone dwelUng, the development 
of fishing, the chase for small game, the weaving of sage-brush bark and of 
rabbit-skin blankets, the extreme simpUcity of their social organization, the 
virtual absence of buffalo tales and the mythological importance of the 
coyote and the wolf, all bear out the supposition of a long occupancy of the 
Plateau region. The historically recorded westward movements of Sho- 
shone bands driven by Plains tribes thus shrink into purely local migrations 
not affecting the tribe as a whole. The influence of Prairie culture is, of 
course, undeniable, but its operation belongs to a relatively late period. 



MATERIAL CULTURE. 

Objects of Stone, Bone and Shell. The Shoshone made knives by break- 
ing pieces of obsidian,^ which was common in their country, and selecting 
suitable, sharp-edged fragments, often of irregular shape. A piece an 
inch or two long was not rejected so long as it would cut. The edge was 
renewed by means of an elk or deer horn. Sometimes a wooden or horn 
handle was attached, but this was frequently lacking.' In fashioning arrow 
points, similar pieces of obsidian were broken off, laid upon a hard stone, 



> Schoolcraft. VI. 697. 
» Ibid.. VI, 118-119. 
« Ross, I, 251; II, 150. 

• Mooney, (a) 1043. Kroeber. (d) 111. 
« Brinton. 121. 

• Kroeber, (d) 165. 

^ Obsidian (du'pi) is still favorably compared with iron, because it is nfi'rOyunt (powerful, 
strong), which iron is not. 

• Lewis and Clark, III, 19; Wyeth. 213. 



174 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

and struck with another stone or finished with a deer or elk horn. The 
points were about three-quarters of an inch long, half an inch wide and 
rather thin. According to Wyeth, those intended for hunting were widened, 
so that the head might be withdrawn with the shaft, while arrows for war 
lacked this feature.^ The Shoshone had no axes; smaller branches were 
seized and broken with the hands, for larger trunks they had to depend on 
windfalb. Wood was split by means of a sharpened antler.' 

Lewis noted pots of white soft stone which became black and very hard 
by burning.* According to information obtained by the writer, the stone 
formerly employed* by the Shoshone was called to'sa-tak (white + ?) or 
ba'mu-tak (tobacco + ?). As it is known that the Shoshone made steatite 
pipe-bowls,* there can be little doubt that the vesseb seen by Lewis were 




Fig. 1 (50-1166). Steatite Cup. Diameter, 12 cm. 



of the same material. Wyeth pictures a "stone cooking pot and mortar" 
of pure lava, truncate, but curved at the bottom, widening towards the open- 
ing and recuned at the top. In his text, he states that these pots, which 
had a capacity of about two quarts, were very rare, and that he never saw 
them used either as mortars or pots, though he believes they could have 
stood fire as a boiling- vessel.* The Museum contains a (probably unfin- 
ished) flat-bottomed steatite cup with handle from Wind River; the out- 
side bears the marks of a picking instrument (Fig. 1). Stone mortars and 
pestles were seen by Culin among the Washakie Shoshone and Fort Hall 



1 Wyeth. 212; Lewis and Clark, III, 12. 19. 

2 Lewis and Clark, III. 9, 19. 
» Ibid., Ill, 19. 

* Wyeth. 214. 
« Ibid., 211. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 175 

Bannock.^ Stone scrapers consisting of thin segments of quartzite, made 
by striking the rock a smart blow, were found by Leidy both in actual use 
and in an old grave.^ They were circular or oval, sharp-edged, convex on 
one side and flat on the other. 

Awls, salmon-gigs, and sometimes the caches in the hand-game, were 
of bone. Besides antlers, sharpened ribs were used as scrapers in the 
preparation of hides. Drinking cups and spoons ^ were made of mountain- 
sheep or buffalo horn. In the manufacture of bows, the horns of mountain- 
sheep and elk were used, after being molded by heating and wetting; they 
were worked smooth by scraping with sharp stones and drawing between 
two rough stones.* Shells were used for personal decoration only. Abalone 
ornaments were obtained in trade from the coast Indians.' 

Preparation of Hides. Buffalo, elk, and, in recent times, cowskins. 




Fig. 2. Hide tied to a Frame for Tanning. 

were stretched out on the ground and pegged down; whereas deerskins 
were hung up (Fig. 2). The hair is removed either by means of the elk- 
horn scraper having an iron blade secured by a buckskin thong, or with a 
horse's rib. The flesh is removed with the typical serrate Prairie fleshing 
tool. The brains of a deer were formerly dried for a length of time varying 
from a few days to several weeks, then boiled with deer-bones, and the mix- 
ture was rubbed in to soften the hide. The hide is put in cold water, wrung 



1 Culin, 13. 89. 
« Leidj% 653. 

• Spoons were sometimes made of wood (Townsend, 260). 

* Wyeth, 212. 

» Lewis and Clark, II, 372, 378. 



176 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History [Vol. II, 

out, suspended from a cross-beam and scraped. The scraper is either the 
elk-hom adze of the Plains, or a small elliptical sharp-edged stone. The 
scraping is continued until one side is perfectly white and smooth. The 
skin is repeatedly immersed in water, wrung and scraped in this fashion. 
In wringing, the left hand seizes one part of the hide from below, and the 
right twists the portion directly beneath, while the worker sits on the ground. 
The wringing operation is continued ad infinitum, the main worker being 
relieved from time to time by other women of the family or by visitors. In- 
stead of sitting on the ground, the worker will sometimes tie the hide to a 
frame; standing before it, she twists and untwists every section of the hide 

in succession about a wringing stick. In 
smoothing the skin, it is often placed 
across a sinew cord stretched between 
two supports, and vigorously moved back 
and forth. This method is said to have 
been used regularly with buffalo hides. 
Once I saw the cord stretched vertically 
instead of transversely, one end being 
attached to a tree near the ground and 
the other several feet above. The fibres 
are carefully removed on one side and 
remain on the other. Now- 
adays, as a rule, but one side 
is smoked, especially in mak- 
ing gauntlets for trade; for- 
merly both sides were usually 
smoked. 

Two smoking - frames 

Fig. 3. Arrangement for Smoking a Tanned HideT ^^'^ observed by the writer. 

One consisted of a cross 
beam connecting the stump of a branch with the fork of two poles tied 
together so as to rest on the ground as the sides of an isosceles triangle. 
On one side quite near the tree, a hole was made, perhaps 45 cm. deep, and 
a fire built. On the one occasion when the process of smoking itself was 
witnessed, the deerskin was sewed together so that the side to be smoked 
formed the inner surface of a hollow cylinder. The lower end of the hide 
was staked down with wooden pegs to the perimeter of the firehole, the 
upper part was tied to the crotch of a tripod frame (Fig. 3). The woman 
built a fire of wooden shavings in a one-foot excavation. The smoke played 
on the inner half of the skin for from ten to fifteen minutes, turning it yellow. 




1909.] Louie, The Northern Shoshone. 177 

According to Mason,^ the Shoshone employed three kinds of buckskin, 
— white, yellow and brown. The hair was often removed by rolling up the 
hide in ashes wet with warm water for a few days. **The hair was then 
removed by means of a wooden knife, a rib, or in later times with an old 
case-knife or bit of hoop-iron. The yellow and the brown skins received 
their tint by drying them over a smoldering fire of dry willow for the former 
and green willow for the latter color. The skins were vigorously pulled 
and stretched in every direction while the drying and smoking were going 
on." Mason's account is probably derived from descriptions of the method 
of Paiute and Ute tanners, whose implements are reproduced in his paper 
(Plates XC and XCII). 

Pottery, "Co'go-wi'towE," earthen pots, were referred to by several 
of my informants, and an old woman professed to have seen some in her 
youth. The existence of pottery is affirmed by Lewis,^ who speaks of "pots 
in the form of a jar made either of earth, or of a white soft stone." Still 




Fig. 4 (50-6404.) Loom for Bead-weaving. Length, 55 era. 

more explicit is a statement by Ross, who pronounces the Shoshone the best 
of western potters. **The clays to be found all over their native soil are of 
excellent quality, and have not been overlooked by them." Reference is 
made to cylindrical kettles and water-jars with stoppers, which were also 
used for holding fish, oil and grease.^ 

Embroidery and Weaving. The designs produced with quills and in 
beadwork will be considered later. Nowadays, in beading, the women 
frequently employ a bow-shaped loom notched at both ends for the recep- 
tion of the single strings (Fig. 4). The use of looms in modem beadwork is 
rather common on Indian reservations, especially in the schools. The frame 
is, however, generally rectangular,* instead of being arched as among the 
Shoshone. The process of embroidering resembles the second variety of 
Menomini beadwork as illustrated by Hoffman.* Where beads are sewed 
directly on cloth or buckskin, the Shoshone, as a rule, have no definite system 



1 Mason (a) 572. 

2 I^wis and Clark. III. 19. 

3 Ross. I. 273-4. 

* Hoffman. 269. fig. 45. 
« Ibid.. 271. fig. 47. 



178 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

of stitching. In this respect, however, two Museum specimens form an 
exception. A number of beads are strung together and sewed on, the stitch 
passing down to the next row, where an equal number is strung in the oppo- 
site direction. 'Vertical bands result, producing the ridged effect character- 
istic of Dakota beadwork, while on the other side of the fabric the stitches 
run in straight parallel lines marking the borders of the bands. 

Sage-brush bark (wa'dzipi) was used for weaving baskets, bags (wa'- 







Fig. 5: a (50-2333), height, 27 cm.; b (50-6418), height, 33 cm.; c (50-6429), diameter 
50 cm.; d, from Schoolcraft. Outlines of Shoshone Basket-forms. 

dzi-mo'gots) and blankets. For the latter purpose, the skins of cottontail 
and jack-rabbits, ground-hogs and other small animals were also employed. 
Mats were manufactured from rushes. The forms of Shoshone baskets, 
so far as known to the writer, are illustrated in Fig. 5. The technique of 
the basketry was either coiled or twined. Basket hats, roasting trays (Fig. 5, 
c), gathering baskets (Fig. 5, b), and fans were twined; water-bottles (Fig. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 179 

5, a), gambling trays, berrying baskets, and cooking vessek (Fig. 5, d) 
were coiled. The latter were made of long tough roots wound in plies 
around a center. The plies were held together by a small root passed 
through a space made by forcing an awl between the two last pUes, and 
winding the root under the last and over the one to be added in the progress 
of formation.^ This vessel was abo used for a drinking cup, and was worn 
as a hat by women on the march. Dice trays were of a three or four-rod 
vertical foundation. Water bottles were rendered tight by pitching. Sev- 
eral Museum specimens are round-bottomed and suppUed with inwoven 
horsehair braids for handles. Some have a two-rod foundation, changing to 
one-rod near the rim. The gathering baskets are of twilled openwork twine. 
Professor Mason notes the peculiar twisting of the warp elements, which, 
instead of rising vertically, make about one-fourth of a turn from the per- 
pendicular. Both these baskets and the other weavings in diagonal twined 
work are furnished with a coiled border.^ The manufacture of cordage 
will be discussed later in connection with fishing. 

Clothing and Personal Decoration, Lewis and Clark found the Sho- 
shone rather well dressed, in the typical Plains fashion.^ The blanket robe 
was the same for both sexes, except that the women's was smaller. It con- 
sisted of buffalo, or more commonly of antelope, deer or bighorn skin, 
dressed with the hair. It was thrown loosely over the shoulders, and drawn 
together by the hands, or confined with a girdle in cold weather. Some robes 
were of beaver, wolf and ground-hog skin, and there is testimony for the 
former use of woven rabbit skins. In the summer, elk skins dressed without 
the hair were commonly employed. 

The moccasins were of deer, elk, or buffalo skin dressed without the 
hair; but, in winter, moccasins of buffalo skin had the hair inside. There 
was one seam on the outer edge of the foot. According to my informants, 
moccasins were stuffed with sage-brush bark in the cold season.* Some 
young men ornamented the tops of their moccasins with polecat skins, trail- 
ing the tail at their heels. Nowadays practically none of the women's 
moccasins are beaded, and many of the men's are likewise undecorated. 
The Shoshone and Bannock made their moccasins in one piece.* In manu- 
facturing the footgear for her family, the housewife cuts off a number of 



1 Wyeth, 211. 

2 Cf. Mason, (b) 489-496. 

8 Lewis and Clark, II, 372. 377-9; III, 4-6. 
* Cf. Dixon, (a) 156. 
» Clark, 258. 



180 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



pieces of tanned buckskin, about ten inches wide for adults. One edge of 
these strips is incised, so as to leave two adjoining semi-circular pro- 
jections from the uncut portion; the point of intersection of these projec- 
tions marks the beginning of the seam in the finished product (Fig. 6). One 
of the two symmetrical halves is then folded over the other, and sewed to 
it with awl and sinew. Before the folding over, the part designed for the 
upper receives a short horizontal incision and a much longer one perpen- 
dicular to it, marking the place for the insertion of the tongue and for the 
turning up at the back; holes are pierced for the sinew lace. This method 
agrees with that anciently employed by the Blackfoot, but varies from that 
in recent use among Plains tribes wearing hard-soled moccasins. I noted 
a single instance of a moccasin of Algonquin style with a seam in the middle 
of the upper. There were usually several triangular or rectangular trailers. 

At home, men and women were 
often barefoot. 

The women's leggings were 
of antelope skin, reaching to the 
knee and secured by a garter 
below. They are often united 
with the moccasin. The men's 
leggings were of the same mate- 
rial ; but very long and full, each 
legging being formed of almost 
an entire skin. 'The tail was 
worn upwards, while the deeply 
fringed neck trailed behind. The 
upper part was left open, so as 
to permit the legs of the skin to 
be drawn beneath a girdle both 
before and behind; while the wide part of the skin covered the buttocks and 
extended in front so as to render a breechcloth unnecessary. Townsend, 
however, notes square clouts fastened with a thong, which were worn by 
both men and women.^ The leggings had deeply fringed flaps at the sides, 
which were sometimes ornamented with bunches of hair taken from a slain 
enemy. Long beaded strips commonly decorated the sides. 

The men's shirt was of deer, antelope, bighorn, or, more rarely, elk skin, 
dressed without the hair; it reached nearly half way down the thigh. The 
sides were sewed, fringed and ornamented from the bottom upwards to 
within six or eight inches of the sleeve. The sleeves were fringed below and 




Fig. 6. Pattern of a Shoshone Moccasin. 



Townsend, 246. 252-4, 261. 



1909.] Lowicy The Northern Shoshone, 181 

on the sides above the elbow, being plain from elbow to wrist and fitting 
the arm tightly. There were wide, richly quilled or beaded shoulder straps, 
lacking in the women's chemise. The chemises were closed at the sides; 
except for women nursing children, in which case there was an opening as 
low as the waist. The breast was generally ornamented with porcupine 
quill embroidery. The women wore a girdle of dressed leather. In dis- 
engaging their arm from a sleeve, men and women drew it out by means of 
the opening underneath the arm and threw the sleeve behind the body. 
Women sometimes attached an awl-case to the front of their shirts. 

The tippet of the Shoshone is described by Lewis as the most elegant 
Indian garment ever seen by him, its collar being a strip of otter fur about 
four or five inches wide, cut out of the back of the skin, the eyes and nose 
forming one extremity and the tail the other. Beginning a little behind 
the ear at one edge of the collar and proceeding towards the tail, the Indians 
attached from one hundred to two hundred and fifty little rolls of ermine 
skin. The ermine skin was first dressed with the fur and a narrow strip 
cut out of the back from the nose to the tail. This was sewed around a 
small cord of silk-grass (Yucca filamerUosa), twisted and tapering so as to 
give a just proportion to the tail which is to form the lower extremity of the 
strand. Thus arranged, the skins are confined in bundles of two or three, 
which are attached to the collar. To conceal the connection, a broad 
ermine skin fringe was attached to the collar, and little bundles of fine fringe 
were fastened to th^ taib in order to show off their black extremities. The 
center of the otter-skin collar was ornamented with abalone (?) shells. 
The collar was confined around the neck, and little rolls of ermine skin 
covered the shoulders and body nearly to the waist, thus giving the appear- 
ance of a short cloak. The men often wore headbands of fox or otter skin. 
Remy mentions a cap of rabbit skins, to which were attached several rabbit- 
taib.^ 

In Lewis and Clark's time, only children wore beads about their necks. 
To-day necklaces of long, cyUndrical beads (Fig. 7) are very popular among 
men and women. These were preceded by ornaments of strung salmon- 
vertebrae, separated at a later period by intervening beads, or of small 
sea-shells obtained from neighboring tribes. Braided sweet-grass and em- 
broidered collars of leather or silk-grass were used for the same purpose. 
Elk-tooth necklaces were worn by women and children; while bear-claw 
necklaces were the prerogative of men who had killed a grizzly, thus serving 
as a badge of distinction.^ Fans are still made of long eagle feathers wrapped 
with red cloth at the bottom and sometimes provided with an attachment 
of little bells. 



» Remy, I, 146. 

2 Lewis and Clark, III, 6. Townsend, 253-4. 



182 Antkropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [\''ol. II, 

The nose was never pierced for the insertion of ornaments. Beads were 
worn suspended from the ear in little bunches, sometimes being intermixed 
with triangular pieces of shell. Nowadays, men and women have one or 
two perforations in either ear, and wear earplugs or rings. Frequently 
the plug is perforated to admit a brass ring. The ears are pierced at a very 
early age; sometimes as many as five holes are made. 

The explorers found both sexes wearing their hair **in a loose lank flow 
over the shoulders and face*'; only a few men had two equal cues hanging 
over each ear and drawn in front of the body. The men tied on eagle feath- 
ers and sometimes attached beads to the front of the crown. At present 
the men usually have two cues in front, with an occasional third in the rear; 
the cues are decorated with strips of weasel or otter skin and feathers. The 
women part their hair in the middle and, with a little piece of wood, put red 
paint on the dividing line; braids are very rare with them. The old-style 
brush (nfi'tuye) consisted of a bunch of dried pi'a co'nip (spear ?-grass). 




Fig. 7 (50-6412). Bead Necklace. Length, 32 cm. 

The hair of the beard is pulled out with iron, formerly brass, tweezers. I 
saw only two men with moustaches; one was a medicine-man who derived 
his name Tumodzo, Black-Moustache, from this pecuUarity. The fingei> 
nails were filed with a small, rough, flat stone. 

Tattooing was not practised, except that women sometimes punctured 
a small circle on their forehead, nose or cheeks, and introduced soot or 
grease, or some other black substance which left an indelible stain. ^ The 
men paint their face with a mixture of grease and bi'cap, red paint. The 
women also employ bi'cap, which is kept in small buckskin pouches tied 
at the top with a buckskin thong. Young girls sometimes painted with 
white clay. Black and &'k-hwi (bluish ?) paint were abo in use. The 
ways of painting for a dance wdll be described later. In washing, the mouth 
is filled with water, which is squirted in a stream at the hands, which then 
wet the hair and face. 

Dwellings, The majority of the Lemhi lived in log-cabins at the time 

» Lewis and Clark, II, 373. 



1909.] Lotvie, The Northern Shoshone. 183 

of my visit. These face the entrance to the summer-shades, hfi'gii-gan* 
(shade-lodge), where the greater part of the day is spent during the warm 
season. The hfi'gii-gan* has a rectangular ground-plan, about twelve feet 
by ten, bounded by four forked posts rarely more than six feet high, which, 
with beams passing from crotch to crotch, support the flat roof of brush and 
twigs. The walls are also formed of brush; sometimes there is a partial 
covering of canvas. As food is prepared in this shelter, a fireplace may be 
maintained in the center. Smaller shades for temporary use were made 
by arranging a few willows or cottonwoods in the arc of a circle. For feasts 
and some dances, a circular enclosure is similarly constructed. At a dis- 
tance of about twenty feet from the main habitation, there is often a rude 
conical structure of unexcoriated branches or trunks, much lower than a 
tipi and walled with brush or canvas. This serves as the menstrual hut 
(hu'na-gan*). Sometimes the menstrual hut is dome-shaped, after the 
fashion of the sweat-lodges (na'bacoko-gan*) ; but still lower and smaller, 
just large enough for a single person to crawl in. 

I saw very few (canvas-covered) tipis, one of which was used exclusively 
for the storage of dance-regalia. Skin-lodges were, however, the common 
dwellings of all bands in contact with the Prairie tribes during the last 
century.^ The Lemhi visited by Lewis possessed a single ''leather" lodge; 
but this was due to the recent loss of their tipis in a fight with the Atsina,^ 
which obliged them to construct small conical lodges of willow branches 
an,d brush .^ The crudity of this style of dwelling led to the designation of 
the Snakes as Bad Lodges in the sign-language of the Plains.* According 
to the Lemhi themselves, supported by the testimony of their myths, the 
habitation preceding the skin tipi was small and of conical shape, resembling 
the modem menstrual hut. In summer it was simply walled with brush; 
but in the winter there was a thatching of sage-brush, or more commonly 
of dry pi'a co'nip, (spear-grass) whence the name coni-gan^ grass-lodges. 
The Kiowa still remember the Shoshone as formerly dwelling in lodges of 
interwoven rushes or grass, and have named them accordingly.^ Bonne- 
ville described huts shaped like a hay-stack and constructed of willow 
branches covered with long grass; these were sometimes surrounded^by a 
small enclosure of wormwood, about three feet high.' Semi-circular straw- 
thatched dwellings were found by Fremont.^ The Western Shoshone of 



J Townsend, 257. 

a L€\Nis and Clark, II, 343. 

8 Ibid., II, 300. 343, 352. 

4 Clark. 337. 

8 Mooney. (b) 160. 

« Irving, (a) 255. 

^ Fremont, 170. 



184 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Nevada have kept wikiups of straw or tule reeds until quite recent times.^ 
In this respect they resemble their congeners, the Paiute, whose ordinary 
habitation is described as a "small rounded hut of tul6 rushes over a frame- 
work of poles, with the ground for a floor and the fire in the center and al- 
most entirely open at the top."^ There is absolutely no evidence that the 
Shoshone ever constructed semi-subterranean earth-lodges. On the other 
hand, they and kindred tribes are sometimes mentioned by early travellers 
as cave-dwellers.' 

The flooring was of pi'a c5'nip, foliage and brush. Antelope and other 
skins served for seats and beds. Mats made from large (tule ?) rushes 
were also used to sleep on. They were about four feet wide and, when 
carried, were rolled up like a scroll.* For storage, parfleches and other raw- 
hide bags were employed; berries were kept in bags of silk- grass bark.* 
Within recent times, Nez Perc6 bags (cai'mogots) of various sizes have 
become very popular, sometimes as many as h^lf a dozen being used in a 
single dwelling; they are all obtained by trading. 

When on the warpath, the Shoshone erected a shelter by simply insert- 
ing half a dozen willow branches in the earth, making a semi-cylindrical 
framework, over which blankets were spread.* 

ECONOMIC LIFE. 

The economic life of the Northern Shoshone differed fundamentally 
in the summer and winter. From the middle of May to September, they 
dwelt on the tributaries of the Columbia, subsisting mainly on salmon. 
\Vhen the fish perished, or returned, the Lemhi Shoshone united with other 
Snake bands and, joining the Flathead, descended east of the Rocky Moun- 
tains in quest of buffalo. The people met by Lewis and Clark in August, 
1805, were on the point of beginning their hunting expedition; they were 
already seriously suffering from want and were only able to entertain their 
visitors with an odd salmon and dried choke- cherries. Lewis states that 
they greatly dreaded their eastern neighbors and, accordingly, returned 
speedily to the salmon country as soon as they had obtained a sufficient stock 
of dried meat.^ Other bands of Shoshone are described as typical Plains 
peoples, permanently engaged in the pursuit of the buffalo. This is explic- 

J Report 1890, 385. Of. Wyeth, 214. 

2 Mooney. (a) 1050. 

« Domenech. II. 256-7. Remy, I, 129. 

* Wyeth, 214. 

» Lewis and Clark, III, 12. 

« Bourke, 340. 

» Lewis and Clark, II, 373-4, 385; III. 23 Domenech. II. 61. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 185 

itly stated of the Shiny-dikas (Ca'ro-rika = Dog-eaters) by Ross * and 
of the Green River Snakes by Wyeth.^ 

Hunting, Buffalo were hunted on horseback in typical Prairie fashion. 
The Blackfoot method of driving a herd down a ledge is said to have been 
unknown. Antelopes were also hunted on horseback. As it was found 
impossible to overtake them with a single horse, the Shoshone would sepa- 
rate to the distance of five or six miles around a herd, generally selecting an 
eminence for a stand. One or two men pursued the herd at full speed and, 
after several miles, were relieved by other hunters on fresh horses. This 
relay chase was continued until the exhausted animals could be dispatched 
with arrows. It would sometimes take forty or fifty hunters half a day to 
kill two or three antelopes by this method. During Lewis's visit, twenty 
men set out after a herd of ten head and were unable to capture a single 
animal in a two hours' run.' Irving records that the surrounded antelopes 
were killed by men, women and boys with clubs.* Another method, called 
oro'ongEn, was to stalk the game dressed in an antelope skin and with a 
headgear of antelope horns, and to shoot the approaching animals.* This 
method was sometimes used to lure mountain sheep. The customary way 
was to pursue them with several dogs until they were driven to a high rock 
where they could be easily shot. The arrow-points were sometimes tipped 
with a mixture of blood and a poisonous root called i'zai. 

Elk and deer are said to have been relatively rare in the countr}'^ of the 
Lemhi people.' According to one of my informants, deer were sometimes 
killed in winter by planting poisoned spears in the ground. Smaller game, 
such as groundhogs, jack-rabbits, cottontails and prairie-dogs were hunted 
by the boys with the aid of their dogs.^ Sage-hens were driven into an en- 
closure, or trapped with nooses. Wolves and foxes were snared.* Owing 
to the scarcity of food, the customary distribution of the game among all the 
members of a band seems to have been suspended at times, each hunter 
preserving his booty for himself and his immediate family.® 

Fishing. Salmon constituted the principal means of subsistence dur- 
ing the fishing season, but sturgeon and trout were also caught. They 
were speared, caught in nets, or trapped by means of weirs. The spears 
consisted of a long pole with a bone gig about two and a half inches long,^® 

1 Ross. I. 249-51. 

2 Wyeth. 219. 227. 

3 Lewis and Clark. II. 346. 
* Irving, (a) 401-2. 

6 Remy, I. 128. 

« Lewis and Clark. II. 346. 

7 Irving, (a) 259. 

8 Lewis and Clark, II, 373. 
» Ibid.. Ill, 18. 

'" Lewis and Clark give the length as from four to six inches; III, 9. 



186 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



to which a small strong line was attached near the middle, connecting it 
with the shaft about two feet from the point. Towards the forward end of 
this head there was a small hole, which entered it ranging acutely toward 
the point of the head; it was quite shallow. In this hole, the front end of 
the shaft was placed. The shaft was about ten feet long. When a salmon 
or sturgeon was struck, the head became detached from the shaft and turned 
crosswise to its direction while entering. If the fish was strong, the staff 
was relinquished and acted as a buoy until the 
exhausted fish could be secured. A modem salmon- 
gig, consisting of an iron nail and a piece of bone is 
illustrated in Fig. 8. 

The Shoshone were in the habit of constructmg 
barriers of stones or brush on small streams to force 
the fish into certain places, where they watched for 
them, often at night, with a torch.^ These barriers 
sometimes consisted of nets of closely-woven willows, 
stretched vertically and extending several feet above 
the surface. They were generally constructed in slues 
and creeks rather than in wdde and deep parts of the 
river. **A number of Indians enter the water about a 
hundred yards above the net, and, walking closely, 
drive the fish in a body against the wickerwork. 
Here they frequently become entangled and are always 
checked; the spear is then used dexterously, and they 
are thrown out, one by one, upon the shore."^ 

Ross describes a Wararika fishing scene, where from 
fifty to a hundred men were busily engaged, some 
wading into the water to their waists and spearing the 
fish with fourteen-foot shafts ; while many erected scaf- 
folds, and others stood on projecting rocks with scoop- 
nets or stretched their netting in the narrow channels. 
The youngsters carried the fish home for the women to 
clean and prepare .^ Bourke saw the Shoshone construct 
a dam of rocks and a wattle-work of willows, which allowed the water to 
pass, but retained solids, 'the spot was guarded by two or three watch- 
men. The rest of the party mounted their ponies, started down-stream to 
a favorable place, entered, and began to ascend the current, lashing the 
surface of the water in front with long poles, while joining in a medicine 
song. **The frightened trout, having no other mode of escape, would dart 



Fig. 8 (50-6426) 
Salmon-gig. Length, 
XI cm. 



1 Wyeth, 213. 
« Townsend, 265. 
3 Ross. 269. 



1909.] Lotme, The Northern Shoshone. 187 

up-stream only to be held in the dam, from which the Indians would calmly 
proceed to take them in gunnysacks."* 

Wyeth speaks of scoop-nets and seines, both resembling those used by 
whites; the knots used in netting also seemed to be of exactly the same 
character. The leaded line was formed by attaching oblong rounded 
stones which had a sunken groove near the middle in which to wind the 
attaching ligature. Reeds were used for floats. The nets were made with 
the outer bark of a weed, which made a stronger line than any of Wyeth's 
own. "The twine b formed by laying the fibre doubled across the knee, 
the bight towards the left, and held between the thumb and finger of that 
hand, with the two parts which are to form the twine toward the right and a 
little separated; rolling these two parts between the knee and right hand 
outwardly from the operator, and twisting the bight between the thumb and 
finger of the left hand fonns the thread. More fibre is added as that first 
commenced on diminishes in size, so as to make a continuous and equal 
line. In this way excellent twine is made much more rapidly than could 
be expected."^ 

The method of trapping fish by the aid of weirs and baskets combined, 
is best described and illustrated by Lewis and Clark. The weir, observed 
by them, extended across four channels, three of which were narrow and 
stopped by tree trunks. These supported the willow-stakes which were 
driven down closely enough to prevent the passage of the salmon. About 
the center of each, a basket eighteen or twenty feet long, cylindrical at the 
top and tapering towards the bottom, was opposed to a small aperture in 
the weir with its mouth up-stream. The basket was so narrow at its lower 
extremity that the fish, when once inside, could not turn about; they were 
taken out by unt}ing the small ends of the longitudinal willows. The weir 
in the main channel was somewhat diflPerently contrived, inasmuch as there 
were two distinct weirs, each furnished with two baskets. The one was 
designed to take the salmon in ascending, the other in descending.' 

Food. To a considerable extent, the Shoshone depended on vegetable 
food, and to this fact is due the name of "Diggers" occasionally applied to 
portions of the tribe. The seeds of Pinus Ttumophyllus were gathered and 
stored for the winter.* Sunflower seeds were knocked into gathering-baskets 
with woven trays. By pounding and friction between smooth stones, they 
were reduced to flour. A mixture of sunflower seeds, lambs-quarter and 
service-berries was pounded and made into a kind of bread.^ Often the 



» Bourke. 341. 

2 Wyeth. 213-4. 

3 Lewis and Clark, III, 6-7; figure, page 7. 
« Remy. I, 135. 

» Lewis and Clark, III, 42. Gass, 118, 121. 



188 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

pounded mass of seeds was roasted in a long, flat willow-tray. Choke-cher- 
ries were mashed with stones and dried in the sun. Service-berries were 
prepared in the same way, sometimes on scaflFolds, made into cakes, and 
stored in bags.^ 

In gathering roots, the women observed by Wyeth employed crooked 
sticks with curved ends sharpened by firing and rubbing against a rough 
stone. Sometimes the implement consisted of an elk or deer horn attached 
to a stick. ^ I saw three digging-sticks, varying from two to three feet in 
length. All were of iron and pointed at the bottom. Two had an iron 
knob at the top; the third was provided with a horizontal piece of wood for 
a handle, which was clasped with the left hand palm-up, and in reverse 
fashion by the right. Yampa {Anethum graveolens) was a favorite article 
of food. It was sometimes eaten green, or dried, without any preparation 
or pounded to a mealy substance which thickened with boiling water.' 
Valeriana edulis was baked in the ground for two days to deprive it of its 
strong poisonous qualities.* Camass roots were placed in pits underground, 
into which hot stones had been placed. Here they were kept for several 
days until "of a dark-brown color and sweet as molasses." Often they 
were made into cakes by washing, pressing and baking sUghtly in the sun.* 
At present, camass is boiled to a gelatinous consistency in modern kettles. 
Lewis and Clark mention a kind of artichoke (prairie-turnip) which was 
hardened by dr}dng and boiled, and an unidentified white root which was 
always boiled .• 

A basket served for a boiling-pot. Stones were heated and deposited 
in the basket with the food, "producing a mesg mixed with soot, ashes and 
dirt." ^ Domenech states that the baskets were covered with buffalo skins 
and placed in an excavation when used for cooking.' Both fish and game, 
as well as pulverized bones,* were boiled. Fish were dried with berries, 
often on scaffolds. The red salmon-eggs were also eaten ; dried and pounded 
they made a good soup.^° Serpents, lizards, grasshoppers, mice, crickets, 
and pismires were thrown into a large tray with burning cinders and tossed 
to and fro until roasted. Roasted ants were kept in bags for future use. 

In making fire the Shoshone twirled a blunt drill in the cavity of a soft 



» Lewis and Clark, III, 12, 15; II. 342. Townsend. 268. 

3 Wyeth, 213. 

3 Fremont, 124. Lewis and Clark, III, 13. 

* Fremont, 136. 

» Townsend, 247. 

« Lewis and Clark, III, 13. 

1 Wyeth, 211. 

8 Domenech, II, 244. 

• Wyeth, 217. 
»o Gass. 121. 



1909.] Lovde, The Northern Shoshone. 189 

spongy hearth (Fig. 9, a), so that the particles of wood separated by the fric- 
tion were heaped up in a little pile. In rolling the drill between the palms, 
it was pressed downwards; and when the hands had descended to the bot- 
tom, they were rapidly brought back to the top and repeated the work until 
the dust ignited. Dry grass and rotten wood were employed as tinder. 
Lewis was surprised to find that fire could thus be obtained in less than a 
minute.^ Wyeth describes the hearth as dry and hard, the shaft as about 
two feet in length and three-eighths of an inch in diameter. According to 
Wyeth, when the hands of the manipulator had approached the lower end, 
they were relieved by those of a second operator.' The drill of all Sho- 
shonean tribes is unique in being spliced, — a characteristic shared only by 
the firestick of the Klamath.* A specimen from Wind River (Fig. 9, c) has 
a sage-wood head; thinned towards the upper end so as to fit into the split. 




*^^^^^'°»=g 



doiiiS 



Fig. 9 (a, 50-6408-A; b, 5D-6408-B). Lemhi Hearth and Drill. Lengths, 20 cm., 37 cm. 
(c, 60-2329 B). Wind River Drill. Length, 75 era. 

which is wrapped with buckskin; each head can be easily removed and 
re-inserted. The shaft is of service- berry wood. In a Lemhi model (Fig. 
9, b), the head cannot be extricated, being securely lashed with sinew both 
at its tapering extremity and at the lower end of the shaft. Long ropes were 
twisted from the bark of wormwood and carried about lighted as a slow- 
match, which would be used to ignite suitable dry wood.* Sage-brush was 
also used for torches. I saw a willow fire-drill split at the lower end to 
receive the blunt point. 

Transportation and Trade, As has often been pointed out, the intro- 
duction of the horse effected momentous changes in Indian modes of life. 
The Lemhi Shoshone have no historical tradition as to the way horses were 
first obtained by them. Clark states that their first ponies were secured 



1 Lewis and Clark. III. 21. Gass, 121. 

2 Wyeth, 214. 

3 Hough, 536. 538-540. 
* Irving, (a) 259. 



190 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

from the Comanche.^ At the time of Lewis and Clark's visit, they had just 
suflPered defeat at the hands of the Atsina; nevertheless the number of horses 
in the tribe was at first estimated at 400, and later at 700. Each warrior 
kept one or more horses tied to a stake near his lodge, both day and night. 
The horses bore Spanish brands, and there were some mules said to have 
been derived from the same source. Bridle-bits and stirrups were also 
obtained from the Spaniards. The Shoshone ranked as expert equestrians.^ 

Streams were sometimes crossed in rafts, which were about eight feet 
long. Small bundles of reeds, with the butt-ends lashed together, were 
placed with their small ends outwards. Several bundles were united so as 
to form a cavity on top. There was no attempt to render the craft tight; 
the navigator depended largely on the buoyancy of the material. The raft 
was propelled by punting.^ 

There are two types of cradle- boards. One form consists of a board 




Fig. 10 (60-2365). Cradle-board. Length. 104 cm. 



about one meter long, curved convexly above and concavely below, and 
tapering towards the bottom. There is a covering of white buckskin, fringed 
in the back, and provided with a hooded pocket in front, for the insertion 
of the infant, which is tightly laced with strings. From a bent stick, which 
may be raised and lowered, there is suspended an awning that serves as a 
sunshade. The child's back rested against the board, and the cradle wa5 
carried like a knapsack by means of a shoulder-strap.* This type is char- 
acteristic of the Sahaptin.^ The form illustrated in Fig. 10 does not differ 
in general shape ; but the frame consists of a hoop and a series of transverse 
willow-sticks lashed down to the rim on both sides, from a distance of twenty- 
five centimeters from the top to within eight centimeters from the lower 

» Clark. 338. 

2 Lewis and Clark. II, 348, 372; III. 19, 31-2. 

3 Wyeth, 214. Fremont. 168. Ross, I, 274. Irving, (b) II. 21. 
* Cf. Remy. I. 127. 

6 Mason, (c) 186-7. 



1909.] Lovde, The Northern Shoshone. 191 

end of the cradle. The gradually shortened willow-sticks are closely united 
by three strings passing through perforations made near the extremities and 
centre of each. In the middle, the sticks are braced by a perpendicular 
rod nailed to the uppermost transverse bar and the lower extremity of the 
hoop. 

Trade was carried on especially with the Flathead, Nez Perc6 and 
Cayuse. The Nez Perc6 would pay a horse for four bags of salmon. Ten 
sheep, or two bearskins, were considered the equal of a horse. Buffalo 
meat and various kinds of peltry were traded to and fro. Lewis and Clark 
found metal arrow-points, which had been secured from the Crow on the 
Yellowstone in exchange for ponies.* Lewis purchased horses of the Snakes, 
giving an axe, a knife, a handkerchief, and paint for each. Mules had to be 
bought at approximately twice the amount of property; and some mules 
were considered worth three or four horses.' The cessation of hostiUties 
with other tribes naturally promoted trading, so that articles of foreign make, 
Blackfoot tobacco pouches, and especially Nez Perc6 bags, are at present 
extremely common. In 1834, the normal price of a dried salmon was a 
straight awl and a small fish-hook, valued at one cent; ten fish were given 
for a common butcher knife worth eight cents. Individual tribesmen 
preferred to get beads and paint. A beaver skin, then valued at from 
eight to ten dollars in Boston, was sold for twelve and a half cents' worth of 
goods.^ Of course, the supply regulated the price; in time of dearth, 
excessive prices were asked for salmon, or even exorbitant offers might be 
rejected.* In Fremont's day, clothing was eagerly sought, and a few gar- 
ments were gladly purchased with a disproportionate amount of food.* 



WARFARE. 

The military equipment of the Shoshone consisted of bows and arrows, 
poggamoggans, shields and skin armor. IVo types of bows occurred. 
The characteristically Shoshonean bow, shared by the Canadian Atha- 
bascans, Apache, Navajo, and Pueblo tribes, is described by Mason as nar- 
row, ovate in section, and sinew-lined. The occurrence of sinew lining on 
bows from the Plains is attributed by Mason to contact with the Great Basin 
tribes.* Lewis and Clark found bows of cedar and pine with their backs 



» Lewis and Clark, III. 19. 

2 Ibid.. Ill, 28; II. 374. 

« Townsend, 261. Of. Ross. I. 257-8; II, 98. 

* Ibid, 252. 263 

* Fremont, 169. 

« Mason, (d) 643, explanation to Plate LXII. 



192 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

covered with sinew and glue.^ Elk-hom bows of similar construction, 
made of a single piece and sinew-backed, occurred; they were often 
ornamented with porcupine quills wrapped for sonle distance at both 
extremities. Of a different type were the compound bighorn bows, con- 
sisting of two parts spliced in the center with sturgeon-glue and with 
deer-sinews wound around the splice. At the center, two deer-sinews were 
strongly glued before winding the splice and secured by their butt-ends, the 
small ends bending outward at the ends of the bow. Sometimes the sin- 
ews covered the whole width of the back. For ornament, the skin of a 
snake was glued to the bow. The string was of twisted sinew and used 
loose; the archer made use of a wrist-guard.^ The arrow-shaft was about 
two and a half feet long and generally made of a shrub called "grease- 
bush"; it was steamed,, wetted, and immersed in hot sand and ashes. 
For smoothing, it was drawn between two rough slightiy-grooved stones, 
coarse sand being used to increase the friction. The arrow was unnotched, 
and was feathered for about five inches near its rear end, leaving just 
enough space for the marksman to pull it in drawing the bow.^ 

Several writers refer to the use of poison. To Wyeth, the arrows seemed 
to have been dipped in some dark-colored fluid, which had dried on them.* 
Clark was told that the arrows were dipped into a compound made of pul- 
verized ants and the spleen of an animal. The mixture was placed in the 
sun and allowed to decay. **The result was such a deadly poison that if 
the arrow broke the skin in touching a person, it was sure to produce death." * 
Another source mentions the use of rattlesnake poison both for the chase 
and in war.' 

The quiver, whiqh contained the fire-drill as well as the arrows, was 
formed of various skins, preferably of otter skin. It was narrow, sufficientiy 
long to protect its contents from the weather, and was worn on the back by 
means of a strap passing over the left shoulder and under the right arm.^ 
The poggamoggan consisted of a wooden handle about two feet long, cov- 
ered with dressed skin, and a round stone weighing two pounds, also covered 
with leather and strongly united to the handle-cover by a thong; a wrist- 
loop was attached to the handle.^ 

The armor consisted of many folds of dressed antelope skin, united with 



1 I^wis and Clark, III, 19. 

a Ibid., 20. Wyeth, '1\2, plate 76. 

3 Wyeth, 212-3. 

-• Ibid., 212. 

fi Clark, 47. 

• Report 1890, 386. 

7 I^wis and Clark, III, 21. 

8 I.e\vis and Clark, III. 21. 



1909.] Lomie, The Northern Shoshone, 193 

glue and sand. This served to protect the bodies of both men and horses.^ 
The shield, made from the skin of a buflPalo bull's neck, was cut a little 
larger than the desired size to allow for shrinkage, pegged down tight on 
the ground, and covered with a thin layer of clay. Upon this were heaped 
burning coals, which hardened the skin so that it could turn the point of a 
lance or a round bullet.' Lewis gives an account of the ceremony of shield- 
making, to which the protective power of the shield was largely attributed. 
The entire skin of a buffalo bull two years old was fiiist provided; then a 
feast was prepared in which all the warriors, old men, and medicine-men took 
part. A hole of the same diameter as the shield was sunk in the ground 
to the depth of eighteen inches. Several stones were heated red and thrown 
in, then water was poured on them. The green skin, which must not have 
been dried before, was spread over the steaming stones. The flesh side is 
laid next to the ground, and the workmen seize its edges and extend it in 
every direction. As the skin becomes heated, the hair separates and is 
taken off with the fingers, and the skin contracts until the whole is of the 
required diameter. It is then taken off, laid on a rawhide, and trampled on 
with unmoccasined feet. This trampling continues for several days, when 
the shield is handed to its owner and declared arrow-proof by the per- 
formers. There was an implicit belief in the efficacy of such a shield in 
protecting from arrows and bullets.' The cloth cover of a modem Shoshone 
shield, in the Museum, is decorated with a crescent-shaped representation 
of the moon, around which nine circular patches denoting stars are ranged 
in a circle. The circumference of the shield is decorated with hawk and 
eagle feathers. 

The Shoshone practised the war-customs of the Prairie tribes, though 
the time of their adoption is uncertain. Signal-fires were lit on the moun- 
tains to indicate the position of a hostile body.* Lewis and Clark, as well 
as Ross, noted the occurrence of scalping; killing an enemy without scalping 
him was not considered meritorious. To touch the corpse first, and to 
lead a successful war-party constituted equal claims to distinction.* Bourke 
mentions coup-sticks made of willow branches, twelve feet long, and each 
having some distinctive mark, such as feathers, paint, or furs. The owner 
of a coup-stick claimed the horse first struck with it.' The face was painted 
before going to war. In a skirmish, the chief appeared naked to the waist, 
wearing a gorgeous bonnet of eagle feathers trailing along the ground behind 



» Ibid. 

2 Bourke, 335. 

3 Lewis and Clark, III, 20. 

* Remy, I, 97. 

« Lewis and Clark, III. 29. 

• Bourke. 305-6. 



194 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

the pony's tail.^ In a drill-ride, a standard of eagle feathers attached to a 
twelve-foot lance was borae alongside of the chief .^ 

The scalp-dance was celebrated in the customary way. The scalp was 
borne to the village, and elevated on a pole in the center. The dance fol- 
lowed; then the scalp was given to the women and boys, who paraded it up 
and down, occasionally insulting it with taunts.^ In 1876, the Shoshone 
contingent left the United States troops for their reservation to celebrate the 
scalp-dance.* My informants gave two names for the scalp-dance-, na'- 
rupinoa and wQ'tabEn, or ta-wu'tabEn. It is not quite clear whether 
these terms are strictly sjnonymous. Only the women were said to have 
taken part in the dance, which was performed in a circle around the cen- 
tral pole or tree from which the scalps were suspended. The men sang 
and beat a small hand-drum in accompaniment. The women wore head- 
bands ornamented with eagle feathers and profusely beaded capes. Ac- 
cording to another account, the men were seated and three or four women 
alternately approached and receded from them. It is perhaps worth noting 
that the scalp-dance plays a prominent part in one of the important myths, 
where Coyote, disguised as an old woman, enters the enemy's camp to 
recover his brother's scalp (page 242). While the men were alwa)^ killed 
and scalped, women were sometimes taken captive. At times they are said 
to have been maltreated and butchered by the Shoshone women.* 

Bourke mentions the mutilation of enemies' corpses in revenge of a young 
warrior's death.® , So far as I know, the Ute custom ^ of eating the heart of a 
brave enemy for acquiring courage, or of eating any part of a slain warrior, 
has not been established among the Shoshone proper. 

Just before one of the social evening dances of the Shoshone, I obser\'ed 
what was explained as the imitation of an old custom called wupa'rEk. 
A number of men, perhaps as many as fifteen, held the edge of a blanket 
and vigorously beat it with wooden sticks. At the same time, they sang a 
song without changing their positions; there was no drum. I was told that 
formerly, when a man had decided on undertaking the leadership of a war- 
party or horse-raid, he and his companions started out with a buffalo-hide, 
stopped before every lodge in the camp, held up the blanket as described, 
and began their song. Any one who held and beat the hide was obliged to 
join the expedition. This custom was shared by the Nez Perc^.* 



Ibid., 316. 

Ibid., 337. 

Irving, (a) 249. 

Bourke, 318. 

De Smet. 220. 

Bourke. 317. 

Burton, 580. 

Spinden, The Nez Perc€ Indians, p. 265. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 195 

In 1840, De Smet witnessed preparations for an expedition against the 
Blackfoot. After the chief's announcement, the young men prepared their 
arms, moccasins and rations. The evening before their departure, the chief, 
at the head of his followers, performed a farewell dance at every lodge, re- 
ceiving everywhere a piece of tobacco or some other present.^ In 1876, 
a somewhat similar custom was noted by Bourke. In the night one of the 
Shoshone, mounted on a pony and stripped almost naked, passed from 
lodge to lodge, stopping in front of each, and praying for the capture of 
plenty of Sioux scalps and ponies. **The inmates would respond with, if 
possible, increased vehemence."^ 

The ratification of a treaty of peace was generally marked by ceremonial 
smoking.' Horses were sometimes demanded of the enemy as an indemnity 
for the loss of slain tribesmen.* Tobacco, blankets, cloth and knives could 
also be offered to the bereaved family at the conclusion of a love-feast; but 
the recipients would distribute the gifts among their companions. Accord- 
ing to De Smet, the surrender of scalps taken by the foe and the assurance 
that the scalp-dance had not been performed also preceded the formal 
reconciliation, which was followed by the exchange of presents and reciprocal 
adoption of children.' 

GAMES. 

The most popular games of the Shoshone were dice-throwing (do'pedi) 
and the hand-game (na'yahwina). The latter is mentioned by Lewis and 
Clark.' It is played both by men and women; but, as far as my experi- 
ence goes, all the players are of the same sex. There are one or two players 
on each side, who kneel opposite to each other at a distance of several feet. 
Two small bones, or sticks (tindzo'mo), about three and a half inches long and 
tapering towards both extremities are used; one of them (pi'gap no'toma) 
has sinew or a string wound about its thickened section, the other (do'cabit) 
is plain. The player places the two tindzo'mo under his blanket, hiding 
one in each hand. Then, exposing his hands, he begins to sing and move 
his arms in front of his body and on a level with his shoulder, occasionally 
stopping to re-adjust the caches behind his back or under the blanket. His 
opponent carefully watches the singer's hands, sometimes beating his breast 
with one hand, and points out the hand supposed to hide the plain button. 



» De Smet, 220. 

2 Bourke. 304. 

8 Ross, II, 93-96. 

* Rept. Comm. Ind. Affairs, 1852, 437-8. 

» De Smet, 679. 

8 Lewis and Clark, IV, 37-8. Remy, I, 130. 



196 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

If he guesses correctly, it is then his chance to play; if he has mistaken the 
hand, he must surrender one of the ten tally-sticks (dCl mo) with which each 
side starts at the beginning. A spectator may be seated next to one of the 
performers, hitting a piece of tin with a stick as an accompaniment to the 
chant. When there are two opposing pairs, each side plays with two sets. 
Both plain tindzo'mo must then be guessed before the guessers get their 
inning. When neither is guessed, two counters are relinquished. If both 
are guessed, the players continue mo^^ng their arms until they have finished 
their song, when they finally give up two tally-sticks. If but one do'cabit is 
correctly indicated, only one set of tindzo'mo is given up and the players 
receive one counter. The game is concluded as soon as one side has lost all 
its counters. In playing, the women swing both arms in the same direction, 
keeping the closed hands, as far as possible, at a uniform distance. The 
men move the hands from in front of the shoulders towards and past each 
other, then back again to the initial point. Spectators sitting in a row with 
the players sometimes join swinging their arms and singing. Formerly, 
beaver testicles and excrements are said to have been used as charms to 
ensure success at the game. 

The dice of the Lemhi people are of two kinds, both called do'pedi. 
In one form of the game four long, thin willow-sticks, convex on one side 
and flattened on the other, with a groove in the center, are thrown on a flat 
stone. Two of the sticks have a burnt mark on either side of the groove, 
midway between the top and bottom. These dice count a tally-stick each, 
when they turn up on the marked side. The other two sticks have four 
marks on either side of the groove, one pair near each extremity, and count 
four points each. The convex side does not count in any case. The second 
type of dice is similar in general appearance; but the groove is painted red, 
and the marks are different (Fig. 11). Two sticks have, one a short, the 
other a longer, central burn on the convex side. The former is also marked 
on both sides of the groove. The sticks are thrown on a flat stone and the 
throws counted by means of tally-sticks. In betting, a player wagers so 
many counters that he will equal a certain number of points. If successful, 
he receives a number of tally-sticks corresponding to his throw. Then the 
opponent throws. Unless he equals or surpasses the former throw, he must 
pay the number of sticks wagered; but receives the staked amount if he 
outdoes the first gambler. The following list indicates the manner of 
counting the various throws: 

All convex sides up, 10 

Three convex sides and the groove with marks, 10 

(The maximum throw, made either way, is called do'ca, white.) 



1909.] 



Lowie, The Northern Shoshone 



197 



The convex side with the elongated mark, the other sticks 

on the grooved side, 9 

(This throw is called tQ'tai, which is not the usual word for nine.) 

The convex side with the short mark, other sticks flat, 5 

All sticks on grooved side, 5 

Long mark, other sticks on the flat side, 4 

In other cases, any convex side, 1 

E. g. Short mark -h long mark -f flat -f flat, 2 

-H " '* -f " + convex, 3 , 

One stick with plain convex side, others flat, 1 

(Scoring only one point is called dzCl'na.) 

From the specimens of dice collected by St. Clair and Culin,^ it appears 
that the marking of the four sticks is slightly different at Ft. Hall and Wind 



mmmmsma^^^^^m 




^ 



^ 



^ 



Fig. 11 (50-6417). Set of Dice. Length. 25 cm. 

River; the mode of counting also differs. These observers also report the 
use of a tray with bone dice, which has never been seen at Lemhi by old 
white residents. 

Do'pedi and na'yahwina are the gambling-games par excellence. At 
present the sums wagered sometimes amount to ten or fifteen dollars. 

Athletic games were common. Foot-races (dana'ronon, c6'go-na'- 
ronon) between two contestants and horse-races persist to the present 
day. In the latter the riders often returned to the starting-point after 
going around a stick marking the half-goal. Nacft'gwuthun (kicking) 
was a game in which betting was wholly absent. The players were mostly 
boys and young men, sometimes ten on each side, who tried to kick their 
opponents' legs and bodies. Occasionally players were knocked down, 
but never seriously injured. NacS'gwuthun was simply a form of physical 



» Culin, (b) 159. 168-9. 



198 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



exercise, for there was no goal and neither side "won." Wrestling and 
putting the shot were also favorite pastimes; in the latter, bets were made 
on the result. 

Three games are still played by the boys in the beginning of spring: 
football (dknacoto'En) ; arrow-shooting; and the hoop-game (wu'raka). 
Dknacoto'En is really a football race. There are two balls, one for each 
side. All the contestants, sometimes as many as forty on a side, run in the 
same direction, each party kicking its own ball towards a previously 
determined goal without interfering with its opponent. The players 
do not all take an active part simultaneously. As the goal was formerly 
several miles from the starting-point, many would 
get tired and drop out before the completion of 
the game. It was proper for a player to rest 
when exhausted and to have a partner take his 
place. If the ball happens to fall into the brush 
whence it cannot be easily extricated by kicking, 
the players are under no conditions allowed to use 
their hands, though the use of a stick is permissi- 
ble. Of course, the side that first reaches the 
goal wins. In an arrow-game called ho'bak-wu- 
kun' at Lemhi, two competitors shot two feathered 
arrows each at a target in the shape of a stick, 
betting blankets on the result. This game has, 
according to St. Clair, a more complicated ana- 
logue at Wind River, called doroVokftna. Wu'- 
raka was played with a willow hoop and dart 
(no'notsak-bag) ; it is also found at Fort Hall and 
in Wyoming.^ As elsewhere, the women played 
shinny. A considerable number of players faced 
each other and attempted to carry the ball to 
their antagonists' goal. At Wind River, women 
also played with a dumb-bell shaped buckskin ball (Fig. 12). The ball 
was picked up with forked sticks and carried or thrown to the opposing 
goal. 

Horse-parades (na'mana'ki) formed a favorite mode of entertainment. 
The men would retire some distance from the camp, don breechclouts and 
war-bonnets, mount, gallop towards the camp, and ride around it. Such 
drill-rides were witnessed by Bourke ^ and De Smet.^ According to De Smet, 




Fig. 12 (50 -2362 -A). 
Buckskin Ball. Length, 37 
cm. 



» Culin, (b) 495, 499. 
2 Bourke, 337-40. 
« DeSmet, 217. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 199 

the equestrians ostentatiously displayed their sears, and waved scalps of 
slain enemies at the ends of poles, uttering exclamations of joy. Sham 
battles on horseback were fought at Lemhi within recent times. 

Dr. Dorsey discovered a game at Wind River called nawa'tapi.^ Several 
women approach a goal, juggling from two to four balls of mud or gypsum. 
The one who arrives first without dropping any, wins. This game is found 
also among the Bannock, Ute and Paiute. The occurrence of the cup and 
ball game, tops and stilts is also vouched for by Culin and Dorsey.' Cat's- 
cradle is known to Lemhi boys and girls, and names are given to the figures. 
The most popular were called **boy," ** woman," "tipi," "rabbit-snare," 
"fish-trap," and "antelope." In the last of the figures, the string is alter- 
nately loosened and tightened to represent the animal in motion. The native 
name of the game is dii'mabana-nai^duit wonder-making; but it seems to 
have no ceremonial significance. The individual figures receive analogous 
names, e. g. gwa'are-naidui, antelope-making; du'a-nai*dui, boy-making. 

The children have the usual games: the girls play with buckskin dolls 
and model cradle-boards, and construct small lodges; while the boys shoot 
arrows, and race in imitation of their elders. The Lemhi boys of to-day 
are fond of playing with slingshots (u'gwuti), using a crotched stick spanned 
by a rubber-band. 

ART. 

Of the realistic art of the Shoshone very little is known. Petroglyphs of 
largely realistic character have been reported from Idaho, Utah and the 
Wind River country and reproduced by Mallery.^ A pictographic drawing 
published by the same writer* is in the Plains style, and Irving mentions 
"fantastically painted" lodges,* probably referring to semi-realistic motives 
of similar character. The Museum contains a pair of moccasins from Wind 
River, which are rather unique in being decorated with realistic representa- 
tions rather than with the customary geometrical patterns. One moccasin 
is painted with the roughly sketched figure of a woman, the sun above her, 
a flower at her right, and a rainbow at her left. Its mate bears the figure 
of a horse (in red) on the corresponding portion of the upper; while on the 
sides there are representations of a tipi, a snake (green) and a bear (blue). 
A large drum is decorated on one side with the painting of a bird (Fig. 
19, a). 



» Dorsey, (a) 24-25. Culin, (b) 712-4. 

2 Culin, ibid.. 554, 732. 

3 MaUery, 228-29; (b) 128-29, 680-681. 
* Mallery, (a) 215. 

« Irving, (b) I, 283. 



200 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

Decorative Art. So far as the general features of their decorative art are 
concerned, the Shoshone are a typical Plains people, painting parfleches, 
rawhide envelopes and scabbards, and embroidering with quill and bead- 
work such objects as leggings, moccasins, soft bags, and pouches. On the 
Wind River Reservation, Mr. St. Clair succeeded in getting interpretations 
for some of the decorative designs. These were usually designated as 
representing geographical features, such as hills, creeks, or roads. A few 
examples, also indicating the occurrence of color symbolism, may be quoted 
from his notes. On a parfleche ^ the obtuse triangles in the central rectangle 
and the smaller triangles in the longitudinal border-strips represent moun- 
tains, the red line in the center stands for a river, and the right-angled tri- 
angles are tipis. On a second parfleche, ' the green rectangle in the center 
represents trees, its red frame the ground, the blue halves of the diamond a 
lake, the yellow transverse line in the diamond an inlet. The smaller obtuse 
triangles at the sides represent mountains, the larger ones (dark blue) timber 
on the mountains. Above and below the central field, there are mountains. 
The yellow isosceles triangle approaching the frame b the sun shining on the 
mountains; the green obtuse triangle denotes grass, and the two red triangu- 
lar spaces represent the ground. In the comer squares the triangles are 
lodges, the external yellow strip is sunlight, the green strip represents grass. 
While largely geographical, the interpretations obtained by Mr. St. Clair 
are not exclusively so; prongs are designated as rays of the sun, two mutually 
I)erpendicular stripes on a moccasin represent the horned-toad, and a cross 
is said to convey the idea of exchange. Other symbolical ideas connected 
with decorative patterns have been described by Professor Boas.' 

At Lemhi, all efforts to secure interpretations proved futile. A single 
parfleche design was, after persistent inquiry, called mando'towa; but this 
term proved to mean simply ''corners." It is therefore necessary to treat 
Shoshone art from a strictly objective point of view. As a thorough dis- 
cussion of Plains art, including that of the Shoshone, has been undertaken 
by Professor Kroeber,* it is best not only to follow his treatment in the matter 
of nomenclature, but also to refrain from a detailed re-consideration, except 
so far as to add some supplementary notes. 

In considering embroidered work, Kroeber finds it desirable to give 
separate treatment to the types of moccasin decoration. He distinguishes 
three principal types: the stripe-border type; the type with a single geo- 
metric pattern covering the entire front of the moccasin ; and the form with a 



^ Kroeber, (g). Plate X, figure 1 

2 Ibid., Plate X. figure 2. 

3 Boas, (a) 489 et seq. 

* Kroeber, (g), 151-179. 



1909.] 



LotnCf The Northern Shoshone. 



201 



figure on the front of the moccasin in the middle of the decorative field, the 
figure neither filling the entire space nor bearing an exact relation to its 
outline.^ The third class comprises various central figures, such as the 
crossing angle, circle, U-figure, and transverse zigzag. While the Ute show 
a high development of the stripe-border pattern, the Shoshone, according 
to Kroeber, rarely employ this type; their characteristic forms are the round- 
head and angle-across. The second type is used less frequently, and of 
the U-figure there are but a few scattering examples. This would ally the 
moccasin-decoration of the Shoshone most closely with that of the Gros 
Ventres (Atsina). 

So far as the Lemhi people are concerned, this statement of the case 
requires modification. With them three styles of decoration are especially 
popular. One is characterized by the circu- 
lar design (Plate i. Fig. 4), which Kroeber 
recognizes as typically Shoshone. The 
Blackfoot U-pattem (Plate i, Fig. 3) consti- 
tutes the second type. It was generally 
joined with a transverse bar at the instep 
and small isosceles triangles, which, in a 
single Museum specimen, are superseded 
by the feather-design. The third style is 
marked by a simple longitudinal stripe 
perpendicular to a horizontal bar (Plate i, 
Fig. 2). From the extremities of the bar 
and of the toe-end of the stripe, there often 
extend isosceles triangles. In some cases, 
the stripe slightly tapers towards the instep. 
A single triangle in the center of the toe-end 
of the stripe may replace two such triangles 
at the extremities. These facts are of some 

importance, because they lead to a revision of Kroeber's scheme of tribal 
relationships in the matter of moccasin decoration. If the Shoshone angle 
and circle designs are shared by the Gros Ventres, the frequency of U-pat- 
tems indicates an equally close relation with Blackfoot art; while the 
presence of stripe-patterns no longer warrants a sharp separation from the 
decorative type of the Ute. 

In discussing the distribution of embroidered designs generally, Kroeber 
finds considerable similarity between Ute and Shoshone art.* Both, espe- 
cially the former, employ the ''spreading design" (Fig. 13), as well as the 




Fig. 13 (5(>-2382-A). Spreading 
Design on Moccasin. Length, 23 cm. 



1 Kroeber, (g) 157, figure 2. 

2 Kroeber, (g) 156. 



202 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



^* 



! 



forked, pronged, diamond, triangle, and slanting bar design.^ The Sho- 
shone, according to Kroeber, occasionally use the diagonal checker^row; 
but otherwise lack the characteristic Blackfoot patterns, i, e. the checker 
or step triangle, and the stripe, as well as the rectangular cross, feather- 
design and box-square of the Sioux. 

Again an inspection of Lemhi beadwork tends 
to establish a closer relationship with the Black- 
foot. The Blackfoot mountain-design, a check- 
ered or plain step triangle, occurs rather frequently. 
It is found on dance-leggings (Fig. 14), moccasins 
(Plate I, Fig. 1), belts, and hat-bands. Sometimes 
the union of two such triangles results in the stepped 
iw^ ^L rhombus; in other cases, the approaching bases 

BIf; '^ are separated, and the line joining them may be 

interrupted in the middle by a rectangular or 
narrow hexagonal figure. The rectangular cross, 
though not so frequent, is not wholly absent. It 
is found on a small amulet, an armlet, dance leg- 
gings (Fig. 15), hatbands, and appears very 
clearly as the central design within a stepped 
rhombus (Plate i, Fig. 3). It is also worth men- 
tioning the occurrence of the angular horseshoe 
design (Fig. 15) common among the Blackfoot 
and Crow. A further point of similarity with the 
A A A irTi i Blackfoot is noticeable in the general color effects 

™** * ■ ' of Shoshone, and more particularly Lemhi, head- 

work. While the majority of the Plains tribes 
show a predilection for white backgrounds, the 
Blackfoot and Shoshone use white less frequently 
and are inclined to employ greenish and bluish 
colors. 

Gauntlets made for trade, and sometimes 
moccasins as well, are frequently decorated with 
floral designs. A number of native informants 
agree in considering this style quite recent. 
Somewhat similar designs occur on Nez Perc^ pouches. 

In Shoshone parfleche painting, Kroeber recognizes a distinct style 
constituting the second of his three types of rawhide decoration in the 




^ 



in 



i 



Fig. 14 (60-2302). 
Strip on Dance 
Length, 73 cm. 

Fig. 15 (60-6419). 
Strip on Dance 
Length, 69 cm. 



Beaded 
legging. 

Beaded 
legging. 



1 In the illustrations, colors are represented as follows: light blue, by diagonal shading; 
dark blue, by heavier diagonal shading; green, by horizontal shading; red, by vertical shading: 
yellow, by dotting. The drawings were made by R. Weber. 



1909.] 



Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 



203 



Plains. Its characteristic feature is the partial substitution of combinations 
of square and triangular elements for the exclusively triangular designs of 
other tribes. While there are many triangular figures, the square-and- 
triangular type is so characteristic, according to Kroeber, that very. few 









c. d. 

Fig. 16 (a. 50-1163: b, 50-1126; c, 50-I166;Id, 50-1138). Parfleche Decoration. 

Shoshone parfleches are wholly without rectangular motives; i. e. without 
either a central rectangle, corner squares in combination with triangles, or a 
heavy square-containing border-stripe. A briefer reference to these features 
was also made by Professor Boas some years ago.^ 



Boas, (a) 487-8. 



204 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 




Fig. 17 (60-643(>-B). Parfleche 
Decoration. Length, 69 cm. 



It does not seem to me that Shoshone parfleches are adequately defined 
in this characterization. It is true, as Kroeber points out, that there is a 
strong tendency to develop longitudinal border-stripes, often consisting of 
comer squares connected by obtuse triangles. Such borders, occasionally 
filled with purely triangular designs, occur in sixteen out of twenty-two 
parfleches examined. Of these, five represent the characteristic sub-type 
wdth a central rectangle touched above and below by the apex of an isosceles 

triangle and enclosing a lozenge (Fig. 16, c). 
Four have the section between the border- 
stripes bisected by a blank or varicolored 
stripe separating two symmetrical patterns in 
each of which an obtuse triangle is flanked 
by two right-angled ones (Fig. 17). One 
specimen produces a similar effect, though 
the bisecting stripe disappears. The re- 
maining bordered parfleches present individ- 
ual features in the center field. There may 
be a lozenge, split (Fig. 16, d) or unsplit; 
a pair of s}Tnmetrical isosceles triangles 
with nearly touching apices separated by a narrow oblong (Fig. 16, b), or 
two homogeneous triangles, with their apices directed downward, the point 
of one resting on the base of the other (Fig. 18, c); or a longitudinal central 
strip bisecting two diamonds of which the split components contain smaller 
triangles (Fig. 18, d). The parfleches without square-triangular borders 
are sometimes decorated in Arapaho fashion, — long, narrow patterns 
being disposed in longitudinal stripes (Fig. 16, a). In a Lemhi specimen 
of this sort, the center of the decorative field is occupied by an elongated 
hourglass with its halves containing smaller parallel triangles, and by large 
diamonds on either side enclosing a series of successively smaller diamonds. 
Irrespective of the presence of border-stripes, a rather different aesthetic 
effect from those previously mentioned results, I think, from the division* 
of the decorative field into three portions by two transverse lines. In one 
specimen (Fig. 18, b), the upper and lower sections produced in this way are 
occupied by triangles; while the middle portion has a diamond in the center, 
with two hourglass figures at the sides, and obtuse triangles at the edges of 
the flap. 

From the foregoing enumeration of decorative motives, it appears that 
border-stripes are very common among the Shoshone. The development 
of certain *'square-and-triangular" patterns, coupled with their rarity 
among other tribes, merits emphasis, and the diagnostic value of such de- 
signs in determining the provenience of a given parfleche is considerable. 



1909.] 



LowiCf The Northern Shoshone. 



205 



On the other hand, it cannot be maintained that the bulk of Shoshone par- 
fleche decoration conforms to the square-triangular, or any other single type. 
There is undoubtedly a relatively large number of parfleches of purely 
triangular type; and the question may be raised whether the several "square- 
triangular" motives themselves are not diverse in their aesthetic effects 






c. d. 

Fig. 18 (a, 50-6430-A; b, 50-2295; c, 50-1127; d, 50-1189). Parfleche Decoration. 



and should not be grouped in several distinct classes. A classification, 
moreover, which would wholly separate a parfleche such as is pictured in 
Fig. 17, from that in Fig. 18, a, however useful it may be in bringing out 
tribal peculiarities, no longer holds when the art of a tribe is considered 
per se. 



206 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Music. Two kinds of drums (wi'towE) are in common use among the 
Shoshone of to-day. The small hand-drum of the Plains is about thirty- 
five centimetres in diameter, covered on one side with horse or cowhide, 
and on the other side is provided with intersecting or netted thongs. The 
large drum (Fig. 19) is hollowed out of a section of a cottonwood tree and 
covered with strips of elk-hide above and below. These are perforated 
along the circumference of the drum, and united by a thong passing in an 
alternately vertical and diagonal direction from the hole in one drum-skin 
to the corresponding hole in the other. Both covers are decorated, one 
side bearing the realistic representation of a bird. Usually there are four 
loops, allowing the suspension of the drum from pegs driven into the ground. 
Willow drumsticks have their ends wrapped with buckskin or cloth. The 
flute was formerly used, but has disappeared among the Lemhi. As else- 
where, it was employed in courtship. It was made of the wood of a berry- 
bearing shrub, had from four to six holes, and was about sixty centimetres 
in length. The Museum contains two whistles. One, used in the sun-dance 
is of eagle wing-bone, to which an eagle plume is attached. The other is 
of wood, about thirty-five centimetres long, and ornamented with ribbons, 
a feather and plumes. A notched board used as a musical instrument will 
be described in connection with dances. 



SOCIAL ORGANIZATION. 

The social organization of the Shoshone was marked by extreme sim- 
plicity. No trace of a totemic or other clan division has ever been found 
among them. As stated by Kroeber,^ all the Shoshone proper were desig- 
nated as n^'mo, people; while practically all the local groups had names 
consisting of the word "eater," to which the kind of food was prefixed. I 
obtained the following list of bands at Ross Fork, Idaho: A'gai-dika (Sal- 
mon-eaters) at Lemhi; Tuku-rika (Sheep-eaters) in the Lemhi district, 
now practically extinct; KG'embe-rika (Squirrel-eaters) in southern Idaho; 
Wa'ra-rika (Eaters of an unidentified species of seeds); Ya'han-dika 
(Groundhog-eaters) ; To'sa-wi'h* (White-Knives) in Nevada.^ To these a 
Lemhi informant added the Tfl'ba-dika (Pine-nut eaters) of Nevada. The 
Bannock are distinguished as Ba'naite. The Wind River people as a whole 
are called Ko'gohue (Guts), and those of Fort Hall Po'hogwe (Sage-brush 
people). Clark gives the Wah-ra-ree-ca as a subdivision of the Bannock.* 



1 Kroeber, (d) 102. 

2 Simpson, 47, places tlieni along the Humboldt River. 
« Clark, 60. 



1909.] 



Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 



207 





Fig. 19 (50-2446). Designs on a Wind River Drum. Diameter, 56 cm. 



208 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Ross recognizes three divisions: the Shirry-dikas (Ca'ro-ri^ka = dog- 
eaters), War-are-ree-kas (wrongly translated fish-eaters), and Ban-at-tees, 
"robbers," whose name is remarkably like the Shoshone **Ba'naite" for the 
Bannock.^ He describes the Shirry-dika as superior to the other two groups, 
predominating in a common council and subsisting to a considerable extent 
on the buffalo. In camping together, each division remained distinct, the 
Shirry-dikas occup}ang the central space and being flanked on either side 
by the War-are-ree-kas or Ban-at-tees. It is rather curious to note in this 
connection that the Shoshone are reported as abstaining from dog-flesh and 
that Ca'ro-ri' ka is undoubtedly the Shoshone name for the Arapaho.' 

The Shoshone sometimes gathered in villages; but isolated families, 
or small bands of families, were frequently encountered by the early explor- 
ers. The camp was pitched and broken according to exigency; the village 
visited by Lewis in August, 1805, had removed two miles higher up the river 
when sighted by Clark a few days later.^ It consisted of about twenty-five 
lodges; the population was estimated at about one hundred warriors and 
three hundred women and children.^ Larger villages of about one hundred 
and fifty lodges were found in the thirties among the Green River and Bear 
River people.^ The formation of a camp-circle was remembered by some 
of my informants. As in the- Plains, it was used for councils and dances, 
in times of war, and while engaged in a tribal chase; the horses were kept 
inside. It opened towards the east, as did the individual lodges. It is 
uncertain when the Shoshone adopted the camp-circle and to which of the 
local groups it was known. 

From the accounts of early travelers, it is quite clear that the powers of 
the chiefs were advisory rather than dictatorial.® "Little" chiefs attained 
their dignity by the performance of warlike deeds, and there were sometimes 
as many as ten in a single community. The head-chief was general director 
of the camp, presided at councils, received visitors from o.ther tribes, and 
conducted hunting and fishing^ excursions; but beyond this his power 
rested simply on his personal influence. To the authority of such men as 
Tendoy of Lemhi, and Washakie of the Wind River country, governmental 
recognition doubtless lent additional weight. The chief seems to have 
enjoyed no privileges of any kind. At a dance or hunt, he was assisted by 
di'rakone, policemen, armed wuth quirts. At Fort Hall, at least, a camp 

> Ross, I, 249-51 253. 

2 Domenech, II, 61. Mooney, (a) 954. 

3 Lewis and Clark, II, 379. 
< Ibid., II, 370. 

5 Wyeth, 219. Schoolcraft, V, 198. 

6 Lewis and Clark, 370. Remy, I, 128. 

7 Wyeth, 207. 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone. 209 

crier announced important occurrences. The head-chieftaincy was not 
hereditary. Sometimes a chief was succeeded by his son; but this was not 
by any means necessary, nor was it necessarily the oldest son that fell heir 
to the position. In 1906, Tu'pambe was generally recognized as Tendoy's 
heir-apparent, though there were several older sons. It was noticeable that 
at councils he played a very insignificant part, hardly ever speaking. This 
was probably due to his comparative youth. However, it should be re- 
marked that there was obviously a limit to the deference paid to old age. 
Tendoy was certainly losing in prestige during the last years of his life, and 
the opposing faction contended he was getting too old. Similariy, a sick 
Indian declared he could no longer have confidence in the efficiency of the 
older medicine-man of the reservation, because he was getting too weak. 
Ability as an orator seems to have counted for something in the estimation 
of a chief; nowadays, in the absence of war-raids, probably more so than 
formerly. 

Neither the chief nor any other member of the tribe exercised judicial 
functions. Murderers were regarded as irresponsible (ke'-cuant), and were 
dealt with by the individual family and friends of the victim. In cases of 
adultery, the husband sometimes shot one of the offender's horses. This 
mode of punishment does not, however, seem to have been popular at Lemhi 
within recent times. Several years ago, Mo'bi, the physically most powerful 
man on the reservation, suspected his wife of infidelity, and shot one of her 
lover's horses. The people were indignant, but were afraid to oppose Mo'bi. 
At last, several of the strongest united, attacked and bound him while gam- 
bling, and had him sentenced to prison by the Indian judges appointed by 
the government. 

Terms of Relationship. The following terms of relationship were ob- 
tained : 

A'p5, Father, father's brother. 

Bi'a a'p5, Father's older brother (big father). 

Na'gahai a'p6, Father's younger brother. 

Bl'a, Mother. 

G5'nu, Paternal grandfather, (also used for reciprocal relationship). 

Do'go, Maternal '' ( " '' " " " ) 

Hu'tsi, Paternal grandmother ( " " " " '' ) 

Ga'gu, Maternal " ( " " " " " ) 

Dz6, Grea1>grandparent. 

A'rabe, Maternal uncle, sister's son 

A'ra, 

Ba'ha, Aunt. 

Ba'vi, Older brother, cousin. 

Da'me, Younger " " 

Ba'dzi, Older sister, " 



210 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vo. II, 

Na'mi, Younger sister, cousin. 

Du'a, Son. 

Ba'di, Daughter. 

Gwu'ahd, Wife. Never used in direct address. 

GwQ'apd, Husband. " " " " 

N6 m5nd6'gotsi, My father-in-law. 

N6 mdgfi'gutsi, My motter-in-law. 

N5 hu'tsdmbia, My son's wife. 

N6 mil'nap6, My daughter's husband. 

N5 dedz, My brother-in-law. 

Marriage. — No information could be obtained as to any restrictions of 
marriage. It was expressly denied by several informants that first cousins 
were barred from matrimony. Childhood betrothals were common a hun- 
dred years ago, and still occur. The father of the girl received horses or 
mules in payment at the time of the contract. The girl remained with her 
parents until puberty, when she was surrendered to her fianc^ with gifts 
equalling, at times, those originally paid for her.^ That gifts to the parents 
were essential was, however, strongly denied by some of my informants. 
Sometimes a young man proposed by wrapping a blanket about the girl; 
acceptance of the garment indicated consent. In case of a rebuff, the pro- 
posal was sometimes repeated several times. Formerly girls were married 
at a very early age, and some Shoshone express misgivings as to the post- 
ponement of matrimony caused by modem conditions. A case where a girl 
was wedded at twelve was, however, brought to my notice. Under modem 
conditions it has been customary for a young man to live with his wife's 
relatives and work for her family if he had no land of his own. Polygamy 
was fairly common, but the wives were not usually sisters. Tendoy once 
had five wives at a time; in 1906 he had three, but lived with only one, the 
other two staying with their adult sons. The practice of the levirate is 
reported from the Wind River Reservation.^ Though a man could freely 
dispose of his wife, irregular intercourse without his consent was resented. 
The offended husband could demand a horse as indemnity or, in case of 
refusal, shoot one of the lover's horses.^ Divorce was easily consummated, 
and involved no restrictions as to future unions. "Grover Cleveland" 
divorced his wife in order to marry another woman; his wife also re- 
married. After the death of his younger brother's wife, Kobitsak gave 
him his own (according to a white informant, in exchange for two horses), 
and wedded another woman. They continued to be next-door neighbors, 
and the women visited each other practically every day. Elopements also 



» Lewis and Clark, II, 370-1. 

a Report 1890, 632. 

3 Report 1890, 631. But cf. page 209 of this paper. 



1909.] Lotoie, The Northern Shoshone, 211 

occurred. Some years ago a man fled to Wyoming with another man's 
wife, and returned after several years' absence, when the husband's anger 
had passed away. 

Husband and wife do not address each other by the specific relationship 
terms employed in the third person, because "they are afraid to do so." 
Instead, they use the generic terms for man (do'napo) and woman (wai*pe). 
The mother-in-law taboo is strictly observed. Only crazy (ke'cuant) men 
would venture to speak to their mothers-in-law. 



VARIOUS CUSTOMS. 

Names. — Clark gives some notes on the naming of Bannock children, 
which presumably apply to the Shoshone as well. Children were named 
by their parents about the age of ten or twelve, but sometimes an old man 
would bestow his name on a young one. Many girls were called after 
different species of frogs. Children were not named after a dog, wolf, 
coyote, or fox.^ Individual peculiarities were often referred to, and a new 
name was assumed after some notable achievement.' T^ndoy (Climber) 
was so called, because in his childhood his mother had once refused to grant 
him a request, whereupon he flew into a passion and began to climb a tree. 
The chief visited by Lewis and Clark had two names. Black Gun and He- 
does-not-walk (Ke mi'awE). In token of his friendship for the whites, he 
bestowed his second name on Clark, who was thereafter called Ke mi'awE.' 
The Lemhi people still show great reluctance in divulging their native names; 
a middle-aged man who had lived with the whites for many years obstinately 
denied having a Shoshone name, though it was subsequently discovered by 
chance. 

The following men's names were noted: To'sa-wu'ra, White-Bear, 
O'ho-wu'ra, Yellow-Bear; Tu'modzo, Black-Moustache; Tu'dzomon- 
do'mi, Master-of-Black-Beads; K^'bi-tsak, Little Jack; YE-hu', Poor- 
Man; Ka'nu-kwac, Grouse-Tail; Ti'carimip, Charger; Gwl'na-mo'bi, 
Eagle-Nose; Wi'hitEmbo'gona, Iron-Ball; Ku'bui, Squinting-Eye; Gwi'd- 
am-ba'bi, Ani Frater; E'nga-gwacu, Red-Shirt; Tu'pambe, Black-Hair; 
Wu'ra-yo'go, Cum-ursis-copulat. The following are women's names: 
Toma', Cloudy; Da'bEntcotc, Little-Sun; Tsi'dzi, Baby; Ya'mpatsi, Wild- 
Carrot; Na'soai, Not- Ashamed; To'kaidzo, Black-Forehead. 

Salutation. In recent times, the handshake has become the symbol of 



> Ctark, 61, 267. 

2 Lewis and Clark, III, 29. 

3 Ibid.. II, 367: III. 29. 



212 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

a friendly welcome, both in receiving white and Indian visitors. A hundred 
years ago an embrace was customary. The left arm was put over the guest's 
right shoulder, clasping the back, while the left cheek touched his. At the 
same time, the host repeatedly shouted **Ah-hi'-e," which Lewis inteq^rets 
as an expression of great joy.* 

Smoking, — The most common type of pipe nowadays employed by the 
Lemhi Shoshone consists of a narrow stem of currant or rose-brier (dzl'ampi 
wood), about twenty-five centimeters in length, with a small red-stone 
bowl. One pipe had a willow stem, only fifteen or eighteen centimeters 
long, inserted in the middle of the red-stone bowl, which was not cylindrical, 
but globular, with a very marked flattening at both sides. The manufacture 
of these pipes seemed to be the monopoly of a few men. Large catlinite 
pipes, such as are commonly found on the Plains, were rare. The pouches 
containing the few specimens seen were said to have been obtained from 
the Blackfeet. I saw a single tomahawk pipe. The old straight-pipe 
(tu'na rowe) of the Shoshone as described by Lewis in 1805 ^ consisted of a 
dense, semi-transparent green stone about seven centimeters long, of an 
oval figure, and very highly polished, the bowl and stem being in the same 
direction. A small piece of burnt clay was placed in the bottom of the bowl 
to separate the tobacco from the end of the stem; it is of an irregularly 
rounded figure, fitting the tube imperfectly in order that the smoke might 
pass. From Lewis's drawing, it appears that the stem was about three 
times as long as the bowl. This does not tally with my informant, who, 
in a crude sketch, made the bowl slightly longer than the stem, somewhat 
like the Califomian specimen pictured by McGuire.^ Ross describes the 
bowls as of stone with large heavy stems of ash-wood almost a meter long,* 
Clark speaks of a soft greenish stone forming the small bowl ; ^ while, ac- 
cording to Wyeth, the stems were about sixty centimeters long and the bowl 
was made of fuller's earth or steatite.* 

The Shoshone never cultivated tobacco. Lewis found that the Lemhi 
used the same tobacco as the Miiinitarees, Mandans and Arikaras; and 
states that they obtained it from their eastern neighbors and from Shoshone 
bands living to the south. ^ Ross describes their tobacco as a low, brownish 
plant, thriving particularly in sandy or barren soil, having the same aromatic 
flavor and narcotic effect as ours, though weaker. It was dried, rubbed 



» I^wis and Clark, II, 340. 

2 I^wis and Clark, II. 341-2. 

3 McGuire, 390. 
* Ross. II, 109. 

« Clark. 303. 353. 

Wyeth, 214. 

7 Lewis and Clark, II. 342. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 213 

between the hands, or pounded with stone, until it was quite fine. It left 
a gummy taste in the mouth.^ According to my informants, the Shoshone 
employed kinikkinik (ti'mayiha) obtained by drying the leaves of the 
dzi'ampi (wild-rose bush ?) ; they knew that their Cree friends use the bark 
of e'ngabit ho'pi (lit. red-tree). The Shoshone, however, also use red- 
willow bark. Remy relates that the kinikkinik of the Utah Snakes was 
derived either from the dried inner bark of a species of Comus, or from the 
dried leaves of Vaccinium and another (unidentified) shrub.' 

In smoking, the fumes are expelled from the nostrils;^ sometimes they 
were swallowed on ceremonial occasions.* Though nowadays the pipe is 
sometimes passed from left to right, the proper method, observed at councils 
or meetings with visitors, is for the chief, or host, to take a few whiffs, pass 
it to the left, until the last visitor has smoked, and then to have the pipe 
handed back unsmoked to the chief, who cleans the bowl with a tamper 
and sends it on the second round. I never saw the pipe offered to the six 
directions in a ceremonial way, and the chief expressly stated that this was 
a Sioux custom not practised by his tribe. Lewis's account, however, is 
conclusive on this point. At his reception, Ke-ml'awE had a fire kindled 
in a two-foot circle cleared of grass in the center of the lodge, lit his pipe, 
rose from his seat, and after a brief address pointed the stem towards the 
four cardinal points beginning with the east and ending with the north. 
Next he presented the pipe to Lewis, but drew it back three times; then 
offered it to the sky and the fire-place, smoked three whiffs, held it for 
Lewis and his companions to smoke, and finally passed it to his own men.* 

. A similar account is given for the Green River Snakes by De Smet ® 
who adds that each smoker had a different way of taking the pipe, one 
turning it around, another describing a semicircle before accepting it, the 
next holding the bowl in the air, and so forth. De Smet connects these 
peculiarities with the specific directions of each man's manitou. Ross saw 
the pipe held first east, then west, south and north; but it was not offered to 
the sky. A forked stick taken from a medicine bag was employed to place 
in the bowl the bit of burning horse-dung used for lighting the pipe.' 

Lewis notes the queer custom that the Shoshone, before smoking, re- 
moved their moccasins, and, on one occasion, requested their white visitors 
to do likewise. This act, he states, involves a sacred obligation of sincerity 



» Ross. I, 272. 

a Remy, I, 130. 

3 Ibid.. 131. 

* Ross, II, 93-6. 

« Lewis and Clark, II, 342. 

« De Smet, 217-8. 

7 Ross. II, 93-6. 



214 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

of friendship, and the wish that if the smoker is disloyal, he may always go 
bare-foot.^ Of this custom I found absolutely no recollection, except that 
one old man stated that the medicine-men were formerly wont to remove 
their moccasins when smoking during the treatment of their patients. 
Though Clark regards the Shoshone as less addicted to smoking than the 
Plains tribes,^ Lewis and Clark, as well as Ross, found them excessively 
fond of tobacco.^ According to Ross, they even claimed to have been the 
first smokers in the beginning of the world, and to have instructed all the 
other Indians in the art.* 

Menstrual Lodge. — During the menses, the women retire to a special 
lodge (hu'na-g^n*), where they stay by themselves, abstaining from meat 
and fish. This custom is rigorously obsen^ed at the present day. Formerly, 
the woman's sole sustenance during this period consisted of seeds and roots, 
nowadays bread is also allowed her. It is believed that if a woman were to 
eat meat, the flow of blood would continue indefinitely. No one is supposed 
to go into the lodge of a menstruating woman. Long ago, a squaw infringed 
this law; she began to vomit, and died. Men approaching catamenial blood 
would also vomit and die. During the latter part of pregnancy, a woman 
retires to the same lodge. No man comes near her, but her women friends 
may sit at some distance outside and talk to her. For several days before 
the expected birth of the child, both husband and wife abstain from meat 
and fish.^ The institution of the hu'na-g^n*, like the origin of menstruation 
itself, is attributed to Coyote. 

Burial. — In the old days, when a Lemhi died, his body was wrapped in 
blankets, tied up, and deposited in the clefts in the rocks. The tribal grave- 
yard was formerly in the gullies several miles beyond the reservation on the 
Lemhi River, a site of rather difficult access strewn with the bones of horses. 
Nowadays the corpses are buried in the ground. Tree-burial is known as a 
practice of other tribes, but was never resorted to by these Indians. Cre- 
mation has been cited as an occasional custom of the Nevada Snakes; but 
among them also concealment among rocks was the usual method.® Some- 
times the corpse was simply abandoned, and rubbish, or the remains of the 
wikiup, thrown on top. In Nevada, Hoffmann once discovered the body of 
a young boy, which had been disposed of in this fashion.' 

The relatives and friends present gifts to the deceased, and a woman 



» Lewis and Clark, II, 340, 363, 365. 

2 aark, 303, 353. 

3 Lewis, II. 351; Ross, I, 257. 
* Ross, I, 272. 

» Remy, I, 126-7. 
Yarrow, 143. 
7 Ibid.. 153-4. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 215 

kneeling beside the corpse shouts into its ears the names of the donors and 
the character of their offerings. A missionary at Ross Fork is said to have 
ingratiated herself with the Fort Hall people by regularly appearing at 
funerals with a gaudy handkerchief, or some similar gift, for the departed. 
According to two informants, the following words are addressed to the 
dead:^ — 

*'0'n6 mi'aiy". Dza'Ent co'gopE pi'dehunk. 
You are going. A good land reach. 

O'yogE n^'mo ma-bu'i, dza'Ent n^'mo, dza-na^buin. 

All Indians see, good Indians, good-looking (ones). 

Ke ko'oi. Ik ke dza'Ent co'gopE; dzu'guputsi. 

Don't return. This not good land (is) ; it is old. 

Dza'Ent o mi'agwain." 

It is good for you to go. 

After the death of a Lemhi medicine-man in 1906, Dr. Murphy informs 
me, the Indians lamented his loss for four or five days. Three horses were 
covered with ribbons, mirrors, feathers and tawdry blankets, and Tcept on 
exhibition. When the corpse had been deposited in the ground, the finery 
was also buried, and the horses were killed. De Smet gives the following 
account.^ After the hair of the dead man's relatives is cut and the manes 
and tails of all his horses have been docked, all his possessions are piled up 
in the middle of the lodge, the tent-poles are cut into little pieces, and the 
property is burnt. Then the corpse is tied upon the man's favorite horse, 
which is led to the edge of a neighboring river. There the warriors chase 
the animal, surround him, and with yells force him to leap into the current 
with his master's body. Then, yelling louder, they tell him to transport his 
master without delay to the land of souls. Remy saw a chief's best-looking 
wife killed with the horses. "After two horses had been sacrificed, the unfor- 
tunate young woman stepped without flinching on the tomb of her husband, 
whose brother forthwith cut off her hair, and then shot her through the 
heart. — Earth was heaped over the two bodies, the horses were buried 
beside them, and, after hiding the victim's hair at some distance, all was 
over." The mother of the deceased prostrated herself every evening at the 
grave, singing a mourning song.^ 

The mourning women gashed their legs above and below the knee and 
had their hair cropped. Sometimes the arms and ears were also scarified. 
The men, as a rule, only clipped the hair in the back of the neck; but Lewis 
and Clark's host had cut all his hair quite short .^ The personal property 



1 De Smet, 219. 

2 Remy, I, 131-2. 
« Ibid.. II, 372. 



216 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

of the deceased was either distributed among the friends of the natural heirs, 
or burnt. It is reported from Nevada that during mourning the survivors 
follow the paths traveled by the lost relative when alive, — a custom called 
** hunting the dead." * The lodge of the deceased is abandoned. At Inkom, 
Idaho, my interpreter had just deserted a comfortable log-cabin to live in a 
tent on account of his uncle's death. In order to avoid this necessity, a 
hopelessly sick person was sometimes removed to a solitary xidkiup at some 
distance from the general camping-ground.' 



|2 



DANCES. 

The ceremonial organization of the Shoshone, so far as they were not 
directly influenced by their neighbors, was extremely simple. I could find 
no trace of age-societies; and, while Mr. St. Clair discovered a wolf-dance at 
Wind River, I gather from his oral description, as well as that furnished by 
Culin,^ that it had nothing to do with a grouping on the basis of supernatural 
experiences, but corresponds to the Lemhi ta'cayuge, with apparently 
much greater development of body-painting. The sun-dance (da'gu-wo no) 
is performed at Wind River and Fort Hall; it was, of course, known to the 
Lemhi by hearsay, and had been witnessed by some on other reservations. 
However, the older men agreed that it had never been celebrated among 
them. As the chief remarked, they "were afraid" of the ceremony because 
of the several days' abstention from food and drink. The lack of the sun- 
dance among the Lemhi, taken with an informant's statement that the 
Fort Hall people derived the ceremony from their kinsmen in Wyoming, 
indicates a relatively recent introduction of the dance among the Shoshone 
groups practising it. That the Wind River Shoshone have adopted cere- 
monial features from the Arapaho appears from a description of a *' Sho- 
shone buflPalo-dance." * The dancers congregate in a tipi. A middle-aged 
and a very young woman are brought to the center of the circle, where an 
old attendant removes their clothing, replacing it with a sage-brush apron. 
The girl is covered with white clay and decorated with black spots. She is 
handed a staff, stretches out her arm, and plants the stick firmly in the 
ground. All the dancers pass a given number of times under her arm, then 
rush at her with a yell, raise her on their shoulders and carry her around, 
the by-standers touching her with their hands and coup-sticks for good 
medicine. V She is returned to her place in the circle. Then a number of 

» Report 1890. 386-7. 

2 Yarrow. 153-4. Report 1890, 387. Cf. Enga-gwacu's personal narrative, p. 301. 

3 Culin. (a) 14. 

* Report 1890. 634. 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone. 217 

women impersonating buffaloes run off into the bush, pursued by the men, 
who capture and bring them back. Some of the features, at least, of this 
ceremony may have been adopted from the women's dance of the Arapaho.* 
It is probable that other cultural elements were similarly borrowed, and 
this conjecture would account for the somewhat greater complexity encoun- 
tered among the Wyoming Shoshone, as compared with those here espe- 
cially dealt with. 

Of the dances formerly in vogue at Lemhi, the nu'akin or ta-nu'in, 
seems to have been the most important. Some informants identified it 
\\ath the na'dzangai, or na'dzangEn; but others denied any connection 
between the two, and insisted that the latter was a squaw-dance recently 
derived from the Nez Perc6, though some similarity in the step was admitted. 
The nu'akin was celebrated for several days, either towards the end of 
winter or in the beginning of spring. Its object was to ensure a plentiful 
supply of food, especially of salmon and berries. A camp-circle was formed, 
but no special lodge was erected. The main circle of dancers consisted 
of men and women, the normal arrangement being that each participant 
stood between members of the opposite sex. A woman might, however, 
refuse to stand between two men if she disliked them. Neighbors joined 
hands, interlocking fingers, a custom called ma'wekw^gin. Boys and 
girls formed concentric circles, the former dancing in front of, the latter 
behind the main ring. The women wore elk-tooth dresses or their modem 
equivalents, put red paint on their face, and dyed their hair yellow. Ac- 
cording to some, the women rarely daubed their hair, the face was painted 
yellow, and red paint was spread in oblique lines from the eyes downwards. 
The men used bi'cap on their face, white clay on their forehead and hair. 
An eagle, or at times a magpie feather, was inserted in the hair. No drum 
was used during the performance. The dancers themselves sang, gliding 
with clockwise movements similar to those of the Cree dance, but much 
more slowly. As soon as the singing ceased, the women stepped out of the 
circle, resuming places when a new song was begun. So far as could be 
learned, there was no difference between the several (according to some 
two, according to others five) days' performance, which was concluded with 
a feast. Mr. Faukner, a young half-breed from Ft. Hall, remembers a 
dance, called grass-dance, which seems to correspond to the nu'akin, 
though he has forgotten the native designation. An immense circle was 
formed by men and women, neighbors interlocking fingers. The dance 
continued for several days and nights; the object of the dance was to make 
the grass grow. 



1 Kroeber, (.b) 210 it seq. 



218 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

The following very imperfectly translated nu'akin song was secured: 
Ma'zambia un-du'a, 
Mountain-sheep her son, 

wa'sipi un-du'a-tsi, 

mountain-sheep's son, 

dii'mbi ma-to'owEn. 

on the rock goes out. 

E'nga-m-bo pa gfl'nait 
A red ball cloud 
wu'kum-bai yo'ina, 

wind has (?) 
padA'nobina. 
go outside. 
(At this point of the song several of the singers knelt down on the ground.) 
Bl'a-gwina umbi'oi un-du'atsi pa'wucorotogin. 

Eagle white ( ?) her son ? 

Ta'ham bl'agwina bi'oi du'atsi. 
Our white- eagle's son. 

A very vague, general resemblance might be noticed between the style 
of this song and that of some recorded ghost-dance songs. Together with 
the informant's statement that some Shoshone called the nu'akin dzo'a- 
no gakin, ghost-dance, the slow movement, the characteristic position of the 
women, and the clasping of hands,^ it might be taken as evidence of a recent 
development of the dance. But Moone/s statement, that the Shoshone 
ghost-dance was merely a re\dval of an older dance practised fifty years ago, 
is supported by the testimony of Lemhi informants, re-enforced both by the 
mention of the nu'akin in mythology and the explanation of its object. 
There can thus be little doubt as to its antiquity. 

While the nu'akin was celebrated to insure the coming of the fish, the 
first catch of salmon (ta'ma-a'gai) was also attended by some celebration. 
All the members of the band painted with bi'cap, and a feast took place, 
the first catch being divided among all the tribesmen. This custom is re- 
ferred to by Remy in his description of Brenchley's journey along the Snake 
River in 1850. "At the commencement of their fishing season the Indians 
perform a sort of superstitious ceremony, which consists in making certain 
prayers or signs over one of the fish before they vehture to eat any. They 
believe that a violation of this law will bring ill-luck to the fishers, and any 
one of them disobeying it would run the risk of losing his life, even if he were 
famishing." ^ 

1 Mooney. (a) 809, 920. 

2 Remy, II, 508. 



1909.] Lotme, The Northern Shoshone. 219 

The a'po-no'kakin (Father's dance) was danced like the nu'akin, but 
with different songs, which were usually without words, but partly in the 
nature of a prayer. No information was given beyond the statement that 
it was usually performed by old men and had originally belonged to the 
Bannock. Another old dance was the dii'mu-no'kakin, in which men and 
women participated, moving contra-clockwise in a circle and bending down 
low at regular intervals. 

Somewhat fuller information is available as to the wo'ho-nokakin, of 
which the name is derived from a musical instrument called wo'honog 
(Fig. 20). This consists of a notched wooden board, held up in a slanting 
direction and resting on a parfleche or piece of tin, and a second stick, or 
bundle of twigs, which was rapidly drawn down the scale of notches. A 
somewhat similar instrument was found by Alexander Henry among the 
Assiniboine, and is used by the Hoof-Rattle society of the Cheyenne; * it 
is also found among the Hopi, Tonkaway, and Mexican tribes.^ There were 




Fig. 20 (50-6410). Musical Instrument. Length, 53 cm. 

four musicians. The men and women were ranged on diflPerent sides of 
the dance-ground. Both were allowed to invite members of the other sex 
to become their partners. If a man refused a woman's invitation, the 
belief was that he would be killed by a bear the next time he went out hunting. 
There were usually from four to six couples dancing at a time. All the 
spectators sang a song without words. Partners faced each other. The 
man's right hand grasped the woman's right arm, or he might simply place 
his hand on her waist or shoulder. He ran rapidly backwards with his 
partner, then both ran to their initial position. Usually the dance took 
place on spring evenings. At Lemhi the wo'honokakin has not been 
practised for twenty years; but Mr. J. P. Sherman of Owyhee, Nevada, 
who kindly obtained some additional notes, reports that on the Duck River 
Reservation the last performance dates back as late as 1905. The mis- 
fortune incurred by refusal to dance with a woman was not restricted by 

> Henry. 296. G. A. Dorsey. (d) 18. 
2 Hawley, 344. 



220 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

his informant to injuries from wild beasts; the guilty individual might be 
drowned, killed by a windfall, etc. Within recent times an open box was 
substituted for the rasping-stick. Mr. Sherman's authority regards the 
dance as old, but as having been originally introduced by the Ute. The 
Museum contains a specimen of a Ute notched instrument, collected by 
Kroeber, and Culin found it in use at a Uinta bear-dance performed in the 
spring.* The bear-dances of the Ute, however, are described as purely 
social entertainments by Clark,^ while the homologue of the wo'hono^kakin 
was an annual religious ceremony performed in February or March. The 
dance-ground was bounded by a large circular enclosure, and near one end 
the musicians sat down with their rasps. *'The men and the squaws 
arrange themselves into two lines, so that the sexes stand opposite and facing 
each other. When the music commences two squaws clasp hands, advance 
to the male line, and choose their partners; then two more in the same 
manner make their selection, and so on until all are supplied. Now the 
males and the females from their respective lines advance towards each 
other with a trot and a swaying motion of their bodies, until the couples are 
almost face to face, and then with similar backward movements return to 
the places from which they started. This alternate advance and retreat 
is all there is to the dance, but the participants apparently enjoy the exercise 
immensely, and often continue the dance until they are completely ex- 
hausted." 

The scalp-dance has already been referred to in connection with war 
customs. 

The dances heretofore mentioned were not witnessed by the writer. 
When visited, the Lemhi Shoshone only practised two dances, the ta'cayuge, 
or war-dance, and the a'nonokakin, or Cree dance (a'na = horn, a'angant 
= Cree), also called kwapakin, or hugging-dance. Usually both were 
performed during the same night, the songs and correlated dances alternat- 
ing according to the wishes of the performers. The decision to hold a 
dance was made early during the day, and the news was rapidly carried all 
over the reservation. About sunset the drummers gathered on the dance- 
ground, suspended a large drum from four willow-sticks fixed in the ground, 
and began their music. It generally took about two hours, or longer, 
before all the people had arrived. During this waiting period, the drum- 
sticks were plied with short intermissions of rest, and appropriate songs 
were sung. On one occasion the wupa'rEk was revived before the com- 
mencement of the drumming. There was often great reluctance about 
starting the dance, and in such a case some of the drummers, or some of 
the older people present, exhorted the men and women to begin. 



Culin, (a) 95. 
'■ Clark. 389. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 221 

The customary site of the dance was a large, unroofed bam, in the center 
of which a fire was maintained. At other times, the dancing took place in 
the open air around a pile of dry wood. For a public feast, followed by a 
dance in the evening, a circular enclosure of willow-trees opening towards 
the east was erected. A similar structure with a forked cottonwood in the 
center was put up for an afternoon dance, ostensibly in honor of the chief, 
who had recently returned from a visit, and of some Cree. It was only on 
the last occasion that the older war-dance seemed to predominate over the 
recently acquired Cree dance. 

The Cree dance (a'no), which is practically identical with the owl-dance 
of the Crow, was introduced both at Lemhi and Fort Hall by the Cree some 
eight years ago, and rapidly became very popular. After the Cree song has 
been sung several times, a woman rises, approaches one of the men who are 
seated on the other side, or possibly one of the drummers, and tries to pull 
him up. The man summoned is frequently reluctant, yielding only after 
repeated pulls. At last, he steps forward, stands next to his partner, places 
his right arm around her waist, or his hand on her shoulder, and both begin 
to glide around the central fire-place in a clockwise direction. In position, 
the feet may form an angle, but are as frequently parallel. They are hardly 
raised from the ground, and the legs are bent but slightly, if at all. Other 
couples follo.w, and with young boys dancing by themselves the circle is 
soon closed. At intervals some of the dancers give vent to brief exclamations. 
As soon as the singing ceases, the circle is broken, the men release their 
companions, and receive in payment a small coin varying from five cents to a 
quarter. At the very next dance, however, it is the man's duty to invite 
his former associate and ultimately return to her twice the original amount, 
the established sums being a dime for a nickel, two-bits for a dime, and 
half-a-dollar for a quarter. On exceptional occasions, such as visits from 
friendly tribes, more valuable gifts are exchanged, such as beaded necklaces 
and even horses. A number of times the same man was simultaneously 
approached by two women. He would embrace each w'ith one arm, and 
received a twofold fee, repaid in the customary fashion. 

There was no special dress for the Cree dance. Men and women took 
part in their everyday costume, except in so far as the former were prepared 
for the ta'cayuge. The dancing continued through the night, those tired 
out lying down on the margin of the dance-ground and resuming places 
when rested. As a rule, the i)urely social nature of the performance was 
emphasized by the well-nigh total absence of the older men. The chief 
expressed detestation for night-dances, asserting that in former times dances 
always took place before dark. This, however, is disproved by the testi- 
mony of early travelers.^ 

> Lewis and Clark. II. 343. 347. 



222 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

The ta'cayuge was said to be an old dance. In fonner days the per- 
formers remained rooted to the same spot, merely dancing up and down. 
One man carried a bow and arrow in his hand. There was no costume 
beyond a breechclout. Scars from wounds received in war were painted 
conspicuously. The dancers seen, almost exclusively young men, would 
rise from their seats at the beginning of the song, mark time in their places, 
then leap forward into the center, several at a time, and advance alternately 
one foot before the other with violent movements of the legs and body. 
Sometimes two dancers would gradually approach each other face to face, 
sometimes they danced abreast, keeping sfep. The ta'cayuge thus re- 
sembles both the Omaha dance of the Prairie Tribes,' the hot-dance of the 
Crow, the prairie-chicken dance of the Stoney Assiniboine, and the Black- 
foot ka'espai pa'skan. The actual dance is very brief, probably owing to 
the physical exertion involved. 

There were no definite rules as to the costumes to be used. The per- 
formers freely borrowed what paraphernalia they could, and consequently 
there was considerable variety in their appearance. Some wore wigs, 
others porcupine head-dresses. At times eagle-feather fans with little bells 
attached were borne in the hand. On one occasion a rattle and an eagle- 
bone whistle derived from the sun-dance regalia of a Fort Hall Shoshone 
were suspended from a war-dancer's belt, with no idea of their originally 
ceremonial significance. The costume of one well-dressed dancer consisted 
of beaded moccasins; leggings with unf ringed flaps and adorned with long 
strips of beadwork; a cloth breechclout decorated with a zigzag design, 
and partly covered by a linen shirt; an open vest with embroidered floral 
designs on the back, of which the sun-flower could be easily identified; and 
a porcupine head-dress from which rose two tall eagle-feathers. Leg-bands 
with bells were attached below the knees. The chiefs favorite son wore 
the typical Prairie bonnet without a tail, a buckskin cap with tall feathers 
tipped with reddish-yellow horsehair from six to eight inches long. On the 
sides of the headgear, there were small mirrors; in the back, there were 
numerous little bells; the front was beaded. Below the red cloth wrappings 
of the quills were little strips of weaselskin, gaily colored ribbons were sus- 
pended in the back. Besides a black shirt and a cloth breechclout, there 
were beaded armlets, leg-bands below the knee, and anklets with bells. 
Another dancer wore richly beaded moccasins and otter skin anklets, a 
loincloth confined by a beaded girdle, a red shirt with sleeve-holders and a 
porcupine head-dress. To the belt were attached an eagle-bone wrapped 
with strips of otter skin and a wooden staff wrapped with blue cloth and 



1 Mooney, (a) plate CXIX. 



1909.] Lotuie, The Northern Shoshone. 223 

crudely carved at one extremity into a bird's head, similar to a Musemn 
specimen from Wind River; while the other terminated in a buckskin ball 
filled with little pebbles and occasionally employed as a rattle. Some 
dancers had necklaces composed of little bone discs strung on parallel 
thongs. 

Similar irregularity was observed in the application of paint. The 
chiefs son first painted his face yellow (6'hapit), then daubed his forehead 
with red paint; finally the portion of his face below the mouth was given a 
dark-brown paint, leaving only the space between the eyes and upper lip 
stained with the original o'hapit. This space was further restricted by a 
pair of blue stripes extending from the extreme point of each eye outwards 
to the ears, but passing below them. Between each pair of these sym- 
metrically disposed blue stripes, red paint was applied. Both sides of the 
hair were daubed yellow, and the frontal braids, as well as the hair in the 
back, were irregularly painted in the same fashion. The thighs were at 
first completely covered with yellow paint, later some blue dots were added. 
From the knee downward the legs were stained dark-blue. Other dancers 
used white clay (a'bi) on the forehead and upper part of the face. One 
performer painted his face red, with three slanting rows of yellow patches 
on one side and three symmetrically disposed yellow lines on the other. 
The legs were yellow, the thighs had in addition three rows of blue circles. 
Another dancer painted his legs red, and added several rows of circular 
yellow patches. All informants positively stated that the selection of both 
paint and costume was a matter of purely individual choice. Jack Tendoy 
used white clay in four or five patches under the eyes on either cheek. 

As already stated, Mr. St. Clair discovered considerably greater com- 
plexity in the body-painting of the Wind River Shoshone. Some wolf- 
dancers had realistic representations of a bear or snake below their breasts, 
standing for bear or snake-medicine; a sun-dancer had a similar painting 
of a buffalo. Right angles, or angular horseshoes, represent horse tracks; 
wavy lines extending along the entire length of the arms and legs s}Tnbolize 
the rainbow; short lines, horizontal, curved, oblique or vertical, indicate 
people killed; and painted hands record hand-to-hand encounters with the 
enemy. 

RELIGION. 

As in the Plains, the basis of religious feeling seems to be the desire to 
secure power by the aid of dreams, visions and tutelary helpers. A man in 
quest of supernatural power would sometimes go up into the mountains at 
night. Suddenly he sees a light, which represents the expected medicine. 



224 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. IT, 

He goes to sleep. The next morning he rises, and begins to look for roots. 
After having found them, he addresses the Sun, saying, "Look, I take this 
for my medicine." Then he brings them home, ties them up in a buckskin 
bag, and carries them about his body. In the night, his medicine speaks 
to him and counsels him. It may tell him how he ought to paint. The 
next day he will act in accordance with its directions. Sometimes, if a 
man wishes to kill an enemy, he will speak to his medicine, attach it to a 
little stone, and throw it at the victim with disastrous results. Long ago a 
man married a woman, whom he came to dislike. He spoke to his medicine, 
and threw it at her. She died the next spring. An individual helper of 
this kind is called bu'ha, while medicinal herbs, charms, etc., are distin- 
guished as na'dcu. However, the weaselskins and eagle feathers worn in 
the hair were referred to as bu'ha, perhaps on account of the manner in 
which they were secured; some Shoshone regarded them as a protection 
from missiles. Some men obtained bu'ha for war only,^ while the medi- 
cine-man (bu'ha-gant = bu'ha-possessor) received help from his bu'ha as 
to the nature and cure of his patient's sickness. The Wind River people 
seem to look upon many birds as possessors and bestowers of bu'ha. The 
tail-feathers of the flicker, worn as a headgear, ward oflp sickness and tend 
to restore health; and a certain male of a species of sage-hen is explicitly 
stated to impart the gifts of a healer, seer and exorcist. This bird was 
offended some time ago because a Shoshone shot at it; hence the relative 
weakness of the bu'ha of modem, as compared with ancient, medicine-men.^ 
If a man disobeyed the orders of his bu'ha, it would leave him forever. 
Some twenty years ago, Enga-gwacu Jim, who had a war-bu'ha, disregarded 
his helper's instructions as to the eating of salmon. He fell sick, his bu'ha 
no longer aided him, and he died. Though afterwards restored to life, he 
never recovered his bu'ha.' There are individual relations of a similar 
character which are not explicitly connected with a bu'ha. Thus, K6'bitsak 
is not afraid of rattlesnakes, because he has dreamt that he put rattlesnakes 
all over his body without being injured by them. He, accordingly, regards 
them as his friends. He knew an old Indian who would even venture, for 
the same reason, to put a rattlesnake into his mouth. Some medicine-men 
could never be hurt by obsidian arrow-points. The arrow would just 
graze them and pass off harmlessly; ''perhaps it knew them." In con- 
cluding the tale of a woman who had illicit intercourse with a stallion, the 



* Bonneville's Bannock chief, who had a channed life and could not be hit by a bullet, 
probably belonged to this category. He was ultimately killed by the Blackfoot; but his people 
declared it was not a bullet, but a piece of horn shot into him that caused his death. Irving, 
(a) 147. 

2 CuHn, (a) 20. 

» Cf. p. 301. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 225 

narrator stated that she had dreamt horses were her friends and that she 
herself was like a horse. 

Dreams also give knowledge of past and future events, and bestow 
ability of a special character. A medicine-man once dreamt that an agent 
had killed an Indian school-child, and the Shoshone are firmly convinced 
that this is true. A Fort Hall Indian dreamt that he would be able to 
restore performers of the Sun-Dance, when falling down in exhaustion 
from thirst, by squirting water from his throat at their bodies. He tried 
the experiment, and succeeded. After Enga-gwacu had offended his bu'ha, 
the Sun appeared to him, ostensibly in a dream, and told him to build a 
wikiup all by himself, that he was going to di^, but that he would be allowed 
to return to life, if he so desired. This was just what actually took place 
afterwards. 

From what information could be secured, it seems that to speak of 
Shoshone shamanism would be misleading. Though additional evidence 
may refute the statement, it does not appear that Shoshone medicine-men 
are distinguished from ordinary men by the common possession of a special 
type of supernatural relationship. As a chief acquires his war-medicine, 
so the medicine-man obtains the power to treat, say rattlesnake bites, which 
is specifically different from, but derived in fundamentally the same way as, 
another medicine-man's ability to cure barrenness, or as Kfi'bitsak's im- 
munity from snake-bites.^ The following particulars are given by Culin 
on the authority of a mbsionary. A medicine-man, in seeking supernatural 
aid, went to the mountains to fast and pray. At the end of some days an 
eagle, a bear, and a badger appeared to him. The eagle took off one of his 
talons and gave it to him, telling him that by means of it he would be able 
to command all the powers of the air. The bear similarly took off one of 
his claws and promised him aid from all the powers of the earth. Finally, 
the badger gave him a claw and told him by means of it he could command 
all that was under the earth. The medicine-man, by way of testimony, 
produced the three claws, strung on a cord to be worn about his neck. 

In Shoshone mythology there is mention of miracle (dii'mabana)- workers 
(page 256). The term "du'mabana,'' though undoubtedly correctly trans- 
lated in the context of the myth referred to, has a somewhat uncertain 
significance. It is used for the tightrope walking of an itinerant vaudeville 
performer seen in Salmon City; but also for a beaded charm with which 
Coyote overcomes the rolling rock, and the game of cat's-cradle is called 
du'mabana-working. The Shoshone nowadays are skeptical as to the 



' This statement is in agreement witii observations made by Dr. Dixon in a recent paper 
on "Some Aspects of the American Shaman" (Journal of American Folk- Lore, 1908, Volume 
XXI, page 12). 



226 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

existence of Indian miracle-workers. Until recently some Bannocks claimed 
wonder-working powers; but the defeat of their people in the last uprising 
has destroyed confidence in their ability. In what way the power to per- 
form miracles was supposed to be derived, and whether it was understood 
to differ from that of a bu'ha-gant in the wider sense of the term, could not 
be determined. 

The SouL The principle of life which departs at death is called mu'gua. 
During life its seat is in the head. According to one (unconfirmed) state- 
ment, the mu'gua of persons dying by violence travels in a different direc- 
tion from that traveled by the souls of people who have died a natural death. 
The latter go to the land of Wolf and Coyote. The common belief seems 
to be that the mu'gua of a dead Indian rises immediately until it reaches 
Wolfs house. There it is washed and revived by Wolf. The spirits of 
Indians are darker than those of white men and very small. While rising, 
they look like clouds. At first they are visible only to medicine-men; but, 
after being washed, any one can see them. Half-way up they are met by 
a spirit descending on horseback, who then escorts them to their proper 
place. The mu'gua then becomes a dzo'ap, ghost. White men probably go 
to a different country. Individual experiences, of course, may lead to heter- 
odox views. When Enga-gwacu Jim died, his mu'gua came out of his 
thigh, made one step forward, then halted and looked back at the body, 
which was still breathing. After three steps had been taken, the mu'gua 
looked back again, and found the body cold and stiff. The mu'gua was 
about ten inches in height. Suddenly something descended, passing clean 
through it. Then the soul did not ascend, but went underground until it 
got to a place, where one of A'po's (the Father's) helpers was making the 
dead men over again. Enga-gwacu thought of A'po, but could not see 
him. At length he heard him saying, "You don't look very sick." There 
was a kind of thin wire there, which A'po hit three times. Thus, Jim came 
to see the Father's hand, which is small and as clean as a baby's. A'po 
had a buckskin bag, out of the contents of which he could fashion whatever 
he pleased. At last, A'po became visible for a short time; he looked like 
a handsome Indian. Suddenly everything opened up, so that Jim could 
see the earth plainly, with his own body lying dead on the ground. How 
he ever got back, he does not know; suddenly he had returned to the earth 
and was alive. On another occasion, he went up to the clouds. There he 
found another world, filled with sage-brush. The Indians there were 
all skeletons; he was able to recognize some of his former friends among 
them. Jim has questioned Shoshone medicine-men concerning a hereafter; 
but mistrusts both their statements and those of the missionaries, because they 
fail to tally with his personal experiences. 



1909.] Loine, The Northern Shoshone. 227 

Some Shoshone are said to believe that one of Tendo/s sons changed 
into a silver-fox after his death; consequently they abstain from hunting 
these foxes, though their furs are very valuable. 

Ghosts, Ghosts are greatly dreaded. School-children can be thrown 
into hysterics by the cry of "Dzo'ap!" and adults avoid passing their old 
cemetery on the Lemhi River at night. Meetings with ghosts are relatively 
frequent. They are sometimes heard making a noise outside of the lodge. 
Jack Grouse once heard singing, and managed to catch sight of some female 
ghosts. His nephew once went out hunting. He suddenly saw a skeleton 
figure. Speechless with fright, he ran home. The next spring, his father 
died. All the Indians believed that it was his father's wraith that he had 
seen. Another Shoshone once met a ghost, which tried to push him over 
from behind. The man resisted, tried to grasp the skeleton, and got his 
fingers between the bare ribs. After this adventure, he became very strong, 
so that he could lift a horse — *' Perhaps some of the ghost got into him." 
Enga-gwacu, who has had a number of peculiar experiences of this sort, 
was once traveling at night, when he saw an Indian approaching him. The 
outlines of the body and head were plain, but the face was invisible; the 
stranger seemed to wear a striped vest. As he got nearer, Jim saw that he 
had mistaken the ribs of a skeleton for stripes. He ran away, but was headed 
off. At last he said to the apparition, ** You are only a ghost, let me alone." 
(O'no-n dzo'ap, no-vii'ak.) The figure turned about, and disappeared into 
the ground. On a similar occasion, Jim used the same formula with like 
success against an uncanny snake. 

Medicine. For ordinary cases of sickness, there are a number of medici- 
nal roots and herbs. A decoction of sagebrush leaves is prepared against 
colds and minor distempers. This forms, according to some white settlers, 
a very satisfactory remedy. A sweet-smelling plant, called ba'gwina, is 
similarly employed. In almost every dwelling visited, I found a spray of a 
species of spruce, called dza'-wongobi (good-pine). Other species were 
declared to possess no medicinal virtue. The needles were ignited and the 
smoke was inhaled ; or, they were boiled, and the tea was drunk. Spruce- 
bark was treated in the same way for colds and headaches. Large braids of 
sweet-grass were commonly suspended from the wall; they are said to be 
similarly boiled and drunk for a colic. Some Shoshone keep old buffalo 
horns, which are employed as bu'i-na'dcu, eye-medicine. Small particles 
are broken off, boiled with spruce-needles, and the cooled mixture is rubbed 
over the sore eye. Bourke states that the Shoshone knew how to splint a 
fracture with willow twigs.^ At Fort Hall, poultices madwfrom pulverized 

1 Bourke, 319. / 



228 Antkropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

roots or leaves of diflPerent weeds or herbs are sometimes applied to wounds 
or swellings.^ According to Fremont, the Convollaria stellata furnished 
'*the best remedial plant" in the treatment of wounds.^ 

When the ordinary remedies fail to act, the sick person decides on calling 
a medicine-man. This resolution usually follows a dream to that effect. 
The theory of disease, at all events in most cases, is that a dzo'ap, ghost, 
has entered the patient's body. The Ute had a superstition that whistling 
at night results in the entrance of a pygmy spirit, called un"'pits, into the 
whistler's body, causing illness.' The treatment of the medicine-man is 
therefore designed to extract the intruder and render him innocuous. At the 
time of my stay there were three practitioners, two men and one woman. 
The latter was not a specialist for female ailments, but was said by white 
informants to practise hypnotism. Some years ago, I was told, the black- 
smith of the Reservation had derided her power, and on a challenge, she had 
almost succeeded in putting him to sleep. The testimony on this subject 
proved contradictory; some Shoshone confirmed, others strongly denied, 
the statement that their physicians could perform movements inducing sleep. 
Of the other two doctors, one was said to cure rattlesnake bites; the other, 
Tu'mo-dzo, a hunchback, was a specialist for sexual troubles. It was said 
that the latter carried his medicine about in his hump. He had a reputation 
for obscenity, and, in conversation, gave a ribald turn to innocent questions. 
Among other things, he cured barrenness. His nephew was married for 
ten years without having any children. At last he summoned his uncle to 
examine his wife, who has since borne two children. This result was, of 
course, attributed to the medicine-man's skill. Tu'modzo's treatment of 
gonorrhea (du'mbehaip), according to various Indians, consisted of insert- 
ing the diseased member in his mouth and sucking it; he would then expecto- 
rate. Women were similarly treated by him. Dr. Murphy, by way of 
corroboration, told me that when he was first appointed as agency physician 
the Indians visited him, and inquired as to his method of dealing with vene- 
real disease. In reply to his explanations, they said they had no faith in 
his treatment, as he seemed to be afraid to employ suction like their own 
practitioner. Tu'modzo was about seventy-five years of age, and had be- 
come nearly blind. He claimed to have been exceptionally strong in his 
youth, and to have overcome a bear in wrestling with him. Within recent 
years, confidence in his power seems to have been waning. 

As to the method usually employed by medicine-men, very little definite 
information could be got. Of course, incantations and 'sweat-lodges were 

1 Report 1890, 236. 

2 Fremont, 273. 
8 Powell, (a) 29. 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone. 229 

in common use. To extract the dzo'ap, the doctor forms a tube of his 
hands, applies it to the patient's mouth, and begins to suck until the sick 
individual retches, and finally belches forth the evil spirit. This is seized 
by the physician, shown to the spectators, sometimes in the shape of blood 
or of some small object, rubbed between his palms, and thus killed. By 
the Ute doctor, the evil spirit is driven away by stretching the patient out 
on the ground and scarifying him with an eagle claw from head to heel, 
while a group of men sing an incantation in chorus.^ The compensa- 
tion varied; Jack Grouse paid a doctor a dollar for curing his child; in 
other instances, a horse was presented to the practitioner. As indicated 
above, there is no distinction of rank among doctors, but merely a diffei> 
entiation of function. Medicine-men, besides aiding the sick, could some- 
times charm arrows for hunting, and, as shown by Lewis and Clark, could 
impart supernatural virtues to shields. None of them are said ever to 
have engaged in causing the sickness or death of a fellow tribesman. Some- 
times the sons or nephews of physicians followed the same profession. 

There are cases in which the medicine-man is powerless. Ko'bitsak's 
little girl died of cholera infantum. His explanation, according to Dr. 
Murphy, was that the child had been caught in a whirlwind, which whirled 
out her brains. After my departure from Lemhi, Tu'-dzomo-n-d5'mi, the 
younger of the two medicine-men, was taken sick. He declined Dr. Mur- 
phy's services, saying that he knew he must die in three days, but if he 
took any white man's medicine he would die before that. He looked rather 
strong, but actually died on the third day. What the native theory of this 
case may have been, I do not know. In general, two reasons were given 
for failure to restore the sick. A dzo'ap may have entered the patient's 
body, snatched away his mind, and flown away with it; under these cir- 
cumstances, madness usually ensues: or, the part of the ghost may be 
played by Coyote himself, who descends from above, carries off a man's 
mu'gua, and either makes him insane, or kills him outright. Jack Grouse 
knows of a farmer living in the vicinity, who used to abuse the Indians; he 
thinks that this malefactor was dispatched by Coyote about a year ago. 
In this r6le. Coyote disguises himself as an Indian, and can be recognized 
only by his eyes. 

Charms. Amulets of various kinds are in use. Spruce-needles are pow- 
dered, and crammed into a buckskin bag somewhat resembling an awl- 
case. The bag is hung around a baby's neck as a safeguard against illness. 
Adults use white weaselskins, or the foot of a white weasel, buffalo horns 
and manes for similar purposes. A very old woman keeps two small. 



» Powell, (a) 29. 



230 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

irregular pieces of obsidian in a bag as a preventive of eye-disease; occa- 
sionally she scratches her arm with the stones. Some men have a charm 
enclosed in a little piece of cloth and tied to the middle of either the front or 
back of a beaded necklace. One man carried some spear-grass about in 
this way. A sacred stone, apparently a tribal medicine, by which good or 
evil could be wrought, is mentioned by Culin.^ An evil charm was prepared 
by placing rattlesnake heads on hot coals in a hole in the ground and covering 
them with the fresh liver and gall of wild animals. During the process of 
steaming, the liver absorbs the poison from the heads. It was carefully 
preserved in a little buckskin bag worn on the owner's body. By looking 
intently at the victim and murmuring evil incantations, it was possible to 
eflPect his death.' 

Love-charms are extremely popular. Gwi'damba^bi wears a weasel 
foot on his hat as wai'*-pe-na'dcu (woman-medicine); he expects that it 
will help him in "catching a squaw." Woman-medicine, in the shape of 
shavings of wood or bark, is rubbed on the neck, tied up in a bag or piece 
of cloth, and attached to the belt. Ko'bitsak was seen to take spruce- 
needles into his mouth, chew them thoroughly, spit the moistened substance 
on his hands, and rub it on his head for wai'*-pe-na'dcu. He also knows 
a small inedible root, which is dug up for the same object. The root is 
glued to a little stone, the lover creeps up behind the woman desired, and 
throws the charm at her. Perhaps three or four nights later, she comes to 
see him. She looks into his eyes, and laughs. Jack has repeatedly used 
this charm with success. Some time ago, a Ross Fork Shoshone visited 
him and paid Ko-bitsak a dollar-and-a-half for these roots. The following 
spring. Jack saw him married to a woman. Though in lack of positive 
information on the point, he regards the wife as the woman originally sought, 
and ascribes the consummation of the marriage to his medicine. Lame- 
Jack, while confirming Jack's statements, speaks of another root also called 
wai'i-pe-na'dcu, but causing disastrous consequences. If dropped in a 
woman's path, it will kill her in about ten days. 



CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNIVERSE. 

The ideas of the Shoshone concerning celestial phenomena are rather 
simple and meagre. According to Powell, the domed firmament was be- 
lieved to be of ice, against which was coiled the back of a huge serpent, 
identified with the rainbow. In winter, the monster's friction with the ice 



» Culin, (a) 17. 

2 Report 1890, 386. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 231 

caused snow to fall on the earth; while, in the summer, the snow melted 
and turned into rain.^ Thunder is explained either as the howling of Coyote, 
or, more commonly, as the noise made by a small mouse (pu'nai) rushing 
through the clouds. Its children play about recklessly, and thus produce 
lightning. Powell makes lightning the arrow of Ta-vwots, the Hare.^ 
While there is mention of a gigantic bird, Nii'neyunc, it does not seem to be 
connected with thunder. The Ute regard falling stars as the excrements 
of dirty little star-gods.^ A Lemhi told me of a spot near Red Rock, Mon- 
tana, where a shooting-star had gone down into the ground, making a large 
hole. Its splinters, looking like glass, used to lie around the hole, which 
is now closing up. The portion that disappeared did not descend very 
far, but might possibly be dug up. The Pleiades are the members of 
Coyote's family, who have deserted him on account of his insatiable lust. 

The sun was at one time very close to the earth, scorching the Indians, 
who dispatched the Hare to kiU it. From the corpse a new sun was fash- 
ioned and raised to its present height. A very much more elaborate account 
is given by Powell, who apparently derived it both from Ute and Shoshone 
sources. The Sun used to roam about irregularly, now scorching people 
when too close, then again hiding in a cave until the earth was chilled. 
One day he singed the Hare's back. The Hare pursued him, and, by means 
of a magical weapon, shattered him into a thousand fragments, which 
produced a world-fire. All the Hare's body was consumed except the head, 
which bowled away. At last his eyes burst, and a flood of tears issuing forth 
quenched the conflagration. The conquered Sun was siunmoned before a 
"council of gods," which regulated the change of seasons and the alterna- 
tion of day and night.* 

A Lemhi version derived the moon from the gall of the sun; it was 
subsequently raised to the sky like the resuscitated sun. The man in the 
moon is recognized as a giant cannibal (Dzo'avits), holding a blanket with 
one hand. The Ute believe that Whippoorwill transformed a frog into the 
new moon by means of incantations.** As to eclipses, the only (ill-translated) 
statement apparently relating to them was that of an old doctor, who had 
seen the sun die twice in his life, while the Indians were shooting at it. 



1 Powell, (a) 27. 

2 Powell, (b) 7. 

3 Powell, (a) 27. 

* Powell, (a) 24, 52-6. 
» Powell, (a), 24-5. 



232 Antkropological Papers American Museum of Natural Histary. [Vol. II, 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

There is a belief that, if Coyote myths are told, the weather will become 
rainy or cold; there is also a prejudice against telling stories in the day- 
time.^ 

There is a proverbial expression connecting warts ^^iih the number of a 
man's wives. I had two small warts on my fingers, and every Shoshone 
who noticed them made the following comment: "You have two wives and 
no younger sister; this, perchance, is the older sister (pointing to one wart), 
and that the younger.'* (Wa'hat on-gwu'aho, na'na na'mino; noha'gani 
i'cE umba'dzi, i'cE u-na'mi.) 

The Shoshone never ate dogs.^ They abstain from the meat of white 
mountain-sheep, skunks, or badgers. They do not eat magpies, crows and 
eagles, because they regard them as friends to whom they are indebted for 
the feathers of their head-dress. 

When the Shoshone desire rain, they kill a frog with a stone and lay it 
on its back. When they wish to prevent the rain from falling, they some- 
times address the clouds, asking them to depart. 

The wildcat used to lie down on a hot rock, that is why its back looks 
as though it had been burnt. 

When the smallpox was raging in Lemhi, a Cree advised Jack Grouse 
to hang up a skunkskin and also to drink a mixture of skunk-filth and water. 

The Indians are frightened if a man whistles through a grass blade, 
and call him crazy. 

Mosquitoes once were very large and ate up Indians until Coyote changed 
them to their present size. 

Howls of the coyote at the time of the full-moon presage good luck; 
when a child rejoices at the first thunder in the spring, it is an omen that it 
will live to an old age and enjoy distinction.' 

A Snake chief, treated to horse flesh, by Wyeth's party, expressed great 
horror at the idea of eating a pony, and vomited the meat. Whether this 
was a tribal, or only an individual taboo, is not clear.* 



1 Cf. Dixon, (a) 266. 
a De Smet. II, 680. 
» Report 1890, 632. 
* Townsend, 252-3. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 233 



II. MYTHOLOGY. 

Shoshone mythology is, on the whole, characterized by the absence of a 
systematic cosmogony and of a migration legend. The Washakie Snakes 
are said to have had a tradition that they came originally from the south.* 
The Lemhi, like Powell's Shoshone,^ declare that they originated in the 
locality now occupied by them. The r6le of the creator is sometimes as- 
signed to a character referred to as A'po, the Father, or Nft'mono A'po, 
the Indians' Father.' He is contrasted with Wi'hindaibo, Iron-Man, the 
creator of the Whites, whom he conquers in a trial of strength. Some 
informants identify him with either Wolf or Coyote, the principal figures of 
Shoshone mythology. Clark states that, among the Bannock, the Gray 
Wolf was considered the creator of the Bannock, and Coyote creator of the 
Shoshone; while the Shoshone looked upon Wolf as their own father. 
The heroes' lair and their tracks in the rock, leading from a spring to the 
den, are still pointed out.* Among the Lemhi, the creation of sun, moon, 
and animals for the benefit of man is occasionally (in conversation) credited 
to Wolf. Wolf is universally regarded as the older, benevolent brother. 
Nevertheless, the younger Coyote, who thwarts his designs, introducing 
strife, labor, and death into the world, is ob\4ously the more important 
character; though the word for Coyote is commonly used for a liar or 
cheater, and a dyed-in-the-wool deceiver is called "very much of a Coyote." 
With the Ute * the elder of the Cin-au'-ao is the marplot, and the younger 
figures as the benefactor of mankind, who is ultimately obliged to flee to hb 
father, the Hare. Among the Lemhi, the Hare does not appear as the 
heroes' father, and plays only a subordinate part. Coyote is the culture- 
hero par excellence; he figures as the leader in the theft of fire, and such 
inventions as the flaking of obsidian are attributed to him. At the sight 
of an obsidian arrow-point, which I showed to a number of Indians, each 
one immediately excltymed, "I'dzapo an-du'p*" (Coyote's obsidian). There 
is a long m}^h of the procreation of all the Indians by Coyote; the Shoshone 
become his special proteges because they alone were washed by him as 
newborn babes. The majority of the Lemhi are still said never to kill a 



1 Ciilin. (a) 21. 

a Powell, (c) 86. 

« This character is mentioned by the Wind River people, as Mr. St. Clair has informed me. 

* Clark, 60, 337. 

* Powell, (a) 44-5. Powell does not state that this is a Ute myth. Cin-au'-fto, however, 
is the Ute word for wolf; vid. Kroeber, (d) 81, 96. The Shoshone terms for wolf and coyote 
are Ic and I'zdapO. Clark's Shinnob (explicitly Ute) is obviously the same as Powell's Cin- 
au'-&o; Clark. 388. 



234 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

coyote, though one man was pointed out as having done so. Clark was 
skeptical as to the strict observance of the taboo at his time, but at Fort 
Hall it seems to persist.^ There is a strong belief in Coyote's immortality; 
no sooner is he killed than he rises again. Whether this belief is generally 
extended to embrace all members of the species, is doubtful; but one Sho- 
shone, in conversation with me, scoffed at the idea that a white man could 
ever permanently deprive a coyote of life. In the less important tales, 
partly shared with neighboring tribes. Coyote presents all the features of 
the typical trickster. As a greedy, unscrupulous erotomaniac, he usually 
attains his ends; but occasionally suffers defeat or humiliation at the hands 
of a superior antagonist. 

Besides the important elements of the Coyote cycle, there seems to be 
another group of autochthonous stories; those dealing with the Dzo'avits. 
These constitqte a race of gigantic ogres dwelling in stone houses. When a 
Dzo'avits slept, a Shoshone would sometimes creep up and shoot an arrow 
at his arms; but the arrow, instead of disturbing him, would break in two. 
Individual members of this people are overcome by the Weasel brothers, 
or, less frequently, by other Indians. The destruction of the whole tribe 
is ascribed to the conflagration caused by a number of birds, or to the magic 
of Weasel-woman's uncle. With Powell, Dzo'avits is a witch ultimately 
transformed into the echo.^ Pa'-n-dzo'avits is a giant with enormous 
hands and feet, who lives in the water. He sleeps on rocks in the water, 
holding his hands before his face. When Indians approach, he imme- 
diately dives below the surface, as he greatly fears them. In a myth, however, 
he is represented as rising from the water to climb up a tree after the twin 
heroes, until the benevolent Pabi'hiano (Water-youths) throw him back 
again. 

' Other supernatural water-beings are the water-buffalo (Pa'-gutc), which 
swallows one of the twins, but is shot by the other; and the Pa'ona, or 
water-baby, which Indians never catch sight of, but hear crying in the 
night. Besides the Dzo'avits cycle, there are stories of apparently anthropo- 
morphic cannibals (no'mori'ka = people-eaters), and, according to some 
Indians, their existence is still believed in. Nu'-numbi is the name of a 
little boy, about two feet in height, who runs about the mountains, shooting 
game with his bow and arrows; though small, he is stout and very strong. 
Among the Wind River people of Wyoming, this character seems to be of 
considerable importance. Culin, basing his statements on information 
given by the Rev. John Roberts, gives the following details. Nii'numbi 
(Nin-nim-be) is a very short, old man, living in the mountains. He can 



» Culin, (a) 91. 
a Powell, (a) 45. 



1909.] Lovrie, The Northern Shoshone. 235 

appear and disappear at will. To meet him presages death. A trifling 
accident when starting on a journey will cause a Shoshone to turn back in 
dread of Nii'numbi. His shooting is the cause of a horse's or cow's illness, 
and old stone darts picked up by the Indians are exhibited as his arrow- 
points. Every sudden death is attributed to his agency, and the average 
Shoshone is afraid of uttering his own name lest Nu'numbi should overhear 
it and sh6ot him with his invisible arrows. Nu'numbi was regarded by 
Mr. Roberts' informant as the descendant of the no'morika, who are 
described as dwarfish mountaineers, who often fell a prey to eagles.^ The 
Lemhi people did not seem to connect Nu'numbi with the no'morika, 
nor were these cannibals conceived as dwarfs by them. The Wind River 
Shoshone believe that the Widjege, a species of titmouse, discovered the 
world. Its tongue is said to be divided into six parts; one tongue is dropped 
every month, and at the end of the sixth the tongues are renewed. It is 
considered "bad medicine" to kill this bird.^ 

The material available for comparison permits some conclusions as to 
the direction from which Shoshone mythology has been most strongly 
influenced. Some of the tales found among the Shoshone, such as that of 
the bungling host, of the rolling rock, the magic flight.^ or the eye-juggler,' 
are shared by too many other tribes to allow a definite inference. On the 
other hand, the colorless account of the deluge, which lacks the familiar 
diving incident, recalls some Califomian versions. In Mr. St. Clair's ver- 
sion, the chickadee is dispatched by A'po to bring land, but nothing b 
explicitly stated about diving for it. The occurrence of the tale of the theft 
of fire also allies Shoshone mythology with that of tribes west of the Rocky 
Mountains, though the Lemhi version is not exactly paralleled by any 
other form kngwn to the writer. The Bear and Deer myth is very closely 
related to that of northern California, while some striking details are 
shared with the Klamath variant. The importance of Coyote indicates a 
general relationship with Plateau and Califomian mythologies; while the 
antagonism of Wolf to Coyote, and the institution of labor, suffering and 
death by the latter, establish a closer connection with the Maidu. The 
liberation of salmon by the culture-hero, the counseling excrements, the 
contests of a party of travelers with the inhabitants of successively visited 
villages, the appearance of Coyote as a baby on a raft, are all additional 
features allying Shoshone folklore with that of the Columbia River and the 
Califomian area. The very characteristic detail of a gigantic bird carrying 
off twin heroes, — who slay him, are counseled by his mother, and later 



1 CuJin, (a) 17, 20 et seg. 

a Ibid., 20. 

3 Not secured at Lemhi, but recorded by Mr. St. Clair at Wind River. 



236 Anlkropological Papers American Museum of Xaiwal History. [Vol. II, 

encounter a mouthless people, for whom they cut mouths, — are, so far as I 
know, common only to the Shoshone and Yokuts; though the last of these 
incidents b found also among the Zuni and Tillamook. 

The most important Prairie tale in the collection is that of Lodge-Boy 
and Thrown-Away. From a recent discussion,^ it appears that the Sho- 
shone form of the story tallies in important particulars with that of the 
Blackfoot, Gros Ventre, Arapaho and Hidatsa. N^lecting minor stories, 
the tales of buffalo stealing an Indian girl and of the poor boy shooting the 
fox in a competitive hunt are almost the only other distinctively Prairie 
stories in the collection. A version of the star-husband myth, somewhat 
similar to the Blackfoot variant, was obtained by Mr. St. Qair. There is 
a version of Coyote and his Daughter among the Gros Ventre and Arapaho; 
but also among the Ute, Maidu, and Navaho.^ Coyote and Porcupine 
occurs in Wichita and Osage mythologj'; but is shared by the Jicarilla 
Apache, Zuni, Chilcotin, Ute and Maidu. Shoshone mythology lacks 
important buffalo tales, according to an old medicine-man, because "the 
buffalo was never an Indian." Both star-myths and stories of boy heroes 
are relatively insignificant. It is thus fairly clear that the mythology of the 
Shoshone indicates a closer connection with the people of California and the 
Great Basin, than with their eastern neighbors of the Plains. 



1. The Creation of the Shoshone. 



(a) 

Coyote was living there. He went do\\Ti to the big sea. No Indians 
were living at that time. Coyote thought he might find some. He lay 
down, covered himself with a blanket of jack-rabbit skins, and commenced 
to sing and move his legs. While singing, he felt something touching his 

Coyote feelf '^^^* ^^ looked up and saw nothing. He covered him- 
clri dancing on self up again and continued singing. Again he felt some- 

* *** thing dancing on the lower part of his body. He looked 

around and saw nothing. Coyote made a peep-hole in his blanket; then he 
saw a pretty girl dancing on his legs. He did not know what to do; when 
he threw off his blanket, she disappeared. 

The next time when he felt the touch of the girl, he jumped up and 
pursued her. Near the shore of the sea, he caught up to her. He asked 



^ Lowie, 141. 

2 This tale was also told to the writer by a half-breed Cree at Edmonton, Alberta. Natur- 
ally the Cree trickster, Wisfiketcak, takes the part of Coyote. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 237 

her what she was doing. She said her mother had sent her. "Where 
do you live?" he asked. She pointed out an island far ^ ^ ^ 
away in the sea, and offered to take him to her home, carried on her 
Coyote agreed to go with her. She took him on her back, *»»«^» dropped in 
and began to walk across the sea. In media via, Canis 
amore inflammatus muliere frui conatus est. She dropped him into the sea 
and walked on, thinking he was drowned; but Coyote crawled up, like a 
spider, and swam towards the island.^ 

Coyote got to the island first, and saw two wikiups with the smoke rising, 
and between them sat an old woman. Coyote spoke to her. She asked 
him to come inside and sit down. He went in. After Beachei island, 
a while the girl came in and talked to the old woman, entertained by 
who was her mother. She said, "I dropped Coyote in ^®°^'** 
the water." Her mother said, "Keep still; he is in there now." When the 
girl peeped in, she saw Coyote sitting there. She cooked duck eggs for him 
and set them just in front of him, touching his feet. As soon as she touched 
his feet, he immediately drew them back. He ate only a few eggs. He 
was eager for the night to come. 

Coyote looked around and noticed quivers hanging all over the lodge. 
This frightened him; he went outside, eased himself, and asked his anus 
for advice. He asked why those quivers were hanging j^^^ wami 
there. He had also noticed that the women, while pre- asainit toothed 
tending to swallow the food, let it slide down to the ^*«"^*' 
abdominal region, where he heard the eggs crack. His anus said, "You 
fool; whenever the girl and her mother get hold of a man, they kill and 
eat him. Earum vagina dentibus insita. Quod edimt dentibus vaginalibus 
mordent.^ Coire simula, sed aliquid aliud intrude. Take your elk horn 
scraper and break their teeth." 

In the evening, the old woman told the girl to lie down near Coyote. 
Before retiring, all three went outside. Minxerunt. 
When they came in, the old woman fastened the door ^ ^JSIkeZ'*'*"* 
with a rope so Coyote should not escape. Coyote was 
afraid. When he lay down, he wished the rats would come and gnaw up 
the rope. After a while, he heard the rats come and gnaw up the rope. 
Then he knew that he could run out if necessary, and raised the girl's 
blanket. Penem insertum esse simulavit, vere nihil inseruit. Rima clausa 
est, non eum vulneravit. Fugiens ad portam cucurrit. Vetula secuta; 
cuius quoque dentes non Canem, sed solam togam momorderunt. Canis 
effugiens dentium crepitum audiebat. 



1 Cf. the beginning of this myth with Kroeber, (f ) 97. 

2 The distribution of this motive is discussed by Lowie, 110. 



238 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

Coyote escaped. He jumped into the sea and swam across, splashing 
in the water. He had a hard time of it; but got out in the place where he 
Seturni with ^^^ ^^* '^^ down to rest. He had left his tools there, 
tools, lerred by He went to sleep again. When he woke up he put on 
women. paint, went to the shore, and killed a duck. Coyote re- 

turned to where the old woman was sitting, and threw the duck with some 
eggs over to her. The girl was not there; because she was on the water 
every day, looking for people to take home and kill. In the evening, she 
returned with some ducks. Coyote had entered the wikiup; but the old 
woman was still sitting outside. The girl told her mother she had not 
found Coyote anywhere. "Keep still," the old woman said, "he is in 
there." The girl looked in and saw Coyote, who looked handsome with 
his face painted. She fed him as before, setting duck eggs before him. 
When she touched his feet. Coyote quickly pulled them in. He only ate 
a few eggs, pushing the rest aside. The women ate in their usual way. 
Coyote could hear the egg-shells cracking in the vulva. 

In the evening, the old woman told her daughter to lie down beside 
Coyote. The girl lay down. Coyote went outside to get 
women with his tools, which he had not taken into the wikiup. He lay 
scraper; is sent down and embraced the girl. Tunc inrimam claudentem 
comu (elk horn scraper) inseruit. Omnes-dentes comu 
perrupit sustulitque. The girl cried out, "Something is wrong with my 
teeth." The old woman misunderstood what she said, and said to her, 
"Keep it there." Coyote now went over to the mother, and in the same 
way broke off all her teeth. Ad puellam rediit et cum ea assidue copulavit. 
Tunc demum cum matre coiit. Postridie mulieres se gravidas esse sen- 
serunt. They told Coyote to go outside and fetch water; but to get it from 
far away where they were in the habit of getting it. Coyote was afraid to 
go there, and fetched water from near-by instead. When he returned the 
old woman told him that he had not brought good water, and- sent him out 
again. He went for it once more. 

As soon as Coyote was gone, the babies fell in great numbers out of the 

women's wombs. The women took the water brought in by Coyote and 

washed the babies. They made all the tribes of Indians 
Birth of Indl- "^ 

ans; Shoshone in this way except the Shoshone, whom they left lying on 

separated from Q^e side. When Coyote came in, they said, "We have 
left these for you to wash." Coyote washed the Sho- 
shone babies and said to them; "You are my children. I am going to 
stay with you." If he had washed all the babies, there would have been 
nothing but Shoshone in the world; but the women washed the others. 
That is why the other tribes were always fighting the Shoshone. Coyote 
told his children to be brave and not be afraid of the other Indians. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 239 

(b) 

Coyote once came to an old woman and her daughter. He saw bows 
and arrows hanging in their lodge. The old woman warned him against 
the girl. She said her daughter was in the habit of killing and eating people 
who came there. Coyote considered what to do. In 
the evening the girl came in with ducks and their eggs, gj^^^** ^' *^^ 
Coyote went off. He found a kind of blue stone. Ex la- 
pide membrum virile finxit. He also plucked some thorns from a rose 
bush. Cum domum veniret vaginalium dentium crepitum audivit. He 
waited for the night to come. In the night Coyote lay down by the girl. 
Inserto membro quod fictum erat omnes dentes pemipit. Tum spinis 
vulvam vulneravit. Coyote married the girl and their children were the 
ancestors of the Shoshone. 

2. Wolf and Coyote. 

(a) 

In the beginning, Wolf wanted to make everything easy and pleasant 
for the Indians, Coyote tried to make them work hard as they must do 
to-day. Wolf had all the game shut up so that people 
could easily take what they wanted; Coyote released the 
game so that people had to go hunting. Wolf said, **The Indians shall not 
die." "Why should they not die?" asked Coyote, "they must die." An 
Indian was lying sick in his tent. The medicine-man was treating him, but 
he died. Coyote taught the Indians to cry and to cut their hair when any 
one died, and told them that the dead go to another world. 

Wolf said to Coyote, "Let there be no menstruation." Coyote thought 
it was proper that women should menstruate; so he took 
some blood and threw it at his daughter. She began g^nwiSon**' "****" 
to menstruate and went to a menstrual lodge. Lupus, 
"Homines oportet ex digito nasci sine coitu," inquit. Coyote disagreed. 
"Bonus est coitus, ex utero nasci oportet. Melli est coitus." To-day 
things are as Coyote wished them.^ 

ib) 
Wolf and his younger brother Coyote were living together. Every day 



1 Powell, (a), 44. 



240 Antkropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Wolf went to his aunt Bear for dinner. She prepared every kind of food 
Coyote aitauits ^^^ ^^"^' when he came home, he used to tell Coyote 
Bear, is wounded of the good things he had eaten. Coyote said he would 
^^ ^^' also visit his aunt in order to get something good to eat; 

but Wolf advised him not to go, because he was afraid Coyote would 
play some trick on their aunt. Coyote promised to behave well, but Wolf 
still kept on warning him. **When she sits down to cook,'' he said, "she 
always spreads her legs wide apart. Conspectis pudendis muliebribus tu 
certe coitum concupisces." Nevertheless Coyote went to the Bear's wikiup. 
When Bear began to cook, she spread out her legs. Conspectis pudendis 
Canis libidine accensus se continere non potuit. Prostrata muliere cum ea 
concumbere conatus est. Bear closed her arms about him and tore his 
loins. Coyote howled with pain. Bear got up and ran away. 

W^olf was waiting for Coyote to come home. When Coyote did not 
return, his brother went to look for him at Bear's wikiup. When he found 
out what had happened, he said, **Did n't I tell you to stay home?" He 

treated Coyote's wound, and cured him. Then he got 
venM kUls^ar ^^^ ^ passion, because Bear had hurt his brother. He 

went away and found his aunt gathering wild carrots. 
He killed her, went back and ordered Coyote to bring her home, but to 
leave all the inside of the Bear's body intact. Coyote skinned and butch- 
ered the Bear; but disobeyed his brother, cutting out the he'gwi (an uniden- 
tified part of the body). When he got home, Wolf noticed that something 
was missing and said, **You have cut out the most important part. Now 
Indians will often attack us. They will surround us while we sleep. 
You must look out for the hostile Indians." 

After some time had elapsed, Coyote beheld many Indians coming to 

surround their home. Coyote went out directly in front 
tacked by In- of them. They shot at him again and again, but could 
dians; Wolf only graze his skin and shoot off his hair. They failed to 

hurt him, though he was fighting all alone. In the mean- 
time, Wolf stayed indoors, dressing up and painting himself. When Coyote 
was exhausted, he went inside, and Wolf came out to fight. Coyote became 
jealous of his brother, because he was so handsomely dressed. He wished 
the enemy would kill Wolf. Immediately Wolf was shot and killed by the 
Indians. They scalped him and took away his dress. Coyote fled and the 
Indians went off. 

Coyote made many arrows; he tracked the enemy. When he came to 

his brother's body and saw the scalped head, he cried, 
the enemy^*^*" Then he buried the body, and went in pursuit of the 

Indians. He came to the site of a camp-fire, where they* 
had celebrated the scalp-dance. There he looked at the scalp-pole, and 



1909.] Loune, The Northern Shoshone. 241 

left a quiver on a tree. He wandered on until he reached another camp- 
ing-ground with a scalp-pole. Here he also left a quiver with arrows. 
From time to time, he wept as he journeyed along. He came to another 
camp-site, which had been abandoned only a short time ago, and again left 
a quiver there. Then he asked his anus, "When did they leave this 
place?" The anus replied, "Two days ago." At last Coyote got to a 
camp which had been broken only one day ago. 

As he walked on, he saw an old Indian woman hobbling along.^ Coyote 
quickly walked around so as to meet her from a different direction. In 
order to make himself irrecognizable, he put paint on both his cheeks. 
When the old woman saw him approaching her, she 
stopped to sit down. Coyote sat down beside her. The BouncU old 

old woman asked him where he had come from. He re- and doni im skin, 
plied, "Don't you see my paint? I came from a distant 
land in the East. I don't know at all what is going on here. Tell me 
what the people are doing." She replied, "The Indians have kiUed Coy- 
ote's older brother. They have taken away his scalp, and perform the 
scalp-dance every night." Coyote said, "Go on, tell me some more news." 
The old woman told him that she always walked in the rear on account 
of her age. As she approached the new camp, some girls were in the habit 
of running towards her and supporting her the rest of the way. She always 
took care of the children, putting them to sleep every evening. Whenever 
the people gave her food, she would eat a portion and stow the remainder 
away under her knee. When the time for dancing arrived, all the girls 
were put to bed together. Coyote said, "Continue, tell me some more." 
"They take Wolfs skin and hang it on a pole." Coyote said, "Tell me 
some more, tell me everything about these Indians." She told him that in 
the night she herself went to the dance-ground. Then the other dancers 
handed her the wolf-skin, she put it about her neck and danced with it. 
"That is all I have to do," said the woman. "Well," said Coyote, "walk 
on; you will reach your people some time. I am going back to my home." 

Coyote pretended to depart, while the old. woman slowly rose from her 
seat. Coyote, however, walked around her, picked up a stone and knocked 
her down with a blow on the back of her head. He kicked her about until 
her skin peeled off. Having shaken out her entrails, he put on the woman's 
skin. When he looked at his shadow, he saw that he exactly resembled 
the old woman in appearance. He imitated her walk, 
hobbling and supporting himself on a staff. He came to flaw^*** 
the summit of a hill, whence he beheld a wikiup. He 
was now walking just like the old woman and, like her, sat down for a 

1 Cf. the following incidents with Cuahing, 461-463; 8pinden, 21; Sclioolcraft, (b) 40-41; 
Curtin. 318, 359; Boas, (c) 138. 



242 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

rest at short intervak. He used both hands to grasp his stick. As he 
approached the camp, the girls ran up to him. He sat down to tell them 
of the strange Indian from the East who had met him and had returned to 
. his people. The girls took Coyote home, supporting him on both sides. 
He saw his brother's skin hanging on a pole, and began to cry; but they 
could not see hb tears because they were rolling down beneath the old 
woman's skin. When they gave him food, he acted as the old woman had 
told him, eating some and putting the rest under his knee. At sunset, the 
Indians were going to dance. The girls looked into his eyes and noticed 
their strange appearance. They said, "How queer her eyes look I They 
look like Coyote's." Coyote said, "You must not speak like that, girls. 
Don't mention Coyote." All the people went to the dance, leaving the 
children with Coyote. While the dance commenced outside. Coyote put 
the girls to bed. Cum earum pudendis quasi copulare vellet ludere incipie- 
bat. The girls said, "She is acting just like Coyote." Coyote said, "Don't 
speak like that girls. Don't mention Coyote." 

Towards evening, the people came to ask the old woman to dance. 
Coyote began to dance very stiffly. Unseen he shed tears 
Seoiiref Wolf's under the woman's skin. Towards morning his brother's 
escapes. ' skin was tossed to him. He put it around his neck and 

began to dance up and down. Suddenly he jumped up, 
dropped the woman's skin and ran away. The Indians gave chase, and 
shot at him repeatedly, but could not hurt him. They shot his hair off. 
As he came to their former camp-sites, he took down the quivers and shot 
his arrows back at them. He used up all his arrows. When they had 
nearly overtaken him, he suddenly disappeared in a cavity in the ground. 
They looked everywhere. "He came this way, he must be somewhere." 
They could detect nothing but a heap of old Coyote excrements. They 
talked to each other about the dung-heap, and finally said, "That must 
be he." When they began shooting again. Coyote rose and ran away. 
He got very tired. When he came to another cavity, he again transformed 
himself into old Coyote excrements. When they came up to the place, they 
looked around and saw nothing. Again they had a council and decided he 
must be in the excrements. As soon as they began shooting, he got up and 
ran away. Finally he got to a body of water and wished he would change 
into a water-spider. He immediately turned into one, and swam across. 
The pursuers got to the edge of the water, but could not see anything. 
They were obliged to give up the chase and return home. 

Coyote walked on eastward, carrying his brother's scalp. He put it on 

a rock facing the east. Then he went to where Wolf's 

body lay buried, and went to sleep crying. Suddenly Wolf 

returned to Ufe. Coyote heard him howling on the other side of the hills. 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone. 243 

"Why did you wake me up? I was dreaming." Coyote went to the 
rock, brought |^aok Wolfs skin and covered his brother's body with it. 
He put him together again. Wolf was restored by Coyote. 

(c) 

Coyote and Wolf were going to war. The hostile Indians (Andavits) 
were surrounding them. Wolf cautioned his brother not to peep out of 
their grass-lodge. "If you hear any noise outside, it will 
mean that I am fighting the enemy." Coyote covered mju^ng. * ^ 
his face. The enemy were jumping about, touching the 
lodge. He heard his brother fighting. Wolf had just shot off all his arrows, 
and was defending himself with his bow. The enemy were jumping against 
the lodge again. Then Coyote looked outside. The very moment he 
peeped out, Wolf was slain. 

Coyote fell down, crying, ''The enemy have slain my older brother." 
Then he fled, crying as he ran along. After a while, he returned to track 
the enemy. He stopped wherever they had left a camp- 
fire. Blowing on the ashes, he secured fire for himself. -^oU's^scaip!**^*'* 
The next day he caught up with an old squaw. He asked 
her what she was doing there. She told him she was walking behind her 
people on account of her old age. She showed him how she walked along. 
Then Coyote killed her with a rock, skinned her and put the skin on his own 
body. He imitated her gait and walked on until he arrived at the enemy's 
camp. They were ha\ing a scalp-dance around a pole with Wolfs scalp. 
Coyote played the part of the old woman. When he got close to the dancers, 
the Indians tossed the scalp at him. He seized it and began to dance like 
the other old women. When he received it the second time, he ran away 
with it as fast as he could. Then they recognized him. They pursued 
Coyote, but soon saw that they could not catch him. 

Coyote walked home crying. When he arrived at the lodge, he placed 
the scalp where his brother generally lay down to rest. He fell asleep. At 

first, he built a fire every morning; later he became so lazy 
11 1 M 11 TT . 11 1 Wolf revives, 

that he never built one at all. lie was contmually lament- 
ing his brother's death. One morning his brother Wolf shouted at him, 
"Get up, Coyote! Make a fire." Coyote jumped up immediately, and 
built a fire. He blew on the flames and looked at his brother stealthily. 
Wolf was alive again. 



244 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

3. The Theft of Fire. 

One winter evening, Coyote went outside to defecate. He looked down 

as he was squattini? there, and noticed a fire below. He 
Co]rot6 dlfoov- .... 

ers Are, anuf thought he saw it right in his anus and jumped up. Then 

oounieif fteai- jj^ g^w that it was way down the mountain. He asked his 
Ing It. *^ 

anus, **WTiat's that fire for?'* It answered, '*You are 

crazy. Some other Indians own it. Crane is their chief. Go and get their 
fire for yourself.'* Coyote did not tell any one that night, but went to 
sleep. 

In the morning Coyote painted all his body. Then he talked to the 
Indians. He said, "I saw something last night. I saw fire from the moun- 
tain. Shall we go and get the fire?" All the Indians debated whether 
they should go or not. The Mice, the Rats and all the 
Crane^f trii)e * other men went along. The women stayed at home. Coy- 
ote defecated. His excrements told him to have a feast 
with the Crane people. "Eat with them and enjoy yourselves." They went 
over the mountains. As they walked along, they saw the fire. This was the 
first time they had ever seen fire. The other Indians talked aboui Coyote, 
while he was not listening. "Let hhn go by himself, when we get there," 
they said. "Don't go with him, or they'll give us excrements to eat." So 
when they got to the Crane's people, all went to different tents; while Coyote 
went to an old woman's tent. 

When all had arrived. Crane addressed his people. He told them to 
receive their visitors hospitably. All began to cook. The old woman 
stirred excrements with the food she was preparing for 
of^rttors*"***"** Coyote. Coyote ate and said, "This tastes sweet; this 
tastes well." At night all got ready for a feast. The Sho- 
shone were playing the hand-game. They said they would leave the offals 
of their feast for Coyote. As they were gambling, Coyote approached. 
He looked at the offals. "Well, uncle," they said, "we have eaten. Go 
ahead; eat what we have left for you." He ate, saying, "It tastes well. 
I like it." In the night. Coyote went out at short inter\'als, saying, "lam 
looking for girls." A pud puellas ambulabat, earumque pudenda scruta- 
batur. Comas non invenit. Ad castra rediit. Cantavit "Absunt comae." 
The people told him to go around again. This time he stayed away a long 
time. Multas comas invenit. Rediit, canta\dt "Multae sunt comae." 

The Shoshone were still gambling. Crane's people were performing 

the nu'akin dance. Crane told the Shoshone they could 

inc^tt(»if 1^^" S^ ^^ ^i^joyiJ^g themselves at gambling; later they might 

come and see the dance. Coyote joined in the nu'akin, 

wearing a head-dress that reached the ground. The old squaws said to 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 246 

him, "You are not watching your head-dress; you are dragging it along the 
ground and singeing its edge at the fire." But Coyote only did this when 
the women were watching him. When they did not see him, he pulled ofiE 
the fire. Towards dawn he summoned a council of his people. "As soon 
as we can get their fire and their food," he said, "we shall all run away." 
Crane's people kept all their food in a large bag high up on a tree. Crane 
kept the fire in his own lodge. There was another dance that night. While 
it was going on. Coyote went about, and his head-dress caught fire. He 
took the fire, hid it under his blanket, and sneaked out. 

The Indians told Jack-rabbit to play his flute outside of all the enemies* 
wikiups, so their hosts would fall asleep. Jack-rabbit went crane's pine- 

around and played. Everybody listened, and fell asleep. nuti captured; 
While they were all sleeping, the Shoshone attempted to ^«^*' 
steal the food. Again and again Coyote tried to jump up the tree, but 
could not reacfi the bag. All his followers tried in vain. At last they asked 
the woodpeckers to put their bills together. Thus they reached up. The 
bills pierced the bag, and the food fell out through the hole. It was pine- 
nut food. The Indians ate; then they ran away with the pine-nuts and 
the fire. 

In the morning, Crane's people got up. They tried to start a fire. They 
could not get it to bum. They looked for the food-sack, 
and there was nothing in it. "Where are those Indian th«(f^*pm?uit. 
visitors ? " they asked. " They are all gone." Crane looked 
around. "Let us pursue those Indians," he said, "and get back our food 
and our fire." They started out in pursuit of the Shoshone. They kept 
going till they saw the fugitives. 

Coyote was in his war-dress now. The enemy shot at him, but missed 
every time. He was the last in Une, keeping directly in 
front of the enemy. They continued shooting at him; j^j^J^** ^***' ** 
they shot all his hair off, but could not hurt him. He ran 
to and fro. At last he got tired, he was exhausted. He did not know what 
to do. When he came to an old track, he hid in it. They looked for him, 
but could not see him. "Where did he go to?" they asked. At last they 
saw the track. "That must be he." They threw a rock at him, and he ran 
away. They continued shooting at him. He began to fall behind. He got 
to where there was a pile of old excrements, and hid there. The enemy 
came up and did not see him. At last they said, "That must be he," and 
aimed at him. He ran once more. When Coyote was completely ex- 
hausted, he gave the food and the fire to the men in front of him. The 
enemy then overtook Coyote, and killed him. They skinned him. They 
looked all over his body. They could not find the stolen property, so they 
went on. 



246 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

Crane's people killed the Indians one by one. The Indians passed the 
indlant killed ^^^^ ^^^ ^^ along the line. Jack-rabbit jumped aside 
H'^'f loc escapes from the road and hid in a hole. There were then only 
^* "" ' two Indians left, Hai (a black bird), and Rock-squirrel. 

Hai was carrying the food, and Rock-squirrel the fire. The enemy nearly 
caught Hai. The bird wished his leg would rot. His leg rotted, and he 
put the food into it. Then he fell down, exhausted. Crane said, "You 
are a great chief," and kicked him. Hai screeched, and his leg flew ofif; 
but Crane and his followers did not notice it. The leg ran away by itself. 
Crane searched Hai and cut him up, but could not find the food or the 
fire on his body. At last, they looked down and noticed that one of his 
legs was gone. They looked for the missing leg. Someone had seen it 
fly away. They discovered its track and followed it. Hai wished it would 
rain and snow behind him. The rain and snow fell, and effaced his track. 
At last they saw his footsteps again going up a mountain. They had a 
council. "There is no use pursuing him," they said, "he is too far. Let 
us go after Rock-squirrel, who has the fire." Hal's leg went westward, 
scattering all the pine-nuts on the way; that is why the people living there 
have pine-nuts now. 

The next day Crane pursued Rock-squirrel. Rock-squirrel hid the fire 

by his breast; that is why he has a spot there, as if he 
Bock-squlrrel . . 

escapes with Are. had been burnt. They got close to him, nearly catching 

Pursuit aban- ^ini several times. He got on a steep cUff and jumped 

down, throwing the fires ticks all over the mountains. He 

said to the fire, "Everybody is going to use you. Go and bum every\^'here." 

This is how all the Indians got fire. Crane came to the cliff. He was 

fatigued. He saw the fire burning everywhere. So he said, " I '11 give up 

the chase and go to the river." His son, Chickadee, said, "I shall go too." 

Crane turned into the bird he is now, and went to the river, where he 

belonged. 

Now Jack-rabbit came out of the hole he had hidden in, and hit Coyote 

Indians re- ^"^^^ ^^^ whistle. Coyote woke up. "Why did you wake 

stored by Jack- me up?" he asked. "I was dreaming." Jack-rabbit hit 

'* ** every one of the Indians with his whistle. All thus came 

back to life. 

4. The Theft of Pine-nuts. 

A long time ago the other Indians were gathering to play the hand-game. 

Indians steal They played two nights in succession. They had their 

nuts and flee. pine-nut food suspended from the top of a pole. The 

Rats tried to climb up to get it, but fell down. At last the Woodpecker and 



1909.] Lowiej The Northern Shoshone. 247 

his brother made an efifort. Woodpecker's brother stretched his bill and 
made a hole in the bag containing the food. The pine-nuts fell down and 
the Rats ate some of them. They liked them better than any other kind of 
food, so they fled with the stolen nuts. 

The gamblers ceased playing. An old woman was about to cook some 
nuts. They had disappeared. The other Indians saw Discovery of 

that some one had stolen their food. When their chief, ***•**• councu. 
Crane, found out about the theft, he marked his legs as they are now. 
Then he summoned a council and started in pursuit of the thieves. 

On the way. Coyote stopped fleeing ut cum rana muliebri coiret. Ilium 

in muUerem incumbentem Grus calcibus interfecit. Crane's people also 

killed Magpie and all the rest of Coyote's people, except Hai. For a long 

time, they could not catch him. Then he got tired and 

, , Unsuooetstul 

could not run any further. He wished his leg would rot. pursuit. bJH 

It rotted and he put the nuts into it. The Crane's people •^^^ »"*• 'or 
caught up and kicked him. They kicked his rotten leg, 
so that it flew away. They killed Hai. Then Crane sat down. "Search 
his body for the nuts," he said. His followers looked all over Hal's body, 
but found no trace of the food. Then Crane said he had seen one leg fly 
away somewhere. They looked for the leg, but it was gone. It got to 
Coyote's Indians in the west, so all of them have pine-nuts now. The nuts 
used to grow here, but now they are among the Dttbadi^ka (Eaters of pine- 
nuts). 

Hai got up again and went to an island with treeless mountains, where 
Crow joined him. 

5. The Flood.^ 

Coyote saw some wild-geese flying and begged them for some feathers. 
They flew down and gave him some. Then he was able to join them. 
When they got to the summit of a high mountain, they saw that the water 
below was moving a little. ITiey had a council there, debating whether they 
should wash the whole world. They decided to do so, and 
raised the water until it filled all the low parts of the earth. diuinr*flo*od*^ 
Everyone except Coyote and his companions was drowned. 
Someone shut off the water; no one knows who. When everything was dry- 
ing up again, the survivors took sticks and placed them on the slopes of the 
mountains. That is why we have trees on the mountains now. They 
made little creeks and lakes. Then they also created the fish and all the 
other animals for the Indians. 

1 Cf. Kroeber, (f) 96. 



248 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

6. Coyote and his Daughters.^ 

Coyote was living with his family. The women were celebrating a 
Coyote prepares scalp-dance, and his daughters were taking part in it. 
for war. LUe- Coyote was watching them. He blew the air towards 
*^^"' them. Ita fecit ut vestibus ablatis pudenda muUebra 

vidisset. Formosis pudendis amore inflammatus coitum concupivit. Coy- 
ote began to make arrows. When he had finished them, he hung them 
up in his lodge. He told his wife he intended to go on a war expedition 
as soon as he was ready. "If anything happens to me," he said, '*I will 
make a fire and you will be able to see the smoke." 

Coyote started out. When he was at some distance from the dwelling, 

he shot an arrow into the air, which hit him in the side. He built a big 

Woundi him- fire. His family saw the smoke and knew that something 

■elf, ftgnali for ^^g wrong. The old woman sent the older daughter to 
aid, assaults ® 

daughter, is see what was the matter; but Coyote's son went there 

dropped by her. £rst. When the boy came up to him, Coyote was crawling 

on the ground, pretending to be very sick. The boy noticed the arrow 

and attempted to pull it out; but Coyote told him to let it go, because it 

hurt him badly. He asked his son to call his sisters. The boy returned 

and requested the older girl to go to her father. When she came up, Coyote 

told her that someone had shot him. He dropped to the ground, and 

groaned as if he were dying. He said it was impossible for him to walk, 

and asked the girl to carry him home. She took her father on her back. 

He asked her to pull up her dress to prevent the blood from trickling down 

and soiling the robe. Tunc demum membrum in vaginam iaseruit. The 

girl threw him off, and ran away. Coyote told her to go home and bid his 

younger daughter come to him. 

The girl got home, and told her sister. The second daughter came. 
Iterum vestibus altius cinctis cum filia coire conatus est. She dropped 
Assaults second ^^^ ^^^ went home. He ordered her to send his wife to 
daughter; carried him. At last the old woman came. She took him on her 
home by wife. back. Coire incepit cum uxore. His wife did not mind 
him; but went along until they reached home, where she put him down. 

Coyote pretended he was getting sicker and sicker. He told his family 
he did not expect to live much longer. **Put a stick under me," he said. 
" WTien I die, the stick will break in two. Do not bury me in the ground, 
but cover me up and burn my remains. Don't look back going home, or a 

1 Cf. Dixon, (c) 270. Dorsey and Kroeber, 82. Kroeber, (a) 269; (e) 73. Matthews, 271. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 249 

ghost will pursue you. If you are in need of food, go to the rocks and look 

for rock-squirrels. After my death a visitor will come to 

. . Feigns (toatli, 

you. He will bring you some presents, but don't treat giyat dyinc in- 

him well. Let him depart. Then another \isitor from •toucttons. u 

, burled. 

the south will arrive, bringing a great many rock-squirrels. 

Talk to him, and treat him well. Let him marry our two daughters. I 

shall die within two days." Coyote tried the stick on each day; on the 

third day he broke it and dropped dead. His wife and children began to 

cry; but as Coyote had asked them not to mourn too long, they wrapped up 

the corpse, removed it from the lodge and started a fire. Then they went 

homewards. The boy put his arm akimbo and looked back through the 

opening between his arm and his body. He saw his father g^t up and run 

away with the funeral gifts. He informed his mother; but she rebuked 

him, asking him not to look back again, or a ghost might pursue them. 

The next day they looked for squirrels among the rocks. In the evening 
the first visitor announced by Coyote came with a dog and Eetumi in dli- 
several baskets. The old woman told him about Coyote's cune, marrtot 
orders and did not treat him well. She refused to let him ^^^^^' 
marry the girls. He stayed overnight, but left in the morning. Then the 
man from the South arrived, bringing a great many rock-squirrels, which 
he threw on the ground before the old woman. She cleaned them and threw 
them on the fire to bum off the hair. Coyote laughed, "Yo ho," quite 
differently from his usual way of laughing. **The taik look burnt," said 
he. In the evening, the woman ordered her daughters to he beside the 
stranger. **This is the man your father spoke about." Thus Coyote 
married the two girls. Noctu cum eis assidue coibat. Mane filiarum vestes 
semine humidae lavandae erant. The women dried them outside. 

Coyote offered to show the boy where he had hunted those rock-squirrek. 
As they were going along, the boy said he could not find 
his former hunting ground any more. For a moment ^^j^ ton^"**^* 
Coyote forgot himself and said, '*I know where it is;" but 
he quickly added, **No, I don't know where it is." Omnibus noctibus 
Coyote assidue coibat cum mulieribus. One night the old woman heard a 
strange noise which sounded like a drum. She sent her son to find out 
what was the matter. Puer Canem conspexit membro inserto, dum cauda 
terram violentor percutiebat. 

One. day Coyote and his supposed brother-in-law were hunting for 

rock- squirrels. Coyote bade the boy go on the other side 

.. , 1 1 1 1 • • 1 • 1 T 1 Eecocniaed by 

of the rock and poke his stick into the crevices. In the ton, unmasked 

meantime, Coyote on his side was opening his mouth wide ^^ daughters; 

for the rock squirrels to jump in. The boy was peeping 

at him, however, and noticed four holes in his teeth, by which he recognized 



250 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

his father. The boy was badly frightened, dropped his stick, and ran home 
crying. Coyote tried to lure him back. He hit the ground, shouting, **I 
have caught the thing that scared you away." The boy, however, did not 
listen to him; but ran home crying. He scolded his sisters, who were just 
drying their skirts, for having married Coyote. The old woman asked him 
why he was chiding them. He answered, "Their husband is our father." 
Then the mother told her daughters to look for a wart on their husband's 
head. If they found one there, it was surely Coyote. In the evening, 
Coyote came home. Both his hands were filled with rock-squirrels. When 
he sat down, the two women began playing with his head and pulled off his 
false hair. Coyote dropped all his disguise, and fled. 

After some time, a young man named Duck visited the Coyote family 
and married the two girls. They all bt^gan to wander about. One of the 

Olrlt married women gave birth to a girl. After a long time, Coyote 
to Duck. Coyote came hobbling along on crutches. Seeing the Uttle girl, 
sranddauchter he asked, *'Is that my granddaughter? Let me kiss 
*^' her." He played with the little girl, making her dance up 

and down. Ceteris inscientibus membrum virile in puellae vaginam in- 
seruit. Quo facto, rupta mentula, dimidium in vagina remanebit. The 
baby began to cry; she continued crying. Nobody knew why. Duck, 
who had been out hunting since early in the morning, returned. "What 
is ailing the girl?" he asked. No one could tell him. "From the time 
Coyote has played with her, she has been crying continually." She kept on 
crying during the night. 

Duck went to Hummingbird, who was a medicine-man, and begged 
him to cure the child. Hummingbird ordered the fire to be put out and all 

OhUd cured. the holes in the wikiup to be covered up. This was the 

Coyote stunned custom of medicine-men. When everythinx? was closed 

by doctor. Fun- ® 

lly transferred to up, those present could hear Hummingbird moving about 

■^- and making a noise. He was saying, "It must have 

been one of Coyote's tricks." Coyote said, "The medicine-men always 
blame me for ever^lhing." He rushed towards the ashes, and rekindled 
the fire. Hummingbird immediately flew away. The Duck family ex- 
tinguished the fire; then Hummingbird came in again. He flew towards 
the baby and began to suck. Canis membrum extraxit. He struck Coyote 
with it, knocking him down and stunning him. It fell into the fire and was 
burnt up. Then Duck, the two young women, Coyote's wife and son, and 
the baby all flew up to the sky, where they form a const(*llation now. 

The next morning. Coyote woke up. He did not see any one around. 

Coyote wakes, " Some one has left something in the fire to burn," he said. 

unable to leap up. n^ got a stick and began to rake the ashes. He found a 

half-cooked deer's head, and ate it up. He was all alone. After a while, 



1909.] Lotvie, The Northern Shoshone. 251 

he looked up and saw all his relatives in the heavens. He tried to jump 
up there too, but could not reach them. He tried again and again, but 
failed every time. 

7. Iron-Man (Wi'mN-DAiBo). 

(a) 

Iron-Man, the father of the white people, lived on the water; Wolf, the 
father of the Indians, Uved underground. Wolf asked his 
son to visit his friend Wi'hindaf bo. The young man trav- lenMWoU ^ 
eled across the water until he reached Iron-Man's house. 
Iron-Man shook hands with the youth and invited his father to visit him. 
"We shall see which one of us can beat the other in making guns." Wolfs 
son told his father of Iron-Man's invitation. Wolf got ready to go. Iron- 
Man locked up his house and sat down inside. 

The next morning Wolf started out. Wi'hindai^bo's house was in the 
middle of the sea. When Wolf came nearer, the house 
began to shake. Wolf entered it with a breath of air. gnioWM^contei? 
Iron-Man saw him. "You have arrived at your friend's 
dwelling," he said. Wi'hindai^bo was trailing his long pipe along the floor. 
He cut his tobacco, filled his pipe and began to smoke. He handed the 
pipe to Wolf, who smoked up all of the tobacco. Then the Father of the 
Indians took his little pipe from a quiver. Clouds of smoke rose. He 
handed the pipe to Wi'hindai^bo. Wi'hindai^bo could not smoke it all up. 
He filled the house with smoke until he was completely stupefied by it.^ 
Wolf's son told his father that Iron-Man was nearly dead. Then Wolf 
dispelled the smoke and made Iron-Man well again. 

They sat down for a while. Then Wi'hindai^bo brought a large iron 
ball, of which he gave half to his friend. "We are now Defeated in 

going to make guns," he said. Both made guns as quickly gun-makinc 

as possible, putting them up as soon as they were com- °^* ^ ' 

pleted. Wolf made more guns in the same time than Wi'hindai^bo. The 
Father of the Indians won. 



» In another version, Iron-Man vomits and dies from smoking too much. 



252 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

Coyote went to visit Wi'hindai^bo who lived in the middle of the big sea. 

He was sent there by his brother. When Coyote ap- 
Coyote defeats .... . . 

host In imokinc proached his dweUing, Wi'hindai^bo locked himself in and 

match, leti him gat down. Coyote, nevertheless, was able to enter. Iron- 
freeae. . . . 

Man had a large iron pipe, which he filled with tobacco. 

He smoked, then he handed the pipe to Coyote. Coyote just puffed once, 
and all the tobacco was consumed. Then Iron-Man filled the pipe a sec- 
ond time for his \isitor. With one whiff, Coyote smoked up all the tobacco. 
Then Coyote took out his own Uttle pipe^ and filled it with kinikkdnik. 
He handed it to Wi'hindai^bo, who fainted from smoking it. Coyote wished 
that the doors, which Wi'hindai^bo had shut, be blown away by the wind. 
The wind blew so hard that Wi'hindai^bo's house was beginning to totter. 
Wi'hindai^bo was trembhng with fear. He was freezing. Coyote left him 
and lay down in the sunshine. Coyote asked Nii'neyunc for one of its 
wings and flew home. 

While Coyote was in Iron-Man's house, his host asked him whether 

Tranipoiet the he could take down the sun. To show his power, Coyote 

■^"*' took it down. Then Wi'hindai^bo could not see at all and 

got hurt stumbling against the objects in his dwelling. Coyote put the 

.<?un back in its place. 

8. The Sun. 

(a) 

Long ago the Sun was so near to the earth that it burnt people to death. 

Sun shot by AH the Indians said to Cottontail (rabbit): "The sun is 
OottontaU. ^qq hot. Get into a hole and shoot it from there." In 

the evening, Cottontail hid in a hole, and stayed there until sunrise. When 
the Sun came up in the morning, Cottontail shot his arrows at it; but they 
were all burnt up. Some one told him to use his fire-drill instead of an 
arrow. He took the drill and shot it at the Sun. He knocked the Sun down 
into his hole. This is how Cottontail's neck and legs were burnt ^-ellow. 
The Sun was dead. The people cut open its chest and took out its 

Baited to pres- ^^'^" ^^^^^ ^^^7 debated who should make the Sun go up. 
ent height by ** Perhaps the IIorned-Toad (?) can make it go up vdih his 
Horned-toad. ^^^^ horns," they said. The Horned-Toad took the Sun 

and raised it on his horns to where it is now. 

1 According to another version, a "small straight-pipe." 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shothone. 253 

(b) 

The Sun was burning people to death. One day Jack-rabbit shot at 
the Sun. He shot off all his arrows in vain; at last he got gun shot bj 

his fire-drill and hit the Sun with it. It fell down and J»ck-r»bblt. 
scorched him yellow where he is spotted to-day. He made the Sun over 
again out of its gall, and also made the Moon. Then he told the Sun; **Be 
this way hereafter and don't bum people." He told the Moon to shine only 
a Uttle. Then both went up to where they are now.^ 

9. The Bear and the Deer.^ 



The Bears and the Deer were neighbors. One day the old Bear and 
the old Deer went to dig roots, while their children re- 

killed by Bear. 



mained at home. The women sat down to louse each ®" "* 



other. "Let me louse you in the back of your neck," said 
Bear. She began lousing and wrung Deer's neck. Then she returned 
home, bringing the Deer's flesh with her. "Our mother is returning," said 
one of the cubs, she is bringing us meat and fat." "Keep still," said the 
older one, "don't show it to the Deer." They ate up the Deer's flesh; then 
they said to the fawns, "This is your mother's fat." When the young Deer 
saw what had happened, they cried. The old Bear went to them and said, 
"Don't cry; your mother has found many roots. She has gone to sleep 
and will come back again. I am going to her now." She went away to get 
some more meat. 

The fawns wished to avenge their mother's death. They asked the 
cubs to play with them. "Let two of us go into the 
sweat-lodge and get smoked," they said. The cubs agreed. cui^T^' ***^* 
Then the deer went in first. When there was too much 
smoke, they cried, "Let us get out," and the bears allowed them to go out. 
"Now you two go inside." WTien the cubs were inside, the deer fanned 
the smoke in. After a while, the bears asked to be let out; but, instead the 
fawns stopped up every little hole as quickly as possible. The cubs suffo- 
cated. The Deer painted the cubs' faces red, and placed the corpses at the 
entrance to Bear's wikiup. When the Bear came home, she saw her chil- 
dren peeping out at her and noticed their appearance. "You are wasting 
my red paint," she said. When she saw what had happened, she ran 
around in a passion of grief. "Who has killed them? Who has killed my 
children?" 



^ Cf. Powell, (a) 52 et acq. 

> Gatschet, 118. Dixon, (b) 79. Kroeber, (c) 203. My version was obtained at Inkora, 
Idaho. 



254 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

The fawns said to each other, "How could we kill the cubs?" They 

ran awav. After a while, the youmrer one got tired. 

Pursued by * . » j *& & 

bear, crofs itreazn When he was quite exhausted, they took refuge in a pine- 
over grandlath- trunk, sleeping in the hollow of the tree. The old Bear 
had tracked them and came up to their resting-place. The 
older fawn saw her coming, and woke up his brother. "Here is the one 
who wishes to eat us up. She has overtaken us. Come, wake up, younger 
brother." The Bear did not wish to eat them in the dark. "At daybreak," 
she said to herself, "I shall make a good feast of them." She was tired and 
went to sleep. She slept soundly. The two young ones got out of the tree, 
jumped over her and ran away. They arrived at the bank of the Salmon 
River. Their maternal grandfather was sitting there with his legs stretched 
out. "Hoi Take us across, Blue-Bald-Head" (a bird^). He allowed them 
to pass over his legs to the other side of the stream. They ran to their 
grandfather's lodge; then they ran around the mountains. The old man 
transformed them into deer. 

The Bear was going to have a feast, she thought. She tracked the 

Bear foUowt children. She came to the river and asked Blue-Bald- 
it thrown Into Head to let her cross. He stretched out his legs and the 
^* • old woman went across. When she got to his knee, she 

bent down to drink. She hit his knee with her cup. He pulled up his legs 
and the Bear fell into the water. She did not pursue the deer any more. 
She floated for a month; then she came out where her cubs had been killed. 
She looked at her body; all the hair had come off. 



10. The Weasels and the Giants. 

Weasel and his brother were li\'ing together. They used to go out hunt- 
ing in the morning and return in the evening. Once a Dzo'avits caught 
Weasel moumi Weasel's brother and devoured him. Weasel mourned 
brother's death; his death. He was crying all night. His wife said, " Keep 
inttructi wife. ^^jjj^ ^,^^^ brother will come back." Weasel went out to 
look for his brother. He went to Dzo'avits' house; he saw his brother's 
body hanging cut up in the tent. He went home and told his wife. Then 
he said to her, "I am going to hunt now. Don't let our boy cry too much; 
feed him when he cries. If Dzo'avits comes to see you, don't tell him 
an}i:hing. Don't take any food from him. Si cenare \'ult, camem cum 
excrenu^ntis misce; cum a({ua oportet urinam miscere." He also left his 
obsidian knife at home. "You must send Dzo'avits out for some wood. 
In the meantime I will get on top of the house.' ^ 

» Crane (?). 



1909.] Lotme, The Northern Shoshone, 255 

Weasel left. After a while Dzo'avits approached the Weasel's lodge. 
He dropped his bag, which was made of sagebrush bark, 
outside. It contained the dead Weasel's fle^h. The giant ^f^*^*' '^•**" 
entered the lodge, sat down and fell asleep. Weasel's child 
began to cry. Dzo'avits woke up and asked, **\Miat is my grandchild cry- 
ing for ? Let me have your cup, I will give him some food." The Weasel 
woman answered, "No, there is nothing the matter with him, he always 
cries like that." 

It began to rain when Weasel returned. He spoke to the giant as if he 
were a friend. The woman said to her boy, "Move out of the way; I must 
take off your father's moccasins." Then she addressed the 
giant. " Grandfather, go out and g<^i some fire- wood for us. ^o'dT"* '^' ^*"" 
We '11 cook some jack-rabbits for you ." Dzo'avits went out 
to look for fire-wood. When he got to the wood, all the sage-brushes cried 
out together, "Get me, /'U make a good fire." The giant ran to and fro, 
not knowing which to take.^ He stayed out a very long time. In the mean- 
time. Weasel sat down on the top of the wikiup. He was waiting for the 
giant to come back. At last Dzo'avits returned with some wood. He told 
the woman how each of the sage-brush trees had asked him to take it. The 
woman said "These brushes always act in this way." 

Weasel's wife set a jack-rabbit before the giant. Caro verum cum 
excrementis mixta, aqua cum urina. Dzo'avits cut up the jack-rabbit and 
said, " That must be a different kind of game." The young 
boy began crying. "Let me give my grandson something dinner, 
to eat," said Dz5'avits. "No," said the mother, "he is not 
hungry; he always cries this way." While the Dzo'avits was sitting there. 
Weasel, who was seated on the roof, seized his hair, and began to pull him 
up. The giant asked the woman what was the matter. She told him such 
things always happened in her lodge. She went outside and carried in the 
wood fetched by Dzo'avits. Then she built a big fire. When the fire was 
built. Weasel lifted the giant directly above it, ita ut testes combusti essent. 
Weasel told his wife to get the obsidian knife. Caput testesque excisi et 
ejecti. 

Testium ejectorum crepitus a gigantis fratribus auditus. The giant had 
told his brothers that, if he caught some game, he would signal to them by 
making a noise. When they heard the sound, they said to each other, 
"Our brother has killed some game." The Weasels cut FUght and 

up Dzo'avits' body into small pieces, which they hung on leparatlon of 
a tree. They buried his head in the ground. Then Weasel couple. 
Weasel said to his wife, "You may go to your family or wherever else you 



1 Cf. Dorspy, (b) 32. 



256 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

wish to go. I am going to run around the mountains and turn into a weasel." 

He left. His wife had a ma^cal cane by means of which she was able to 

vault very far. She made two steps and arrived at her uncle's lodge. 

The giants resolved to visit their brother and join him in feasting on his 

game. Two of them were miracle-workers, who always 

Dioavltt ; Won- managed to get ahead of the rest . They were called Wa'han 

der-workers out- Da'dapekono.^ In order to prevent this pair from getting 

•trip ooinpuiloxis. jr ^ c? o 

to the game before the rest, their brethren hid one of each 

of the Da'dapekono's moccasins. The miracle- workers looked for their 
moccasins, but failed to find them. They hopped along on one moccasin 
behind their brethren. At length they caught up to one of the giants, who 
was trying to lure a ground-hog out of a hole. **You two are miracle- 
workers," he said, "I wish you would get that ground-hog out for me." 
The Da'dapekono knew exactly where the ground-hog was, but they feigned 
they did not. They just dug up dirt. The giant said, " You two are miracle- 
workers. You'll be able to get it out somehow." After he had left, the 
two wizards got the ground-hog out, killed it, ate its flesh and made moc- 
casins of its skin. Then they ran after the other giants and soon outdis- 
tanced them. 

The Da'dapekono arrived at the tree on which Dzo'avits' flesh was 

hanging. Testes conspectos assidue devoraverunt. Hi 

Dsoavitt' ftoth, semper omnium animalium testes edebant, quare Xo'yo- 

dlMover brother's djka Testium Editores, appellati sunt. When they were 
defttht mourn. i 

through eating, they began a wresding-match. In the mean- 
time, the other giants came up. They noticed their brother's flesh and said, 
"Our brother has killed a great deal of game; perhaps he is looking for 
some more now." All of them began to feast, except the two No'yodika, 
who continued wrestling. "Why don't you stop wrestling and eat?" the 
other giants asked them. Suddenly the wrestlers ceased. They had kicked 
up the earth covering the dead Dzo'avits' head, and decided to hurl it at 
the feasting giants. These noticed the surprise of the miracle- workers, and 
shouted at them; **What is the matter? Quidnam videtis? Matris vagi- 
nam ?" Then they threw Dzo'avits* head among the crowd. The ^ants 
recognized it immediately, and stopped eating. They saw that they had 
eaten their own brother's flesh and vomited what they had swallowed. 
** Someone has killed our brother," they said to one another. "W^e have 
been eating his flesh." Now the Da'dapekono shouted at them: **AVhat 
is the matter with you? Quidnam videtis? Matris vaginam?" The 
giants tried to mourn Dzo'avits' death by crying, but they did not know how. 
The No'yodika taught them. ''You must cry this way — *ai, ai, ai.'" 
This is the way people cry to-day. 

1 In another version, this pair is identified with ilie water-youths (Pa-bi'hianO). 



1909.] Lotvie, The Northern Shoshone, 257 

The other giants said to the wizards, "You must find the murderer, 
you are miracle- workers." The Da'dapekono separated; Pursuit of Wea- 
and quickly ran around the mountains in opposite direc- ■•**■ ^*'** 
tions. They noticed the two places where Weasel's wife had landed in her 
jumps with the vaulting-pole. They came back, separated, and ran around 
the mountains once more. Again they saw the Weasel- woman's footsteps. 
Then they returned and told their people. The giants started in pursuit of 
the murderer. 

The Weasel- woman, with her son, was living at her uncle's lodge. Her 
uncle was also a miracle-worker. He had the hearts of unole instructs 
many kinds of animals hanging up in his wikiup. There Weasel-woman. 
were many empty lodges around his own. He gave orders to his niece. 
"You must take these hearts and cook them, but be careful not to taste of 
any." She cooked the hearts, but tasted of one. When she brought them to 
her uncle, he took a Uttle of each heart and placed it in an empty lodge. 
The next morning there were Indians in every wikiup but one. The 
wizard asked his niece whether she had tasted of any of the hearts. She 
confessed that she had tasted of one. Then he said, "That was your 
mother's heart. Look outside now. The Dzo'avits people are coming." 

The No'yodika had told the giants' wives that their husbands had killed 
a great many animals. They always fooled people in this Destroys the 

way. When the Weasel-woman looked outside of the dants. 
lodge, she saw many giants approaching. The two miracle workers and the 
other Dz5'avits surrounded the Indian wikiups. The Weasel-woman's uncle 
went outside his wikiup. Minxit. The water turned into ice and rolled 
down towards the enemy. The ice caught the Dzo'avits so that they stuck 
fast. The two No'yodika were the only ones that could walk about freely. 
They were shouting continually, "Dzantjnl Dzantin! DzantinI" Then 
they went home. The other Giants were all frozen to death. The Weasel's 
uncle took a knife and cut off their heads. He removed their hearts, and 
hung them up in his lodge. When the No'yodika came home, the women 
asked them what had happened to the other giants. They replied, "All of 
them have been killed." Then the women cried and cut their hair.^ 

11. Dzo'avits and the Weasels. 

Weasel was li\ing in his lodge. In the evening, he began to long for his 
brother. He was getting sleepy and his wife told him to weasel mourns 
go to bed; but he was still thinking of his older brother, ^ro^li©'' 
"Dzo'avits is eating my older brother," he said. He cried, and continued 



* Vid. Powell, (a) 45, for an essentially different Dzo'avits story. 



258 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

to cry all night. His wife asked him to keep still, but he did not cease 
wailing. "My brother is being eaten up by the Dzo'avits." At last he fell 
asleep; but when he woke up in the morning, he cried anew. His wife said, 
**Keep quiet I Perhaps your brother will be back soon." 

Weasel, however, went away crying. He knew where the Giant's tent 

was situated. He got to it and looked in. He had his 
viSModje?"*'*' obsidian knife with him. A woman was sitting there, 

wea\dng a willow cup. Weasel entered and sat down. 
He saw a large knife covered with blood hanging in the lodge. '*Let me 
have that cup," said Weasel to the woman. She gave him the cup she had 
been making, after cleaning its bottom. Weasel hung the cup around his 
neck; it was very greasy. He sat down, and remained seated for a long 
time. At last he heard Dzo'avits coming home. The giant dropped his 
bundle outside and entered the lodge. 

"Coire volo" mulieri inquit. Uxor supina cunnum exposuit. Mustela 
in ejus rimam terram injecit. Dzo'avits in vaginam membrum inseruit, 
futuere coepit. Mentulam siUcem tangere sensit. "Hoc quid est?" 
Juvenis silicem injecerat. Conspecto juvene "Tu" Dzo'avits inquit, "ter- 
ram jecisti in uxoris rimam." Longe et assidue coibat. Sole oriente 
coitus completus. 

Dzo'avits got up. "Bring us something to eat," he said to his wife, 

"I have brought some Indians home." The woman 
timt Mclpe. ^^' arose, took the large, bloody knife and went outside, 

where her husband had left his Indian captives. His wife 

could not find any in his bag. "There are none here," she said, "you must 

have lost them. 'WTiere are they?" "There are not many of them," the 

giant answered; "there are only a few. They may be in the bottom of the 

bag." The woman brought in his bag. He looked in, but the Indians 

were gone. He began to cry. At last he stopped crying and sat down. 

He looked at Weasel and noticed that he was very fat, so the giant thought 

he would be ffood to eat. He proposed that they should try 
Dioavltf klUed , , , i Txr , , , t> . • 

by Weasel In to cut each other s throats. Weasel agreed and Dzo'avits 

throat-cutting took his big knife. "I'll try to cut yours first," said 

the boy. Dzo'avits put his head in position and Weasel 

tried to cut his neck. The giant laughed. He said to his wife, "You must 

not look at us two." The woman lay down and covered herself up. The 

giant again told her she must not watch them. Weasel began to cut once 

more. Then he drew out his obsidian knife. As he was going to use it, 

the woman noticed it. "What kind of a stone has that boy got? What is 

the boy doing there?" she asked. Dzo'avits got his neck free. "Where 

is that knife ?" " Nowhere," said Weasel. " I spat it out, I threw it away. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 259 

I have n't it any more." Then he began to cut the giant's neck. Dzo'avits 
again warned his wife not to watch them, so she lay down and covered her 
face. Weasel placed his knife against Dzo'avits' throat. Dzo'avits fell 
asleep. Then Weasel took out his obsidian and cut off the giant's head. 
He carried it outside and threw it away. The woman arose. The boy 
. struck her with the knife and killed her. Thus he killed them both. 

Weasel sat down and began to cry. He wept for a long time, then he 
stopped. He picked up the head of an Indian, looked at 
it and threw it away again. He could not find his older brother's hair, 
brother's gray hair. He searched for it everywhere, bui rettorei him to 
could not find it. He picked up one Indian head after 
another, examining all; but could not find his brother's gray hair. He 
sat down, and cried for a long time. At last he picked up Dzo'avits' head. 
He examined the giant's body. Viri anum non invenit multis comis. Eius 
excrementa scrutinatus. At last he pulled off the giant's teeth and looked 
between his jaws. Between the giant's big teeth, he found his brother's 
gray hair, and took it out. In the night, he brought it home, crying. At 
home he tied it to his fire-drill, and stuck it in the ground until morning. 
His wife was there. In the morning, his brother revived and called Weasel; 
"(Jet up, younger brother." Weasel said, *'My older brother is talking, 
listen to him." The older brother said, "(Jet up and eat." He laughed. 
Weasel looked at his brother, threw his arms about him and kissed him. 
"Let me alone and eat," said the older brother. At last, he let him alone. 
Both of them laughed. The older brother was well again, but he could not 
he down comfortably. 

12. Dzo'avits and Mosquito. 

Dzo'avits was living in his tent. He used to go out to look for Indians. 

Once, while he was gone. Mosquito came to his lodge and sat down by the 

giant's wife. After a while Dzo'avits returned, carrying some Indians 

in his bag. He came in. Cum uxore coire concupivit. MuUer recubuit. 

Cruribus distentis Culex in vaginam siUcem injecit, quo 

, . , , ,., , , . Mofqulto klUg 

facto exut. He went to the giant s bag, liberated the im- Dioavitf in 

prisoned Indians and bade them go home. Coitu com- throat-cuttlnj 
pleto Dzo'avits ortus est. " (Jo outside," he said to his 
wife, "and bring in some food." She looked for the Indians, but could 
not find them. Dzo'avits was very angry. He thought he would eat Mos- 
quito and proposed a throat-cutting match to him. He sharpened his white 
knife. "You cut my neck first," said he to the boy. Mosquito took out his 
obsidian and killed the giant. 



260 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

13. The Weasel Brothers. 

Dzb'avits was walking, pulling along some wood. Weasel tracked him 
until he caught sight of him. Illius testes pendebant, penden tes juvenis 
Younc Weasel O^^^asel) tutudit. "What is this?" asked the giant, 
wreitief with and "Hie juvenis meos testes tundit." They built a fire, and 
t loa t. ^j^^ giant proposed a wrestling-match. ** Whoever loses, 
shall be thrown into the fire." Weasel won and, throwing his opponent 
into the fire, killed him with a fire-stick. 

"Take care," said Weasel's older brother, "another powerful Dzo'avits 
will kill you; don't go over there." Weasel was not afraid, and did not 
believe what his brother told him. As he was going along, he saw another 
giant looking down from a mountain-rock. Illius quoque testes pendebant. 
Throw! another ^^ barked like a dog. Juvenis pendentes testes acu pu- 
clant over a preo- pugit. "What is that? That weasel has stuck me. 
^^' Come, younger brother," said Dzo'avits, "look down at 

these girls." When Weasel approached him, the giant tried to hurl him 
down; but the boy evaded him, and stole up behind him. Dzo'avits peeped 
down. "Have I killed him?" he asked. Weasel, who was then standing 
behind, pushed him over and killed him. 

Weasel was going along again. "Take care," said his brother, "a strong 
bear will kill you. Don't go in that direction. There is a 
tw^m^c wJe^ ^^^^ ^ ^^^ ^^'^ cubs, who kills strangers in a swinging-game. 
They will kill you immediately." "My older brother," 
said Weasel, "I am going to look for them." He arrived at their home. 
They put him in the swing and the old bear moved the rope. She tried to 
throw him down ; but he jumped in time, and was not hurt. Then he told 
the bears to get into the swing. He threw them all down and killed them. 
He scraped off the old bear's flesh, and put on her skin. In the meantime, 
the old Weasel had tracked him, thinking he might have been killed by the 
bear. At sunrise, he caught up to him and saw the bear's tracks. He 
peeped through the willows, took aim at the supposed bear and shot at it. 
He missed it by a trifle. Weasel lea})t up and laughed at his brother; then 
the older, Weasel also laughed. "What is the matter with you? You 
frightened me." "Oh, it was only a joke." 

The older Weasel wanted to hunt water-elk. They went to the bank 

Dlioheyi broth- ^^ ^^^^ stream, and the older brother took off his clothes. 

er, dlei of thint, "I am going into the water," he said, "I am going to 

restored. j^^^^^ water-elk. You must not get frightened; if you run 

away you will die of thirst." He went in further and the water came up to 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 261 

his eyes. At last he was entirely beneath the water. The water-elk were 
standing up and jumping around. The younger Weasel suddenly became 
frightened and ran away, shooting off his arrows. He famished with thirst. 
The old Weasel had killed an elk and was skinning it. ''Perhaps my younger 
brother ran away," he thought, "and died of thirst." He left the elk 
entrails in the water and tracked his brother. At last he found him and 
gave him water to drink. Thus he made his younger brother wake up again. 

14. Dzo'avits and the Old Woman. 

An old woman was walking along with her grandson. Magna illae 
pudenda. It began to rain and they got wet. They looked for Dzo'avits' 
dwelling and arrived there in the evening. The boy 
laughed. "We have arrived at Dzo'avits' house this to^atS** '^**' 
evening." In the night, Dzo'avits came running home, 
making a noise. The woman had put an iron rope ^ into the house. The 
giant asked "What is that in my house? What thick object is growing 
there?" He attempted to pull it out. Then he ran around his visitors. 
He seemed to be freezing. He could not pull out the iron rope. "I am 
freezing to death," he said. He went out and tried to make a fire by rub- 
bing his fire-drill. He was shivering. "What's the matter? I can't get a 
spark." He froze to death and dropped to the ground. 

At sunrise the woman and her grandson arose. They looked at Dzo'avits 
"Dzo'avits is lying dead over there." They saw that Dzo'avits wore a 
great many beads. The woman ordered her grandson to Bobbed by 

take off the beads. "Don't be afraid," she said to her woman and 

grandson, "take the best beads." The boy stole the grandton. 

. beads, and they left. 

Dzo'avits was frozen stiff; but when the sun shone the heat revived him 
and he got up. He looked everywhere for his beads. They were gone. 
His good beads had disappeared. "Who has stolen my Eevtves cap- 
beads?" he asked. His sight was not very good. He turei thlevei. 
began to track the ivoman and boy. After a while, he ^^*^ eicape. 
saw their footsteps. After some time, he caught up to them. "Have you 
two stolen my beads?" he asked. "No, not we. We have come from 
the other side; we have never seen you before." "Give me my beads," 
said he. "No, we have not seen them." "Give me my beads, or I'll put 
you into my bag." He picked them up and threw them into his bag. Carry- 
ing them on his back, he ran along. He came to a pine-wood and ran under 

1 Tliis passage is obscure. 



262 Antkropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

the trees. His prisoners took hold of the branches and climbed up the trees. 
Thus he lost his captives. When he arrived at his home, he looked into the 
bag. He found it empty and began to cry. The woman and her grandson 
ran home. 

15. Dzo'avits. 

A giant (Dzo'avits) was standing on a mountain and looked down a 
deep canon. As he was looking down, he barked like a dog. When Weasel 
WeaMi throws ^'^^^ ^^^ noise, he stole up behind the giant with a stick, 
slant over preci- Dzo'avitsi testes pendebant; juvenis eos baculo tutudit. 
^ ^* The blow hurt the giant; looking around he saw that it 

was his nephew, Weasel, who had played the trick on him. He wbhed to 
get even with the young man and said, "Look down where I was looking. 
There is a mountain-goat down there." When Weasel stooped, the giant 
tried to push him over, but Weasel did not fall in. He rushed behind the 
giant and killed him. 

Once a number of Indians were riding around Dzo'avits' dwelling. The 
giant looked up and turned his head in all directions. The horses shied. 



A great many Dzo'avits used to live in the mountains. They dwelt in 
stone houses and each one had two wives. Only a few 

aU^StS!*'''' ""' ^f ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^"^ ^y ^^^ Weasels. The others 
were killed by five birds who built a big fire on the moun- 
tains. The Dzo'avits tried to run away; but it got very hot and they were 
burnt to death. Their houses were also consumed by the fire. All of them 
perished. 

16. Coyote and the Rock.^ 

(a) 

Coyote was walking along a river. He came to a large white rock of 
which every one was afraid. In rupem minxit et cacavit. 

rock.^''** *^'*^* ^^^^ ^^ scratched the rock like a dog. He went away. 
After a while he looked back. The rock seemed to move; 

it was rolling after Coyote. 

» Kroeber, (a) 260-4. Louisa McDermott, 245-6. Grinnell, 166. 



1909.] Loime, The Northern Shoshone. 263 

Coyote thought, "That rock will never be able to catch me." He ran 
along, making fun of the rock. At first he ran along the slope of a hill. 
The rock followed him. He went down-hill again, and npuwued ben 
this time he was nearly caught. Mingebat, cacabatque for aid, hii pro- 
currens Canis. He ran through a narrow gorge. The *****^'* cruihed. 
rock shattered the rocks in its way and continued the chase. Coyote 
crossed a stream. The rock plunged in and followed. Coyote went through 
a wood. The rock made a path for itself by knocking down all the trees. 
Coyote did not know what to do. The rock was just behind him, treading 
on his tail and heels. He saw a Bear digging for wild-carrots. "Aunt," he 
cried, "this rock is going to kill me. Get behind me." Bear stepped be- 
tween them, standing up on her hind-legs. Rock knocked her to pieces. 
Coyote fled until he came to an elk. "This rock is killing me," he cried, 
"get behind me." The Elk got behind him, and raised his antlers against 
the rock; but the rock crushed him and went after Coyote. 

Coyote came to To'sa-ki'yacatsi (White + ?) "Brother,'' he cried, "the 
rock is killing me." To'sa-ki'yacatsi apparently paid no ii reicued, iiaTi 
attention to him. He was building a fire. When the rock savtor to tteal 
approached, he just pushed out his elbow and hit it. The ^ *"**" 
rock was shattered into small pieces. To'sa-ki'yacatsi had large beads on 
his elbow, which formed his medicine, and it was this charm that killed the 
rock. Coyote fell to the ground, completely exhausted. After some time 
he arose, walked around the hill and killed To'sa-ki'yacatsi by striking him 
with a stone. He then stole the charm and put it on his arm. 

Coyote now walked up-hill and got ready for a rock that might tumble 
down. A rock began to roll down. As it approached Coyote, he put out 
his elbow and it was split asunder. "This is nothing," ^p^^ charm on 
said Coyote. He went up higher and waited for a bigger other rocks, u 
rock to tumble towards him. The rock came down; but ^""^•^* 
before Coyote had time to stretch out his elbow, it crushed and killed him. 
Only his tail stuck out from beneath it. 

ib) 

Coyote met Fox and asked him where he got all his beads from. Fox 
said he obtained them from a rock which murmured, 'Kedzo't. "You 
can go there and take some beads; but you must pay the coyote warned 
rock something. If you do not, it will catch you in a against robbing 
trap." Coyote went to the rock, took some beads and ^^ ' 
returned without paying. "You must pay the next time," said Fox, "or 
it will catch you." Coyote went again and again took beads without paying 



264 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

for them. When he came the third time, he thought, "I will never pay," 
and tried to seize some more beads; but the rock caught him in the trap. 
He howled for help. Fox came up and asked, "Friend, what have you been 
doing?" **I have been caught in a trap here." *'Did n't I tell you, you 
should pay for the beads ? I do not care to stay here for I might be caught 
myself." Fox went home and told the people what had happened. 

After a time, Coyote got his toes out and ran home. When he looked 
back, he saw that the rock was coming after him. He 
puwiwd.^*' came to a river and crossed it; but the rock also went 

across the stream. He thought, ''I am going to climb 
up a hill"; but the rock also climbed the hill. Coyote ran down-hill saying, 
"You can't come down to level ground; you can't jump into the river." 
Coyote jumped in deep; «till the rock followed in pursuit. 

At last Coyote saw a Snipe, who was digging roots. Coyote asked her 
Beioued by ^^^ help. She asked Coyote what was the matter and told 

Snipe. Origin him he had done wrong; nevertheless she consented to 
of rocks. ^y j^jjjj ''\jei the rock run over me," she said. The 

rock struck the Snipe; but she shouted, "Bo!" The Rock immediately 
broke up into many little rocks, which were scattered everywhere and are 
now seen in the Rocky Mountains. 

(c) 

Coyote was walking along a trail. He met his uncle Fox. "Uncle, 
Coyote wimed ^'h^'*^ did you get those beads, that gun-sack, and those 
Mrainst oiashing fine ear-rings?" asked Coyote. "From a large rock 
rock. which continually opens and closes, saying 'Kidzo'tal' 

You must not go there; he will catch you. Keep on walking on your trail." 
Coyote walked straight towards the rock. Fox was watching him. "My 
nephew does not believe what I said. He is going there." 

Coyote approached the rock and heard the noise it was making. "I'll 

go and see it," he thought. He saw the beads, and took 

retel^d'byFo^^ some. The rock closed and caught him. "Unde, 

come quickly! The rock has caught me," screamed 

Coyote. Fox returned. Coyote cacabat. Fox said, "Rock, open." 

The rock obeyed and Coyote was liberated. He was tired. 

"Nephew, said Fox, "there is another large round bowlder with plenty 

of beads. You can take everything there, only you must 

ro^^*** "^^^^^^ behave decently." Coyote went towards the mountains. 

"Where is that big rock my uncle spoke of ? " He followed 

a trail and found the rock. He seized the beads, dressed up handsomely 

and began to dance. "I wish to dance," he said. He took a gun-sack 



1909.] Lotuie, The Northern Shoshone. 265 

and danced with it. Finally he ceased dancing. In rupem minxit, cacavit- 
que. Excrementa canis more in rupem miguibus impressit. He walked 
away saying, "That rock can never track men; it must stand still forever." 
After a while. Coyote looked back and saw the rock moving. He began 
to trot. The rock came up very fast. Coyote thought, *'A rock cannot 
run along a slope." So he ran along the hillside, but the rock nearly caught 
up to him. "How can a rock run in a brush ?" he asked; but the rock still 
pursued him. Coyote was exhausted. "How can a rock ascend a moun- 
tain-stream?" he asked, but the rock was still following puwued ret- 
his footsteps. Coyote was completely worn out. He cued by Night- 
saw a Ka'wi (a bird). "Uncle," he shouted, "stand *^^^* 
behind me." The bird did as he was biddea; but the rock ran over and 
killed it. Coyote saw a Crane. "Uncle," he yelled, "get behind me." 
The Crane tried to shield him; but was run over and killed. Coyote caca- 
bat. A rattlesnake was lying in his path. "Uncle, help me," shouted 
Coyote. The rattlesnake got between him and the rock, and hissed at it; 
but was crushed to pieces. The rock was now very close. Coyote saw 
the Night-hawk (Whippoorwill ?) "Uncle Night-hawk, get behind me I" 
When the rock came up, the Night-hawk screamed, "Bo!" and the rock 
broke up. Coyote was lying panting on the ground. Nighthawk said, 
" Rocks are not powerful. As soon as you say "Bo, " they burst up." Coyote 
then walked up a hill; but before he had time to say "Bo," a rock tumbled 
down and crushed him. 

17. The Bungling Host.* 

Coyote was living there. "I am going to eat at my brother-in-law 
Owl's lodge to-morrow," he said. The next morning he 
went to the Owl. Owl took his awl and stuck it in his ^^ towate c^. 
eyes so that the grease trickled down into a willow basket. 
He gave the grease and some of his own flesh to Coyote. Coyote ate and 
went home. "To-morrow," said the Owl, "I shall eat with my brother- 
in-law Coyote." Owl went to Coyote. Coyote took his awl, stuck it in 
his eyes, and allowed the grease to drip into a willow basket. He also cut 
some flesh from his breast and gave it to Owl. Owl did not like it. "I 
have had plenty to eat already," he said, "I don't care to eat now." 

"To-morrow," said Coyote, "I shall eat with my brother-in-law, Wido'tc 
(a bird)." He came to Wido'tc's wikiup. Wido'tc took coyote and 

his arrows and stood outside. He told the birds to come Widotc. 

nearer. He killed many of them, cooked them and gave the food to Coyote. 

» Cf. Teit. 40-2. Matthews, (b) 87-8. Schoolcraft, (b) 43-7. Kroeber, (a) 264r-8. 



266 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Coyote ate; when he was through eating, he went away. Wido'tc said, 
"To-morrow, I am going to eat with my brother-in-law Coyote." He 
arrived at Coyote's lodge. Coyote took his arrows; he went outside near 
the willows. He tried to lure the birds, saying, **Wid<itI WidtitI Widut!" 
Only a few perched on the willows. He killed them and cooked them. 
He gave the food to Wido'tc. Wido'tc ate it.^ 

"To-morrow, I am going to my brother-in-law Jack-rabbit," said Coyote. 

He got there. Jack-rabbit went out. He gathered plenty 
Jack^abm^ ^^ dead wood. For a long time, he sat down. He made a 

fire, cooked a brown rabbit, and gave it to Coyote. Coyote 
ate, and went home. Jack-rabbit said, "To-morrow, I am going to my 
brother-in-law Coyote's to eat." Coyote went out and brought in dead 
wood; but put nothing in the fire to cook for his guest. 

"To-morrow, I am going to eat with my brother-in-law Beaver," said 

Coyote. He got there. Beaver took a stick and killed 
Bea^. "* ^^^ sons. He cooked them and gave them to Coyote. 

When Coyote was through eating, he went home. At 
nightfall, he threw the bones of Beaver's sons into the water. "To-morrow," 
said Beaver, "I shall eat with my brother-in-law Coyote." He got there and 
sat down. Coyote took a stick, killed his sons, cooked them and gave them 
to Beaver. Beaver did not like the food. "I have had plenty to eat this 
morning," he said, "I will not eat anything now." 

Coyote said, "I am going to eat with my brother-in-law. Otter." He 
got there. Otter dived deep into the water, and got out some fresh salmon 

which he boiled and gave to Coyote. Coyote went home. 
Otter^^ "* "To-morrow I shall go to my brother-in-law Coyote," 

said Otter. He got there. Coyote gave him some stale 
salmon. Otter did not eat them. 

"To-morrow, I am going to eat with my brother-in-law Deer," said 
Coyote. He went there. Deer took his arrows. He shot one up into the 

air so as to hit himself. Then he took out his own fat 
^^^yo an ^^j flesh, cooked it, and gave it to Coyote. Deer said, 

"To-morrow I am going to eat .with my brother-in-law 
Coyote." He arrived there. Coyote took his arrows, shot himself, cooked 
his flesh and offered it to Deer. Deer did not like it. "I have eaten plenty 
this morning," he said, "I don't wish to eat now." 

Coyote wished to eat all of Deer's flesh. He wanted to kill him. There 

was a dance going on. Unseen, Coyote stuck an arrow 
jj^^^ * into Deer and killed him. Then he advised Deer's rela- 

tives to throw the corpse into the water. Coyote and his 
son watched for the floating body. They seized it and ate it up. 

> This is manifestly inconsistent with the rest of the story. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 267 

18. Porcupine and Coyote.^ 

Porcupine was walking along. He was trying to track buffalo. He 
saw some fresh excrements and followed the trail until he arrived at the 
bank of a stream. The buffalo were seated on the other Porcupine 
side. Porcupine shouted across, "Carry me over the crawls into Buf- 
water." One of the buffaloes inquired whether Porcu- ® * paunch, 
pine meant him. '*No, I mean another one." Again he shouted, ''Carry 
me across the water." "I?" asked another buffalo. ''No," replied Por- 
cupine, "I am looking for another one." (This dialogue is repeated several 
times.) At last a very fat buffalo asked whether Porcupine meant him, and 
Porcupine quickly answered, "Yes, yes, yes." The buffalo crossed the 
stream. "(Jet on my back," he said. "No, I am afraid, you might shake 
me off." "Well, sit on my horns." "No, you might throw me into the 
water." "Get into my nostrils." "No, you might sneeze, and I would 
fall into the river." "Well, crawl into my rectum." "That is well," said 
Porcupine, "when you come to some good grass you may defecate and drop 
me there." He crawled into the buffalo's rectum. 

The buffalo started across the stream. When he got to the other side, 
he looked about for some good grass. Then he defecated mjjg D^amo 

and dropped the Porcupine to the ground. For a short leeks knife to 
time he stood still, then jumped up and fell dead. Porcu- *^ 
pine had killed him while he was inside. "With what," asked Porcupine, 
"shall I skin my buffalo?" Coyote heard what he was saying, and ap- 
proached him. "What is it you want, Uncle?" "Oh, I was just saying, 
*What am I going to cut my willows with?*" "No," said Coyote, "you 
were saying something else. I heard it. You said, 'What shall I cut my 
buffalo with ? ' " "Well, I have killed this buffalo right here." 

Coyote offered to help him skin it. Then he said, "Uncle, whoever 
outjumps the other, will skin him." Porcupine agreed. Then Coyote 
jumped first; but he only landed on the middle of the j^^^g buffalo 
buffalo skin. Porcupine leapt clear across, and claimed in jumping con- 
the victory. "No," said Coyote, "the one who wins in *~* ^*^ ^''^''**- 
the second trial, shall be the winner." This time Coyote jumped far across, 
while Porcupine only reached the middle. So Coyote won and skinned the 
animal. As he was cutting out the guts, he called Porcu- ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^^^ 
pine and said, "Uncle, go, wash the breasts, but don't eat i» killed by Coy- 
anything." Porcupine went to the stream with the flesh. ® " 
There he washed it, began singing and ate it up. When he was through, 

1 Of. Kroeber, (a) 270-2. Dixon, (b) 83. George A. Dorsey, (b) 271. Gushing, 243. 
Spinden, 21, and footnote. 



268 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

he returned to Coyote. "What is the matter, Uncle? You have eaten it 
up." "No," replied Porcupine, "while I was standing there, a water- 
bug asked me to let him have some and I gave it to him." "Well, I'll 
go and ask him," said Coyote. He walked to the stream and asked the 
water-bug. The water-bug said, "No, I asked him for some; but Porcu- 
pine did not give me any." Coyote was furious. When he came back, 
he seized a stick, struck Porcupine with it and killed him. Then he dug a 
hole in the ground, put all his buffalo meat inside and covered it up. He 
threw the Porcupine's body aside et in eins corpus cacavit. Coyote walked 

homewards. As soon as he had left. Porcupine arose. 
tr2*with V^S?.^* Coyote saw him and struck him with his stick. Then he 

walked homewards again. WTien he had turned his 
back. Porcupine arose; but Coyote's excrements shouted after Coyote, telling 
him to return. Coyote came back and again killed Porcupine with his 
stick. Iterum in eius corpus cacavit. Nevertheless, when Coyote had 
left, Porcupine again got up. The excrements summoned Coyote; but he 
had gone too far and could not hear them. Porcupine dug up all of Coyote's 
meat. He went to a pine-tree. "Pine-tree, grow!" The pine-tree grew 
up higher. Then Porcupine leapt on the tree with his meat. 

The next morning. Coyote returned to fetch his meat. He did not find 
anything in the hole. His children, one boy and two girls, came running 
Dropi buffalo ^lo^^g- Suddenly Coyote looked up the pine-tree and 
ktlUng Coyote detected Porcupine far up. "Give me my meat," he 
"* * • shouted. Porcupine threw half the buffalo down; but in 

such a way as to kill all the Coyotes except the little boy. Then he climbed 
down and took the boy with him. He boiled his buffalo-meat and gave 
some to the boy. The boy ate it very quickly. When he was through 
eating, he asked Porcupine, "Where can I ease myself?" "Right there," 
said Porcupine. While he was easing himself. Porcupine shook him. 
The boy burst up. Thus Porcupine killed the Coyote family. 



19. Skunk. 

Eagle was Skunk's younger brother. Eagle was hunting all day. He 
killed some elk and deer. While he was away, ten Frog-women came to 

Eagle'i women ^^^ lodge to marry Skunk; there also came five Rabbit- 
interoepted by women who wanted Eagle for a husband. Skunk kept 

" * the Rabbits for himself and put the Frogs under Eagle's 

bed. At night Eagle returned, bringing some deer. He asked Skunk to 
cook the meat. After preparing the food, Skunk gave all of it to the Rabbits. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 269 

Eagle asked, *'What have you done with all the food?" "I have eaten it 
all because I was very hungry." When it got dark, they went to bed. Sud- 
denly Skunk laughed. Eagle asked, **What are you laughing at?'* He 
said, "Nothing, a mouse was running over my face," The Frogs woke up 
the Eagle. They said, ** Those Rabbit-women are yours; they came to 
marry you. We are his wives." The Eagle gave them some food and the 
Frogs left. 

The next morning, Eagle bade Skunk prepare some food. Then Eagle 
proposed that they should get some game he had killed. Skunk did not 
believe he had killed any; but at last he agreed to go. They found some 
elk. Eagle said, "I forgot my gun; I'll go home to get Eagle flndi 

it." Skunk wanted to get it for him ; but Eagle said, them and fleet 
''No, you can't run as fast as I." Then Eagle returned "^^^ *''*°'' 
and found his wives under Skunk's bed. He went away with the five women 
and sat down on the top of a high rock. 

Skunk ran home. He did not find his wives there. He decided to kill 
Eagle. He looked for him everpv^here and got very 
tired. He lay down in the shade. He was thirsty and ,^^. ^^^^ ^^^ 
walked to a brook. As he looked into the water, he thought 
he saw the Eagle and the women there; so he squirted his filth at them, 
blowing away the water. But it was only the reflection of the fugitives in 
the water. At last, he beheld them on the rock. He asked Eagle to give 
him the youngest woman. Eagle answered, "No, she is my best wife." 
Skunk said, "Well, brother, give me any one of them." Eagle refused. 
Then Skunk asked, "How did you climb up there? Is there any way to 
climb to that rock?" Eagle replied, "I climbed up with my head down and 
my feet up." As the Skunk began to climb. Eagle thought he might knock 
off his anus. He hit it with a red-hot rock. Skunk fell into the water 
and his anus floated away. 

Skunk got out alive, but he could not find his anus. He looked for it 
do^Ti the river. He asked a woman who lived there, 
"Have you seen my anus?" He went down and asked coveriit^^*' "^ 
all the people who lived on the banks of the river. One 
woman said, "Some Indians are keeping your anus over by the mountain." 
He walked in that direction and met a meadow-lark. Skunk asked him, 
"Where is my anus?" The bird answered, "An orphan-boy is playing 
with it continually. When he does not play vdih it, he always cries; as 
soon as he gets it, he is satisfied." Skunk went on until he saw the child 
playing with his anus. The boy was throwing it in the air and it looked like 
a fire in the night. Skunk watched very closely, seized the anus, and fled. 
The child cried and the Indians searched for the anus, but failed to find it. 



270 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. 11, 

Skunk now turned back. He met many Indians, and killed them all 
with his filth. Then he robbed them of their heads and their other orna- 
ments. He walked on and met other Indians^ whom he killed and robbed 

in the same way. When he came to the next village, a 
it iiain by w^^ ^^^^ recognized him. Five wolves watched him when he 

got there. He sat down. They saw the beads that he 
had stolen from the dead Indians and decided to punish him. They walked 
up behind him and stepped on his tail. Skunk said, "Let me alone, breth- 
ren." One Wolf said, "Let us kill him." They seized his tail and toes. 
He cried, "Let me loose and let us fight. This is a woman's way of acting; 
a man would not kill another like this." But they paid no attention to 
what he said and killed him. 



20. Skunk and Coyote. 

Long ago Skunk's odor was very powerful and could kill a passer-by. 

Skunk had killed all the Indians and was going to Coyote. Coyote was 

standing on a hill, making arrows. Skimk and Coyote 

by^coyote.**^^*** *old stories to each other; then Coyote said he would 

run home first and Skunk should follow later. Then 

everything would be prepared for his reception. 

When Coyote got home, he poured melted pitch on his blanket and 
Coyote kms turned the hairy side up to deceive his visitor. When 
suett, outi off Skunk had entered and was about to sit down, Coyote 
"*^* turned the pitched side up so that Skunk stuck fast to the 

blanket. Coyote pushed him about xmtil his anus was completely filled 
with pitch. Skunk said he would go out to ease himself. He tried to squirt 
out his excrements, but did not succeed. He tried very hard. Then Coyote 
came out with a club and killed him. He cut off the Skunk's anus and gave 
it to the Indians. 

All the Indians made spears. They began to play with Skunk's anus, 
Indians ipear throwing it into a creek and spearing it. They riddled it 
anut. Skunk ro- with holes. Skunk woke up again. He started after 
covert It. ^j^^ Indians. When he had traveled many days, he arrived 

at the bank where the Indians were playing. He joined them and com- 
menced to spear his o\\ti anus. He dug two holes in the ground, one straight 
down, the other in a crooked line. The Indians could only see the hole that 
went straight down. Skunk descended through the other hole and re-cap- 
tured his anus. The Indians tried to catch him by poking down the straight 
opening; but failed to touch him. Skunk shouted up that he was very 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 271 

far away. Then they said, "He is too far down, we can't get him," and let 

him go. 

After some time had elapsed, Skmik came up begging for an awl and 

sinew to sew his anus together. He mended it in the 

Anut mended, 
sunshine. When some birds perched on a tree above him, 

he tried his power on them by squirting up his excrement. It did not work 

well. He was only able to kill a single one. This is how Skunk came to 

lose the power he used to have. 



21. Skunk and the Mountain-Lion. 

Skunk found a dead mountain-lion. "What is the matter?" he asked. 
" Is he really dead ? He cannot be dead very long." Skunk stood up straight. 
*'I am not afraid," he said. "Not even a great number of enemies can hurt 
me. Fire cannot kill me and water cannot kill me. The only thing I am 
afraid of is whistling." Skunk took Mountain-Lion on hb back, w^here 
he also carried his arrows in a quiver. Suddenly Moxmtain-Lion began to 
whistle. Skunk was badly frightened, threw him off and ran away. Moun- 
tain-Lion went to lie down on a rock; Skunk fled to the Mountaln-Lion 
brush and began to sing. After a while, he came out. piayi trick on 
"That scoundrel, Mountain-Lion, has broken my quiver." 
he said. He was furious and went to track his enemy. Mountain-Lion 
saw him coming from the top of his rock. Skunk shot at him again and 
again, but missed him every time. Then Mountain-Lion proposed that 
they should tell stories to each other. They got good wood and built a fire. 
In the morning, Mountain-Lion told Skunk to get up so they could tell 
stories to each other. Mountain-Lion caught up the firewood, put it in 
a bag and went away. Skunk woke up, seized his arrows and shot at 
Mountain-Lion, but failed to hit him. 



22. The Bull-Frog and the Elk. 

A Bull-Frog once carried away Elk-woman's son. She brought him up 
for a year as her own son. In the spring, when the grass was getting green, 
she made arrows for her foster-child. "My boy, take these arrows, and go 
out hunting." The Elk-boy went away and noticed a 
hi'to (a bird). He aimed at it and shot repeatedly, but elk?^ eUt escaj«i* 
missed every time. Hl'to approached him and said, 
"That Frog-woman has only stolen you. Your real mother lives in the 



272 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

mountains. Go to her." The Bull-Frog was looking for the little Elk. 
"Come here, my boy. Suckle my breasts." Hi'to said, "Don't listen to 
her. Go to the mountains. Your mother lives in the moxmtains." The 
boy ran away with the bird. Frog-woman gave chase, but soon got tired 
and returned home. 

Hi' to stopped on the way and told the little Elk to proceed. "You will 
see some fine spring-water on your way, but dotiH drink it. Go straight 
EUc drlnki of ^P *^^ mountains and find your mother." The Elk went 
forbidden spring, on alone. He came to the spring. "I'll take a good 
loiet teeth. ^^.j^j^ ,, j^^ thought. When he had drunk, all his teeth 

fell out with the exception of the two big teeth which may be seen to-day. 

23. Coyote Tales. 

(a) 

Coyote met Fox, who was eating yampas. * * Uncle, what are you doing ? " 
asked Coyote. "I am pulling up yampas wdth my tail. When I want to 
pull up a great many, I put my tail deep in the ground." "Well, I'll try 
Coyote pulled this," thought Coyote. He went to a place where the 
underground by yampas were growing. He put his tail in, pulled out 
^^''^ " yampas and ate them. He w^ent along. He wanted to 

eat yampas again and put in his tail very deep. This time he could not 
pull it out. "Wai, wai, wai," he shouted, "Uncle!" Coyote went down 
until he was completely underground. The yampas pulled him in. 

(b) 

Fox was eating roots. *'How do you get roots from the ground?" 
Coyote asked him. "I stick my tail in." "Show me how you do it." Fox 
showed him and said, "You must not put it in too deep, or you will never 
get it out again." Coyote put in his tail; but it was too deep in the ground, 
and he could not get it out. He cried, "Wai, wai, wai." Fox asked what 
was the matter. He let Coyote dig away for several years; finally he 
helped him out. Then Fox went westward. When he w^as gone. Coyote 
got his tail into the ground again and was killed. 

ic) 

Coyote was li\4ng in a grass-lodge with two young women. One day one 
of them asked him why he did not go out to hunt buffalo. He agreed to go 



1909.J Lorvie, The Northern Shoshone. 273 

and asked them to hand him his bow and arrows. The girls promised to 
tan the hides. Coyote pursued a buffalo herd, but was only able to kill 
one miserable buffalo. The women went away to skin it. coyote bUnd of 
''Well, Coyote," they said, "you have killed a fine one I" on© eye, aban- 
"I could not kill any more," said he, "because my feet ^^^ ^^ *^^*' 
were sore." When they got back to the camp. Coyote asked his wives to 
make buckskin shirts for him. One of the women noticed that Coyote used 
only one eye. When he slept in the day-time, he covered one eye with a 
weaselskin. The girl removed the skin and saw maggots coming out of 
the eye. Both the women ran away. When Coyote woke up and saw that 
his wives were gone, he went in pursuit of them. He found them standing 
on a cliff; but as he was climbing up, they shook their bells. Coyote fell 
down and was killed. After a while, they looked down. "What are you 
domg down there?" "I am just eating the marrow of a mountain-lion. 
Join me." But the women said, "You blind old beast, we have had enough 
of you." 

(d) 

Wolf asked Coyote whether he was still in the habit of winning every 

game he played. Coyote answered that he was. Wolf then asked him to 

play ball against some Indians. "How much shall I bet on your winning ?" 

"Stake everything you have; we two shall surely win." . Coyote was soon 

tired out and lost. "What is the matter? why can't you run?" Wolf 

asked him. "I am tired," said Coyote. They lost the 

. LoMt cunet 

game. Wolf said, "Let us have an arrow-shooting game. throuch bUnd- 

You must play as well as possible, for I am betting all I '^■•» ®**'^ ^^ 

have." Again Coyote lost. When Wolf asked what 

made him lose, he said he had worked too much and was worn out. Then 

Wolf made him play the game of arrow-throwing, but Coyote was beaten 

again. "The trouble must be that he can't see," thought Wolf. When 

Coyote was asleep, Wolf took off the weaselskin covering his eyes, and saw 

the maggots crawling in there. "That's why he can't see," he said. Wolf 

made little arrows and killed all the maggots. Then he went off and killed 

a mountain-sheep. When he came back, he inserted the mountain-sheep's 

eyes in place of Coyote's sore eye. Now, they played the games over again 

and wagered all their property. They won every time, because Coyote had 

good eyes now. 

(e) 

Coyote was walking along the hills. In the evening, he met two women 
who were gathering seeds. Coyote assumed the appearance of a woman. 



274 Anihropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

In the night, they all slept together. Nocte Canis assidue copulavit. At 
Ditffuiied M a ^^^'^ Coyote left. When the sun rose, the women got up. 
woman, iiaept "Where is Coyote gone?" they asked each other. 'They 
women. washed their faces and ate some food, then they continued 

their jouraey. As they were walking along, they did not know what made 
them feel so queer. Gravidae erant. Coyote had made them conceive. 
On that day each gave birth to a child. 

(/) 

In the fall, Coyote and Wolf were chiefs. Wolf asked all the Indians 
to meet in a council. They were to decide how many spring months there 
should be. Coyote declared that spring should last ten months. A little 
bird (To'tsegwe) said, "Let there be three spring months." All the Indians 
shouted, "Yes, three months will be long enough." To'tsegwe went outside. 
Coyote was furious, because the Indians decided against him. He seized 
Duration of ^ ^*^^^ *^^ attempted to kill the bird, but missed him. 
spring ftoter^ As he pursued To'tsegwe, Rattlesnake, who was To'tse- 

gwe's friend, came out from a hole and began to hiss. 
Coyote was badly frightened and fled back to Wolfs camp. 

(9) 

The ground-hogs were running down the mountains. Fox watched them 

as he was lying down. They ran towards him, and he killed two of them. 

While he was cooking the ground-hogs. Coyote came up and proposed a 

race. "Let us run a race around the mountains, with stones tied to our 

feet. The one who arrives first shall eat all of the food." 
Coyote outrun. _ 11.11 1 . • 11 

1^ ox agreed, they tied the stones to their feet and began to 

run. Fox arrived first and won. He ate up all his food and did not give 

any to Coyote.^ 

(h) 

An old woman was living with her grandson. They used to catch buffalo 

in a hole. All that time Eade was chief of the Indians. 
Poor Boy wlni ,, , , , , 1 . 1 . , 

Chief'i daughter, He had two daughters and promised to give one of them 

robbed by Coyote, in marriage to any one who would kill a fox.* The old 

woman's grandson killed the fox and all the people were 

saying, "The poor boy has killed it." Eagle took him to his house, where 



1 Cf. Wi&sler and Duvall, 28. 

2 Dorsey and Kroeber, 348, 372. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 275 

he slept with the chiefs older daughter. Nocte in lectum minxit et uxor 
eum expulit. He cried and went far away. He found a blanket and 
put it on. Then he found red paint and painted his face with it. He 
found beads. At thl same time, he was growing continually bigger and 
bigger. He found an otter-skin and put it on like a sash. Then he returned 
to the camp and married Eagle's younger daughter. Crow now married 
the other girl; his beak hung down her shoulder in the night. The boy 
always carried a bird on his head. Once his grandmother sent him to the 
buffalo-hole. He met Coyote there and made friends with him. Coyote 
let him down into the hole. He asked the boy for his blanket and the boy 
gave it to him. Then Coyote asked him for all his clothes and weapons, 
one by one, and the boy gave him everything. Coyote went to Eagle's 
family and married the boy's wife. Coyote was now carrying the boy's 
bird on his head; but the bird was always crying. The boy's grandmother 
went to the hole and helped him out. The boy went to his wife's lodge and 
sat down outside the entrance. When his bird saw him, it cried out and, 
leaving Coyote's head, flew to the poor boy's. Coyote was obliged to give 
back everything he had taken away from the boy. 

(i) 

Coyote was passing along the bank of a river. He noticed a dam pre- 
venting the salmon from going through the stream. 
"How can I remove the dam?" he thought to himself, guiwed as baby. 

He made a boat and wished he would become a baby.^ adopted by wom- 

6x1; fridt salmon. 
Straightway he changed into a baby, lying in a boat near 

the dam. Coyote began to cry. Five women heard the noise. "Some 

Indians must have been drowned," they said, "there is a baby floating on 

the water." They swam over to Coyote. They agreed that the one who 

got there first was to keep the baby and bring him up. The oldest one beat 

the others 'and henceforth nursed Coyote when he cried. Whenever the 

women went out to dig roots, they left Coyote home. One day, while they 

were gone, he made five pointed sticks and tried to dig out the dam. Four 

of the sticks broke, but with the fifth ^ he succeeded. When the women 

returned and saw what he had done, they whipped him. In the night the 

boy went away. When he arrived at the river bank, he was very hungry. 

He said to the salmon, "I took the dam out for you; come over to me." 

One of the salmon swam towards him and Coyote killed it. Then he made 

a fire and cooked it. As he sat by the fire, he fell asleep. 



1 Spinden, 15. Goddard. 125. Also found by Mr. Sapir among the Wishram. 
* The occurrence of five as the mystic number is noteworthy. Vid. Spinden, 13. 



276 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

While Coyote was sleeping, five wolves appeared, ate up his salmon, 
NoM puUed by changed his nose to its present shape and went away. 
Wolveg; retmu- When Coyote awoke, he found that his salmon were gone. 
He was thirsty and went to the water. He saw his re- 
flection and was so terrified by the appearance of his nose that he could 
npt drink at all. He defecated and asked his excrements what had hapn 
pened. The excrements answered. "The Wolves are to blame for it. 
They changed your nose and ate up your food." Coyote tracked the 
Wolves, whom he found sleeping with ducks' eggs before them. Then 
he raised their noses, changed them to their present form and walked off 
laughing. He watched them from a hill-top. When the Wolves woke up, 
they looked at each other and laughed. Coyote also laughed at them and 
went away. 

Coyote came to a tent. He looked inside and saw a giri, who was the 
chief's daughter. She was very sick because she had stepped on an elk- 
Cupei and mir- ^^^n. Coyote went in and spoke to her. She told him 
rtoi obief' I daush- how the Indians had left her alone when they broke camp. 
Coyote made medicine and cured her. When she was 
well, they married. After a while, they caught up with the giri's tribe and 
journeyed with them. One evening Coyote proposed a dance. In the 
night, they began to dance. While Coyote was dancing another Indian 
stole his wife. Coyote did not find out until morning, when some of the 
people told him. He said, "This is what we shall do hereafter; we will 
steal one another's wives." This is why the Indians steal one another's 
wives now. 

(i) 

Coyote was walking along and met an old buffalo. He made fun of 
him and urinated on him, then he walked over the hills. When he turned 
back, he saw the buffalo pursuing him. Coyote laughed, 
ab^'bufl^.*"* "You can never catch me," he cried. The buffalo con- 
tinued running after him and after a while Coyote was 
tired out, so that he was nearly caught. Coyote ran around a large rock, 
took out his pipe and said, "Let me alone, let us smoke." He Ut his pipe 
and put it in Buffalo's mouth. In this way, they became friends, lliey 
sat down and smoked. Buffalo said, "Some one stole my wives. That is 
why you found me sitting there. Then you came and urinated on me. 
The others have scratched me all over my body." Coyote said, "I shall 
give you horns," and he made horns for him as well as he could. Then they 
tracked Buffalo's enemies. Wlien they got close to them, Coyote sat down 
on a hill, while Buffalo went to the Indians. He fought them and tore open 



1909.] Loivie, The Northern Shoshone. 277 

their stomachs. He killed them all and recovered his wives. Then Buffalo 
said to Coyote, "What am I going to give you for these horns ? I will give 
you one of my wives." Coyote went away with the woman, but when he 
got hungry he killed and ate her. He walked along and met a bear. The 
Bear pursued Coyote. Coyote ran crying, '*You can never catch me." 
After a while, Coyote was tired and the Bear nearly caught up. Coyote 
ran behind a big rock, where he saw buffalo horns. He put them on his 
head and now he pursued the Bear.^^ 

^ ' : ' ■ (k) . 

Coyote said, "Let us go against our enemies." His party started out 
and arrived at an Indian village, of which Eagle was chief. Coyote proposed 
a water-game and the chief agreed. Beaver was to dive for Coyote and 
Duck for Eagle. The one who could remain under water ooyote'i coin- 
longer than the other was to win. In the middle of the panioni defeat 
water, there was a boat which had sprung a leak. Coyote ******" ** f»ni6i. 
put his nose in the hole. All the people watched the divers. After a long 
time Duck's stomach burst and Beaver won. Then they had a wrestling 
match. Eagle's side was represented by Mole-woman, Weasel was to 
wrestle for Coyote. Weasel threw Mole-woman and her stomach burst. 
Coyote's party won. Eagle proposed another game. The people made 
bread and cooked all kinds of food. Coyote said, "Let Rat play for us." 
Eagle had Floating-ice to play for him. Both commenced to eat. Ice's 
stomach burst and Rat won. Next they were going to have a race. Diibii'- 
simuk (a little bird) was to run against Coyote himself. They ran to the 
other side of the mountains and back again. Coyote got back first and 
won. He had won every game. He went home.^ 

Some time after this, Coyote went away again with Fox. When they 
arrived at another village, they built a fire. The people coyote and Fox 
asked them what they came for. They answered, "Let loie race, are 
us run a race. Whoever loses, shall lose his head." The 
people agreed to run the next day. Magpie raced against Coyote. They 
ran to the other side of the mountains. Magpie was far ahead. When 
Coyote arrived at the goal, the Indians said, "Now we shall cut your head 
off." Coyote said, " No, wait till we have swum." They did not listen to 
him. They had already cut off Fox's head. Now they seized Coyote and 
killed him in the same way. Thus they killed both. 



1 Cf. Boas, (b) 6. The last incident occurs as a separate tale in Cree and Assinibolne 
mythology. Cf. Wlssler and Duvall, 32. 

* Farrand, 102. Also found by Mr. Sapir among the Wishram. 



278 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [VoL II, 

(0 

Below Teton Basin, an old woman was sitting with a willow basket, 
which was filled with water and salmon. One night Coyote came to her. 
He took some sage-brush and made the Andavits (Indians hostile to the 

Shoshone) out of it. Then he told them that he wanted 
M^on!^ ^^'*'**** to stay with the old woman that night; the next morning 

they might come after him. Coyote slept there. In the 
morning the Andavits arrived. Coyote got up, upset the old woman's 
willow basket with his foot and thus liberated the salmon. The water 
flowed down with the fish to fill the bed of the salmon-stream. Below Ross 
Fork, Coyote put up two large rocks, so that the fish could not descend any 
further. He was tired from running after them and sat down. Then he 
told them that they must come up the stream every spring. 

(m) 

An old woman was sitting with a willow basket filled with salmon. 
Coyote came to her tent. She boiled one fish for Coyote. Coyote ate it 
and liked its taste very much.. When he had finished eating, he stepped on 
the edge of the basket so that the salmon fell out and began to float down to 
Ross Fork Creek. Coyote ran along the bank till he got to a waterfall. 
There he made a dam to stop the fish, but the water broke the dam. Coyote 
ran down further and made another. Then he said to the salmon, "Every 
spring you must go up the mountains and spawn." That is why the salmon 
come up here every spring. 

(n) 

Coyote was walking along. A white trickster was riding about on horse- 
back and rode over Coyote, who transformed himself into an Indian. The 
White man told him he was looking for Coyote, the Indian trickster; he had 
heard that Coyote was near-by. Coyote said he had seen him (i. e, himself) 

on the other side of the hill. **Let me have your horse 
tricSi^.^^** and I will bring him to you immediately." The White 

man agreed. Coyote rode away, but returned after a short 
while. He said the horse had refused to go on, because it did not see the 
shadow of the White man's gun. The White man gave Coyote his gun 
and Coyote departed. After a while, he came back, saying the horse had 
turned around, because it was used to seeing the White man's hat. The 
White man gave Coyote his hat and Coyote rode away. He came back 
once more, because the horse was used to feeling the weight of the WTiite 



1909.] Lovjie, The Northern Shoshone, 279 

man's coat. Then the White man gave Coyote all he had; he was stark 
naked now. Coyote kicked up the horse and said, "You wanted to fool 
me, but I have fooled you, the White trickster." The White trickster 
began to cry. 

(0) 

Coyote had a brown race-horse, which he had made out of a jack-rabbit. 
He rode off to another tribe. Here he saw the Whites g^jj^j j^^^^ 
beating the Indians in a horse-race. Coyote joined and which turnt into 
defeated the best of the white horsemen. Then he ex- '* 
changed horses with the White man, who tied Coyote's horse to one of his 
own. During the night, the White man lay awake, thinking of his new horse. 
Before sunrise he got up to look at it. He saw only one horse where he had 
left two. When he got closer, he saw that his old horse was tied to a 
jack-rabbit. 

Coyote killed the horse obtained by trading with the White man, ate it 
and continued to walk along. He was carrying a bundle on his back. 
The White trickster met him and asked whether he had any moccasins to 
sell. Coyote answered he had, but they were only intended 
for the use of persons with whom he had intercourse. tnokiter. 

Ablatis vestimentis, corpore flexo, Canis in eius anum 
subulam inseruit. The blood began to flow and the White man was killed. 
Such is the way of Coyote. 

(p) 

Long ago, when all the Indians lived together, they frequently had horse- 
races and always defeated the other side. Coyote once transformed a red- 
willow stick into a pinto horse, on which he rode to one of the race-grounds. 
He approached the losing side. At last one of them said, "Why don't 
we try our friend Coyote's horse?" Coyote consented. g^^ j^^^^ 
They wagered blankets on the success of the horse. Coy- which turni into 
ote exhorted the rider to whip it only with his left hand. '^*^<*^-«**<^^* 
The pinto horse won the race. Then one of Coyote's opponents bought 
the horse and rode home. There he picketed it outside his wikiup. At 
first he heard the horse pawing the ground. Later, towards morning, 
he heard no noise at all. He went outside, the horse was gone. He merely 
saw a willow stick with a rope tied around it. 

(?) 

Coyote and his brother-in-law. Porcupine, went out hunting. Porcu- 
pine said, "Let us go against the enemy." The enemy caught him, bound 



280 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

him and played roughly with Porcupine all day and all night. In the morn- 
ing Porcupine said, "I have to go outside." So they allowed him to go 
outside. Porcupine then used his quills as arrows and 

Cr06l to WAT 

With Poroupina, shot the enemies with them. He scalped them, tied their 
tteali Porouplna'i heads to a long pine-branch and marched home. People 
could see the scalps from the other side of the moimtains. 
Coyote noticed them, stole the scalps on the stick and took them to his own 
home. There his boys and girls began to dance around the pole. (There 
follows the story of "Coyote and his Daughters".) 



24. Lodge-Boy and Thrown-Away.* 
(Ka'taxantandza'uwuhe and Pa'garutandza'uwuhe.) 

(a) 

Long ago a man and his wife were living in a grass-lodge. The man 

always went hunting with his bow and arrows. One morning the Sun 

informed him in a dream that a visitor would come to 

BtTftllgCT 

throws away them, and told him how to treat his guest. The man told 

twins from dead tig ^fg ^^o was pregnant at the time. ''Whenever he 
mother's body. ', \ ^, ,.,,-. 

comes, do not touch the ground with the food you give 

him. Place it on his chest, when he lies down on his back." While the 

man was out hunting, the visitor arrived. The woman prepared food for 

him and set it on the ground. He did not touch it. Then she put it on 

his legs; still he would not taste it. Finally, she put it on his chest and he 

ate it all up. When he was through eating, the woman fell down dead. 

The visitor rubbed her body and took out two boys from her womb. He 

threw one of them into the water (Pa'garutandza'uwuhe = the one who 

has been thrown into the water), the other one he threw into the entrance of 

the wikiup (Ka'taxantandza'uwuhe = the one who was thrown into the 

entrance of a wikiup). Then he went away. 

The Indian did not know what had happened when he came home and 

found his wife dead and her womb emptied. He prepared some food. 

Suddenly some one cried, '* Give me some food, father." He looked around, 

but could not see any one. Three times the baby bobbed 
Water-hoy ... . 

scratches hroth- up, crying in this way; but the hunter could not see it, 

er's face, Is cap- because it disappeared below the grass. The fourth time 
ttired by father. , • i. , , i t , i 

he saw its face and body. It went down once more and, 

when it re-appeared, was already a young man. His father asked, "Why 



1 Lowie, 141. 



1909J Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 281 

don't you get up and eat?" The boy ate. The next morning the man 
made a willow hoop and gave it to his son to play with. "Don't roll it 
southwards," he warned him. When he returned in the evening, he found 
the boy's face badly scratched. "Who did that?" asked the hunter. The 
boy told him it was his brother, Pa'garutandza'uwuhe, that had scratched 
his face. The next day the hunter told his son to play in the same place as 
before. "If your brother comes up to scratch you, hold him till I come." 
The man hid near-by to watch. When Pa'garutandza'uwuhe came out 
of the water, he tried to scratch Ka'taxantandza'uwuhe's face. His own 
face was yellow. His father seized him, bound his hands and feet, and took 
him to the grass-lodge. There he told the boys they were brothers and 
should never fight. They were the first twins ever bom. 

The twins began to like each other. One day, while their father was out 
hunting, the boys were cooking some food in an earthen pot. Their mother 
was still lying on the ground unburied. "Get up, mother, tend to the 
meat," said the twins. "You wake her up," said Lodge-Boy to his brother; 
"you are clever." He saw his mother's fingers twitching Twins retuiol- 
and tried to rouse her, but failed. Then Thrown-Away ***• mother, 
took a stick, put it in his mother's hand, grasped her wrist and made her 
stir the meat in the earthen pot. Suddenly she woke up, sat up straight and 
continued stirring the food. She began to eat and walk about, looking very 
handsome. Her husband came home and noticed how pretty she looked. 

The hunter made a new hoop for the twins. He told them not to throw 
it southward. When the boys were playing, they forgot about his warning 
and rolled the hoop towards the south. The hoop rolled on without stop- 
ping. The boys ran after it, throwing their sticks; still boU hoop in 

it went on rolling. At last it got to the shore of the big forbidden dlrec- 

, , tlon* iwallowed 

sea. Lodge-Boy asked his brother to let it go, but Thrown- by water-buflalo. 

Away followed. The hoop fell into the water where it ""c^"** 

turned into a water-buffalo. Thrown-Away ran into the monster's anus. 

Lodge-Boy dug a hole near the shore and waited for the animal to come out. 

The next morning at sunrise, the water-buffalo went ashore. Lodge-Boy 

took his bow and shot the buffalo. It ran back to the sea and fell dead at 

the shore. The boy skinned it and cut it open. Thrown-Away came out 

with his hoop, smiling. They cut the animal into small pieces and cooked 

its flesh. Then they started homewards. 

Tliey came to a strange tribe of Indians, who locked travelers up in a 

dark rock, where they could not get out and were finally killed. The boys 

were imprisoned in the usual way. "Thrown-Away, Locked in cave* 

get us out, you know something," said his brother, bunt it open by 

Pa'garutandza'uwuhe began to think how they could be ■**®^"^'' 

saved; he was a medicine-man. He wished that water would come. Im- 



282 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

mediately it began to rain very hard. The rain cracked the rock, the boys 
escaped and again turned towards their home. 

Next they came to a giant. He said to them, " If you go to those willows 

and get sticks from them, I shall make arrows for you." 
thS-^path^*" *** '^^^ giant kept a great many bear-dogs (wu'ra ca'ro) under 

the trees and hoped they would devour the two boys. 
When they saw the bear-dogs under the willows, Pa'garutandza'uwuhe 
asked his brother to take the lead. Ka'taxantandza'uwuhe said, "No, 
you are the clever one; you ought to go first." So Thrown- Away started 
out and, when he got to the bears, he kicked them aside right and left, mak- 
ing a path for himself and his brother. At first Ka^taxantandza^uwuhe was 
afraid and held back, then he followed in his brother's footsteps. They 
took the sticks from the willows and brought them to the giant, who now 
made arrows for them. Then they se{ out once more for their home. 

They came to a large white rock, which they cut into little pieces. They 
put the white fragments on the mountain-tops. This is why there is snow 

on the mountains to-day. At last they reached home, 
turn home!*^* '^ Their father was now an old man and their mother also 

was very old. The mother died a short time after. Two 
days after her death her husband also died of old age. This is why people 
die of old age now. 

(6) 

One evening two boys were rolling a willow hoop towards the west, 
throwing willow sticks at it. It rolled down to the water of the big sea. The 
boys ran after their wheel and one of them fell into the 
wi^-buflalo^"* water, where a water-buffalo swallowed him. His brother, 
Ka'taxantandza'uwuhe, stood on the shore and began to 
wail. "The water-buffalo has swallowed my brother." Then he asked 
the monster to show him his brother. A wave came and he asked it also to 
show him his brother. After a while he met a man, who hunted water- 
buffalo and who promised to shoot the monster. The hunter shot and 
killed the buffalo. He skinned it and told the boy to look out for his 
brother. They cut out the entrails and the flesh about the breasts. Then 
the hunter said, "Here is your younger brother." The boy could not see 
him and asked, "Where?" "Here he is; this is your younger brother." 
When he saw him, he cried, "Younger brother, I have been pining for 
you." The hunter told Pa'garutandza'uwuhe to get out quickly, then the 
two brothers embraced each other. 

Suddenly it became cloudy and rain began to fall. Then a huge bird 
called Nii'neyunc ^ came flying and carried the boys to a distant island. 

» Kroeber, (c) 208. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 283 

Nii'neyunc's mother always sent him out to hunt. The Father* used to 
tell him, " Hasten, bring more people to this island." The carried away by 
bird was going to kill the boys; but Water-Boy thought of ^^ wT**^^^*^ 
his obsidian knife and threw it at Nti'neyunc's throat, mother aidt 
Nii'neyunc immediately flew up so high that the boys *^*»«« 
could no longer see him. Then he circled around and around, finally 
falling down on the island. All the island was quaking. Then Water- 
Boy knew the monster was dead. They did not know what to do next. 
Water-Boy saw smoke rising and they went towards it. They found that 
it came from the tent of Nii'neyimc's mother, an old woman, who kept a 
great number of ducks. There were a great many duck's eggs lying there. 
The old woman allowed them to eat and told them it was time for them to 
go home. She gave them her son's wings to fly away on and said the Water- 
youths would take care of them. 

After they had left, the Water-youths told the boys they would have to 
be put on a tree because otherwise Pa-n-dzo'avits (the water giant) would 
kill them. The Water-youths placed the boys high up, and left. After a 

while Pa'-n-dzo'avits came out of the water, and said, _ 

ii-r 11 1 . 1 )) Tx 1* 1 1 1 Water-youth! 

I smell somethmg good to eat. He clunbed up the protect twlni 

tree to catch the boys, but the Water-youths returned and M:»in«t water- 
pushed him down again. '*Now," they said to the boys, 
"you will go home to your mother. You must travel westward. You will 
get to the Owl tribe, who are very strong; but don't be afraid of them. 
They do not eat anything." 

They set out and came to the Owls, who could not eat, because they 
had no mouths. Water-Boy said, **I will make a mouth Twlni cut open 
for you, then you will be able to eat." So he cut an mouthleu peo- 
opening with hb obsidian and then they could swallow p^*» ^*<*» '•*^*"** 
food. The boys went on. They passed a cliff by the water. Then at 
last they arrived at their mother's lodge. 

25. The Boy's Travels and the Water-Youths (Pa-bi'hiano). 

Two boys were camping at night. At the foot of a pine-tree they 
built a fire and were going to fall asleep. One of them ^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ 
took out an arrow. "Perhaps the bird Nii'neyunc is sit- hoy. ii iiain hy 
ting on a tree near-by." The other boy was badly fright- ®®"*i>"^®'*' 
ened and begged his friend to keep still. In the night Nii'neyunc was sitting 
on a tree near-by. The boys woke up, saw him, and shot off their arrows 



Shoshone: A'pO = father. My interpreter translated, " God.' 



284 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

at him. He seized them and flew towards the east.^ There he lived on 
an island in the big sea. He dropped them at his house and killed one 
of the boys. Then he sat down and devoured the dead youth. He began 
to drink his blood. As he was swallowing it, he raised his head and gazed 
fixedly at the sky. Then the second boy remembered his obsidian knife. 
He threw it at Nu'neyune's throat. The bird flew up, but after some time 
fell dead on the ground. 

The boy arose. ''Where shall I go?" he asked. Seeing some smoke, 
he walked towards it and met an old woman, who was sitting on the ground. 

Boy aided by ^^^ ^^^ never seen an Indian before; she was Nii'neyunc's 
Boc'i mother and mother. ** Where did you come from?" she asked, 
water-youtht. '^Nii'neyunc brought me here." ''My boy is bad, he 
always kills Indians." "I have killed him," said the boy. "Well, go and 
cut off his feathers." The boy did as he was bidden and the old woman 
made a boat for him. She brought him ducks' eggs to eat. These were put 
in the boat. She also brought some wood and built a fire for him. Then 
he paddled away. The Water-youths came up to him ; Nu'neyunc's mother 
had told them to help the boy. "Pa'-n-dzo'avits wishes to eat you up," 
they said. "You must keep up a fire all the time, then he will be afraid." 
The old woman watched the fire from afar. The Water-boys caught up 
with the youth and pushed his boat to shore. A pine-tree was growing close 
to the water. The Water-youths placed the Indian high up on the tree, to 
prevent Pa'-n-dzo'avits from catching him. When they had left, the monster 
came out of the sea and climbed the tree to devour the boy. But the Water- 
youths returned at daylight and threw him back into the water. 

The Water-youths told the boy he would next have to pass over fields of 

Cactui-fieldi cactus, but admonished him not to be afraid. He put 
and rattlesnakei on a great many moccasins and passed through the cactus 
^ • fields without injury. In the evening, there were no more 

cacti. Then the youths informed him he would have to pass a great many 
rattlesnakes, but exhorted him not to be afraid. For a whole day he had to 
pass rattlesnakes, but in the evening they were all gone. 

The boy was obliged to travel through Dzoavits' country. The Water- 
youths told him Dzoavits would come up and play with him. They ad- 
vised him not to laugh, no matter what the giant did; but to stand straight 

Tickled by '^^^ * stick. Dzoavits noticed the boy. "What is this? 

Dioaviti, itandi This is Indian flesh." He went up to tickle the boy and 
* * make him laugh. He tickled his nose, his mouth, his 

ears, his nostrils and his breasts. Anum quoque titillavit; cum testibus 



J Cf. Kroeber, (c) 208. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 286 

et cum membro virili ludebat. He watched the boy. The boy did not 
stir. Then Dzoavits went away without hurting him. 

The Water-youths warned the Indian against another monster. "You 
will have to pass a powerful mouse. Dig a hole in the 
ground to sleep in, build a fire around it and shoot up gOToi« mouie. 
arrows. Then you will be safe." The boy obeyed and 
was not annoyed by the monster. 

The next day the Water-boys said, "In the evening you will get to the 
Owl people. They are going to howl. Don't get frightened. In the 
morning you will have passed them." The boy traveled 
on and in the evening arrived at a large Indian village, j^^ ^^^^ "*^^ 
All the Owl-people had no mouths. They used to put 
fat meat in the fire and inhale the vapors through the nose.* The youth 
took a knife and cut open their mouths. Then they were able to eat a great 
deal. 

26. The Boy who Visited his Grandfathers. 

An old woman was living in her lodge with her son. One day the boy 
asked. "Who is my maternal grandfather?" "Your ^^ 

grandfather does not live here, he lives far away." "Well, al>out grand- 
to-morrow I shall ffo out early to hunt rabbits. I shall '**li«'» *■ warned 

. by mother, 

kill one, which you shall skin. Then I shall go to my 

grandfather." "You are crazy, he lives very far away," said his mother; 
"He lives on the other side of the mountains, you will get burnt up if you 
go there." "I shall go." The woman began to cry. "Don't go away, 
you will surely be killed. Your grandfather's terrible bear-dog (wtira- 
ca'ro) will bum you up." 

The boy killed the rabbit and told his mother to keep the skin as a life- 
token. "If I get killed, it will break to pieces." He went away. His 
mother lay down and cried. The boy went up the moun- Leavei lUe-Hcn, 
tains. He looked down from the summit. He saw the lett out, foot 
fire from where he was standing. The earth was on fire ""^ ^ 
and it seemed as if he could not cross. He walked along and jumped over 
the red-hot ground. One of his feet burnt off. He went home. He stood 
in his lodge on only one foot. The people heard about it. 

Again he went across the fire. His second foot* burnt up. He went 



» Kroeber, (c) 209. 
Boas. (c). 31. 
Cushing, 401. 



286 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

home. He stood in his lodge without feet. The people heard about it.* 
Completely ^^ "fff^nt out again. On successive trips his legs, thighs, 

burnt up, re- waist, trunk, arms, stomach, intestines, liver, heart, bum 
•toredbygtranger. ^^ Membrum virile quoque combustum est. Then his 
head, neck, cheeks, tongue, eyes, ears, teeth, and brains were all consumed 
by the flames. The white flesh behind his ear peeled oflf. Then after sim- 
set, Tosa-pono (white + ?) came along. He jumped across the fire and sat 
down under a rock. He said, **In the night, it will rain and snow. There 
will be a snowstorm." It stormed and snowed all night. The fire was 
put out. In the morning it was cool. Tosa-pono took the burnt boy's 
head and put his body together again. 

The boy then proceeded on his way. He lay down. Far away he 
could see his grandfathers' lodge. His two grandfathers' ^ big bear-dog 
that used to eat Indians noticed the boy and was getting restless. "What 
Arrtves at ^^^^ ^"^ ^^^ ^^ there?" asked one of the brothers; 

grandfatheri' for neither of them could see the boy. The boy walked 

lodge. ^^ ^^ j^j. ^j^^ older man saw him. "What is that? 

That looks like an Indian. Leave him alone," he said to the big dog. He 
took a large rope and tied the dog up. "An Indian is coming here, let him 
alone. He looks like our grandson ; he is our grandson." They restrained 
their bear-dog, which they also used as a horse, by holding the rope very 
firmly. The boy came up to his grandparents. They kissed him and 
told him to rest. Then they gave him food and built a fire. They ate for 
a long time. 

When the boy had perished in the flames, his mother had looked at the 
skin hanging in her lodge. It broke to pieces. His mother cried, "My son 
has been burnt up." She wept all night. 

The two old men noticed that their horse was getting restless again. 
"W^hat is the matter with our horse? It must see some hostile Indians, 
HottUe attack ^^^ come to kill us." They turned their bear-dog loose. 
repeUed by grand- The animal ran away, killed one of the enemy and ran 
parents' bear. back to its own tent. He stayed there a little while; 
then ran away, killed another enemy and returned. The two grandfathers 
went out to fight th^ hostile Indians. Their dog was completely covered 
^dth blood. When the old men were exhausted, they roused their grandson 
and he went out. The bear killed all of the enemy. Then the old men 
cut off the heads of th^ slain men, tied the scalps on a pole and sang all night. 



1 These sentences are repeated every time the hero returns with another part of liis body 
burnt off. 

2 Literally his two maternal grandfathers, i. c. his maternal grandfather and a grand- 
uncle. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 287 

In the morning, the boy said, "I am going away. My mother is longing 
to see me." His grandfathers kissed him and bade him farewell. They 
held their bear back, telling him to leave their grandchild alone. One of 
them held him by the mouth and the other by his ears. The boy went 
homewards. When he came to the spot where he had been burnt up, he 
foimd no fire there. He only saw some smoke. Without any misadven- 
ture, he approached his mother's lodge. His mother 
was there, crying on his account. Suddenly he cried, ^q^^J^" """ 
"Get up, mother, get up." "That soimds like my son's 
voice," she thought. She arose crying. "Why, what are you 6rying for? 
I am dying of cold; build me a fire," said the youth to hb mother. She 
looked at him. Her son sat down. The old woman got up and kissed her 
son until he asked her to let him alone. 



27. The Disobedient Brother. 

A woman was living with her two sons. Her father. Snake, dwelt near- 
by. One day, one of the boys asked his mother to tell him a story. She 
said, "I don't know any story; go to your grandfather, he knows many 
stories." The boy went to his grandfather. He said, gnake orawli 
"My mother has sent me to you to hear a story." Senex into woman, idUi 
"Vestri matris vagina," haud aliud respondit. The boy 
went home and told his mother. She got up, saying, "That filthy old 
man." She seized a stick and was going to club him, sed senex in vulvam 
inrepsit et eam interfecit. The boy did not know what had happened and 
was crying, "Mother, your food is burning." He went to look for her 
and found his mother dead, with her abdomen bulging out. 

He climbed up a hill and cried for a long time. His older brother, who 
had been out himting, saw him and asked what was the matter. "Our 
grandfather has killed our mother." "Perhaps you are the cause of his 
killing her," said the older brother. The youth knelt 
down and rubbed his mother's body to get out the snake. animmli from 
Various animals came out and the younger boy killed them corpse, at last 
all. At last the youth said, "When our grandfather comes 
out, I am going to kill him." But the younger boy did not want to press 
down his mother's abdomen, so he insisted on killing Snake. However, 
when Snake stuck out his head and wriggled his body, the boy was badly 
frightened and ran off. The youth pursued the Snake, but could not catch 
him. He went into a rock. The older brother scolded the younger one 
for running away. "There is still a younger sister of ours in the corpse," 
he said. So they belabored the corpse once more and extracted a little girl. 



288 Anthropologiccd Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

They washed her with warm water and took her to their lodge, where 

they wrapped her up in a hide and laid her on the ground. The boy made 

a pappoose-board, on which he always carried the little girl about, strapping 

it to his back. The boy performed all the duties of a 
Boy tendt lii- '^ 

tor, dlfotoeyi older woman. Whenever the older brother killed some game, 

brother; filter the boy would scrape off the hair. The youth cautioned 

his brother to take good care of the girl and never to chide 

her. Once the baby fouled the boy's back. He became very angry and 

threw her away. Then he went up a hill and began to sing. The baby 

cried all the time. At last the boy thought he would look after her. As he 

came nearer, he could not hear any crying. The girl had disappeared. 

Now, the boy himself began to cry. He went to an open place and 

, ^ cried there. The older brother returned and the boy went 
Boy looldedt 
filter rescued towards him. *'Our sister has disappeared," he said. 

from abductor. "What did you do to her?" asked the older brother. "I 
Dioavltt. 

threw her away, because she fouled my blanket." The 

youth scolded his brother. ** We shall never see her again," he said; "Dzoa- 

vits has taken her away." The boys started for Dzoavits' house. They 

went on the roof and could hear a noise below. It was caused by their sister, 

who was wea\ing a willow-basket. She was now Dzoavits' wife; Dzoavits 

was inside. **How can we get down there?" they asked. Dzoavits told 

them to use their scrapers to cut the rocks. They cut a wide opening and 

fell through into the lodge. Dzoavits asked them to be seated. Their 

sister was now a large, pregnant woman. The boy said, **My sister has 

grown." The two brothers decided to kill the giant and take away their 

sister. They shot their scraper at Dzoavits and killed him. Then they 

climbed up with their sister. As soon as they had gone out, the opening 

closed tight. 

From now on, the sister scraped hides and did the woman's work about 

Boy acftin ^^^ lodge. *'When our sister cooks, let her alone; don't 

dliobesn, iliter bother her," said the youth to the boy. Once, when the 

^"^*"i>- woman was preparing some food, the younger brother 

began to help her. Suddenly her hair caught fire and she was consumed 

by the flames. The younger brother cried. The youth returned. '*How 

did this happen ? You did not obey me." They could not save their sister 

this time. 

28. The Sheep- Woman. 

Two brothers were living together with their wife. The older brother 
went out hunting every day. The woman went in search of roots. One 



1909.] Lotoie, The Northern Shoshone. 289 

morning the older man found the trail of a mountain-sheep. He followed 
it around the mountain-side. Towards evening it led him 
back towards his lodge again and he gave up the chase. ^ ibLp. 
His wife had returned before him and he told her how 
he had tracked the sheep. He decided to start again on the next day and 
try to catch the animal. The next morning, the woman went out digging. 
After eating, her husband also left the lodge. Again he found the sheep's 
trail. It was a fresh track going around the mountain. Towards evening 
it led him back to his wikiup again. His wife was home when he returned. 
He told his younger brother to set out for the other side of the mountain, 
where there were no trees and where he might be able to catch sight of the 
sheep. Accordingly, they started out the next morning. The woman also 
left in order to dig roots, but she never brought any home. She told her 
husband she could not get any food because of her baby, which cried all 
the time and had to be nursed. 

The younger brother stayed out for three days. He went to the summit 
of the mountain. He was fatigued. His guardian spirit 
ordered him to build a big fire. He saw the track aroimd ^^ J^^fe'i trlck?^" 
a turn in the path. He obeyed. After a while, he saw 
the woman coming along. Ejus vulva terrae nixa quasi ovis vestigia fecit. 
The youth drew nearer and pulled his bow-string. Hearing the noise, the 
woman looked up, saw the man and hurried home. The baby was crying. 
The young man returned to the place assigned by his brother and fell asleep. 
His brother came up and asked whether he had seen anything. The youth 
had forgotten all about the woman and said he had not seen anything 
because he had been asleep all the time. The older brother began to upn 
braid him; "Why didn't you watch? I told you to watch." Then the 
youth recollected and informed his brother of what he had seen. They 
went home. When they arrived there, they found the woman busy. "Why 
don't you bring any roots home?" they asked her. She said the child had 
kept her busy again, the next time she would leave it home. 

The brothers decided to play a trick on her. They turned themselves 

into mountain-sheep and stood on the creek near their lodge. The little 

boy was with them. In the evening, the woman came « ^ 

, , Brothers wum 

home. Seeing the sheep so near their dwelling, she thought themtelyei into 

the men must have fallen asleep. "You sleepy-heads, ■h«ep;puriuedby 

there are some sheep right out here. Get iip!" When 

no one got up, she went in, took a bow and arrow and shot at them herself. 

The sheep ran away. The woman pursued them. Whenever she came 

up to them, they managed to escape. They went far across the mountains 

and the woman continued to follow them. 



290 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [\<A. II, 

At last, their wife got to Coyote's people. She informed Coyote of the 
big sheep that had run away there. Coyote painted himself up and an- 
wixe mMtt Coy- i^o^^^^ed the news to his fellow-tribesmen. The Indians 
ote'g tribe, Mtoctt scattered to hunt down the game, but failed to catch them, 
new husbana. ^^ j^^^ j^ Grasshopper went out. He saw the sheep 
running towards him, tore oflf a patch from his moccasins, pasted it on his 
forehead to disguise himself and then shot the baby sheep. The other In- 
dians hunted other game. When they returned to camp, the woman sharp- 
ened a stick and tested the hide of each animal brought in. When she 
struck Grasshopper's sheep-skin, the stick broke in two inmiediately. Ac- 
cordingly, she married Grasshopper. Coyote was jealous. "A man must 
have a loose-jointed leg like Grasshopper's," he said; "then one can get a 
girl easily. If I had a leg like that, I would have won the woman." 

29. Thunder.* 

An old woman was li\dng with her grandson. Rabbit. The boy once 
said to his grandmother that he wanted Thunder's wife. He had a bear's 
paw for his medicine. The old woman warned him. "Thunder is strong, 

Thunder ex- ^^ ^^' ^^^ you." The boy, however, went up the moun- 
ohanset wife for tains. He met Thunder's ten wives, who were digging 

7 1 me cine. ^p p^^^g jj^ looked at them for a while to see which was 
the best-looking. Then he went up to the prettiest one, who was beauti- 
fully dressed, and tried to carry her oflf. She resisted and the other wives 
caught hold of her and called on their husband for aid. Thunder came, 
making a terrible noise. At first he was going to kill the young man, but 
when he saw the boy's bear's paw he was frightened. He said, "Give me 
your medicine and you may have my wife." The boy agreed and took the 
woman home. His grandmother had been cr}dng; when she heard Thunder 
rumbling, she thought he had killed her grandson. The young woman 
lived with her husband and went out digging roots for him and his grand- 
mother. 

30. The Bad Medicine Man. 

A long time ago there was an Indian who used to start dances for the 
other people. Whenever he saw a good-looking girl, he would point at 
her, cr\4ng, "Wu!", and claim her as a wife. He was a very large man and 



» Cf. Spinden, 154-156. 



1909.] Loxvie, The Northern Shoshone. 291 



believed to be a very powerful medicine man. The people believed he 
had the power to kill them by making them cough, so all 
were afraid of him. Once he pointed to another man's mankiitodl *" 
second wife, saying, "Wu!", and seized the woman. Her 
husband refused to let her go and pushed the medicine-man away. The 
medicine-man, who only looked so large because he was in the habit of 
padding himself, did not hurt the young man in any way. The Indians 
saw he did not have very much power. They had a council about him and 
decided to kill him with a rock. The large man had a dog at home. Cum 
canis coiret, magi quoque membrum erigebatur. The Indians seized the 
medicine-man and killed him. The dog managed to escape. He was 
supposed to be his master's spirit. 

31. Cannibal Stories. 

(a) 

Long ago there was a Cannibal (No'mo-rika = Indian eater), whose 
father was called No'mopagurturux. All the people were afraid of them. 
They used to kill women ; they did not wish to kill men. When an Indian 
died, they took his corpse and ate it. The Cannibal 
father, with his son, ate up his own wife. When the habiti.""^ * 
Cannibal found Indians, he would say, "I like to eat 
people." He ran towards young men's tents and slept nearby. When the 
women went out to dig up potatoes from the ground, No'mo-rika would lie 
in ambush. He would carry off one at a time on his back, and eat her up. 
After devouring a woman, he slept five days, snoring loudly. Once the 
Indians burnt the Cannibal up, but he came to life again. 

(b) 

A man was living with his wife and son. The woman and her son were 
going out for wood. When they came home, the husband pushed her down. 
She began to cry and the boy also cried. The woman told the boy to kill 
his father. Her son brought his bow and arrows. "Quick, oannibti 

shoot him," she cried. The man begged to be let alone abusei, flayi. 
and his life was spared. He went out, while the woman **** ^^*'** 
remained at home. When he returned, he again ma}.treated his wife. She 
cried and begged her son to shoot his father. The man stabbed her with a 
pointed stick, killing her. The son went around crying, because his mother 



292 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

was dead. The husband began to eat his wife. He chewed her flesh, he 
ate her stomach and her intestines. Then he stopped eating. 

(c) 

A man was living with his sister and her two boys. One day the man 

said, "I wish to visit a friend." He set out and arrived at his friend's 

lodge, where he slept during the night. The next morning he arose and 

killed his friend. He skinned the body, dried it and 
Man kllli "^ 

Mend, givei fleih sliced it; then he lay down there. The man's sister was 

to nephews for beginning to grow anxious about him. "What has 

happened to your uncle?" she asked her sons. The boys 

quickly ran away to look for their uncle. Avunculum conspexerunt qui cum 

muliere coibat. When he saw his nephews, he told them to carry the meat 

home and have it cooked whenever they were hungry. He said it was some 

game killed by his friend. They brought it home and their mother sliced 

and dried the meat. She boiled it for an entire day; then she told her sons 

to eat it outside the lodge. The children took the food outside and began 

to eat. 

The cannibal was sleeping at this time. While one of the boys was 
sitting outside and eating, he looked at the piece of meat in his hand and 
Diicoveiy of noticed the hair on it. He thought, "What is this? 
human hair In This looks like human hair. Do they eat food like this 
®® at the home of our uncle's friend ?" He asked his brother 

to look at his meat. In the evening, they compared their own hair with 
that found in the food. "I think," said one boy, "our uncle has killed 
some Indian." They ran home and told their mother. She smelt the food, 
took her pot and carried it outside. They sat down by the bank of a creek 
and vomited what they had eaten. 

Their uncle came home at night. He was very hungry and wanted to 
eat the boys. "To-morrow you may eat them, but not to-day," said the 
mother. They all lay down to sleep. In the morning, the woman woke 

Nephewi flee "P ^^^ ^^"^ ^^^ ^^^* t^v^m away. Later their uncle 
from \mcle, es- woke up and wanted to eat them. "They don't wake 
**^' up early enough," he said. They were gone. They 

were traveling about. Their uncle and his sister tracked them. The boys 
were saying, "He is hunting us; he kills Indians." In the night the uncle 
said, "I am longing for my nephews." After he had lain down, his sister 
departed. He tried to find the tracks of his relatives.^ 



1 The details of the last paragraph are not dear, owing to the interpreter's deficient com- 
mand of English. 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone. 293 

32. The Buffalo who Stole an Indian Girl.* 

A young woman once went for water. Near the creek she found a 

buffalo skeleton and she began to play with the bones. _ 

® . r .^ Woman ab- 

Suddenly the buffalo came to life, and took the girl along ducted by buffalo 

with him. The woman's husband looked for her until he ^wovwrwl by hui- 

band. 
found her trail, followed it and recovered his wife. 

The buffalo summoned his followers. He said, "A man has stolen 

my wife." They all started in pursuit. There was nothing but dust flying 

up in the air from the trampini; of the buffaloes. The _ 

. r o Fugltivet oUmb 

chief buffalo had a large anus. When the herd had tree; buffalo hook 

nearly caught up to the fugitives, the man and his wife ^» ^^^ kUled 

climbed up a cottonwood facing a river. The buffalo 

passed by the tree without noticing the couple on it. Ultimus cum venit 

bos, mulier in eius tergiun minxit. The buffalo noticed the fugitives and 

told the animal in front of him; so word was passed along the line to the 

leader. The entire herd faced about and the chief jumped at the tree, 

hooking it with his horns. Vir per bovis anum miratus cordem conspexit. 

He aimed at the buffalo's heart and shot off arrow after arrow, but failed 

to hurt the animal. In the meantime, the buffalo were tearing down the 

cottonwood. At last Meadow-lark flew on the tree and bade the Indian 

use his fire drill for an arrow. The man opened his quiver and shot off his 

fire-stick. He struck the buffalo's heart and killed him. The other buffalo 

dispersed and left them alone. 

33. The Stolen Wife.' 

Two brothers were living with their wife. They always went out hunt- 
ing together. Once, while they were out, some hostile Indians came and 
stole their wife. When they returned, they saw that she 
was gone and looked for her in the neighborhood, but ^j^~ *** ^ 
without success. The older brother was furious, he went 
to the mountains, sharpened his knife and came home again. 

They set out together to look for their wife. At night they arrived at 
the camp of the enemy. The people were meeting at a council in a large 
tent and were smoking their pipes. Some friendly Indian 
told the brothers that their wife's new husband had tied j^^^'^*"** ^^* 
bells to the woman's dress, so that the camp should be 
alarmed if she attempted to flee. The two men watched the Indians. 

J Cf. Dorsey and Kroeber, 153. Kroel)er, (g) 101. Wissler and Diivall, 112. 
2 Cf. Kroeber, (e) 125. 



294 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

When the Indians had ceased smoking, the council broke up and each 
warrior went to hb lodge. 

In the evening, the stolen woman went out to ease herself. Then her 
husband, who lay in ambush, seized her. She asked him to wait until all 
the Indians had gone to sleep. She told him her new husband never woke 

up at night after he had once fallen asleep. The older 
gt^ahonMMr *^' brother said, **I shall cut his head off." After every one 

in the camp had retired, the two men entered their wife's 
tent. The older brother cut off her new husband's head and threw it away. 
The woman cut off her bells so as not to make any noise. Then the brothers 
took away some of the enemies' beads and stole some horses. They fled 
and arrived home in safety. 

34. The Horse Woman.* 

The Indians were hunting buffalo. They had broken camp. One 

young woman was riding a stallion. She always fell behind the rest of the 

Woman enam- Indians. Once a man watched her. Eam solam cum 

ored of hone, equo coire vidit. When the people camped the next 

nini away. ^j^^^^ ^j^^ ^^^ ^y^^^ ^^ stallion and killed him. The 

woman cried all night. Then she ran away with a wild horse. 

The next year the Indians were hunting again. They noticed a herd 
of wild horses and what looked like an Indian woman running along with 
Oaucht amonc ^^^^' ^^^ pubic hair was very long and hung down 
wild honei, re- like a horse's tail. Her skin also resembled that of a 
leaaed. horse, only her face was human. The Indian chief sent 

out some men to catch her. They went out and lassoed her when she was 
exhausted from running. They took her home to the tent of her Indian 
husband. Her grown-up son saw her, but she did not recognize him or 
speak to any one. She only whinnied like a horse. The Indians tied her 
up. The boy said to his father, **Let her go, father, she is not a good 
woman." They released her and she escaped. 

35. The White Man and the Monster-Bird. 

The Indians were moving camp. They found that some of their young 

-aru**^ •^••. men and horses were lost, and did not know how this could 

wnite inan 

ofleri to kiU have happened. A White sheep-raiser was living there, 

montter. jj^ ^^y j^^ knew what was the trouble. A strange being 

had taken the men away. '*If you pay me," he said, **I may kill it for you." 

» Dorsey and Kroeber, 247. G. A. Dorsey, (c) 294, 358. Wissler and Duvall, 152. 
Kroeber (e), 114. The theme, which is treated with great finesse in Guy de Maupassant's 
"Fou?", may possibly have been imported by Europeans. 



1909.] Loune, The Northern Shoshone. 295 

The Indians paid no attention to the White man. An Indian went out 
alone to fight the monster. He saw it flying; it looked 
like a large dark cloud. He shot at it, but could not hurt ^^^ indiani. 
it. It caught him and flew home. The next day, two 
men went out with their guns. They separated at a little distance. When 
they saw the monster flying, they shot at it. Again the monster snatched 
them up and took them home. Then all the Indians said, "Perhaps the 
White man will kill it." They killed thirty head of sheep, took oflF their 
hides and gave them to the sheep-raiser. He put them all on, took a stick 
and went looking for the monster-bird. 

The giant bird swooped down on the White man and carried him home, 
but could not kill him. The black monster's son came home and wanted 
to eat the sheep-raiser. The White man said, "You won't 
eat me." ^ Then he grasped his stick and knocked down ^^^ ** "**** * 
father and son. He killed both of them. The monster 
had a beautiful tail. The sheep-raiser cut off its tail feathers and brought 
them home. 

Perhaps this monster was the bird Nti'neyunc. 



36. The Poor Boy and his Horse. 

(Told by a Shoshone who had married a Nez Perc6 woman and lived 
with her tribe.) 

An old woman was living with her grandson. He was in the habit of 
playing by the edge of a pond. Once he found there a colt and some gold. 
Every morning he went to the pond to tend the colt. One 
day it said to him, "Make a halter for me." The boy poor^ioy^"^* *^ 
obeyed. Then the horse said, "Try me in a race. There 
are race-horses on the other side of the mountains. Let us go there 
to-morrow morning." 

The next day the boy rode to the other side of the mountains. The 
Chief who lived there had five daughters and five horses. 
The boy said, "We wish to race with you." The Chief ^^^ '*** '''' 
laughed at the orphan, but prepared for the race. He 
wagered a race-horse; the boy, his gold; and Coyote, who took the boy's 
side, his bow and arrows. The Chief said, "We'll ride around the other 
side of these two mountains." They were to go around a yellow post and 
then return to the starting-point. The boy brought his horse there and 

1 This is possibly a fragmentary version of the familiar Thunderblrd dialogue. 



296 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

bridled it. It advised him to get two switches. They started and the little 
horse ran beside the Chiefs. Soon all the people were gathering to watch. 
They said, ''There goes the sorrel horse." The little horse won the race. 
Coyote shouted and seized the Chiefs horse. ''It is mine now," he said. 

The Chief proposed to run another race. He had a big horse to ride on 
this time. The Chief bet his horse against the boy's 
outrun hy boy. ^^^ Coyote's wagers. "We'll ride to the other side of 
these four mountains," he said. This time there was a 
red stick to mark the half-goal. The men mounted their horses and started 
off. After a long while they came back again, and the little horse was ahead. 
Coyote seized the Chiefs horse. "We'll race again to-morrow," said the 
Chief; "come back again in the morning." 

The next day the Chief had a white race horse. They went over sLx 
mountains and rode around a white goal-staff. When they came back, 
the bo/s horse was in the lead. Coyote ran to the Chief, and seized his 
other racei horse. The Chief now had only two horses left. He 

^^^' asked the boy to come again. The next day they passed 

eight mountains. The Chief rode a buckskin horse. After a long while, 
they arrived at the starting-place with the little horse in the lead. Coyote 
shouted and got the Chiefs horse. The Chief said, "Let us race again to- 
morrow for the last time." 

At night the Chief kept thinking and talking of his opponent's little 

horse. In the morning they started to race and the boy won. Coyote 

shouted and took the Chiefs horse. They sat down. The Chief did not 

know what to do. He said, "To-morrow we shall pile up sticks, build a 

fire and see which of us can ride through the fire." The boy went away 

-,,.,- ^ - ^ ^ crving, for he was afraid he would be killed in this contest. 
Chief defeated t . 

In trial of His horse said, "Cease crying! You won't be hurt." 

■teength; ride When the boy came to the Chief the next day, the Chief 
through Are. *^ , •' 

wagered one of his daughters against all the horses that he 

had lost. They gathered firewood and built a fire. "Let the boy go in 

first," said the Chief. The boy mounted his horse and rode through the 

fiames. All the people watched him. He passed through without getting 

burnt at all. Then the Chief had to ride through. After he had gone only 

a short distance, his horse fell down, burnt to death. Thus the boy won 

again. 

The Chief said, "Come again to-morrow, you must capture the big 

horse for me. If you get it, you may have my second daughter." This 

horse was a gigantic animal, as large as a log-cabin, and no one was able to 

ride it. The boy set out with a large rope to look for the monstrous horse. 

His own colt said, "I will fight mth it; you just put your halter around 



1909.] Lowie, The Northern Shoshone, 297 

his neck and lead him home." The boy turned his colt loose. When the 

gigantic horse appeared, the colt grew bigger and bigger, 

until it was larger than the big horse. The two horses colt* ■ aid, boy 

met and fought. The colt threw the other horse to the capture! gicantlo 

ground. The boy ran up with his rope and put his halter 

on the conquered animal. Then he brought the horse to the Chief. His 

colt grew small again. 

"Come again, to-morrow," said the Chief. "I'll set you your last task 
then." When the boy arrived the next morning, the Chief told him of a 
young girl who lived on the other side of the big sea. "If you bring her 
here and win again, you may become Chief in my place and have all my 
property. I shall be your servant." The Chief ordered Brinci girl 

the girl not to accompany the poor boy. The boy crossed from diitant 

the sea on his colt which grew much larger again. When coiintiT. 

he dismounted on the other side, he saw the Indians going to a church- 
meeting. The girl, who lived in a large house, was watching the Indians. 
The boy, dressed up handsomely, passed by her house. She noticed him 
and liked his appearance, not knowing who he was nor where he came from. 
She also dressed up, mounted her horse and approached him. Then both 
crossed the sea and got to the Chief. The colt assumed its former shape 
and the boy dressed in his usual way. The Chief scolded the girl, because 
she had disobeyed him. 

The girl complained that she had lost her ring while crossing the sea. 
Then the Chief ordered the boy to get the ring. "If you find it," he said, 
"I shall leave this place and you will be chief instead.*' 
The boy went to the shore of the sea. He took some of |,ecomef OhiS?*' 
his gold and threw it into the water. WTien the fish swam 
up to him, he asked, "Have you seen my ring?" The fish said they had 
not seen it. The boy threw more and more gold into the water, and every 
time the fish came to him, but they said they did not know anything about 
the ring. At last an old fish came up and, when the boy asked him, he 
replied, "I have the ring," and gave it to the boy. "What shall I give you 
for it?" asked the boy. The fish answered, "Make me a skin out of your 
gold." When the boy returned with the ring, the Chief left his people; 
because the boy had defeated him every time. 

Then the colt said to his owner, "You are rich now 
and do not need me any more. Take me to the place you xnagic col^ ^ 
found me in and turn me loose." The boy obeyed, but 
he began to cry. 



298 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

37. The Bear's Son.^ 

Bear's son killed his father. His mother married a White man, who 
sent the boy to school. The White children teased the Bear-child. They 
made fun of his long nose and whipped him. The Bear-boy went to the 
Bear-boy kiui blacksmith's shop. He had an iron pole made there, 
white children, Eight steers were not strong enough to pull it to pieces. 
coei tra g. Bear went home and told his mother he was going out 
alone to hunt the enemy. First, however, he went to school. The White 
children made fun of him again. ''Your nose is big," they said. "Don't 
come in here." Bear took his rod and killed all the children with it. Then 
he went far away. 

He saw an Indian who was transposing the soil. The Indian asked 
him, "Where are you going?" "I'm looking for the enemy." "I think 
I will go along with you," said the man; "two of us will not be afraid of 
anything." They went along until they met another Indian, who was 

moving rocks from one place to another. "Where are 
tiu^ ttrazifferii. ^^" ^^^ S^^S^*' ^^ asked. "We are going far away to 

look for the enemy." "Let us three go together; we'll 

not be afraid of anything we may see." They went along. They saw an 

Indian who was transplanting a pine. The Indian asked what they were 

doing and joined them, saying, "Four of us will not be afraid of anything." 

They went along until they came to a creek with willow-trees on its 

banks. There was a house standing there, which they 
house, three com- entered. "To-morrow," they said, "three of us will go 
radeiatiaultedby hunting. Earth-Transposer will stay home and cook." 

The next morning the three others went out to hunt. 
Earth-Transposer cooked. When he was done, he looked at a news- 
paper. Suddenly Iron-Head ^-Man came in and asked for some food. 
Earth Transposer refused. Iron-Head-Man pulled him about, knocked him 
down and ate up all the food. Then he went away. In the evening, the 
hunters came home laughing. They asked Earth-Transposer why he had 
not prepared any food. He answered that he had wanted to cook, but had 
fallen down in reaching for some food that was kept near the top of the 
house. The next day Rock-Mover stayed at home to cook. Again Iron- 
Head came in, knocked him down and disappeared after eating up all the 
food. When the hunters returned, Rock-Mover gave the same excuse for 
not having any food for them. On the following day, Pine-Transplanter 
met with the same adventure. 



* A well known European tale, of which a similar version was heard by the writer among 
the Stoney Assiniboine of Alberta. 
« BOi-wihi-bambi-gant. 



1909.] Lorvie, The Northern Shoshone. 299 

Finally Bear stayed at home. When he was through with his work, he 
began to whistle and to walk back and forth with his rod. 
He knew that Iron-Head was the ghost of his older brother. ^^^^ conquew 
Iron-Head came and asked for food. Bear refused. 
They wrestled. Bear threw the ghost and cut his throat, killing him. 
The head jumped away by itself and went down into a hole. When the 
hunters came home in the evening, they laughed. When they saw that 
there was plenty of food, they thought Iron-Head had not come that day. 
They would not believe that the boy had killed him. Bear took them to 
the hole and showed them the blood around its edge. Then he told them 
to bring a rope. 

The men brought Bear a large rope and tied a bell to it. They were 

to be let down the hole, one by one. As soon as any one rang the bell, it 

would mean that he was frixrhtened and the others were 

Dei Mndi uiidM> 
to pull him up. Rock-Mover, Earth-Transposer and ground, wim 

Pine-Transplanter went in successively. Each rang the ^o»en, hoiiti 
bell and was pulled up again. Then Bear went down. 
He met three men, killed them and took their wives, whom he hobted 
up on the rope. 

When the first woman came out of the hole, Earth-Transposer said, 
"I'll take you for a wife," and seized her. Pine-Transplanter and Rock- 
Mover married the other women. Then the men cut the rope. Bear fell 
down and broke his limbs. His older brother picked him up and healed 
his wounds. Then Bear asked his brother which was the wivei itoten by 
swiftest animal. His brother told him the eagle was. commdei; vain 
They gave the eagle three sheep to eat; then Bear mounted ^"" * 
him and flew up on his back. They flew faster and faster. The boy cut 
oflF some of his own flesh to feed the eagle so as to make him fly faster still. 
At last they got up. Bear tracked the Indians who had stolen his wives, 
but never found them. 



38. Ghost Stories. 



(a) 



I was going to the Flathead Reservation with two other Shoshone. 
In the night we got to a river. The moon was shining. We went in for a 
swim, leaving our clothes on the bank. When we got across, my friends 
asked me to bring the clothes over. As I was getting the clothing, I heard a 
baby crying. The moon was still high up. The sound was a little different 

» Told by Enga-grvsacu ("Red-Shirt") Jim. 



300 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

from that of an ordinary baby's crying. I turned in that direction and 
saw a faint light under a cotton wood. As I got closer, I thought I had 
better go back. I felt strange. I knew it must be a water-baby (Pa'ona) 
that was crying. I faced about and walked to a spot where there were no 
trees. Then I beheld an Indian coming towards me. I stopped and stood 
still. He also stopped. I could see his head and body plainly, but not 
his face. I began to walk, the stranger also walked. I stopped and he 
stopped. Then I thought I saw he was wearing a striped vest, but I was 
still unable to see his face. When I got nearer, I saw that I had taken the 
ribs of a skeleton for a striped vest. Now, I knew the Indian was a ghost. 
I could see a light in his eyes. I had an uncanny feeling. I did not know 
what to do. I turned away. The ghost headed me off. He did not speak. 
I could see him plainly now. He was all bones. I said, "You are just 
a ghost, leave me alone." (On'o-n Dzo'ap, no-vii'ak.) He turned about, 
went down into the ground and disappeared. I joined my friends and 
told them of my adventure. 

ib) 

Several days later, I was riding along at sunset, looking for ground- 
squirrels. On one side of the road there was a row of pine-trees. I heard a 
sound as if a squaw was crying at a funeral. I got off and built a little fire 
to cook the ground-squirrels I had caught. After they were cooked, the 
noise stopped for a while. Then it came nearer again. By this time it 
was quite dark. The sound was now circling around me. I knew it was a 
ghost, so I untied my horse, took out my squirrels and prepared to flee. 
When the noise had come very close, it changed into the panting of a bear. 
I was very much terrified. The moon rose. I heard the noise circling 
about me again. For an instant it stopped. That moment I jumped on 
horseback and rode back to my two friends. By this time, we were near 
Salmon City. 

(c) 

When I was a little boy, I was once out looking for ground-hogs. I had 
a mirror with me. Looking around, I saw an Indian standing on a hill. 
I tried to flash the light towards him by holding my glass in the sun. Then 
I put my things away and ran towards the Indian. He was standing still. 
As I approached, I saw him sitting down with his legs stretched out. I 
thought his camp was near-by. Suddenly he arose and walked away. I 
looked around for him, but could not see him any more. I called him aloud. 
I returned to where he had sat down and tracked him. Suddenly his foot- 
steps ceased. It must have been a ghost. 



1909.] Lotoie, The Northern Shoshone, 301 

I went in the opposite direction then, and walked homeward. I crossed 
a creek and then started up-hill. Suddenly a rock was thrown at me, but 
did not hit me. As I turned around, I saw a rattlesnake. I thought the 
snake might have thrown the rock and ran down. I stopped to rest on a 
log until I saw the snake crawling from under it. I turned about and ran 
back, but stumbled over a stone and fell down. Then I crawled up the 
hill on my hands. The snake followed very quickly. I ran up the hill, 
then down again; but the snake continued to pursue me. The snake 
was only a few yards behihd me. I was tired out. I threw stones at the 
snake, but it did not seem to mind them at all. I thought this snake must 
be a ghost, perhaps the same man that had disappeared before. I did not 
know what to do and began to cry. Finally I said to the snake, "You 
are a ghost, let me alone." Then it let me go. 

39. Enga-gwacu's Experiences in the Underworld. 

I was roasting some salmon on issue-day about twenty years ago. I 
told my family to eat and that I would join them later. This was against 
the advice of my familiar spirit (bu'ha). That night something spoke to 
me in a dream. I dreamt of a big war where fighting was going on close 
to me. Suddenly a hail-stone struck me and I could not get it out. 

From that time on, I was sick, and ate very little for a month after my 
dream. My spirit did not help me any more. I felt as if I were going 
mad and was ready to die. The Sun spoke to me. He said, "You are 
going to die. Put up a separate lodge for yourself. After your death, you 
will be restored to life if you desire to be alive again." The Indians built 
me a separate lodge and left me there to die by myself.^ 

I was still breathing. I thought of seeing my dead father and mother, 
brother and other relatives. I wished to (}ie immediately. For three 
days and four nights I lay in the tent. At last on the fourth day, my soul 
(mu'gua) came out of my thigh, made a step forward and glanced back at 
my body. The mu'gua was about as large as this (ten inches). My body 
was not yet lifeless. When the mu'gua had made three steps forward, my 
body dropped, cold and dead. I looked at it for some time; it made no 
movement at all. 

Suddenly something came down and went clean through my soul. My 
soul began to go downward. It did not ascend. I reached another world 
and followed a trail there. I beheld a helper of the Father (A'po) who was 
making some dead men over again. I thought I might see the Father, but 

* The speaker indicated the place where the lodge was erected. 



302 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [VoL II, 

could only hear him. He was saying to me, *'You don't look very ill." 
A kind of thin wire was making a noise at the time. The Father had a 
buckskin bag; out of its contents he makes everything. He tapped the 
wire three times. Then I was able to see his hand, which was as small 
and clean as a baby's. Then the whole world opened up and I could see 
the earth plainly. I saw everything there. I saw my own body lying there 
dead. 

The Sun told me I would be restored to life. I did not walk back and 
I don't know how I returned. Suddenly I was back alive. For a few 
moments, I had seen the Father. He was a handsome Indian. My famil- 
iar spirit left me when I fell sick and never returned after that. 

On another occasion, I went up to the clouds. The people I met there 
were nothing but skeletons. I saw some of my friends there. In this other 
world there was a great deal of sage-brush. 



1909.] Lovne, The Northern Shoshone, 303 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

The following bibliography comprises the sources consulted in the preparation 
of this paper, as well as other publications referred to for comparative purposes. 
In the footnotes, references are made to the name of the author, followed, where 
several publications are quoted, by the letter preceding the full title in the list. 

Bancroft, Hubert Howe. History of the Pacific States. Vol. XXVI. San 

Francisco, 1890. 
Boas, Franz, (a) The Decorative Art of the North American Indians. (Popular 

Science Monthly, 1903, pp. 481-498.) 

(b) Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen KOste Amerikas. 

Berlin, 1895. 

(c) Traditions of the Tillamook. (Journal of American Folk-Lore, 

1898, Vol. XI, pp. 23-38, 133-150.) 

BouRKE, John G. On the Border with Crook. Second Edition. New York, 1892. 

Brinton, D. G. The American Race. Philadelphia, 1901. 

Burton, Richard F. The City of the Saints. New York, 1862. 

Clark, W. P. The Indian Sign Language. Philadelphia, 1885. 

CuLiN, Stewart, (a) A Sununer Trip Among the Western Indians. (Free Mu- 
seum of Science and Art, Department of Archeol- 
ogy, University of Pennsylvania Bulletin, 1901, 
Vol. III.) 
(b) Games of the North American Indians. (Twenty-foiui;h 
Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Washington, 1907.) 

CuRTiN, Jeremiah. Creation Myths of Primitive America. Boston, 1898. 

Gushing, Frank H. Zufii Folk-Tales. New York, 1901. 

De Smet, Father. Life, Letters and Travels of Father Pierre-Jean De Smet, S. J. 

1801-1873. Edited by Chittenden and Richard- 
son, New York, 1905. 

Dixon, Roland B. (a) The Northern Maidu. (Bulletin, American Museiun 

of Natural History, New York, Vol. XVII, pp. 
119-346.) 

(b) Maidu Myths. (Bulletin, American Museum of Natural 

History, New York, Vol. XVII, pp. 33-118.) 

(c) Some Coyote Stories from the Maidu Indians of Cali- 

'fomia. (Journal of American Folk-Lore, 1900, 

Vol. XIII, pp. 267-270.) 
Domenech, Emanuel. Seven Years Residence in the Great Deserts of North 

America. London, 1860. 
Dorset, George A. (a) The Shoshonean Game of Nawa'tapi. (Journal of 

American Folk-Lore, 1901, Vol. XIV, pp. 24-5.) 

(b) The Mythology of the Wichita, Washington, 1904. 

(c) Traditions of the Skidi Pawnee. (Memoirs, American 

Folk-Lore Society, 1904, Vol. VIII.) 

(d) The Cheyenne. (Field Columbian Museum, Anthro- 

pological Series, Chicago, 1905; Vol. IX.) 



304 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 



DoRSEY and Kroeber. Traditions of the Arapaho. (Field Columbian Museum, 

Anthropological Series, Chicago, 1903, Vol. V.) 

Farrand, Livingston. Traditions of the Quinault. (Publications, Jesup North 

Pacific Expedition, Vol. II, pp. 77-132.) 

Fremont, J. C. Report of the Exploring Expedition to the Rocky Mountains in 

the Year 1842 and to Oregon and North California 
in the Years 1843-'44. (Printed by order of the 
House of Representatives, Washington, 1845.) 

Gatschet, Albert S. The Klamath Indians of Southwestern Oregon. (Contribu- 
tions to North American Ethnology, Vol. II, 
Part I, United States Geological Survey, Wash- 
ington, 1890.) 

Gass, Patrick. Lewis and Clark's Journal to the Rocky Mountains, as related by 

Patrick Gass. Dayton, 1847. 

GoDDARD, E. P. Hupa Texts. (University of California Publications, American 

Archaeology and Ethnology, Berkeley, 1903-4, 
Vol. I, pp. 89-368.) 

Grinnell, George Bird. Blackfoot Lodge Tales. New York, 1903. 

Hawley, E. H. Distribution of the Notched Rattle. (American Anthropologist, 

Vol. XI, pp. 344-346.) 

Henry, Alexander. Travels and Adventures in Canada and the Indian Terri- 
tories, Between the years 1760 and 1776. New 
York, 1809. 

Hoffman, Waufer J. The Menomini Indians. (14th Annual Report, Bureau of 

American Ethnology, Washington, 1896, pp. 
3-328.) 

Hough, Walter. Fire-making Apparatus in the U. S. National Museum. (Smith- 
sonian Report, United States National Museum, 
1888, Washington, 1890, pp. 531-587.) 

Irving, Washington, (a) The Adventures of Captain Bonneville. New York, 

1860. 
(b) Astoria, or Anecdotes of an Enterprise beyond the 
Rocky Mountains. Philadelphia, 1836. 

Kroeber, Alfred L. (a) Ute Tales. (Journal of American Folk-Lore, 1901, 

Vol. XIV, pp. 252-285.) 

(b) The Arapaho. (Bulletin, American Museum of Natu- 

ral History, New York, Vol. XVIII.) 

(c) Indian Myths of South Central California. (University 

of California Publications, American Archaology 
and Ethnology, Berkeley, 1906-7, Vol. 4, pp. 
167-250.) 

(d) Shoshonean Dialects of California. (University of 

California Publications, American Archaeology 
and Ethnology, Berkeley, 1907, Vol. 4, pp. 65- 
165.) 

(e) Gros Ventre Myths and Tales. (Anthropological Papers, 

American Museum of Natural Nistory, New York, 
1907, Vol. I, Part III, pp. 55-139.) 

(f) Wishosk Myths. (Journal of American Folk-Lore, 

1905, Vol. XVIII, pp. 85-107.) 



1909.) Lawie, The Northern Shoshone. 305 

Kroeber, Alfred L. (g) Ethnology of the Gros Ventre. (Anthropological 

Papers, American Museum of Natural History, 
1908, Vol. I, Part IV, pp. 141-282.) 

Leidy, Joseph. On Remains of Primitive Art in the Bridger Basin of Southern 

Wyoming. (Hayden, Sixth Annual Report, United 
States Geological Survey, Washington, 1873, pp. 
651-653.) 

Lewis and Clark. Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition. (Thwaites 

Edition.) New York, 1905. 

Lowie, Robert H. The Test-Theme in North American Mythology. (Journal 

of American Folk-Lore, 1908, Vol. XXI, pp. 97- 
148.) 

McDermott, Louisa. Folk-Lore of the Flathead Indians of Idaho. (Journal of 

American Folk-Lore, 1901, Vol. XIV, pp. 240- 
251.) 

McGuiRE, J. D. Pipes and Smoking Customs of American Aborigines. (Report, 

United States National Museum for 1897, Wash- 
ington, 1899, Part I, pp. 361-645.) 

Mallery, Garrick. (a) Pictographs of the North American Indians. (Fourth 

Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Washington, 1886, pp. 3-256.) 
(b) Picture- Waiting of the American Indians. (Tenth Annual 
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Wash- 
ington, 1893, pp. 25-807.) 

Mason, Otis T. (a) Aboriginal Skin Dressing. (Report, United States National 

Museum, for 1888-89, Washington, 1891, pp. 553- 
589.) 

(b) Aboriginal American Basketry (Report, United States 

National Museum for 1902, Washington, 1904, 
pp. 171-548.) 

(c) Cradles of the American Aborigines. (Smithsonian Report, 

United States National Museum for 1887, Wash- 
ington, pp. 161-235.) 

(d) North American Bows, Arrows and Quivers. (Smithsonian 

Report, United States National Museum for 1893, 
Washington, 1894, pp. 631-679.) 
Matthews, Washington, (a) The Origin of the Utes, A Navajo Myth. (Ameri- 
can Antiquarian, Vol. VII, pp. 271-274.) 
(b) Navaho Legends. (Memoirs of the American Folk- 
Lore Society, 1897, Vol. V.) 
MooNEY, James, (a) The Ghost-Dance Religion. (Fourteenth Annual Report, 

Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 
1896, Part II, pp. 653-1110.) 
(b) Calendar History of the Kiowa. (Seventeenth Annual 
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Wash- 
ington, 1898, Part I, pp. 141-445.) 
Parker, Samxjel, Rev. Journal of an Exploring Tour beyond the Rocky Moun- 
tains. Fifth Edition. Auburn, 1846. 



306 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [VoL II. 

Powell, J. W. (a) Sketch of the Mythology of the North American Indians. 
4 First Annual Report, Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, Washington, 188 1, pp. 19-56.) 

(b) Outlines of the Philosophy of the North American Indians. 

New York, 1877. 

(c) On Limitations to the Use of Some Anthropological Data. 

(First Annual Report, Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, Washington, 1881, pp. 73-86.) 

Remy, Jules. A Journey to Great Salt Lake City. London, 1861. 2 vols. 

Report on Indians Taxed and Indians not Taxed in the United States at the 

Eleventh Census: 1890. Washington, 1894. 
(Quoted as "Report 1890.") 

Repobts of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 

Ross, Alexander. The Fiu* Hunters of the Far West. A Narrative of Adventures 

in the Oregon and Rocky Mountains. London, 
1855. 2 vols. 

ScHOOLCRAPT, Hbnry R. (a) Historical and Statistical Information respecting 

the History, Condition and Prospects of the 
Indian Tribes of the United States. Philadelphia, 
1851. 6 vols, 
(b) The Myth of Hiawatha. Philadelphia, 1856. 

Simpson, J. H. The Shortest Route to California. Philadelphia, 1869. 

Spindbn, Herbert J. Myths of the Nez Perc^ Indians. (Journal of American 

Folk-Lore, 1908, Vol. XXI, pp. 13-23, 149-158.) 

Teft, James. Traditions of the Thompson River Indians. (Memoirs, American 

Folk-Lore Society, 1898, Vol. VI.) 

Townsend, John K. Narrative of a Journey across the Rocky Mountains to 

the Columbia River. (Thwaites, Early Western 
Travels, Cleveland, Ohio, 1905, Vol. XXI, pp. 
107-369.) 

WissLER, Clark, and D. C. Duvall. Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians 

(Anthropological Papers of the American Museum 
of Natural History. Vol. II, Part I, pp. 1-164.) 

Wyeth, Nathaniel J. Indian Tribes of the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains; 

the Salt Lake Basin, the Valley of the Great Saap- 
tin, or Lewis' River, and the Pacific Coasts, of 
Oregon. (Schoolcraft, (a) Part I, pp. 204-228.) 

Yarrow, H. C. A Further Contribution to the Study of the Mortuary Customs of 

the North American Indians. (First Annual 
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Wash- 
ington, 1881, pp. 89-203.) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Platk I. 




ANTHROPOLOGICAL PAPERS 

OF THB 

American Museum of Natural History 

Vol. II, Pabt III. 



NOTES CONCERNING NEW COLLECTIONS. 
Edited by Clark Wissler. 



CONTENTS. 

Page 

Introduction 311 

List of Donors, 1906-1908 312 

North America 313 

The Lewisohn Tlingit Collection 313 

The Eskimo of Prince Albert Land 314 

The Eskimo of Mackenzie River 316 

Eskimo near Pond's Bay 316 

The Norton Collection 318 

The Booth Collection from New York State 320 

West Indies 322 

Costa Rica 322 

South America 330 

The Schmidt and Weiss Collection 330 

Painted Capa from Punta Arenas 332 

Cauca Valley Black Pottery 333 

Terra cotta Stamps 333 

Munmiified Body from Chile 334 

Islands of the Pacific Ocean 336 

Hawaii 336 

New Caledonia 337 

New Zealand 340 

Samoa 345 

Bismarck Archipelago 346 

Africa 347 

The Congo 347 

Benin 352 

British South Africa 353 

Archaeology 355 

307 



308 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Asia 356 

Philippine Islands 366 

Upper Burma 362 

Andaman Islands 363 

Archaeology 363 

Physical Anthropology 364 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Plates. 

II. From Prince Albert Land. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 60-5855 A), length 128 
cm.; Fig. 2 (60-5855 B); Fig. 3 (60-5857), length 26 cm.; Fig. 4 (60- 
5864); Fig. 5 (60-5858), length 150 cm.; Fig. 6 (60-5855 I. F, C, E, K, 
H), length 88 cm. 

III. Banner Stones from Valley of the Hudson. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 20.0- 
2140), length 6.5 cm.; Fig. 2 (20.0-2154), length 7 cm.; Fig. 3 (20.0- 
2148), length 10 cm.; Fig. 4 (20.0-2147), length 5 cm.; Fig. 5 (20.0- 
2152), length 5 cm.; Fig. 6 (20.0-2250), length 6 cm.; Fig. 7 (20.0-2138), 
length 9 cm.; Fig. 8 (20.0-2153), length 8 cm.; Fig. 9 (20.0-2186), 
length 8 cm.; Fig. 10 (20.0-2158), length 8 cm.; Fig. 11 (20.0-2157), 
length 14 cm.; Fig. 12 (20.0-2155), length 15 cm.; Fig. 13 (20.0-2181), 
length 13 cm.; Fig. 14 (20.0-2129), length 8 cm.; Fig. 15 (20.0-2150), 
length 6 cm.; Fig. 16 (20.0-2159), length 9 cm.; Fig. 17 (20.0-2149), 
length 5 cm.; Fig. 18 (20.0-2151), length 5 cm.; Fig. 19 (20.0-2146), 
length 5 cm. 

IV. Nicoya Pottery. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 30.0-1479), length 13 cm.; Fig. 2 
(30.0-1466), length 20 cm.; Fig. 3 (30.0-1469), length 13 cm.; Fig. 4 
(30.0-1315), length 18 cm.; Fig. 5 (30.0-1321), length 24 cm.; Fig. 6 
(30.0-1335), length 19 cm.; Fig. 7 (30.O-1339), length 28 cm.; Fig. 8 
(30.0-1334), length 23 cm.; Fig. 9 (30.0-1340), length 27 cm.; Fig. 10 
(30.0-1468), length 35 cm.; Fig. 11 (30.0-1485), length 24 cm. 
V. Armadillo Jar. (Museum No. 30.0-1484), length 21 cm. 
VI. Pottery from Nicoya and Terraba. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 30.0-1361), 
length 17 cm.; Fig. 2 (30.0-1371), length 27 cm.; Fig. 3 (30.0-1504), 
length 6 cm.; Fig. 4 (30.0-1364), length 5 cm.; Fig. 5 (30.0-1366), 
length 9 cm.; Fig. 6 (30.0-1367), length 9 cm.; Fig. 7 (30.0-1506), 
length 6 cm.; Fig. 8 (30.0-1505), length 8 cm.; Fig. 9 (30.0-1362), 
length 6 cm.; Fig. 10 (30.0-1363), length 7 cm.; Fig. 11 (30.0-1507), 
length 16 cm.; Fig. 12 (30.0-1359), length 11 cm. 

VII. Full Costume of the TukHno Indians. 
VIII. Painted Capa from Punta Arenas. 
IX. Black Pottery from Colombia. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 41.0-198), length 
12 cm,; Fig. 2 (41.0-99), length 13 cm.; Fig. 3 (41.0-183), length 14 cm.; 
Fig. 4 (41.0-148), length 10 cm.; Fig. 5 (41.0-221), length 16 cm.; Fig. 6 
(41.0-142), length 9 cm.; Fig. 7 (41.0-145), length 16 cm.; Fig. 8 (41.0- 
60), length 5 cm.; Fig. 9 (41.0-106), length 12 cm.; Fig. 10 (41.0-121), 
length 8 cm.; Fig. 11 (41.0-64), length 7 cm.; Fig. 12 (41.0-63), length 
7 cm. 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



309 



X. 

XI. 
XII. 

XIII. 



XIV. 
XV. 



XVI. 



XVII. 



XVIII. 



XIX. 



XX. 



XXI. 



A Mummy from Chile. 

The Kearny Feather Cape. (Museum No. 80.0-784). Length 211 cm. 

Technique of the Kearny Cape. Basket from New Hebrides. (Museum 
No. 80.0-734), length 30 cm. 

Carved Figures from Bismarck Archipelago. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 80.0- 
197), length 157 cm.; Fig. 2 (80.0-191), length 170 cm.; Fig. 3 (80.0- 
195), length 267 cm.; Fig. 4 (80.0-194), length 129 cm.; Fig. 5 (80.0- 
192), length 147 cm. 

Taboo House, Bismarck Archipelago. 

Wood Carvings from Mudandi. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0-1450) length 
96 cm.; Fig. 2 (90.0-1449), length 62 cm.; Fig. 3 (90.0-1445), length 
67 cm.; Fig. 4 (90.0-1442), length 60 cm.; Fig. 6 (90.0-1444), length 
64 cm.; Fig. 6 (90.0-1443), length 58 cm. 

Wood Carvings from the Congo. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0-3242), 
length 8 cm.; Fig. 2 (90.0-2236), length 20 cm.; Fig. 3 (90.0-2246), 
length 21 tm.; Fig. 4 (90.0-2257), length 23 cm.; Fig. 5 (90.0-5042), 
length 18 cm.; Fig. 6 (90.0-2237), length 16 cm.; Fig. 7 (90.0-5235), 
length 17 cm.; Fig. 8 (90.0-5099 A-B), length 45 cm.; Fig. 9 (90.0- 
5025), length 35 cm.; Fig. 10 (90.0-4898), length 34 cm.; Fig. 11 (90.0- 
2224), length 21 cm. 

African Images and Masks. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0-2397), length 87 
cm.; Fig. 2 (90.0-3665), length 39 cm.; Fig. 3 (90.0-2260), length 
50 cm.; Fig. 4 (90.0-5309), length 43 cm.; Fig. 5 (90.0-2384), length 
34 cm.; Fig. 6 (90.0-2309), length 35 cm.; Fig. 7 (90.0-2308), length 
32 cm.; Fig. 8 (90.0-5308), length 92 cm. 

Musical Instruments from the Congo. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0-2314), 

. length, 60 cm.; Fig. 2 (90.0-2447), length 28 cm.; Fig. 3 (90.0-5078), 
length 30 cm.; Fig. 4 (90.0-5096), length 66 cm.; Fig. 5 (90.0-5185 A), 
length 78 cm.; Fig. 6 (90.0-3125), length 99 cm.; Fig. 7 (90.0-5238- 
A-C), length 43 cm.; Fig. 8 (90.0-2417), length 44 cm.; Fig. 9 (90.0- 
2355), length 26 cm.; Fig. 10 (90.-4975), length 74 cm. 

Bakuba Pile Cloth. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0-2208); Fig. 2 (90.0-2191); 
Fig. 3 (90.O-2204); Fig. 4 (90.0-2199); Fig. 5 (90.0-5194); Fig. 6 (90.0- 
2178); Fig. 7 (90.0-2195). 

Bakuba Pile Cloth. Fig. 1 (90.0-2207); Fig. 2 (90.0-2192); Fig. 3 (90.0- 
5278); Fig. 4 (90.0-2193); Fig. 5 (90.0-2183); Fig. 6 (90.0-2182); 
Fig. 7 (90.0-5195). 

Carved Tusks and a Bronze Head. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0-97), length 
24 cm.; Fig. 2 (90.0-94), length 84 cm.; Fig. 3 (90.0-98), length 22 cm.; 
Fig. 4 (90.0-2012), length 170 cm.; Fig. 5 (90.0-95), length 62 cm.; 
Fig. 6 (90.0-96), length 67 cm.; Fig. 7 (90.0-2013), length 173 cm.; Fig. 
8 (90.0-1975), length 36 cm.; Fig. 9 (90.0-1976), length 40 cm.; Fig. 
10 (90.0-2017), length 37 cm. 

Baskets, Pottery, Gourds and Wooden Ware. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 90.0- 
653), length 27 cm.; Fig. 2 (90.0-1121), length 26 cm.; Fig. 3 (90.0-1117), 
length 30 cm.; Fig. 4 (90.0-1120), length 24 cm.; Fig. 5 (90.0-706), 
height 15 cm.; Fig. 6 (90.0-639), length 17 cm.; Fig. 7 (90.0-638), 
length 26 cm.; Fig. 8(90.0-796), length 37 cm.; Fig. 9 (90.0-779), 



310 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

length 18 cm.; Fig. 10 (90.0-656), length 15 cm.; Fig. 11 (90.0-804), 
length 31 cm.; Fig. 12 (90.0-671), length 21 cm.; Fig. 13 (90.0-794), 
length 40 cm. 
XXII. From the Philippine Islands. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 70.1-4366), length 
18 cm.; Fig. 2 (70.1-4351), length 14 cm.; Fig. 3 (70.1-4365), length 
14 cm.; Fig. 4 (70.1-4283), length 49 cm.; Fig. 5 (70.1-4081), length 
43 cm.; Fig. 6 (70.1-2774), length 37 cm.; Fig. 7 (70.1-4083), length 
40 cm. 
XXIII. Stone Implements from China. Fig. 1 (Museum No. 70.0-180), length 
10 cm.; Fig. 2 (70.0-178), length 8 cm.; Fig. 3 (70.0-185), length 10 cm.; 
Fig. 4 (70.0-180), length 10 cm.; Fig. 5 (70.0-185), length 10 cm.; Fig. 
6 (70.0-179), length 12 cm.; Fig. 7 (70.0-186), length 10 cm.; Fig. 8 
(70.0-184), length 7 cm.; Fig. 9 (70.0-183), length 10 cm.; Fig. 10 
(70.0-181), length 8 cm.; Fig. 11 (70.0-182), length 6 cm.; Fig. 12 
(70.0- 187), length 7 cm. 



Tbxt Fiqures. 

Page 

1. Copper- bladed Knife from Prince Albert Land 315 

2. Leather Masks from near Pond's Bay 316 

3. Bone Needle Case 317 

4. Pictographs Etched in Ivory 318 

5. Throwing boards and line rack, ivory inlaid . . . • . . .319 

6. Kayak from Greenland and Pond's Bay 320 

7. Kayak from Greenland and Pond's Bay 321 

8. Map of Northwestern South America and the Region Occupied by the 

Tukftno Indians. 330 

9. Design from a Terra Cotta Stamp 334 

10. Designs, on Terra Cotta Stamps from Colombia 335 

11. Knots in Feather Cape 336 

12. Foundation Pattern for a Feather Cape 337 

13. Wooden Vessels from the New Hebrides 338 

14. Designs on a Bowl from Marquesas 339 

15. Technique of Maori Capes 343 

16. Technique of Overlay in Maori Garments 343 

17. Forms of Weapons from the Congo 348 

18. Carved Spoon Handles . . . 353 

19. Ivory Pins 354 

20. A Musical Bow 355 

21. Decorations on Lime Boxes 358 

22. Designs and Forms in Kris Decorations 360 

23. Types of Malayian Swords 361 



INTRODUCTION. 

The following publication has been prepared in response to many calls 
for information concerning new anthropological collections received at the 
Museum. The plan was to enumerate what seemed to be important fea- 
tures of acquisitions not resulting from field-work carried on under the direct 
supervision of the anthropological staff, but from the generosity of the 
many donors whose support has contributed in a large way to the increase 
of our general collections. The results of field-work together with notes 
on donated collections pertaining to related areas will appear under special 
titles in the series of which this publication is a part. While the intent was 
to treat especially such acquisitions for 1908, it seemed best to mention some 
of those received during the two or three preceding years. Since the field 
work of the staff is practically confined to the North American continent, 
relatively more space has to be given to the collections from other continents. 
In passing, it may be stated that during the period 1906-1908, inclusive, 
fourteen field parties were sent out in North America under the direction of 
the staff, all of which returned collections and data for future publications. 
In addition some collections were donated from areas not visited by these 
field parties. Such of these as seemed to add new data have received notice 
in the following pages. 

From foreign countries the acquisitions have been considerable. Pre- 
vious to 1906, there were in the Museum practically no representative col- 
lections from Africa nor many of the Islands of the Pacific Ocean. Since 
that time something over six thousand catalogue numbers have been added 
for Africa, while the Islands of the Pacific have greatly increased repre- 
sentation for Polynesia and Melanesia. Also where there were but a few 
scattered specimens from the Philippine Islands, there is now a large col- 
lection. Finally, mention may be made of a fairly complete collection from 
the Andaman Islands and imp)ortant collections from the South American 
Indians. As the great general gain in these foreign collections has been 
made possible by the direct and indirect donations of many patrons, the 
credit for this gratifying progress belongs to them. 

In preparing the following notes, no attempt has been made to discuss 
all of the important features of the various collections, but to select such as 

311 



312 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [VoL IE, 



seemed of special interest to the work of the anthropological staff and to 
current discussion. To Dr. Robert H. Lowie, are to be credited the notes 
on African collections; to Mr. George H. Pepper, those on the Central 
American states; to Miss Mary Lois Kissell, the notes on basketry and 
textiles; to Mr. Charles W. Mead, the notes on South America and New 
Zealand; to Mr. Alanson Skinner, notes on many of the archseological 
collections; to Mr. William Orchard, many of the photographs and plates; 
to Miss Ruth B. Howe, the drawings; to Miss Grace E. Taft, the technical 
arrangement of the manuscript for the press; and to Mr. William A. Sabine^ 
assistance in selecting the materials to be described. 

The Editor. 



List of Donors, 1906-1908. 



George Albro 

Champe S. Andrews 

Dr. S. T. Armstrong 

Belgian Government 

F. A. Bertold 

W. M. Blake 

Henry Booth 

George S. Bowdoin 

Irving Brokaw 

Bamum Brown 

Bull Child (Blackfoot^Indian) 

Dr. Walter Channing 

Jas. Chapin 

Alex. C. Chenoweth 

J. R. Cushier 

William Demuth 

D^partement de rint^rieur, Etat In- 

d^pendant du Congo 
T. E. Donne 
Richard Douglas 
H. Duffy 
Robert Dumont 
Theo. Dwight 
Dr. J. J. Edwards 
Lieut. G. T. Emmons 
Miss Adele M. Field 



Charles H. Flint 
J. B. Foulke 
Dr. W. Freudenthal 
Robt. F. Gilder 
Wilbur F. Goodrich 
Dr. James Goodwillie 
Dr. Frederic Griffith 
Thos. M. Guerin 
Alfred Hammerstein 
Harper Bros. 
Gerald E. Hart 
George G. Heye 
G. K. Hollister 
Henry W. Howell 
Archer M. Huntington 
Morris K. Jesup 
Mrs. Morris K. Jesup 
Henry E. Jones 
Mrs. D. F. Kelley 
George A. King 
George B. King 
Edward J. Knapp 
Mrs. Charles B. Knox 
E. Kuzmier 
Frank G. Lahey 
Dr. E. A. Le Souef 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



313 



Dr. A. B. Lewis 

R. Maccarone 

W. S. MacCoUester 

T. MacGregor MacDonald 

G. Archibald McTavish 

Mrs. Niles Ross Martin 

E. P. Mathewson 

Mrs. J. J. Mayhan 

George W. Maynard 

Metropolitan Museum 

Paul C. MUler 

Pitser Miller 

Hon. Mason Mitchell 

J. P. Morgan 

Ralph M. Munroe 

B. T. Nash 

Dr. Francis C. Nicholas 

G. Frederic Norton 

George N. Pindar 

Paul Radin 

Miss Dorothy Reed 

Miss F. L. Risley 

Capt. Wirt Robinson 

Sheldon Rodman 

T. S. Rumney 

M. F. Savage 



Emest Schemikow 
Mrs. C. Scheuer 
Mrs. Philip Schuyler 
Mrs. Louis Scott 
Dr. L. L. Seaman 
Chas. H. Senff 
H. W. Seton-Karr 
Henry Siegel 
Alanson Skinner 
Capt. Joshua Slocum 
Harlan L Smith 
Mrs. J. Smith 
J. G. Phelps Stokes 
Mrs. Mary H. Taft 
R. Thys 

C. H. Townsend 
J. Reeve Van der Veer 
W. A. Welch 
Mrs. John Wheelwright 
Caspar Whitney 
Gen. Charles A. Whittier 
Miss T. Wilbour 
Mrs. Viola G. Wissler 
Women's National Relief Associa- 
tion 
Louis G. Zumaya 



NORTH AMERICA. 



During the interval (190&-08) the Museum acquired, as the results 
of field-work, collections from the Eskimo, Cree, Assiniboine, D6n^, Sarcee, 
Nez Perc^, Blackfoot, Crow, Shoshone, Dakota, Hidatsa and Iroquois; 
also archaeological collections from Wyoming, Idaho and New York. These 
collections will receive special attention in future publications based upon 
the results of the several investigations now under way. The following 
notes, therefore, refer to collections, acquired by gift or otherwise, from 
regions or peoples not at present the subjects of investigation by the anthro- 
pological staff. 

The Levnsokn Tlingit Collection. Mr. Adolph Lewisohn presented an 
important collection from the Tlingit Indians of Alaska, collected by Mr. 
Louis Levy. Among the ceremonial objects may be mentioned a shaman's 



314 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

box, or the chest containing a shaman's outfit, evidently taken from a grave 
after several years of exposure by which the contents were somewhat dam- 
aged. In the box were a few carved rattles, ivory necklaces, a head-dress 
of carved goat-homs, a bunch of the shaman's hair, and a number of small 
bundles. These latter are from a subjective point of view the most im- 
portant, consisting of the skins of small animals and birds wrapped up with 
sticks, pieces of cloth and other small objects. In treating the sick, the 
shammi holds these little bundles in his hand, waving them over the patient, 
while. 3Jhging songs and uttering prayers. In the bottom of the box was 
found tlie most important of all, a small package containing a number of 
vegetable compounds the uses of which were known only to the shaman 
himself. Of some interest also is a series of one hundred decorated baskets 
for which Mr. Levy secured pattern names. Making due allowance for 
differences in translation, the names for the various figures agree fairly well 
with those recorded by Lieutenant G. T. Emmons.^ 

The Eskimo of Prince Albert Land, In 1907 a small collection was 
received from Captain S. F. Cottle to whom it was given by the commander 
of a whaling vessel that touched at Minto Inlet, at which point he met the 
Eskimo from w^hom the specimens here mentioned were said to have been 
received. So far as our observation goes no specimens from this coast have 
been described. The bow (Plate ii) is of wood, rather heavy, with the 
double curve- sometimes seen in Alaskan bows. The belly is of one piece 
but the ends are built up by splicing in the same manner as the arrows to 
be described later. The greater curve at one end is due to a break under 
the lashing. The back is not trussed by a cable, but by a layer of sinew 
cords, held in place on the belly of the bow by a single cord running in a 
spiral. The only lashing is at the bend where the cord is laced somewhat 
like Alaskan bows. Another feature found also on some Alaskan bows is a 
backing of rawhide underneath the sinew strands, extending the entire 
length and hooked over the notched ends. Again under the lashing at the 
bends and at the grip, the bow is reinforced by plates of bone, as in some 
Alaskan bows. Curiously enough a piece of sheet iron, probably part of a 
tin, has been laid over one of these plates. The quiver is simple, but seem- 
ingly different in shape from those of other tribes. There is no bow-case. 
The carrying strap is a curious band of braided sinew. 

There are seven arrows with copper points and three with bone. The 
former are provided with fore-shafts of bone which with one exception are 
barbed upon one side. The copper points are of three types: a leaf-shaped 
point with a tang driven into the fore-shaft, a triangular point set in a notch 



1 Memoirs. American Museum of Natural History, Vol. Ill, Part II, pp. 229-277. 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



315 



and held by a copper rivet, and a triangular point bearing at one side of the 
base a barb similar to those on bone fore-shafts. One of the bone points 
is of the same form as last mentioned. The remaining bone points are of 
the familiar long one-side-barbed type (Plate ii). 

The arrows range in length from 82 to 87 em. Three of them have 
three feathers, the others but two. In a few eases the upper end of one 
feather is forced into an incision on the shaft instead of passing under the 
sinew wrapping. The shafts have been built up from several pieces of 
wood neatly fitted in v-shaped splices and apparently arranged so as to pre- 
vent warping. The fore-shafts are inserted, the shafts being reinforced at 
that place by sinew wTapping. 

There is also a copper-bladed woman's knife (Fig. 1) with a two-part 
bone handle and what appears to be a bone 
dagger with a wrapped grip suggesting Athapascan 
influence (Plate ii). 

A woman's coat has a long narrow tapering 
tail resembling most those of Cumberland Sound. 
The hoods are pointed in the extreme. A cap 
cut to fit the head closely and surmounted by the 
beak of a bird is of unusual interest. The 
assimiption is that this cap was worn inside the 
hood, whose tip rested on the spike-like beak at 
the top. It is formed by piecing narrow strips of 
caribou skin, those with the hair and those dressed 
alternating. The dressed bands are painted red 
and black. The same kind of technique is found 
on the knee-bands of a pair of trousers and the facing of a coat. Assuming 
that the hair-covered strip simply divides the painted bands, the color 
scheme is two red, one black, etc., with a variation for the front of the cap. 
A long scattering fringe hangs from its top. 

From a comparative point of view, this small collection is of some interest. 
We find similarities to Alaskan Eskimo culture on the one hand and to 
Central Eskimo on the other. Thus while many features of the bow are 
Alaskan, the use of many strands and the form of the wrapping suggest the 
Central culture. The arrows also show some western characteristics, 
but in the form of some points duplicate specimens from the east.^ The 
woman's knife has the form of modem examples from the west coast of 
Hudson Bay. The cut of the garments also resembles those from Hudson 
Bay, but the technique of decoration suggests Alaskan or even Siberian in- 
fluence. 




Fig. 1 (60-5866). Copper- 
bladed Knife from Prince 
Albert Land. Length, 8 cm. 



» See Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. XV, p. 83. 



316 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



The Eskimo of Mackenzie River. By purchase a small number of 
specimens from the mouth of the Mackenzie River were secured. There 
are models of kayaks, the well-known Eskimoan hand drum, snow probes, 
bone needles, horn spoons, a set of wooden gambling sticks, and a bow 
with quiver full of arrows. The arrows are two-feathered. Of bird arrows 
there are three types: (a) a blunt cylindrical point; (b) a blunt point ending 
in three radiating wings; and (c) one ending in four such wings at right 
angles. Curiously enough while the most of these are of bone, there are 
two with iron points worked out as in t}^pe c. The barbed arrows are longer 
and heavier than the preceding, bearing long iron points variously barbed. 




Fig. 2(60-5877,8). Leather Masks from near Ponds Bay. Lengths, 23 cm. 



The decorations upon these shafts and points are various combinations of 
parallel lines either transverse or spiral. The bow is of wood in single 
curve, backed with two sinew cables, lashed near each end and slightly at 
the grip. The quiver is ornamented by pairs of parallel oblique red lines 
and on its back is a small pocket containing sinew, presumably for mending 
arrows.^ 

Eskimo near Pond's Bay. During the year a collection was received 
from the Eskimo residing in the vicinity of Pond's Bay and Eclipse Sound, 
northeast of Baffin I^and. Most of the specimens have the general char- 
acteristics of Central Eskimoan culture quite fully described in recent 



1 This collection by gift from Mrs. Morris K. Jesup. 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



317 



publications from this Museum.* Further, it may be said that they show 
many of the minor details peculiar to Cumberland Sound collections. We 
may mention, however, four leather masks, since with one or two exceptions 
such masks have not been found in previous collections from this area. 
Two of them are similar to the one described by Professor Boas as having 
been collected near Cumberland Sound.' The mouths and eyes are bordered 
by strips of white sealskin while the faces of the masks are black. Both 
have the curiously cun'ed bands on the forehead, the lines radiating from the 
nostrils and chin, and heavy eyebrows of fur. The remaining two want 
the radiatting lines and have in addition hairy lips. One has peculiar squint- 
ing eyes (Fig. 2). 

Since the distribution of stone pipes among the Central Eskimo has 
frequently been a matter of discussion, it may be of interest to note that 
eight are found in this collection. Most of these are brass-bound and iden- 
tical in form with those described as from the west coast of Hudson Bay.' 
According to Professor Boas, the tribes west of Hudson Bay made these 
stone pipes, whence it seems probable that they are also made at Pond's 
Bay. 

A gracefully fashioned throwing board has the cur\'ed head and is other- 
wise identical in detail with a specimen illustrated in a previous publication.* 

The number of slate blades and points is unusual for 
Central Eskimo collections. The knife blades are of two 
forms, the usual triangular woman's knife blade with one 
or two perforations and a long narrow straight-backed 
blade resembling Alaskan knives. It seems, however, 
that the blades of the triangular form are peculiar in that 
the cutting edges are straight instead of curved. There are 
also a large number of triangular slate points with one and 
two perforations. Finally there is a complete harpoon 
head fashioned from a single piece of slate. 

A rectangular needle case, apparently an old specimen 
picked up on a camp site, is shown in Fig. 3. In cross- 
section, it is very like a Netchillik case,* which Professor 
Boas considered exceptional, though paralleled by a single 
specimen from King William Land. On the other hand, 
the decoration of this needle case is produced by dots in- 
stead of lines, though its general arrangement is somewhat 
like the two just mentioned. 




Fig. 3 (60-6019). 
Bone Needle Case. 
Length, 8 cm. 



* Franz Boas, Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. XV, 1907. 
2 Bulletin, Vol. XV. op. cit., p. 140, fig. 169. 

8 Bulletin, Vol. XV. op. cit., p. 110, fig. 160. 

* Bulletin, Vol. XV, op. cit., p. 16. 

» Bulletin, Vol. XV. op. cit., p. 459. 



318 



Anthropological Papers American, Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



Perhaps of greater interest is a small curved piece of ivory resembling 
the bow of a drill upon the sides of which are small delicate pictographs. 
Unfortunately the specimen is old and much weathered so that its entire 
restoration is impossible (Fig. 4). However, what we have bears a closer 
analogy to Alaskan art than anything so far brought to our notice among 
the collections from the Central Eskimo. 

Finally, mention should be made of a peculiar ornament bearing four 
rows of caribou teeth, in series, arranged on a rectangular mat of two colors. 
The whole is backed by a piece of membrane, apparently seal intestine. 
The only similar specimen we have seen is from St. Lawrence Island, Alaska, 
collected by Lieut. G. T. Emmons (0-346). This is a long girdle bearing a 



I T /r 




fe-R^ 



X ^^ ^>T^^^fainiii 






iLjHii 



',fiimIMSimurj^:^/iiTmii<^ ' n 



/i'"%n^ 



i»iff "'''^^^^. 



Fig. 4 (60-5944). Pictographs on Ivory. Length, 23 cm. 

single row of such teeth; but arranged and attached in precisely the same 
manner as on the' Pond's Bay piece. 

Thus there are several peculiar resemblances to Alaskan culture presented 
by this collection from Pond's Bay, one of the extreme eastern out-posts of 
the Central Eskimo. 

The Norton Collection. An interesting series of specimens from Hoktens- 
borg and Discoe Islands off the southwest shore of Greenland was presented 
to the Department by G. Frederic Norton. The series from Holstensborg 
consists of a complete kayak outfit of the Greenland type. While there is 
nothing strictly new or suggestive in this collection, some of its characteristics 
may be given, since no American writer seems to have described Greenland 
specimens from this point of view. There is the characteristic harpoon and 
lance, each with a throwing board. As shown in Fig. 5, the throwing 



1909.] 



Notes on New CoUectiona, 



319 



board is held in position by two ivory pegs. In throwing the slanting peg 
fits into the eye of the board which is shaped so as not to bind when the 
throw is made. For details as to manipulation as well as illustrations of 
parts, see Fridtjof Hansen's Eskimoliv.^ The two throwing boards col- 
lected by Mr. Norton differ in the form of the grip, one having a series of 
notches for the fingers instead of a single groove. 

Perhaps the most characteristic general feature of Greenland specimens 



y 




Fig. 5 a (60-6199), b (60-«193 B), c (60-6192 B). 
inlaid. Length of a, 27 cm. ; b 44 cm. ; c, 44 cm. 



Throwing boards and Line Rack, Ivory 



is the inlaying and trimming with bone and ivory. Kayak paddles are 
tipped and edged with bone, the support of the line rack (Fig. 5c) is inlaid 
with disks and crossbars of ivory similar to the inlaying and trimmings of 
the two throwing boards shown in the illustration. The fore-shafts of the 
harpoons and lances are decorated with incised designs and relief work, 
while one harpoon shaft is topped by an ivory ball with a carved pedestal. 
While it may well be, as has been suggested, that this technique is the result 



1 Also F. Krause, Smithsonian Report for 1904, pp. 619-638. 



320 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



of long contact with Europeans, the illustrations in many books treating of 
Greenland indicate considerable permanence of motive as well as detail in 
all such decoration. 

The kayak seems to be of the typical Greenland 
type, and is well-fumished with carved ivory sup- 
ports, toggles and buttons. Fig. 6 shows the deck 
with its trimmings and the outline in longitudinal 
section. In this connection the reader may be 
referred to an illustration showing all the accessories 
such as float, lance, harpoon, line, etc., in place for 
the hunt, from which an idea of the use of these 
various toggles can be had.^ A kayak collected in 
the vicinity of Pond's Bay bears some striking resem- 
blances to the Greenland type, the paddles being 
almost identical (Fig. 7). 

The Booth Collection from New York State. A 
notable accession, during the past year, was the 
Henry M. Booth collection of archaeological speci- 
mens from New York State. The collection which 
numbers 1154 catalogued specimens was gathered 
almost entirely from the Hudson River Valley in and 
between Westchester County and Albany, and well 
represents the prehistoric culture of the Algonkin 
Indians of that region. 

One feature deserving of special mention is the 
unusually large number of banner stones. While 
these finely made and little understood objects occur 
throughout New York State, and the New England 
and Middle States in general, they are as a rule far 
from abundant in any locality. From the compara- 
tively small area covered by this collection, however, 
come about twenty specimens, both whole and frag- 
mentary. They are of several types, notably the 
plain, notched and perforated forms. The latter 
showing considerable range of design and recalling 
the archaeology of Ohio, Indiana and the middle 
west generally. The perfectly plain, unnotched type 
is quite infrequent, though not unknown along the 
New York seaboard, and the one shown in Fig. 13, 
Plate III, is a decided rarity; whereas, from other collections examined by 



I' 



Fig. 6 a, 6 (60-6190.1). 
Kayak from Greenland 
andlPonds Bay. Length, 
225 cm. 



> Hansen. Eskimoliv. p. 37. 



1909.] 



Notes on New CoUeciions. 



321 



the writer, it might be supposed that the notched form, Fig. 16, would be 
well represented. Another shown in Fig. 4 was in process of manufacture, 
the shaping being completed, and drilling, evidently with a stone drill, 
begun. This latter fact is rather unusual as the un- 
finished specimens in other collections usually show 
a core, suggesting the use of a hollow reed and sand 
drill. Fig. 3 shows a broken specimen, the fractured 
surfaces of which have been smoothed over and the 
object apparently still kept for some purpose. 

Several "bird'' amulets, a number of gorgets, and 
one or two stone tubes are also in the collection, as 
are a number of semilunar knives and one rubbed 
slate arrow or knife point. The celt is more frequent 
than the grooved axe, several types of each occurring. 
The gouge, adze, and long pestle, so typical of New 
England are very well represented. The number of 
long stone pestles is truly astonishing. Several very 
deep stone mortars and a large grooved stone of the 
type usually considered as having been used to shape 
arrow shafts may be mentioned. 

Pottery is rather poorly represented, and is in the 
main Algonkian though some Iroquoian types occur. 
Steatite seems nearly as common for the area in 
question. No pipes of either clay or stone are 
among the specimens. There is, however, what 
appears to be the stem of a broken steatite pipe, 
worked over for a bead or other ornament. 

The bulk of the collection is made up of flints, 
arrow points, knives, drills, chips, rejects, etc., ham- 
merstones, sinkers, grooved and notched. There are 
several notched axes, and one or two pitted stones of 
the so-called '*lap stone" type. There are several 
trade articles and articles of Indian make inspired 
by European contact, the most interesting being a 
steatite bullet mould and an earring of brass or 
copper wire upon which are strung several shell 
beads. 

Judging the prehistoric culture of the Hudson 
River Valley above Manhattan Island by the material 

at hand; the number of long pestles, gouges, and adzes; the scarcity of 
pottery in contrast to the comparative abundance of steatite; the presence 



y 



Fig. 7 a, b (60-«167, 
6172) Kayak from Green- 
land and Ponds Bay 
Length 216 cm. 



322 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. 11^ 

of the rubbed slate semilunar knives, etc.; one is inclined to class it with 
the culture of New England, especially that of the Connecticut River Valley. 
It may be well to note that the Mahican, who within historic times held the 
Hudson River Valley — at least on the east bank, from whence this collection 
was largely derived, — were the immediate ancestors and near relations of 
the Mohegans of the lower Connecticut River valley, who separated from 
them about the period of European contact. (A. S.) 

West Indies, Dr. S. T. Armstrong presented a collection of five stone 
axes from the Island of Cuba, collected in 1898 in the Department of Puerto 
Principe. They are particularly interesting in view of the fact that archaeo- 
logical material from this Island is hard to obtain. 

A large stone axe and a rubbing stone from St. Vincent were presented 
by Mr. T. MacGregor MacDonald of Wallilabo, St. Vincent, B. W. I. 
The former was found at Chateau Belair and the latter came from Walli- 
labo. 

Another collection of typical stone implements from St. Vincent was 
obtained by exchange. The predominating implement is the axe. The 
material was collected by Rev. Thomas Huckerby, a missionary who lived 
at Chateau Belair. Many of the specimens were found by this gentleman, 
and the remainder were obtained by purchase from natives in the villages 
where they were found. The major part of the material came from Stubbs 
Village, Barronallie, Layon, Fitzhughes, Troumacca Valley and Petit 
Bordel. 

Costa Rica, During the past year, the Anthropological Department 
has been enriched by the addition of a collection of pottery and stone objects 
from Costa Rica. Many of the specimens are new forms which help to fill 
in the gaps in the Museum material from this culture area, and there is one 
group from the southern part of the country that may be new to science. 
The material was bought in Costa Rica by Mr. E. O. Schemikow of this city, 
and presented to the Museum. The material as presented was a combina- 
tion of four lots, one of which was known as the Weiss collection, this being 
the largest. The other three were the La Croix, Gruinter and Underwood 
collections. The only one of the four that was properly catalogued was 
the one made by Weiss. According to Mr. Schemikow, Mr. Weiss is an 
experienced collector who can be trusted, inasmuch as he is careful to ascer- 
tain the exact location of the ** finds" that come into his hands. This col- 
lection comprises specimens from the following places: — Nicoya, Buenos 
Aires, Province of Terraba; San Isidro de Arenilla, at the foot of the vol- 
cano of Irazu; Cartago; and Santo Domingo de Heredia. 

The Costa Rican fictile productions of the prehistoric period are well- 
known through the researches of Hartman and others. The great pre- 



1909.] Notes on New CoUectiona. 323 

ponderance of fictile productions in the Isthmian region has been pointed 
out by Professor Holmes in his memoir on the Chiriqui.^ He states that 
the graves had *' yielded to a single explorer upwards of 10,000 pieces of 
pottery, and this chiefly from an area perhaps not more than fifty miles 
square." The same author also states that pottery vessels constitute at 
least ninety percent of the known art of the people. The percentage in 
Costa Rica would be somewhat lower, as the art of stone carving was devel- 
oped to a much greater degree especially in the northern part of the region ; 
but pottery was the greatest of the non-{>erishable objects that were made 
by the old Costa Ricans. A number of different wares are represented from 
the various parts of the country; but the most ornate, both in symmetry 
and in decoration, is from the Nicoya Peninsula. The Museum has a col- 
lection from this region which shows in a fairly representative way the 
types and decorations. An exchange with the Carnegie Museum of Pitts- 
burg added a few new forms and furnished a rather complete series of 
small stone objects, especially amulets, beads of jadeite and other stones. 
Although most of the typical forms were in evidence, the Museum collection 
was not large enough to furnish material for comparative studies. The 
collection under consideration will, however, add materially to this series, 
especially that showing the large, elaborately decorated jars from Nicoya. 
A series of the Nicoya jars may be seen in Plate iv. There were eleven 
large jars of this form and several smaller ones, each with a flaring annular 
base and with decorations of painted or raised designs. Fig. 8 is of the 
globular form with the upper half maintaining a gentle taper from the 
median line to the rim. The annular base is missing; but, at the point 
where it was fastened to the lower part of the vessel, there is a scarified area 
made no doubt to facilitate the joining of the two independently made parts. 
The vessel is 20.5 cm. in height and 16.5 cm. in width at the central part. 
The body color is dark cream and the painted ornamentation is in black and 
red. The decorative devices are a combination of painted and relief ele- 
ments. The head of a tiger is modeled in the round, and placed at the base 
of the painted band that surrounds the rim. The main physical features 
are accentuated by means of rather broad bands of black and red. On the 
opposite side of the jar there is a painted design evidently made to represent 
the tail of the animal. On the other two sides there are large painted zoo- 
morphic figures the bodies of which are red. They are outlined with black 
and special features such as the eyes are of the same color. Directly above 
the figures and encircling the rim are several narrow bands and one broad 
one with interlocking terrace-shaped figures, possibly conventionalized 
animal forms. 



1 Ancient Art of the Province of Chiriqui, William Henry Holmes, 6tii Annual Report, 
American Bureau of Ethnology. 



324 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

Fig. 7 has a flaring neck, a raised band encircling the body at the widest 
part, and a high annular base. The lower part of the stand was flaring, 
but the major part of it is missing. The painted decorations are in black 
and red, confined to three broad bands which encircle the neck, central part 
and base. The color work extends also to an animal head and fore-l^s 
which are modeled in the round and attached to the upper part of the jar. 
The head is shown with open mouth, protruding tongue and with the paws 
resting against the lower jaw. The teeth are represented by painted lines 
and the other features are heightened by the application of red paint and 
black line work. This jar is 27.5 cm. high and 19.5 cm. in diameter at the 
broadest part. 

One of the most elaborately decorated vessels that has been noted from 
Costa Rica is shown in Plate v. Unlike many vessels of this character, it 
has been a tripod jar, all of the others in this collection having annular bases. 
The hind legs and tail have been lost, but otherwise the jar is practically 
perfect. The body color is of rich maroon. Over this a light cream slip 
has been placed, forming the background for an elaborate color scheme. 
The whole represents, in a most convincing way, the body of an armadillo, 
the physical features brought out by painting and modeling, and the whole 
treatment furnishing one of the most striking evidences of realism so far 
noted in the fictile productions of the Isthmian region. 

The armadillo is an animal well-known in most parts of tropical America, 
extending from Mexico through Central America to South America where 
it has a wide range. It is peculiarly marked and presents an admirable 
motive for pottery decoration, being especially adapted to relief and incised 
techniques. The Chiriqui area is noted for its vessels which show the 
armadillo figure or conventionalized adaptations of its form. This feature 
has been developed by Dr. MacCurdy; ^ but in the large collection brought 
together by Professor O. C. Marsh, now in the Yale University Museum, 
there seems to be no evidence of an attempt to represent this animal in as 
elaborate a way as in the specimen under consideration. Dr. Carl Hartman 
in his extended researches in Costa Rica did not find, or at least has made no 
mention of, such a high development of zoomorphic delineation as applied 
to the armadillo. The armor-like carapace of the armadillo is the most 
characteristic feature of its anatomy. Its protective qualities would natur- 
ally appeal to a primitive people who were given to the reproduction of animal 
forms in their art products. This then would be the distinctive feature 
when conventionalism was resorted to, and it is only natural that it should 
be accentuated in a semi-realistic jar adaptation. Referring to Plate v, a 



Congr^s International ties Americanist es, Tome II, Quebec, 1907, pp. 147-163. 



1909.] Notes on New CoUecHona. 325 

broad decorated band may be seen encircling the jar, with the exception of 
an area directly below and including a strip that is defined by the space 
between the fore-legs. This band represents the carapace of the armadillo, 
and the open space the belly of the animal which is covered with hair instead 
of dermal plates. 

The common armadillo of this region is the Tatu novemcinctumy and in 
comparing the decoration of this jar with the animal this species will be 
used. This, as the name implies, is the nine-banded armadillo. These 
transverse dermal plates are so arranged that, in the living animal, they over- 
lap. They have the appearance of rows of narrow incisor teeth placed side 
by side, the upper shaded area and the intervening space forming a saw-tooth 
band that extends the entire length of each plate. In applying this design 
to the vessel, the artist has modeled seven slightly depressed bands; then 
by means of black paint the ridges that separate the bands were accentu- 
ated; after which, with the same color, a saw-tooth strip, similar to that on 
the animal, was painted on each band. The intervening spaces, — that 
b, between the teeth, — were left unpainted and, as these were the dull 
cream slip of the jar, they caused a perfect representation of the natural 
rows of tooth-like divisions as already described. 

In considering the other physical features of the jar, we find that the 
head, legs and tail have been modeled in relief. The hind legs and tail are 
missing, but these three parts formed the tripod upon which the vessel 
rested. The hind legs were evidently cylindrical in form, whereas the tail 
was semicircular. The fore-legs are modeled in low relief from the shoulders 
to the paws. The paws have been modeled in the round; but, owing to the 
fact that they are missing, it is impossible to determine their shape. The 
arms are outlined with broad bands of red. The head is perfect with the 
exception of the end of the nose. Unlike most animal heads, this one is 
solid in construction, the form being concavo-convex, causing the under 
part of the head to be hollow. The head shows the characteristic pointed 
nose. Th^ ears, very large in the living animal, are modeled in relief and 
accentuated with red bands. The major part of the head has been painted 
black, and there are designs in white in the form of dots and scrolls which 
give an effect similar to that shown in the lost color ware of Chiriqui. The 
nose itself is salmon red in color, and there is a pointed design on its upper 
part. This design is formed by black and cream lines, surrounding a 
wedge-shaped figure of dark red. Above this, there are three red dots on 
the cream slip which was not covered by the black band on which the 
scrolls and dot^ were traced. At the base of the head there is a salmon red 
band and below this there is a scroll design in black encircling the neck. 
On the breast, which is painted a salmon red and outlined with dark red, 



3 26 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

there is a triangular design of black surrounded by lines of cream, black, 
and a broad band of red. On the outer edge of the last-named band, there 
is a series of black dots. Directly below this design there b another of 
circular form, the central part being black. This is surrounded by a band 
of cream and this in turn by a band of black and another broad band of red. 
What these designs typify, cannot be stated, but they form a striking finish to 
this part of the vessel. 

At either end of the dermal plate band there is an area painted black. 
This extends from the upper part of the hind-legs to the shoulders. Over 
this area a series of lines and dots have been traced, the appearance being 
that of the lost color designs of the Chiriqui pottery and similar to that on 
the head of this jar. The space above and below the dermal plates was 
decorated with bands and scroll designs of a salmon red color. Below this, 
on the base of the vessel, there is a narrow band of the cream-colored slip ; 
then a band of black, and below this a broad band of red. These three 
bands begin at the base of one of the black areas mentioned, pass below the 
dermal plate area, around the tail, and back to the corresponding black area 
opposite. The remaining portion forming the base of the vessel is covered 
with the cream slip. 

The designs on this vessel are fairly well preserved on one side but, on the 
opposite side, at least one-half of the surface has been denuded not only of 
the decorations but also of the cream-colored slip. In its present condition, 
without the legs it measures 20.5 cm. in height, and 16.5 cm. in width at the 
widest part. 

Regarding the other vessels shown in Plate iv, little need be said. They 
are all of the annular base type, but in the case of one of them the base is 
missing. The series serves to show the variations in form and, although in 
most of them the designs are partly obliterated, enough remains to indicate 
the similarity of treatment in this type of jars. 

The bowls from the Nicoya peninsula are of various forms, some ha\'ing 
tripod bases, others annular bases, and a third form is the simple type in 
which no base ai)pears. A series of these bowls is shown in Plate vi. They 
have a dull red or cream background, upon which is developed a series of 
designs of geometrical or zoomorphic character. The designs are all painted 
and usually a combination of red and black colors is used in the delineation. 

In Plate iv, Figs. 9-11, a series of three of the smaller jars with annular 
bases is shown. As they are similar to the large ones that have been de- 
scribed, and as they are devoid of raised figures, no special description is 
necessary. Suffice it to say, that the painted designs, which are so well 
preserved that the decorative scheme may be readily seen in the illustration, 
are composed of figures in black and red. The smallest jar of this series 



1909.] Notes on New Collections. 327 

has a polished surface, the ware being much better than that generally 
employed in this region in making this type of vessel. There are many other 
interesting forms from the Nicoya peninsula that might be described in 
detail; but, owing to the fact that similar specimens have been described 
or figured by other writers, these need not be mentioned. 

A rather interesting specimen of red ware which is shown in Plate vi, 
Fig. 2, was found at San Isidro de Arenilla at the foot of the volcano of 
Irazu. This is a cylindrical vessel of red ware having flaring ends. There 
are two raised bands encircling the body at either end, and two bands of 
similar form spanning the central part. Between these bands there is a 
series of raised lines which have been applied in a slanting position. These 
bands are in series of three, each series being separated by two bands form- 
ing an acute angle. This object is devoid of painted decoration other than 
the red slip which covers the entire surface. Both ends of the cylinder 
are open and, from its appearance, it would seem that the vessel has prob- 
ably been a drum; for in many respects it is similar to specimens found in 
the Chiriqui region. These drums had a piece of skin stretched over the 
end, and the raised bands facilitated the fastening of the skin to the pottery. 
There is a raised surface of a similar nature on the drums figured by Pro- 
fessor Holmes in his "Ancient Art of the Province of Chiriqui." The ends 
of this object are open. It is possible that these cylinders were used as jar 
rests or for some similar purpose, but their form and general treatment would 
seem to indicate that they had been drums. 

In the collection there are a number of pottery vessels collected by a 
priest. Rev. Jos6 Nieborowski at San Jos6, Terraba. This material was 
especially noticeable, owing to its similarity to certain Chiriquian forms. 
It was, therefore, deemed advisable to make a comparative study of the 
specimens from the two regions in an endeavor to deteiiaine whether these 
specimens had actually been found in the Terraba region, or whether they 
had come from the Chiriquian culture area. In buying collections of this 
nature from men who do not realize the importance of scientific data, there 
is always a chance of the material having been found at a distant point and 
shipped to the place where it is obtained. As the Terraba region is quite 
near the Chiriqui boundary line, such a proceeding might be possible. On 
the other hand, it is also possible that the Chiriquian culture extends to the 
region of the Terrabas. However, the points of similarity seem to indicate 
that the specimens might well have come from the region as represented. 

Senor de Peralta, President of the Commission from Costa Rica to the 
exposition in Madrid in 1892-93, prepared a resum6 of the existing knowl- 
edge concerning the tribes of Costa Rica. He has the following to say con- 
cerning the Terraba region: 



328 Anthropological Papers American, Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

"Southeast of the Chorotega and the heights of Herradura and south of the 
Guetares, extending to the Pacific Ocean between the rivers Pirris and Grande of 
Terraba was the province of the Quepo, of which the Spanish Government formed 
the district of Quepos, the extreme limit toward the southeast was the old Chiriqui 
River. According to the most probable conjectures the Quepos belonged to the 
family of the Guetares and lived, by preference, on the coasts. They were also 
enemies of the Mangues and the Cotos and Borucas and in consequence of their wars 
with them and with the whites, and with the burden of labor laid upon them by the 
latter, their towns disappeared in the middle of the 18th century without leaving 
any positive traces which will enlighten us upon their origin. Adjoining the Quepos, 
the Cotos or Coctos occupied the upper valley of the river Terraba, formerly known 
as the Goto. They are not known in Costa Rica by this name; but there is no doubt 
that the Borucas are their descendants. These Borucas occupied the region about 
Golfo Dulce, formerly the gulf of Osa, east of the River Terraba. The Terrabas, who 
have given their name to the river formerly called the Goto, do not belong to the 
tribes of the Pacific slope. They were brought to the location there, which they now 
occupy, in Aldea or Terraba, partly by the persuasion of the missionaries, partly by 
force, having been obliged to abandon the rough mountains to the north about the 
head waters of the Tilorio or Rio de la Estrella, the Yurquin and the Rovalo about 
the year 1697. They have been variously called the Terbis, Terrebes, Terrabas and 
Tirribies, but there are no dififerences of dialect between them and their relatives 
to the north, other than would necessarily take place in any tongue from a separation 
of this length." 

This writer mentions the fact that at the time of the Conquest, the 
Terrabas with several other tribes occupied the territory of Costa Rica and, 
continuing, says: 

''As to the Guaimias, Terrabas, Changuenes and Borucas, their affinities to the 
tribes to the east of them are well marked and it would not be surprising if they 
were also closely related to the natives between Paria and Darien, and even with 
the Chibchas of Colombia, as has been maintained by Brinton." 

The first objects to excite special interest in the material from the Ter- 
raba region was a series of small vessels of a type that corresponds to the 
"alligator group of ware" of the province of Chiriqui. This name, as 
applied by Professor Holmes, includes vessels which have the alligator 
designs in a highly conventionalized state, as well as those showing painted 
or modeled representations of the animal. The vessels of this type from 
Terraba show both painted and raised conventional designs and raised ani- 
mal figures, but none of the latter would be recognized as alligator featiu^s. 
These vessels, as shown in Plate vi, are decorated with painted designs in 
black and red, the background being either a light or dark cream color. 
They are all quite small, the largest being only 9 cm. in diameter. 

One of the most common objects of this ware in Chiriqui is a whisde 
in the form of an animal or bird. One of the animal forms is represented 



1909.] Notes on New CoUecHons. 329 

in this collection (Plate vi, Fig. 6). This is a small object and from its 
general appearance it might well have come from the Chiriquian area. 
Another specimen of this ware is shown in Fig. 5. It is that of an animal 
with the head, tail, and legs modeled in relief. This specimen, although 
similar to some found in the Chiriqui region, does not have the finish that 
is noticeable in the typical Chiriquian ware. This may be due to a lack of 
polish or perhaps the application of the slip. 

Another type that is quite common in the Chiriqui region is that with 
four nodes on the shoulder of the vessel. There were three of this type in 
the Museum collection from Terraba and two of them have painted designs 
on the nodes which is one of the main characteristics of the specimens of 
this group from Chiriqui. 

Another vessel, shown in Plate vi, Fig. 1, is that of a pottery drum. 
Professor Holmes figures two of these interesting objects from the Chiriqui 
region, and although they are not exactly the same in form, the main char- 
acteristics are the same. The specimen from Terraba is 17 cm. in height 
and 8 cm. in diameter at the top. This specimen has an indented and 
flaring rim, a characteristic shown in both of the specimens above-mentioned. 
This feature was not intended to be ornamental, but it made possible the 
fastening of the skin drumhead in a manner much more secure than would 
be possible on an even surface. From the rim, the vessel tapers gently to a 
cylindrical stand which has four raised bands in the way of ornament. The 
base of the vessel is annular in form. This specimen is of dull red ware and 
has been covered with a black paint which originally had a high polish. 
The base of the vessel is open and a hole has been made at the base of the 
upper part at the point where it joins the cylindrical stand. Professor 
Holmes in describing this t^'pe of vessel states that the use of clay drums in 
Chiriqui was probably exceptional. There is but one specimen in the Yale 
University Museum Collection; therefore, as compared with other pottery 
forms, this type must have been quite rare even in the Chiriqui area where 
small pottery whistles in the form of the clay drums are not uncommon. 

There are other forms from Terraba which are slightly dissimilar in some 
particulars from those found in Costa Rica. One is a large jar of the so- 
called '* biscuit ware," that is so common in Chiriqui collections, and there 
are several tripod vessels which might be of Chiriquian make; but the points 
of similarity are not great enough to warrant a comparison at this time. 
It is to be regretted that more data are not available; but, in view of the 
fact that Dr. Lehman of the Berlin Museum is now working in this region, 
this suggestion of a possible connection between the two culture areas may 
suflSce. Should Dr. Lehman's researches show that specimens of the nature 
herein described are found in suflBcient numbers to show that they were 



330 



Anihropoloffiad Paper* American Museum of Xaiural HtMiory. [\'oL U, 



ma^le in those parts, it wiD be the means of extending the Chinquian cukure 
over a hundred miles to the north. tG. H. P.) 

SOUTH AMERICA. 

The Srhmidt and Weiss Collection. The Museum has had the good 
fortune to secure the entire collection made bv Messrs, Hermann Schmidt 
and Ix>uLs Weiss, in the years 1905-06, among the little-known Indians on 
the upper waters of the Rio Caiarf-Uaupfe, the most important tributary 
of the Rio Negro, in the State of Amazonas, Brazil (Fig. 8). Mr. Schmidt 




FIk. 8. Map of Northwestern South America and the Re^on Occupied by the Tuk&no 
IndlanH. 

the ethnologist of the expedition, was forced, by the loss of his boat, to live 
eight months alone with the Indians, being finally rescued by a party under 
Mr. Weiss. During his exile, he had ample opportunities to learn the 
customs of the Indians, and to acquire a very fair knowledge of their lan- 
guage. The results of this expedition consist of five hundred ethnological 
specimens, an extensive vocabulary of the language, drawings of the painted 
figures to be found on the rocks at the numerous waterfalls along the river, 
and a number of folk-tales. Of this collection, about three hundred speci- 
mens are pieces of feather-work, consisting of a great variety of head-dresses, 



1909.] NoUa on New CoUecHons. 331 

waist-bands, ornaments for the legs and arms, and plumes to be carried in 
the hands. They are never worn except on ceremonial occasions and then 
only by the men; the women wearing little or no clothing, and but few 
ornaments. Some other notable objects are spears, shields, bows, arrows, 
blow-guns with their poisoned arrows, fish traps of basketry, and a variety 
of baskets and pottery vessels. Among the musical instruments are drums, 
rattles in many forms, pan-pipes and whistles made of deer and jaguar bones. 

Great additional scientific value has been given to this collection by the 
fact that Mr. Schmidt was present in the Museum when it was received, 
and by the aid of a model illustrated the uses of the different specimens. 
Many photographs were made during the progress of this work; one of which 
is shown in Plate vii. This represents a headman or chief in ceremonial 
dress. He carries a ceremonial spear, and a shield of basket-work, and 
wears on the back of the head the long, decorated comb peculiar to this 
region. From his neck hangs the perforated cylindrical stone, the insignia 
of a chief, and four jaguar teeth. 

A series of curious specimens illustrates the method of smoking the native 
tobacco. A cigar from ten to fifteen inches long and about an inch in diam- 
eter is made by rolling the tobacco in a wrapper of bark and is fastened 
between the prongs of a wooden cigar-holder. The holder, which is about 
two feet long, exactly resembles a tuning-fork in shape, except that the handle 
is longer and is sharpened to a point. After lighting the cigar, the Indian 
sticks the sharp end of the holder into the ground and lies at ease in his 
hammock, reaching out from time to time to draw in a whiff of smoke from 
the big cigar. 

In the collection are a number of blow-guns with their poisoned arrows. 
Along the Upper Caiar^-Uaup^ blow-guns are made from the stems of a 
variety of palm {Iriartea setigera Martins). These palm stems have 
often been described as canes on account of their having rings of scars of 
the fallen leaves which closely resemble the joints of canes or bamboos. 
The Indian selects two stems of such sizes that the smaller will exactly fit 
within the larger. After these stems have been carefully dried and the 
pith cleared out with a long rod, the bore is made smooth by drawing back 
and forth through it a little bunch of tree-fern roots. The smaller stem is 
then inserted in the larger, so that one will serve to correct any crookedness 
that may exist in the other. The wooden mouth-piece is then fitted to one 
end, and, about three and one-half feet from it, a boar's tooth is fastened 
on the gun by some gummy substance, for a sight. Over the outside the 
maker winds spirally a strip of the dark shiny bark of a creeper which gives 
it an ornamental finish, and his blow-gun is complete. 

In some localities instead of the two canes a single piece of palm wood is 



332 Anthropological Papers American. Micseum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

used, which is split into two equal parts throughout its length, each piece 
hollowed out, and the two divisions afterward cemented together like the 
divisions of a cedar-wood pencil. 

The arrows are from ten to fourteen inches long, and of the thickness of 
an ordinary lucifer match. Those of the Indians of the Caiarf-Uaup^ are 
made from the midrib of a palm leaf or of the spinous processes of the 
Patawd {(Enocarjms Batawa) sharpened to a point at one end and wound 
near the other with a delicate sort of wild cotton which grows in a pod upon 
a large tree {Bomhax ceiha). This mass of cotton is just big enough to fill 
the tube when the arrow is gently pressed into it. The point is dipped into 
poison, allowed to dry, and redipped until well coated. The exact composi- 
tion of this poison is unknown, and probably varies in different localities; 
but it would seem that the chief ingredient is always the juice of a Strychnos 
plant. It is known among different tribes by many names; such as Curari, 
Ourari, Urari and Woorali. Poisoned arrows are dangerous things to 
handle, and they are always carried in a quiver which has been partly filled 
with cotton or some other soft vegetable material into which the poisoned 
ends of the arrows are thrust for protection. The blow-gun is called "Sara- 
batana" on the Upper Caiar^-Uaup6s, and by many tribes in the Amazon 
region it is known as the "Pucuna." The Portuguese of the River District 
call it "Gravatana." 

The blow-gun in the hands of an Indian is a very effective weapon, and a 
skilled marksman will kill a small bird at thirty or forty paces. It is par- 
ticularly deadly when used against birds or monkeys in the tops of trees, as 
in shooting in a direction nearly vertical the hunter can take the surest aim. 
The poison acts very quickly, seldom requiring more than two minutes to 
do its work, but the length of time depends much on the size of the game and 
the condition of the poison used. 

Painted Capa from Punta Arenas. The guanaco skin capa shown in 
Plate VIII comes to the Museum as a gift from C. H. Townsend, Esq., who 
obtained it at Punta Arenas, Strait of Magellan. It measures fifty-seven by 
sixty-nine inches, and contains the skins of twelve very young animals, 
probably not over two weeks old. The hair of the adult guanaco is coarse, 
and never used for this purpose. The skins are so trimmed that when turned 
in opposite directions and placed side by side they fit exactly together; the 
sewing is done with the sinew of the ostrich (Rhea dawini). The surface 
of the skin side, with the exception of a border two inches wide around the 
edges, is colored a dull yellow. Upon this ground has been painted the 
narrow line in red and the two broader ones in blue to be seen in the photo- 
graph. The decoration of the border, which is but indistincdy shown, 
consists of simple v-shaped or zigzag lines in red and blue, between a band 



1909.] Notes on New Collections. 333 

of red on the outside and one of yellow on the inside. The two transverse 
bands dividing the decorated field are formed by a band-and-dot design. 
The two upper comers are painted red. (C. W. M.) 

Cauca Valley Black Pottery. From Mr. Frederick F. Sharpless, a mining 
engineer, the Museum acquired something over one hundred and fifty 
pieces of curious black ware from the Cauca valley, Colombia. Previously 
a few pieces of the same type had been received as the gift of Francis C. 
Nicholas. Mr. Sharpless states that his collection was secured from graves 
between the towns of Quinchia and Papyal, where many ancient burial sites 
have been sluiced away for the gold ornaments they contained. Upon its 
arrival at the Museum, this collection was examined by a number of anthro- 
pologists some of whom denounced the pieces as fraudulent. Since that 
time, however, a number of very large private collections have come to 
notice and a number of reputable travelers, to whom the Museum collection 
was shown, pronounced it identical with the type worked out by miners in 
that region. Also the late H. A. Ward brought from Colombia a small lot 
of the same pottery with a certification to its antiquity by Leocadio Ma 
Arango. Thus, taking everything into consideration, there seems little 
ground for doubting the reality of this collection. 

The objects range from curious platters to effigy and animal-shaped 
vessels all presenting a striking size uniformity. They are rather crudely 
modeled, uniformly black throughout, presenting an outer surface of deep 
black with a suggestion of polish. At the brims the true vessels usually 
bear curious frog and lizard-like figures in relief. The other decorations 
are chiefly incised, consisting of parallel lines, rows of dots and dashes, or 
rows of rectangles enclosing dots. The animal forms are various; but the 
snake, lizard and frog are the most common. The human-like figures are 
very much distorted, the feet usually suggesting a quadruped, the nose long 
and hooked, and the face triangular. In most cases, the eyes are repre- 
sented by a slit. As a rule the ears are perforated or represented as wearing 
plugs and the noses are pierced. In one case, a twisted cord is represented 
as having been thrust through the septum (Plate ix). 

Terra-cotta Stamps. A portion of a very large terra-cotta stamp ob- 
tained in Apullo, Peru, and said to have been found in that vicinity, is chiefly 
remarkable for its size: having measured, when entire, 6 J by 4 J inches 
(Fig. 9). Small stamps made in this form have been found in the coast 
region of Peru, which were undoubtedly used to decorate pottery vessels; 
but the great size of this stamp would seem to preclude its use for such a 
purpose. 

That it could have been designed for use in the decoration of Peruvian 
textile fabrics is improbable, as a careful examination of many pieces of 



334 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



cotton cloth from their ancient graves, bearing the so-called stamped designs, 
has failed to show the employment of any kind of printing device; they 
invariably prove to have been hand-painted. 

It is probable that this specimen may originally have come from Colom- 
bia where the printing of designs on cloth with both flat and cylindrical 
stamps seems to have been a common practice. Fig. 10 shows the designs 
on fifteen terra-cotta stamps from Colombia. Fourteen of these stamps 
are cylindrical; the other, like the one shown in Fig. 9, is flat and has a 
handle projecting from the upper surface. They were collected by Mr. 
Francis C. Nicholas in the region of Santa Marta and Barranquilla. The 

drawings were made from ** rub- 
bings," and are correct represen- 
tations of the relief figures on 
their surfaces. 

(C. W. M.) 
Mummified Body from Chile. 
The naturally mummified body 
shown in Plate x was found in a 
copper mine at Chuquicamata, 
province of Antofagasta, Chile. 
The condition of the body shows 
that the unfortunate miner, prob- 
ably a man, was caught by a 
cave-in of the roof and partly 
crushed. The mummification 
seems to have been produced in 
part by the action of copper salts 
and not to have been merely a 
desiccation due to the dryness of the region. The skin has not collapsed on 
the bones, as in the mummies found usually in the region, but the body 
and limbs preser\e nearly their natural size and proportions, except for the 
crushing already mentioned. No analysis has yet been made of the tissues, 
so that it is too early to hazard any supposition as to the chemical changes 
which have been undergone. The mine has been worked for an unknown 
length of time upon a peculiar deposit of atacamite, a hydrous chloride of 
copper, which is much prized on account of its easy reduction. The age of 
the mummy is unknown, but it is supposed to be pre-Columbian. 

(C. W. M.) 




Fig. 9. Design from a Terra Cotta Stamp. 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



335 












I : f 





^mz^ 



"^//^ 





Fig. 10. a (40-589), 6 (40-593). c (40-584), d (40-592). 
h (40-690), i (40-588), ; (40-596), k (40-608). I (40-587), m, 
Designs on Terra Cotta Stamps from Colombia . 



e (40-594) / (40-469). g (40-695 )» 
(40-591). n (40-585), o (40-586). 



336 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



ISLANDS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN. 

In addition to the collections given special notice herein, many small 
lots wtre received by gift or otherwise from New Guinea, Australia, many 
islands of Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia. 

Hawaii. Mr. George S. Bowdoin presented a feather war-cape, once 
the property of Kamehameha III, king of the Hawaiian Islands, who gave 
it to Commodore Lawrence Kearny, U. S. N., in 1843 (Plate xi). A brief 
note on this cape will be found in Dr. Brigham's paper on Hawaiian Feather 
Work.^ However, the sketch by this author does not quite agree with the 
specimen, indicating that he wrote either from memory or from information 
at second hand. 

Like all Hawaiian feather pieces the foundation of this cape is a net 






Fig 11. Knots in Feather Cape. 

(Plate xii). This netting, according to Dr. Brigham, is of Olona, a fibre 
grown in deep ravines and on well-watered mountain slopes. By much 
soaking and scraping it is made ready to spin, which process is by rolling 
on the thigh without a spindle. The netting is formed with a needle and 
is a variation of the well-known square knot (Fig. 11a). The meshes are 
one-quarter of an inch, although on some capes they are one-sixteenth of an 
inch. Strips of netting from eight to eighteen inches in width are woven, 
then cut and joined to suit the pattern of the circular cape just as modem 
cloth would be treated; the strips, however, running horizontally as seen 
in Fig. 12. Some one has made the statement that a small caj>e is first 



Memoirs of Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, Vol. I. 



1909.] Notes on New CoUections. 337 

woven, and then enlarged from time to time by adding net and feathers at the 
edge. The pattern of the foundation of this cape and others which have 
been examined give no evidence of this practice. 

Bright feathers from the breast of the liwi cover the body of the cap)e; 
while the feathers from the yellow wing-tufts of the black Oo furnish a 
pattern of two large spherical triangles in the center of the cape, and four 
semi-crescents at the sides and edges of a border at the base. In preparing 
the feather for ornamentation, the shaft was first knotted, usually two or 
more times, half an inch from its end which was then doubled over and 
knotted down one or more times over the first binding knots. This cluster 
of threads and knots formed a firm point on which to place the knots which 
secure the feathers to the netting. Contrary to the custom of the Peruvians, 
who first made the feathers fast to a cord and then knotted this cord to the 
cloth,* the Hawaiians attached the feathers separately to the netting. On 
some capes, the feathers are joined to the netting by two knots (Fig. lib); 
but, on the cape in question, 
each feather is secured by 
three knots (Fig. lie), all 
alike, and in fact similar to 
those which first join the 
shaft. Parallel overlapping 
TOWS of these knotted feathers 
usually run parallel to the 
lower edge of the cape. 

While feather -work of 
some kind is practised by most 
peoples, the art reached a high development among the Hawaiians, ancient 
Peruvians, Maori and Pomo Indians. It so happens, however, that these 
four peoples have in each case introduced the mosaic on an entirely different 
technique — the Pomo on coiled basketry, the Maori on twined basketry, 
the Peruvians on plain cloth and the Hawaiians on netting; and further, 
that, while the Pomo and Maori have introduced the feathers during the 
process of weaving the foundation, in Peru and Hawaii the feathers are 
knotted to a foundation, previously prepared, thus suggesting the probable 
independence of development in each case. (M. L. K.) 

New Caledonia. The Engler Melanesian collection ^ was made among 
the Islands of the New Hebrides and New Caledonia groups. It contains 
something over a hundred specimens, such as bows, arrows for war and 




Fig. 12. Foundation Pattern for a Feather Cape. 



1 Technique of some South American Feather-work, by Chas. W. Mead. Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. I, Part I. 
* Gift of Mrs. Morris K. Jesup. 



338 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History . [Vol. II, 



hunting, spears of many forms, decorated lances, clubs, model of a boat, 
paddles, baskets, cloth, gourd vessels, pottery, wooden dishes, shell and 
other ornaments, flutes, etc. Taken as a whole it is a fairly representative 
collection. Deserving special mention are two flat wooden dishes from the 
New Hebrides of graceful outline and high finish. The one shown (Fig. 13a) 
seems to be a fish form with notched edges. On the bottom are eight small 
projections suggesting legs, analogous to the great kava bowls of Samoa 
and other island groups. The other specimen has the peculiar fish-tail 
and the perforated head with the conical tip, or hat; but lacks the legs and 





Fig. 13. 
cm., 70 cm. 



(80.0-729, 80.0-728). Wooden Vessels from the New Hebrides. Lengths, 80 



incised decorations. A similar bo\yl is figured in James Edge-Partington's 
Album, though the fish-tail is wanting, a second perforated head taking its 
place. The form of this specimen suggests that the more conventional form 
of dish handle is the double perforated type and that we have in the figured 
specimens another example of inter-play between the conventional and the 
representative motive in art. 

With this collection was a small bowl from Marquesas with deeply 
incised designs, the handles to which are double birds' heads. The peculiar 
central design on this bowl is found also upon some turtle shell ornaments 
from the same locality (Fig. 14). 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



339 



Among the specimens from New Caledonia may be mentioned a peculiar 
wooden bird figure said to be a rain charm (80.0-698), and a short looped 
cord about 18 cm. long said to be a spear thrower (80.0-764). Some in- 
teresting examples of the textile art are found in netted gourd vessels, four 
to six strands being manipulated to give broad bands of interlaced work. 
This type is well shown in an illustration by Ratzel.^ While the general 
practice of netting gourds is found in many parts of the world, the specific 
t\i)e here mentioned seems almost peculiar to ^Melanesia. Of baskets 
proper there are several examples. A scoop-shaped tray is practically 
identical in form with the well-known winnowing trays of western^ North 




Fig. 14 (80.0-727). Designs on a Bowl from Marquesas. I^ength, 23 cm. 

America. On the other hand the weave is wicker instead of twine, and 
the material a delicate stem instead of the coarse twigs found in North 
American trays. In the specimen under consideration the warps are 
groups of seven stems, laid flat. At the start four of the warps are placed 
and as the work j)rogresses others are added in such manner as to appear 
as branches of the other warps. The edge is finished by turning the warps 
to one side and closing in a braid, held down by a buttonhole stitch. Slight 
ornamentation is produced by very narrow transverse black bands. 

A small bag containing eleven double-pointed sling-stones is in technique 



» History of Mankind. Vol. I, p. 212. 



340 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

a buttonhole coil (Mason) in which the loops of fibre, or string of which it 
is made, catch into the loops of the previous row of weaving and at the same 
time enclose a single string foundation. Variants of this technique are too 
widely distributed to be of special ethnographical significance. 

There are two odd cone-shaped pendant ornaments said to have been 
U3ed by men as well as women. They are formed by rolling up in spiral 
fashion a long fringe similar to that used as aprons and skirts in many parts 
of the worid. Strands of cocoanut fibres are twined together in a simple 
manner. Each turn of the two-twined wefts encloses three threads of one 
strand and an equal number of the succeeding, a very common technique 
for skirts and aprons the worid over. In Africa, aprons of like construction 
are, when not in use, rolled into a similar cone, and a comparative view of 
the case suggests the probability that this ornament developed from the 
simple rolled apron. This is supported by the fact that among some South 
American collections, we find feather bunches of the same form produced 
by rolling up the strings of pendant feathers used as girdles and head-bands. 
That these rolls from New Caledonia are not garments rolled up is suggested 
by the fact that the fringe is contmuous and in one specimen reached the 
length of eight meters. 

A small plaited bag from New Hebrides presents a type of technique 
widely distributed throughout the Pacific area. The bag or basket is begun 
at the edge or top. Two midribs of the cocoanut palm are used, each leaf 
made being split into twelve weaving elements. In weaving six of these 
pass obliquely to the right and an equal number to the left, thus giving a 
twill effect (Plate xii). 

New Zealand. The Robley collection of New Zealand heads was pre- 
sented to the Museum by Mr. Jesup. Major-General G. Robley of the 
British Army, who made the collection, took an active part in the Maori 
campaign of 1864-66 and spent several subsequent years in the country. 
Gen. Robley was an enthusiastic collector, and was especially interested 
in everything that related to the old-time method of tattooing. He succeeded 
in bringing together thirty-three very fine examples of the tattooed heads, 
with the implements, pigments, funnel and all other accessories used during 
the process; making this the largest and most complete collection in exist- 
ence illustrating the ancient art of **Moco" or Maori tattooing. 

The incisions were made with a narrow comb-shaped blade, made of the 
wing-bone of a sea-bird, attached to a little wooden handle. This was 
driven by tapping with a mallet quite through the skin. Then the tattooer 
rubbed into the wound a pigment made from the powdered charred resin 
of the ** Kauri" or "Rimu" tree. This process left deep blue-black grooves 
with raised borders, and is entirely diiferent from the method common in 



1909.] Notes on New CoUectiona. 341 

most parts of the world, in which needles are used and the skin left smooth. 
The carved wooden funnel was used for feeding a man while his face was 
swollen by the wounds due to the tattooing. 

According to General Robley, only the heads of prominent men were 
preserved after death. The principal object was to keep alive the memory 
of the dead, either of great friends or powerful enemies, and the **moko 
mokai," as these tattooed heads were called, supplied the place of statues 
and monumental records. In the case of a departed chieftain, his pre- 
served head was a visible sign that in some mysterious way his spirit was 
still present among his people. 

The old embalming consisted in the removal of all the interior of the 
head and drying in smoke after a careful steaming or even baking. The 
form and features were well kept, and the identity of the deceased was 
easily recognized, for the tattooing kept its place exactly on the face. 

In General Roble/s exhaustive work, "Moko or Maori Tattooing,*' 
will be found a complete history of this art from its first discovery by the 
great navigator Captain Cook to the present day. It contains numerous 
illustrations, many of the drawings having been made from specimens in 
the collection now in the Museum.^ 

Maori wood carving is represented in this collection by two large wooden 
images (Teko-Teko, from old council houses, one from Rotorti, the other 
from Tologo Bay; also by two beautifully carved prows of war canoes and 
a large piece from the gable board of a council house. 

Besides the above, the collection contains a chief's war belt, a bark- 
beater of wood, a "patu" or club of whalebone, and eight of the peculiar 
shawl-like garments of the chiefs, characteristically ornamented with 
feathers and fringes of cord. 

During the year the collection of Maori robes was increased by the 
addition of seven garments, making this series of eighteen robes a some- 
what representative one, containing many of the numerous types found 
among this people. The Maori costume consists of rectangular mats 
varying in size from shoulder capes and waist mats to those enveloping the 
whole figure; but variance in size does not compare with the variety in kind 
which ranges from beautiful, fine, silky robes and feathered cloaks to coarse 
and fantastically fashioned garments of rattling cylinders of flax leaf. Their 
value is estimated according to the fineness of material of which they are 
composed, the number and kind of ornaments introduced and the amount 
of labor expended, for even the common garments require eighteen months 
to complete, while the more elaborate ones take twice that time.^ Strange 



» See also Journal. American Museum of Natural History, 1908, Vol. VIII, p. 73. 
2 Wood, Civilized Races of the World, p. 808. 



342 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

to say, these garments in most cases are of one material and the makers 
have expended much patience and ingenuity in the different treatments to 
produce a variety of effects. For materials, the long fibres of the leaf of 
the flax plant were called into service. These leaves, sometimes five and 
six feet long, have the epidermis scraped from both sides and the remainder 
beaten until soft. We read that for cloaks of }>eople of rank certain varieties 
of flax are cultivated and prepared with great care until the substance 
resembles silk, which is often kept for years to improve color and texture.^ 
To add greater beauty to these garments, feathers of the red parrot, w^hite 
pigeon, albatross, tui and kawi, dog hair, sealskin and gay colored worsteds 
are all made to contribute to the ornamental effect. 

The simplest loom of two sticks to support the work is used for making 
these fabrics, while women's fingers do the weaving. It is like the loom 
of the Indians of the Northwest Coast for making cedar bark garments, 
but lacks the cross bar on which to suspend the warps. A fibre thread is 
stretched from stick to stick instead, on which the untwisted parallel warps 
or **io" are hung. At first sight, one might mistake the process of wea\ing 
in the two localities as identical; but on closer examination one finds that 
the weaving has not two rows of two-ply twine, but that four wefts of thread 
are woven at one time in twine weaving. In other words, it is a four-ply 
twine with the appearance of two rows of two-ply twine woven in opposite 
directions (Fig. 15a). The **aho'' or weft of four threads ends in a knot 
at the close of each row of twining, the rows spaced from one-quarter to one 
inch apart. It is interesting to note that this technique occurs on basket 
edges in Borneo and the adjoining islands. 

Hamilton speaks of the older garments as unseamed, stating that seam- 
ing to fit the figure is a modem innovation. Some robes in this collection 
appear very old, yet all are seamed with the exception of a very narrow thir- 
teen-inch cape and in all but two there are two places for seaming on each 
side of the cloak, one near the neck and the other toward the bottom. 

The most beautiful robes, those which no plebeian would be allowed to 
wear, are the fine dress mats or **Kakahu" with close **taniko'' or orna- 
mental colored borders, of which the Museum has no example. These 
borders are usually woven after the body of the mat is finished and compare 
favorably in fineness of technique with old Peruvian weaving. Hamilton 
tells us that one artist, a man, received an equivalent to £ 7 for each border 
that he made, and also adds that the Maori excel all other Polynesians 
in their mat and garment making. Another finely woven mat, a woman's 
garment, is the "Korowai," a mat with its surface more or less thickly cov- 



» A. Hamilton, Maori Art, 1896, Dunedin, N. Z.. p. 272. 



1909.] 



Notes on New Collections. 



343 



ered with shreds of twisted fibre. These shreds are introduced while the 
weaving is in process and are held by the weft thread which passes over the 
shreds at the middle point from which they hang (Fig. 15b). They vary in 
length and also in their distribution on the mat, for they may be arranged 
in vertical or horizontal stripes, in groups, or scattered evenly all over this 
surface. The art of the Maori shows itself, in the placing of the shreds or 






Fig. 15. Technique of Maori Capes. 

fringes, which are usually black, and in the introduction of spots of color, 
either of feathers or of wool among these shreds. Borders of tufted wool 
and of feathers usually edge the sides and the bottom while an accompany- 
ing row of fringe completes the mat. This style of mat and in fact many 
of the types are woven upside down; that is, the fibre supporting the warps 




Fig. 16. Technique of Overlay in Maori Garments. 

is to be the lower edge of the cloak when completed. After the last row of 
twining, the warp ends which have been purposely left long are rolled into a 
soft rope finish for the neck. 

One artistic old garment in the Museum collection has an interesting 
overlay in brown and black wools. This style of decoration is found on 
mats not otherw'ise decorated and also on some of the "Korowai** type where 



344 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

the fringes are placed at some distance apart, the isolated rectangular figures 
in the flat overiay taking the place of the tufted spots of color previously 
mentioned. This method of overiay is the simple catching of the wool 
thread under the twining as the garment is woven, the thread then passing 
over a number of warps before again entering the weave, as illustrated in 
Figs. 16 a-d. Through this simple technique, the Maori have developed a 
great variety of pleasing effects, only a few of the more common ones being 
here illustrated. A fine tracery of line patterns on the flax fabric results, 
which as the lines double and combine mass themselves in more solid figures, 
giving a dainty, lacy effect which is greatly enhanced when several colors 
combine. In place of lines, the overlay may ornament by means of dots, in 
which case the wool threads are caught under the twining in one of three 
ways (Figs. 15 b-c, 16) and then clipped short a distance from the weft 
threads. The same method of attaching bits of wool as in Fig. 15c b also 
used by the Aleutian Islanders in decorating their fine twined grass baskets. 
A third slight variation of this technique is where, by doubling and tripling 
the wool threads under each twine of the weft, close tufted fringe and knot 
effects are produced which, in contrast to the flat overlay, stand out from 
the surface of the mat. Much artistic feeling is expressed in this decoration, 
in combining of shapes and colors to produce patterns either of isolated 
circular and rectangular figures or in borders of lines, broken lines, zigzag 
and triangular shapes. Both styles of design are in the flat and tufted over- 
lay and are of black, brown and brighter colored wools. Connected with 
the process of garment-making are interesting legends and superstitions with 
certain evil omens attached should these superstitions be disregarded, but 
this cannot b^ touched on here.^ Enough to say that the "aho" must not 
fall short, but be long enough to weave the full width of the cloak, neither 
must its threads become entangled or knotted. 

A unique type of mat is seen in the kilts and shoulder capes which are 
covered with rattling thrums made of strips of the flax leaf and called by 
the natives **Kanekeneke." Great ingenuity is shown in preparing the 
ornamental cylinders of the flax leaf. With a short shell the epidermis is 
removed from the under side of the leaf; then it is scraped at intervals on 
the upper side, exposing the fibres at those points, and put into the dye. 
The dye attacks the exposed fibres while those covered with the yellow epi- 
dermis remain uncolored, giving stripes of brown or black with yellow.* 
After rolling these black and yellow strips into cylinders, they are woven 
on the mat, making what the Maori consider a very delightful garment for 
they enjoy the rattling sound, every movement of the wearer causing the 

» Hamilton, op. clt., pp. 276-280. 
2 Hamilton, op. cit., p. 276. 



190^.] Notes on New Collections, 345 

thrums to clatter against each other. Of the five examples of ** Kanekeneke/' 
two have foundation warps of black, two of brown and one of uncolored flax, 
while all have yellow wefts which can be seen between the moving thrums. 
These ornamental thrums display great variety in their black and yellow 
stripings, making most effective garments. 

Of exceedingly coarse make are the "Manaeko" or rough capes of un- 
dressed flax used as shelter and rain coats. Strips of the undressed flax 
leaves are woven to overlap each other so that the rain may run off. The 
Museum cape is of dyed material with an occasional group of undyed flax 
leaves for ornament. The foundation warps of dressed flax are bound by 
alternate rows of two-ply and four-ply twine, the leaf strips catching under 
the four-ply only. Another strong serviceable cloak of the same type is a 
large shaggy garment covered with partly dressed material and has the 
appearance of having been a sleeping mat. 

A highly prized garment and one which is most tedious and diflScult to 
make is the **Kahu-kuri" or chiefs fighting mat. This war cloak is spear- 
proof and thickly covered with dog's hair. Strips of dog's skin or dog's 
tails are caught under the twining on a stiff foundation of closely woven 
flax and then to render it a sure defence and perfectly impervious to spear 
thrusts, it is soaked in water. ^ These are of white, black and reddish brown 
dcg^s hair of which the Museum has no example. Among a number of 
Indian tribes of western North America, rabbit's skin robes are made on a 
twined foundation; but in America no case has come to our notice wh^re 
strips of dog's skin were used, although long white dog's hair was mixed 
with wool of the moimtain goat and duck down for spinning and weaving 
blankets among the Lkungen Indians,^ and those of the Lower Frazer River.* 

Color is the dominant note in the feather cloaks or *'Kahu" of the Maori, 
for he fashions this garment of the gorgeous plumage of many birds. The 
wing of the Kake parrot furnishes crimson; the neck of the native pigeon, 
peacock green; the albatross, the pheasant and the breast of the pigeon, 
pure white; and the tui, blue black. These he twines on his flax mat, as 
illustrated in Fig. 15c, placing one, two or three feathers under one turn of 
the twine, in accordance with his desire for a thickly or thinly covered surface. 
The shaft of the feather is turned to the side and twined down under the 
next turn of the weft. Alternate rows of twining only have feathers and 
usually there is one turn of twine between the feathers. (M. L. K.) 

Samoa. The Zimmermann collection contains, besides numerous 

1 Hamilton, op. cit., pp. 286, 328. 

2 Boas, 6th Report, Northwest Tribes of Canada. Report, British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 1890, p. 566. 

» Telt, The Lillooet Indians. Memoirs, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. IV» 
Pan V, p. 210. 



346 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

weapons and carvings, a complete tapa-maker's outfit, a "tuiga*' head- 
dress, and other chiefs regalia, two fine-mats, and a kava bowl with all 
accessories for preparing the drink. 

For the preparation of tapa cloth, the Samoan women peel off the bark 
of the paper-mulberry, and separate the outer layer from the inner bark, 
which alone is used to make the bark-cloth. This bast is soaked in fresh 
water, thinned with a shell scraper, and pounded with a mallet on a wooden 
board or log. The separate strips of pounded bark are spread out, dried 
in the sun, and united with arrowroot paste to form a piece of suitable size. 
The cloth is then ready for ornamentation, which consists of applying col- 
ored patterns, sometimes painted free-hand, but more commonly printed 
from stamps. Stamps are wooden or Pandanus palm-leaf plaques; on 
the former, the designs are carved; to the leaves, they are sewed. The 
undecorated tapa is stretched out on the stencil, and the dye, consisting of a 
soft brick-red clay or the soot of burnt candlenuts, is rubbed in with a rag 
until the patterns appear. Finally, the principal lines are accentuated with 
a brown varnish, which acts as a preservative against weathering. 

The "tuiga" is the ceremonial head-dress of the Samoan nobility. It 
consists of three upright stems with shells or mirrors, a girl's hair oiled and 
dyed with lime, and the breast feathers of a parrot. The frontlet of Nautilus 
shells and the whale-tooth necklace in the collection were customary con- 
comitants of this gala head-dress. 

.While ordinary mats served as garments and blankets for the wealthy 
classes, the fine-mats, collected by Mr. Zimmermann, formed the principal 
medium of exchange. They were used to fee the professional classes, such 
as shipwrights, tattooers, and architects, and constituted the princesses' 
dowries. 

Kava is the national beverage of Samoans. It is made of the roots of a 
pepper-plant, which are chewed by the unmarried villagers, placed in the 
bowl, and mixed with water, pounded, and strained by the chiefs daughter. 
Kava is drunk at all festi\'ities, councils and ceremonial occasions. The 
most conspicuous object in a Kava outfit is the bowl with many legs, one in 
this collection having as many as fourteen and the whole carved from a 
tree trunk. (R. H. L.) 

Bismarck Archipelago. A valuable collection from various islands in 
the Bismarck Archipelago, brought together by Professor Eugene Schroder, 
for many years a resident of the locality, came to the Museum during the 
year 1907. Among others, mention may be made of a series of characteristic 
wood carvings, some of which appear in Plate xiii, which, like most carv- 
ings from this part of the world, while characterized by open detail, are in 
reality fashioned from a single piece of wood and not pieced. Such figures 



1909.] Notes on New Collections, 347 

are supposed to reside in ghost, or "taboo," houses, for which see repro- 
duction of Professor Schroder's photograph, Plate xiv. A general account 
of the collection will be found in the Museum Journal ; * but mention may be 
made of a good series of hafted obsidian knives. There are a number of 
arrows with curious heart-shaped barbed wooden points. A rather unique 
series is the complete outfit for making shell arm-rings and other ornaments, 
with samples of worked shell. The grinding stones resemble scythe whet- 
stones mounted in the hollows of bamboo stems, the projecting ends of which 
serve for handles. Finally there are double pointed spears with obsidian 
heads, with perforations like the phallic openings in iron spear heads from 
the Congo and other parts of Africa. Some other spears have four-pointed 
wooden heads. Shell objects abound, such as trumpets, edge tools and 
ornaments. There are some interesting drums, including the so-called 
** death-drum," reported to have been sounded at the death of an important 
personage. Curiously enough the sounds seem to have been produced by 
rubbing instead of beating. 

(C. W. M.) 

AFRICA. 

Before the period covered by this paper, the Museum was poorly equipped 
for the illustration of African native life ; but since that time collections have 
been acquired sufficient for the equipment of a special exhibition hall. 
The material from the Congo was secured through the kindness of King 
Leopold and the officers of the Congo Free State; other collections are due 
to the interest of Messrs. Percy R. Pyne, Cleveland H. Dodge, Arthur 
Curtiss James, George S. Bowdoin, Archer M. Huntington and Mr. and 
Mrs. Morris K. Jesup. 

The Congo. The special collections from the Congo are unusually well- 
equipped with specimens of native ironwork, spears and knives being espe- 
cially abundant. While it has not yet proved feasible to study the tv^pes 
peculiar to each cultural district and to determine the range of diffusion of 
certain common forms, the illustrations of knife-forms, swords and axes in 
Fig. 17 may convey some idea of the character of Congo ironwork. Fig. 
17d, represents a three-branched thro wing-knife of the Asande (Niam- 
Niam) in the northern section of the Congo State. Schweinfurth, who 
pictures sample specimens from this people, calls attention to the occurrence 
of similar forms among the Fan of the Ogowe country in western Africa.^ 

» Vol. VIII, No. 3. March, 1908. 
a Artes Africana, Plate XII. 



348 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



According to Frobenius/ this highly characteristic weapon has, within 
recent times, traveled up the Lomami and reached the Bassongo-Mino of 
the Sankumi district by way of the Lukenye. It has obviously been in- 
fluenced by the Sudanese type of throwing-knife. A sabre manufactured 
by the Asande is shown in Fig. 17j. The Mangbettu (Monbuttu) employ, 
among other forms, a perforated falcate blade with a grip expanding at the 
base into a cylindrical butt (Fig. 17i). With the exception of the Egyptians, 




Fig. 17. a b (90.0-3679a), r (90.0-2820), d (90.0-2903), e (90.0-4092), / (90.0-5053). iT 
(90.0-2797a), h (90.0-4070), i (90.0-2742) ; (90.0-4122) k (90.0-4072). Forms of Weapons 
from the Congo. Length of a, 64 cm.; b, 51 cm.; c, 44 cm.; d, 49 cm.; e, 40 cm,; /, 33 cm.; 
ff, 19 cm.; h, 51 cm.; i, 40 cm.; j, 58 cm.; k, 55 cm. 

they are the only African people to employ, in European fashion, a one- 
edged knife (Fig. 17c), of which the blunt side is supported by the index- 
finger.^ Fig. 17a shows an excessively long and narrow Bayaka knife; the 



> Zeltschrift fOr Ethnologic, 1907, p. 323. 
a Schwelnfurth, 1. c, Plate XVIII. 



1909.] Notes on New CoUeciions. 349 

scabbard terminates in a curious semi-circular expansion. Fig. 17k repre- 
sents a Bangala execution-knife; a possibly ornamental knife of steelyard 
type (Fig. 17h) from the same tribe also deserves mention. A small knife 
from the Uele region is illustrated in Fig. 17g; the ivory handle is decorated 
with a characteristic series of circular designs enclosing dots. .Both the 
blade and the decoration have been found in a Benin specimen. In Fig. 17f 
there is a "parade-hatchet" from Urua; the handle is carved into a human 
head. Fig. 17e pictures an openwork axe from the Kasai, presumably from 
the Zappozapp country. The handles of several of the axes in the collection 
are wrapped with snake-skin. 

Woodwork has attained a high grade of development in some sections 
of the Congo State. The most artistic specimens of native craftsmanship 
are the neatly car\'ed and decorated cups and goblets of the Bakuba, of which 
a representative series is sho^n in Plate, xv. The top is frequently carved 
into a human head (Fig. 4). Less tastefully finished, but equally interest- 
ing, is a box from the Uele consisting of a bark cylinder surmounted by a 
wooden cover shaped into a crude head and resting on a wooden pedestal 
(Fig. 8). The distribution of these bark receptacles seems to be confined 
to the northern tribes of the Congo. Neck-rests have been regarded as 
foreign to the West African culture area, though even there they occur sporad- 
ically.^ In the Museum there are several rests from the Kasai, Bangala, and 
Equator regions, as well as from the Ubangi and northeastern districts. 
This fact, of course, does not militate against the supposition of a relatively 
recent importation. A rather interesting type of openwork carving deserves 
mention (Fig. 10). Sometimes the slab of the head-stool is supported by a 
human figure. A stool of rather elaborate make with a crescent-shaped 
perforation may serve as an example of woodwork from the Eastern Province 
(Fig. 9). 

Many articles of religious significance fall, from a technological point 
of view, under the category of wood-carvings. The Congo collection 
embraces a considerable number of objects illustrating the beliefs and ob- 
servances of the aborigines, notably fetiches and masks. Modern investi- 
gation does not support the popular conception of fetiches, nor does it 
confirm Tylor's classical definition of fetichism as **the doctrine of spirits 
embodied in, or attached to, or conveying influences through, certain material 
objects." ^ Fetiches are in no way connected with spirits, except in so far 

» Ankermann, Kulturkreise und Kulturschichten in Afrika, pp. 69-70, Zeiischrift fOr 
Ethnologic, 1905, pp. 54-84. 

2 Primitive Culture, II, 144. The following statements on fetichism are based on, — Notes 
Analytiques sur les Collections Ethnographiques du Mus^e du Congo, Tome I, Fascicule II: 
La Religion (Pages 145-316), and PechuCl-Loesche, Die Loango-Expedition (Dritte Ableilung, 
Zweite Halfte; Stuttgart. 1907), pp. 347-472. 



350 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

as they are employed to counteract the activities of malicious supernatural 
beings. Any object, or artifact, invested with "manitou'' power by appro- 
priate incantations, ritualistic performances, and a coating of magical sub- 
stance, becomes, when properly used, a fetich. As such, it is not necessarily 
either wo.rshipped or abused, but may be abandoned as soon as, its inefficacy 
has been denlonstrated. Fetiches are charms, serving some specific purpose, 
such as protection in battle or success in trading. As their power is due 
exclusively to the application or enclosure of the magical substances, fetiches 
destined for the same end assume various forms; and, on the other hand, the 
most elaborate carvings are powerless before contact with the **medicinar' 
ingredients. Representations of animal and human forms are especially 
common in the Kasai and Kwango districts, the Lower and Middle Congo 
area, and the Eastern Province, while they are very rare in the remaining 
divisions of the Congo. It has been plausibly argued that the high develop- 
ment of carving in some of the districts mentioned has effected this differ- 
ence.^ Pechuel-Loesche suggests that the images brought in by Catholic 
missionaries at the time of the great Portuguese voyages of exploration 
greatly promoted the development of human car\ings. In support of this 
view, he points to the rarity of human figures both in the sections of Africa 
influenced by iconoclastic Islamism and in the south and southwest where 
Protestant missionaries have labored during the last century. That pre- 
cisely those 'Bantu tribes subject to Catholic influence have developed such 
an abundance of human fetiches seems to him a significant coincidence. 
At the same time, he does not deny the possibility that such figures originated 
prior to contact with Europeans, whose influence may have been restricted 
to fostering an already existing art.^ In the artistic representation of 
human fetiches, certain sectional differences of style become manifest. In 
the maritime and lower Congo regions, as well as in Loango, perhaps the 
most peculiar characteristic is a trough, a circular or a box-like excrescence 
extending sometimes from the chest to the umbilical region, and intended 
for the reception of the magical substance.^ This peculiarity is strongly 
marked in Fig. 2, Plate xvi. In Fig. 7, the excavation is less prominent 
and overshadowed by other peculiarities: the crested headgear, quad- 
rangular chin-beard, series of parallel vertical lines on both cheeks, and 
extraordinarily thin arms. The up-turned nose, developing at times into 
a grotesque proboscis, is highly characteristic of Kwango figures (Fig. 6) ; 
the jutting ears are likewise remarkable. Sexual characteristics are strongly 
emphasized in some specimens (Fig. 8) from the Kasai. Several fetiches 



» Notes Analytlques, op. cit., p. 212. 

2 Pechuel-Loesche, 1. c. pp. 397-399. 

3 Ibid., p. 246; Pechufil-Loesche, p. 364. 



1909.] Notes on New Collections. 351 

are of clearly phallic character. In many of the human figures, the dis- 
proportionate shortness of the legs is noticeable. Animal fetiches are 
relatively rare ; a specimen from the Kasai is shown in Fig. 5. 

Masks are employed in war, by ordinary dancers and by shamans. In 
Fig. 4, Plate xvi, there is pictured a remarkable Bakuba war-dance mask, 
with a long fringe at the base. There are no eye-slits, each eye being closed 
by a conical projection. The cones are divided into a number of triangular 
surfaces alternately painted black and white. The wearer was able to peep 
through a number of small circular of)enings. A Bakuba shaman's mask 
is remarkable for the narrow eye-slits, pyramidal nose, and the decorative 
incisions on forehead and cheeks (Fig. 3). Fig. 1 represents a mask with 
fringe and a lofty crest flanked by two lower crests of similar curvature; the 
eyes are represented by cowries, with which the entire specimen is also 
profusely dotted, and beads are added for the ornamentation of the facial 
portion.^ 

The well-developed musical sense of the Congo negroes is attested by 
the number of their musical instruments, some of which are represented in 
Plate XVII. The wicker-work rattles made from split canes deserve special 
attention ; the insertion of a wicker globe enclosing small shells or seeds at 
both ends of the handle results in the characteristic dumb-bell iy\ie (Fig. 9). 
The simple wicker rattles are distributed over the whole of equatorial Africa. 
Among the Mangbettu, they were used as royal sceptres and batons in 
public councils and choral chants.^ Among many other Congo tribes, they 
are employed in shamanistic practices. Tomtoms (Fig. 7) are hollowed- 
out blocks of wood with one or two longitudinal slits at the top; the walls 
are of unequal thickness, so that sounds of different pitch result from strik- 
ing them with a drumstick. By varying the succession and length of the 
beats, some of the negro tribes have developed a definite long-distance signal 
code, which is used to summon tribesmen to the chase, council, war-expedi- 
tions, or other tribal undertakings. The tomtom is distributed over the 
entire Congo region and along the coast from the Congo River to Kamerun ; 
the signaling code, however, seems to be restricted to the lower Lomami, 
Lulongo and Juapa rivers, and to the northern Congo State generally. The 
Bakongo of the maritime region and the Baluba in the south have tomtoms, 
but do not use them for signaling.' The drums are of two principal types: 
those of elongated cylindrical shape with drum-heads stretched by means 
of leather cords (Fig. 10); and vase-shaped forms with but a single skin- 



» Though almost the exact counterpart of the specimen is pictured in Notes Analytiques 
Tome I. Fascicule II, it is deemed advisable to illustrate the mask for the benefit of the Ameri- 
can reader. 

a Schweinfurth, 1. c. Plate xvi. 

3 Sir Harry Johnston, George Grenfell and the Ck>ngo, London, 1908, pp. 721-722. 



352 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

cover nailed to the wooden resonator, which terminates in a circular stand 
(Fig. 8). The sansa,^ consisting of a wooden key-board with wooden or 
iron keys of varying size (Fig. 2), is of very wide distribution in Africa; a 
marimba with gourd resonators is shown in Fig. 5. The principle of the 
musical bow is shown in an instrument formed essentially of five curved 
sticks constituting with corresponding strings so many bows, and all joined 
to the same sounding-board (Fig. 1). The attachment of several strings, 
one above the other, to the same bow, united with a resonator, results in a 
kind of harp-guitar akin to that of the ancient Egyptians (Fig. 4). A 
zither with curved bark resonator is pictured in Fig. 3, and a trumpet partly 
of ivory and partly of wood in Fig. 6. 

As the basketry and woven fabrics from the Congo will receive detailed 
treatment in a later Museum publication, it is merely desirable at present 
to call attention to a series of beautiful samples of Bakuba "plush" fabric 
(Plates xviii and xix). The cloth is woven of raphia fibres by the men, 
and the women subsequently sew on the "plush" patterns. The Baptndi 
living near the mouth of the Kwango are also skilled in the pile-cloth in- 
dustry,^ and similar fabrics are reported from the natives of Lake Ntomba 
(Natumba) ; ^ in course of trade, it seems to have traveled rather far north 
from its area of manufacture.* One of the most interesting of the design- 
elements illustrated is the combination within a rectangle of four right-angled 
triangles with touching apices, — the Samoan "whirligig" pattern (Plate 
xrx, Fig. 1). 

Benin. The accessions from Benin include a number of bronze figu- 
rines, ornaments and tusk-stands, and several carved tusks. Four large 
tusks, two of which are figured in Plate xx, are of special interest. The 
pieces illustrated are covered wnth realistic carvings in low relief, but lack 
the lozenge-pattern band usually found at the bottom of this class of objects. 
On both there are the characteristic human figures with peaked headgear, 
bearing staves, wands or leaf-shaped swords, nude men with legs curved 
upward and outward, and sigma-shaped designs, which on one of the 
specimens enclose eye-ornaments, and a tail-like appendage, and seem to 
correspond to the "cat-fish" pattern of British ethnographers. The 
sigma-patterns are juxtaposed, one above the other, the upper being the 
symmetrical counterpart of the lower. One piece shows in addition a 



1 Called marimba in Notes Analytiques sur les Collections Ethnographiques du Musfte du 
Congo, Tome I, Fascicule I. while the instrument commonly called marimba is there designated 
as xylophone. The term is used with varying significance by the natives. 

2 Torday and Joyce. Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and 
Ireland. 1907, Vol. XXXVII, p. 143. 

3 Johnson, 1. c, p. 175. 
* Ibid., p. 758. 



1909.] 



Notes on New CoUections, 



353 



horseman wearing a brimmed helmet with pendant, and a pleated skirt. 
With one hand he reins the horse, in the other he holds a dart. The same 
specimen also exhibits the characteristically Benin group of a dignitary sup- 
ported on either side by an attendant. Besides the larger antiques, the 
collection includes a number of small tusks and tusk-tips divided by a 
descending spiral line into a series of bands ornamented with realistic carv- 
ings. The totality of relief figures on any one piece seems to represent a 
procession. There are representations of hand-to-hand encounters, Euro- 
pean headgear, umbrellas, a wheeled vehicle, a European house, fish, birds, 
and quadruped forms. The provenience of only one of these smaller tusks 






Fig. 18. a (90.0-912), b (90.0-914), c (90.0-920). Carved Spoon Handles, 
a, 53 cm.; b, 45 cm.; c, 53 cm. 



Length of 



is definitely known, but, as all the pieces are essentially similar, they may 
be regarded as coming from the Loango coast. 

British South Africa. The Douglas collection embraces a large num- 
ber of specimens illustrating the technology of Mashonaland, the Barotse, 
Bechuana, and neighboring tribes. A considerable part of the collection 
consists of baskets, detailed treatment of which, together with those of the 
Congo tribes, is reserved for a future paper. A group of specimens of abo- 
riginal manufacture from the Barotse and their neighbors is presented in 
Plate XXI. The decorated gourds are noteworthy; they show a combina- 
tion of geometrical motives, such as checker, rows of triangles, columns of 
lozenges or triangles with realistic representations of human figures, birds 
and beasts. A point of some interest is the fact that some of the earthen pot- 
forms are exactly duplicated among the wooden vessels, which are frequently 
decorated with bands of shaded triangles or diamonds. The somewhat 



354 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 




Fig. 19. a (90.0-858). b (90.0-852), c (90.0-849), d (90.0-850), e (90.0-855), / (90.0-837), 
(90.0-853), h (90.0-856), i (90.0-830), j (90.0-846), k (90.0-857). I (90.0-851), m (90.0-«64). n 
(90.0-842). Ivory Pins. Length of a, 15 cm.; 6, 10 cm.; c, 13 cm.; d, 11 cm.; «, 13 cm.; /, 
13 Qm.:o, 10 cm.; h, 11 cm.; t, 12 cm.; ;, 12 cm.; k, 13 cm.; I, 18jcm.; m. 13.5 cm.; n, 14 cm. 



crudely shaped spoons (Fig. 18) have their handles decorated with realistic 
cannings, among which the figure of a swimming bird predominates; this 
motive show^s a tendency to conventionalization.'^'Possibly the opposite 



1909J Notes on New CoUectiona. 355 

tendency is to be recognized in a series of carvings on ivory pins (Fig. 19). 
In a number of these specimens, the handle assumes a serpentine form of 
varying degrees of sinuosity. As a few of the pins actually culminate in a 
clearly recognizable snake-head, it might be speciously argued that in this 
case also a process of conventionalization has taken place. As, however, 
the snake-head is frequently replaced by the heads of other animals, several 
times by that of a bird, once by that of a monkey, it is quite conceivable 
that the serpentine handle was originally a decorative motive, in some cases 
surmounted by an animal head ; that occasionally the form of the customary 
decorative unit suggested to the artist the idea of a snake, and that the 
complete snake figure is thus a later product due to the inherent congruity 
of the geometrical unit and the realistic form. Both the serpentine and 
straight pin-handles are decorated with the swimming-bird motive common 
in Barotse woodwork (Fig. 19, j, n). Other ivory pins present the circle- 




Fig. 20 (90.0-1256). A Musical Bow. Length 63 cm. 

dot pattern noted above as occurring on ivory carvings from the Congo (Fig. 
19, f, i), and possibly due to Arabian influence. A modification of the 
musical bow from Mashonaland is shown in Fig. 20. The two strings are 
attached to a straight carved stick with several pegs, two pieces of gourd 
forming a resonator. Specimens of this type occur sporadically in the 
Congo State,^ but they are more common in the east, where they have been 
found, among others, in the Wayao tribe. ^ (R. H. L.) 

ArchcBoiogy. From Mediterranean Africa, the Museum has long pos- 
sessed a representative series of flaked material, secured by Andrew E. 
Douglass through the kindness of M. Jacques De Morgan, whose name 
must ever be associated with the problems of old world archaeology. In 
addition there are a few stone implements from Somali Land, presented 
by H. W. Seton-Karr. Recently this nucleus has been augmented by a 
series of prehistoric flints from ancient village sites in the Fayum Desert, 



1 Johnston (1. c, p. 716) reports them from the Aruwimi. 
Ftlllebora. Das deutsche Njassa-und Ruwuraa-Gebiet (Berlin, 1906), p. 238. 



356 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

Africa, apparently belonging to a later period, probably the Neolithic. 
A number of types are shown, all differing, some large, stemless and very 
deeply-barbed; others having the ends of the barbs squared like some 
European types. A large number are very diminutive. Several semilunar 
flint knives among quite a series of various blades are of interest, and some 
scrapers and drills are in the collection.* 

ASIA. 

From the living peoples of Asia and the Malayan area, a number of 
collections were received during the interval. Field-work was carried on 
in Korea under the direction of Dr. C. C. Vinton, the results of which, with 
notes on the collections made, will be treated in a special publication at 
some future time. Among the gifts may be mentioned a number of Tibetan 
scrolls from the Lamasery at Batug, due to the interest of Mr. Mason Mit- 
chell; from Mr. Charles H. Senff, a shield and a series of weapons from 
India, collected by Captain Hagadom; from Mr. M. F. Savage, two impe- 
rial token coins, what is said to be a ** judge's sceptre" from Pekin, China, 
collected by the artist Mueller during the late Boxer War, and an iron pipe 
inlaid with gold from Manchuria. 

Philippine Islands. The Jesup Philippine collection represents in 
general four cultures: the Christianized tribes, the Pagan tribes, the Moro 
tribes, and the Negrito tribes. For the former three, cultural features are 
quite fully represented; the rice industries, the textile arts and the hemp 
industry. The former is of considerable ethnographical interest, because 
of its distribution on the Asiatic continent and the indications that the 
Malayan groups acquired it from some southern Asiatic culture center. The 
investigation of this problem and the distribution of wheat and allied cereals 
in Mediterranean countries would doubtless throw some light on the general 
anthropological problems of the Old World. It would seem that many of 
the textile arts can also be traced to an Asiatic center and, while far less 
specialized than the rice culture, may in turn prove an important aid in the 
same connection. 

As a matter of general interest, we may call attention to one unique 
feature of the rice culture. The peculiar rice mill shown in Plate xxii is 
constructed almost entirely of bamboo, though seemingly in strict imitation 
of the Old World stone mill. While the whole collection is rich in objects 
illustrating bamboo culture, this example seems one of the most unusual 
and unexpected adaptations of such material. 



^ See, Report of the U. 8, National Museum for 1904, pp. 745-751. 



1909.] Notes on New CoUecHons. 357 

Transportation both by water and land is fully represented, the series of 
models of boats being unusually complete and is supplemented by a number 
of real boats with complete fittings. Types of habitations are also well 
represented by models as well as a typical Igorot store house and Negrito 
hut. 

The Jesup Collection has been augmented by a fairly representative 
series from the Bontoc Igorot of northern Luzon, including costumes, coiled 
and twilled baskets, wooden shields, spears, a drum, gongs, beaten vessels 
of copper, large wooden dishes, ladles, carved spoons, tobacco-pipes, etc. 
There are a few curiously shaped boxes carved from blocks of wood appar- 
ently in imitation of plaited basket tobacco-pouches (Figs. 1 and 3, Plate 
xxii) as shown in Fig. 2. That the wooden ones are imitations is suggested 
by the wnde distribution of the basket type and the fact that Fig. 1 is hol- 
lowed out underneath, giving the appearance of the peculiar ridged bottom 
found on the former. The wooden bowls all bear notched edges as shown 
in Fig. 4. Some are provided with one small side bowl instead of two as in 
this case. Wood carving is further represented by a monkey-headed staff, 
a large hat, surmounted by a human head, carved from a black wood, and 
spoons with the human figure for handles similar to one described by Ratzel.^ 
Pipes of wood, clay and brass present the types described by Jenks.' One 
of the brass pipes is of unusual form, the bowl resting on the back of a quad- 
ruped. A girdle to which are fastened thirty-four Spanish coins ranging 
in date from 1723 to 1825 may be mentioned, and a curious ornament 
composed of eleven perforated ivory disks held together by plaited links. 
The fact that these disks are arranged in order of size suggests that this may 
have been a pendant rather than a girdle, though in another collection such 
an object forms the belt for a knife scabbard. There are also armlets of 
boar's teeth joined by plaited bands, almost identical with specimens found 
in collections from Melanesia. 

On a decorated bamboo lime box, we find the characteristic zigzag 
and hour-glass patterns found in various parts of the Malay area, but in 
addition some attempts at realism (Fig. 21, a). Among the Jesup collection, 
there are many similarly decorated lime boxes, on only one of which there 
are a few animal figures, indicating that such realistic decorations are excep- 
tional. Taking Philippine lime boxes as a whole, we find one general type 
of decoration consisting of zigzag, stepped and angular patterns which differ 
entirely from the specimens we have seen from other parts of the Malayan 
Islands and New Guinea. In particular the specimens from Borneo and 
Sumatra bear scroll and leaf designs as the chief motifs, while those from 



1 History of Mankind, Vol. I, p. 431. 

2 Etiinological Survey Publications, Vol. I. 



358 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 





7 £ 










IIHHIIIhj 




g 




1 •" 

2 £ 







^ O 

CO - 
CO •— 



2 3 



^ E 



1909.] NoUb on New Collections, 359 

New Guinea have the characteristics of Papuan art. A bamboo cup or 
tobacco-box from the Hova of Madagascar, in the Berlin Museum, bears 
representations of animals similar in execution to those upon one of our 
Philippine lime boxes, and so far as our observation goes different from the 
conventional forms in African art. It is the wide biit seemingly contigu- 
ous distribution of these decorated bamboo boxes that suggest their impor- 
tance from an ethnographical point of view. Though we have not the time 
to treat the subject fully, the data at hand seem to indicate their center of 
distribution to have been in the heart of the Malay Islands. Returning 
to the Philippines, we find a general type seemingly originating frop some 
undetermined center whence they have found their way into various parts 
of the island group. In Fig. 21, we give a series of selected designs. 

A set of brass ear cleaners bear designs produced by repeated impressions 
of a small punch similar to African iron snuff spoons from Barotseland.^ 

Mr. Charles H. Senff presented a large representative collection of swords, 
knives and spears from the Philippine and other Malayan Islands. They 
were selected by Captain Hagadorn, chiefly among the Moro and Igorot. 
The cutting weapons are of four main t^^jes: the well-known long-handled, 
angling, bladed knife found in Borneo and elsewhere (Fig. 22, e); the long 
straight sword with a spreading blade and fringed handle (Fig. 22, a) ; the 
so-called Sulu knife with short bulging blade (Fig. 22, b) ; and finally the 
kris, some with straight blades, others of the well-known waving type (Fig. 
22, c and d). A number of the latter are decorated with inlaid designs, in 
most cases highly conventionalized. One specimen suggests a connection 
between these designs and the curious form of guard found on all these 
blades (Fig. 23, a). On part of this blade we find the form of a scaly serpent 
passing under the ornamental clasp and terminating in a conventionalized 
head or beak. This peculiar hooked mandible and protruding tongue seem 
the most persistent features of these weapons, occurring so far on every 
specimen examined. While further research will be necessary to establish 
the suggestion that this is a serpent motive, it is clear that the decorator of 
this specimen so regarded it. The opposite projection of the guard is also 
repeated with fair fidelity and may well be a horn or a distorted occiput of 
the same monster. This is suggested by a figure on a jar of assumed 
Malayan origin figured by Ratzel,^ suggesting that we have here the well 
known dragon of Asiatic art. The inlaid decorations of these blades 
(Fig. 23, b, c, d) vary greatly in detail, but agree in general arrangement 
in so far that we have a central stem parallel to the edges of the kris, flanked 
near the top by scroll and other simple designs. 



» See Ratzel, History of Mankind, Vol. I, p. 411. 
2 History of Mankind, Vol. I, p. 470. 



360 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II , 




Fig. 22. a (70.1-4153). b (70.1-4189) c (70.1-4238). d (70.1-4155), e (70.1-1496). 
Types of Malayian Swords. Length of a, 106 cm.; 6, 64 cm.; c, 84 cm.; d, 71 cm ; e, 98 cm. 



1909.] 



Notes on New CoUectiona, 



361 




I 
2 



c 



s 

te 



o 



^ B 
I « 

d t^ 



« e 



T^. 



Pci S 



362 Anlhropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 

The handles are usually slight variants of what appears to be a bird 
form. Knives of the type shou-n in Fig. 22 d, often have handles repre- 
senting heads of conventionalized animal forms. For the specimen exam- 
ined the eyes are marked by inlaid dots. Many of the swords and knives 
have silver mountings and mention may be made of a kris scabbard orna- 
mented with alternating bands of fretwork in silver and turde shell. 

Upper Burma. A small collection of baskets has been received from 
the Kachin of Upper Bui ma in which there is an interesting pack basket 
of unusual form. It may be mentioned that the pack baskets of America 
are usually i>ointed, while in some parts of the Congo, Africa, they are 
shallow and tray-shaped. This basket has a cover and a rectangular base, 
as is frequent in southeastern Asia and the Malayan area. It is also 
strengthened by hoops and supporting staves of bamboo. The carrying 
strap passes over the head and is provided with a curious wooden yoke for 
the shoulders as a spreader. The basket b in technique a double struc- 
ture with a layer of leaves between the inner weave of coarse twill and the 
outer of fine wicker. The edges of both body and cover present an 
interesting braid of fine cane. The framework is attached to the basket 
by short spirals while small rings of complex flat braid and loops bound 
with a braid-like edge, form the strappings of the basket. 

For short journeys, a small cylindrical basket on an oval base is carried. 
These cane baskets are about 40 cm. high and of wicker weave, with a frame- 
work as in the larger basket but which is attached by a Malay knot.^ Five 
rows of twine weave border the edge below a braid formed by the ends of 
the warps. A three-ply rope with short ends of a material which appears 
to be the same as the framework of the basket is attached by means of loops 
formed by the upright spokes of the frame. A braided carrying strap of 
cane is attached to this rope by swivels of interlaced cane. 

A satchel-like carrying basket used by chiefs when visiting friends is 
constructed of twilled cane. A flat rectangular mat 80 cm. by 35 cm. is 
first woven, then folded double and the side edges firmly closed by the aid 
of two strips in the framework. Malay knots attach this framework to the 
satchel. A native three-ply rope and a braided carrying strap make it 
complete. On festival occasions the Kachins use a small ornamental basket 
of very fine cane and yellow orchid stems. Its shape and construction is 
similar to that of the last basket; but when half of the mat is woven, the 
weave changes from twill to twilled twine, woven in opposite directions. 
Bands of the twilled twine are overlaid with the yellow orchid stems, in 
diamond and arrow point designs. The edge is of twine with the alternate 



• Otis T. Mason, Basketry Bolo Case from Basilan Island, p. 196, Washington, 1907: Vo- 
cabulary of Malaysian Basketwork, p. 25. Washington, 1908. 



1909.] Notes on New Collections. 363 

waq)s coiled over three joining warp stems and run into the twining. A 
dainty three-ply cord and braided strap are also attached to this wallet. 
The character of the ornamentation is quite like that on specimens from 
the Andaman Islands. (M. L. K.) 

Andaman Islands. A systematic collection, the gift of Mrs. Morris K. 
Jesup, was made in the Andaman Islands by Mr. C. Anderson, an account 
of which, with numerous illustrations appears in the Museum Journal, 
April, 1909. The collection is fairly complete and is accompanied by 
important notes on the custo s of the Andamanese. The peculiarly shaped 
bow of the Andamanese, used for shooting fish is well represented in the 
collection and in addition, mention may be made of baskets, drums, sleeping 
mats, ornaments of shell and torches made of resin wrapped in palm leaves 
used for fishing at night, large iron-pointed arrows for killing the wild boar 
and long barbed turtle spears. Of especial interest are several human 
skulls worn as tokens of respect for lost relatives. These are carefully 
cleaned and painted, after which pendants with shells or fringe are attached 
and a strap put on, by w^hich they can be suspended around the neck of the 
wearer. The collection contains a number of human jaws prepared and 
Avom in the same way and for the same purpose as the skulls just described. 
Also, mention may be made of a fetich composed of human bones with shell 
pendants w^om by friends of a sick person in order that his sufferings may be 
mitigated. With the collection is a series of photographs representing 
ceremonies and other phases of Andamanese life. 

ArchcBoiogy. Through the kindness of H. W. Seton-Karr, a few palaeo- 
lithic implements from India were added to the collection. These were 
washed up out of pleistocene lateric alluvium, containing quartzite boulders, 
in Poodi and Gazeefet, Madras Presidency, and are interesting as coming 
from a country archaeologically little known. They are generally like the 
palfeoliths of England and of the Somme Valley, France. In addition may 
be mentioned some celts from the vicinity of Banda, all made by pecking, 
in some cases finished by polishing, and characterized by a broad bit taper- 
ing to a pointed butt. They have a general resemblance to some New 
World forms. ^ 

Also it may be of interest to mention casts of a few stone implements 
from Shantung, China, collected by Rev. Samuel Couling, a Baptist mission- 
ary. The originals are in the Royal Scottish Museum, Ekiinburgh. The 
series consists of celts, hammer and rubbing stones and a grooved axe. The 
celts are of a number of types, easily duplicated in almost any collection 
from the Eastern United States (Plate xxiii). Examination shows them 



H. W. Seton-Karr, Report of the U. S. National Museum, for 1904, p. 748. 



364 Anthropological Papers Ameriacn Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 

to have been carefully wrought by the usual process of pecking, grindbg 
and polishing. An irregularly shaped object of stone appears from its worn 
and battered appearance to have been a hammerstone; while another pebble, 
very much worn and beveled on one side, shows every evidence of having 
been used for grinding and polishing. Yet most interesting of all is that 
rarest of neolithic forms in the Old Worid, a grooved axe. The sjjecimen is 
small and the groove encircles three surfaces, the fourth side being flat. 
Thus this small collection is exceedingly interesting as coming from a region, 
the prehistoric archfieology of which is so comparatively little known, and 
in its duplication of so many well-known New World types. 

PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY. 

The collections under this head were considerably augmented during 
the year. We may mention fragments of a skull from a mound in Nebraska 
presented by Mr. Robert F. Gilder, thirteen skulls from the vicinity of New 
York City presented by Henry Booth, and one skeleton and two skulls from 
Aukland, New Zealand. By courtesy of the Egyptian Expedition from the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, a collection of human bones from ancient 
burials has been received. However, the largest acquisition was a series 
of 1800 palate casts from normal and feeble-minded white subjects, col- 
lected and presented by Dr. Walter Channing. The casts are so distributed 
as to furnish an unbroken series from the sixth year of childhood to middle 
life. During the year the Museum published a comparative study of this 
collection to which the reader is referred for further information.^ 



» Anthropological Papers, Vol. I, Part V. 



1909.] 



Index. 



365 



INDEX. 



A'bi, 223. 

Adze, 321, 321. 

A'gai-dika, 206. 

Ah-hi'-e, 212. 

A'k-hwi, 182. 

Album, James Edge-Partington's, 338. 

Algonkin, 7, 8, 9, 12, 321. 

Algonquin, 180. 

Amulete, "bird," 321; Costa Rica, 329. 

Andaman Islands, 363. 

Anethum graveolens, 188. 

A'no, 221. 

A'nonokakin, 220. 

Apache, 191. 

A'po, 209, 226, 233, 235. 

A'po-no'kakin, 219. 

A'ra, 209. 

A'rabe, 209. 

Arango, Leocadio Ma, 333. 

Arapaho, 11, 12, 16, 17, 172, 204, 208, 

216, 217, 236. 
Archaeology, 355, 363. 
Ankara, 16, 172, 212. 
Armadillo, pottery design from, 324. 
Armlets, Igorot, 357. 
Arm-rings, outfit for making, 347. 
Armstrong, Dr. S. T., 322. 
Arrows, Bismarck Archif>elago, 347; 

Eskimo, 314, 315; poisoned, 331 
Asande (Niam-Niam), 347. 
Assiniboine, 16, 219, 313. 
Athabascans, 191. 
Atsina, 171, 183, 190, 201. 
Axes, 322, 347, 349. 

Ba'di, 210. 
Ba'dzi, 209. 
Ba'gwina, 227. 
Ba'ha, 209. 
Bakongo, 351. 
Bakuba, 351. 
Baluba, 351. 
Ba'mu-tak, 174. 



Ba'naite, 206, 208. 

Ban-at-tees, 208. 

Banner stones, 320. 

Bannock, 171-174, 179, 199, 206, 208, 
211, 219, 226, 233. 

Bantu, 350. 

Bapindi, 352. 

Barotse, 353. 

Basketry, Congo, 352; Kachin, 362; 
bag, 339, 340; New Caledonia, 340; 
tray, 339. 

Baskets, carrying, 362; cylindrical 362; 
Kachin, 362; pack, 362. 

Bassongo-Mino, 348. 

Bavi, 209. 

Bear and the Deer, 169, 235, 253. 

Bear-knife, 95. 

Bear-Moccasin, 143. 

Beaver-medicine, 74, 79. 

Bechuana, 353. 
[ Benin, 352, 349. 
I Bi'a, 209. 

I Bi'a a'po, 209. ♦ 

' Bi'cap, 182. 

Bismarck Archipelago, 346. 

Blackfoot, 172, 180, 185, 191, 195, 201, 
202, 212, 236, 313. 
, Blackfoot, mythology of, 1-164. 
I Bladder Story, 127. 

Blood, 5, 6, 7. 

Blood-Clot, 12, 13, 17, 53. 
I Blow-guns, 331. 

Board, throwing, 318. 
I Boas, Franz, 169, 200, 203, 310, 317. 
' Bon toe Igorot, 357. 

Booth, Henry M., 320. 
' Bourke, 186, 193-195, 198, 227. 

Bow, Eskimo, 314; musical, 355. 

Bowdoin, George S., 336. 

Bowl, kava, 346; Marquesas, 338; New 
Cale<lonia, 337. 

Bowls, 338; Igorot, 357. 

Boxes, Igorotj 357; lime, 357. 



366 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 



Braves, 106. 

Brenchley, 218. 

Brigham, Dr., 336. 

Brinton, 173. 

British South Africa, 353. 

Brother on Desert Island, 14. 

Bufifalo, Boy, 13; child reared by the, 

13; riding the, 157. 
Buifalo-Rock, 85-89. 
Buffalo's Adopted ChUd, 121. 
Bu'ha, 224. 
Bu'ha-gant, 224, 226. 
Bu'i-na'dcu, 227. 
Bullet mould, 321. 
Bunched Stars, 12, 17, 71. 



Caddoan tribes, 16. 

Cai'mogots, 184. 

Cannibal stories, 291. 

Capa, 332. 

Capes, Hawaiian, 336; Maori, 340. 

Caribou teeth, 318. 

Ca'ro-rika, 185, 208. 

Casts of palates, 364. 

Catchers, 121. 

Cat-fish pattern, 352. 

Cauca Valley, pottery from, 333. 

Cayuse, 172, 191. 

Celt, 321. 

Changuenes, 328. 

Charm, Eagle-head, 103; rain, 339. 

Cheyenne, 11, 12, 16, 17, 172, 219 

Chibchas, 328. 

Chilcotin, 236. 

Chile, body from, 334. 

Chiriqui, 323. 

Cigar, Brazilian, 331. 

Cin-au'-ao, 233. 

Clark, 6, 189, 192, 206, 208, 211, 212, 214, 
220, 233, 234. 

Cloth, Bakuba, 352. 

Coat, woman's, 315. 

Coctos, 328. 

Co'go-na'ronon, 197. 

Co'go-wi'towE, 177. 

Collection, Booth, 320; Engler Melane- 
sian, 337; Lewisohn, 313; Norton, 
318; Schmidt and Weiss, 330. 

Collections, Africa, 347; Asia, 356; 



Islands of the Pacific Ocean, 336; 

North America, 313; South America, 

330; Physical Anthropology, 364. 
Comanche, 173, 190. 
Congo, 347. 
Coni-gan*, 183. 
ConvoUaria stellata, 228. 
Costa Rica, specimens from, 3? " 
Cotos, 328. 

Cottle, Captain S. F., 314. 
Coyote, 156, 169, 239, 248, 262, 267, 

270, 272-80. 
Crse, 9, 12, 16, 213, 217, 220, 221, 232, 

313. 
Crow, 11, 16, 313. 
Crows, 172, 191, 202. 
Culin, 174, 197, 199, 216, 220, 225, 230, 

234. 
Cup, Hova, 359. 
Cups, wooden, 349. 
Cuts- Wood, 12, 66. 



Da'bEntcotc, 211 

Da'gu-wo no, 216. 

Dakota, 17, 178, 313. 

Da'me, 209. 

Danicoto'En, 198. 

Dina'ronon, 197. 

Dance, buifalo, 216; Cree, 217, 220, 221; 
Father's, 219; ghost, 218; hot, 222; 
hugging, 220; Omaha, 222; prairie- 
chicken, 222; scalp, 220; squaw, 217; 
sun, 216, 225; war,' 220; wolf. 216. 

Dancing Ducks, 16. 

Datci'ba, 171. 

Death-drum, 347. 

De?r-dance, Kutenai, 15, 157. 

De Morgan, M. Jacques, 355. 

Designs, alligator, 328; armadillo, 324; 
Barotse, 353; Benin. 349; Cauca 
Valley, 333; Congo, 347; incised, 
349; Hawaiian, 337; Maori, 344; 
Philippine, 357; Samoan stamped, 
345. 

De Smet, 195, 198, 213, 215. 

Di'rako ne, 208. 

Dishes from New Hebridef, .'38. 

Do'ca, 196. 

Do'cabit, 195, 196. 



1909.] 



Index. 



3()7 



Dog-Chief, 107. 

Do'go, 209. 

Domenech, 188. 

Do'napo, 211. 

Donors, list of, 312-313 

Do'pedi, 195-197. 

Doro'wokiina, 198. 

Dorsey, Dr., 199. 

Douglass, Andrew E., 355. 

Drills, 321. 

Drum, hand, 316; pottery, 329. 

Drums, Congo, 351. 

Du'a, 210. 

Du'a-nai dui, 199. 

Duclos, Eugene, 169. 

Du'mabana, 225. 

Du'mabana-nai dui, 199. 

Dumo, 196. 

Du'mu-no'kakin, 219. 

Duvall, D. C, 5. 

Dza'-wongobi, 227. 

Dzi'ampi, 212, 213. 

Dzo, 209. 

Dzo'ap, 226-229. 

Dzoavits, 169, 231, 257,^ 259, 261, 262. 

Dzu'ma, 197. 

Earring, 321. 

Elk- Woman, 15, 17, 83. 

Enmions, Lieutenant G. T., 314, 318. 

E'ngabit ho'pi, 213. 

Enga-gwacu Jim, 211, 224-227, 301. 

Eskimo, 314; Prince Albert Land, 314; 
Mackenzie River, 316; near Pond's 
Bay, 316; Alaskan, 315, 318; Cen- 
tral, 315. 

Execution-knife, 349 

Fan of the Ogowe, 347. 
Faukner, Mr., 169, 217. 
Feather cloaks, Maori, 345. 
Feather-work, Hawaii, 336; Maori, 345; 

Peruvian, 337; Pomo, 337. 
Fetiches, Congo, 349. 
Fetichism, 349. 
Fixed-Star, the. 12, 58. 
Flathead, 171, 172, 184. 191. 
Flints, 321; prehistoric, 355. 
Found-in-the-Grass, 12, 13. 



Fox. 9, 12. 

Fremont, 183, 191. 228. 

Frobenius, 348. 

Ga'gu, 209. 

Gambling sticks, 316. 

Games, Shoshone, 216. 

Ghost houses, 347. 

Ghosts, 227. 

Ghost Stories, 299. 

Ghost woman, 155; fed^by, 156. 

Girdle, Igorot, 357. 

Girl with a Dog for a Lover, 13. 

Goblets, wooden, 349. 

Gfl'mi, 209. 

Gorgets. 353. 

Gouge, 321. 

Gourds, Barotse, 353. 

Gourd vessels, 339. 

Grasshoppers, 134. 

Grinnell, George B., 6, 7, 9, 10, 11. 

Gros Ventre, 11, 12, 16. 

Gros Ventre, 172, 201, 236. 

Grouse, Jack, 227, 229, 230, 232. 

"Grover Cleveland," 210. 

Guaimias, 328. 

Guamaco skin capa, 332. 

Guetares, 328. 

Gw&'are-naidui, 199. 

Gwi'd-am-ba bi, 211, 230. 

Gwr-na-m6'-bi, 211. 

Gwfl'ah6, 210. 

GwQ'ap(5, 210. 

Hagadom, Captain, 359. 

Hale, 10. 

Hammerstones, 321. 

Hansen, Fridtjof, 319. 

Harpoons and lances, Norton, 318, 319. 

Hartman, Dr. Cari, 322. 

Hias-Scars-All-Over, 109. 

Hatchet, parade, 349. 

Hawaii, 336. 

Hawaiians, 337. 

Henry Alexander, 6, 8, 9, 10. 

Henry Alexander, 219. 

Hidatsa, 16. 

Hidatea, 172, 236. 

Hidatsa, 313. 



368 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History. [Vol. II, 



Hixtcaba Niha"ca», 11. 

Ho'bak-wukQn', 198. 

Hoflfman, 177, 214. 

Hfl gti gan', 183. 

Holmes, Prof., 323, 328, 329. 

Hoof-rattle society, 219. 

Hopi, 219. 

Homed- toad and Frog, 159. 

Horns and Matoki, 117-119. 

Hova, 359. 

Huckerby, Rev. T., 322. 

Ha'na-gan*, 183, 214. 

Hu'tsi, 209. 

I'dzapa an-dQ'p*, 233. 

Igorot, 351. 

Imitations of the Host, 16. 

Implements, India palseolithic, 363. 

Implements, Shantung, China, 363. 

Iron-Man, 251, 169. 

Ironwork, Congo, 347. 

Iroquois, 313. 

Irving, 185, 199. 

Ivory carvings, Congo, 354. 

Ivory pins, 354. 

i'zai, 185. 

Jacobs, Joseph, 170. 
Jars, 324, 325, 326. 
Jenks, 357. 
Jicarilla Apache, 236. 
Jones, Dr. Wm., 7. 
Joseph, Chief, 172. 
Judge's Sceptre, China, 356. 

Kachin, 362. 

Ka'espai ph skan, 222. 

Kahu-kiiri, 345. 

Kakalu, 342. 

Kanekeneke, 345. 

Ka'nu-kwac, 211. 

Kasai, 350. 

Kasai Bangala, 349. 

Kava, 346. 

Kayak, 320, 321. 

Kearny, Commodore Lawrence, 336. 

K<^-cuant, 209, 211. 

Ke-mrawE, 211, 213. 

Kiowa, 16 



Kiowa, 183. 

Kit-Fox, 121. 

Klamath, 172, 189, 235. 

Knife, Bangala, 349. 

Knife, Bayaka, 348. 

Knife, Borneo, 359. 

Knife, execution, 349. 

Knife, Sulu, 359. 

Knives, 348. 

Knives, African semilunar, 356. 

Knives, Congo, 347. 

Knife throwing, 347, 348. 

Knives, obsidian, 347. 

Knives, Philippine, 359. 

Knives, semilunar, 321, 

Knot, Malay, 362. 

Kd'bitsak, 210, 211, 224, 225,|229, 230. 

KO'gobue, 206. 

Korowai, 343. 

Kris, Malayan, 359. 

Kroeber, A. L., 11. 

Kroeber, Prof. 173, 200, 201, 202, 2a^ 

204, 206, 220. 
KQ'bui, 211. 
Kfl embe-rika, 206. 
Kutenai, 15, 157. 
Kwango, 352. 
Kwapakin, 220. 

Lacombe, R. P., 10. 

Lame-Jack, 230. 

Lap stone, 321. 

Lehman, Dr., 329. 

Leidy, 175. 

Lemu, 171, 172, 173, 182, 183, 184, 185, 

189, 196, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 

206, 211, 214, 215, 231, 233, 235. 
Levy, Louis, 313. 
Lewis, 174, 177, 181, 183, 184, 185, 

189, 191, 193,208,212,213. 
Lewis and Clark, 171, 179, 181, 184, 187, 

188, 190, 191, 193, 195, 211, 214, 215, 

229. 
Lewisohn, Adolph, 313. 
Lewisohn Tlingit collection, 313. 
Lime boxes, Malay, 357; Philippine, 

357. 
Lotlge, otter, 92, bear, 92, horse, 94; 

painted, 94-5. 



1909.1 



Index. 



369 



Loom, Maori, 342; Northwest Coast 

Indians, 342. 
Lowie, Robert H., 170. 

Maclean, John, 6, 7, 8. 

MacCurdy, Dr., 324. 

MacDonald, T. MacGregor, 322. 

Mahican, 322. 

Maidu, 235, 236. 

Malay knot, 362. 

Mallery, 199. 

Manaeko, 345. 

Man cut in two, 154. 

Mandans, 171, 212. 

Mand6 towa, 200. 

Mangbettu, 351. 

Mangues, 328. 

Man who played dead and deceived a 

bear, 16. 
Man who received a flageolet from an 

elk, 16. 
Maori, 337. 

Marsh, Professor O. C, 324. 
Masks, Bakuba, 351; Congo, 350. 
Masks, Eskimo, 316. 
Mason, 177, 179, 191. 
Matoki, 117, 119. 
Mats, dress, 343, 346. 

fighting, 345. 

caribou teeth, 318. 

covered with thrums, 344. 
Ma'wek wftgin, 217. 
McGuire, 212. 
Medicine, Blackfoot, 74-80; pipe, 89; 

shields, 99. 
Medicine Hat, 135-8. 
Menomini, 177. 
Minnitarees, 212. 
MO'bi, 209. 
Moco, 341. 
Mohegan, 322. 
Moko mokai, 341. 
Monbuttu, 348. 
Moon, 6, 12, 17. 
Mooney, 218. 

Moon-Woman, 72, 11, 12, 17. 
Morning-Star, 12. 
Moro tribes, 356. 
Mortars, 321. 



Mosquitoes, 105. 
Mu gua, 226. 

Murphy, Dr., 169, 215, 228, 229. 
Musical Bow, Mashonaland, 355. 
Musical instruments, Congo, 351. 
M3rthology, Blackfoot, 5-164; Shoshone, 
233-302. 

Na'bacoko-gan', 183. 
Nacft'gwuthun, 197. 
Na'dcu, 224. 
Na'dzangai, 217. 
Na'dzang En, 217. 
Na'gahai fi p6, 209. 
Nah-toos, 10. 
Na'manft ki, 198. 
Na'mi, 210. 
Napi, 10. 

Napi\^-», 7, 8, 10, 11, 12. 
Nap peekoon, 10. 
Na'rupinoa, 194. 
Na'soai, 211. 
Natos, 10, 11. 
Navajo, 191, 236. 
Nawa'tapi, 199. 
Na'yahwina, 195, 197. 
Neck-rests, 349. 
Needle-case, 317. 
Needles, bone, 316. 
Negrito tribes, 357. 

hut, 357. 
NetchiUik, 317. 

Never-Sits-down's Shield, 102. 
New Caledonia, 337. 
New Zealand, 340. 
Nez Perc^, 169, 172, 184, 191, 194, 202, 

217. 
Nez Perc^, 313. 
Nicholas, Francis C, 333, 334. 
Nieborowski, Rev. Jos^, 327. 
Nih'a''9a«, 11. 
Nix nn, 11. 
No dedz, 210. 
N6 hu'tsombil, 210. 
Nfl'mo, 206. 
N6 mog a'gutsi, 210. 
No mdndo'gotsi, 210. 
N6 mono A'p6, 233. 
Nb'morrka, 234, 235. 



370 



Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II, 



N6 mu'napo, 210. 
No'wotsak-bag, 198. 
Norton, G. Frederic, 318. 
Nfl'tuye, 182. 
Nu'akin, 217, 219. 
Na'aiin dz6 a-nG^kin, 218. 
Na'neyunc, 231. 
Nu'-numbi, 234, 235. 

Ogallala, 172. 

O'hapit, 223. 

O'ho-wu'ra, 211. 

Ojibwa, 9, 12. 

Old Man, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17. 

Old Man's Gambling-Place, 9. 

Old Man's River, 9. 

Old Man's Sliding-Place, 9. 

Old Man, tales of the, 19-40. 

Origins, Cultural, 7, 126-138. 

ritualistic, 7, 74-125. 
Ornaments, cone-shaped, 340. 

in Africa, 340. 

South American, 333. 
Oro ongEn, 185. 
Osage, 236. 
Ott^r- Woman, 15, 17, 78. 

Pa^bi'hiano, 234. 
Paddles, Kayak, 319. 
Pa'-gutc, 234. 
Paiute, 177, 184, 199. 
Pa'-n-dz6'avits, 234. 
Pa'Owa, 234. 
Pechuel-Loesche, 350. 
Peralta, Sefior de, 327. 
Peruvians, 337. 
Pestles, 321. 
Petitot, Father, 6, 7. 
Philippine Islands, 356. 
H'a c6nip, 182, 183, 184. 
Piogan, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15. 
Pi'gap wo'toma, 195. 
Pigeons, 105. 
Pile-cIoth, 352. 
Pimis monophyllus, 187. 
Pipe, iron, Manchurian, 356. 
Pipe, medicine, 89. 

Seven Stars, 91. 

Worm, 91. 



I Pipe, Black-covered, 91. 
I Pipe, steatite, 321. 

Pipes, Igorot, 357. 

Pipes, stone, Eskimo, 316. 

Platters, Cauca, 333. 
I Pleiades, 17. 
' Plush, Bakuba, 352. 
' Po'hogwe, 206. 
, Porno, 337. 

Pottery, 322-330. 
I Pottery, black, 333. 

Powell, 230, 231, 233, 234. 
I Probes, snow, 316. 

Proverbs, Shoshone, 232. 

Pueblo, 191. 

PQ'wai, 231. 

Punta Arenas, capa from, 332. 

Quepos, 328. 

Rattles, wicker-work, 351. 

Ratzel, 339, 359. 

Raven, 134. 

Raven creating the world, 16. 
; Recovery of Daylight, 16. 
' Recovery of water, 16. 

Red-Head, 129. 
I Remy, 181, 213, 215, 218. 
' Rice Mill, Philippine, 356. 

Roberts, Rev. John, 234, 235. 
I Robes, Maori, 342, 343. 
I Robley, Major-General G. 341. 

RoUing-Stone Creek, 9. 
I Ross, 173, 177, 185, 186, 193, 208, 212, 
213, 214. 

Russell, Frank, 12. 

I 
I 
Sahaptin, 190. 

Samoa, 345. 
' Sand Hills, 163. 

Sansa, 352. 
' Sarcee, 8. 

Sarcee, 313. 

Sauk and Fox, 7. 

Scabby-Ball, 112. 

Scabby-Round-Robe, 81, 14, 17. 

Scar-Face, 61-65, 12, 14, 17. 

Schernikow, E. O., 322. 

Schmidt, Hermann, 330. 



1909.] 



Index. 



371 



Schr5der, Prof. Eugene, 347. 
Schweinfurth, 351. 
Seaming garments, 342. 
Seven-heads, 163. 
Seven Stars, 68, 17. 
Shaman's mask, 351. 
Shaman's outfit, 314. 
Sharpless, Frederick F., 333. 
Sherman, D. J. P., 169, 219, 220. 
Shirry-dikas, 185, 208. 
Shoshone, 16. 
Shoshone, 313. 
Shoshone, the northern, 165-360. 

Creation of, 236. 
Sinkers, 321. 

Sioux, 172, 195, 202, 213. 
Skull, from Nebraska Mound, 364. 
Skulls from New York, 364. 

New Zealand, 364. 

Egyptians, 364. 
Smoking-otter, 98. 
Smoking-Star, 12. 
Snakes, 171, 172, 183, 184, 185, 191, 

213, 214, 232, 233. 
Spears, double-pointed, 347. 

four-pointed, 347. 
Spear thrower, 339. 
Spinden, Herbert J., 169. 
Split Feather, 147. 
Spoons, Barotse, 353. 
Spoons, horn, 175. 
Spotoom Napiwa, 11. 
Stamps, Samoan, 346. 
Stamps, terra-cotta, 333. 
Stone, rubbing, 363. 

Star myths, Blackfoot, 40, 72, 7, 12, 13, 
St. Clair, H. H., 169, 197, 198, 200, 216. 

223, 235, 236. 
Sun, 6, 12, 17. 

-man, 10, 17. 

Taboo houses, 347. 
Ta'cayuge, 216, 220, 221, 222. 
Ta ma-a'gai, 218. 
Ta-nu'in, 217. 
Tapa cloth, 346. 
Tar-Baby, 16. 
Tattooing, Maori, 341. 
Ta-vwots, 231. 



Ta-wQ'tabEn, 194. 

Teko-Teko, 341. 

T^wdoy, 208, 209, 210, 223, 227. 

Terbis, 328. 

Terrabas, 328. 

Terrebes, 328. 

Thompson, 6. 

Thompson Indians, 11. 

Throwing-knife, Asande, 347. 

Sudanese, 348. 
Thunder, 17. 
Thunder-bird, 134. 
Ti'carimip, 211. 
Tillamook, 236. 
Ti'mayihft, 213. 
Tindz6'mo, 195, 196. 
Tirribies, 328. 
Tlingit, 313. 

Tobacco-box, Hova, 359. 
Tobacco-seeds, 79. 
To'kaidzo, 211. 
Toms', 211. 
Tomtoms Congo, 351. 
Tongue Flag River, 9. 
Tonkaway, 219. 
To'sa-tak, 174. 
To'sa-wi'h*, 206. 
To'sa-wu'ra, 211. 
Townsend, 180. 
Townsend, C. H., 332. 
Tsi'gzi, 211. 
Tfl'ba-dika, 206. 
Tu'dzomon-dd'mi, 211, 229. 
Tuiga, 346. 
Tuku-rika, 206. 
Tumodzo, 182, 211, 228. 
Tu na r5we, 212. 
Tu'pambe, 209, 211. 
Turtle goes to War, 160. 
Tushepaws, 171. 
Tusks, Benin, 352. 
Tu tai, 197. 
Twin-brothers, 40, 12. 
Twin-Stars, 12, 13. 
Tyler, 349. 

Ubangi, 349. 
Uele, 349. 
Ug'wuti, 199. 



372 Anthropological Papers American Museum of Natural History, [Vol. II. 



Uinta, 220. 
Un^'pits, 228. 
Upper Burma, 332. 

Ute, 172, 177, 194, 199, 201, 220, 228, 
231, 233, 236. 

Valeriana edulis, 188. 
Vaginal teeth, 16. 
Vessels, 324, 326, 327, 329. 
Vihuk, 11. 
Vinton, Dr. C. C, 356. 

Wa'dzi-mo'gots, 178. 

Wa'dzipi, 178. 

Wah-ra-ree-ca, 206. 

Wai*pe» 211. 

Waf*-pe-ma dcu, 230. 

WaUa Walla, 172. 

War-are-ree-kas, 208. 

Wararika, 186, 206. 

Ward, H. A., 333. 

Warrior's dilemma, 160; duty, 162. 

Washapie, 208. 

Water-BuU, 128. 

Wayao, 000. 

Weapons, Philippine, 359. 

Weaving, basketry, 339. 

featherwork, 336', 337. 

Maori, 343, 344. 

Aleutian, 344. 
Weaving, Kachin basketry, 362. 
Weiss, Louis, 330. 
West Indies, specimens from, 322. 
Whirlwind Boy, 126. 
Wichita, 236. 
Widjege, 235. 
Wi'hindaf bo, 233. 



Wl'hit E mbS'gona, 211. 

Wilson, R. N., 6. 

Wissler, Clark, 5, 18. 

Wi'tow, E, 206. 

Wives, treacherous, 148. 

W6'hon5g, 219. 

W6'hd-w5kakin, 219, 220. 

Wolverene, woman, 162. 

Woman, Blackfoot stories of, 141, 150- 

155, 83-5, 162, 15. 
Woman-who-brought-the-Pipe, 15. 
Woman- who-married-a-Star, 13, 17. 

who-married-a-Buffalo, 15, 17. 

who-married-a-Bull, 13. 
Woman's Knife, 315. 
Wood-carvings, Congo, 349. 
Wood-carvings, Igorot, 357. 
Wood-carving, Maori, 341. 
Woodwork, Barotse, 365. 
Woodwork, Congo, 349. 
Wounded man, 16. 
Wupa'rEk, 194, 220. 
Wu'rakft, 198. 
WQ'ra-yO'go, 211. 
Wa'tabEn, 194. 
Wyeth, 174, 185, 187, 188, 189, 192, 212, 

232. 

Yft'han-dika, 206. 
Ya'mpatsi, 211. 
YE-hu', 211. 
Yokuts, 236. 
Young, Brigham, 172. 
Yucca filamentosa, 181. 

Zither, Congo, 532. 
Zufii, 236. 



Anthrop. Pai*. a. M. M. H. 



Vol. II, Plate II. 




y^ i ' MJi - 



From Prince Albert Land. 
(Page 314) 



o 

> 




^5 

O 

CO 

Q 

K 

X 
H 

O 

Ed 

< 
> 

O 



o 
eg 



55 



S5 









Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate IV. 



• 






NicoYA Pottery. 
(Page 323) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate V. 




Armadillo Jar. 
(Page 324) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate VI. 









W 



Wf W^ 






Pottery from Nicoya and Terraba. 
(Page 327) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate VII. 




Full Costume of the Tukano Indians. 
(Page 331) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate VIII. 




Painted Capa from Punta Arenas. 
(Page 332) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate IX. 




Black Pottery from Colombia. 
(Page 333) 






O 
> 




X 

o S2 

a ^ 

D 



c 
> 



X 

< 



o 

I 

< 




eu 

H CO 

H 

H 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M, N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate XII. 



:vt\\ 






tv^ 




Technique of the Kearny Cape. 
(Page 336) 




W 




Basket from New Hebrides. 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. 11, Plate XIII. 




Carved Figures from Bismarck Archipelago. 
(Page 346) 



> 

a 

J 



> 



X 



Z 

< 




o 
o 
< 

H 






o 

o 



Anthkop. Pap. A. M. N. H. Vol. II, Plate XV. 




Wood Carvings from Mulandi. 






It 



1 JO 3 







Wood Carvings from the Congo. 
(Page 349) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate XVI. 







^W*Wf 



African Images and Masks. 
(Page 351) 



Anthrop. Pap, A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II. Pij^TE XVII. 




Musical Instruments from the Congo. 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate XVIII. 




Bakuba Pile Cloth. 
(Page 352) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. 11. Platk XX. 




Carved Tusks and a Bronze Head. 
(Page 352) 



X 
X 



o 










< 

Z 
H 
Q 

O 

o 



< 

Q 

o 






o 

0L, 






Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate XXII. 




From the Philippine Islands. 
(Page 357) 



Anthrop. Pap. A. M. N. H. 



Vol. II, Plate XXIII. 











Stone Implements from China. 
(Page 363) 



1 


DATE DUE 


- 


1 


1 








I 






■ 


I 






^ 


I 








I 






" 


1 




^^^ 


1 






~ 


1 








1 . 








I 








1 1 




1 " 






^ 


1 






" 
























^ 


0"*nc^ Inc. 31^ 


a 




" 







I 

f 



] ^mBTsB 530 387 ^ 




f 



