UNrV^OF 

Jtmm 
UBRftnr 


THE    NATIVE    TRIBES 

OF 

SOUTH-EAST    AUSTRALIA 


THE 


Native  Tribes 


OF 

I 


South-East  Australia 


BY 


A.   W.    HOWITT,  D.Sc. 

HON.  FELLOW  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  Or  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND 


ILontion 
MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,    Limited 

NEW    YORK  :     THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 
1904 

All  right:  reserved 


*% 


i  \ 


i^ 


4nM 


-'^d 


)t 


TO 

THE    MEMORY    OF    MY    WIFE 

WITHOUT  WHOSE  UNFAILING. SYMPATHY 

THIS   WORK 

MIGHT    NEVKR    HAVE    BEEN     UNDERTAKEN 


;i> 


PREFACE 

The  materials  for  this  work  were  collected  during  the  past 
forty  years,  commencing  during  explorations  in  Central 
Australia,  where  I  came  into  close  and  friendly  contact  with 
two  tribes  who  were  in  a  condition  of  complete  savagery. 
Circumstances  later  on  enabled  me  to  acquire  considerable 
influence  over  tribes  in  South  -  East  Australia,  and  to 
become  acquainted  with  their  sacred  ceremonies  and  be 
present  at  them. 

In  1873  I  joined  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  in  investigating  the 
classificatory  system  of  relationships  which  obtains  among 
these  savages.  In  connection  with  this  inquiry,  our  attention 
was  directed  to  the  tribal  class  system,  and  the  rules  of 
marriage  and  descent  connected  therewith. 

In  these  investigations  we  were  assisted  by  corre- 
spondents living  in  places  scattered  over  the  greater  part  of 
Eastern  Australia,  and  in  a  less  degree  in  the  western  half 
Without  their  aid  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  have 
brought  together  the  collection  of  facts  which  was  neces- 
sary to  enable  us  to  draw  sound  conclusions  as  to  the  real 
character  of  the  organisation  and  beliefs  of  the  native  tribes. 

In  the  course  of  our  work  we  found  the  conclusions  to 
which  wc  were  led  regarding  the  system  of  relationships,  the 
character  and  origin  of  the  tribal  and  social  organisation,  and 
the  rules  of  marriage  and  descent,  brought  us  into  conflict 
with  hypotheses  as  to  primitive  society  and  its  organisation 


viii         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

and  development  advanced  by  certain  leaders  of  anthropo- 
logical thought. 

Such  being  the  case,  we  deemed  it  advisable,  in  anticipa- 
tion of  fuller  publication,  to  make  known  the  preliminary 
results  of  our  inquiries.  This  had  also  the  advantage  of  not 
only  making  known  our  results,  but  also  submitting  our  con- 
clusions to  criticism,  and  finally,  to  use  a  well-known  mining 
term,  to  "  marking  out  our  prospecting  claim." 

This  we  did  by,  in  the  first  place,  communicating  a  series 
of  memoirs  to  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland  ;  and  secondly,  by  other  publications,  all  of 
which  are  included  in  the  following  list. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  several  chapters  of  this  work, 
in  one  aspect,  are  those  memoirs  elaborated,  but  they  also 
include  other  facts  which  have  been  since  obtained. 

With  the  increase  of  information,  due  to  a  wider  scope 
of  inquiry,  the  mental  horizon  was  necessarily  widened, 
bringing  the  facts  into  a  truer  perspective.  Thus  it  has 
come  about  that  some  of  the  views  expressed  in  earlier 
papers  have  been  modified,  as  will  be  pointed  out  in  several 
places  in  this  work. 

The  following  list  gives  the  publications  referred  to, 
being  either  the  joint  works  of  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  and 
myself,  or  of  myself  alone  : — 

Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai.  Lorimer  Fison  and  A.  W.  Howitt.  1880. 
"From  Mother-right  to  Father- right."  A,  W.  Howitt  and  Lorimer 
Y'xson,  Journal  Ant/irop.  Inst.  August  1882. 

"  Notes  on  the  Australian  Class  Systems."  A.  W.  Howitt,  Journal 
Anthrop.  Inst.  May  1883. 

"  On  Some  Australian  Beliefs."  A.  W.  Howitt,  Journal  Anthrop. 
Inst.  November  1883. 

"Australian  Group  Relations/'  A.  W.  Howitt,  Smithsonian  Report, 
1883. 

"  On  Some  Australian  Ceremonies  of  Initiation."  A.  W.  Howitt, 
Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.  1884. 


PREFACE  ix 

"  On  the  Deme  and  the  Horde."  A.  W.  Howitt  and  Lorimer  Fison, 
Journal  Ant hr op.  Inst.  1884. 

"The  Jeraeil,  or  Initiations  of  the  Kurnai  Tribe."  A.  W.  Howitt, 
Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.  May  1885. 

*'  On  the  Migrations  of  the  Kurnai  Ancestors."  A.  W.  Howitt, 
Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.   1886. 

"  On  Australian  Medicine-men."  A.  W.  Howitt,  Journal  Anthrop. 
Inst.  August  1886. 

"  Notes  on  Songs  and  Song-Makers  of  Some  Australian  Tribes." 
A.  W.  UoWxii,  Journal  Ant/irop.  Inst.  1887. 

"  Further  Notes  on  the  Australian  Class  Systems."  A.  W.  Howitt, 
Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.  1 888. 

"  Notes  on  Australian  Message-Sticks  and  Messengers."  A.  W. 
Howitt,  Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.  1 889. 

"  On  the  Use  of  Gesture  Language  in  Australian  Tribes."  A.  W. 
Howitt,  Aust.  Ass.  Ad.  Set.  vol.  ii.  p.  637.      1890. 

"Anthropology  in  Australia."  A.  W.  Howitt,  Aust.  Ass.  Ad.  Set. 
vol.  iii.  p.  342.      1 89 1. 

"On  Trade  Centres  in  Australian  Tribes."  A.  W.  How'xiX,  Aust. 
Ass.  Ad.  Set.  1901. 

The  facts  upon  which  my  conclusions  arc  based  were 
stated  substantially  in  the  above  works.  But  in  some  cases 
my  views  have  been  modified  by  a  wider  experience  and 
more  mature  consideration.  Yet  the  broad  facts  on  which 
Dr.  Fison  and  I  relied,  and  the  general  deductions  from  the 
same,  remain  unaltered.  That  they  were  securely  founded 
upon  native  custom  is  sufficiently  shown  by  the  splendid 
work  done  by  Spencer  and  Gillen,  who  have  independently 
found  the  same  social  facts,  and  have  drawn  therefrom  the 
same  conclusions  as  we  did. 

I  have  to  express  the  very  great  obligations  I  am  under 
to  correspondents  for  information  about  the  organisation, 
customs,  and  beliefs  of  the  several  tribes  with  which  they 
were  acquainted,  or  as  to  which  they  obtained  information. 
My  sincerest  thanks  are  due  to  them,  not  only  for  this 
information,  but  also  for  the  patience  with  which  they  bore 
my  continued  questioning,  and  for  the    very  great  trouble 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


which  some  of  them  took  to  work  out  further  details  of  social 
questions  which  their  information  or  my  personal  knowledge 
suggested. 

In  the  following  list  I  give  the  names  of  the  tribes 
described  or  referred  to,  and  the  name  of  the  correspondent 
in  each  case  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  the  information 
recorded.  I  have  also  given  in  the  body  of  the  work,  in 
footnotes,  the  names  of  the  correspondents  whose  statements 
I  quote.  Where  there  are  no  such  footnotes,  and  especially 
as  regards  the  Dieri,  Yantruvvunta,  Yaurorka,  Leitchi-leitchi, 
Wiradjuri,  Wotjobaluk,  Mukjarawaint,  Jupagalk,  Jajaurung, 
Wurunjerri,  Thagunwurong,  Kurnai,  Wolgal,  Ya-itma-thang, 
Ngarigo,  Yuin,  and  Biduelli,  I  speak  from  personal  knowledge 
of  those  tribes-people  at  some  time  during  the  last  forty  years. 

It  will  be  observed  in  the  perusal  of  this  work  that  there 
are  certain  gentlemen  to  whom  I  am  especially  indebted  for 
most  important  contributions,  and  to  whom  my  special 
thanks  are  due  for  very  valuable  assistance,  without  which  I 
could  not  have  fully  given  the  information  as  to  certain  tribes. 
These  are  :  Mr.  Harry  E.  Aldridge,  Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron, 
Mr.  W.  H.  Flowers,  the  Rev.  Otto  Siebert,  the  late  Mr. 
Edward  Palmei-,  Mr.  Tom  Petrie,  Mr.  J.  C.  Muirhead,  and 
the  Rev.  John  Bulmer. 

List  of  Correspondents  and  Tribes  described 
BY  Them 

Harry  E.  Aldridge  .  .  Maryborough  district,  Queensland. 

J.  W.  Boultbee        .  .  .  Wilga,  Kongait,  Tongaranka,  Bulali, 

Naualko,  Guerno,  Barabinya. 
J.  W.  Boydell         .  .  .  Gringai. 

G.  H.  Bridgeman  .  .  .  Bombarabura.    Tribes  about  Mackay. 

Jocelyn  Brooke       .  .  .  Kaiabara. 

Rev.  John  Bulmer .  .  .  Kurnai,   Ngarigo,  Theddora,  Wiim- 

baio. 
John  Buntine  .  .  ,  Theddora. 


PREFACE 


A.  L.  P.  Cameron 


R.  Christison 
R.  Crowthers 
Cyrus  E.  Doyle 
C."  I.  Duve    . 
M.  J.  Fehan 
W.  H.  Flowers 
Dr.  John  Eraser 

J.  Gaggin       . 

Captain  Garside 

F.  Gaskell 

S.  Gason 

James  Gibson 

Rev.  J.  H.  Gribble 

J.  Hogarth     . 

C.  F.  Holmes 

A.  Hook 

Frank  James 

Rev.  H.  Kempe 

J.  H.  Kirkham 

Julius  Kiihn  . 

James  Lalor  . 

T.  E.  Lance  . 

R.  Lethbridge 

W.  Logan 

W.  Lucas 

Dr.  E.  M.  M'Kinlay 

Hon.  A.  M'Lean 

J.  C.  Macleod 

J.  C.  Muirhead 

C.  Naseby 
W.  O'Donnell 
John  O'Rourke 
Edward  Palmer 
Tom  Petrie    . 
Rev.  J.  G.  Reuther 

D.  Elphinstone  Roe 
Dr.  W.  E.  Roth     . 


Barkinji,  Ithi-ithi,  Muthi-muthi, 
Ta-tathi,  VVathi-wathi,  Wiradjuri, 
Wonghibon,  Unghi. 

Dalebura. 

Wollaroi,  Bigambul,  Yualaroi. 

Kamilaroi. 

Kurnai,  Ngarigo. 

Paruinji. 

Kuinmurbura. 

Various  tribes  through  correspon- 
dents. 

Herbert  River  tribes. 

Wiradjuri. 

Kukata. 

Dieri  and  kindred  tribes. 

Chcpara. 

Wiradjuri. 

Yendakarangu. 

Hunter  River  tribe. 

Gringai. 

Dieri,  Mardala. 

Aldolinga. 

Huntamurra. 

Narrang-ga. 

Higambul,  Emon,  Ungorri. 

Kamilaroi. 

Maranoa  tribe. 

Mundainbura,  Yakunbura. 

Kurnai. 

Wiimbaio,  Gringai. 

Kurnai. 

Kurnai. 

Wakelbura  and  kindred  tribes. 

Kamilaroi. 

Kurnandaburi. 

Ngarigo,  Kurnai,  Theddora 

Wide  Bay  tribes. 

Turrbal. 

Dieri. 

Yerkla-mining. 

Annan  River  tribe. 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


G.  W.  Rusden 

W.  Scott 

J.  Shaw 

Rev.  Otto  Siebert  . 

Mrs.  James  Smith  . 

Professor  W.  Baldwin  Spencer 

Rev.  J.  H.  Stahle  . 

D.  Stewart  . 
T.  M.  Sutton 
F.  W.  Taplin 
Rev.  George  Taplin 

E.  R.  Vernon 
H.  Vogelsang 
H.  Williams  . 


Geawe-gal. 

Gringai. 

Wurunjerri,  Wiimbaio. 

Dieri  and  kindred  tribes. 

Buandik  and  kindred  tribes. 

Arunta,  Waramunga. 

Gournditch-mara. 

Buandik. 

Narrang-ga. 

Narrinyeri. 

Narrinyeri. 

Kamilaroi. 

Dieri. 

Yerkla-mining. 


I  have  endeavoured  to  show  on  the  maps  which 
accompany  this  work  the  range  of  the  several  class  organisa- 
tions, and  the  locality  in  each  state,  of  each  tribe  referred  to. 
But  the  reader  will  kindly  bear  in  mind  the  great  difficulty 
which  always  presents  itself,  not  only  in  defining  the  true 
boundaries  of  any  tribal  country,  but  also,  in  many  cases,  of 
giving  the  true  and  comprehensive  name  of  the  tribe.  A 
member  of  a  clan  will  probably  give  its  name,  and  only  on 
closer  inquiry  will  give  the  name  of  the  tribe  of  which  that 
clan  is  a  part.  It  is  still  more  difficult  to  ascertain  the 
name  of  what  I  have  termed  a  nation,  that  is,  of  a  group 
which  includes  two  or  more  kindred  tribes. 

Some  tribes  are  again  spoken  of  by  the  name  of  their 
language.  Such  causes  have  produced  errors  giving  con- 
siderable trouble  to  correct,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  even 
now  they  have  not  been  eliminated  in  all  cases. 

In  the  map  which  faces  page  90  I  have  indicated  the 
approximate  boundaries  of  the  several  class  systems  men- 
tioned in  Chapter  III.  The  boundaries  are  necessarily  but 
approximate,  as  more  precise  ones  could  only  be  obtained  by 
possessing  an  intimate  knowledge  of  those  of  each  tribe  along 
the  common  line  of  division.      But  sufficient  is  given  to  show 


PREFACE  xiii 

on  broad  lines  the  range  of  the  great  groups  of  tribes 
organised  successively  from  the  two-class  system  of  Central 
Australia,  and  the  more  developed  four-  and  eight -class 
system  of  the  more  northern  parts  of  the  continent,  to  the 
highly -modified  organisations  of  the  coastal  regions  of 
South-East  Australia. 

I  have  more  than  once  drawn  attention  to  the  almost 
complete  identity,  even  in  details,  of  certain  tribal  customs 
in  places  far  distant  from  each  other.  I  now  mention  this 
in  advance,  for  the  purpose  of  pointing  out  that  in  such  cases 
I  have  endeavoured  to  give  the  expressions  made  use  of  by 
my  native  informants,  or  my  correspondents,  as  the  case  may 
be,  and  have  given  them  in  detail,  in  order  to  impress  the 
coincidence,  since  it  shows  a  remarkable  and  widely-spread 
observance  of  custom. 

By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  materials  for  this  work 
was  collected  and  recorded  before  1889.  Since  then  the 
native  tribes  have  more  or  less  died,  and  in  the  older  settle- 
ments of  South-East  Australia  the  tribal  remnants  have  now 
almost  lo.st  the  knowledge  of  the  beliefs  and  customs  of  their 
fathers.  I  have  preferred  to  let  my  notes  remain,  as  they 
were  written,  in  the  present  tense,  rather  than  to  attempt  to 
bring  them  up  to  the  present  time. 

Among  the  causes  to  which  the  rapid  extinction  of  the 
native  tribes  by  acquired  vices  must  be  attributed,  I  may 
note  the  use  of  opium  in  Queensland.  My  correspondents 
inform  me  that  it  was  acquired  from  the  Chinese  employed 
there,  and  that  it  is  given  to  the  aborigines  as  wages  and 
gratuities,  or  is  sold  to  them  by  retail  traders. 

Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  and  I  have  been  so  long  associated 
in  investigations  into  the  organisation  and  customs  of  the 
native  tribes  of  Australia,  that  it  was  with  feelings  of  the 
greatest  regret  that  I  found  his  other  engagements  would 
prevent  him   from  joining  me  in   this  work.      It  had   been 


xiv         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

always  my  hope  that  his  name  would  be  associated  with 
mine  in  it,  but  although  that  cannot  be,  the  fact  remains,  as 
will  be  seen  from  the  list  of  our  joint  works,  that  much  of 
what  I  have  done  is  equally  his. 

I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  great  obligations  I  am  under 
to  Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  for  much  assistance  during 
the  preparation  of  this  book,  and  for  photographs  which 
have  been  reproduced  in  it.  He  most  kindly  read  over  the 
drafts  of  the  several  chapters,  and  I  have  benefited  by  his 
kindly  criticisms  and  suggestions  in  their  final  settlement. 
I  have  also  to  thank  him  and  Mr.  F.  J.  Gillen  for  generously 
permitting  me  to  use  some  of  the  photographs  taken  by 
them  in  Central  Australia. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Miss  A.  J.  King  for  some 
interesting  photographs  of  Kurnai  men  and  women. 

I  have  to  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  Dr.  J.  G. 
Frazer  for  much  kindness  and  for  most  valuable  suggestions 
in  connection  with  this  work. 

The  Government  Astronomers  of  New  South  Wales, 
Queensland,  and  South  Australia  have  most  willingly  sup- 
plied me  with  information  as  to  rainfall  and  temperature. 
And  to  Mr.  P.  Baracchi,  the  Government  Astronomer  of  the 
State  of  Victoria,  are  due  my  especial  thanks  for  the  interest 
which  he  has  taken  in  this  part  of  my  work,  and  for  the 
suggestions  which  he  has  made. 

Mr.  J.  H.  Maiden,  the  Government  Botanist  for  the  State 
of  New  South  Wales,  very  kindly  examined  and  named  a 
collection  of  plants  from  Lake  Eyre,  some  of  which  have 
been  drawn  for  this  work  by  Miss  Flockton  under  his 
direction. 


""^ 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER    I 

I'AGF. 

On   the   Origin   of   the   Aborigines   of  Tasmania  and 

Australia  ....  .  .  i 

CHAPTER    H 
Tribal  Organisation  •  •  •  •  •         34 

CHAPTER    HI 
Social  Organi.sation  .  .88 

CHAPTER    IV 

Relationship  Terms  .  .  .156 

CHAPTER    V 
Marriage  Rules      .  .  .  173 

CHAPTER    VI 

Tribal  Government  .....       295 

CHAPTER    VII 
Medicine-Men  and  Magic  .  .  -355 


xvi         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


CHAPTER    VIII 

TAGE 

LiEFs  AND  Burial  Practices       ....       426 


CHAPTER     IX 
Initiation  Ceremonies,  Eastern  Type      .  509  \y 

CHAPTER    X 

Initiation  Ceremonies,  Western  Type  .  .       643 

CHAPTER    XI 

Messengers   and   Message- Sticks — Barter   and   Trade 

Centres — Gesture  Language  .  .  678 

CHAPTER    XII 

Various  Customs  .  .736 

APPENDIX    .  .  .  .  .  .        779 

INDEX  .......       807 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIG. 

1.  Kurnai  man  wearing  opossum  rug  . 

2.  Man  of  the  Wonkanguru  tribe 

3.  Man  of  the  Wonkanguru  tribe 

4.  Man  of  the  Narrang-ga  tribe 

5.  One  of  the  Krauatungalung  clan  of  the  Kurnai  tribe 

6.  One  of  the  Krauatungalung  clan  of  the  Kurnai  tribe 

7.  A  Kuriiai  woman  ..... 

8.  One  of  the  Krauatungalung  clan  of  the  Kurnai  tribe 

9.  A  woman  of  the  Dalebura  tribe 
I  o.  Kaiabara  record  of  the  sub-class  names 

1 1 .  Berak,  one  of  the  Wurunjerri  tribe 

12.  Native  weapons     ..... 

13.  Spear -thrower   used  at   Kurnai  Jeraeil,  and  considered   to 

be  very  strong  magically 
I  4.   Stone  axe,  ground 

1 5.  Molongo  dance  in  which  decorations  of  emu  feathers  are 

worn     ...... 

16.  Shields  used  to  ward  off  spears  ;  shields  for  club  fighting 

17.  Hoomerangs  of  Victorian  tribes 

18.  Tulaba,  one  of  the  Kurnai,  as  a  Wait-jurk  . 

19.  Tankowillin,  one  of  the  Kurnai,  as  a  Nungi-nungit  . 

20.  A  Nungi-nungit  preparing  to  avenge  a  death  by  evil  magic 

in  the  Kurnai  tribe 

21.  Guliwils     .... 

22.  Preparation  for  the  Molongo  dance 

23.  Molongo  dance  near  Lake  Eyre 

24.  A  Kurnai  bark  canoe 


40 
46 

48 
66 

74 

75 

79 

136 

228 

231 

254 
265 

277 
312 

331 
337 
339 
344 
345 

349 
364 
415 
417 

424 


xviii       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


-3- 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 
30- 

31- 
32. 
33- 
34- 
35- 

36. 

n- 
38. 

39- 

40. 
41. 
42. 
43- 

44- 

45- 

46. 

47. 
48. 

49- 
50. 


51- 

52. 
53- 


Spear-throwers       ..... 

The  Bret  or  dead  hand       .... 

Pigeon  rock,  Urabunna       .... 

Tikovina  used  by  the  Herbert  River  tribes 

Yuin  bull-roarer,  Mudthi ;  Dieri  bull-roarer,  Yuntha 

Man  decorated  for  the  Kuringal  ceremony  . 

The  figure  of  Daramulun  cut  on  a  tree 

Earth  figure  in  relief  of  Daramulun 

Teeth  e.xtracted  at  Yuin  Kuringal  and  implement  used 

Rough  figure  used  at  the  Port  Stephens  ceremonies 

Bribbun  of  the  Chepara  tribe  ;  Wabulkan  of  the  Chepara 

tribe     ...... 

Head  of  Bullawang  showing  the  characteristic  markings 

The  two  bull-roarers  of  the  Kurnai  tribe 

Tutnurring,  showing  characteristic  marking 

Urabunna  man,  showing  Wilyaru  cuts  on  the  back 

The  Narrang-ga  bull-roarer,  opposite  sides 

Token  worn  by  messenger,  Wilyaru  ceremony.      Dieri  tribe 

Head-net  worn  by  messenger  to  call  a  Pinya.     Dieri  tribe 

Message-sticks  of  Wurunjerri,  Narrinyeri,  Goumditch-mara 

and  Wotjobaluk  tribes  .... 
Message-sticks  of  the  Tongaranka,   Narrang-ga,   Mundain 

bura,  and  Yakunbura  tribes 
Message -stick    of  the   Wakelbura    tribe,    and    Kabugabul 

bajeru  of  the  Chepara  tribe 
Wirha  {Acacia  salicind)      .... 
Kurnai  woman  with  baskets 
An  Obal  placed  as  a  guide  to  a  following  party.     Kurnai 

tribe     ...... 

Kurnai  woman  carrying  a  child 

Markings  which  were  made  upon  the  skin  sides  of  opossum 

skins  by  the  Kurnai  when  they  sewed  them  together  as 

coverings  ...... 

Kurnai  woman,  showing  raised  scars  on  back 

Yuin  man  with  raised  scars  on  chest,  in  ceremonial  dress     . 

A  Kurnai  man  climbing  a  tree  in  search  of  an  opossum 


457 
460 

483 
499 

539 

540 

553 
562 

573 

579 
619 
628 
636 
659 
672 
68a 
681 

696 

704 

708 
712 
719 

722 
1Z1 


742 
743 
745 
757 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


54.  Urabunna  man  making  fire 

55.  Kurnai  using  fire-drill 

56.  Kulua  {Hakea  leucoptera)  . 

57.  Paia-moku  {Didiscus  glaucifolius) 

58.  Duntyi  {Crotalaria  sp.) 


PAGE 

772 
788 
788 
792 


MAPS 


Victoria  and  Tasmania  .  .  .  .  .21 

South  Australia  .  .  To  face  page  44 

New  South  Wales  .  .  .  »»  »»  5© 

Map  No.  I — Queensland  .  .  .  „  „  86 

Map  No.  2       .  .  „  „  60 

Map  No.  3       .              .  .  .  .  „  „  62 

Map  No.  4       .              .  .  .  ,>  M  58 

Victoria            .              .  .  .  .  „  „  72 

Sketch  map  of  Gippsland  .  .  ,  „  „  80 

South-East  Australia,  showing  Social  Organisation  „  „  90 


CHAPTER    I 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    ABORIGINES    OF 
TASMANIA    AND    AUSTRALIA 

Literature  relating  to  the  subject — No  evidence  that  the  Tasmanians  reached  the 
Island  by  water — They  must  have  gone  when  there  was  land  communication 
with  the  Australian  coast — Literature  relating  to  the  Australian  coast — The 
Australian  ancestors  must  also  have  arrive<l  by  land  communication — Prol)ably 
they  came  from  lands  lying  to  the  north  or  north-west  of  the  continent  — 
Physical  geography  of  the  northern  coasts — Probable  route  of  migration  by 
New  Guinea — Evidenceof  antiquity  of  man  in  Australia — Legends  of  volcanic 
era  in  Australia  —  Evidence  of  period  of  subsidence  in  \'ictoria — Coastal 
soundings — The  Tasmanians  the  autochthonous  inhabitants  of  Australia — 
Mr.  Mathew's  Malayan  hypothesis — Australians  belong  to  Caucasian  stock 
—The  connection  between  the  Australians  and  Dravidians  considered — 
Tasmanians  placed  among  the  Oceanic  Negritos — The  evidence  points  to 
vast  antiquity  of  both  races  in  their  latest  surroundings. 

The  question  of  the  origin  of  the  Australian  and  Tasmanian 
aborigines  has  engaged  the  attention  of  many  writers,  who 
have  attempted  its  solution  by  inferences  drawn  from 
language,  from  custom,  from  the  physical  character  of  those 
savages,  and,  while  direct  evidence  is  not  existent,  from  what 
some  writers  apparently  assume  to  be  fact. 

Before  entering  upon  the  conclusions  to  which  I  have 
been  led  in  this  inquiry,  it  will  be  well  to  note  in  chrono- 
logical order  the  views  of  various  authorities,  in  doing  which 
I  have  found  it  necessary  to  include  those  dealing  with 
the  Tasmanians. 

Mr.  R.  H.  Davis  ^  considered  the  Tasmanians  to  be 
scions  of  the  Australians,  and   that   their   ancestors,   being 

1  Davis,    R.   H.,   "The   Aborigines  of  Van   Diemen's   Land,"    Tasmanian 
Journal  of  Natural  Science.     Tasmania  and  London,  1 846. 

I  B 


2  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

driven  to  sea  in  a  canoe  from  the  vicinity  of  King  George's 
Sound,  would,  by  the  prevailing  winds  and  currents,  be  apt 
to  reach  the  western  part  of  Van  Diemen's  Land,  He 
selected  that  point  of  departure  apparently  for  the  reason 
that  the  word  for  "  water "  among  the  western  tribes  of 
Tasmania  is  similar  to  that  used  by  the  natives  of  Cape 
Leeuwen. 

In  1839  Captain  Robert  Fitzroy,^  in  his  narrative  of 
the  surveying  voyages  of  the  Adventure  and  the  Beagle, 
between  the  years  1826  and  1836,  attributes  the  origin  of 
the  aborigiiles  of  Tasmania  and  Australia  either  to  a  party 
of  negroes  who  might  have  been  driven  by  storms  from  the 
coast  of  Africa,  and  thus  reached  New  Zealand  or  Van 
Diemen's  Land,  or  to  negroes  escaping  or  being  brought  to 
the  northern  shores  of  Tasmania  as  slaves  by  "  red  men." 

The  conclusions  of  Dr.  Pritchard  "  as  to  the  derivation 
of  the  Tasmanians  and  Australians  are  noteworthy.  They 
mark  the  great  advance  made  in  ethnology  since  the  year 
1 847,  but  they  also  disclose  the  germs  of  those  beliefs,  as 
to  the  primitive  races  of  mankind  who  inhabited  the 
Australian  and  Melanesian  regions  and  the  Indo-Malayan 
Archipelago,  which  are  now  fairly  established  and  accepted 
by  ethnologists. 

He  goes  back  to  primitive  black  tribes  inhabiting 
"  Oceania,  Oceanic  Negritia,  or  Oceanic  Negroland,"  at  a 
time  when  the  "  Malayo- Polynesian "  race  had  not  yet 
entered  the  Indian  Archipelago. 

He  considered  that  this  Negrito  race  was  spread  by  way 
of  New  Guinea  over  the  adjacent  archipelago  of  islands,  and 
that  one  branch  took  a  more  southerly  course  by  the  chain 
of  islands  ending  at  Timor,  and  lastly  entered  Australia. 

In  the  same  year  Dr.  Latham  ^  stated  in  the  Appendix 
to  the  narrative  of  the  surveying  voyage  of  the  Fly  during 
the   years    1 842-1 846,   that   the   Tasmanian    language    had 

1  Fitzroy,  Captain  Robert,  Narrative  of  the  Siuveying  Voyages  of  H.M.  Ships 
"Adventure"  and  "Beagle"  between  the  years  1826  and  1836,  vol.  ii.  p.  654. 
London,  1839. 

2  Pritchard,  Robert  M.,  Researches  into  the  Physical  History  of  Mankind, 
vol.  V.  p.  214.      London,  1847. 

3  Latham,  Robert  M.,  Elements  of  Comparative  Philology.      1882. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  3 

affinities  with  both  the  Australian  and  New  Caledonian 
languages,  but  in  a  stronger  degree  with  the  latter.  This, 
he  considered,  will  at  once  explain  the  points  of  physical 
contrast  between  the  Tasmanian  tribes  and  those  of  Australia, 
and  will  indicate  that  the  stream  of  population  for  Van 
Diemen's  Land  ran  round  Australia  rather  than  across  it. 

Mr.  Edward  John  Eyre  ^  expressed  the  belief  that  there 
were  grounds  for  the  opinion  that  Australia  was  first  peopled 
on  its  north-western  coast,  between  the  parallels  of  i  2"  and 
16°  South  latitude.  Thence  he  surmises  that  three  great 
divisions  branched  out  from  the  parent  tribe,  and  from  their 
offsets  the  whole  continent  was  overspread. 

Mr.  M'Gillivray,^  after  quoting  Eyre,  Pritchard,  and 
Latham,  says  that  a  common  origin  is  implied  by  the  belief 
in  the  unity  of  the  Australian  race.  That  it  was  not  derived 
from  New  Guinea  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  since  Cape  York 
and  the  neighbouring  shores  of  the  mainland  are  occupied 
by  genuine  and  unmixed  Australians,  while  islands  of  Torres 
Strait  and  the  adjacent  coast  of  New  Guinea  are  occupied 
by  equally  genuine  Papuans.  Intermediate  in  position 
between  the  two  ra<;ps,  and  occupying  the  point  of  junction 
at  the  Prince  of  Wales  Island,  is  the  Kaurarega  tribe 
(according  to  M'Gillivray),  an  Australian  tribe  altered  by 
contact  with  the  Papuan  tribes  of  the  adjacent  island  so  as 
to  resemble  the  latter  in  most  of  their  physical,  intellectual, 
and  moral  characteristics. 

Mr.  James  Bonwick  ^  devotes  a  long  chapter  to  the 
origin  of  the  Tasmanians.  So  far  as  I  am  able  to  gather, 
his  views  appear  to  be  that  at  the  time  when  a  now  sunken 
continent  connected  Tasmania  with  New  Zealand  on  the  east, 
and  with  Victoria  on  the  west,  the  Tasmanians  migrated 
therefrom  and  ranged  round  the  coasts  of  the  continent  as 
the  highway  between  what  are  now  distinct  lands. 

He  considers  that  the  Australians  came  from  the  same 

'   Eyre,  Edw.iid  ]6hx\,  Journals  of  Exploration  ami  Discovery  into  Central 
Australia,  p.  405.      London,  1845, 

2  M'Gillivray,  John,  Narrative  0/  the  Voyafi^e  of  H.M.  Ship  '^  Rattlesjtake" 
dtirinf;  the  years  1846-1850,  vol.  ii.  p.  81.      London,  1852. 

3  Bonwick,  Jas.,  The  Daily  Life  and  Origin  of  the   Tasmanians,  pp.  264, 
265,  269.      1870. 


4  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTHEAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

centre  as  the  Tasmanians,  namely,  the  "  sunken  continent," 
and  therefore,  in  their  emigrations,  established  themselves 
directly  upon  the  south-western  part  of  Australia,  and 
possibly  after  the  separation  of  Tasmania  from  it. 

According  to  this  author,  the  Tasmanians  were  then 
isolated  for  several  or  many  thousand  years  from  the  world's 
progress,  and  he  feels  "wonder  that  the  Tasmanians  retained 
the  speech  and  form  of  man  and  the  strength  of  human 
thought,  the  power  of  human  love." 

Professor  Giglioli,^  in  the  conclusion  to  his  work  on  the 
Tasmanians,  regards  them  as  being  Australians  with  the  hair 
of  Papuans,  retaining,  but  in  a  primitive  form,  the  habits 
and  customs  of  the  former,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  as 
being  the  descendants  of  an  earlier  black  race  with  woolly 
hair  who  were  settled  in  the  continent  of  New  Holland. 
The  Tasmanians  were  the  last  remainder  of  that  race,  having 
been  preserved  through  the  isolation  of  their  country. 

He  says,  in  conclusion,  that  the  Tasmanians  were 
members  of  the  great  Papuan  family,  and  owed  their 
inferiority  to  the  complete  state  of  isolation  in  which  they 
had  existed  since  a  very  remote  epoch. 

The  Rev.  William  Ridley "  appears  to  have  held  the 
view,  although  he  states  it  with  some  hesitation,  that  the 
Australians  passed  from  New  Guinea,  from  island  to  island, 
to  Cape  York.  Having  found  their  way  onwards  to  the 
south  and  west,  the  necessities  and  jealousies  of  the  numerous 
families  that  followed  them  forbade  their  return. 

Mr.  H.  Ling  Roth,^  in  his  most  excellent  work  on  TJie 
Aborigines  of  Tasmania,  discusses  the  views  of  M.  Topinard, 
Professor  Huxley,  Professor  Friedrich  Miiller,  MM.  de 
Quatrefages  and  Haura,  Dr.  Garson,  Mr.  Barnard  Davis, 
and  other  authorities,  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Tasmanians. 
He  says  that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  define  the  race  to 
which  they  were  most  closely  allied,  but  that  a  comparison 
of  their   physical    and    mental    characteristics   tends    to    the 

*  Giglioli,  E.  H.,  I  Tasmaniani  conni  storice  ed  ethno  ogici  di  nn popolo  estinto, 
p.  147.      Milan,  1874. 

2  Ridley,  Rev.  William,  Kamilaroi  and  other  Austi-alian  Languages,  \i.  119. 
Government  Printer,  Sydney,  1875. 

^  Roth,  H.  Ling,  The  Aborigines  of  Tasmania,  p.  224.      London,  1890. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  5 

conclusion  that  the  Tasmanians  were  more  closely  related 
to  the  Andaman  Islanders  than  to  any  other  race. 

Mr,  R.  Brough  Smyth/  in  the  introduction  to  his  work 
on  The  Aborigines  of  Victoria,  published  in  1878,  says  that 
it  is  difficult  to  believe  the  Tasmanians  were  scions  of  the 
continental  tribes,  and  that  if  Tasmania  was  peopled  from 
Australia  it  was  at  a  time  when  the  latter  supported  a  race 
that  in  feature,  character,  and  language  was  Tasmanian. 

As  to  the  Australians,  he  says  that  they  may  have 
landed  from  Timor,  but  that  it  is  doubtful  if  a  canoeful  of 
natives  landed  anywhere  upon  the  coast  of  Australia  could 
find  subsistence.  Yet  he  speaks  of  one  stream  of  migration 
coming  from  the  north-east,  one  branch  of  which  following 
the  coast  southwards  ultimately  reached  Gippsland  ;  of  the 
other  which  again  dividing  at  the  south-ea.stern  shore  of  the 
Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  one  section  took  a  course  along  the 
coast  westward  and  southward  to  Western  Australia,  and 
the  other  followed  the  course  of  the  rivers  that  flow  south- 
wards into  Cooper's  Creek  and  the  Darling. 

In  The  Australian  Race,  published  in  1886,  Mr.  E.  M. 
Curr^  formulated  a  theory  which  may  be  condensed  as 
follows,  leaving  those  who  desire  to  do  so  to  peruse  the 
reasons  which  are  advanced  in  its  support.  ' 

All  tribes  of  Australia  are  descendants  from  one  source, 
probably,  indeed,  from  a  shipload  or  canoeful  of  persons 
who  originally  found  their  way  to  these  shores.  According 
to  the  agreement  between  custom  and  language,  they  were 
negroes  from  Africa.  These  ancestors  of  the  Australian 
race  landed  on  the  north-west  coast  many  ages  back,  and 
their  descendants  spread  themselves  over  the  continent  by 
travelling  along  the  north,  west,  and  east  coasts,  and  also 
through  the  interior. 

The  Rev.  John  Mathew,^  who  has  had  opportunities  of 
becoming  personally  acquainted  with  many  examples  of  the 
aborigines,  published  an  elaborate  paper  on  that  subject.     He 

'  Smyth,  R.  Brough,  The  Aborigines  of  Victoria,  p.  Ixii.  et  infra.  Melbourne, 
1878. 

^  Curr,  E.  M. ,  The  Attstralian  Race,  pp.  158-190.     Melbourne,  1866. 

^  Mathew,  Rev.  John,  "The  Australian  Aborigines,  "yi?«/-wa/ rtW/Vt)((rft//«^ 
of  the  Koyal  Society  of  New  South  ll'^ales,  vol.  xxiii.      Sydney,  1889. 


6  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

considers  them  with  regard  to  their  origin,  mythology,  and 
traditions,  their  implements,  customs,  language,  mental 
characteristics,  food,  institutions,  and  superstitions.  He 
concludes  that  Australia  was  first  occupied  by  a  purely 
Papuan  people,  or  possibly  by  a  people  produced  by  a  fusion 
of  Papuans  and  Melanesians  sparsely  and  unevenly  distributed 
over  the  continent.  Taking  for  granted  that  the  cradle  of  the 
human  race  was  in  Asia,  he  derives  them  from  the  north 
by  way  of  New  Guinea,  and  he  looks  upon  the  now 
extinct  Tasmanians  as  the  lineal  descendants  of  the  original 
Australians. 

He  then  supposes  Australia  to  be  invaded  by  a  more 
advanced  fairer,  straight-haired  race  which,  arriving  at  a  very 
early  period  of  the  world's  history,  perhaps  on  the  north-west 
coast,  poured  into  Central  Australia  with  a  generally  south- 
easterly current.  Partly  driving  before  it,  partly  darkening 
itself  by  the  tide  of  life  upon  which  it  pressed,  the  stream 
inundated  the  whole  country,  but  not  to  an  equal  depth. 

Finally,  it  is  supposed  that  another  invasion,  apparently 
of  Malays,  took  place  from  the  north,  first  with  some  degree 
of  continuity  and  then  intermittently,  winding  about  here  and 
there,  touching  the  .shores  at  various  places,  and  bending 
back  inwards. 

The  author  then  says  that  upon  the  Papuan  aborigines 
"  the  Dravidian  influx  "  made  a  deep  and  general  impression. 
The  influence  of  the  final  arrivals,  the  Malays,  was  slighter 
and  more  partial. 

Mr.  R.  Etheridge,  junior,  in  a  most  valuable  contribution 
on  this  subject,  asked  the  question,  "  Has  man  a  geological 
history  in  Australia?"^  After  reviewing  the  evidence  derived 
from  the  discovery  of  stone  axes,  bone  implements,  oven 
mounds  common  in  parts  of  Victoria,  and  the  occurrence  of 
a  human  molar  in  the  Wellington  Cave  in  New  South  Wales, 
he  reaches  the  conclusion  that  the  matter  cannot  be  summed 
up  better  than  by  the  Scotch  verdict  "  not  proven." 

As   to  the  Tasmanian   aborigines,  he  remarks  that  the 

*  Etheridge,  R.,  junior,  "Has  Man  a  Geological  History  in  Australia?" 
Proceedings  of  the  Linitcan  Society  of  Neiv  South  Wales,  Second  Series,  vol.  v. 
1896,  pp.  259-266. 


{ 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  ^ 

former  geological  connection  of  Australia  and  Tasmania 
appears  to  be  a  generally  accepted  fact,  and  that  if  such  be 
the  case,  a  vast  period  of  time  must  have  elapsed  since  that 
connection,  allowing  for  the  formation  of  Bass  Strait.  He 
very  justly  observes  that  herein  lies  one  of  the  strongest  proofs 
of  man's  early  existence  in  the  island  continent,  although 
trustworthy  geological  evidence  is  still  wanting  as  to  the 
approximate  date  of  his  first  advent  in  Australia. 

Dr.  John  Fraser  has  stated  his  views  of  the  origin  of  the 
Australians  in  the  introduction  to  his  work,  An  Australian 
Language}  He  holds  that  the  negroid  population  of  Australia 
originated  in  Babylonia,  and  that  it  was  driven  into  southern 
India  by  the  "confusion  of  tongues"  which  followed  the 
attempt  of  Nimrod  to  establish  dominion  over  his  fellows. 
The  overthrow  of  the  Chaldaean  monarchy,  about  1500  B.C., 
by  Arab  tribes  drove  thousands  of  Kushites  into  southern 
India,  where  they  took  refuge  in  the  mountains  of  the 
Deccan,  and  where  to  the  present  day  there  are  Dravidian 
and  Kolarian  black-skinned  and  savage  races. 

The  Babylonian  Kushites  are  then  supposed  to  have  been 
driven  out  of  India  into  the  Malay  Peninsula,  Papua,  and 
Timor  by  Dravidian  tribes  who  came  down  from  Central 
Asia.      Finally  they  found  their  way  into  Australia. 

These  conclusions  appear  to  rest  mainly,  if  not  altogether, 
upon  philological  deductions  which  also  cause  the  author  to 
argue  that  the  Australians,  the  Dravidians,  Malays,  Papuans, 
Fijians,  Samoans,  and  the  New  Hebrideans  were  at  one  time 
part  of  a  common  stock. 

The  latest  work  with  which  I  am  acquainted  which 
expresses  an  opinion  as  to  the  derivation  of  the  Australian 
aborigine  is  the  second  edition  of  Mr.  G.  W.  Rusden's 
History  of  Australiar 

The  author  places  the  original  site  of  the  Australian  stock 
among  the  Deccan  tribes  of  Hindustan,  and  says  that  in 
a  prehistoric  time  some  powerful  class  or  race  of  invaders 

'  Fraser,  John,  An  Australian  Language  as  Spoken  by  the  Awabakal. 
Sydney,  1892. 

'■'  Rusden,  G.  W.,  History  of  Australia,  second  edition,  pp.  84  et  seq. 
Melbourne,  1897. 


8  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

sought  to  impose  the  peace  of  death  upon  the  ancestors  of 
the  AustraHans.  Their  safety  was  in  flight,  and  they  migrated 
southwards  from  island  to  island  until  in  Australia  they 
marched  free  from  molestation.  The  Tasmanians,  he  thinks, 
once  occupied  the  mainland,  and  were  driven  southwards  by 
some  warlike  or  skilful  tribes.  Although  to  boat  across 
Bass  Strait  in  a  canoe  might  be  sometimes  hazardous,  yet  in 
calm  weather  it  would  be  easy,  and  the  so-called  catamarans 
of  Southern  Australia  could  not  be  filled  with  water 
or  upset. 

Such,  then,  are  the  views  which  have  been  recorded  by 
various  writers  on  the  Tasmanian  and  Australian  aborigines. 

I  shall  now  proceed  to  deal  with  this  subject  as  it 
presents  itself  to  me  when  looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of 
present  knowledge. 

The  level  of  culture  of  the  Tasmanians  is  best  indicated, 
.  apart  from  their  customs  and  beliefs,  by  the  primitive 
character  of  their  weapons  and  implements.  The  former 
were  a  spear,  which  was  merely  a  thin  pole  hardened  and 
pointed  in  the  fire,  and  a  club  which  was  also  used  as  a 
missile  weapon.  Flints  chipped  on  one  side  were  used  for 
cutting,  scraping,  and  being  held  in  the  hand,  without  a 
handle,  for  chopping.^ 

The  only  means  they  had  for  navigating  the  waters  was 
a  rude  raft,  or  a  bundle  of  bark  tied  with  grass  or  strips  of 
kangaroo  skin  into  a  canoe-like  shape,  by  which  a  river  or 
a  narrow  strait  of  the  sea,  such  as  that  between  Maria  Island 
or  Bruni  Island  and  the  mainland,  could  be  crossed  in  calm 
weather." 

Thus,  as  pointed  out  by  Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor,'^  the  Tasmanians 
were  representatives  of  the  stone -age  development,  in  a 
stage  lower  than  that  of  the  Quaternary  period  of  Europe, 
and  the  distinction  may  be  claimed  for  them  of  being  this 
lowest  of  modern  nomad  tribes.  The  Australians  stand  on 
a  somewhat  higher  level  than  the  Tasmanians.  They  are 
better  armed,  with  a  formidable  reed  spear  propelled  by  the 

1  Roth,  H.  Ling,  op.  cit.  chap.  iv.  ^  Id.  chap.  iv.  p.   i6i. 

^  Tylor,  E.  B.,  "On  the  Tasmanians  as  Representatives  of  Palneolithic  Man," 
Journal  Anthrop.  hist.  November  1893. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  9 

throwing-stick,  the  boomerang,  and  a  variety  of  clubs  which 
serve  either  at  close  quarters  or  as  missiles,  and  for  defence 
they  have  the  shield.  Their  canoes  are  far  in  advance  of 
the  raft  or  the  bundle  of  bark  of  the  Tasmanians,  and  are 
able  if  necessary  to  cross  narrow  arms  of  the  sea  under 
circumstances  where  the  latter  would  have  been  destroyed. 

Their  stone  implements  are  either  ground  to  an  edge  or 
fashioned  by  chipping,  as  among  tribes  living  where  material 
for  the  ground  and  polished  type  of  hatchet  is  not  procurable. 
But  even  in  such  cases  these  are  obtained  by  barter  from 
other  tribes. 

The  Australians  may  therefore  be  classed  as  representing 
hunting  tribes  of  the  Neolithic  age. 

Some  of  the  writers  whose  opinions  I  have  quoted  have 
either  stated  in  so  many  words,  or  have  left  it  to  be  inferred 
by  their  statements,  that  the  Tasmanians  reached  this  con- 
tinent by  canoe  or  ship. 

But  there  is  not  a  tittle  of  evidence  in  support  of  the 
belief  that  the  Tasmanians  ever  were  acquainted  with  the 
art  of  constructing  a  canoe  able  to  cross  such  a  sea  strait 
as  that  between  Tasmania  and  Australia,  much  less  wider 
extents  of  ocean.  On  the  contrary,  the  whole  of  their 
culture  was  on  a  par  with  the  rudeness  of  their  bark  rafts. 

I  have  long  since  come  to  the  conclusion  that  one  of 
the  fundamental  principles  to  be  adopted  in  discussing  the 
origin  of  those  savages  must  be,  that  they  reached  Tasmania 
at  a  time  when  there  was  a  land  communication  between  it 
and  Australia. 

It  is  only  in  the  work  of  Professor  Giglioli  that  I  have 
found  this  clearly  shown,  where  he  says  that  there  is  no 
instance  recorded  of  a  people  who  have  lost  the  art  of 
navigation  which  they  had  once  acquired.^ 

The  Australians  have  also  been  credited  by  most  authors 
with  arriving  in  canoes  or  ships  on  the  coasts  of  Australia. 

But  I  am  quite  unable  to  understand  how,  since  these 
authors  picture  them  as  settling  down  upon  and  then 
spreading  along  the  coasts,  they  should  have  lost  the  art  of 
constructing  sea-going  canoes,  which  would  be  as  necessary 

»   op.  cit.  p.  146. 


lo  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

to  them  as  to  the  southern  sea-coast  tribes  of  New  Guinea 
or  to  the  islanders  of  Torres  Strait  of  the  present  time. 
There  is  no  evidence  of  such  a  degeneration  in  culture,  and 
before  this  belief  can  be  accepted  as  a  settled  proposition, 
some  evidence  in  support  of  it  must  be  forthcoming. 

It  might,  however,  be  urged  that  the  tribes  living  on 
the  east  coast  of  Cape  York  Peninsula  and  of  the  Australian 
coast  of  Torres  Strait,  as  far  as  Port  Darwin,  are  acquainted 
with  and  use  outrigger  canoes,  and  therefore  may  represent 
the  condition  of  the  first  arrivals.  As  to  this,  the  observa- 
tions of  the  earlier  navigators,  and  especially  of  those  engaged 
in  surveying  voyages,  are  much  to  the  point 

Mr.  M'Gillivray,  speaking  of  the  year  i  847,^  says  that 
the  canoes  seen  in  Rockingham  Bay  were  constructed  of  a 
single  sheet  of  bark  brought  together  at  the  ends  and  secured 
by  stitching.  Near  Shelbourne  Bay,  on  the  east  side  of  Cape 
York  Peninsula,  they  were  constructed  of  a  tree  trunk  with  a 
double  outrigger,  "and  altogether  a  poor  instance  of  these 
used  by  the  islanders  of  Torres  Strait."  Further  on,  when 
at  Cape  York,  he  speaks  of  the  ordinary  outrigger  canoe  of 
the  Straits,  and  of  the  friendly  intercourse  existing  between 
the  "  natives  of  the  southern  portion  of  Torres  Strait  and 
those  of  the  mainland  about  Cape  York." ' 

These  observations  indicate  the  distance  to  which  a 
knowledge  of  the  outrigger  canoe,  derived  from  the  islanders 
of  the  Straits,  had  passed  southward  at  the  time  spoken  of 
by  Mr.  M'Gillivray.  To  this  may  be  added  that  according 
to  oral  information,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  R.  L. 
Jack,  the  use  of  the  outrigger  canoe  extends  now  as  far 
southward  as  Hinchinbrook  Island. 

As  to  the  knowledge  of  the  outrigger  canoe  by  the 
Australians  on  the  western  part  of  the  shores  of  Torres 
Strait,  Mr.  M'Gillivray  also  mentions  that  two  years  after 
the  founding  of  the  English  settlement  at  Raffles  Bay  in 
1827,  the  Bugis  had  taken  advantage  of  the  protection 
afforded  to  carry  on  trepang  fishing,  and  that  formerly  bark 
canoes  had  been  in  general  use  by  the  aborigines,  but  that 

1   M'Gillivray,  op.  cit.  pp.  8l,  119,  125. 
2  Op.  cit.  vol.  i.  pp.  141-146. 


1  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  ii 

they  were  then  completely  superseded  by  others  hollowed 
out  of  trees,  which  they  procured  ready  made  from  the 
Malays  in  exchange  for  tortoise-shell  and  in  return  for 
assistance  in  collecting  trepang. 

Captain  Stokes,^  in  speaking  of  the  visits  of  Malays  to 
Port  Essington,  also  says  that  the  aborigines  obtained  their 
canoes  chiefly  from  the  Malays,  whom  he  elsewhere  calls 
"  Bugis."  At  the  time  at  which  he  wrote,  namely,  the  years 
1837-43,  such  canoes  were  used  as  far  as  Clarence  Strait, 
but  beyond  that  place  he  saw  no  single  instance  of  any 
"  proa  or  canoe."  - 

It  is  therefore  possible  to  fix  the  limits  beyond  which  the 
knowledge  of  the  outrigger  canoe  did  not  extend,  namely, 
from  Hinchinbrook  Island  on  the  north-east  coast  of  Queens- 
land to  Clarence  Strait  in  north-western  Australia. 

Some  further  light  is  afforded  by  a  statement  made  by 
a  man  from  Prince  of  Wales  Island  whom  I  once  met.  It 
was,  that  his  tribesmen  are  accustomed  to  migrate  periodi- 
cally in  their  sea-going  canoes,  according  to  the  prevalent 
winds,  either  southwards  along  the  coast  of  Queensland,  or 
northwards  to  the  further  islands  of  Torres  Strait,  or  even 
to  the  mainland  of  New  Guinea. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  practice  must  have  existed  for 
ages  ;  indeed,  since  that  time  when  the  Papuan  population 
settled  on  the  Straits  Islands  and  thus  came  to  be  neigh- 
bours of  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  Australian  mainland. 

It  is  difficult  to  believe,  if  this  coast  at  that  time  had 
been  unoccupied  by  Australians,  that  the  Papuans  would  not 
have  settled  on  it  as  well  as  upon  islands  at  no  great 
distance  northwards. 

The  Kaurarega  of  Prince  of  Wales  Island  are  usually 
considered  to  be  Papuans,  with  a  strong  Australian  mixture, 
which,  judging  from  the  example  I  saw,  would  be  very 
marked.  This  mixture  is  easily  to  be  understood  when  one 
considers  the  annual  voyages  by  these  people  down  the 
Cape  York  coast  on  the  one  side  and  across  Torres  Strait 

'  Stokes,   J.    Lort,    Disccn<eries   in   Australia,    etc.,   during  the    ]'oyage   of 
If. M.S.  '^Beagle''  in  the  years  1837-43,  vol.  i.  p.  388.     London,  1846. 
2  Op.  at.  vol.  i.  p.  81. 


12  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

on  the  other,  and  that  on  these  voyages,  according  to  my 
native  informant,  they  obtain  wives  from  the  Australian 
mainland  and  the  New  Guinea  Islands. 

I  am  therefore  led  to  believe  that  the  Australian 
ancestors  as  well  as  Tasmanians  must  be  held  to  have 
reached  this  continent  by  some  land  connection,  or,  at  least, 
a  land  connection  so  nearly  complete  that  the  breaks  in  it 
might  be  crossed  in  vessels  no  better  than  the  bark  canoe  of 
the  present  time. 

If  these  conclusions  are  well  founded,  there  arise  certain 
questions  which  demand  answers.  What  evidence  is  there 
of  a  former  land  connection  between  Australia  and  other 
lands  to  the  north  or  north-west,  and  between  Australia  and 
Tasmania  within  the  limit  of  time  fixed  by  the  probable 
existence  of  man  ? 

A  reply  to  these  questions  can  only  be  given  by  the 
sciences  of  physical  geography  and  geology,  and  the  time 
limit  restricts  the  inquiry  to  those  later  Tertiary  or  Post- 
Tertiary  lands  from  whence  such  migrations  might  have 
proceeded. 

Thus  their  direction  is  indicated  as  having  been  probably 
from  lands  lying  to  the  north  or  north-west  of  Australia. 

Dr.  Wallace,  in  his  classical  work  on  The  Malay  Archipelago} 
directed  attention  to  several  matters  bearing  upon  this 
question,  which  still  remain  as  significant  as  when  he  stated 
them  in  i  869, 

A  deep  but  narrow  sea  channel,  being  part  of  what  is 
now  known  as  "  Wallace's  Line,"  separates  areas  of  shallow 
seas  bordered  by  great  ocean  depths,^  while  the  boundaries 
of  the  shallow  seas  indicate  the  former  extension  on  the  one 
side  of  the  Austral  and  on  the  other  of  the  Asiatic  continent. 

The  chain  of  islands  which  extends  from  the  Malay 
Peninsula  towards  Australia,  ending  with  Timor,  when  con- 
sidered in  connection  with  the  boundaries  of  the  shallow  sea, 
represents  a  former  continental  extension,  probably  only  broken 
by  the  channel  between  Bali  and   Lombok,^  and  a  channel 

1  The  Malay  Archipelago.      London,  1869. 

2  Guillemard,  F.  H.  H.,  Australasia.     Stanford  Series,  Cambridge,  1894. 
'  The  Malay  Archipelago. 


1  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  13 

between  Timor  and  Australia,  twenty  miles  in  width.^  The 
former,  which  is  only  fifteen  miles  wide,  has  sufficed  to  stop 
the  advance  of  the  larger  mammals  from  the  Asiatic  to  the 
Austral  region,  and  the  latter  strait  has  similarly  prevented 
the  Australian  mammals  from  entering  Timor. 

If  this  was  the  line  of  migration  of  the  early  Tasmanians 
and  Australians,  we  should  have  to  assume  either  that  they 
were  able  to  cross  the  deep  sea  straits  on  rafts  or  in  bark 
canoes,  or  that  these  sea  straits  were  at  such  a  comparatively 
recent  geological  time  much  narrower  than  the  soundings 
suggest. 

An  alternative  line  of  migration  would  be  by  way  of 
Torres  Strait. 

The  position  of  the  Great  Barrier  Reef  as  to  north- 
eastern Australia  strongly  suggests  a  submerged  shore  line 
of  the  continent  ;  and  if  so,  the  numerous  islands,  islets,  and 
reefs  between  Cape  York  Peninsula  and  New  Guinea  also 
suggest  the  former  existence  of  a  land  connection  now  broken 
by  subsidence. 

Dr.  Jack  points  out  that  from  Cape  Palmerston  to  the 
Herbert  River  the  coast  is  fringed  by  a  strip  of  alluvial  flat, 
composed  of  alternating  beds  of  clay,  sand,  and  gravel,  the 
latter  probably  belonging  to  river  beds.  The  old  land 
surface,  as  proved  by  boring,  is  from  80  to  lOO  feet  below 
the  present  sea-level,  and  no  river  could  possibly  have  ex- 
cavated a  channel  to  this  depth  while  the  land  stood  at  its 
present  level.  This  submergence,  in  all  probability,  took 
place  after  the  period  to  which  the  extinct  mammalia 
belonged.' 

Dr.  Jack  has  also  pointed  out  to  me  orally,  that  bays 
and  estuaries  into  which  rivers  flow  on  the  east  coast  indicate 
submerged  valleys,  and  suggested  that  this  comparatively 
recent  submergence  of  the  eastern  part  of  Australia  gave 
rise  to  Sydney  Harbour  on  the  one  hand  and  Torres  Strait 
on  the  other. 

An  inspection  of  the  Admiralty  Chart  of  Torres  Strait 

'    The  Malay  Archipelago. 

'  R.  L.  Jack  and  R.  Etheridge,  junior.  Geology  and  Paleontology  of  Queensland 
and  New  Guinea,  vol.  i.  pp.  613,  614.      1892. 


14  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

between  Cape  York  and  the  nearest  part  of  New  Guinea 
shows,  not  only  a  number  of  islands  of  some  size,  but  in- 
numerable islets  and  reefs  studding  a  sea  so  shallow  that 
there  is  only  exceptionally  a  depth  of  lo  fathoms  in  the 
chaimels.  A  movement  of  elevation  of  60  feet  would  there- 
fore connect  Australia  and  New  Guinea,  and  a  re-elevation  of 
the  80  to  100  feet  of  subsidence  in  comparatively  recent 
times  which  Dr.  Jack  assigns  to  the  north-east  coast,  would 
do  more  than  merely  connect  the  two  lands. 

So  far  as  is  yet  known,  the  extinct  mammalia  to  which 
Dr.  Jack  refers  did  not  extend  into  New  Guinea,  and  the 
absence  of  the  platypus  and  the  feeble  development  of  the 
polyprotodont  fauna  in  north-eastern  Australia  is  considered 
by  Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  to  indicate  that  they  spread 
northwards  rather  than  southwards,^  thus  negativing  the 
existence  of  an  upraised  Torres  Strait  at  that  early  period. 

This  suggests  that,  although  there  had  been  a  land 
communication  which  admitted  of  a  certain  migration  of 
Australian  forms,  it  had  ceased  before  the  giant  extinct 
marsupials  spread  into  the  extreme  of  Northern  Queensland, 
and  according  to  Dr.  Jack  that  would  probably  have  been 
in  Post-Tertiary  times."  It  seems  therefore  evident  that 
there  was  a  land  communication  between  New  Guinea  and 
Australia  at  a  comparatively  recent  period  by  which  the 
Tasmanians,  and  subsequently  the  Australians,  might  have 
entered  this  continent.  But  this  would  have  been  anterior 
to  the  subsidence  of  Torres  Strait  as  we  now  see  it. 

Thus  all  the  evidence  I  have  been  able  to  collect  points 
to  there  having  been  a  more  practicable  line  of  migration  by 
way  of  New  Guinea  than  by  Timor. 

At  present  too  little  is  known  of  New  Guinea  to  enable 
anything  to  be  said  as  to  existing  traces  of  the  Tasmanian 
and  the  Australian  stocks  in  that  island.  But  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  New  Guinea,  Australia,  and  Tasmania  were 
during  our  time,  and  as  to  the  two  former,  still  are  occupied 
respectively  by  well-defined  types  of  man,  effectually  separated 

1  Summary  of  Zoological,    Botanical,   and  Geological  Results  of  the  Home 
Expedition,  p.  i8o.      Melbourne,  1896. 

2  Op.  cit. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  15 

from  each  other  by  Torres  Strait  to  the  north  and  Bass 
Strait  to  the  south  of  Australia. 

The  relative  positions  of  these  peoples  show  that  the 
Papuans,  Australians,  and  Tasmanians  must  have  occupied 
their  respective  locations  in  such  manner  that  Bass  Strait 
stopped  the  march  of  the  Australians,  and  Torres  Strait  of 
the  Papuans. 

It  is  now  to  be  considered  whether  there  are  any  data 
from  which  a  fair  inference  may  be  drawn  as  to  the  former 
existence  of  a  land  bridge  between  Australia  and  Tasmania, 
across  which  the  Tasmanians  might  pass  to  the  latter 
country. 

There  has  been  much  hesitation  in  accepting  any  great 
antiquity  for  man  in  Australia.  Mr.  R.  Brough  Smyth  ^ 
pointed  out,  as  far  back  as  1878,  that  in  the  hundreds  of 
square  miles  of  alluvial  deposits  which  have  been  turned 
over  by  miners  in  Victoria  very  few  aboriginal  stone  hatchets 
have  been  found,  and  those  even  at  inconsiderable  depths 
below  the  surface.  Since  that  time,  some  evidence  has  been 
forthcoming  which  may  be  held  to  place  man  in  Australia 
in  possibly  Pleistocene  times. 

It  may  be  well,  therefore,  to  bring  together  those  instances 
which  have  come  under  my  notice  in  order  that  the  evidence 
from  these  sources  may  be  seen  concisely. 

Mr.  Bonwick '^  records  the  discovery  of  a  "stone  tool" 
by  miners  in  Ballarat,  22  inches  below  the  surface,  in  a  place 
which  had  not  been  before  disturbed.  This  author,  how- 
ever, according  to  his  practice,  gives  no  reference  to  his 
authority. 

Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace  communicated  to  mc,  for  the  purpose 
of  investigation,  the  discovery  of  an  axe-head  of  basalt  at 
Maryborough,  in  Victoria,  in  1855,  by  Mr.  A.  C.  Swinton, 
who  was  at  the  time  engaged  in  mining. 

Mr.  Swinton  says  that  he  and  Mr.  M.  C.  Shore  were 
sinking  a  shallow  .shaft  on  a  small  tributary,  leading  into 
the  main  lead,  when  at  a  depth  of  about  4  feet  from  the 
surface  and  i  foot  from  the  bottom,  Mr.  Shore  drove  his 
pick  into  an  axe-head  made  of  basalt.     The  shaft  was  sunk 

'   op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  364.  "^  Op,  cit.  p.  45. 


i6  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

through  cemented  gravel  with  three  false  bottoms,  and  about 
half-way  down  there  was  a  hard  band  of  cement. 

By  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  James  Travis,  the  Acting  Secretary 
for  Mines  and  Water  Supply,  Mr.  Stanley  Hunter,  one  of 
the  officers  of  the  Geological  Survey,  examined  the  place 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Swinton  and  marked  by  him  upon  a 
parish  plan  of  Maryborough. 

Mr.  Hunter  reported  to  the  effect  that  the  tributary 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Swinton  is  one  of  the  heads  of  the  main 
Bet  Bet  lead,  and  as  that  lead  is  covered  by  Pleistocene 
basalt,  the  lower  strata  in  the  contributary  lead  in  question 
may  be  of  the  same  age.  Yet  this  is  merely  an  assumption, 
as  no  fossil  evidence  of  any  kind  is  to  be  found. 

In  1865  the  late  Mr.  C.  S.  Wilkinson,^  together  with 
Mr.  Forde,  found  flint  chips,  a  sharpened  stone  tomahawk, 
and  several  bone  spikes  or  needles,  together  with  bones  of 
animals,  in  the  sand-dunes  near  Cape  Otway.  In  the  same 
locality  they  also  found  a  similar  bone  spike  with  numerous 
seal-bones  and  shells  of  apparently  existing  species  in  beach 
material  of  pebbles  and  humus,  resting  upon  carbonaceous 
sandstone,  and  apparently  intermediate  between  it  and  the 
overlying  dunes. 

In  1870,  when  visiting  the  Upper  Dargo  River  in 
Gippsland,  I  was  informed  by  some  miners  that  in  cutting 
a  race  for  mining  purposes  they  had  turned  up  a  stone 
tomahawk  at  about  2  feet  below  the  surface.  But  as  the 
race  was  cut  out  of  the  shingly  alluvium  at  the  side  of 
the  valley,  the  find  does  not  necessarily  imply  any  great 
antiquity. 

Mr.  Bennett,  in  his  History  of  Australian  Discovery'^ 
makes  a  statement  that,  in  sinking  wells  and  other  excava- 
tions in  the  Hunter  River  Valley,  flat  rocks  were  found  with 
marks  such  as  are  made  by  the  aborigines  in  sharpening 
their  stone  tomahawks.  These  were  at  a  depth  of  30  feet 
or  more  below  the  present  surface,  and  covered  with  a  drift 
or  alluvium. 

'  Etheridge.R.,  junior,  "Observations  on  Sand-dunesof  the  Coast  of  Victoria," 
Transactions  of  the  Koyal  Society  of  Victoria,  vol.  xii.  1876. 

2  Bennett,  Samuel,  The  History  of  Australian  Discovery  and  Colonisation, 
p.  263.     Sydney,  1867. 


1  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  17 

In  1896  an  important  find  of  aboriginal  stone  hatchets 
was  made  at  Shea's  Creek,  near  Sydney,  at  a  depth  of  i  I 
feet  below  water-level,  together  with  bones  of  dugong, 
bearing  such  cuts  and  scratches,  not  recent,  as  would  be 
made  by  direct  blows  of  a  sharp-edged  stone  tomahawk. 
There  were  also  several  standing  stumps  of  Eucalyptus 
botryoides,  including  a  land  surface,  and  the  whole  was 
covered  by  estuarine  beds  of  marine  shells.  The  total 
alteration  in  the  level  of  the  land  and  sea  was  about  i  5  feet 
below  high  water. 

Mr.  R.  Etheridge,  junior,  Professor  T.  W.  Edgworth 
David,  and  Mr.  J.  W.  Grimshaw,  the  authors  of  the  account 
of  this  discovery,^  say  that  the  date  of  the  "  aboriginal  feast 
upon  dugong "  cannot  be  much  below  the  limit  of  Post- 
Tertiary  time,  and  it  is  even  doubtful  whether  it  is  likely 
that  the  date  can  be  carried  back  into  Pleistocene  times. 

There  may  be  added  to  this  evidence  the  discovery  of 
the  crown  of  a  human  molar  by  the  late  Mr.  Gerard  Krefft 
in  the  Wellington  Caves.  As  to  this  discovery,  Mr.  Etheridge, 
junior,^  says  that  the  tooth  appears  to  be  completely 
fossilised,  for  on  comparing  it  with  the  teeth  of  the  larger 
marsupials  from  the  Wellington  Caves,  the  normal  condition 
is  without  question  similar.  Yet  its  position  in  the  cave, 
and  association  with  the  other  organic  remains  entombed 
there,  is  open  to  doubt  ;  and  as  no  other  human  remains 
have  been  found  at  Wellington  under  similar  circumstances, 
its  precise  age  must  remain  uncertain. 

If  any  reliance  may  be  placed  upon  aboriginal  tradition, 
the  affirmative  belief  in  the  presence  of  man  in  Victoria 
during  the  Newer  Volcanic  Era  is  strengthened. 

It  is  said  that  there  was  a  tradition  to  the  effect  that 
Mount  Buninyong  had  at  a  distant  time  thrown  out  fire. 

Mr.  Dawson  ^  reports  a  tradition  among  the  aborigines 
of  the  western  district  of  Victoria  that  fire  came  out  of  a  hill 
near  Mortlake,  and  of  "  stones  which  their  fathers  told  them 
had  been  thrown  out  of  the  hill  by  the  action  of  fire." 

'  Etheridge,  R. ,  junior,  Professor  T.  W.   K.   David,  and  J.  W.  Grimshaw, 
op.  lit.  p.  23.  '^  Op.  lit. 

3  Murray,   R.   A.    F. ,  Geology  and  Physical  Geography  of  Victoria,  p.  129. 
Melbourne,  1887. 

C 


i8  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        c  u. 

To  the  northward  of  Ballarat  portions  of  the  Main 
Divide  is  of  volcanic  formation,  and  a  wide  sheet  extend- 
ing northwards  finally  disappears  under  the  Post-Tertiary 
deposits  of  the  Loddon  Valley,  and  covers  the  ancient  river- 
courses  which  trend  towards  the  Murray  River.^ 

As  seen  in  the  Ballarat  district,  flows  of  basalt  followed 
each  other,  separated  by  periods  of  time  which  permitted 
the  accumulation  of  alluviums,  until  finally  vast  areas 
became  basaltic  plains,  studded  with  volcanic  cones.^ 

The  older  Dividing  Range  is  in  many  parts  covered, 
and  the  newer  river-courses  do  not  in  places  accord  with  the 
older  drainage  areas. 

Thus  were  formed  what  are  known  to  miners  as  the 
"  deep  leads,"  trending  from  Ballarat  northwards  towards  the 
River  Murray,  and  southwards  towards  Bass  Strait. 

It  is  not  possible  in  the  present  state  of  information  to 
fix  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  when  in  geological  time 
these  deep  leads  were  formed,  when  volcanic  activity 
commenced,  or  when  it  finally  terminated  with  the  volcanoes 
of  south-western  Victoria  and  the  south-east  of  South 
Australia. 

The  latter  are  placed  by  Professor  Tate  in  that  time 
when  Diprotodon  and  Phascolomys  Pliocenus  were  still 
existing,  and  when  the  flora  included  Casuarina  and 
Banksia.^ 

The  discovery  of  bones  of  an  extinct  kangaroo  in  the 
mine  of  the  Great  Buninyong  Estate  Company,  under  two 
sheets  of  basalt,  suggests  that  the  Mount  Buninyong 
volcano  may  have  been  of  the  same  period. 

If  these  views  are  correct,  it  may  be  said  that  the  newer 
volcanic  era,  during  which  the  river  valleys  of  Central 
Victoria  were  sealed  up  by  basaltic  flows,  may  have  extended 
into  Pleistocene  time. 

I  have  been  long  impressed  by  the  fact  that  the  "  deep 
leads  "  referred  to — that  is,  the  ancient  river  channels — are 
now  at  considerable  depths  below  the  surface  over  which  the 

1  op.  cit. 

2  R.  Tate,  "Anniversary  Address,"  Transactions  of  the  Philosophical  Society 
of  Adelaide,  1878-79,  p.  69. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  19 

modern  rivers  flow,  with  but  a  slight  fall  to  the  sea  by  way 
of  the  Murray  River  Valley. 

During  the  past  thirty  years  the  Victorian  Department 
of  Mines  has  carried  out  an  immense  amount  of  boring  with 
the  diamond  drill,  by  which  the  underground  contours  of  the 
valleys,  and  also  the  trend  of  the  deep  leads  extending 
north  and  south  from  Ballarat  have  been  ascertained. 

It  seemed  to  me  that  a  comparison  of  the  data  thus 
obtained  might  prove  of  interest,  and  for  this  purpose  I  have 
selected  the  statistics  of  bores  put  down  furthest  north  on 
three  main  leads,  where  the  hilly  country  subsides  into  the 
great  levels  of  the  plains  through  which  the  River  Murray 
winds  its  course  towards  South  Australia  and  the  sea. 

Each  locality  chosen  is  not  far  distant  from  the  termina- 
tion of  the  flow  of  basalt,  by  which  the  old  valley  had  been 
levelled,  and  which  itself  is,  at  its  termination,  levelled  off  by 
the  later  alluviums  of  the  plains. 

The  following  are  the  data  from  which  I  have  drawn 
certain  conclusions  : — 

No.  9  Bore  at  Hung  Bong. 

Height  of  surface  above  sea-level  .......  714  feet 

Depth  of  Deep  Lead  channel  below  the  surface  '      .  .  .  300    ,, 

Distance  from  the  bore  to  .Swan  Hill  on  the  River  Murray,  by  way  of 

Bet  Bet  Creek  and  the  Loddon  River  .....  200  miles 

No.  8  Bore  at  Charlotte  Plains. 

Height  of  surface  above  sea-level  ^  .....  .     708  feet 

Depth  of  Deep  Lead  channel  below  the  surface       .         .         .         .      270    ,, 

Distance  from  the  bore  to  Swan  Hill  by  way  of  Tallaroop  Creek  and 

the  Loddon  River    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .180  miles 

No.  5  Bore  0/  Second  Line  near  Baringhup. 

Height  of  surface  above  sea-leveP  ......     600  feet 

Depth  of  Deep  Lead  channel  below  the  surface        ....      226    ,, 

Distance  from  Swan  Hill  by  way  of  the  Loddon  River     .  .  .      191  miles 

1  In  each  case,  in  order  to  approximate  the  conditions  of  the  '*  lead  "  with 
those  of  the  River  Murray,  I  have  deducted  from  the  res^ults  of  boring  the  depth 
of  "  wash,"  and  have  also  allowed  5  feet  for  the  possible  depth  of  water. 

2  On  the  authority  of  Mr.  A.  Everett,  chief  draughtsman,  Department  of 
Mines  and  Water  Supply,  Victoria. 

3  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Jas.  Travis,  Secretary  for  Mines  in  Victoria,  for  this 
information. 


20         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  distance  from  Swan  Hill  to  the  sea,  fpllowing  the 
channel  of  the  Murray  River,  is  about  950  miles. 

The  fall  of  the  surface  to  Swan  Hill  is — from  l^ung 
Bong,  2  feet  6  inches  ;  from  Charlotte  Plains,  2  feet  9  inches  ; 
and  from  Baringhup,  2  feet  per  mile.  But  the  fall  of  the 
surface  to  the  sea,  by  way  of  the  channel  of  the  River 
Murray,  is  only  2.75  inches  per  mile,  and  even  that  is  not 
much,  since,  at  Morgan,  400  miles  up  from  the  sea,  there  is 
only  from  3  to  10  feet  above  sea-level  according  to  the 
season.^ 

Thus,  if  these  Deep  Leads  are  imagined  as  being  restored 
to  their  former  condition  of  rivers,  they  could  not  flow  out 
to  sea  by  way  of  the  River  Murray  unless  the  land  were 
raised  up,  taking  the  mean  of  the  three  examples  first  given, 
by  about  270  feet  above  its  present  height  as  compared 
with  the  sea-level.  This  height  of  270  feet  may,  moreover, 
be  taken  as  the  minimum  elevation  required,  since  it  would 
give  no  more  than  the  present  fall,  which  is  improbable, 
when  the  character  of  the  sea  bottom  in  Bass  Strait  is  taken 
into  consideration. 

The  fall  southwards  of  the  country  from  the  Main 
Dividing  Range,  near  Ballarat,  to  the  sea  is,  also  for  a  long 
distance  over  Newer  Volcanic  basaltic  plains,  analogous  to 
those  through  which  the  above-mentioned  bores  have  been 
put  down. 

Here  also  the  Deep  Leads  trending  southwards  have 
been  proved  by  boring,  and  analogous  results  have  been 
obtained.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  is  a 
marked  difference  in  distance  to  the  sea  in  this  direction. 
From  Bung  Bong,  for  instance,  to  the  sea  is  i  i  50  miles  by 
the  Murray  River  Valley,  while  from  Mount  Mercer,  where 
there  is  one  of  the  most  southern  bores,  to  Bass  Strait  is 
only  50  miles.  Thus  compared  with  the  distance,  the  fall 
of  the  land  in  the  latter  case  is  much  steeper. 

A  bore  put  down  to  the  west  of  Mount  Mercer  proved 
the  Deep  Lead  gutter  at  a  depth  of  113  feet  from  the 
surface,  and  one  at  Glenfine,  near  the  Woady  Yalloak  River, 

1   Mr.    Slewart    Murray,    Chief   Engineer    of  Water    Supply,    Victoria,    has 
furnished  me  with  these  heights  alx)ve  the  sea  of  the  River  Murray. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  21 

bottomed  at  161  feet  4  inches,  of  which  2  feet  9  inches  was 
heavy  wash.  All  that  can  be  said  as  to  the  leads  on  this 
side  of  the  Main  Divide  is,  that  they  show  the  same  general 
features  as  those  on  the  northern  side,  but  that  any  com- 
parison with  the  outlets  of  those  old  rivers  is  not  possible. 

In  order  to  test  the  conclusions  drawn  from  the  data 
obtained  from  considering  the  Deep  Leads,  I  also  examined 
the  Admiralty  Charts  of  Bass  Strait,  and  of  the  coast  of 
Tasmania,  and  the  opposite  Australian  mainland. 


,c:> 

■;>™-^*.       Kingr»ton\  "^13^ 


C.  Northii""> 


EW  SOUTH  WALES  »</• 

fi! 


■■*  i.Hunter      Ooofl.'-^A 

,&V  C.  Portland  o^     .,  -,     .. 

^^^  '^Banti  Strait 

fEdifitont 


XVPurncaux  Croup 
I'^C.^Irtnl 


Map 

shewing:  the  lines  of  50  &  100  fathoms 
on  the  coasts  of 

VICTORIA  &  TASMANIA. 

Entflish  Miles 

O  JO  100  200 


Walker  .V  CockorelKc. 


On  the  accompanying  map  are  shown  the  50  and  100 
fathom  lines  of  soundings  in  Bass  Strait,  extending  west- 
ward to  include  the  mouth  of  the  Murray  River,  and  cast- 
ward  as  far  as  Jervis  Bay  in  New  South  Wales.^ 

A  line  of  soundings  is  also  shown  connecting  Wilson's 
Promontory,  in  Victoria,  with  Cape  Portland,  in  Tasmania, 
by  way  of  the  islands  lying  between  these  points.  On  this 
line    the   greatest   depth   is    32    fathom.s,   between   Wilson's 

1  Taken  from  the  Admiralty  Chart.  Mr.  Everett,  chief  draughtsman  of  the 
Department  of  Mines  and  Water  Supply,  has  directed  my  attention  to  a  paper 
read  by  Dr.  Becker  before  the  Philosophical  Institute  of  Victoria,  in  which  he 
points  out  the  features  referred  to  in  this  passage  (vol.  ii.  p.  15). 


22  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Promontory  and  Kent  Group.  It  is  shallower  between 
that  island  and  Flinders  Island,  and  still  shallower  thence 
to  Cape  Portland. 

A  35-fathom  line  on  either  side  would  indicate  a  plateau 
80  or  90  miles  wide  connecting  the  shores  of  the  strait,  and 
on  the  Victoria  side  widening  out  so  as  to  extend  up  to 
Cape  Howe. 

On  this  there  would  be  a  low  ridge  from  Wilson's  Pro- 
montory to  Cape  Portland,  with  occasional  elevations — now 
islands — rising  at  Mount  Strzelecki  to  over  2700  feet 
above  the  sea.  These  islands  are,  therefore,  a  submerged 
continuation  of  that  part  of  the  Cordillera  which  ends  in 
Victoria  at  Wilson's  Promontory.  The  prevailing  rocks, 
except  a  few  isolated  peaks  of  recent  igneous  origin,  are 
granite  and  schists,  which  on  the  low -lying  tracts  are 
overlaid  by  deposits  of  Eocene  age  covered  by  recent 
formations.^ 

These  islands  are,  therefore,  composed  of  Palaeozoic 
plutonic  rocks  and  metamorphic  schists  similar  to  those 
largely  represented  in  the  Gippsland  Mountains,  which 
terminate  in  a  southerly  direction  in  Wilson's  Promontory. 

An  inspection  of  the  soundings  shows  that  the  50-fathom 
line  encloses  a  comparatively  level  plateau,  which  falls  more 
rapidly  and  in  places  almost  suddenly,  to  the  loo-fathom 
line,  especially  on  the  western  and  southern  side  of  Tasmania. 
Beyond  this  there  are  few  soundings,  but  from  those  given 
the  following  statements  may  be  noted. 

The  50-fathom  line  is  distant  about  40  miles  in  a  south- 
westerly direction  from  Cape  Otway  ;  at  10  miles  further 
off  is  the  loo-fathom  line  ;  at  20  miles  further  the  depth  is 
over  900  fathoms;  finally,  at  150  miles  from  Cape  Otway, 
in  the  same  direction,  there  is  a  sounding  of  over  2300 
fathoms. 

Similarly,  in  a  south-easterly  direction  from  the  Ninety- 
mile  Beach  in  Gippsland,  the  50-fathom  and  lOO-fathom 
lines  are  distant  50  and  70  miles  respectively. 

South-easterly  from   Cape   Pillar,   in   the  extreme  south 

'  Johnston,  Robt.  M.,  Systematic  Account  of  Geology  of  Tasmania,  p.  365, 
Hobart,  1888. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  23 

of  Tasmania,  the  soundings  of  50,  lOO,  and  1000  fathoms 
are  distant  respectively  about  5,  8,  and  50  miles. 

The  Tines  of  50  and  100  fathoms  soundings  off  the 
Murray  mouth  are  distant  therefrom  about  100  miles,  the 
two  lines  being  apparently  no  more  than  5  miles  apart.  At 
100  miles,  further  south,  there  is  a  sounding  of  2840 
fathoms. 

The  general  conclusions  derivable  from  a  study  of  these 
charts  are  that  the  50-fathom  line  represents  a  submerged 
plateau  connecting  Victoria  approximately  from  Cape  Howe 
to  Cape  Otway  with  Tasmania.  From  it  there  is  a  more 
rapid  slope  to  the  lOO-fathom  line,  and  thence  a  still  greater 
slope  into  ocean  depths.  An  elevation  of  300  feet  would 
therefore  lay  dry  a  tract  of  comparatively  level  country 
between  Victoria  and  Tasmania,  rising  to  a  central  ridge  on 
the  eastern  side.  The  plateau  would  be  mainly  not  more 
than  100  to  200  feet  above  sea-level,  but  in  places  rising 
up  to  3000  feet.  On  the  western  side  a  deep  bend  to  the 
north-east  indicates  the  former  channel  of  a  river  conveying 
the  combined  waters  of  all  streams  and  rivers  which  now 
debouch  between  Cape  Otway  and  Wilson's  Promontory, 
whose  deposits  probably  account  for  the  unusual  distance 
between  the  50  and  100  fathom  line,  from  the  embouchure 
down  to  Cape  Sorrell. 

The  plateau  of  low-lying  land  thus  indicated  flanking  the 
eastern  side  of  the  chain  of  denuded  and  eroded  mountains, 
whose  peaks  are  now  islands  in  Bass  Strait,  would  probably 
resemble  the  sandy  and  swampy  country  covered  with  dwarf 
scrub  and  coarse  sedges  which  border  Corner  Inlet,  and 
separate  Wilson's  Promontory  from  the  Gippsland  coast 
ranges. 

A  great  delta  is  indicated  by  these  soundings,  extending 
between  Kangaroo  Island  and  Cape  Jaffa,  100  miles  beyond 
the  present  Murray  mouth. 

That  the  elevation  and  subsidence  of  the  land  has  been 
by  widespread  and  not  merely  local  movements  is  shown 
by  the  Eocene  and  Miocene  marine  series  of  Victoria,  South 
Australia,  and  Tasmania,  which,  although  subjected  to  eleva- 
tion, are  in  the  whole,  at  low  angles,  little  beyond  horizontal. 


24  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        m. 

All  that  can  perhaps  be  said  as  to  the  antiquity  of  man 
in  the  Australian  continent  appears  to  be,  that  he  may  have 
inhabited  it  as  a  contemporary  of  the  extinct  marsupial 
fauna,  the  giant  forms  of  which,  equally  with  himself,  appear 
to  have  been  isolated  by  those  depressions  of  the  surface 
which  formed  Torres  and  Bass  Straits,  Those  changes  in 
the  physical  geography  of  Australia  may  have  occurred  at 
a  somewhat  later  geological  period  than  seems  to  have  been 
usually  accepted. 

I  may  now  advance  a  further  step  and  consider  the 
origin  of  the  primitive  Tasmanians  and  Australians. 

If  the  conclusions  to  which  I  have  now  been  led  are 
correct,  it  follows  that  the  Tasmanians  were  the  autochthonous 
inhabitants  of  Australia,  and  that  their  preservation  in  Tas- 
mania was  due  to  isolation  by  the  formation  of  Bass  Strait. 

The  occupation  of  the  continent  by  the  Australians,  who, 
it  may  be  reasonably  held,  were  in  a  somewhat  higher  state 
of  culture  and  who  were  better  armed  than  the  Tasmanians, 
must  have  resulted  in  the  amalgamation  of  the  two  races, 
either  by  the  subjection  of  the  latter,  or,  what  is  more  likely 
from  what  we  know  of  the  Australians  of  the  present  day, 
by  the  extermination  of  the  former  inhabitants,  at  least  so 
far  as  regarded  the  males,  and  the  absorption  of  the  females 
into  the  conquering  tribes. 

At  any  rate,  whatever  the  process  may  have  been,  the 
result  of  a  strong  negroid  cross  in  the  Australians  may  be 
accepted. 

Deducting  this  negroid  element,  there  remains  a  residuum 
from  which  also  must  be  deducted  the  "  Malay  element "  of 
Mr.  Mathew,  who  finds  in  the  Australian  language  traces  of 
Malay  influence.  He  says  that  they  are  not  numerous,  are 
not  met  with  in  the  extreme  north-west,  where  they  might 
be  expected,  but  turn  up  in  unexpected  parts  of  Australia, 
far  removed  from  casual  intercourse  with  Malays.^ 

In  order  to  account  for  this  Malay  element,  he  introduces 
parties  of  Malays,  who,  either  from  choice  or  necessity,  landed 
and  became  naturalised  at  various  spots  on  the  east,  north, 
and    west    coasts    of   Australia.       These    Malays    are    thus 

1  Op.  cit.  p.  377. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  25 

supposed  to  have  modified  the  speech  of  the  people,  first, 
immediately  round  them,  and  then  landwards.^ 

As  to  this,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  Australia  is  three- 
fourths  the  size  of  Europe.  What  would  be  thought  of  an 
hypothesis  based  upon  the  landing  of  occasional  parties  of 
Asiatics  upon  the  northern  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean, 
thereby  introducing  an  Asiatic  strain  into  the  people  in- 
habiting, for  instance,  Northern  Germany  ? 

The  linguistic  ground  upon  which  this  "  Malayan  "  hypo- 
thesis rests  consists,  first,  in  identification  of  the  interrogative 
pronouns,  for  instance,  minyanggai  or  viinna  of  the  Kabi 
language  in  Queensland  with  the  Malayan  juana,  which, 
as  Mr.  Mathew  himself  points  out,  is  properly  the  adverb 
"  where,"  but  which  is  used  idiomatically  to  signify  "  who," 
"  whom,"  "  which,"  and  "  what "  ;  second,  on  twelve  words 
selected  from  vocabularies  of  Australian  tribes.  Of  these 
words,  three,  namely,  the  Malay  terms  for  moon,  rain,  and  sun, 
are,  on  reference  to  Dr.  Codrington's  work,^  found  to  be  also 
Melanesian.  A  fourth  word,  namely,  the  West  Australian 
j>oora,  or  ura,  meaning  "man,"  he  identifies  with  orang, 
but  does  not  rely  on  it.  As  to  the  remaining  eight  words 
which  are  scattered  over  the  continent,  it  may  be  that  some 
might  also  be  identified  with  Malayan  and  Melanesian  words, 
and  as  in  the  case  of  isolated  occurrences,  it  is  always  open 
to  doubt  whether  the  average  collector  of  Australian 
vocabularies  has  correctly  reported  them.  Even  to  the 
occurrence  of  the  word  hapa  over  wide  areas  in  Australia, 
tneaning  "  father,"  much  weight  cannot  be  attached,  since 
a  similar  or  identical  term  may  be  found  in  languages  the 
world  over. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Threlkeld,  than  whom  no  one  has  obtained 
so  great  a  knowledge  of  an  Australian  language,  denies  that 
it  has  any  close  affinity  with  the  Malay,  cither  in  word  or 
construction.^  This  opinion  carries  weight,  not  only  by 
reason  of  his  special  qualifications,  but  because  it  relates  to 

»  op.  cit.  p.  378. 

*  Codringlon,  Rev.  R.  H.,  The  Melanesiatt  Languages,  p.  78.     Oxford,  1885. 
3  Threlkeld,  Rev.  L.  E.,  /Cey  to  the  Structure  of  the  Aboriginal  Language, 
p.  82.     Sydney,  1850. 


26  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  languages  of  south-eastern  New  South  Wales,  where 
Mr.  Mathew  finds  a  strong  Malay  element. 

A  passage  in  Crawfurd's  Grainmar  of  the  Malay 
Language,  published  in  1852,  speaks  on  this  question  with 
authority  and  with  no  uncertain  voice.^  He  examined 
thirty  languages  from  all  the  then  discovered  parts  of 
Australia  in  quest  of  Malayan  words  without  finding  one, 
or  the  trace  of  one.  They  might  have  been  expected  in 
the  language  of  Raffles  Bay,  not  distant  from  the  trepang 
fisheries  of  the  natives  of  Celebes,  but  were  absent  from  this 
as  from  all  other  of  the  languages.  He  remarks  that, 
although  the  trepang  fishers  occasionally  see  natives  of 
Australia,  they  hold  no  intercourse  with  them,  and  from  what 
he  knew  of  the  opinions  and  prejudices  of  the  former,  he  was 
satisfied  that  they  would  no  more  think  of  a  social  intercourse 
with  them  than  with  the  kangaroo  or  wild  dogs  of  the  same 
country. 

The  trepang  fishers  here  spoken  of  are  the  Bugis,  a 
Malayan  people,  who  form  the  principal  nation  of  the  Island 
of  Celebes,"  of  whom  M'Gillivray  says  that  two  years  after 
the  foundation  of  the  English  settlement  at  Raffles  Bay 
they  had  taken  advantage  of  the  protection  of  Europeans 
to  carry  on  the  trepang  fishery  there.^ 

These  remarks  are  confirmed  by  Captain  Stokes,*  who 
says,  speaking  of  Raffles  Bay,  that  six  Malay  proas  came 
in,  followed  by  others,  soliciting  permission  to  erect  their 
establishments  for  curing  trepang  under  the  protection  of 
the  British  flag,  now  for  the  first  time  secure  from  the 
attacks  of  the  natives,  whose  hostility  had  until  then  forced 
every  other  man  of  them  to  keep  under  arms  whilst  the 
rest  worked. 

The  visits  of  the  Bugis  to  the  north  coast  of  Australia 
appear  to  have  been  far  more  numerous  annually  than 
might  have  been  suspected.  Mr.  Earl,  writing  in  1837^  of 
these  very  people,  says  that  they  visited   the  northern  shore 

'  Crawfurd,  John,  Grammar  and  Dictiotiary  of  the  Malay  Language,  with  a 
Preliminary  Dissertation.     London,  1852.  ^  Op.  cit.  p.  ccvi. 

3  Op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  141.  *  Op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  388. 

^  Earl,  Geo.  Windsor,  The  Eastern  Seas :  Voyages  and  Adventures  in  the 
Malay  Archipelago  in  1832-33-34,  p.  390.      London,  1837. 


I 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  27 

of  New  Holland  annually  with  from  "80  to  100  praus," 
and  that  their  trepang  and  tortoise-shell  fishing  afforded 
employment  for  1000  men. 

If  this  may  be  taken  as  having  been  a  custom  of  long 
continuance,  one  might  reasonably  expect  not  only  that 
there  should  be  a  strong  Malay  (Bugi  ?)  cross  in  the  tribes 
inhabiting  the  coast  from  Clarence  Strait  to  Raffles  Bay, 
but  that  there  should  be  found  a  strong  Malay  element  in 
the  language  of  these  aborigines.  But  from  the  quotations 
which  I  have  given,  the  relations  of  the  two  peoples  appear 
not  to  have  been  always  friendly,  and  this  may  account  for 
the  absence  of  words  of  Malay  origin  in  this  very  part  of 
Australia  where  Mr.  Mathew  says  we  might  expect  to,  but 
do  not,  find  them.^ 

It  seems  that  all  that  can  perhaps  be  properly  said 
as  to  the  influence  of  Malays  (Bugis)  upon  the  Australian 
languages  is  that  on  the  north  coast,  limited  probably  to  the 
range  of  the  trepang,  words  might  become  naturalised  in  the 
languages  of  coast  tribes,  and  be  thence  transported  inland 
to  such  distances  as  the  interchange  of  women  as  wives  by 
those  tribes  might  extend. 

As  I  have  pointed  out,  three  of  the  twelve  words 
identified  by  Mr.  Mathew  as  Malayan  are  found,  on  reference 
to  Dr.  Codrington's  work  on  the  Melanesian  languages,  to 
be  also  Melanesian.  Dr.  Codrington  shows  conclusively  that 
the  elements  which  are  common  to  them  and  the  Malay 
have  not  been  derived  from  the  latter,  but  are  common  to 
all  the  ocean  languages,  from  the  Malagasy  in  the  west  to 
the  Hawaiian  in  the  east  and  the  Maori  in  the  south.  He 
says,  further,  that  this  indicates  an  original  oceanic  stock 
language,  from  which  the  Polynesian,  Melanesian,  and  Malay 
tongues  have  derived  their  common  elements,  which  is  now 
extinct  and  of  which  the  Malay  is  one  of  the  younger 
descendants.  The  presence  of  certain  common  words  in  the 
ancient  ocean  languages  testifies  that  the  speakers  made 
canoes,  built  houses,  cultivated  gardens,  before  the  time  when 
their  posterity  branched  off  on  their  way  to  Madagascar 
and  Fiji." 

'  Op.  cit.  p.  377.  •■'  op.  cit.  pp.  II,  26,  31,  78. 


28  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

« 

Such  being  the  case,  the  primitive  home  of  those  speakers 
of  the  "  ocean  language "  may  be  supposed  to  have  been 
somewhere  in  the  Indo-Malayan  or  Austro-Malayan  regions, 
or,  perhaps,  to  speak  more  correctly,  in  the  ancient  extensions 
of  the  Asiatic  and  Austral  continents  which  they  represent. 

At  any  rate,  the  dispersal  of  the  primitive  speakers  of 
the  ocean  stock -language  must  have  been  long  after  the 
migration  of  the  Australians,  and  still  longer  after  that  of 
the  Tasmanians. 

It  seems,  however,  not  a  little  remarkable  that  the 
migrations  of  the  offshoot,  which  is  now  represented  by  the 
Melanesians,  should  have  extended  from  New  Guinea,  or 
perhaps  from  a  point  further  west,  around  and  beyond  but 
not  touching  Australia. 

Compared  with  the  sea  distances  which  must  have  been 
passed  over  (since  the  common  stock-language  proves  that 
they  were  acquainted  with  canoes)  before  reaching  Fiji,  the 
stretches  of  sea  between  Timor  and  Australia,  and  New 
Guinea  and  Australia,  must  have  been  comparatively 
insignificant. 

At  any  rate  it  would  seem  that  Torres  Strait  separated 
the  Papuans  from  the  Australians  almost  as  effectually  as 
Bass  Strait  separated  the  latter  from  the  Tasmanians. 

The  Melanesians  occupy  a  vast  insular  extent,  touching 
New  Guinea  at  the  one  end  and  Fiji  at  the  other,  and 
probably  represent  the  older  race  on  which  the  Papuans 
have  intruded. 

It  seems  not  unreasonable  to  consider  these  facts  as 
indicating  migrations  of  three  branches  of  mankind  in 
successive  stages  of  ethnical  development  and  culture. 

If  the  Australians  migrated  from  the  north-west  by  way 
of  New  Guinea,  as  I  have  suggested,  it  may  be  that  they 
brought  with  them  some  elements  of  language  common  to 
the  ancient  oceanic  stock-language,  to  crop  out  here  and 
there  in  the  Australian  speech  as  words  having  a  resemblance 
to  Malay. 

But,  it  appears  to  me,  there  must  be  very  grave  doubts 
as  to  the  Malayan  element  in  the  Australian  aborigines  as 
formulated  by  Mr.  Mathew. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  29 

Deducting,  therefore,  the  hypothetical  Malay  ethnical 
element,  which,  if  it  exists  at  all,  may  be  considered  as 
merely  local  in  Northern  Australia,  there  is  yet  a  limited 
Papuan  or  Melanesian  element  in  Northern  or  North-eastern 
Australia,  which  cannot  be  altogether  attributed  to  the 
original  cross  of  the  primitive  Tasmanians. 

I  was  much  struck,  when  comparing  some  men  from 
Prince  of  Wales  Island  with  other  men  from  the  Cloncurry 
River,  on  the  mainland,  by  the  marked  Papuan  character  of 
the  former,  and  the  marked  Australian  character  of  the 
latter.  The  intermixture  through  friendly  intercourse 
between  the  Kaurarega  of  Prince  of  Wales  Island  and 
the  Gudang  of  Cape  York  is  well  known. 

Deducting  these  various  elements,  the  apparent  strong 
cross  of  the  Tasmanian  stock,  and  the  certainly  small 
admixture  on  the  northern  coast  due  to  visits  by  the  Bugis 
and  the  Papuan  Islanders,  there  remains  a  large  residuum 
to  which  the  distinctiveness  of  the  Australian  type  may 
be  attributed. 

To  which  of  the  great  divisions  of  the  human  family  may 
this  Au.stralian  stock,  on  which  the  Tasmanian  scion  has 
been  grafted,  be  assigned  ?  Here  is  a  difficult  problem  ; 
but  this  much  may  with  safety  be  asserted,  it  is  not 
Ethiopic  or  Mongolian,  and  leaving  out  the  American 
stocks,  which  can  scarcely  be  seriously  considered,  there 
remains  only  the  so-called  Caucasian  as  the  great  division 
to  v.'hich  the  primitive  type  of  the  Australian  may  be 
referred. 

In  considering  all  the  facts  before  me  bearing  upon  the 
cjuestion  of  the  origin  of  the  Tasmanians  and  the  Australians, 
I  have  been  much  impressed  by  the  immense  periods  of 
time  which  seem  to  be  essential  to  any  solution  of  the 
problem. 

•  The  level  of  culture  of  the  Tasmanians  has  been  termed 
by  Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor  "  Eolithic,"  ^  and  that  of  the  Australians 
probably  stands  in  the  Neolithic,  if  not  as  regards  some 
tribes  on  the  border  between  that  and  the  Paleolithic 
age. 

»   Op.  cit. 


30         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  tribes  of  the  Barcoo  Delta  were,  when  I  knew  them, 
still  in  their  completely  savage  condition  forty  years  ago, 
and  they  used  roughly-chipped  flints  either  held  in  the  hand 
or  fastened. in  handles  with  sinews  and  gum.  This  was, 
however,  not  from  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  Australian 
form  of  ground  and  polished  hatchets,  since  they  obtained 
such  by  barter  from  the  hill  tribes  to  the  south,  but  because 
their  country  did  not  supply  the  material  of  which  such 
hatchets  were  made. 

The  level  of  culture  of  the  Australians  cannot  be  con- 
sidered lower  than  that  of  the  ancestral  stock  from  which 
they  separated,  and  their  language  discloses  nothing  that 
can  point  to  a  former  knowledge  of  the  arts  higher  than 
that  of  the  present  time,  in  their  natural  savage  state. 

It  has  been  and  still  is  frequently  assumed  that  there 
is  an  ethnical  relationship  between  the  Australians  and  the 
Dravidian  tribes  of  the  Hindostan  peninsula,  and  therefore 
this  requires  some  special  attention. 

To  connect  the  Australians  with  the  Dravidians  in  the 
manner  commonly  done  seems  to  entirely  overlook  some 
es.sential  elements  of  the  problem.  These  require  that  the 
original  parent  stock  of  the  former  existed  far  back  in 
prehistoric  or  even  in  Pleistocene  time,  when  the  physical 
geography  of  the  Asiatic  and  Austral  continents  and  the 
racial  character  and  distribution  of  the  peoples  inhabiting 
them  must  have  differed  very  materially  from  those  of  the 
present  time. 

Therefore,  any  ethnical  or  linguistic  connection  between 
the  Australians  and  the  Dravidians  must  be  considered  to 
be  merely  the  relationship  of  two  tribes  co-descendants  from 
a  common  and  distant  ancestral  stock. 

I  should  be  most  unwilling  to  appear  to  underrate  the 
great  services  which  the  science  of  philology  is  capable  of 
rendering  to  anthropology  ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  its 
professors  are,  unfortunately,  not  always  possessed  of  that 
scientific  caution  which  is  so  essential  in  all  ethnological  or 
anthropological  inquiries.  In  Europe  this  has  been  shown 
by  the  results  of  the  Aryan  controversy  ;  and  it  is  sincerely 
to  be  hoped  that  no  analogous  results  may  be  experienced 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  31 

here  through  attempts  to  solve  the  Australian   problem  by 
the  aid  of  philology  alone. 

That  science  is  merely  one  of  the  components  of  the 
comprehensive  science  of  anthropology,  and  is,  therefore, 
incapable  alone  of  being  a  safe  guide  when  attempting  a 
solution  of  so  complicated  a  problem  as  the  origin  of  the 
aborigines  of  Tasmania  and  Australia. 

The  various  provisional  conclusions  to  which  I  have  so 
far  been  led  will  now  admit  of  my  advancing  a  step  further 
in  this  inquiry  and  attempting  to  indicate  what  appears  to 
be  the  most  probable  origin  of  the  Tasmanians  and 
Australians. 

Of  all  the  attempted  solutions  of  this  problem,  that 
which  has  been  offered  by  Sir  VV.  H.  Flower  and  Mr.  R. 
Lydekker  *  appears  to  me  most  nearly  to  fit  in  with  the 
requirements  of  this  case.  They  suggest  that  Australia  was 
originally  peopled  by  frizzly-haired  Melanesians,  such  as  the 
Tasmanians,  but  that  there  was  a  strong  infusion  of  some 
other  race,  probably  a  low  form  of  Caucasian  Melanochroi. 
As  to  the  identification  of  the  Tasmanians  with  the  Melan- 
esians, we  find  that  Mr.  H.  Ling  Roth  has  recorded  certain 
conclusions,  based  upon  the  mass  of  data  collected  and  dis- 
cussed by  him  in  his  work  on  The  Aborigines  of  Tasmania. 
Among  others  there  is  one  which  may  be  well  accepted  as 
agreeing  with  the  weight  of  evidence,  namely,  that  the 
Tasmanians  were  more  closely  related  to  the  Andaman 
Islanders  than  to  any  other  race." 

This  would  place  them  among  the  Oceanic  Negritos,  who 
are  now  found  scattered  in  small  tribes  from  the  Andaman 
Islands  to  the  Philippines  and  New  Guinea,"^  and  not  among 
the  later  Melanesians. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  all  these  scattered  Oceanic  Negritos 
appear  to  be  mere  survivals  of  a  former  widespread  autoch- 
thonous race,  which  have  been  preserved  either  in  inac- 
cessible parts  of  Malaysia,  like  the  Samangs  of  the   Malay 

*  Flower,    \V.    H.,    and    Lydekker,  R.,    An   Introduction  to   the   Study  of 

Mammals^  Living  and  Extinct,  p.  748.  London,  1 89 1, 
a  Op.  cit.  p.  351. 
3  Keane,  A.  H.,  Ethnology,  p.  254.     Cambridge  Series,  1896. 


32  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Peninsula  and  the  now  extinct  Kalangs  of  Java,  or  isolated 
in  islands,  and,  like  the  Tasmanians  and  the  Andamanese, 
have  been  cut  off  by  subsidence  of  parts  of  a  former  continent. 

While  it  may  be  accepted  that  the  present  distribution 
of  the  Oceanic  Negritos  indicates  a  primitive  population 
spread  over  Malaysia,  or  rather  inhabiting  the  former  southern 
extension  of  the  Indo-Asiatic  continent,  it  does  not  neces- 
sarily follow  that  they  all  represent  the  same  branch  of  the 
primitive  stock,  but  rather,  more  or  less,  nearly  successive 
offshoots. 

As  to  the  Melanesians,  Dr.  Codrington's  argument,  which 
I  have  already  quoted,  may  be  again  referred  to,  in  so  far 
that  the  stock  from  which  they  have  branched  off  must  have 
been  acquainted  with  (sea -going)  canoes,  houses,  and  the 
cultivation  of  gardens  ;  therefore  those  ancient  Melanesians, 
being  in  a  far  higher  level  of  culture,  could  not  have  been 
the  progenitors  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Tasmanians. 

It  seems  to  me  also  permissible  to  distinguish  the  Tas- 
manians and  Andamanese  from  tribes  such  as  the  Samangs 
and  Kalangs,  and  on  these  grounds  I  would  suggest  the 
following  tentative  hypothesis  : — 

An  original  Negrito  population,  as  represented  by  the 
wild  tribes  of  Malaysia  ;  a  subsequent  offshoot,  represented 
by  the  Andamanese  and  Tasmanians  ;  and  another  offshoot,  in 
a  higher  state  of  culture,  originating  the  Melanesians. 

As  to  the  Australians,  I  may  say  that  the  discussion  of 
the  problem  as  to  the  origin  of  these  savages,  and  of  the 
Tasmanians,  has  led  me  to  conclusions  which  require,  as 
the  original  stock  of  the  former,  such  a  race  as  would  be 
supplied  by  the  "  low  form  of  Caucasian  Melanochroi "  sug- 
gested by  Sir  W.  H.  Flower  and  Mr.  Lydekker.  From  such 
a  stock  the  Dravidians  may  be  also  thought  to  have  been  in 
part  derived. 

Here  and  there  in  Asia  are  sporadic  groups  of  people, 
characterised  by  black  hair  and  dark  eyes,  with  a  skin  of 
almost  all  shades  from  white  to  black,  frequently  with  profuse 
beards  and  body  hair,  and  being  in  many  cases  in  a  condition 
of  low  savages,^  such  as  the  Veddahs  of  Ceylon,  the  Hairy 
^  Keane,  A.  H.,  op.  cit.  p.  418. 


I  ABORIGINES  OF  TASMANIA  AND  AUSTRALIA  33 

Ainus  of  Japan,  the  Maoutze  of  China,  and  perhaps  the 
Todas  of  India. 

This  stock  might  have  given  the  characters  of  the  hair 
to  the  otherwise  negroid  primitive  inhabitants  of  Australia, 
and  also  certain  peculiarities  of  feature  which  are  occasionally- 
observed,  and  which  are  evidently  and  certainly  not  negroid 
in  character. 

I  have  said  before,  and  desire  to  repeat,  that  the  con- 
clusions to  which  I  have  been  led  as  to  the  origin  of  the 
Tasmanians  and  Australians  necessarily  demand  a  vast 
antiquity  on  the  Australian  continent  for  the  former  and  a 
very  long  period  of  at  least  prehistoric  time  for  the  latter. 

In  dealing  with  the  origin  of  the  aborigines  of  Tasmania 
and  Australia  I  have  attempted  the  solution  of  a  most 
difficult  problem.  I  have  looked  at  the  questions  arising 
out  of  it  from  more  than  one  standpoint,  and  I  have  thereby 
been  led  to  conclusions  which  contradict  the  views  held  and 
enunciated  by  fellow-workers  whose  opinions  are  deserving 
of  respectful  consideration. 

All  that  I  claim  is,  that  I  have  offered  what  seems  to  me 
to  be  a  reasonably  probable  tentative  hypothesis,  based 
upon  known  facts. 

My  views  will  be  accepted  or  rejected  by  competent 
authorities  according  as  they  stand  the  test  of  criticism,  of 
time,  and  of  the  accumulation  of  further  knowledge. 

The  conclusions  to  which  this  inquiry  has  led  me  may 
be  doubtless  modified  by  increased  knowledge  of  new  facts  ; 
but  I  venture  to  think,  with  some  confidence,  that  the 
antiquity  of  occupation  which  I  have  postulated  for  the 
aborigines  of  both  Australia  and  Tasmania  in  this  continent 
will  not  be  lessened. 


D 


CHAPTER    II 

THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION 

Physical  features  of  the  country — Climatic  conditions — Definition  of  word  "  tribe  " 
— Divisions  of  the  triln:  —  The  local  and  social  organisations — Lake  Eyre 
tribes — Darling  River  tribes — Murray  River  trilK-s — Tribes  of  North-Wcstern 
Victoria — Wiradjuri  and  Kamilaroi — Queensland  tribes — Coast  tribes  of 
South  Australia  and  Victoria  -The  Kurnai  of  Gippsland — Tableland  tribes 
— The  Biduelli  trilie— The  coast  tribes  of  New  South  Wales — Queensland 
coast  tribes. 

As  the  title  of  this  work  implies,  the  area  included  within  its 
scope  is  about  one-quarter  of  the  Australian  continent.  It 
extends  on  the  north  to  near  the  tropic  of  Capricorn,  and 
on  the  south  is  bordered  by  the  Southern  and  Pacific  Oceans 
connected  by  Bass  Strait.  This  tract  has  a  great  range 
both  of  climate  and  temperature,  from  the  dry  continuous 
heat  of  Central  Australia,  to  the  severe  winter  climate  of  the 
Australian  Alps,  and  the  warm  moisture  of  the  coast  lands. 
The  most  striking  features  of  this  part  of  Australia  are  the 
Dividing  Range  and  the  vast  plains  of  the  interior,  through 
which  the  rivers,  which  rise  on  the  inland  fall  of  the  Divid- 
ing Range,  wind  their  tortuous  course,  in  two  great  river 
systems,  the  one  to  the  Southern  Ocean,  and  the  other  to 
Lake  Eyre,  in  Central  Australia,  where  such  water  as  can 
find  its  way  there  evaporates. 

The  sources  of  the  Murray,  which  with  its  great  tributary 
the  Darling  flows  to  the  Southern  Ocean,  rise  along  the 
Dividing  Range  for  a  distance  of  over  a  thousand  miles. 
Those  of  the  Thomson  and  Barcoo,  which  lower  down  form 
Cooper's  Creek,  extend  along  the  Dividing  Range  for  a 
further  distance  of  three  hundred   miles.      The  rivers  which 

34 


CHAP.  II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  35 

rise  on  the  other  side  of  the  Divide  have  short  but  vigorous 
courses  to  the  sea. 


The  Coastal  Districts 

It  is  in  the  coastal  districts  that  one  finds  the  most 
favourable  conditions  for  the  native  tribes,  though  at  the 
head  of  the  Great  Australian  Bight  the  desert  extends  nearly 
to  the  sea,  for  the  Nullarbor  Plains  are  waterless,  and  beyond 
them  the  desert,  to  where  Sturt  Creek  ends  in  the  northern 
parts  of  West  Australia.  Yet  the  Yerkla-mining  people  who 
live  there  are  better  off  than  those  who  inhabit  the  desert, 
having  not  only  the  land,  but  also  the  sea,  from  which  to 
procure  food.  The  advantages  of  the  coast  lands  increase 
on  coming  eastwards  ;  and  from  the  Gulf  of  St.  Vincent  the 
country  afforded  ample  food  supplies,  from  the  lakes  at  the 
Murray  mouth  and  the  country  bordering  upon  them  and 
the  sea.  Still  more  favourable  conditions  existed  in  Victoria, 
and  especially  in  Gippsland,  where  again  extensive  lakes  and 
adjacent  country  afforded  an  unfailing  supply  of  fish  and 
game.  The  tribes  of  the  New  South  Wales  coast  enjoyed 
similar  advantages,  the  principal  difference  being  that  the 
climate  becomes  warmer  on  proceeding  northwards,  and  the 
food  supplies  more  varied  in  character,  until  on  the  Queens- 
land coast  the  tropical  influence  is  met  with.  For  instance, 
where  the  scope  of  my  work  ends,  the  blacks  hunt  the  tree 
kangaroo,  and  ponds  and  lagoons  furnish  edible  plants  in 
abundance.  The  high  mountains  of  the  Dividing  Range, 
which  commences  in  Central  Victoria,  and  its  accompanying 
tablelands,  extend  northwards  the  whole  length  of  the  coast. 
In  many  parts  they  isolated  the  tribes  of  the  coast  from 
those  inland,  though  there  were  tracks  here  and  there  by 
which  friendly  meetings  or  hostile  raids  took  place  between 
some  of  the  tribes.  The  character  of  the  coastal  country 
itself  also  frequently  isolated  the  tribes  to  some  extent  from 
their  immediate  neighbours. 


36  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


Character  of  South  Australia 

There  is  no  Dividing  Range  in  South  Australia,  and 
hence  its  climate  has  not  the  marked  distinctions  which 
arise  in  Victoria,  New  South  Wales,  and  Queensland  from 
the  existence  of  a  high  mountainous  tract  near  the  sea  and  a 
depressed  low-lying  interior.  Two  ranges  of  hills  are  met 
with  running  in  a  northerly  direction  :  the  first,  the  Mount 
Lofty  Range,  runs  from  the  coast  west  of  the  Murray  mouth, 
while  the  second  commences  at  the  head  of  Spencer  Gulf, 
and  as  the  Hinders  Range  continues  in  a  picturesque  chain 
to  near  Lake  Blanch,  south-east  of  Lake  Eyre.  But  these 
ranges  have  no  resemblance  to  the  great  forest-covered 
mountain  ranges  of  the  eastern  coast  of  the  continent. 

The  Tablelands 

Throughout  its  whole  length  in  Queensland  and  New 
South  Wales  the  Dividing  Range  closely  agrees,  in  direction, 
with  that  of  a  series  of  tablelands,  which  in  the  former 
State  rise  to  a  height  of  i  500  feet  above  the  sea-level  at  the 
sources  of  the  Belyando  River,  with  a  width  of  about  one 
hundred  miles,  while  further  south  on  the  Darling  Downs  the 
width  of  the  plateau  is  two  hundred.  In  New  South  Wales 
there  are  three  such  plateaux,  called  the  Northern  Table- 
land, rising  to  a  height  of  5000  feet  at  Ben  Lomond,  the 
Central  Tableland,  including  the  Blue  Mountains  (Mount 
Beemering,  4100  feet),  and  the  Southern  Tableland,  which 
ends  at  the  Victorian  border,  rising  in  Mount  Kosciusko  to  the 
altitude  of  8308  feet.  In  Victoria  the  tablelands  are  much 
broken  up  by  the  cutting  back  of  the  rivers  on  either  side  of 
the  Divide,  so  that  in  some  places  there  is  merely  a  single 
narrow  steep  ridge  separating  the  waters  that  flow  on  one 
side  direct  to  Bass  Strait,  and  on  the  other  into  the  Murray; 
while  the  isolated  plateaux  are  situated  on  one  or  the  other 
side  of  the  Divide. 

It  must  be  remarked  that  there  were  tribes  of  natives 
who  regularly  inhabited  these  mountain  tablelands,  with  the 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  37 

exception  of  the  highest  parts  of  the  south  of  New  South 
Wales  and  Victoria,  which  tracts,  however,  they  visited  yearly 
as  soon  as  the  inhospitable  snows  of  winter  had  melted. 


The  Western  Fall 

The  fall  inland  from  the  tablelands  is  much  more  gradual 
than  that  towards  the  sea,  the  hilly  country  becomes  lower, 
the  plain  country  wider,  and  at  last  the  great  levels  of  the 
interior  are  reached.  The  tribes  who  occupied  the  inter- 
mediate position  between  those  living  in  the  hot  dry  districts 
of  Central  Australia,  and  those  who  inhabited  the  tablelands 
and  coast  regions,  lived  under  much  more  favourable 
conditions  than  the  former.  They  had  a  better  rainfall,  and 
from  the  waters  of  the  Thomson,  Barcoo,  Darling,  Murray, 
and  numerous  other  more  or  less  permanent  streams  and 
surrounding  country  obtained  supplies  of  fish  and  game. 
The  tribes  in  Northern  Victoria  were  in  the  same  position. 
The  south-western  country  in  Queensland  consists  chiefly 
of  plains  crossed  occasionally  by  low  sandstone  ridges  and 
merging  into  vast  tracts  subject  to  inundation,  as  well  as 
sandhill  country  which  in  normal  seasons  is  arid,  and  in  times 
of  drought  little  better  than  a  desert. 


Central  Australia 

Central  Australia  may  be  described  as  the  lower  part  of 
a  shallow  basin  into  which  the  drainage,  when  there  is  any, 
flows  to  Lake  Eyre.  Here  and  there  out  of  the  vast 
stretches  of  open  country  there  arise  at  distant  intervals 
isolated  masses  of  rock,  such  as  Mount  Olga,  or  the  remains 
of  the  desert  sandstone  show  as  lines  of  flat-topped  hills. 
The  lower  country  is  either  successive  sand  ridges,  extend- 
ing for  long  distances,  sometimes  as  at  Lake  Hope,  a 
hundred  changeless  miles,  or  there  are  what  are  called 
Gibber  plains,  which  are  well  described  by  Spencer  and 
Gillen  as  follows  : — "  On  these  Gibber  plains  the  ground  is 
covered    with    brown    and    purple    stones,    often    set    close 


38  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA     ch.ii 

together  as  if  they  formed  a  tesselated  pavement  stretching  to 
the  horizon."  ^ 

The  ch'matic  conditions  in  Central  Austrah'a  may  be 
described  as  having  a  minimum  of  rainfall  with  a  con- 
tinuation of  high  temperature  for  many  months,  though  in 
the  winter  nights  the  thermometer  may  fall  below  freezing- 
point.  But  the  most  important  climatic  features  are  long- 
continued  times  of  drought,  when  nature  is  locked  up  and 
the  native  tribes  are  using  all  their  magical  powers  to 
produce  the  rain  which  will  turn  the  desert  into  a  veritable 
garden.  Whenever,  at  long  intervals,  great  inundations  are 
poured  down  by  the  rivers,  wide  plains  of  dried  mud,  usually 
cracked  and  fissured  in  all  directions,  become  saturated  with 
water.  Then  nature,  which  has  been  imprisoned  by  the 
drought,  bursts  forth  in  luxuriant  vegetation  such  as  no  one 
can  picture  who  has  not  seen  it. 


Rainfall 

The  following  table  of  observations  of  the  mean  annual 
rainfall  taken  at  places  between  Lake  Eyre  and  the  southern 
and  eastern  coasts  shows  how  the  rainfall  increases  as  the 
coast  is  approached. 

'  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia^  pp.  70-73. 


[Table 


w 


oS 


«S  o  8 


'.2  °    " 

S  u  C3  c/T 


:5  e  S    • 
s  —   2  Ji 

^.  n  n  u 


.i<5  73  K  »<; 


N    lO  On  On 


«<    2 


TO  *- 

s  s  &  « 

™    SS  S  T3 

rt  •«  ^  .2 

c  =  ti  « 


Mean 

of 
Years. 

i    1 

e 

ro  N    0    N 
^  PO  O  vO 

»0  lA  0>  N 
-    N  VO 

Innaminka  . 
CunnamuUa 
Warwick 
South  Port. 

rt   V 


.£•>       S 

£  -  <«  -^ 

rt     m     U     £* 


hi 


CS 

.-^ 

.:< 

% 

0 

u 

>, 

E 

rt 

c 
c 

MN 

re 

^ 

u 

«s 

«5 

«c  » 


T3    O 


tt>    <tf 

.S  ^ 
I!  £ 

K  CI 


t5  >» 


1^ 


Ea 


■si 

c  r 


■^c3 


.S  •£ 


o 

so 

c 

»N 

S^ 

JS 

m 

•T3 

rS 

f 

c 
c 

1 

3^ 


40 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


I  am  indebted  to  the  Government  Astronomers  of  New 
South  Wales,  Victoria,  South  Austraha,  and  Queensland  for 
the  above  particulars. 

This  increase  in  rainfall  means  that  the  tribes  enjoying 
it  lead  an  easier  life,  which  condition  has  probably  assisted 
them  in  making  the  social  advance  which  I  shall  show  later 

on  has  taken  place, 
especially  in  those 
tribes  living  on  the 
coast. 

As  an  indication 
of  relative  climates,  I 
may  point  out  that 
the  tribes  of  Central 
Australia  had  no  kind 
of  clothing;  I  only  saw 
one  instance  of  a 
covering  being  worn 
in  the  tribes  of  the 
Delta  of  the  Cooper, 
that  of  a  woman  suffer- 
ing from  disease  who 
sheltered  herself  under 
;i  single  pelican  skin. 
The  tribes  who  lived  in 
the  intermediate  parts, 
and  particularly  those 
of  the  tablelands  and 
coastal  regions,  made 
good  rugs  of  opossum 
and  other  skins,  Which  they  used  for  both  warmth  and 
covering  when  necessary — at  other  times  going  naked. 

Such,  then,  is  the  country  in  which  the  tribes  of  South- 
Eastem  Australia  have  been  living  for  ages,  as  part  of  an 
isolated  aboriginal  race  free  from  disturbing  external  influ- 
ences, and  left  to  work  out  its  social  life. 


-KLRNAI    MAN    WEARING    OPOSSUM    KUG. 


11  the  tribal  organisation  41 

Definition  of  Tribe 

I  use  the  word  "  tribe  "  as  meaning  a  number  of  people 
who  occupy  a  definite  tract  of  country,  who  recognise  a 
common  relationship  and  have  a  common  speech,  or  dialects 
of  the  same.  The  tribes-people  recognise  some  common 
bond  which  distinguishes  them  from  other  tribes,  usually  a 
tribal  name,  which  may  be  their  word  for  "  man,"  that  is,  an 
aboriginal  of  Australia. 

In  such  cases  there  is  a  prefix  or  postfix  meaning  "people" 
or  "tribe";  thus  the  Wotjo  are  collectively  called  Wotjo-baluk, 
that  is  to  say,  "  tribe  of  men."  Or  the  name  may  be  derived 
from  the  word  in  their  language  for  "  no "  or  "  yes,"  more 
frequently  the  former,  as  with  the  Wocworung  of  the  Yarra 
River  in  Victoria,  IVoi'  meaning  "  no,"  and  the  postfix  Worung 
"  lip,"  hence  "  speech." 

But  while  individual  tribes  are  thus  distinguished  from 
others,  there  are  numerous  cases  in  which  the  word  for 
*'  man  "  is  common  to  the  languages  of  a  considerable  number 
of  more  or  less  nearly  related  tribes,  indicating  a  larger 
aggregate,  for  which,  in  default  of  a  better  term,  I  use  the 
word  "  nation."  For  instance,  the  word  "  Kulin  "  (man)  was 
used  by  tribes  over  most  of  the  eastern  half  of  Victoria,  with 
the  exception  of  Gippsland. 

A  distinction  is  drawn  by  tribes  between  themselves  and 
aliens  by  some  term  applied  to  the  latter,  either  of  contempt 
or  fear.  Thus  while  the  Kurnai  speak  of  themselves  as 
"men,"  they  give  the  name  of  Brajerak,  from  fini,  "man,"  and 
jerak,  "  rage  "  or  "  anger,"  to  their  neighbours,  the  Theddora 
of  the  Omeo  tableland,  the  Ngarigo  of  the  Manero  table- 
land, and  Murring  of  the  south  coast  of  New  South  Wales. 

Those  living  in  the  Western  Port  district  of  Victoria 
they  called  Thurung  or  tiger -snakes,  because,  as  I  have 
heard  them  say,  "  they  came  sneaking  about  to  kill  us." 

Divisions  of  the  Community 

In  all  the  native  tribes  of  Australia  there  are  geographical 
divisions  of  the  community  determined   by  locality,  and  also 


42  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

divisions  of  the  tribe  on  which  the  marriage  regulations  are 
based.  The  former  are  distinguished  by  certain  local  names, 
while  the  latter  are  denoted  by  class  names,  or  totems,  and 
more  frequently  by  both  class  names  and  totems. 

In  the  aggregate  of  the  whole  community  these  two  sets 
of  divisions  are  conterminous,  but  under  female  descent  no 
division  of  the  one  set  is  conterminous  with  any  division  of 
the  other.  That  is  to  say,  the  people  of  any  given  locality 
are  not  all  of  the  same  class  or  totem,  nor  are  the  people  of 
any  one  class  or  totem  collected  in  the  same  locality.  This 
is  the  rule  where  descent  is  in  the  female  line,  but  when  the 
line  of  descent  has  changed  to  that  through  males,  we  find 
cases  in  which  all  the  people  in  a  certain  locality  have  come 
to  bear  the  same  class  name  and  totem. 


The  Local  and  Social  Organisations 

Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  Australian  aborigines  are 
divided  into  tribes  which  are  organised  on  certain  lines  in 
two  independent  directions.  One  I  have  termed  the  "  local  " 
and  the  other  the  "  social  "  organisation,  and  since  this  is  a 
matter  of  great  importance,  I  deem  it  worthy  of  special 
consideration. 

An  entire  community,  tribe,  nation,  or  whatever  it  may 
be  termed,  is  divided  socially  into  two  exogamous  intermarry- 
ing moieties,  which  for  shortness  may  be  designated  A  and  B. 
In  some  parts  of  Australia  these  two  principal  moieties  or 
classes  have  become  divided,  each  into  two  sub-classes.  In 
Central  and  Northern  Australia  there  has  been  a  further 
division  of  the  sub-classes,  resulting  in  eight  sub-classes,^  and 
the  same  process  has  taken  place  in  Northern  Queensland." 

To  the  classes  and  sub-classes  together,  or  to- the  latter 
only  without  the  former,  a  number  of  lesser  groups  are 
attached,  having  the  names  of  material  objects,  even  of 
natural  phenomena,  for  which  the  term  "  totem "  is 
appropriate.      But   as    their   sum    only   equals    A  and    B,    I 

1   Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  pp.  70-73. 
2  Dr.  W.  E.  Roth. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  43 

need  not  take  them  into  account  at  the  present  time.      They 
will  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  chapter. 

It  is  this  systematic  division  of  the  tribe  which  was 
called  by  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  and  myself  "  the  social 
organisation."  ^ 

As  I  have  said,  the  tribe  is  also  divided  into  a  number 
of  lesser  groups,  say  X,  Y,  Z,  etc.  (I  take  these  for  the  sake 
of  convenience,  but  there  may  be  many  more);  these  divisions 
of  the  tribe  are  local,  and  therefore  differ  essentially  from 
the  classes  or  totems,  which  are  groups  of  the  social 
organisation.  In  order  to  prevent  confusion  between  the 
lesser  division  of  each  of  these  different  organisations  of 
the  tribe,  the  term  "  clan  "  is  used  for  the  subdivision  of  a 
tribe  which  has  descent  in  the  male  line,  and  "  horde "  for 
that  in  which  there  is  female  descent.  The  clan  and  the 
horde  are  each  therefore  a  geographical  division  of  a  tribe. 

Thus  the  local  organisations,  X,  Y,  Z,  etc.,  are  made 
up  of  individuals  belonging  to  both  A  and  H.  The  children 
of  the  horde  belong  to  the  horde,  e.g.  the  children  of  X 
males  are  of  X  horde  and  so  forth,  but  since  A  (male)  must 
marry  B  (female)  with  descent  in  the  female  line,  the  son  of 
X  is  XB.  In  other  words,  the  son  is  of  the  father's  horde 
and  tribe,  but  of  the  mother's  totem  and  class  ;  of  the  local 
division  to  which  the  father  belongs,  but  of  the  mother's 
social  division.  In  extreme  cases,  where  descent  has  come 
to  be  in  the  male  line,  the  hordes  or  clans  as  well  as  the 
social  divisions  are  found  to  be  exogamous  ;  the  exogamic 
law  has,  seemingly,  passed  over  from  the  social  to  the 
local  division,  which  therefore  in  such  cases  regulates 
marriage.  It  is  as  if  an  English  village  had  determined 
that  its  children  should  marry  beyond  its  bounds,  the  sons 
bringing  their  wives  to  the  village,  while  the  daughters  went 
to  the  villages  whence  their  brothers  took  their  wives.  In 
illustration  of  these  statements  I  shall  give  instances,  com- 
mencing with  the  Dieri,  which  is  one  of  the  socially  back- 
ward standing  tribes  ;  going  through  the  tribes  in  a  socially 
progressive  series,  until  the  end  is  reached,  with  tribes  of 
which  the  Kurnai  are  an  example.  In  this  way  I  hope  to 
•  "On  the  Deme  and  the  \\on\c,"  Journal  AtithroJ>.  lust.  November  1S84. 


44  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

be  able  not  only  to  show  the  actual  advances  made  in  the 
local  and  social  organisations,  but  also  the  character  of 
those  important  changes. 

In  order  to  make  clear  the  definition  of  the  terms  I  use, 
the  following  is  given  : — 

(i)   Nation  is  used  to  signify  a  group  of  tribes. 

(2)  Tribe  is  used  in  the  sense  given  at  p.  41. 

(3)  Horde,  the  primary  geographical  division  of  a  tribe 
having  female  descent,  for  instance,  the  Ngadi-ngani 
below. 

(4)  Clan,  the  primary  geographical  division  of  a  tribe 
with  descent  in  the  male  line,  for  instance,  the  Krauatun- 
galung. 

The  alliance  of  the  tribes  forming  the  nation  comes  into 
view  on  the  occasion  of  one  of  the  great  ceremonies  being 
held  ;  all  the  tribes  which  form  the  nation  may  attend  the 
ceremonies  and  take  part  in  them,  a  bond  which  holds  the 
hordes  or  clans  of  a  tribe  together. 


Lake  Evre  Tribes 

The  Dieri  tribe  inhabits  part  of  the  Barcoo  delta  on  the 
east  and  south-east  of  Lake  Eyre,  in  Central  Australia.  It 
is  one  of  a  number  of  tribes  which  have  the  same  organisa- 
tion, with  allied  languages  and  ceremonies,  customs  and 
beliefs.  These  tribes,  though  submitting  to  the  white  man's 
supremacy,  live  their  own  lives  in  a  great  measure,  and 
follow  the  ancestral  customs  as  far  as  possible  under  changed 
conditions.  What  I  have  to  say  of  them  will  describe  what 
they  were  forty  years  ago,  when  I  knew  them  in  their  savage 
state,  and  before  their  country  was  occupied  by  the  white 
man  for  pastoral  purposes. 

The  local  division  of  the  Dieri  tribe  into  hordes  is  the 
following,  and  will  serve  as  an  example  of  that  and  other 
tribes  surrounding  Lake  Eyre. 

(i)  The  Ngadi-ngani  or  Bukatyiri  inhabited  the  country 
around  Lake  Perigundi.  The  Ngadi-ngani  connect  the 
Dieri  with   the  Yaurorka  tribe,  and  the  name   Ngadi-ngani 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  45 

is  derived  from  Ngadi,  which  affirms  the  statement  of  another 
person  without  using  the  word  meaning  "  yes."  ^ 

(2)  The  Pando-etya  or  Pandola  were  the  inhabitants  of 
the  country  around  Lake  Hope  (Bando  pirna  or  Great 
Lake). 

(3)  The  Kunari-kana,  that  is  the  Kunari  "  men,"  occupied 
the  country  around  Kopperamana  and  Killalpanina.  Kunara 
is  the  name  of  Cooper's  Creek  where  it  flows  through  the 
Kopperamana  and  Killalpanina  districts,  and  during  floods 
spreads  over  a  width  of  1 2  miles.  Pando  is  "  lake,"  and 
la  "of"  or  "from  "  a  place,  and  the  termination  etya  implies 
a  constant  inhabiting,  and  is  equivalent  to  our  terminal  "  er  " 
(Londoner). 

(4)  The  Paritiltya-kana,  that  is  the  Paritiltya  "  men," 
were  the  people  in  the  country  from  Kopperamana  north- 
wards to  the  Salt  Creek.  Paritiltya  is  derived  from />ari,  "a 
valley,"  and  tiltya^  "a  lowest  place  or  part,"  hence  meaning  the 
bottom  of  the  valley.  It  refers  to  the  habit  of  these  people 
of  fixing  their  camps  in  a  valley  close  to  the  creek  so  as  to 
be  near  the  water,  while  the  other  Dieri  camp  on  the  higher 
ground.^ 

In  former  times,  according  to  Dieri  traditions,  their 
forefathers  held  the  country  now  occupied  by  the  Won- 
kanguru,  by  whom  they  were  thrust  out — the  Wonkanguru 
having  been  themselves  expelled  from  their  country  by  the 
Wonkatyeri,  who  had  been  driven  out  by  the  Wonkamala. 
Such  tribal  changes  no  doubt  frequently  occurred  in  past 
ages. 

'  Tlie  foUowin;;  will  show  the  use  of  ngadi — 

Tanktibana  tigaldra  ninki  daiuiru  punt  ilia  nganai.  Ngadi'. 
To-morrow  morning  we-two  this  place  from  away  will.  All  lij^hl  ! 
Ngato  neyi         ngakani  nayina  warai.  ■    A[i;adi .' 

I     elder-brother     mine      seen       have.       Indeed  I 
JVau  munlya  pirna  nganai.  Ngadi ! 

He      sick       very    will  (is).      You  don't  Siiy  so  ! 
Ani  or  anai  is  the  native  termination,  and  the  ng  is  introduced  for  euphony. 
The  alternative   name   Bukatyiri    means  "wood''  or  "forest,"  Ijecause   in   the 
country  of  this  horde  the  trees  and  bushes  are  much  more  plentiful  than  in  that 
of  the  Kunari. 

'^  Professor  Spencer  tells  me  that  tiie  Puiulu  and  Kumara  always,  when  they 
can,  pitch  their  camps  on  rising  ground,  and  the  Panunga  and  Hulthara  on  low 
ground  near  a  creek,  if  one  be  present. 


46 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


(5)  The  Tirari,  who  lived  on  the  south-east  shores  of 
Lake  Eyre,  between  the  embouchures  of  Cooper's  Creek  and 
the  Clayton  River. 

These  five  hordes  of  the  Dieri  tribe  are  agfain  subdivided 


KIG.   2. — MAN    OK    THE    WONKANGUKU    TRIBE. 

locally :  for  instance,  the  Pando-etya,  who  live  at  Lake 
Hope,  are  called  Pando-pirnani  ;  while  another  subdivision 
of  the  same  horde,  located  about  Kunabura,  a  lake  some  6 
miles  to  the  westward  of  Lake  Hope,  are  called  the  Kuna- 
bura-kana,  or  men  of  Kunabura, 

In  this  manner  a  tribe  is  organised    geographically  in 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  47 

local  groups,  each  having  a  definite  tract  of  hunting  and 
food  ground,  and  the  aggregate  of  these  groups  forms  the 
tribe.  The  sons  inherit,  or  perhaps  to  speak  more  correctly 
occupy,  as  a  matter  of  birthright,  the  country  which  their 
fathers  hunted  over.  Such  is  the  local  organisation  of  a 
typical  two-class  tribe  with  descent  in  the  female  line. 

To  the  south  of  the  Dieri  were  the  Mardala,  a  hill  tribe 
inhabiting  the  terminations  of  the  Flinders  Range.  At  the 
time  when  I  became  acquainted  with  the  Dieri,  the  Mardala 
were  a  source  of  great  trouble  to  the  settlers  in  that  district, 
which  was  the  frontier  of  the  settlements.  The  leader  in 
the  attacks  on  the  settlers  was  a  Mardala  black  named 
Inabuthina,  but  better  known  to  the  whites  as  Pompey.  He 
was  a  leading  man  in  his  tribe,  but  had  to  escape  and  take 
refuge  with  the  Dieri  for  burning  huts  and  killing  white  men 
— in  other  words,  defending  his  country.  His  inveterate 
enmity  to  the  white  men  extended  to  those  blacks  who 
assisted  them  in  opening  up  the  country.  A  black  boy  of 
that  division  of  the  Dieri  tribe  which  lived  about  Blanchwater, 
and  therefore  immediately  adjoined  the  Mardala,  whom  I 
had  with  me  on  an  expedition,  was  killed  after  my  return 
by  Inabuthina  for  having  acted  as  my  guide  and  been  too 
friendly  with  the  white  men. 

Beyond  the  Mardala  there  was  a  tribe  of  the  .same 
organisation  extending  to  the  coast  at  Port  Lincoln  called 
Parnkalla. 

Extending  west  from  Port  Lincoln,  as  far  as  Point 
Brown,  and  inland  to  the  Gawler  Ranges,  is  the  Nauo  or 
Willuro  tribe.  The  Tidni  tribe,  also  called  Hilleri,  extends 
from  Point  Brown  to  the  head  of  the  Great  Australian  Bight, 
and  about  50  miles  inland. 

These  tribes  are  all  organised  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
Parnkalla,  and  therefore  belong  to  the  great  group  of  tribes 
about  Lake  Eyre. 

Extending  from  the  Tidni  tribe  up  to  the  boundaries  of 
the  southern  Urabunna,  the  Kuyani  and  the  VViranguru,  is  a 
large  tribe  known  as  the  Kukata,  and  spoken  of  by  the  Dieri 
as  a  fierce  tribe,  but  having  the  same  organisation  as  them- 
selves. 


48 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


Tribes  of  which  the  Dieri  is  an  example  surround  Lake 
Eyre,  and  extend  up  the  rivers  which  debouch  into  it  from 
the  north-west,  the  north,  and  the  north-east.  Spencer  and 
Gillen    have   given    particulars   of   the   organisation    of   the 


1  IG.    3. — MAN    OF   THE    WONKANGURU    TRIBE. 

Urabunna,  whose  northern  boundary  defines  the  extent  in 
that  direction  of  the  two-class  tribal  system.  To  the  north- 
east are  many  tribes  which  differ  but  little  from  the  Dieri, 
such  as  the  Yantruwunta,  who  occupied  Cooper's  Creek  west 
of  the  Queensland  boundary.  It  was  these  blacks  who 
hospitably    received    John    King,    the   only   survivor   of  the 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  49 

companions  of  Burke  in  his  march  across  the  continent  to 
the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria  and  back  to  Cooper's  Creek.  Tribes 
of  similar  organisation  occur  up  the  course  of  the  Barcoo  at 
least  as  far  as  Mount  Howitt,  where  the  now  extinct  Kur- 
nandaburi  lived,  about  1 20  miles  from  the  Yantruwunta 
country,  but  I  do  not  know  how  far  such  tribes  extend  into 
the  western  deserts  beyond  the  Tangara,  of  whom  I  know 
little  more  than  the  name. 


The  Darling  River  Tribes 

To  the  east  and  south-east  of  the  Dieri  country  axe  the 
Grey  and  Barrier  Ranges,  which  separate  the  tribes  I  have 
been  speaking  of  from  others,  whom  the  Yantruwunta 
described  to  me  as  being  so  stupid  that  they  "  called  a 
snake  fire,"  the  word  for  fire  in  the  Yantruwunta  language 
being  Turo,  which  in  the  other  tongue  means  carpet  snake. 

The  tribes  to  the  east  of  the  Grey  and  Barrier  Ranges 
form  two  nations,  which  with  another,  the  Barkinji,  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  Darling,  occupy  practically  the  whole  of 
its  course  from  the  Barwon  River  to  its  junction  with  the 
Murray. 

The  two  former  nations  are  the  Itchumundi  and 
Karamundi,  the  first  of  which  comprises  the  following 
tribes  : — 

(i)  Wilya,  occupying  the  country  about  the  Grey 
Ranges,  and  having  its  headquarters  about  Endeavour  Lake. 

(2)  Kongait,  north  and  south  of  Cadell's  Range,  and 
having  its  headquarters  at  Cobham  Lake. 

(3)  Tongaranka,  the  country  including  Momba,  Tarella, 
Wonominta,  Yandarle,  and  the  Daubeny  Range,  and  having 
its  headquarters  at  Momba  and  Tarella.  The  name  means 
a  hillside. 

(4)  Bulalli,  the  Barrier  Range  countrj',  having  its  head- 
quarters at  Polamacca  and  Sturt's  Meadow.  Bulalli  is  from 
bola,  "  a  hill." 

Some  of  the  tribes  forming  the  Karamundi  nation 
are  : — 


50  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

(i)  Milpulko,  on  the  Darling  frontage  from  Wilcannia 
downwards. 

(2)  Naualko,  the  Darling  frontage  from  Wilcannia  up- 
wards to  about  70  miles  below  Bourke  and  extending  back 
towards  the  Paroo  River. 

(3)  Guerno.  Thence  up  the  river  to  Bourke,  and  ex- 
tending up  the  Warrego  to  about  Ford's  Bridge. 

(4)  Barrumbinya,  from  Bourke  up  to  the  Barvvon  River. 
There  are  three  other  tribes  which  I  have  not  been   able 

to  assign  to  either  of  these  nations.  The  Badjeri,  who 
extend  up  the  Paroo  River  from  Currawinya,  near 
Hungerford,  to  Eulo.  The  Barunga,  who  occupy  the 
Wanaaring  district  on  the  Paroo  River.  Finally  the 
Paruinji,  from  Hungerford  down  the  Paroo  to  Bootha-bootha, 
a  shallow  waterhole  in  Gorimpa,  and  who  claim  also  the 
country  of  the  Barunga.  There  appears  to  be  an  over- 
lapping of  tribal  boundaries  in  this  case,  and  possibly  an 
indication  of  a  larger  nation. 

Most  of  these  tribes  speak  the  same  language,  but  the 
speech  of  others  differs  so  much  that  a  native  of  one  division 
may  not  understand  one  word  of  the  language  of  another. 

The  third  nation  is  the  Barkinji,  whose  country,  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron/  is  on  the  Darling  River, 
between  the  junction  of  the  Bogan  with  it  and  a  point 
about  half-way  between  Menindie  and  Pooncarrie,  although 
other  information  given  me  extends  their  range  still  further. 
It  seems  uncertain  whether  tribes  belonging  to  the  Barkinji 
nation  are  to  be  found  on  both  sides  of  the  Darling  River. 
My  information  places  them  on  the  south-eastern  side, 
occupying  about  50  miles  back  from  the  river.  This  agrees 
with  a  sketch  map  of  Mr.  Cameron's,  who  says  that  the 
tribes  adjoining  it  are  the  Wonghibon,  a  tribe  with  four  sub- 
classes, to  the  south-east,  and  the  Ta-tathi,  Muthi-muthi, 
Wathi-wathi,  and  Ithi-ithi  -  to  the  south. 

These  three  nations  are  a  good  illustration  of  the  terms 
used    by  me.      The    unit    of  local    organisation    is    a   small 

1  "Notes  on  Some  Tribes  of  New   South  ^2\&%,^''  Journal  Anthrop.   Inst. 
vol.  xiv.  p.  344. 

2  Science,  Nos.   ii,  12,  vol.  ii.  New  Series. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  51 

group  or  family  which  hunts  over  a  restricted  area  of 
country.  A  number  of  these  form  a  horde,  such  as  that  at 
Momba,  which  with  Tarella,  Wonominta,  Yandarle,  and  the 
locahty  called  the  Daubeny  Range,  form  the  Tongaranka 
tribe.  The  aggregation  of  tribes  forms  the  Itchumundi 
nation,  a  Momba  man  being  at  the  same  time  Tongaranka 
and  Itchumundi. 

There  is  a  large  extent  of  country,  without  any  per- 
manent surface  water,  between  the  Darling,  Murray,  and 
Murrumbidgee  Rivers.  This  was  occupied  by  the  Berriait 
tribe,  who,  when  the  surface  water  failed  them,  obtained  a 
supply  from  the  Mallee,  a  species  of  Eucalypt,  and  from  one 
of  the  Hakeas.  At  times  of  drought  they  were  forced  to  go 
to  the  rivers  for  water,  and  as  these  were  occupied  by  other 
tribes  such  as  the  Barkinji  and  the  Wonghibon,  they  had 
to  fight  their  way  in  strong  parties. 

Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Came"on  has,  in  addition  to  the  above, 
described  to  me  the  method  used  for  obtaining  water  from 
the  Mallee  roots.  Those  selected  are  generally  from  i  to 
3  inches  in  diameter,  and  are  easily  dug  up,  as  in  many 
localities  they  extend  laterally  as  far  as  10  feet  without 
varying  much  in  thickness,  and  are  not  more  than  9  or 
10  inches  below  the  surface.  A  good  root,  say  10  feet 
long  and  2^  inches  in  diameter,  would  yield  a  quart 
of  water,  which,  though  not  very  palatable  to  those  un- 
accustomed to  it,  is  liked  by  those  who  have  used  it  for  a 
time. 

All  the  tribes  forming  the  above-mentioned  nations  are 
bound  together  over  an  enormous  district  by  the  same  two- 
class  system,  having  the  same  names  for  the  classes,  and 
being  not  only  distinguished  thereby  from  the  analogous 
great  organisation  of  which  the  Dieri  is  a  representative, 
but  also  from  other  tribal  groups  to  the  south,  now  to  be 
described. 

Murray  River  Tribes 

The  Wiimbaio  tribe  before  mentioned  occupies  the 
country  at  the  junction  of  the  Darling  and  the  Murray  Rivers, 


52  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

and  they  were  the  people  who  attempted  to  prevent  the 
descent  of  the  Murray  by  Captain  Sturt  in  the  year 
1829. 

They  were  located  on  the  Murray  for  about  30  miles 
up  and  down  from  the  junction.  The  tribe  on  the  Murray 
above  the  Wiimbaio  was  the  Kerinma,  speaking  a  different 
language.  The  Wiimbaio  were  essentially  a  river  tribe,  and 
their  country  did  not  go  back  southwards  from  the  river 
more  than  about  a  day's  journey,  say  20  miles,  at  which 
distance  the  country  of  a  branch  of  the  Wotjobaluk  com- 
menced. 

According  to  my  native  informant,  the  river  tribes  which 
occupied  the  course  of  the  Murray  River  upwards  from 
Wentworth  were  as  follows  : — 

The  Wiimbaio  already  mentioned  extended  for  some  30 
miles  on  the  south  bank  where  the  country  of  the  Kerinma 
or,  as  others  said,  the  Grangema,  commenced.  This  is  an 
instance  of  the  difficulties  which  beset  these  inquiries,  since 
a  group  of  blacks  at  a  certain  place  may  be  called  by  their 
local  name,  or  by  the  name  of  the  dialect  which  they  speak, 
or  by  the  name  of  the  tribe  to  which  they  belong. 

Further  on  about  Kulkyne  were  the  Leitchi-leitchi,  also 
on  the  southern  bank.  The  Weki-weki  lived  about  Pyangil, 
and  between  that  place  and  Swan  Hill  were  the  Wathi-wathi, 
and  thence  to  the  junction  of  the  Loddon  with  the  Murray, 
the  Bura-bura. 

On  the  northern  side  of  the  Murray,  between  Wentworth 
and  Euston,  was  a  strong  tribe,  the  Ta-tathi.  West  of  the 
junction  of  the  Murrumbidgee  with  the  Murray  were  the 
Muthi-muthi,  and  in  the  junction  of  these  rivers  the  Wi- 
thai-ja. 

Proceeding  further  up-stream,  on  the  south  side  beyond 
the  Bura-bura  were  the  Wamba-wamba  on  the  Terrick 
plains. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Murray  there  were  other  tribes 
covering  a  considerable  part  of  Riverina  south  of  Hay  and 
Deniliquin,  of  which  the  Baraba-baraba  may  be  taken  as  the 
example.  The  country  occupied  by  this  tribe  extended 
from    Mathoura    between    Deniliquin   and    Moama    on    the 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  53 

south  to  Jerilderie  or  Narandera  on  the  east,  to  Moulamein 
on  the  south-east,  and  Dry  Lake  on  the  north-east. 

With  the  exception  of  the  Wiimbaio,  whose  name  is 
taken  from  the  word  in  their  language  JVu;n,  meaning  "  man," 
all  the  river  tribes  spoken  of  have  been  named  from  their 
language,  or  rather  from  their  dialects,  in  which  the  negative 
is  respectively  Taa^  or  Taath,  Leitchi,  Weki^  Wathi,  and  so 
on,  and  reduplicated  as  their  speech.  This  practice  is 
common  over  a  large  part  of  Victoria,  as  for  instance  in  the 
Wurunjerri  tribe  of  the  Yarra  River,  which,  with  other  tribes, 
was  commonly  spoken  of  as  the  Woeworung,  that  is  the 
"  No-lip,"  hence  "  No  speech." 

Further  up  the  River  Murray  on  the  Victorian  side 
there  was  formerly  a  strong  tribe  called  Bangerang,  about 
which  the  works  of  Mr.  E.  M.  Curr  give  some  information.^ 
He  had  personal  acquaintance  in  1 84 1  with  the  tribes 
which  occupied  the  southern  frontage  of  the  Murray,  from 
Echuca  to  Cobram,  and  up  the  course  of  its  southern  con- 
fluents the  Campaspe,  Goulburn,  and  Broken  River  for  some 
distance.  This  comprised  an  area  extending  as  far  south  as 
Toolamba,  fifty  miles  from  the  Murray  and  about  the  same 
distance  east  and  west.  He  enumerates  ten  different  tribes 
each  of  which  occupied  a  definite  area  of  country,  and  were 
approximately  1 200  in  number.  Of  these  tribes  he  says 
that  "  properly  there  was  only  one  tribe  named  Bangerang, 
which  consisted  of  two  independent  sections,  the  Wongatpan 
and  Towroonban  who,  when  speaking  of  themselves  col- 
lectively always  used  the  term  Bangerang.  But  besides 
these  there  were  eight  other  tribes  in  the  area  above  referred 
to,  which  sometimes  spoke  of  themselves,  and  were  always 
spoken  of  by  others,  as  Bangerang."  -  South  of  this  area  he 
indicates  the  respective  countries  of  other  tribes,  and  he 
says  that  they  spoke  a  language  which  differed  from  that 
of  the  Bangerang. 

Properly  speaking  the  river  tribes,  which,  by  the  way, 
were  confined  to  their  respective  sides  of  the  river,  were 
merely  the  local  parts  of  a  large  organisation.      Each  one 

'    The  Australian  Race,  vol.  iii.  p.  568. 
2  Op.  (it.  vol.  iii.  p.  567. 


54  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

being  certainly  composed  of  lesser  local  groups  analogous 
to  these  which  I  have  already  described  and  others  yet  to 
be  mentioned.  That  such  was  the  case  can  be  reasonably 
inferred  from  the  statement  made  by  Mr.  Curr  that  ten 
tribes  were  spoken  of  by  themselves  and  by  others  as 
Bangerang. 

The  same  organisation  of  river  tribes  extended  without 
doubt  up  the  Murray  and  its  tributaries. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  information  as  to 
the  tribes  occupying  the  course  of  the  Murray  between  the 
Bangerang  and  Albury,  or  on  the  Ovens  lower  than  the 
Buffalo  Mountains.  One  of  the  tribes,  allied  to  those  on  the 
Upper  Goulburn  River,  was  located  on  the  Buffalo  River, 
and  representatives  of  it  attended  one  of  the  great  tribal 
meetings  of  the  Wurunjerri  tribe  near  Melbourne  in  the  early 
forties  of  the  last  century.  I  was  informed  by  one  of  the 
men  (a  Wurunjerri)  who  attended  that  meeting  that  that 
tribe  was  organised  like  his  own. 

Tribes  of  North-Western  Victoria 

In  speaking  of  the  Wiimbaio  I  said  that  their  country 
adjoined  the  northern  boundary  of  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe, 
who  inhabited  a  tract  of  country  lying  between  the  Wim- 
mera  and  Richardson  Rivers.  The  tribal  name  is  taken 
from  the  word  Wotjo,  meaning  "  man,"  and  baluk,  "  people," 
the  latter  word  being  in  its  extended  form  Wotjo-ba-laiuruk^ 
that  is,  "  men  and  women."  Less  frequently  the  word 
Guli  is  used  for  Wotjo^  thus  showing  a  relation  to  the 
Kulin  nation.  The  boundaries  of  this  tribe  were  as 
follows : — Beginning  about  a  mile  north  of  Dimboola 
on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Wimmera  River  and  following 
it  to  L^ke  Hindmarsh  ;  thence  by  that  river  to  Lake 
Albakutya,  and  thence  by  the  river  to  its  termination  at 
the  Pine  Plains  Lake.  Thence  eastward  to  Lake  Coorong, 
thence  by  the  Warraknabeal  Creek  to  Warraknabeal,^  and 
west  to  the  starting-point.  Besides  this  area  in  which  the 
Wotjobaluk    proper    lived,   there  was    another   tract  where 

1    Warrak,  "plain,"  na,  "of,"  Beiil,  "red  gum  tree,"  Eucalyptus  rostrata. 


n  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  55 

there  was  what  may  be  called  a  sub-tribe,  who  were  reckoned 
as  Wotjobaluk,  but  who  called  themselves  Muk-jarawaint, 
and  who  were  spread  over  the  country  defined  by  Ararat, 
Carr's  Plains,  the  Richardson  River,  Horsham,  Rosebrook, 
and  back  into  the  Grampian  Mountains. 

To  the  north  of  the  Wotjobaluk  was  another  sub-tribe 
with  which  they  intermarried,  the  Banju-bunan,  whose 
organisation  was  like  theirs,  a  division  into  local  hordes. 
To  the  east  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  and  adjoining  them,  were 
the  Jupa-galk-wourndich,^  whose  country  extended  into 
the  Mallee  scrubs,  there  joining  the  country  of  the  river 
tribes  before  mentioned,  and  eastward  to  the  Avoca  River. 

The  Wotjobaluk,  having  descent  through  the  mother, 
were  divided  into  local  hordes,  the  names  of  which  were 
as  follows : — 

(i)  The  Gromiluk  at  Lake  Hindmarsh. 

(2)  The  Yakkil-baluk  at  Lake  Albakutya. 

(3)  The  Kretch-baluk  at  Dimboola. 

(4)  The  Witch-wundaiuk  -'  at  Warraknabeal. 

(5)  The  Yarikiluk  at  Lake  Coorong. 

A  man  of  one  of  those  places,  for  instance  of  Gromiluk, 
would  be  Gromiliik-xvotjo,  that  is  "  Gromiluk  man." 

There  were  tribes  adjoining  the  Wotjo  nation  which 
the  latter  considered  aliens — the  Doenbauraket  ^  to  the 
west,  the  Baluk-mernen  ^  to  the  north,  the  Wengen- 
marongeitch  to  the  east,  and  the  Juro-baluk*^  to  the 
south.      I  have  not  been  able  to  locate  the  two  latter. 

The  Wiradjuri  and  Kamilaroi 

Having  described  the  geographical  and  tribal  organisa- 
tion of  the  two-class  tribes,  I  may  now  proceed  a  stage 
farther,    and    consider    those    tribes   which    have   four    sub- 

'  Jupa  is  the  so-callecl  "Native  Box,"  also  called  "Myrtle,"  the  Bursaria 
spinosa.      Galk  is  "tree"  and  ivoiirndich,  "people." 

2  Wundaiuk  is  the  equivalent  of  baluk  or  balaiuk,  which  latter  I  have  heard 
used  as  well  as  baluk. 

^  Doen  probably  the  same  as  tuan,  the  small  "flying  "possum." 

■•  Mcrnen  is  "sand-hill,"  and  the  baluk  mermn  are  therefore  the  "sand-hill 
fellows." 

^  Juro  is  "  plain  or  level  country." 


56  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 


classes.  I  commence  with  the  Wiradjuri,  a  very  large 
tribe  or  nation  of  tribes  occupying  a  vast  extent  of  country 
in  central  New  South  Wales,  and  distinguished  by  a 
common  language  in  dialectic  forms,  the  name  being 
derived  from  IVirai,  "  no." 

The  Wiradjuri  boundaries,  as  given  by  Mr.  A.  L.  P. 
Cameron  ^  are  as  follows  :— "  On  the  west  by  the  Ita-ita  tribe, 
commencing  at  Hay.  On  the  north-west  by  the  Bargunji 
tribe  (Barkinji  ?).  On  the  north  by  the  Wonghibon.  On 
the  north-east  by  the  Kamilaroi.  On  the  east  by  the 
Nungawal.  On  the  south-east,  south  and  south-west  Burra- 
bura-ba.  This  tribe  completes  the  circuit  by  joining  the 
Ita-ita."  The  Nungawal  is  not  known  to  me.  The  Burra- 
bura-ba  tribe  was  between  the  Wiradjuri  and  the  tribes 
of  the  Murray  River,  and  I  have  heard  it  called  Baraba- 
baraba. 

That  part  of  the  Wiradjuri  of  which  I  had  some  little 
knowledge  had  its  location  between  Hay  and  Yass,  and  was 
divided  into  a  number  of  sections,  which  in  this  case  were 
hordes,  descent  being  in  the  female  line.  The  principal  of 
these  divisions  are  as  follows  : — 

(i)   Narrandera  (prickly  lizard)  about  Narrandera. 

(2)  Kuta-mundra  (river  turtle)  about  Cootamundra. 

(3)  Murring- bulla  (two  bark  canoes)  about  Murran- 
burra. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  that  these  divisions  of  the 
tribes  have  been  perpetuated  in  the  names  of  the  places 
where  these  sections  had  their  headquarters. 

The  Wonghibon  tribe  occupied  country  to  the  north  of 
the  Lachlan  River,  which  may  be  approximately  defined  by 
the  townships  of  Mossgiel,  Ivanhoe,  Cobar,  Nymagee,  and 
Nyngan.  The  only  permanent  water  would  be  at  its  north- 
eastern extremity,  where  it  took  in  part  of  the  Bogan  River, 
so  that  those  who  lived  in  the  south  must  have  either  gone 
to  the  Lachlan  or  Darling  in  periods  of  drought,  or  lived  upon 
water  obtained  from  Mallee  and  other  roots.^ 

The  eastern   boundary  of  the  Wiradjuri  is  the  western 

1  Science,  No.  11,  vol.  ii.      New  Series. 
2  A.  L.  P.  Cameron,  op.  cit.  No.  11,  vol.  ii.     New  Series. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  57 

boundary  of  the  Kamilaroi,  a  large  nation  consisting  of  many 
tribes  under  the  same  designation,  which  is  derived  from  the 
negative  kamil  or  kuniil.  The  boundaries  of  the  Kamilaroi 
are  as  follows  : — 

A  narrow  strip  occupied  on  each  side  of  the  Hunter 
River  up  to  Murrurundi,  thence  by  the  Dividing  Range  to 
the  foot  of  the  Moonbi,  above  Tamworth.  Thence  to 
Manilla,  Barraba,  Cobbedah,  Bingera,  and  down  the  Gwydir 
and  the  Barwon  to  Wallget  From  this  place  by  a  line  a 
little  east  of  Barradine  and  Conabarrabran  to  the  Dividing 
Range,  near  the  sources  of  the  Talbragar  Creek  and  the 
Goulburn  River.  In  short,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  pastoral 
district  of  Liverpool  Plains.^ 

North  of  the  Gwydir,  up  to  the  Queensland  border  and 
on  the  Darling  from  Walgett  to  Bourke,  we  find  Kamilaroi 
and  Wollaroi  mixed,  and  on  the  Castlereagh  it  is  Kamilaroi 
and  Wiradjuri. 

The  subdivisions  of  the  Kamilaroi,  which,  since  they 
have  female  descent,  are  hordes,  occupy  separate  portions  of 
the  tribal  territory,  each  claiming  its  own  taurai  or  food  and 
hunting  grounds,  the  boundaries  of  which  are  well  defined, 
and  across  which  a  stranger  might  not  pass  in  search  of 
food.' 

The  Unghi  inhabited  a  tract  of  country  lying  between 
the  Maranoa  and  Warrego  Rivers  in  Queensland  and  ex- 
tending southwards  to  the  Balonne  River,  being  an  area  of 
about  10,000  square  miles.^ 

North  of  the  Kamilaroi  there  was  at  least  one  other 
nation  in  New  South  Wales  organised  on  the  same  lines. 
The  Wollaroi  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  the  Yualloroi, 
being  named,  as  in  the  Kamilaroi,  from  the  negative.  To 
the  eastward  the  Wollaroi  did  not  extend  beyond  the  Birie, 
the  Culgoa,  and  the  Maranoa  Rivers,  which  probably  also 
mark  the  western  boundaries  of  the  four  sub-class  tribes  in 
this    part  of  Australia,  for   at   the   Culgoa   commences  the 

1  These  were  the  boundaries  existing  sixty  years  ago  according  to  Mr.  C. 
Naseby's  knowledge. 
^  C.  Naseby. 
'  A.  L.  P.  Cameron. 


58  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Congaro  language/  which  extends  to  the  Warrdgo  where  the 
two-class  system  obtains. 

Where  two  large  groups  of  tribes  which  speak  different 
languages  meet  there  will  be  found  a  tract  of  country  where 
the  language  is  composed  of  both.  For  instance,  the  Kami- 
laroi  language  extends  northwards  to  the  Gwydir  River. 
To  the  west  of  the  Upper  Darling  River  and  extending  to 
the  Culgoa  it  is  Wollaroi.  Between  the  Darling  and  the 
Gwydir  the  language  is  mixed  Kamilaroi  and  Wollaroi. 
Similarly  between  the  Bogan  and  the  Kamilaroi  boundary, 
which  runs  north-westward  from  Wonabarabra  to  the 
junction  of  the  Peel  River  and  the  Darling,  the  language  is 
a  mixture  of  Kamilaroi  and  Wiradjuri." 

The  Wollaroi,  Kamilaroi,  and  Wiradjuri  tribes  have  all 
the  same  social  organisation,  and  their  languages  are 
branches  of  the  same  stock  language.  In  such  cases  the 
people  living  respectively  on  either  side  of  the  common 
boundary  speak  a  dialect  compounded  of  both  tongues,  and 
probably  could  converse  with  members  of  either  tribe. 

With  the  most  northern  of  the  Kamilaroi  we  come  into 
contact  with  other  tribes  having  the  same  organisation  and 
sub-class  names,  but  speaking  other  languages.  These  are 
the  Bigambul,  the  Ungorri,  and  other  tribes  of  the  same  group. 
The  former  inhabited  the  Darling  Downs  and  part  of  the 
Gwydir  districts,  about  Gooniwindi,  Warialdra,  and  Carol  in 
the  Namoi  district.  The  name  Bigambul,  which  is  also  that 
of  the  language,  is  derived  from  biga,  meaning  "  like,"  the 
"  same,"  "  so  much,"  "  so  many."  ^  The  Ungorri,  speaking  a 
language  of  the  same  name,  were  in  the  country  extend- 
ing to  St.  George,  Charleville,  Nive,  Taroom,  Surat,  and 
Condamine.* 

Some  Queensland  Tribes 

Within  50  or  60  miles  of  Maryborough  (Queensland) 
and   including  Great  Sandy   Island  there  were  many  tribes, 

1  R.  Crowthers.  2  prank  Bucknall. 

3  Biga  anotha-inara,  higa  anotha-tma,  being  ' '  as  many  as  I  have  fingers  and 
toes."     Biga  tialm  na  bogo,  "  as  many  as  there  are  leaves  on  the  tree." 

4  J.  Lalor. 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION 


59 


or  it  may  be  tribelets  or  clans  of  one  great  tribe,  I  have 
not  been  able  to  satisfy  myself  on  these  points,  although 
my  informant  has  had  exceptional  opportunities  of  observa- 
tion, from  the  time  of  his  boyhood.  He,  however,  calls  them 
tribes,  and  I  have  followed  him  in  doing  so.^ 

As  in  all  cases  they  were  composed  of  lesser  groups, 
each  occupying  its  own  area  of  hunting  and  food  ground. 
The  still  smaller  groups  were  little  more  than  undivided 
families  consisting  of  several  generations,  for  instance  of 
grandparents,  children  and  grandchildren  occupying  areas 
of  about  10  miles  radius.  A  number  of  such  families 
hunted  over  the  same  area,  and  the  whole  community  which 
attended  the  Dora  ceremonies  covered  an  extent  of  from 
50  to  60  miles  radius.  The  tribal  divisions  bore  names  of 
which  the  following  are  examples  : — 


Olongbura 

Gilambabura 

Murubura 

Munyabura 

Bunbura  . 

Thuribura 

Pinoba 

Faringnoba 

Yalibura 

Munyabura 

Kiniyen  . 

Waggumbura 

Thuncumbura 

Yarmbura 

Warbaa  . 

Tawarbura 

Tarribelung 

Kulbainbura 

Yargo 

Kombobura 

Thibura  . 

Yawai 

Nukunukubura 


Sandy  Cape 
Indian  Head 
White  Cliffs 
Fig-tree 
Yini 
Pialba. 
Houral. 
Tin  can. 
Burrum. 
Tinana. 
Burrum  Heads 
Boonoora. 
Eliott. 
Boonara. 
Monduran. 
Tiara. 
Bundaberg. 
Gympie. 
Miva. 
Noosa. 
Gayndah. 
Walla. 
Mt.  Perry 
Harry  E.  Aid  ridge. 


Frazer  Island. 


6o         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


About  the  year  1859  these  blacks  might  have  been 
counted  by  thousands,  and  their  customs  and  observances 
were  strictly  followed,  but  in  the  year  1888  all  the  fragments 
of  the  tribelets  could  not  number  150  men,  women  and 
children. 

The  tribes  may  be  divided  into  inland,  fishing,  and  coast 
tribes,  the  inland  people  visiting  the  coast  at  intervals. 

About  60  miles  from  Maryborough  there  was  the 
Kaiabara  tribe,  who  lived  in  the  Bunya  Mountains,  and  was 
one  of  the  group  of  tribes  just  referred  to.  All  these  tribes 
had  the  same  organisation,  and  met  at  the  great  tribal 
ceremonies.  Indeed  it  was  in  the  Kaiabara  country  that 
"  Bunya-bunya  feasts  "  were  periodically  held.  The  Kaiabara 
were  one  of  the  above-mentioned  "  inland  tribes."  ^ 

Somewhat  farther  to  the  north  the  tribes  arc  also 
organised  in  four  sub-classes,  and  there  is  a  group  of  which 
I  take  the  Kuinmurbura  as  an  example.  This  tribe  inhabits 
the  peninsula  between  Broad  Sound  and  Shoalwater  Bay, 
north  of  Rockhampton.  The  name  may  be  rendered  as 
Kuin,  "  plains,"  and  bura,  "  of  or  belonging,"  and  the  range  of 
this  allied  group  of  tribes  is  indicated  by  the  statement  of 
the  Kuinmurbura,  that  the  adjoining  tribes  are  their  "  mates," 
while  the  Rockhampton  blacks  are  "  of  another  country."  '^ 
The  following  is  a  list  of  the  tribes  which,  with  the  Kuin- 
murbura, form  a  nation  : — 

( 1 )  Kutu-bura,  meaning  "  belonging  to  the  end,"  referring 
to  their  country  being  at  the  end  of  the  peninsula. 

(2)  Riste-bura,  "belonging  to  sandfly."  Between  Pine 
Mountain  and  Shoalwater  Bay. 

(3)  Wandu-bura,  "  belonging  to  mountain."  Between 
the  head  of  Broad  Sound  and  Shoalwater  Bay. 

(4)  Wuru-bura,  "  belonging  to  IVuru,"  that  is,  bread  made 
from  a  nut  called  Wuru.  On  the  east  side  of  the  head  of 
Broad  Sound. 

(5)  Pukan-bura,  "belonging  to  a  track  or  road  {pukan)." 
In  the  Agapina  range,  to  the  west  of  the  head  of  Broad  Sound. 

(6)  Muin-bura,  that  is,  "  belonging  to  ashes."  South  of 
the  Pukan-bura  and  opposite  the  Wuru-bura. 

1  Jocelyn  Brooke.  2  w.  h.  Flowers. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  6i 

The  tribes  outside  this  small  nation,  between  the 
Mackenzie  and  the  sea,  down  to  Gladstone,  are  as  follows, 
being,  however,  not  regarded  by  the  Kuinmurbura  as  belong- 
ing to  themselves  : — 

(i)  Taru-bura,  "belonging  to  fig."  West  of  the  head  of 
Shoalwater  Bay. 

(2)  Weluin-bura,  "  belonging  to  iguana's  tail."  East  of 
the  Wuru-bura. 

(3)  Rundu-bura,  at  Townshend's  Island. 

(4)  Waran-bura,  "  belonging  to  sand."      At  Pearl  Bay. 

(5)  Kuke-bura,  "belonging  to  the  green-headed  ant." 
Between  Cape  Manifold  and  Cape  Clinton. 

(6)  Butcha-bura,  "  belonging  to  Butcha."  A  species  of 
Banksia  about  Mount  Atherton. 

(7)  Baipul-bura,  "  belonging  to  '  big  water '  or  river." 
On  the  Fitzroy  River,  near  Woodville. 

(8)  Karun-bura,  "  belonging  to  Karun,"  that  is,  the  water 
that  exudes  from  a  mussel  when  placed  on  the  fire.  South 
of  Yamba. 

(9)  Buri-bura,  "  belonging  to  eels,"  or  more  properly  the 
flames  caused  by  their  fat  when  placed  on  the  fire.  South 
of  Yamba. 

(10)  Bikal-bura,  "belonging  to  Bikai"  that  is  a  grub. 
On  the  river  near  Rockhampton. 

(11)  Konku-bura,  "belonging  to  sickness,  retching."  On 
the  coast  of  Keppel's  Bay. 

(12)  Wara-bura,  "belonging  to  JVara,"  a  parasitical 
plant  known  as  wild  guava.      South  of  Rockhampton. 

(13)  Bombarra-bura,  "belonging  to  open  country,"'  that 
is  the  mainland  west  of  Broad  Sound. 

My  correspondent  speaks  of  these  as  tribes,  and  the  area 
occupied  by  them  is  so  considerable  that  it  supports  this 
view,  but  on  the  other  hand  their  names  suggest  "  local 
divisions  "  of  a  large  tribe.  I  am  not  able  to  decide  this 
matter,  and  my  correspondent  is  not  now  available. 

Besides  these,  there  are  the  following  tribes,  of  which  I 
know  no  more  that  their  names  and  localities  : — 

The  Taruin-bura,  or  "  belonging  to  the  Big  River  "  west  of 
the  Broad  Sound.     The  Yetti-maralla,  south  of  them  on  the 


62  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Mackenzie  River,  from  Woodville.  The  Tarumbul,  south  of 
Rockhampton  and  the  Orambul,  on  the  coast  between  Keppel 
Bay  and  Gladstone. 

West  of  the  Great  Dividing  Range,  and  separated  by  it 
from  the  tribes  last  described,  there  were  many  tribes  having 
the  four  sub-class  system  on  the  waters  of  the  Belyando, 
Barcoo,  Thomson,  and  Flinders  Rivers,  and  of  which  I  take 
the  Wakelbura  as  an  example.^ 

They  were  formerly  called  Kerbulbura,  from  Kerbul,  the 
edible  root  of  a  water-lily  which  grows  in  the  swamps  and 
flat  watercourses  ;  the  present  name  of  the  tribe  is  derived 
from  IVakel  (eels),  and  the  possessive  postfix  bura.  It  is 
somewhat  uncertain  whether  the  Wakelbura  is  to  be  con- 
sidered as  a  tribe,  a  sub-tribe,  or  merely  a  horde  of  a  large 
tribe.  Perhaps  the  latter  may  be  the  true  view  to  take,  yet 
in  such  a  case  there  ought  to  be  some  common  name  to 
show  the  extent  of  the  tribe.  My  correspondent,  however, 
has  been  unable  to  solve  this  question,  although  he  has  been 
acquainted  with  the  Wakelbura  since  boyhood.  It  is  now 
too  late,  for  I  have  learned  during  the  completion  of  this 
work  that  the  tribe  is  practically  extinct,  having  been 
"destroyed  by  the  use  of  opium  "  acquired  from  the  Chinese 
employed  in  the  district.  If  the  Wakelbura  is  a  horde  of 
a  large  tribe,  the  following  would  be  the  hordes  composing 
it : — 

(i)  Wakelbura,  situated  on  the  Belyando  River,  above 
its  junction  with  the  Suttor  River, 

(2)  The  Kumbukabura,  from  K2(mbHka,''i)\Q  Broad-leaved 
Ironbark,"  ^  occupied  the  country  westward  of  the  Belyando 
River  across  the  sources  of  the  Thomson  River. 

(3)  The  Auanbura,  from  Auan,  "  the  young  emu,"  on  the 
Upper  Belyando  River,  above  the  Wakelbura. 

(4)  The  Dorobura,  from  Doro,  "  the  root  of  a  tree,"  on 
the  east  side  of  the  Belyando  River,  above  its  junction  with 
the  Suttor  River. 

(5)  The   Mutherabura,  from  Muthera,  a  grub  found   in 

1  J.  C.  Muirhead. 
-  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  which  tree  this  is. 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  63 


the  Brigalow  tree.^  In  the  years  1883-86  this  tribe  is  said 
to  have  changed  its  name  to  Waralbura,  from  waral,  "  a 
canoe  "  or  "  boat."  The  change  was  made  because  the  owners 
of  the  run  on  which  the  Waralbura  lived  put  a  large  boat  on 
a  lagoon  near  the  homestead,  and  the  tribes-people  called 
themselves  after  it.  This  shows  how  slight  a  circumstance 
might  cause  a  change  of  name,  but  such  a  change  would  be 
unlikely  to  affect  a  whole  tribe  spread  over  so  large  a  tract 
as  that  the  Mutherabura  occupied.  It  looks,  therefore,  to 
me  as  if  the  change  was  merely  in  the  name  of  that  small 
division  which  lived  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
homestead. 

(6)  The  Munkibura,  from  the  name  given  by  these 
tribes  to  sheep.  They  lived  about  Natal  Downs  and  on 
Cape  River.  Here  again  there  is  such  a  change  as  that  just 
referred  to,  and  the  same  argument  may  be  applied  to  this 
case,  namely,  that  the  change  was  probably  that  of  some 
one  of  the  lesser  divisions  of  the  horde,  or  tribe  if  it  were 
such. 

Adjoining  these  hordes  there  were  other  tribes,  or  hordes 
of  tribes,  which  were  more  or  less  nearly  related  to  them. 
The  Mutabura  were  to  the  south -west,  on  the  Thomson 
River.  The  Kumbukabura,  on  the  extreme  source  of  the 
Thomson  River,  and  the  Tilbabura,  who  became  extinct 
about  the  year  1865,  and  lived  south-west  of  and  adjoining 
the  Auanbura.  Two  tribes  also  became  extinct  in  the  year 
1865  ;  and  when  the  Bithclbura  tribe,  who  lived  north-east 
of  the  Auanbura,  died  out  the  latter  took  their  country. 

Beyond  the  Thomson  River  there  were  other  tribes 
organised  in  the  same  manner.  The  strength  of  the  bonds 
connecting  the  Wakclbura  and  the  tribes  farther  out  may 
be  estimated  by  the  following  particulars.  All  the  tribes, 
sub-tribes,  or  hordes  mentioned,  as  the  case  might  be,  and 
with  others  still  more  distant,  as  for  instance  the  Mutabura 
from  the  Upper  Thomson  River,  did  not  come  to  the 
Wakclbura  ceremonies  in   a  body,  nor  did   the   Yankibura, 

'  There  appear  to  be  three  trees  in  (Queensland  which  are  called  by  this  name 
— Acacia  harpophylla.  Acacia  doratoxylon,  and  Acacia  glaucesceiis  —  but  I  do 
not  know  which  it  is  that  grows  in  the  locality  in  question. 


64  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


a  still  more  distant  tribe  near  Aramac.  A  few  of  them 
accompanied  the  Kumbukabura,  and  when  the  Wakelbura 
went  to  the  Mutabura  or  the  Yankibura  ceremonies,  it  was 
only  a  few  of  them  who  did  so,  in  company  with  Auanbura 
or  Kumbukabura  people.  The  same  applies  to  all  the 
distant  tribes,  which  had  some  relations  with  the  Wakelbura, 
and  visited  them.  The  rule  was  that  the  nearer  tribe  came 
in  a  body,  and  the  more  distant  were  represented  by  a  few 
members,  who  accompanied  some  other  friendly  tribe. 

Another  tribe  to  be  mentioned  is  the  Dalebura,  whose 
country  was  within  a  fifty-mile  radius  round  Lammermoor 
Head  Station  at  the  Thomson  River. 

My  correspondent  spoke  of  this  tribe  as  the  "  faithful 
Dalebura." ' 

The  farthest  range  south  of  the  four  sub-class  system 
of  which  I  have  taken  the  Wakelbura  as  the  type,  appears 
to  be  about  Thargominda,  400  miles  in  a  direct  line  from 
that  tribe.  The  point  is,  however,  the  extreme  limit  also 
of  the  Buntamurra  tribe,  whose  country  extends  from 
Thargominda  to  Kaiabara  Creek  in  the  north-west,  the 
Paroo  River  in  the  east,  and  a  considerable  distance  up  the 
BuUoo  River  northwards. 

It  is,  in  fact,  situated  on  the  boundary  of  this  class  system, 
and  in  touch  with  the  two-class  system  of  the  Darling  River 
tribes.^ 

Similar  statements  have  been  made  to  me  as  to  the 
tribes  which  occupied  the  country  between  the  Belyando, 
the  Burdekin,  and  the  coast,  thus  connecting  the  inland 
tribes  with  those  north  and  south  of  the  Kuinmurbura.^ 
The  organisation  of  all  these  tribes  on  a  geographical  basis 
may  be  assumed,  whether  they  are  properly  described  as 
tribes  or  should  be  considered  as  their  component  parts. 

The  particulars  given  as  to  the  tribes  of  this  part  of 
Australia  are  a  good  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  a 
large  tract  of  country  claimed  by  any  one  tribe  is  parcelled 
out  among  its  lesser  divisions.  It  is  in  such  cases  most 
difficult  to  decide  whether  one  has  to  do  with  a  single  tribe, 

1  R.  Christison.  2  j.  h.  Kirkham. 

^  G.  F.  Bridgeman. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  65 

with  a  group  of  sub-tribes,  or  a  number  of  hordes  where 
there  is  female  descent,  or  clans  where  there  is  male  descent. 
More  especially  is  this  difficulty  apparent  when  the  inquiries 
have  to  be  made  through  a  distant  correspondent,  however 
willing  and  careful  he  may  be. 

I  may  mention  here  that  when  investigating  the  social 
organisation  of  the  Australian  tribes  some  30  years  ago,  I 
obtained  information  as  to  certain  tribes  as  far  north  as  the 
Mitchell  River  in  Northern  Queensland.  This  is  far  beyond 
the  geographical  limits  fixed  for  this  work,  and  as  that  part 
of  Australia  is  included  in  the  field  now  being  so  ably  investi- 
gated by  Dr.  VV.  E.  Roth,  I  omit  further  reference. 

We  may  now  turn  to  the  coast  tribes  from  the  Great 
Australian  Bight,  along  the  south,  south-east,  and  part  of  the 
east  coast  of  Australia. 

Coast  Tribe.s 

My  starting-point  is  Eucla,  where  a  coast  tribe  is  located 
which  calls  itself  Yerkla- mining.^  The  e.xtent  of  country 
which  they  claimed  was,  from  about  100  miles  east  to  about 
40  miles  west  of  Eucla,  along  the  coast,  and  as  far  inland  as 
they  dared  to  go.  Owing  to  the  barren  nature  of  the  country 
on  the  north,  north-west,  and  north-east,  they  rarely  went  out 
in  those  directions  farther  than  25  or  30  miles,  where  lies 
the  great  Nullarbor  Plain,  the  southern  edge  of  which  is  about 
2  5  miles  from  the  coast.  The  Mining  know  little  about  this 
plain  or  what  is  beyond  it,  except  that  there  are  tribes  of 
blacks  living  far  to  the  north.  They  have  a  tradition  that 
once  long  ago,  during  a  wet  season,  some  Mining  went  out 
in  a  north-westerly  direction,  but  seeing  footprints  of  men 
and  marks  of  fire,  and  distant  smokes,  they  fled  back  to  the 
coast.  Another  reason  these  people  give  for  not  venturing 
far  upon  the  Nullarbor  Plains  is  that  they  say  they  are 
inhabited  by  a  gigantic  snake,  which  devours  every  living 
thing  that  is  .so  unfortunate  as  to  fall  in  its  way.  It  does 
not  even  spare  stones  or  trees,  and  its  hideousness  is  beyond 
their  description. 

'  W.  Williams.    Yerkla  is  "the  morning  star,"  mining  is  "man,"'  or  "men."' 

F 


66 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


There  is  a  dry  creek  about    i  20  miles  from  Fowler  Bay, 
near  Oldea,  about  which  there  is  a  tradition  that  it  is  the  track 


FIG.    4. — MAN    OF   THE    NARRANG-GA   TRIBE. 

of  a  great  serpent,  which  swallowed  two  men.      The  Kukata 
have  a  great  dread  of  this  creek  and  do  not  go  near  it. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  67 

Two  lesser  tribes  on  the  coast  to  the  west  of  the  Yerkla- 
mining  speak  a  dialect  of  their  language.  Beyond  are  aliens 
only  known  to  them  by  names,  meaning  "  long  nose  "  and 
"  snake  men." 

The  western  shores  of  Spencer  Gulf  was  occupied  by  the 
Parnkalla  tribe,  having  class  names  and  a  local  organisation 
similar  to  that  described  for  the  Dieri.  On  the  opposite 
side  of  the  gulf  is  Yorke  Peninsula,  which  was  wholly 
occupied  by  the  Narrang-ga.'  The  tribal  country  is  divided 
into  four  parts — Kurnara,  meaning  "north,"  being  the  northern 
part  of  the  peninsula  south  of  Wallaroo,  Kadina,  and  Clinton. 
Windera,  meaning  "  east,"  being  the  eastern  part  of  the 
peninsula,  between  Kurnara  and  Dilpa,  which  latter  is  the 
extreme  southern  end  of  the  peninsula.  Wan,  meaning 
"  west,"  being  the  western  part  of  the  peninsula  between 
Kurnara  and  Dilpa. 

The  distribution  of  this  tribe  into  localities,  the  sum  of 
which  makes  up  the  whole  of  the  tribal  country,  is  a  feature 
in  the  organisation  of  some  of  the  coast  tribes.  This  will 
be  more  fully  studied  in  the  second  part  of  the  chapter,  but 
it  may  be  mentioned  here,  that  in  such  cases  the  local 
divisions  and  those  of  the  class  organisation  coincide,  usually 
accompanied  by  a  change  of  descent  from  the  female  to  the 
male  line. 

As  there  is  male  descent  in  this  tribe,  the  local  divisions 
are  clans,  and  taking  Kurnara  as  an  example,  its  area 
coincides  with  the  class  division  Kari  ("  emu  "),  all  of  whose 
members    belong    to   it.      This   is   a   remarkable    innovation 

'  I  must  mention  lli.it  when  I  first  investigated  the  org.anisation  of  this  tribe 
in  1880,  my  correspondent,  the  Kev.  Julius  Kiihn,  gave  me  the  tribal  name  as 
"  Turra,"  in  which  form  it  appeared  in  the  joint  work  of  the  Rev.  Lorimer  Fison 
and  myself.  .Subsequently,  Mr.  Sutton,  the  manager  of  the  alx)riginal  station  in 
Yorke  Peninsula,  in  making  further  investigation,  gave  it  to  me  as  Adjadura,  with 
the  meaning  of  "  belonging  to  men."  In  1899  Mr.  F.  J.  Gillen  resided  for  a 
time  at  Moonla,  and  had  opportunities  for  making  further  inquiries.  I  learn 
from  him  th.Tt  the  tribal  name  is  Narrang-ga.  He  gives  the  translation  of 
Adjadura  as  "my  people."  This  is  no  doubt  correct,  and  it  may  be  that  Mr. 
Sutton's  informants  used  the  term  in  that  sense  in  speaking  of  their  fellow  tribes- 
men, but  on  the  other  hand  the  term  as  given  by  Mr.  Sutton  seems  to  be  analogous 
to  the  name  of  the  tribe  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Gulf  of  .St.  Vincent,  namely 
the  Narrinyeri,  which  means  "belonging  to  men."  I  shall  in  future  gladly  adopt 
the  name  supplied  for  this  tribe  by  Mr.  Gillen. 


68  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

and  an  advance  upon  the  Dieri  vmrdn,  the  members  of 
which  are  found  distributed  through  all  the  local  divisions 
(hordes). 

The  country  of  the  Narrinyeri  commences  at  Cape 
Jervis,  on  the  opposite  side  of  St.  Vincent  Gulf.  An  account 
of  this  tribe  was  given  by  the  Rev.  George  Taplin/  in  addition 
to  which  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  other  explanatory  facts 
through  communications  from  him  and  also  from  the  late  Mr. 
T.  W.  Taplin.  In  order  to  bring  this  additional  evidence 
into  place  I  shall  incorporate  such  particulars  from  the  Rev. 
George  Taplin's  work  as  are  necessary  to  show  the  local,  and 
in  the  second  part  of  this  chapter,  also  the  social  organisation 
of  the  tribe.  The  Narrinyeri  was  essentially  a  coast  tribe, 
and  its  country  extended  from  Cape  Jervis  to  Lacepede  Bay, 
and  inland  up  the  Murray  for  about  30  miles  above  Lake 
Alexandrina.  It  was  divided  into  eighteen  local  groups  or 
clans,  with  male  descent,  each  clan  inhabiting  a  definite  part 
of  the  tribal  territory.  As  with  the  Narrang-ga  the  totems 
are  localised  in  the  divisions  of  the  country  held  by  the 
clans,  showing  that  the  local  organisation  existed  in  a  more 
developed  form  than  in  the  two-class  tribes  of  which  I  have 
already  spoken. 

Somewhat  west  of  Lacepede  Bay  the  Narrinyeri  were 
joined  by  tribes  allied  to  the  Buandik.^  So  far  as  I  am 
aware,  no  particulars  have  been  preserved  of  the  local 
divisions  of  these  tribes.  In  the  absence  of  such  informa- 
tion I  am  not  able  to  say  what  were  the  local  clans  or 
hordes,  but  in  the  account  given,  it  is  said  that  the  Buandik 
was  one  of  the  five  following  tribes,  each  occupying  its 
own  territory,  and  using  different  dialects  of  the  same 
language. 

The  country  of  the  Buandik  was  on  the  coast  between 
the  Glenelg  River  and  Rivoli  Bay.  Between  Rivoli  Bay  and 
Lacepede  Bay  was  the  Moatatunga  tribe.  From  Lacepede 
Bay  to  the  boundary  of  the  Narrinyeri  was  the  Taloinjunga 

1  The  Narrinyeri.     An  account  of  the  tribe  of  Australian  aborigines  inhabiting 
the  country  around  the  Lakes  Alexandrina,  Albert,  and  Coorong.    Adelaide,  1847. 

2  The   Booandik   Tribe  of  South   Australian  Aborigines   by   Mrs.    James   S. 
Smith.      Adelaide  Government  Printer,  1880. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  69 

tribe.  Inland  from  the  Buandik  was  the  Painchunga,  and 
from  the  Moatatunga  inland  the  Wiantunga.  These  are  the 
five  tribes  referred  to. 

On  the  east  side  the  Buandik  adjoined  the  tribes  of 
South-Western  Victoria,  of  which  I  have  very  Httle  informa- 
tion, and  therefore  gladly  avail  myself  of  the  account  given 
of  them  by  the  late  Mr.  Dawson,^  to  complete  as  far  as 
possible  the  account  of  Victorian  tribes,  and  especially  those 
of  the  coast.  The  only  tribe  of  South-Western  Victoria  of 
which  I  have  a  personal  knowledge  is  a  small  one  called  the 
Gournditch-mara,  whose  headquarters  were  at  Gournditch  or 
Lake  Condah,  and  they  belonged  to  a  nation  calling  them- 
selves Mara,  "  men,"  which  extended  from  the  southern 
limits  of  the  Muk-jarawaint  to  the  sea,  and  from  Mount 
Gambler  to  the  Eumerella  Creek,  and  included  the  Kuurn- 
kopan-noot  and  Peek-whuurong  tribes  described  by  Mr. 
Dawson.  The  Gournditch-mara  '*  were,  it  seems,  divided  into 
four  sections,  Kemp  ("  water  "),  Boom  ("  mountain  "),  Direk 
("  swamp  "),  and  Gilger  ("  river  "),  an  arrangement  not  influ- 
encing marriage,  and  appearing  to  be  merely  one  of  the  local 
designations.  It  may  be  compared  with  the  Sea-coasters, 
Tree-climbers,  and  Mountaineers  of  the  Yuin  tribes.  In 
the  Gournditch-mara  there  was  descent  in  the  female  line, 
that  is,  the  child  took  the  class-name  and  totem  of  his 
mother,  but  belonged  to  the  local  division  of  its  father,  and 
spoke  his  language. 

The  area  occupied  by  the  tribes  described  by  Mr. 
Dawson  may  be  roughly  defined  as  lying  between  Portland, 
Colac,  Ararat,  and  possibly  Pitfield. 

It  seems  that  there  were  at  least  ten  languages,  or 
perhaps  more  correctly  dialects,  and  it  is  reasonable  to 
assume  that  there  was  the  same  number  of  tribes.  The 
tribal  territory  was  divided  between  its  members,  and  each 
family  had  the  exclusive  right  by  inheritance  to  a  part  of 

1  Australian  Abori_i;ines,  James  Dawson.      Robertson,  Melbourne,  1S81. 

2  Rev.  J.  II.  Stable.  The  Gournditch-mara  recognised  neighlxjuring  tribes 
as  friends  Ijecause  they  were  also  "niara"  ;  and  on  referring  to  Mr.  Dawson's 
vocabulary  I  find  that  "maar"  is  given  for  "aboriginal  man"  in  the  Peek- 
whuurong  dialect  to  the  south  and  the  Kuurn-kopan-noot  to  the  east  of  the 
Gournditch-mara. 


70 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


the  tribal  lands,  which  was  named  after  its  owner,  and  every 
child  born  on  it  was  named  after  some  object  on  it.  When 
the  boundaries  met  at  lakes  or  swamps  celebrated  for 
game,  well-defined  portions  of  these  were  marked  out,  and 
any  poaching  or  trespassing  was  severely  punished.  No 
individual  of  any  neighbouring  family  or  tribe  could  hunt  or 
walk  over  the  land  of  another  without  permission  from  the 
head  of  the  family  group  which  owned  it,  and  a  stranger 
found  trespassing  on  it  might  legally  be  put  to  death. 

We  may  assume  that  the  tribes  described  by  Mr. 
Dawson  did  not  extend  much  to  the  east  of  Colac,  where 
was  the  western  boundary  of  one  tribe  of  the  Kulin  nation. 
This  nation  occupied  the  country  from  Colac  to  Mount  Baw 
Baw,  and  from  Wangaratta  and  Murchison  on  the  north  to 
Port  Phillip  and  Western  Port  on  the  south. 

The  following  table  shows  all  that  I  have  been  able  to 
learn  of  the  tribes  which  constituted  the  Kulin,  and  of  their 
local  organisation.  It  is  a  defective  list,  but  will  serve  to 
give  a  general  idea  of  the  great  extent  of  country  covered 
by  these  tribes,  who  used,  either  wholly  or  alternatively  with 
some  other  term,  the  word  Kulin  for  man  : — 


Name  of  Tribe  and  Locality. 


Language. 


Wurunjerri-baluk  '...... 

Yarra  Kiver  watershed. 
Gunung-willam-baluk  ...... 

Western  end  of  Mount  Macedon,  extending  to  BuUen 
garook  and  Daylesford. 
Kurung-jang-baluk  ^     . 

Werribee  River. 
Ngaruk-willam  ^ . 

South  side  Dandenong  Mountains. 
Baluk-willam       ..... 

About  C  ran  bourne. 
Bunurong  ...... 

Coast  from  Werribee  River  to  Anderson's  Inlet 
Wudthaurung      ..... 

Geelong  to  Mount  Emu  and  Werribee  River 


Woeworung. 
Woeworung. 

Woeworung. 

Woeworung. 

Woeworung. 

Bunurong. 

Wudthaurung. 


1  IVuritn  is  "  the  white  gum-tree  "  (river  Gum),  Eucalyptus  viminalis. 
is  a  grub  found  in  that  tree. 

2  Kurimg-jang '\%  "red  ground." 

^  Ngartik\%  "stones"  or  "rocks,"  "stony"  or  "rocky." 


Jerri 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION 


71 


Name  of  Tribe  and  Locality. 


14. 


IS- 


16. 


Nira-baluk  *         .......         • 

Kilmore. 
Jajaurung  ......... 

From  Daylesford   to  Boort  and  Castlemaine  to  Lake 
Buloke. 
Buthera-baluk     ........ 

Goulburn  River,  Seymour. 
Ngurahing-bula  ........ 

Goulburn  River,  Murchison. 
Yauung-illam-baluk      ....... 

Alexandra  Upper  Yea  River. 
Waring-illam-baluk      ....... 

Junction  of  Yea  River  and  Goulburn. 
Yirun-illam-baluk         ....... 

Broken  River  above  and  below  Benalla. 
Balung-karak-mittung  ....... 

Ovens  River,  Wangaratta. 
Mogullum-bitch  ....... 

Buffalo  River. 


Language. 


Thagunworung. 
Jajaurung. 

Thagunworung. 

? 
Thagun  worung. 
Thagunworung. 
Thagunworung. 

? 

? 


The  Wurunjerri-baluk  (also  called  the  Woeworung  from 
their  language)  gave  the  following  as  the  boundaries  of 
their  country. 

From  the  junction  of  the  Saltwater  and  the  Yarra  Rivers, 
along  the  course  of  the  former  to  Mount  Macedon,-'  thence 
to  Mount  Bavv-Baw,  along  the  Dividing  Range,  round  1  the 
sources  of  the  Plenty  and  Yarra  to  the  Dandenong 
Mountains,  thence  by  Gardiner's  Creek  and  the  Yarra  to 
the  starting-point. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  a  strip  of  country  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Werribee  River,  and  including  what  is  now 
Williamstown  and  the  southern  suburbs  of  Melbourne,  be- 
longed to  the  Bunurong,  a  coast  tribe,  which  occupied 
the  coast  line  from  there  round  Hobson's  Bay  to  Mordialloc, 
the  whole  of  the  Mornington  Peninsula,  and  the  coast  from 
Westernport  Bay  to  Anderson's  Inlet. 

At  the  time  when  Melbourne  was  established,  the 
Wurunjerri  were  divided  into  the  following  clans  : — 

I.   The  true  Wurunjerri,  under  the  hea.dma.n, /aA^^a-Ja^ka,^ 

'  JVira  is  a  "  cave  or  a  hole  in  the  bank  of  a  creek." 
'■^  The  native  name  of  this  mountain  \?<  Jura' veil. 

^  Jakka-jakka  was  one  of  those  who  signed  the  celebrated  Batman  deed  by 
"his  mark."     To  my  ear,  the  name  should  be  pronounced  as  written  above. 


72  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

occupied  the  Yarra  flats  and  the  upper  part  of  that  river  to 
its  source,  including  the  northern  slopes  of  the  Dandenong 
Mountains,  thence  by  Gardiner's  Creek  to  the  Yarra  River, 
and  by  it  to  the  Darebin  Creek. 

(2)  The  Kurnaje-berreing,  in  two  subdivisions  :  (a)  under 
the  headman  Billi-billeri,  lived  at  and  had  the  custody  of 
the  aboriginal  stone  quarry  near  Lancefield,  occupied  the 
site  of  Melbourne  and  the  country  up  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Saltwater  River  and  its  western  branch  to  Mount 
Macedon,  also  the  western  half  of  the  country  lying  between 
the  Saltwater  and  Plenty  Rivers  ;  {b)  under  the  headman 
Bebe-jan,  the  country  on  the  Darebin  Creek,  and  on  the  Yarra 
River  thence  to  about  Warrandyte,  and  also  the  watershed 
of  the  Plenty  River  and  Diamond  Creek. 

(3)  The  Boi-berrit,  under  their  headman  Biingerim^ 
lived  on  the  western  side  of  the  Saltwater  River,  with 
their  headquarters  about  Sunbury,  and  the  western  end  of 
Mount  Macedon, 

These  clans  were  again  divided  into  lesser  groups  of 
people,  and  each  had  its  own  definite  tract  of  country  and 
food  ground. 

Tribes  belonging  to  the  Kulin  nation  lived  on  all  the 
rivers  rising  in  the  Victorian  Alps  from  the  Yarra  round 
northwards  to  the  Ovens  River.  The  Wurunjerri  was  one 
of  them,  and  it  may  be  well  to  say  here  something  of  the 
country  they  inhabited,  or  at  least  visited,  during  the 
summer  months.  The  Great  Dividing  Range,  which  to  the 
west  of  Melbourne  sinks  to  a  comparatively  low  ridge,  with 
only  isolated  mountains,  rises  on  the  north-east  to  a  great 
chain,  which  reaches  its  highest  altitudes  on  either  side  of 
the  border  between  the  States  of  Victoria  and  New  South 
Wales.  The  great  spurs  of  these  mountains  enclose  valleys 
through  which  rivers  flow  northwards  to  the  Murray,  and 
southwards  to  Bass  Strait.  Tribes  such  as  the  Wurunjerri 
claimed  the  rivers  flowing  through  their  country,  to  their 
sources,  where  their  summer  hunting  grounds  were  situated. 

^  Bungerim    also    attached    a  mark    to   the  Batman    deed    and    appears  as 
Biingarie, 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  73 


The  Kurnai  of  Gippsland 

The  Bunurong  tribe,  whose  eastern  bounds  were  at 
Anderson's  Inlet,  were  there  met  by  the  Kurnai,  also  a 
coast  tribe,  which  occupied  almost  the  whole  of  what  is 
now  Gippsland.  This  great  area,  200  miles  in  length  by 
about  70  in  width,  lies  between  the  sea-coast  and  the 
Dividing  Range.  It  was  divided  into  five  portions,  each  of 
which  was  inhabited  by  a  clan  of  the  Kurnai.  These  five 
clans  spoke  three  dialects,  more  or  less  unintelligible  to 
each  other.  The  dialects  spoken  were  Nulit  by  the 
Brayakaulung,  the  Brataualung,  and  the  Tatungalung,  the 
Muk-thang  or  "excellent"  speech  by  the  Brabralung,  and 
Thangquai  or  "  broad  "  speech  by  the  Krauatungalung.^ 

The  clans  were  divided  into  lesser  groups,  each  of  which 
had  a  special  name,  derived  in  some  cases  from  their 
principal  locality,  while  in  other  cases  it  was  the  local  group 
which  gave  the  name  to  the  locality.  P'or  instance,  a  large 
section  of  the  Brataua  clan  lived  on  the  upper  waters  of  the 
Avon  River,  and  were  called  Kutbuntaura  or  fire-carriers. 
This  name  was  also  that  of  their  country,  with  the  postfix 
wurk,  meaning  "  land  "  or  "  country." 

Such  large  sections  were  again  divided  and  subdivided, 
each  subdivision  having  its  own  tract  of  hunting  and  food 
ground,  until  the  unit  was  a  small  group  of  kindred, 
frequently  an  old  man,  his  sons,  married  or  unmarried,  with 
their  respective  wives  and  children.  Such  an  instance  was 
that  of  the  Biinjil-baur^  or  men  of  the  island,  who  lived  on 
Raymond  Island  in  Lake  King,  and  who  not  only  claimed 
that  island,  but  also  all  the  swans'  eggs  laid  upon  it,  as 
their  own  exclusive  property.  Although  it  was  separated 
from  the  mainland,  which  was  the  country  of  the  Brabralung, 
by  merely  a  narrow  channel,  and  from  that  of  the  Tatunga- 

•  Bra  is  "male"  or  "man,"'  ra-^  is  "west,"  and  lung  "of"  or  "belonging 
to."  Tatting  is  the  sea,  somelinies  spoken  of  as  gatching ;  gal  is  a  possessive 
suffix.     AMiik  is  "good,"  ihang  is  "speech,"  Kratiat  is  "east." 

''  Bunjil  is  a  ilesignation  applied  to  men  of  mature  age,  and  always  with  a 
word  which  expresses  some  characteristic.  For  instance,  one  old  man  was  called 
Bnnjil-harlajan,  being  Bunjil-platypus,  he  being  a  great  hunter  of  that  creature. 
Baul  is  "  island." 


74 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


lung  by  several  miles  of  lake,  the  BimjiV-dau/  claimed  Jto  be 
"partly  Tatungalung,  and  partly  Brabralung,  but  mostly 
Tatungalung." 

Each  male  received  the  name  of  Bunjil-haitl  at  his 
initiation.  The  oldest  male  of  the  family  had  authority 
over  the  others,  but  they  were  all  collectively  Bimjil-bauL 


FIG.  5. — ONK  OF  THE  KKAUATUNGALUNG  CLAN  OF  THE  KUKNAl  TRIBE. 

Any  stranger  who  took  swans'  eggs  on  this  island 
without  the  permission  of  one  of  the  Bunjil-haul  had  to 
fight  them,  but  there  was  no  prohibition  against  friendly 
tribesmen  who  might  visit  the  island  taking  any  other  kind 
of  food  or  game. 

Taking  such  a  family  as  the  tribal  unit  of  the  Kurnai, 
it  was  the  aggregation  of  such  families  which  formed  what 
may  be  called  a  division,  inhabiting  a  larger  area,  and  the 
aggregate  of  the  divisions  formed  the  clan. 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION 


75 


Collins,  in  his  account  of  the  estabhshment  of  the  colony 
of  New  South  Wales,  says  that  a  certain  native  named  Ben- 
nil-long  claimed  the  island  of  Me-mel  (now  known  as  Goat 
Island),  close  by  Sydney  Cove,  as  his  own  property,  and  that 


KlU   6.— ONE   OK   THE    KKAUATUNGALUNG   CLAN    OF   THE    KURNAI    TRIBE. 


it  had  been  his  father's.     He  likewise  spoke  of  other  persons 
who  possessed  this  kind  of  hereditary  property. 

The  Kurnai  extended  to  Cape  Evcrard,  where  the 
Ben-kurnai,  that  is  the  people  who  lived  at  the  Ben  River 
(Sydenham    Inlet),  were  the  most  easterly  of  the  tribe  and 


76 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


the  neighbours  of  the  most  southern  of  the  Coast  Murring 
tribes. 

The  following  table,  together  with  map,  p.  80,  will 
show,  more  distinctly  than  a  mere  verbal  description,  the 
local  organisation  of  the  Kurnai. 


KURNAI    TRIBE 


Clans. 


Divisions. 


Krauatungalung,  from  A>r7«rt/,"east," 
and  f^alung,  a  possessive  postfix, 
"of"  or  "belonging  to." 

Claimed  the  sea  coast  from  near  the 
entrance  to  the  Gippsland  Lakes  to 
Cape  Everard  ;  Lake  Tyers  and  its 
tributaries  as  far  as  Mount  Naua- 
Naua.  All  the  streams  Howing  into 
Ewing's  Marsh.  The  Snowy  River 
up  as  far  as  Willis.  East  of  the 
Snowy  River  they  only  had  a  narrow 
strip  along  the  coast,  the  inland 
country  being  held  by  the  Biduelli 
tribe. 

Brabrahing,  from  Bra,  "man"; 
the  reduplication  may  be  taken  as 
"  manly," 

Claimed  all  the  country  watered  by 
theTambo,  Nicholson, and  Mitchell 
Rivers  and  their  tributaries  to  their 
extreme  sources,  and  west  of  the 
Mitchell  River  to  Providence  Ponds, 
with  a  corresponding  frontage  to  the 
(jippsland  Lakes. 

Brayakaulung,  from  Bra  and  yak, 
"  west." 

They  claimed  all  the  country  west  of 
Providence  Ponds  watered  by  the 
Avon,  Macalister,  Thompson,  and 
La  Trobe  Rivers,  down  to  the  junc- 
tion of  the  two  latter,  thence 
following  the  east  side  of  the 
La  Trobe  to  Lake  Wellington. 
Thence  eastward  by  the  Lakes  to 
near  Roseneath  ;  thence  north  - 
wards  to  Providence  Ponds. 


(a)   Ben,  Sydenham  Inlet. 

{b)  Dura,  Orbost  about  twelve  miles 

up  the  Snowy  River  from  the 

sea. 
(<■)  Wurnung-gatti,  Lake  Tyers. 
(d)  Brt-brita,    Jimmy's    Point,    now 

called  Kalinina. 


(e)  Bruthen,  on  the  Tambo  River. 

(f)  Waiung.    This  word  as  Wy-Yung 

gives  a  name  to  a  parish  near 

Bairnsdale. 
(?)  Wuk  -  wuk,     Lindenow.        Also 

pronounced    Wurk  -  wurk,     or 

"ground,"  "  earth." 
(//)  Dairgo,  the  Dargo  River. 
(/)  Munji,     North     Shore    of    Lake 

Victoria,  colloquially  "there." 

(k)  Kutbuntaura,  Bushy  Park.  A'ltt- 
biin,  to  "carry"  or  "have," 
tatira,  "fire";  also  the  name 
of  a  hill  near  Bushy  Park. 

(/)  Bunjil  Nullung,  the  country  be- 
tween the  Avon  and  Providence 
Ponds ;  also  name  of  a  man. 
Nullung \%  "mud." 

(w)  Bunjil  Daan,  the  country  between 
the  Avon,  Macalister,  and 
Thompson  Rivers.  The  name 
of  a  man.     Daan'xi,  "snow." 

(«)  Bunjil  Kraura,  all  the  country  of 
the  clan,  west  of  (w).  The 
name  of  a  man. 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  ni 


KURNAI  1Ya^Y.—contivued 


Clans.  Divisions. 

Brataualung.    Claimed  all  the  country  {o)  Kut-wut,  the  Agnes  River, 

from  the  La  Trobe  River  to  Cape  (/)  Yauung,  Warrigal  Creek. 

Liptrap,    and   from    the   southern  |  (^)  Drelin,  Merrinian's  Creek. 

watershed  to  the  sea.  j 

Tatungalung.      Tat    is   the  sea,  also  (;)  Yunthur,    adjoining    and  east  of 

the  south.  Merriman's  Creek. 

Claimed  all  the  country  west  of  the  ,  {s)  Ngarawut,  the  south  side  of  Lake 

Krauatun,  and  east  of  the  Brataua,  '            Victoria. 

lying  between  the  Gippsland  Lakes  (/)  Binnajerra,  |xirt  of  ^rtw/i^a///,  that 

and  the  sea,  together  with  all  the  is,  the  sandy  country,  lying  be- 

islands   in    the    Lakes,    excepting  tween  the  Lakes  and  the  sea. 
Flanagan  Island,   which  belonged 

to   the    Brt-brita   division   of   the  ■ 

Krauatungalung  clan.  i 


Tableland  Tribes 

Beyond  the  sources  of  the  Yarra  and  the  Goulburn  the 
Dividing  Range  widens  out  into  great  alpine  plateaux,  with 
tracts  of  grassy  downs  and  mountain  summits,  clothed  in 
summer  time  with  alpine  flowers.  Such  tablelands  extend 
through  Victoria  from  near  VVoodspoint,  at  the  sources  of 
the  Goulburn  and  Macalistcr  Rivers,  to  New  South  Wales, 
where  their  highest  elevation  is  reached  in  Mount  Kosciusko. 
The  highest  plateaux  are  in  winter  covered  deeply  with 
snow,  but  the  lower  ones,  such  as  that  of  Omeo,  are  habitable 
all  the  year  round.  On  such  elevated  plateaux  were  located 
certain  tribes,  such  as  the  Ya-itma-thang,'  the  Wolgal,  and 
the  Ngarigo. 

The  Ya-itma-thang,  commonly  called  the  Omeo  tribe, 
was  divided  into  two  sections — {a)  the  Theddora-mittung, 
occupying  the  sources  of  the  Mitta-Mitta  River  and  its 
tributaries  down  to  about  the  Gibbo  Mountain,  the  Upper 
Kiewa  River  and  the  Ovens  River  to  the  Buffalo  Mountain, 
thus  being  the  neighbours  of  the  Mogullum- bitch,  the 
furthest  out  of  the  Kulin  tribes.  (/;)  The  Kandangora- 
mittung,   who   lived    on    the    Omeo   plains,    the    Limestone 

•  The  name  may  come  from  Ya-yau,  "yes,"  and  thang,  "speech  "  or  "tongue."' 


78  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

River  down  to  its  junction  with  the  Indi  River,  and  the 
Tambo  River  to  Tongiomungie.  On  the  latter  river  they 
were  in  contact  with  the  Kurnai.  It  is  worth  noting  that 
the  old  road  from  Omeo  to  Bruthen  follows  the  trail  by 
which  the  Gippsland  and  Omeo  blacks  made  hostile  incursions 
into  each  other's  countries. 

The  first  mentioned,  the  now  extinct  Ya-itma-thang, 
occupied  the  mountain  country  in  which  rise  the  rivers 
Mitta-Mitta  and  Tambo,  and  some  of  the  sources  of  the 
Ovens,  and  extended  north  at  least  as  far  as  the  Uppier 
Yackandanda  River,  called  by  them  Yakonda.^  I  have 
been  able  to  learn  but  little  of  the  local  organisation  of 
the  Theddora.  Their  country  was  discovered  and  occupied 
about  the  year  1838.  In  1852  gold  was  discovered  at 
Livingstone  Creek,  one  of  the  confluents  of  the  Mitta-Mitta, 
and  a  great  rush  of  miners  set  into  the  Omeo  diggings.  In 
1862  there  only  remained  four  or  five  of  this  once  numerous 
tribe. 

The  eastern  boundary  of  the  Ya-itma-thang  was  about 
the  Cobbora  Mountains,  and  thence  down  the  Indi  River  to 
Tom  Groggin's  Run,  their  neighbours  on  that  side  being  the 
Wolgal  and  Ngarigo  tribes. 

The  Wolgal  lived  on  the  tablelands  of  the  highest  of 
the  Australian  Alps,  and  in  the  country  falling  from  them 
to  the  north.  The  boundaries  of  their  country  commenced 
at  Kauwambat "  near  to  the  Pilot  Mountain,  following  the 
Indi  River  to  Walleregang,  thence  to  the  starting-point, 
Kauwambat,  by  Tumberumba,  Tumut,  Queenbean,  Cooma, 
and  the  Great  Dividing  Range. 

The  Ngarigo  had  the  Wolgal  on  the  north,  the  Ya-itma- 
thang  on  the  north-west,  the  Kurnai  on  the  west  and  south- 
west, and  the  Yuin  or  Coast  Murring  to  the  south-cast. 
The  Ngarigo  in  fact  occupied  the  Manero  tableland. 
The  name  of  this  tribe  was  that  of  its  language,  and  the 
tribespeople    called    themselves   "  Murring,"   that    is  "  men," 

1  An  intelligent  Theddora  woman  told  me  that  her  tribe  extended  as  far 
as  the  upper  waters  of  the  Yakonda  (Yackandanda),  from  which  place  she  went 
as  a  wife  of  one  of  the  Omeo  Theddora.  The  term  viitttmg  appears  to  he  the 
equivalent  of  the  balttk  of  the  Kulin. 

-  Kauwambat  means  "  woman"  in  the  Wolgal  speech. 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION 


79 


indicating  that  it  belonged  to  another  nation  who  used  that 
term  in  common. 


The  Biduelli  Tribe  ^ 

In  that  part  of  Eastern  Victoria  called  Croajingolong 
there  was  a  small  tribe  called  the  Biduelli,  who  occupied  the 
forest  and  jungle  covered  country  between   the  high  coast 


KIG.     7. — A    KUK.NAI    WOMAN. 

ranges  and  the  immediate  coast  along  which  the  Kurnai 
lived.  This  tribe  may  be  considered  an  appendix  to  the 
Ngarigo,  Murring,  and  Kurnai,  being  a  mixture  from 
them  all. 

They  had  the  two  sex  totems  of  the  Kurnai,  some  of 
the  Murring  totem  names,  and  also  the  two  class  names  of 
the  Ngarigo.  These  people  were  enclosed  in  one  of  the 
most  inhospitable  tracts  of  country  which  I  know  of  in 
south-eastern    Australia,    lying    behind    a   narrow    strip    of 

'  This  name  is  derived  from  brida,  "scrub,"  and  ticlli,  "dweller." 


8o  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

coast  country  which  the  Krauatun  Kurnai  held  between  the 
Snowy  River  and  Cape  Everard.  The  Ngarigo  lived 
beyond  the  coast  range  to  the  north  of  them,  and  the 
Coast  Murring  along  the  littoral  tract  north  of  Cape  Howe, 
I  have  traversed  the  mountains,  swamps,  and  scrubs  of  this 
piece  of  country  three  times,  before  it  was  occupied  by 
white  settlers,  and  as  compared  with  the  adjacent  parts,  there 
was  but  little  animal  life.  The  Biduelli  were  few  in  number, 
inhabiting  small  open  spaces  in  the  dense  jungle,  and  called 
themselves  "  men  "  {uiaap). 

After  lengthened  inquiries  from  their  survivors,  and 
from  their  neighbours  the  Kurnai,  the  Ngarigo,  and  Murring, 
I  have  ascertained  the  following  facts  : — 

They  spoke  a  mixture  of  the  adjacent  languages,  they 
intermarried  with  adjacent  tribes,  and  it  seems  that  their 
country  formed  a  refuge  for  what  one  may  term  "  broken 
men." 

This  prima  facie  case  of  a  mixed  descent  is  strengthened 
by  the  case  of  a  Biduelli  man,  who  claimed  as  his  country 
the  upper  valley  of  the  Brodribb  River.^  He  told  me  that 
his  "father's  father"  was  a  Kurnai  of  Bukkan-munji,-  who 
left  his  country  and  settled  in  the  small  open  tract,  known  as 
Goungra  Valley,  west  of  Mount  Ellery.^  His  son  obtained 
a  wife  from  the  Theddora  of  Omeo,  and  the  son  of  this 
marriage,  my  informant,  married  a  Ngarigo  woman.  This 
pedigree  accounts  for  Yiinmg  and  Yukembruk,  as  sex 
totem  and  class  name. 

Such  a  case  as  that  of  my  informant's  grandfather 
corresponds  with  the  account  given  to  me  by  the  Kurnai 
of  a  man  who  broke  the  marriage  law  of  his  tribe,  by  taking 
for  a  wife  a  woman  who  stood  in  the  relation  of  tribal 
daughter  to  him,  escaped   with  her  from   the  vengeance  of 

•  It  was  only  in  the  year  1870-71  that  this  man  "came  in,"  that  is, 
abandoned  his  wild  life  and  went  to  live  among  ihe  stations  of  the  Manero 
tableland.      He  was  the  last  remaining  "  wild  black"  in  Gippsland. 

^  This  place  is  now  written  Bnchan,  and  is  supposed  to  be  a  Scotch  name 
given  by  some  early  settler  from  North  Britain.  It  should  properly  be  spelled 
as  I  have  written  it,  being  the  native  name  for  the  bag  in  which  the  Kurnai 
carries  various  articles.  Bukkan-munji  means  "bag  there"  or  "the  place  of 
the  bag." 

^  The  Krauatun  name  for  this  mountain  is  Bur-umpa. 


THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION 


the  offended  kindred,  and  only  reappeared  when  the  whites 
had  settled  the  country,  and  he  could  thus  find  protection 
from  tribal  punishment. 

I  can  feel  no  doubt  that  the  Biduelli  country  was  an 
Australian  "  cave  of  Adullam  "  ;  that  the  tribe  was  built  up 
by  refugees  from  tribal  justice,  or  individual  vengeance,  and 
that  they  organised  themselves,  as  far  as  they  could  do  so, 
on  the  old-accustomed  lines.  It  is  a  good  example  of  what 
Dr.  Hearn  has  called  the  formation  of  a  non-genealogical 
tribe.^ 

While  the  Kurnai  considered  the  Kulin  on  their  western 
border,  and  the  Theddora  and  Ngarigo  on  the  north  and 
north-east  as  enemies,  they  recognised  in  the  Biduelli  a  sort 
of  distant  kinship,  and  spoke  of  them  as  Biduelli,  not  by  the 
opprobrious  names  which  they  usually  applied  to  other 
outsiders. 

The  Kurnai  tribe  carries  us  to  the  border  of  New 
South  Wales,  and  the  Wolgal,  who  extended  down  the 
Upper  Murray  to  near  Albury,  leaves  only  a  comparatively 
small  part  of  Victoria,  as  to  which  I  have  not  obtained 
information  about  the  native  tribes  which  inhabited  it. 

This  is  the  country  lying  on  the  south  bank  of  the 
Murray,  and  extending  some  distance  up  the  Mitta-Mitta, 
Kiewa,  Yackandanda,  and  Ovens  Rivers.  I  feel  pretty  safe 
in  saying  that  such  a  tract  of  country  would  be  occupied  by 
tribes  in  the  same  way  as  the  Bangerang  occupied  similar 
country  at  the  junction  of  the  Campaspe,  Goulburn,  and 
Broken  Rivers  with  the  Murray. 

The  Coast  Tribes  of  New  South  Wales 

Reverting  to  the  coast  tribes,  I  now  turn  to  the  Murring, 
or  more  especially  the  Yuin  tribes.  These  claimed  the 
country  from  Cape  Howe  to  the  Shoalhaven  River,  in  New 
South  Wales.  They  formed  two  large  sub-tribes  or  sub- 
divisions, called  respectively  Guyangal  and  Kurial,  from  the 
words  guy  a,  "south,"  and  kuru,  "north,"  gai  being  the 
possessive   postfix.       The   inland    extent  of    their    country 

1   The  Af-yan  Household,  p.  297. 

G 


82  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

included  the  fall  from  the  coast  range  to  the  sea,  and  their 
local  organisation  is  as  follows  : — 


Sul)-tribes 


Clans. 


Guyangal-Vuin  j  (i)  Thauaira,' east  of  Malagoota  Inlet. 
(South-Yuin)         (2)  Tadera-manji,-  in  the  Bega  district. 

!  (3)  Bugelli-manji,  in  the  Moruya  district. 


Kurial-Yuin  (4)  Name  not  ascertained,  in  the  Braidwood  district. 

(North-Vuin)      [  (5)  Name  not  ascertained,  in  the  Ulladulla  district. 

(6)  fiurungatta-manji,  in  the  Lower  Shoalhaven  River  district. 

Not  only  are  the  Coast  Murring  divided  into  the 
"  southerners  "  and  "  northerners,"  but  they  are  also  divided 
into  those  who  live  on  the  coast  and  those  who  live  inland. 
The  former  are  the  Katungal,  from  Katurig,  "  the  sea,"  called 
by  the  whites  "  fishermen."  Those  who  live  inland  from 
the  sea  are  called  Paiendra,  from  Paien,  "  a  tomahawk,"  and 
are  called  by  the  whites  "  Waddymen,"  from  the  word 
"  Waddy,"  an  aboriginal  term  for  a  tree,  and  referring  to 
their  climbing  trees  in  search  of  game  for  food.  Those  who 
live  on  the  high  mountains  still  further  back  are  called  the 
Bemeringal  or  mountaineers,  from  Bemering^  "  a  mountain." 
Perhaps  strictly  the  Bemering  include  the  people  living  on 
the  Manero  tableland,  and  even  those  on  the  high  country  as 
far  as  Kiandra,  but  not  those  on  the  fall  thence  to  the  north. 

The  Katungal  commence  at  Moruya,  and  extend  far 
up  the  coast  including  distant  tribes.  Yuin  is  also  a 
general  name  for  all  the  tribes  from  Merimbula  to  Port 
Jackson,  and  "  maan "  for  those  from  Merimbula  to  Cape 
Howe.  Beyond  the  most  distant  Bemeringal  known  to  the 
Yuin,  namely  at  Kiandra,  there  were  tribes  they  called 
Woradjera  and  also  Kunamildan,  or  "  come  by  night,"  who 
had  at  times  crossed  the  mountains  and  killed  the  Murring. 
The  former  are  clearly  the  Wiradjuri,  some  of  whom  lived  on 
the  lower  Tumut  River. 

Claims  to  particular  tracts  of  country  arose  in  certain  of 

1  This  clan  takes  its  name  from  the  language  spoken  by  it. 

2  Manji  means  "  there,  at  some  place,"  and  is  therefore  the  same  as  the 
Kiirnai  word  mimju,  "  there  at  that  place." 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  83 

these  tribes  by  birth.  When  a  child  was  born  among  the 
Yuin,  its  father  pointed  out  some  hills,  lakes,  or  rivers  to  the 
men  and  women  there  present  as  being  the  bounds  of  his 
child's  country,  being  that  where  his  father  lived,  or  where  he 
himself  was  born  and  had  lived.  It  was  just  the  same  with 
a  girl,  who  had  her  mother's  country,  and  also  that  in  which 
she  was  born.  Besides  this  the  father  took  the  country 
where  his  child  was  born,  if  away  from  his  own  locality,  and 
the  mother  took  that  where  her  daughter  was  born  under 
similar  circumstances. 

A  leading  man  of  the  Snowy  River  Krauatungalung,  who 
acted  as  my  messenger  to  the  Yuin,  concerning  the  holding 
of  a  Kuringal,  was  born  in  their  countr>i  and  therefore 
claimed  it  as  his  ;  his  mother  was  a  Ngarigo  woman,  and 
therefore  he  claimed  her  country.  He  was  the  accredited 
messenger  between  the  Krautun  Kurnai  and  the  Ngarigo 
and  Yuin, 

The  son  of  one  of  the  headmen  of  the  Theddora  was 
born  in  the  Ngarigo  country,  to  which  his  mother  belonged. 
It  was  therefore  his  country,  and,  as  he  put  it,  it  would  be 
just  the  same  "for  any  one  who  was  born  there."  One  of 
the  old  men  of  the  Wolgal  said  that  "  the  place  where  a  man 
is  born  is  his  country,  and  he  always  has  a  right  to  hunt  over 
it,  and  all  others  born  there  had  also  the  right  to  do  so." 

Of  the  coast  tribes  between  the  Shoalhaven  River  and 
Newcastle  I  know  but  little.  All  that  I  could  learn  from 
the  Coast  Murring  was  that  the  tribes,  so  far  as  they  knew, 
were  Katungal,  and  had  Bunan  ceremonies  like  theirs. 

Collins,  in  his  description  of  the  natives  of  Botany  Bay 
and  Port  Jackson,  says  that  "each  family  has  a  particular 
place  of  residence  from  which  is  derived  its  distinguishing 
name.  This  is  formed  by  adding  the  monosyllable  '  gal '  to 
the  name  of  the  place ;  thus  the  southern  shore  of  Botany 
Bay  is  called  Gwea,  and  the  people  who  inhabit  it  style 
themselves  Gwea-gal.  Those  who  live  on  the  north  shore  of 
Port  Jackson  are  called  Cam-mer-ray-gal,  that  part  of  the 
harbour  being  distinguished  from  the  others  by  the  name  of 
Cam-mer-ray.  Of  this  last  family,  or  tribe,  the  settlers  had 
heard  Ben-nil-long  and  other  natives  speak  (before  they  were 


84  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

otherwise  known)  as  a  very  powerful  people,  who  could 
oblige  them  to  attend  wherever  and  whenever  they  desired." 

He  also  says  that  the  natives  on  the  sea  coast  had  little 
other  support  than  fish,  and  men,  women,  and  children  were 
employed  in  procuring  them,  the  men  killing  them  with  a 
fizgig,  while  the  females  used  the  hook  and  line.  He  says 
elsewhere  that  the  wood  natives  had  to  climb  trees  after 
honey,  or  small  animals  such  as  the  flying  squirrel  and 
opossum,  and  they  also  had  a  laborious  method  of  snaring 
animals.^  In  this  he  evidently  refers  to  those  local  divisions 
of  the  tribes  called  by  the  Yuin  Katungal  and  Paiendra. 

Of  the  tribes,  however,  which  inhabited  the  watersheds 
of  the  Hunter  and  Manning  Rivers,  and  the  coast  between 
Port  Hunter  and  the  Broadwater  River,  I  have  been  able  to 
gather  some  particulars  which  may  be  supplemented  by 
extracts  from  a  but  little  known  account  of  Port  Stephens, 
written  by  Robert  Dawson  in  the  year  1830." 

The  tribe  on  the  coast  at  Lake  Macquarie  was  the 
Awabakal,  whose  language  is  recorded  in  the  interesting 
treatises  of  the  Rev.  L.  E.  Threlkeld.^  Inland  from  the 
Awabakal  was  the  Geawe-gal  tribe,^  whose  country  was 
part  of  the  valley  of  the  Hunter  River,  extending  to  each 
lateral  watershed,  and  from  20  to  30  miles  along  the  valley 
on  each  side  of  Glendon.  These  aborigines  spoke  the 
language  of,  and  intermarried  with,  those  of  Maitland,  less 
frequently  with  those  of  the  Paterson  River,  and  rarely  with 
those  of  Mussel  Brook.  They  were  always  in  dread  of  war 
with  the  Kamilaroi,  who  followed  down  the  heads  of  the 
Hunter  across  from  the  Talbragar  to  the  Nunmurra  waters, 
and  even  occasionally  made  raids  as  far  as  Jerry's  Plains.  A 
section  of  the  Kamilaroi  occupied  the  upper  waters  flowing 
into  the  Hunter  River,  and  those  which  form  the  heads  of 
the  Goulburn  River,  for  instance  the  Munmurra  Creek.  The 
Dividing  Range,  between  the  Munmurra  and  the  Talbragar, 

1  English  Colony  of  Nexv  South  Wales,  p.  353.      London,  1804. 

2  The  Present  State  of  Australia.      London,  1830. 

^  An  Australian  Language  as  Spoken  by  the  Awabakal,  by  L.  E.  Threlkeld. 
Re-arranged,  condensed,  and  edited  by  John  Fraser,  B.A.      Sydney,  1892. 

*  The  Geawegal  Tribe,  G.  W.  Rusden.  Appendix  G,  Kamilaroi  and  Journal, 
Fison  and  Howitt.     Melbourne,  1880. 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  85 

sinks  down  so  that  a  traveller  would  not  think  that  he  was 
crossing  the  boundary  between  any  waters,  much  less  those 
which  divide  the  Darling  waters  from  the  Hunter  River. 
This  probably  facilitated  the  spread  of  the  powerful 
Kamilaroi. 

To  the  north-east  and  adjoining  the  Geawe-gal  were 
two  tribes,  or  perhaps  two  sections  of  a  large  tribe,  one  on 
the  Paterson  River  and  the  other,  to  which  my  corre- 
spondent refers,  being  on  the  Williams  and  its  tributary,  the 
Chichester.^  After  careful  inquiries  I  have  not  succeeded 
in  learning  the  name  of  this  tribe  with  certainty.  So  far, 
however,  as  I  am  able  to  form  an  opinion,  the  name 
Gringai  may  be  used,  since  it  is  given  for  those  blacks  who 
lived  in  that  part  of  the  country  lying  about  Dungog." 
They  were  distributed  over  the  country  in  local  groups 
called  by  them  "  Nurra." 

Their  territory  extended  up  the  valley  of  the  Williams 
and  its  tributaries  to  their  sources,  and  southwards  for 
about  8  miles  below  Dungog.  There  were  Nurras  all  over 
this  district,  at  convenient  distances  apart,  each  of  which 
consisted  of  six  to  nine  huts,  or  families.  In  1840  the 
blacks  in  this  tract  of  country  numbered  about  250  all 
told.  They  intermarried  with  the  people  of  the  Paterson 
River  on  the  one  side,  and  those  of  the  Gloucester  on 
the  other. 

From  Port  Stephens  to  the  Queensland  border  there  is 
a  stretch  of  coast  of  over  300  miles  in  length.  It  is  a 
comparatively  narrow  strip  of  well-watered  and  generally 
fertile  country  between  the  sea  and  the  Great  Dividing 
Range.  Formerly  it  was  inhabited  by  numerous  tribes 
which  have  now  almost  become  extinct. 

Very  little  has  been  recorded  as  to  their  tribal  organisa- 
tion, beliefs  and  customs,  but  what  there  is  suggests  to  me 
that  they  probably  differed  from  the  inland  Kamilaroi  tribes 
much  as  other  coast  tribes  further  south  differed  from  those 
inland,  but  not  so  much  perhaps  in  their  local,  as  in  their 
social,  organisation. 

Amongst  these  were  the  Kombaingheri,^  whose  four  sub- 

'   Dr.  E.  M.  M'Kinley.  '^  J.  W.  Boydell.  ^  E.  Palmer. 


86  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

classes  and  the  rules  of  their  intermarriage  are  recorded   in 
the  following  chapters. 

Coast  Tribes  of  Southern  Queensland 

On  the  coast  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  boundary 
between  New  South  Wales  and  Queensland  there  is  a  tribe 
called  Chepara  whose  territory  is  said  to  have  extended 
from  Danger  Point  to  near  Brisbane. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  country  claimed  by  this  tribe 
overlaps  that  of  the  Turrbal  tribe,  whose  boundaries  are  said 
to  have  been  the  Pine  River  on  the  north,  and  the  Logan 
River  to  the  south,  extending  about  20  miles  inland, 
and  including  the  present  site  of  Brisbane  and  its  suburbs. 
These  people  were  divided  into  local  groups  which  met 
together  at  set  times — for  instance,  the  "  mullet  season." 

The  Chepara  tribe  was  divided  into  at  least  the  follow- 
ing clans  with  male  descent,  and  each  of  the  clans  was 
subdivided  into  local  groups. 

(i)  Chepara.  This  was  the  principal  clan,  and  gave  its 
name  to  the  whole  tribe.  Its  country  was  to  the  south  of 
Brisbane,  somewhat  inland,  but  also  along  the  coast. 

(2)  Mungulkabultu,  in  the  Pimpana  district. 

(3)  Munnadali,  about  the  sources  of  the  Albert  River. 

(4)  Kuttibul,  about  the  sources  of  the  Logan  River. 

(5)  Yungurpan,  in  the  Coomera  and  Merang  districts. 

(6)  Birrin,  at  the  Tweed  River. 

(7)  Burginmeri,  in  the  Cleveland  district. 

(8)  Chermanpura,  the  district  along  the  coast. 

There  were  some  minor  offshoots,  which  are  not  remem- 
bered by  the  blacks  who  were  my  informant's  authorities. 

The  names  of  the  clans  were  derived  from  local 
associations,  as,  for  instance,  Chepara  means  the  coast, 
Mungulkabultu  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mountains  ;  the 
other  names  are  from  trees,  shrubs,  etc. 

The  Chepara  was,  so  tradition  says,  originally  the  whole 
tribe,  but  in  consequence  of  internal  feuds  it  became  broken 
up  into  the  clans  mentioned.  This  however  seems,  notwith- 
standing the  positive  assertions  of  the   Chepara  informants, 


II  THE  TRIBAL  ORGANISATION  87 

to  require  some  corroboration,  which  cannot  now  be  given. 
The  oldest  of  the  native  informants,  a  man  of  about  fifty 
years  of  age  in  the  year  1880,  spoke  with  certainty  of  this 
tradition,  and  said  that  after  a  time  the  clans  became  again 
friendly,  and  had  during  the  whole  of  his  lifetime  considered 
the  Chepara  the  principal  clan. 


CHAPTER    III 

SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 

As  a  general  rule  all  Australian  tribes  are  divided  into  two  intermarrying  moieties 
— Use  of  the  terms  "  class,"  "clan,"  and  "  horde " — Tril)es  with  two  classes 
and  female  descent — Class  names  and  rules  of  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes — Tribes 
on  the  Darling  River  in  Western  New  South  Wales  —  The  Wiimbaio, 
Ngarigo,  and  Wolgal  —  Tribes  with  four  sub-classes  and  male  descent — 
Kamilaroi,  Wiradjuri,  Wonghibon,  Unghi,  Wollaroi,  Emon,  Ungorri,  Kuin- 
murbura,  Wakelbura,  and  Buntamura  tribes — Tribes  with  four  sub-classes 
and  male  descent — The  Kaiabara,  Muruburra,  Annan  River  tribes — Tribes 
with  eight  sub-classes  and  female  descent — The  Arunta  and  Urabunna — 
Tribes  with  anomalous  class  systems  and  female  descent — The  Wotjobaluk, 
Bviandik,  and  Gournditch-mara — Tribes  with  two -class  system  and  male 
descent  —  The  Wurunjerri  and  other  Kulin  tribes  —  Tribes  with  anomalous 
class  systems  and  male  descent — The  Ycrkla-mining,  the  Narrang-ga,  the 
Narrinyeri,  the  Yuin — Tribes  with  no  class  system — The  Kurnai  of  Cipps- 
land — The  Chepara  of  (^)ueensland — The  equivalence  of  class  names — The 
two  classes  were  evidently  made  by  the  segmentation  of  original,  undivided 
commune  —  Totemism  —  Inherited  and  acquired  totems  —  Sex  totems  — 
Totemism  combined  with  exogamy  at  root  of  the  social  organisation — \'iews 
of  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen,  Dr.  J.  C.  Frazer,  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  and 
Dr.  Hadden — There  is  not  sufficient  data  available  to  allow  of  a  safe 
hypothesis  as  to  the  origin  of  totemistic  names. 

It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  general  rule  that  all  Australian 
tribes  are  divided  into  two  moieties,  which  intermarry,  but 
each  of  which  is  forbidden  to  marry  within  itself. 

For  these  two  moieties  the  term  "  classes  "  used  by  Dr. 
Lorimer  Fi.son  and  myself,  and  since  adopted  by  Messrs. 
Spencer  and  Gillen,  and  other  writers  on  Australian  an- 
thropology, may  now  be  regarded  as  the  recognised  term. 
The  expression  "  tribe "  has  been  used  by  some  writers  in 
this  sense,  but  the  "  tribe "  includes  two  organisations,  the 
"  local,"  already  described,  and  the  "  social,"  to  be  dealt  with 
now.  The  terms  "  clan  "  and  "  phratry  "  are  both  objection- 
able, because   a  definite   meaning   has    become  attached   to 

88 


CH.  Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  89 

them,  which  I  do  not  desire  to  apply  to  the  analogous 
organisations  found  in  Australia  ;  but  have  used  the  term 
"  clan "  to  mean  the  principal  geographical  and  territorial 
division  of  a  tribe,  in  which  descent  is  in  the  male  line. 
Then  some  term  seemed  necessary  to  denote  the  divisions 
of  a  tribe  in  which  descent  is  counted  in  the  female  line, 
and  for  this,  as  before  stated,  I  use  "  horde,"  without  includ- 
ing in  my  meaning  any  reference  to  the  use  made  of  it  by 
other  writers  on  anthropological  theories. 

The  division  of  the  people  of  the  tribe  into  two  classes 
is  the  foundation  from  which  the  whole  social  organisation 
of  the  native  tribes  of  Australia  has  been  developed. 

In  two  tribes  very  far  apart  from  each  other,  not  only 
in  geographical  position  but  in  customs,  there  are  analogous 
legends  purporting  to  explain  how  this  division  of  the  tribe 
came  about.  One  is  a  Dieri  legend  from  Central  Australia  ; 
and  the  other  from  the  Wurunjerri  in  Southern  Victoria.  I 
have  considered  them  fully  in  Chapter  VIII.,  and  need  only 
mention  here  that  they  agree  in  the  essential  point  that  the 
division  of  the  tribe  was  made  with  intent  to  regulate  the 
relations  of  the  sexes. 

These  legends  have  no  historical  authority,  but  are  good 
evidence  of  the  belief  of  these  aborigines  that  this  universal 
basis  of  their  social  system  was  brought  about  by  intention,  and 
according  to  one  of  the  legends  had  a  supernatural  sanction. 

From  what  I  know  of  the  Australian  savage  I  can  see 
very  clearly  how  such  a  social  change  might  be  brought 
about.  They  universally  believe  that  their  deceased 
ancestors  and  kindred  visit  them  during  sleep,  and  counsel 
or  warn  them  against  dangers,  or  communicate  to  them  song- 
charms  against  magic.  I  have  known  many  such  cases,  and 
I  also  know  that  the  medicine-men  see  visions  that  are  to 
them  realities.  Such  a  man  if  of  great  repute  in  his  tribe 
might  readily  bring  about  a  social  change,  by  announcing  to 
his  fellow  medicine -men  a  command  received  from  some 
supernatural  being  such  as  Kutchi  of  the  Dieri,  Bunjil  of  the 
Wurunjerri,  or  Daramulun  of  the  Coast  Murring.  If  they 
received  it  favourably,  the  next  step  might  be  to  announce  it 
to  the  assembled  headmen  at  one  of  the  ceremonial  gatherings 


90         NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

as  a  supernatural  command,  and  this  would  be  accepted  as 
true  without  question  by  the  tribes-people. 

That  such  an  identical  legendary  explanation  of  the 
origin  of  the  classes  and  totems  existed  in  two  tribes  so  far 
distant  from  each  other  may  be  accepted  as  indicating  a 
widespread  belief  in  the  supernatural  origin  of  a  practice 
which  is  universal  throughout  Australia. 

To  bring  into  view  the  class  divisions  with  their  sub- 
divisions and  totems,  and  to  consider  their  bearing  upon 
aboriginal  society  and  the  process  of  social  development  to 
which  they  bear  witness,  it  will  be  necessary  to  tabulate  a 
number  of  cases,  taken  from  such  localities  as  will  enable 
the  reader  to  obtain  a  fairly  representative  picture  of  the  whole 
structure  ;  and  in  doing  so  I  shall,  as  before,  commence  with 
the  Lake  Eyre  tribes,  taking  the  Dieri  as  their  type. 

The  progressive  alteration  of  the  two-class  organisation 
has  been  in  two  divergent  directions.  In  one  the  classes 
have  been  again  segmented,  producing  four  sub-classes  in 
certain  parts  of  Australia,  and  eight  in  other  parts  by  still 
further  segmentation. 

The  alteration  in  the  other  direction  has  been  caused, 
either  by  the  production  of  an  anomalous  system  of  class 
and  totem,  or  by  the  extinction  of  the  class  system  altogether, 
in  which  case  the  local  organisation  usually  regulates  marriage. 
The  nature  and  sequence  of  these  changes  will  be  shown  in 
this  chapter,  and  in  the  following  one  the  manner  in  which 
the  rules  of  marriage  and  descent  have  been  affected. 

Tribes  with  Two  Classes  and  Female  Descent 

The  Dieri  tribal  community  is  divided  into  two  exogam- 
ous  intermarrying  moieties,  called  by  them  inurdu.  In 
Chapter  VIII.,  which  deals  with  the  Dieri  beliefs,  an  account 
is  given  of  the  origin  of  the  vmrdus.  Originally  animals, 
they  became  human  beings,  and  their  descendants  are  the 
Dieri  and  other  Lake  Eyre  tribes.  The  subjoined  tables  give 
the  class  names  and  totems  of  some  of  these  tribes  and  also 
show  how  the  same  totems  are  found  in  all,  either  by  the 
same  or  some  equivalent  name.      It  must  be  noted  that  the 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


91 


Dieri,  Tirari,  Wonkanguru,^  Ngameni,  Wonkamala,  and 
Yaurorka  call  the  class  and  totem  Mnrdii ;  but  with  the 
Yantruwunta  it  is  Kamiri  both  for  class  and  totem,  and  the 
class  names  Tiniwa  and  Kidpuru  answer  to  Matteri  and 
Kararu. 

As  my  inquiries  were  carried  on  in  the  Dieri  country 
mainly  by  Mr.  Siebert,  the  list  of  the  Dieri  umrdus  is  the 
most  complete,  but  even  with  the  Dieri  the  totems  are  more 
numerous  than  those  recorded,  and  the  same  remark  applies 
to  many  if  not  all  of  the  lists  of  totems  given  in  this  chapter. 
The  lists  are  drawn  up  in  the  same  numerical  order,  showing 
the  occurrence  or  absence  of  any  particular  totem  in  the 
tribes, 

DIERI  MURDUS 


Karaku. 


MATfERI. 


I. 

Talara 

rain 

Muluru  2 

2. 

Woma 

carpet-snake 

Malura 

3- 

Kaiialka 

crow 

Warogati 

4- 

I'uralko 

native  companion 

Karawora 

5- 

Karku 

red  ochre 

Markara 

6. 

Tidnama 

a  small  frog 

Kuntyiri 

7. 

Kananguru 

seed  of  Claytonia 
sp. 

Kintala 

S. 

Maiaru 

a  rat 

Yikaura 

9- 

Kirhapara 

10. 

Tapaiuru 

a  hat 

Kokula 

II. 

Dokubirabira 

the  pan-beetle  ^ 

Kanunga 

12. 

Milketyelparu 

'3- 

Kaladiri 

a  frog 

14. 

I'iranioku 

the  rabbit-bandi- 

(Kapita) 

coot 

15- 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

Punta 

shrew-mouse 

22. 

23- 

24. 

25- 

26. 

Karabana 

a  small  mouse 

a  caterpillar 

cormorant 

emu 

eagle-hawk 

a  fish 

Acada  sp. 

dingo 

native  cat 

small  marsupial 
kangaroo-rat 


'    IVotik  nieans  "  language.' 
^  The  Witchetty  grub  of  .Spencer  and  Gilien. 


•'  IIcliciis  perforatiis. 


92 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


WONKANGURU  MURDUS 


Karart. 


Matter!. 


I. 

Kuraura 

rain 

Wonamara 

a  caterpillar 

2. 

Wadnangani 

carpet-snake 

Tantani 

cormorant 

3- 

Wokula 

crow 

Warogati 

emu 

4- 

Karawora 

eagle-hawk 

S- 

Harkaba 

red  ochre 

6. 

Tidnamara 

small  frog 

7. 

Kanangara 

seed  of  Claytonia 

Madia 

dingo 

Maiaru 
Tapairu 


14.   Talka 


sp. 
a  rat 
a  bat 


the  rabbit-bandi- 
coot 


Kokula 
Pitcheri 


a  small  marsupial 

Dtihohia  Hop- 
U'oodii 


VANTRUWUNTA  KAMIRI 


Ku 

.PURU. 

TiNlWA. 

I. 

Ngantyara 

rain 

Padingura- 

padi 

a  caterpillar 

2. 

Manga 

carpet-snake 

5. 

Ngampuru 

a  caterpillar 

7- 

Tirta  or  Di 
gatha 

ran- 

dingo 

8. 

Kunamari 

a  rat 

9- 

Kanunga 

Widla 

10. 

Padipadi 

a  pouch-mouse 

II. 

Dokubirabira 

the  pan -beetle 

12. 

Pitcheri 

Duboisia  Hop- 
woodii 

13- 

Kutyarku 

a  frog 

14. 

Naramoku 

the  rabbit-bandi- 
coot 

Mungalli 

a  lizard 

«5- 

Kani 

iguana-lizard 

16. 

Willangu 

curlew 

17- 

Pinyangu 

shell-parakeet 

18. 

Malparu 

a  crane,  black   with 
white  on  wings 

21. 

Punta 

shrew-mouse 

22. 

Kuruma 

24. 

Kuyaku 

bream 

25. 

Dirangatha 

dingo 

SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


93 


On  the  south  side  of  Lake  Eyre  there  is  a  tribe,  or 
perhaps  more  properly  a  horde  of  the  Urabunna  calling 
themselves  Yendakarangu,  and  their  niurdns  are  as  follows, 
as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain  ;  but  it  is  evident 
that  these  are  only  a  part  of  the  totems  that  the  Yendakarangu 
must  have  possessed  in  common  with  the  other  tribes  of 
Lake  Eyre : — 

YENDAKARANGU   MURDUS 


Kararu. 

Matteri. 

\ 

Wakalo 

crow 

2. 

Tantani 

cormorant 

4- 

Kuraru 

eagle -hawk 

s. 

Arkaba 

red  ochre 

7- 

Mudla 

dog 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  totems  which  were  obtained 
for  me  some  years  ago  in  the  Yendakarangu  district  ^  differ 
in  some  respects  from  those  given  by  Spencer  and  Gillen," 
in  the  first  place  the  class  names  in  my  list  are  those  of  the 
Dieri,  while  in  the  latter  they  are  Kirarawa  and  Matthurie. 
As  regards  Matthurie,  the  difference  may  be  due  merely  to 
the  different  pronunciation  by  the  native  informant,  or  the 
inability  of  my  correspondent  to  seize  the  exact  pronuncia- 
tion, but  I  do  not  think  this  will  apply  to  the  other  class 
name,  because  the  difference  seems  too  marked  to  have  been 
overlooked.  It  seems  possible  that  the  Yendakarangu,  who 
are  near  neighbours  of  the  southern  Dieri  and  of  the  Tirari, 
may,  in  fact,  have  the  same  form  of  class  names  as  both, 
and  also  have  those  murdus  which  are  not  given  in  the  list 
by  Spencer  and  Gillen.  But  I  feel  that  it  is  only  fair  to 
these  authors  to  say,  that  where  there  is  doubt  as  to  the 
totems  of  the  Urabunna,  who  include  the  Yendakarangu,  I 
should  incline  to  their  view,  rather  than  that  of  my  corre- 
spondent, who  had  not  their  scientific  training  or  wide 
knowledge  of  the  subject. 


'  J.  Hogarth. 


*  op.  cit.  p.  114. 


94  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


URABUNNA  MURDUS » 


Ki 

RARAWA. 

Maithurie. 

I. 

Kurara 

rain 

Wonaniara             a  caterpillar 

2. 

Wadnangari 

carpet-snake 

Tantani                   cormorant 

3- 

Wokala 

crow 

Warogati                emu 

4- 

Karawora               eagle-hawk 

S- 

Harkaba 

red  ochre 

6. 

Tidnamara 

a  small  frog 

7- 

Madia                     dingo 

lO. 

Kokula                   a  small  marsupial 

n- 

Kelka 

a  frog 

14. 

Talka 

the  rabbit -bandi- 
coot 

NGAMENI MURDUS 


Kararu. 


Matteri. 


I. 

Kurara 

rain 

Muruwali 

a  caterpillar 

2. 

Woma 

carpet-snake 

Tantani 

cormorant 

3- 

Kaualka 

crow 

Warkityi 

emu 

4- 

Puralko 

native  companion 

Karawora 

eagle-hawk 

S- 

Markara 

a  fish 

6. 

Tidnamara 

a  small  frog 

Kutyiri 

a  variety  of  Acacia 

7- 

Kagnara 

seed  of  Claytonia 
sp. 

Tirta 

dingo 

8. 

Vikaura 

native  cat 

9- 

Kirrhapara 

10. 

Tapairu 

a  bat 

Kokula 

a  small  marsupial 

II. 

Dokubirabira 

the  pan-beetle 

Kanta-wateri 

kangaroo-rat 

12. 

Milkityerpara 

Pitcheri 

Duboisia  Hop  ■ 
ivoodii 

13- 

Taralyu 

a  frog 

Bukatu 

expedition  for  red 
ochre 

14. 

Piramoku 

the  rabbit-bandi- 
coot 

Wompirka 

a  lizard 

15- 

Kadapa 

slow-worm 

Kadni 

iguana-lizard 

16. 

Balyara 

a  small    pouched 
mouse 

Wilyuru 

curlew 

17- 

Chukuru 

kangaroo 

Katatara 

shell -parakeet 

18. 

Malparu 

a  crane,  "black  with 
white  on  the  wings 

*  Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  tells  me  that  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
Urabunna  tribe  the  totem  is  called  Paltinta,  and  that  Mr.  Gillen  found  it  at 
William's  Creek  to  be  Thimthumiie.  At  the  Peak  the  class  names  were  Kirara 
and  Matthurie. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


95 


WONKAMALA  MURDUS 


Kakaru. 


Matteri. 


I. 

Kuraura 

rain 

Padi 

a  caterpillar 

2. 

Chirka 

carpet-snake 

Tantani 

cormorant 

V 

Kaualka 

crow 

Pulkara 

emu 

s- 

Harkaba 

red  ochre 

lO. 

Kokula 

a  pouched  mouse 

12. 

Pitcheri 

Diiboisia           Hop- 
'I'oodii 

14. 

Wolkutyi 

VAURORKA  KAMIRI 


KARARf. 


Matteri. 


I. 

Ngantyara 

rain 

Muluru 

a  caterpillar 

2. 

Woma 

carpet-snake 

Malura 

cormorant 

3- 

Kewora 

emu 

4- 

Puralko 

native  companion 

Kariwora 

eagle-hawk 

s- 

Kambara 

red  ochre 

Ngamjiuru 

a  tish 

7- 

Mapara 

seed  of  Claytonia 
sp. 

Pandi 

dingo 

8. 

Vikaura 

native  cat 

9- 

Widla 

1 1. 

Dokubiral)ira 

pan -beetle 

Kanunga 

kangaroo- rat 

12. 

Pitcheri 

Dnhoisia 
woodii 

Hop- 

13. 

Kuyarku 

a  frog 

14. 

Naramoku 

the   rabbit-bandi- 
coot 

Karingara 

IS. 

Mithindi 

slow-worm 

Kani 

iguana-lizard 

16. 

Baliyara 

a  small   pouched 
mouse 

Wilangu 

curlew 

17. 

Tillngaru 

18. 

Malparu 

a  crane,  black 

with 

white  on  wing 

19- 

Ngarumba 

Box  eucalyptus 

20. 

Tundubulyeru 

water-rat 

21. 

Punta 

shrew-mouse 

22. 

Miltyipalu 

a  large  grey  hawk 

23- 

Yudlanti 

mesembrianthe- 
mum 

The  Perigundi  legend  explains  the  origin  of  the  Murdus 
and  finally  relates  how,  having  become  human,  they  dispersed 


96  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

in  all  directions,  thus  accounting  for  the  fact  that  the  totem 
names  are  scattered  over  the  tribal  countries,  yet  not  equally, 
some  occurring  more  plentifully  in  one  place  than  in  another. 
The  following  list  shows  this  distribution  at  the  present 
time : — 

Universally  distributed.  Woma,  Karku,  VVarogati,  Padi, 
Kaualka,  Karawora,  Malura,  Kuraura,  Markara,  Kintala. 

In  the  south  and  south-east,  at  Hergott  Springs, 
Beltana,  Lake  Frome,  Flinders  Range  etc.  Malka,^ 
Kapiri,  Bukato,  Malburu,  Wilyuru,  Kani,  Yirauka,  Chukuru, 
Tiwiltya,  Kapita,  Pildra.' 

In  the  west  and  north-west.  Mudlakupa,  Kirhapara, 
Kokula,  Kanunga,  Kanangara,  Kaladiri,  Tidnamara,  Pildra, 
Kani,  Kapiri,  Yunda-yunda. 

In  the  north,  at  the  Diamantina  and  Warburton. 
Kallakupa,  Yana,^  Maiaru,  Wonduru,^  Punta,  Pitcheri, 
Kuntyiri,  Kanangara. 

In  the  north-east  and  east,  and  on  all  the  Cooper  and 
its  waters,  Katatara,  Dokubira-bira,  Milketyelpara,  Puralko, 
Mitindi,  Tabaira,  Talyara,  Watari,  Waparu,"  Manpi,*'  Jimba- 
lunga,'  Ngarumba,  Piramoku,  Wolanguru,  Yudlanti,  Karabana, 
Kuruma,  Milkiwaru,  Tundubulyuru."^ 

Following  up  the  course  of  the  Cooper  from  the 
Yantruwunta  tribe,  the  next  tribe  of  which  I  have  any 
information  is  the  Kurnandaburi,  who  occupied  the  country 
now  known  as  Mt.  Howitt  Station,  on  the  eastern  branch 
of  Cooper's  Creek. 

By  it  the  two  classes  and  the  totems  are  called  Gaura, 
and  the  relation  of  persons  of  the  same  class  or  totem  is 
"  Gaura-molli,"  the  equivalent  for  the  Dieri  "  Murdu-mara," 
and  also  of  our  word  "  kinship." 

1  Acacia  atteiira.  *  A  bat. 

^  Opossum.  "  An  owl. 

3  A  small  edible  bulb.  ^  .\ustralian  robin. 

*  A  large  snake.  *  A  water-rat. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


97 


KURNANDABURI  GAURA 


YUNGO. 


Matara. 


Taldra 

kangaroo 

Korimora 

brown  snake 

Kunlara 

native  companion 

Kulbara 

emu 

Turra-guna 

iguana 

Kanni 

frilled-lizard 

Muro-muro 

large  black  cormorant 

Wirri-pirra 

kangaroo-rat 

Taragoro 

small  black  cormorant 

Kopula 

speckled  brown  snake 

Kogun-ya 

blue  crane 

Mirraltiera 

opossum 

Jitti 

dingo 

Kokula 

small  bandicoot 

Waranguim 

carpet-snake 

Korinya 

small  burrowing  rat 

Warogatchi 

crow 

Kanu-wogona 

small  crow 

Paringoro 

small  grubs  found  in 
trees 

Orekomatu 

a  frog 

Parina 

a  rat 

VVillungari 

teal-duck 

The  class  names  suggest  that  Matara  represents  Matteri, 
and  Yungo,  Kararu  ;  but  as  to  this  I  have  no  information, 
nor  does  the  arrangement  of  the  totems  under  the  two 
classes  give  any  certainty.  Half  of  the  totems  under 
Matara  are  also  under  Mattcri,  and  eight  of  those  under 
Yungo  are  also  under  Kararu.  The  others  are  either 
under  the  opposite  class  or  are  not  found  in  the  lists  given. 

But  this  is  certain,  that  the  social  organisation  of  the 
Yantruwunta  and  the  other  Lake  Eyre  tribes  must  extend 
up  the  Cooper  at  least  as  far  as  the  Kurnandaburi  tribe. 

To  the  eastward  of  the  Dicri  the  bounds  of  the  class 
names  Matteri  and  Kararu  are  approximately  marked  by 
the  Grey  and  Barrier  Ranges,  These  also  divide  two  great 
groups  of  tribes,  having  the  two-class  system,  of  which  the 
Dieri  is  the  type  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Wilya  tribe,  whose 
class  names  are  Kilpara  and  Mukwara,  is  the  type  on  the 
other.  The  latter  group  is  of  great  extent,  appearing  to 
consist  of  several  nations,  of  which  three,  namely,  the  Itchu- 
mundi,  the  Karamundi,  and  the  Barkinji  are  known  to 
me.      The  Wilya  tribe  is  an  example  of  the  first.^ 


'  J.  W.  Boultbee. 


H 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch- 


WILYA  TRIBE.      GREY  RANGE 


Classes. 


Mukwara 


Kilpara 


Totems. 


Bilyara 

Tirlta 

Burkunia 

eagle-hawk 

kangaroo 

bandicoot 

Kultapa 
Kami 

duck 
frilled-lizard 

Yaranga 
Kurli 

opossum 
dingo 

Kulthi 

emu 

Turu 

Naniba 

carpet-snake 
bone-fish 

Bauanyal 
Wongaru 

padi- melon 
wallaby 

This  system  obtains  not  only  in  the  Wilya  tribe  but  also 
in  the  Kongait,  Bulali,  and  Tongaranka  tribes  which,  with 
the  Wilya,  form  the  Itchumundi  nation,  all  the  members 
bearing  that  name  as  well  as  that  of  their  own  tribe.  The 
country  occupied  by  these  tribes  may  be  described  as  lying 
back  from  the  Darling  River,  and  bounded  on  the  west  by 
the  Grey  and  Barrier  Ranges. 

The  tribes  between  the  junction  of  the  Culgoa  with  the 

Darling  and  Wilcannia  form  the  Karamundi  nation,  and  its 

class  system   ma\'  be  represented   by   that  of  the  Milpulko 

tribe. 

MILPULKO  TRIBE.1 


Classes. 

Totems. 

Mukwara .          .          .          .      - 

Bilyara 
Turlta 
Burkunia 

eagle-hawk 

kangaroo 

bandicoot 

Uleburri 

duck 

Kami 

frilled-lizard 

Kulthi 

emu 

Turru 
Namba 

carpet-snake 
bone-fish 

Kilpara     .          .          .          .      ■ 

Birnal 
Bauanya 

iguana 
padi-melon 

• 

Yerilpari 
Muringa 

opossum 
wallaby 

»  J.  W,  Boultbee. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


99 


There  is  reason  for  thinking  that  the  Karamundi  nation 
also  includes  tribes  on  the  courses  of  the  Paroo  and  Warrego 
Rivers.  I  have  enumerated  these  in  the  first  part  of  this 
chapter,  and  I  now  give  the  class  system  obtaining  on  the 
Paroo. 

PARUINJI  TRIBE » 


Classes. 


Totems. 


Mukwara 


Kilpara 


Bilyara 

Thurlta 

Burkannia 

Yeringi 

Kami 

Kuiti 
Munji 
Tharu 
Burna 


eagle-hawk 

kangaroo 

bandicoot 

opossum 

lizard 

emu 
bream 

carpet-snake 
iguana 


The  name  Barkinji  includes  a  great  number  of  tribes 
forming  a  nation,  the  approximate  position  of  which  I  have 
already  given.  The  following  is  taken  from  Mr.  Cameron's 
notes : — 

BARKINJI  TRIBE* 


Classes. 


Mukwara 


Kilpara 


Totems. 


Billiara 

eagle-hawk 

Turlta 

kangaroo 

Kurtac  (Bilbae) 

a  rabbit-like  burrow- 

ing animal 

Tickara 

turkey 

Kultuppa 

whistling  duck 

Barkunia 

bandicoot 

Kultlu 

emu 

Turru 

snake 

Kami 

lizard 

Murinya 

wallaby 

Buuna 

Iguana 

Kuntara 

native  companion 

I  have  no  information   as  to  the  tribes  lower  down  the 

•  M.  J.  Feehan. 
*  A.  L.  P.  Cameron.      Op.  cit.     Journal  Anlhrop,  Inst.  vol.  xiv.  p.  348. 


loo        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Murray  than  the  Rufus,  to  which  place  the  Wiimbaio  tribe 
extended. 

All  that  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain  of  the  class  system 
of  that  tribe  is  as  follows,  but  it  suffices  to  show  that  it  must 
have  been  very  similar  to  the  systems  already  given  for 
tribes  higher  up  the  Darling  River.  This  tribe  extended 
for  about  60  miles  up  the  Murray  on  the  south  side. 

WIIMBAIO  TRIBE  > 


Classes. 


Mukwara 


Kilpaia 


Totems. 


?  eagle-hawk 

Karni-wari  lizard 

and  others 


? 
Namba 


crow 
bone-fish 
and  others 


On  the  northern  side  of  the  river  there  is  the  Ta-tathi 
tribe,  whose  class  names  are  Mukwara  and  Kilpara,  but  I 
am  unable  to  say  to  which  class  the  two  groups  of  totems 
given  below  belonged,  unless  by  analogy  with  other  tribes, 
Eagle-hawk,  Teal-duck,  and  Jew-lizard,  should  be  Mukwara, 
and  Crow,  Iguana,  and  brown  Eagle-hawk,  Kilpara. 


THE  TA-TATHI  TRIBE « 

Classes. 

Totems. 

Waip-illi 

large   brown   eagle- 
hawk 

Pain-ira 

teal-duck 

Wirak-gintha 

Jcw-li/.ard 

Wala-kili 

crow. 

Wai-im-haii 
Wa-ip-ili 

iguana. 

brown-coloure.l 
eagle-hawk 

Tribes  having  these  class  names  extended  up  the  Murray 
River  as  far  as  the  Loddon,  and    I   have  no  doubt  that,  had 

1  J.  Bulmer.  2  ^    l    P.  Cameron.      Op.  cit.  p.  349. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


any  one  recorded  their  totems,  they  would  have  been  found 
to  be  analogous  to  those  of  the  Ta-tathi  tribe. 

From  the  Loddon  upwards  the  class  names  were  the 
Bunjil  and  Waang  of  the  KuHn,  but  to  judge  by  the  Bange- 
rang  tribe,  descent  was  in  the  male  line,  and  therefore  such 
tribes  will  be  spoken  of  later  in  this  part. 

In  the  absence  of  direct  evidence  of  the  range  of  such 
tribes  up  the  Murray  from  the  Bangerang,  I  can  only  con- 
jecture that  it  may  have  been  as  far  as  where  the  class 
names  of  Bunjil  and  Waang  ceased,  and  others  came  in. 
This  was  perhaps  at  the  northern  boundary  of  the  Wolgal 
tribe  at  Walaregang  on  the  Murray  River. 

The  only  remaining  tribes,  known  to  me,  which  can  be 
included  in  this  section,  are  situated  on  the  upper  waters  of 
the  Murray,  Murrumbidgee,  Snowy,  and  Tambo  Rivers,  the 
Ya-itma-thang,  Ngarigo,  and  Wolgal. 

As  said  before,  the  first  named  became  extinct  at  an 
early  date  in  the  history  of  Victoria,  and  very  little  was 
recorded  concerning  it.  All  I  can  say  is  that  among  the 
totems  were  Tchuteba  the  rabbit-rat,  and  Najatejan,  the  bat, 
which  also  occur  in  the  neighbouring  Ngarigo  tribe,  with 
which  the  Theddora  branch  of  the  Ya-itma-thang  inter- 
married. That  these  two  totems  were  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  tribe  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  when  the  people 
played  at  ball,  Tchuteba  was  on  one  side  and  Najatejan  on 
the  other. 

The  Ngarigo  adjoined  the  Theddora  on  the  east  and  had 
the  sub-joined  class  system. 

NGARIGO  TRIBE 


Classes. 


Totems. 


Merung  Eagle-liawk 


Bellet-hellet 

Nadjatajan 

Hulemlm 

Muntlarung 

Munuing 

Mulan  or  Munja 

But-the-wark 

Kauunga 

VVaat 


lyre-bird 

liat 

flying-squirrel 

tuan 

black-snake 

a  fish 

the  niopoke 

black  opossum 

red  wallaby 


I02        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


NGARIGO  TRIBE— conitHued 


Classes. 


Yukembruk  Crow 


Totems. 


Bra-ar-gar 

a  small  hawk 

Tchuteba 

rabbit-rat 

Baua 

flying-squirrel  next 

in  size  to  bulemba 

Burrii 

kangaroo 

Berribong 

emu 

Budaluk 

lace-lizard 

Kuriiir 

native  companion 

Kauar 

spiny  ant-eater 

Ulunbau 

sleeping  lizard 

To  the  north  of  the  Ngarigo  were  the  Wolgal,  who 
extended  over  the  great  alpine  ranges  in  which  the  Murray 
and  the  Murrumbidgee  rise.  This  tribe  like  that  at  Omeo 
had  in  1870  become  almost  extinct,  there  being  only  a  few 
individuals  left,  one  of  whom  had  been  the  bard  or  singer  of 
his  people  and  had,  when  I  knew  him,  attached  himself  to 
the  Ngarigo.      The  Wolgal  class  system  is  as  follows  :  ^ 


WOLGAL  TRIBE 


Classes. 

Totems. 

Banda 
Nuron 

kangaroo 
emu 

Ebai 

hawk 

Malian  Eagle-hawk 

Mari 

Wutherin 

Bellit-bellit 

dingo 

flying-squirrel 

lyre-bird 

Natjanajan 

bat 

Umbe  Crow    .          .          .          - 

Megindang 

Maralang 

Biringal 

Maniyuk 

Wandeli 

womljat 
brown  snake 
a  star  (?  Venus) 
bandicoot 
spiny  ant-eater 

Tchuteba 

rabbit-rat 

I  have  said  in  the  last  chapter  that  the  Biduelli,  a 
small  tribe  which  lived  in  the  dense  forest  country  between 
the    coast    range,   the    Lower    Snowy    River    and    the  sea, 

'   Rev.  J.  Bulmer,  verified  by  me. 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  103 

must  be  considered  as  having  originated  by  the  associa- 
tion of  "  broken  men "  from  the  adjacent  tribes.  A  con- 
sideration of  their  social  organisation  also  suggests  the  same 
conclusion.  I  found  one  family  with  the  Ngarigo  class  name 
Yukembruk  Crow,  and  the  Ngarigo,  Theddora,  and  Murring 
totem,  Tchuteba,  the  rabbit-rat.  Another  family  was  Bunjil, 
apparently  connecting  the  Biduelli  with  the  Mogullum-bitch, 
a  Kulin  tribe  on  the  Upper  Ovens  River.  They  had  also 
the  sex  totems  of  the  Kurnai,  Yiirung,  and  Djiitgun,  Emu, 
Wren,  and  Superb  warbler. 

These  classes  and  totems  descended  through  the  female 
line,  with  the  exception  of  the  sex  totems,  which  are  every- 
where respectively  the  brother  or  sister,  as  the  case  may  be, 
of  the  individual. 

There  being  female  descent,  the  Biduelli  may  be  con- 
veniently placed  as  an  appendix  to  the  Ngarigo,  their 
northern  neighbours. 

Tribes  with  Four  Sub-Classes  and  Female  Descent 

The  pastoral  settlers  in  the  country  of  the  Kamilaroi 
tribes  must  from  early  times  have  known  of  the  existence  of 
the  four  sub-class  names  of  this  nation,  for  it  was  common 
for  an  aboriginal  to  be  addressed  by  the  name  proper  to  him 
or  herself.  But  they  were,  so  far  as  I  know,  first  published 
by  the  Rev.  W.  Ridley,  whose  attention  had  been  called  to 
them  by  Mr.  T.  E.  Lance.^  Mr.  Ridley  pointed  them  out  to 
Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  in  1871,  who  sent  a  memorandum  on 
them  to  Dr.  Lewis  H.  Morgan,  following  Mr.  Ridley's 
method  of  spelling,  and  in  that  guise  they  appeared  in  Dr. 
Morgan's  Ancient  Society}  Subsequently  Mr.  Lance  in- 
formed Dr.  Fison  that  the  spelling  aforesaid  did  not  correctly 
represent  the  sound  of  the  words.  After  a  careful  inquiry 
from  several  competent  informants,  he  altered  the  spelling  to 
that  given  in  our  work,  Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai. 

It  was  shown  at  that  time  which  of  these  names  inter- 
married, and  also  which  names  were  borne  by  the  children  of 
the  several  marriages. 

>  J.  A  J.  ii.  p.  259.  2  p.  56 


I04        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Our  critical  examination  of  these  "  rules  of  marriage  and 
descent,"  and  the  fact  that  the  four  names  represented  four 
divisions  of  the  tribe,  led  us  to  feel  satisfied  that  they  must 
be  subdivisions  of  two  primary  classes,  of  whose  existence  in 
many  parts  of  Australia  we  were  not  then  aware. 

It  was  only  after  long-continued  inquiry  that  I  learned 
through  a  valued  correspondent,  Mr.  Cyrus  E.  Doyle,  then 
living  at  Moree  in  the  country  of  the  northern  Kamilaroi,  of 
the  existence  there  of  the  two  class  names,  of  which  the  four 
sub-class  names  are  the  subdivisions.  Subsequently  I  found 
the  two  class  names  in  tribes  of  Southern  Queensland, 
which  have  descent  in  the  male  line,  finally  in  some  of  the 
WiradjuVi  tribes  in  Western  New  South  Wales. 

Not  only  was  the  discovery  of  these  two  primary  class 
names  important,  as  connecting  the  two-class  systems  with 
those  having  four  sub-classes,  but  they  afforded  me  the 
means  of  ascertaining  with  absolute  certainty,  in  any  given 
case  where  they  existed,  whether  descent  was  in  the  male  or 
female  line.      This  will  be  further  detailed  in  Chapter  V. 

The  following  is  the  complete  class  system  of  the 
Kamilaroi  of  the  Gwydir  river,  with  the  exception  that,  as  in 
other  cases,  it  is  not  certain  that  the  totems  are  numerically 
correct : — 

KAMILAROI    TRIBE 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Kupathin 
Dilbi 

1 

/ 
( 

Ipai 
Kunibo 

Murri 
Kubbi 

kangaroo,  opossum,  bandicoot,  black 
duck,     padi-melon,     eagle-hawk, 
scrub -turkey,   yellow- fish,  honey- 
fish,  bream 

emu,  carpet-snake,  black  snake,  red 
kangaroo,    honey,   walleroo,    frog, 
codfish 

Kupathin  and  Dilbi  divide  the  tribal  community  into 
two  moieties,  just  as  Matteri  and  Kararu  or  any  other  of  the 
pairs  of  class  names  do.  Omitting  for  a  moment  the  four 
sub-classes,  there  remain  only  the  two  classes,  each  with  its 
group  of  totems,  and  the  analogy  to  the  two-class  system  is 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  105 

at  once  apparent.  It  is  clear  that  the  difference  consists  in 
the  interpolation  between  the  totems  and  the  two  classes  of 
four  sub-classes  ;  or  perhaps  the  more  correct  statement 
would  be  that  each  primary  class  has  been  divided  into  two 
moieties,  and  that  the  totems  either  remain  with  the  primary, 
and  are  common  to  both,  as  in  some  tribes,  or  as  in  others, 
have  been  divided  between  the  sub -classes.  When  this 
occurs  it  is  evidently  a  further  stage  in  the  process  of 
subdivision. 

The  consideration  of  the  effects  produced  by  these 
changes  will  be  found  in  the  following  pages ;  but  it  may  be 
said  now  that  descent  runs  directly  in  the  primary  classes 
and  the  totems,  and  indirectly  in  the  sub-classes. 

As  an  appendix  to  the  Kamilaroi  tribe,  I  add  some 
particulars  about  the  Gcawe-gal  of  the  Hunter  River.  I  learn 
that  this  tribe  had  the  complete  sub-class  system  of  the 
Kamilaroi,  but  my  informant,  Mr.  G.  W.  Rusden,  said  that 
although  he  could  not  recollect  all  their  class  divisions,  they 
had  certainly  the  great  divisions  Yippai  and  Kombo. 

There  was  a  small  tribe  on  the  Bellinger  River  on  the 
east  coast  of  New  South  Wales  called  Kombaingheri,  which 
had  the  following  four  sub-classes,  each  having  a  separate 
male  and  female  name.  This  peculiarity  has  not  come  under 
my  notice  in  any  other  tribe  of  South-Eastern  Australia. 

M.-ile.  Female. 

Kurlx)    .......  Kuran 

Wombo  ......  Wirikin 

Maro     .......  Kurgan 

Wiro      .......  Wongan ' 

I  have  no  information  which  would  enable  me  to  say 
which  of  these  form  the  pairs  representing  the  two  moieties 
of  the  tribe,  and  therefore  the  line  of  descent  cannot  be 
given. 

To  the  West  and  South-west  of  the  Kamilaroi  is  the 
Wiradjuri  nation,  and  as  an  example  I  take  that  tribe  of  it 
which  occupied  the  greater  part  of  Riverina.  The  following 
table  gives  its  .social  organisation  as  far  as  I  have  been  able 
to  ascertain  it :  ^ — 

»  E.  Palmer.  2  J.  B.  Gribble. 


io6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


WIRADJURI   TRIBE 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

. 

Malian 

eagle-hawk 

I 

' 

Vungai 

mallee  hen 

2 

Vihai  in\ 

Giramul 

opossum 

3 

1  lUcil    \"^ 

Burimul 

fly 

4 

Buragin 

English  bee 

5 

Moiety  A 

^ 

? 

kangaroo-rat 

6 

Ngiirin 

native  bee 

7 

f 

Narung 

bloodsucker-lizard 

8 

Wumba  (6) 

Gunir 

padi-melon 

9 

I 

Wagan 

crow 

lO 

i 

Biringun 

red  kangaroo 

I 

Murri  (r) 

Duliii 

a  small  lizard 

2 

I 

Wungaglan 

young  emu 

3 

Moiety  B 

Butharung 

flying-squirrel 

4 

Kubbi  ((/) 

Guro 

bush-rat 

5 

Bidija 

chicken-hawk 

6 

? 

bandicoot 

7 

The  class  names  have  not  been  found  in  this  tribe.  I 
have  added  the  capital  letters  A  and  B  to  represent  them, 
the  letter  attached  to  the  sub-classes  and  the  numbers 
attached  to  the  totems  are  referred  to  elsewhere.  The 
marriages  are  given  in  the  chapter  on  "  Marriage  Rules." 

The  foregoing  table  shows  that  the  four  sub-classes  are 
the  same  as  those  of  the  Kamilaroi,  and  the  absence  of  the 
two  primary  class  names  in  this  system  means  either  that 
they  have  fallen  into  abeyance,  or  that  my  informant  was 
not  able  to  ascertain  them.  That  they  exist,  at  least  in 
some  of  these  tribes,  is  shown  by  their  occurrence  in  that 
Wiradjuri  tribe  which  occupied  the  country  about  Mossgiel, 
north  of  the  Lachlan  River, 

The  following  table  shows  the  classes,  sub-classes,  and 
totems  of  that  tribe  :  ^ — 

1  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  tribes  of  the  Itchumundi  nation,  the  two 
names  being  Mukolo  and  Ngielpuru,  and  these  names  accompany  the  class  names 
Mukwara  and  Kilpara. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


107 


WIRADJURI   TRIBES,   LACHLAN 

RIVER  I 

Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Yunghai 

mallee  hen 

1 

f 

Ipai  (a)   .     •     . 

Gunarr 

padi-melon 

2 

Willi 

opossum 

J 

Mukula  A 

Yunghai 

mallee  hen 

I 

Kuml)o  (6) 

Uroaine 

emu 

2 

Willi 

opossum 

3 

, 

Murri 

red  kangaroo 

I 

Murri  (c) 

Gurung 

bandicoot 

2 

Budthurung 

black  duck 

3 

Thurungai 

snake 

4 

Budthurung  B  ■ 

Dihuiin 
Murri 

lace-lizard 
red  kangaroo 

5 

I 

Budthurung  '^ 

black  duck 

3 

Kubbi  (d) 

Dihuiin 

lace-lizard 

5 

Gurung 

bandicoot 

6 

In  the  above,  the  totem.s  are  common  to  both  the  sub- 
classes, or  in  other  words  remain  with  the  class,  and  have 
not  been,  as  in  other  case.s,  distributed  between  them.  Some 
of  the  marriages  and  descents  in  this  branch  of  the  Wiradjuri 
are  quite  abnormal,  and  are  discussed  in  the  next  chapter. 

The  Baraba-baraba  tribe  occupied  the  country  to  the 
south  of  the  Wiradjuri,  and  was  most  probably  related  to  it. 

Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron  writes  the  name  "  Bura-burabra  " 
or  shortly  "  Burabra."  The  following  list  gives  the  sub-class 
names,  and  some  of  the  totems,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to 
him  : — 


Sub-Classes. 


Totems. 


Yipai 

Wumbi 

Murri 

Kubbi 


opossum 

? 
birakal,  the  root  of  the  quandong  tree 
kutembruk,  the  blue  crane 


To  the  north  of  the  Wiradjuri  of  the  Lachlan  River,  and 

*  A.  L.  r.  Cameron,  o/.  cit.  p.  345,  and  subsequent  correspondence. 
*  There  is  no  explanation  why  Budthurung  is  also  a  totem. 


io8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


extending  to  the  Bogan,  is  the  country  of  the  Wonghibon 
tribe.  The  Wonghibon  appear  to  be  an  offshoot  or  branch 
of  the  Wiradjuri  nation  ;  for,  as  put  to  Mr.  Cameron  by  one 
of  the  Wathi-wathi  tribe,  the  Wiradjuri  and  Wonghibon  are 
*'  all  the  same,  only  they  talk  a  little  different  ;  Wiradjuri 
blackfellow  say  'wira'  for  'no,'  and  Wonghi  blackfellow 
say  '  wonghi,'  but  they  are  all  friends."  The  class  system 
is  as  follows  : — 

WONGHIBON  TRIBE 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Ngiclbunuirra    -| 
Mukumurra        -' 

Ipai 
Kumbo 

Murri 
Kubbi 

mallee  hen 

emu 

opossum 

black  duck 
bandicoot 
red  kangaroo 

The  similarity  of  the  Wonghibon  class  system  to  that 
of  the  Wiradjuri  is  apparent,  as  is  also  that  of  the  totems, 
making  them  seem  almost  identical. 

The  class  system  of  the  Unghi  tribe  near  Charleville  ^ 
is  as  follows  : — 


UNGHI 

TRIBE 

Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Not  known 

1 

Hepai 

Kombo 

kangaroo 

dingo 

emu 

opossum 

Not  known 

{ 

Muri 
Kubi 

>  Not  ascertained 

The  classes  and  totems  of  the  Yualaroi  or  Wollaroi  are 
those  of  the  Kamilaroi,"  but  the  existence  of  the  primary 

^  A.  L.  P.  Cameron.  2  Robert  Crowthers. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


109 


classes  has  not  been  ascertained.  Indeed  it  is  open  to  con- 
jecture that  all  the  tribes  which  have  the  Kamilaroi  class 
names  are  in  fact  parts  of  the  same  great  tribal  aggregate, 
although  distance  may  have  in  some  cases  practically  severed 
them  from  each  other.  This  view  would  also  include  in  this 
aggregate  the  Bigambul  tribe,  which  inhabited  the  Darling 
Downs  and  Gwydirdistrict.  The  Bigambul  tribe  may  be  taken 
as  the  most  northern  of  those  having  the  Kamilaroi  class 
system,  and  it  is  in  this  part  of  Queensland  that  two  other 
systems  with  four  sub-classes  meet  that  of  the  Kamilaroi. 
The  three  tribes  which  are  the  examples  of  this  are  the 
Bigambul,  the  Emon  about  Taroom,  and  the  Ungorri  in  the 
country  comprising  St.  George,  Charleville,  Nive,  Taroom, 
Surat,  and  Condamine.^ 

The  sub-class  names  of  these  tribes  and  their  relative 
equivalents  are  shown  in  the  following  table  : — 


Bigambul. 

Emon. 

Ungorri. 

Hipai 

Kombo 

Murri 

Kobi 

Taran 
Bondan 
Barah 
Bondurr 

Urgilla 
Anbeir 
Wungo 
Ubur 

The  more  fully  stated  class  systems  of  the   Emon  and 
Ungorri  tribe  are  as  follows  : — 


EMON  TRIBE* 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Taran 
Bondan 
Barah 
Bondurr 

Nguran                 emu 
Amu                      water 
Abbul                    carjiet  snake 
Woggun                 scrub  turkey 

*  James  Lalor. 


•■i  ///. 


no        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


UNGORRI  TRIBE  » 


Totems. 


Ngorgu 
Bondun 

Tonga 
Bulbora 
Tambul 
Abboia 


kangaroo 
bandicoot 

opossum 
flying  fox 
brown  snake 
lizard 


The  Ungorri  are  another  instance  of  the  totems  being 
divided  between  the  sub-classes.  They  appear  to  me  to  be 
incomplete  as  to  number,  but  my  informant  gave  them  as 
complete,  and  his  long  experience  entitles  his  statements  to 
be  accepted  with  respect.  In  the  absence  of  a  tabulated 
statement  of  a  number  of  marriages  and  descents,  showing 
the  respective  inherited  sub-classes  and  totems,  I  am  unable 
to  say  more,  and  give  the  table  as  it  was  given  to  me. 

Neither  in  the  Emon  nor  in  the  Ungorri  tribe  were  the 
two  class  names  obtainable. 

The  Emon  tribe  probably  represents  the  western 
example  of  tribes  which  extend  from  the  Bunya-Bunya 
Mountains  northwards  to  Wide  Bay,  and  possibly  even  as 
far  as  Port  Curtis,  having  four  sub-class  names  differing 
slightly  in  accordance  with  their  dialects.  The  Ungorri 
tribe  represents  a  third  large  group  of  tribes,  with  four  sub- 
classes, the  names  of  which  are  substantially  the  same  as 
those  of  the  Ungorri.  These  sub-class  names  extend  north- 
wards, at  least  as  far  as  the  Maikolon  tribe  on  the  Upper 
Cloncurry  River."  They  occur  on  the  coast  at  Gladstone, 
and  extend  westwards  to  the  Thomson  River  and  other 
sources  of  the  Barcoo,  as  well  as  the  Upper  Diamantina  and 
the  Hamilton  River.^ 

The  social  organisation  of  the  Emon  tribe  is  represented 
by  that  of  the  Kaiabara  tribe  which  inhabited  the  Bunya- 
Bunya  Mountains,  and  the  latter  connects  this  system  with 
that  of  the  Kamilaroi  by  its  two  class  names  ;  but,  as  male 

1  J.  Lalor.  ^  E.  Palmer.  3  D.  M 'Donald. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


descent  obtains,  the  discussion  of  this  will   be  deferred   to  a 
later  part  of  this  chapter. 

Passing  over  for  the  present  those  tribes  which  have 
four  sub-classes  and  male  descent,  the  next  tribe  to  be  noted 
here  is  the  Kuinmurbura,  which  claimed  the  peninsula 
between  Broad  Sound  and  Shoal  water  Bay.  This  tribe  is 
one  of  a  considerable  number  which  may  be  merely  sub- 
tribes,  hordes  of  a  larger  one,  or  possibly  component  parts 
of  a  nation,  but  I  can  form  no  conclusion  on  the  subject. 


KUINMURBURA 

TRIBE  » 

Classes. 

Subclasses. 

Totems. 

Yungeru 

{ 

Kurpal 

the  barrimundi 

Bor 

black  eagle-hawk 

Kuialla 

a  hawk 

Merkein 

laughing  jackxss 

Witteru 

•• 

Karilbui 
Munal 

•a    good  water 
iguana 

f 
1 

Bingarra 
Kaunra 
13oal 
Kolpobora 

curlew 
clear  water 
scrub  wallaby 
a  hawk 

The  female  name  is  formed  by  the  postfix  an,  as  (male) 
Kurpal,  (female)  Kurpalan.  This  postfix  is  also  attached  to 
the  class  names  and  totems. 

This  is  one  of  the  rare  instances  of  class  or  sub-class 
names  being  totems ;  the  others  are  the  Kulin  tribes  of 
Victoria,  and  the  Wolgal  and  Ngarigo  of  New  South  Wales, 
and  the  Annan  River  tribe  in  Queensland. 

The  country  between  the  Mackenzie  River  and  the 
Lower  Dawson,  therefore  south-westerly  from  the  Kuinmur- 
bura tribe,  was  occupied  by  the  Kongulu  tribe  up  to  1895. 
Probably  it  has  become  extinct,  because  at  that  time  it  was 
terribly  demoralised  by  the  wholesale  distribution  of  opium 
in  lieu  of  wages,  and  given  as  bribes,  as  well  as  by  the  retail 
distribution  of  it.""^ 

The  class  system  of  this  tribe  is  as  follows  : — 


Yune-nguru  •!  ,    ,    . 
°     °         tjarbain 


Wut-thuru 


{Kairawa 
Bunjur 


»  W.  H.  Flowers. 
*  "Girroon  bah"  in  the  Qmenslander,  December  28,  1895. 


112        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


The  totems  were  called  Baikain,  and  were  transmitted 
from  mother  to  child.  They  were  usually  animals,  but  also 
trees.  The  totem  names  appear  to  have  been  grouped  under 
other  names,  such  as  Mirunjul,  the  effect  of  which  has  not 
been  explained,  but  possibly  they  may  resemble  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  Wotjobaluk  totems.  The  following  list  gives 
the  totems  and  collective  names  so  far  as  they  have  been 
recorded  : — 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Mirunjul 

Mulloaru 
Mahnul 
Kurithulla 
Buljir 

black  or  brush  wallaby 
black  iguana 
eagle-hawk 
sandal-wood 

Jiimi 

' 

Chewar 

Walukumbi 

KapuUa 

great  owl 
frilled  iguana 
brigalow 

Kulpuwura 

i 

Wataern 
VVaiya 

crow 

scruli  wallaby 

Westward  of  the  tribes  of  which  the  Kuinmurbura  is  the 
example,  and  on  the  waters  falling  into  the  Burdekin  River, 
there  is  the  class  system  of  which  the  Ungorri  is  one  of  the 
most  southern  extensions,  and  which  has  apparently  the 
widest  range  of  the  four  sub-class  systems  of  Queensland. 
As  a  typical  example  of  this  form  of  social  organisation  I 
take  the  Wakelbura  tribe  of  the  Bclyando  River. 

WAKELBURA   TRIBE' 


Classes. 

Siib-Classes. 

Totems. 

Malera 
Wuthera 

. 

Kurgilla 

Banbe 

Wungo 
Obu 

Opossum,  spiney  ant-eater,  eagle-hawk, 
turkey,  iguana,  black  bee,  kangaroo 

Forest     kangaroo,     ringtail     opossum, 
iguana 

Emu,  carpet  snake,  gidya  tree,  wallaby 

Black   duck,   carpet   snake,  large   bee, 
emu,  walleroo,  gidya  tree,  wallaby 

*  J.  C.  Muirhead. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


"3 


These  two  class  names  extend  as  far  as  Charters 
Towers,  where  the  Akulbura  tribe  speaks  a  different  dialect 
and  has  different  names  for  the  classes  and  sub-classes.  At 
about  Muttabura,  on  the  Thompson  River,  and  near  Clermont, 
these  class  names  cease  with  the  Bathalibura. 

The  Bathalibura  classes  are  Yungaru  and  Wutheru,  but 
the  sub-classes  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Wakelbura.  In 
this  latter  tribe  there  is  a  group  of  totems  attached  to  each 
class  division  ;  this  group  divides  between  the  two  sub- 
classes, and  yet  there  are  some  totems  which  are  common  to 
both,  this  being  perhaps  a  survival  of  the  time  when  the 
sub-classes  had  not  yet  come  into  existence. 

Certain  animals  are  the  especial  game  of  each  class. 
Obu,  for  instance,  claims  as  his  game  emu  and  wallaby,  and 
if  he  wishes  to  invite  his  fellows  of  the  same  sub-class,  in  a 
neighbouring  tribe,  to  hunt  the  common  game,  he  must  do 
this  by  means  of  a  message-stick,  made  from  the  wood  of  a 
tree  which  is,  like  themselves,  of  the  Obu  sub-class.  When 
a  man  desires  to  perform  some  magical  act,  he  must  use  for 
it  only  objects  which  are  of  the  same  class  as  himself,  and 
when  he  dies  he  is  laid  on  a  stage  made  of  the  branches  and 
covered  with  the  leafy  boughs  of  a  tree  of  his  class.  Among 
all  the  natural  objects  of  his  class,  there  is  some  one  which 
is  nearer  to  him  than  any  other.  He  bears  its  name,  and  it 
is  his  totem. 

Another  example  of  the  system  is  that  of  the  Buntamurra 
tribe,  whose  country  is  on  the  Bulloo  River,  extending  south- 
wards as  far  as  Thargominda,  400  miles  in  a  straight  line 
from  the  Wakelbura  country. 

The  class  system  of  the  Buntamurra  is  as  follows  : — 


BUNTAMURRA 

TRIBE' 

Class. 

Sul>-Class. 

Totem. 

Not  ascertained 

Gurgilla 

1 

kangaroo 
padi-mclon 
wallaby 
eagle-hawk 

»  J.  H.  Kirkham. 


114        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


BUNTAMURRA  TRIBE— cotttinued 


Class. 

Sub-Class. 

Totem. 

{ 

crow 

Banburi 

1 

mountain  snake 
porcupine  (Echidna  sp.) 

a 
1 

Wongo 

- 

wild  goose 
wild  turkey 
white  duck 
swan 

o 
S5 

. 

opossum 
diving  duck 

( 

1 

bandicoot 

Gubero 

Iguana 
smallest  iguana 

The  feminine  name  is  formed  by  the  postfix  gtin,  as 
Gubero  and  Guberogun. 

This  tribe  appears  to  be  on  the  boundary  of  this  sub- 
class system,  and  of  the  class  system  of  the  Darling  River 
with  the  names  Mukwara  and  Kilpara. 

Tribes  with  Four  Sub-Classes  and  Male  Descent 

The  next  stage  of  social  development  is  where  there  are 
two  primary  classes  and  four  sub-classes,  with  descent  in  the 
male  line. 

When  our  knowledge  only  extends  to  the  four  sub- 
classes, with  their  marriages  and  descents,  it  is  possible  by 
pairing  them  in  different  ways  to  produce  either  female  or 
male  descent. 

But  when  the  class  names  are  known,  no  such  difficulty 
can  arise.  Failing  this  knowledge,  the  totems  will  give  a 
clue,  except  in  tribes  like  the  Arunta,  where  the  totemic 
name  is  not  inherited.  In  the  absence  of  these  guides, 
custom  will  serve  :  for  instance,  in  games  played  with  a  ball, 
the  two  segments  of  one  class  will  play  together  against 
those  of  the  other  ;  or  when   the  whole    tribe    is   gathered 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  115 

together  on  some  ceremonial  occasion,  the  two  pairs  of  sub- 
classes will  camp  on  opposite  sides  of  a  creek.  In  ceremonial 
or  expiatory  encounters,  one  pair  of  fellow  sub-classes  will 
always  side  together  against  the  other  two. 

I  have  found  a  simple  diagram  of  very  great  assistance 
in  working  out  the  class  system  of  a  tribe,  especially  as  a 
test  of  the  line  of  descent. 

In  this  diagram  I  substitute  letters  and  numerals  for  the 
primary  classes  and  sub-classes.  Where  I  introduce  the 
totems  I  use  numbers.  The  Kamilaroi  will  serve  as  the 
type  of  tribes  which  had  four  sub-classes  and  female  descent, 
and  the  class  system  is  thus  diagrammatically  represented, 
"  A  "  being  Kupathin  and  "  B "  Dilbi  ;  then  a  is  Ipai,  d 
Kumbo,  c  Murri,  and  d  Kubbi.  Anticipating  the 
statement  in  the  next  chapter,  that  Ipai  marries  Kubbitha, 
and  that  the  children  are  Murri  and  Matha,  the  diagram, 
using  the  above  symbols,  would  be  as  under,  m.  =  male,  and 
f.  =  female. 

Diagram  I 


M; 

'A- 

m. 

Aa 

f. 

Bd 

m.  Be... 

...  f.  B( 

etc. 


This  diagram  shows  clearly  that  the  child  Ik  inherits 
its  mother's  class  name,  and  the  fellow  sub-class  to  hers. 

Tribes  having  four  sub-classes,  and  also  in  some  cases 
the  two  primary  classes,  with  male  descent,  extend  for  some 
200  miles  inland  from  the  coast  at  Maryborough  (Queens- 
land), and  also  are  surrounded  inland  by  tribes  with  four 
sub-classes,  but  with  female  descent. 

I  take  the  Kaiabara  tribe  living  in  the  Bunya-Bunya 
Mountains  as  my  example,  because  I  first  obtained,  in  its 
class  system,  the  two  primary  classes  which  connect  it  with 
the  great  Kamilaroi  organisation.  The  system  as  I  have 
obtained  it  is  as  follows  : — 


ii6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


THE  KAIABARA  TRIBE » 


Classes. 


Sub-Classes. 


Totems. 


Kubatine  A 


Dilebi  B 


Bulkoin  (a) 
Bunda  (d) 

Baring  (ir) 
Turowaine  (rf) 


carpet  snake  (i),  flood-water  (2) 
native  cat  {3),  white  eagle-hawk  {4) 

turtle  (5),  lightning  (6),  rock  carpet  snake  {7) 
bat  (8),  black  eagle-hawk  (9) 


Making  use  of  the  diagram  as  an  illustration,  we  have 
the  following  result.  The  letters  are  attached  to  the  names 
in  the  table,  the  numerals  attached  to  the  totems  being 
made  use  of  in  the  next  chapter. 


Diagram  II 
m.  Aa 


f.  Bd 

m.  Afi  ■■■■■■  f.  A/> 
etc. 


This  shows  that  the  child  takes  the  class  name  of  its 
father  and  that  sub-class  which  with  his  represents  his  class 
Kubatine. 

The  line  of  descent  is  therefore  in  the  male  line,  being 
thus  in  strong  contrast  with  all  the  tribes  having  four  sub- 
class systems  which  I  have  enumerated. 

Tribes  which  have  the  same  class  system  extend  over  a 
considerable  tract  of  country  between  the  Kaiabara  and  the 
coast.  Mr.  Harry  E.  Aldridge  obtained  particulars  of  their 
class  systems  many  years  ago,  and  also  enabled  me  to  show 
their  positions  on  the  map  which  faces  page  58. 

Their  sub-class  names  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
Kaiabara  with  slight  differences  due  to  local  dialects.  In 
the  following  example  the  two  class  names  are  given,  thus 

'  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


IJ7 


showing  a  wider  extension  of  the  names  which  were  first 
observed  in  one  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes, 

TRIBES  ABOUT  MARYBOROUGH 


Classes. 


Sub-Classes. 


Kupathin 
Tilbi 


Balgoin 
Bunda 

Parang 
Their  wain 


In  Great  Sandy  Island  there  is  the  same  system,  and 
I  obtained  the  following  from  a  man  who  was  Theirwein- 
wurumi. 


MURUBURRA  TRIBE,  WHITE  CLIFFS 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Thulla 

water  snake 

Balgoin 

' 

Kogea 
Murri 
Moroin 
Mebeit 

carpet  snake 
red  kangaroo 
emu 
turtle 

. 

, 

Worowe 

iguana 

Not  known 

Bunda 

i 

Meri 

Murong 
Brongun 
Wotcha 

black  dingo 
black  duck 
thunder 
yellow  dingo 

Baring 

{ 

Waga 
Huntcha 

fish-hawk 
bream 

' 

Therwain 

W^urumi 
Gorgoi 

fire 
opossum 

In  this  tribe,  and  probably  in  all  tribes  between  the 
Bunya-Bunya  Mountains  and  Great  Sandy  Island,  descent 
is  in  the  male  line.  For  instance  my  informant,  Theirwein- 
wurumi,  took  his  class  and  totem  names  from  his  father. 

I  am  not  able  to  define  the  northern  limits  of  this  class 


ii8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

system,  but  it  must  be  south  of  Rockhampton,  for  a  new  set 
of  names  comes  in  there  with  female  descent,  of  which  the 
Kuinmurbura  tribe,  which  occupied  the  peninsula  between 
Broad  Sound  and  Shoalwater  Bay,  is  the  example. 

The  Kongulu  tribe,  south-westerly  from  the  Kuinmurbura, 
also  marks  the  limits  of  this  system. 

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  W.  E.  Roth  for  the  following 
example  of  a  tribe  with  male  descent  at  the  Annan  River 
near  Cooktown. 

ANNAN  RIVER  TRIBE 


Classes. 


Walar         a  bee 
Murla         a  bee 


Wandi 
Walar 


Sub-Classes. 


eagle-hawk 
a  l)ee 


Jorro  a  bee 

Kutchal       salt-water  eagle-hawk 


This  system  is  peculiar  in  that  the  classes  and  the 
sub-classes  have  animal  names,  and  are  apparently  totems, 
which,  as  before  mentioned,  is  a  rare  occurrence.  In  this 
tribe  descent  is  in  the  male  line,  for  instance  the  children  of 
a  man  who  is,  say,  Murla-Jorro  are  Murla-Kutchal. 


Tribes  with  Eight  Sub-Classes  and  Male  Descent 

The  occurrence  of  tribes  in  Central  Australia  with  four 
sub- classes  and  apparently  male  descent  came  under  the 
notice  of  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  and  myself  before  the  year 
1880,  but  in  the  absence  of  further  information  it  was  not 
made  use  of  It  is  due  to  the  epoch-making  work  of 
Spencer  and  Gillen  that  a  full  knowledge  of  the  organisa- 
tion of  the  native  tribes  of  that  part  of  Australia  has  been 
obtained.  They  have  pointed  out  that  in  the  Arunta  tribe 
descent  runs  in  the  male  line,  and  we  may  regard  the 
Arunta  as  typical  of  the  large  group  of  tribes  inhabiting  the 
centre   of  the  continent,  from   Lake   Eyre  in   the  south  to 


HI  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  119 

near  Port  Darwin  in  the  north,  in  which  descent  is  thus 
counted. 

In  all  that  vast  extent  of  country  the  development  of 
the  social  organisation  has  been  from  four  sub-classes  to 
eight,  and  on  the  basis  of  male  descent.  It  is  therefore 
not  surprising  that  so  far  no  tribes  have  been  met  with  with 
the  eight  sub-classes  and  descent  still  maintained  in  the 
female  line. 

Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  point  out  that  each  sub-class 
in  the  Arunta  tribe  is  in  fact  further  divided  into  two  groups, 
with  the  effect  that,  while  for  example  a  Panunga  man 
marries  one  of  the  Purula  women,  those  women  are  divided 
into  two  groups,  the  members  of  one  of  which  stand  in  the 
relationship  of  "  Unawa,"  whom  he  may  marry,  while  the 
members  of  the  other  stand  in  the  relationship  of  "  Unkulla," 
whom  he  may  not  marry.' 

The  other  two  sub-classes  are  similarly  divided,  so  that 
the  complete  eight  sub-class  system  is  shown  in  the  diagram 
below  ^ : — 

-,  f  Panunea  Purula  1  „      1 

Panunea-{  ,,,       ?  ,,       „  >  Purula 

^    I  Uknaria  Ungalla  I 

T,  1.1         I  Bulthara  Kumara  |  „ 

Bultnara  <   .  .  it    u-»  u        f  Kumara 

(  Appungerta  Utnbitchana  J 

The  fact  that  the  old  name  is  still  used  for  one-half  of 
a  sub-class,  while  a  new  one  has  been  given  to  the  other 
half,  is  very  significant  of  the  manner  in  which  the  segmenta- 
tion of  the  class  divisions  has  been  made  by  deliberate 
intention. 

The  eight  sub-class  system  prevails  in  a  large  number 
of  tribes  extending  from  the  Urabunna  a  little  north  of 
Lake  Eyre  to  near  Port  Darwin,  in  all  of  which  descent  is 
counted  in  the  male  line. 

'    0/>.  cit.  pp.  71,  72.  "^  Op.  cit.  p.  72. 


I20        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Tribes  with  Anomalous  Class  System  and 
Female  Descent 

I  have  traced  the  progressive  development  of  the  social 
organisation,  from  the  two- class  system  with  maternal 
descent  through  various  stages,  to  eight  sub -classes  and 
descent  counted  in  the  male  line.  I  now  return  to  the 
two-class  system,  with  female  descent,  in  order  to  trace  out 
the  alteration  of  the  social  organisation,  in  another  direction, 
with  different  results. 

The  most  convenient  starting-point  in  this  line  of 
inquiry  will  be  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe,  whose  northern  limits 
adjoin  the  southern  boundary  of  the  Wiimbaio,  whose  class 
names,  Mukwara  and  Kilpara,  are  the  equivalents  of  the 
Wotjobaluk  classes  Gamutch  and  Krokitch  respectively. 
The  class  system  of  this  tribe  is  in  some  respects  peculiar. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


121 


WOTJOBALUK 

TRIBE. 

Classes. 

Totems. 

Sub-Totems. 

i 

/ 

Yum 

native  cat 

/ 

Gunewara 

black  swan 

/ 

Berejul 

tiger-snake 

Jalan 

deaf  adder            f 

Jinap 

Waa 
VVilkri 

sulphur-crested  cocka- 
too 
crow 
dingo 

Ngungul 

the  sea 

Sub-totems  not  known 

/ 

? 

thunder 

Goruk 

magpie 

Boam-berifc 

.  native  cat 

Wanyip 

fire 

Jarb-juk 

white  gull 

Burtita 

white-bellied  cormor- 
ant 

Gamutch  f 

Batya-ngal 

pelican 

Borup 

small    black    cormor- 

ant 

Wangwung 

large  cormorant 

Ngari 

bull    oak    (Ctisuarhia 
j^/auca) 

Karimbel 

a  wader 

Barnga 

grey  heron 

\ 

I'ro|X)rn 

Joya 

Ngar-nur 

chough 

a  small  iguana 

lace-lizard 

Wurant 

black  cockatoo    - 

Nguri 
Gurmil 
Ikrnera 
Jering 

Bunjil 

black  duck 
a  small  snake 
teal  duck 
a  bird 

the  star  Fomalhault 

{ 

Gurau 

plains  turkey 

\ 

? 

opossum 

Ngaui 

the  sun                f 

'  Gur 

a  grub 

\ 

Garuka 

a  tuber 

1 

Gori 

grey  kangaroo 

v 

Burra 

red  kangaroo 

/ 

(iotjun 

native  companion 

1 

Bok 

bandicoot 

1 

Kau-ur 

emu 

Garchuka 

galah  cockatoo    f 

Jallup 
Julwil 

mussel 
musk  duck 

Krokitch 

I 

Bit-jan-gur 
Ngaru-wara 

mountain  duck 
magpie  goose 

Barewun 

a  cave 

Sub-totems 

not  ascertainable 

Batya-ngal 

pelican 

Do. 

Moiwilluk 

carpet  snake 

Do. 

Tikomai 

a  venomous  snake 

Mindai 

a  small  snake 

Wartwut 

the  hot  wind        i 

Morokut 
Wurip 

Pennant's  lorikeet 
a  small  bird 

Mitjen 

the  moon 

\ 

Munya 

a  tuber 

Sub-totems  not  ascertainable 

122        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  class  names,  totems,  and  sub-totems  are  called  mir. 

This  system  seems  to  be  a  peculiar  development  of  the 
class  systems  of  the  Darling  River  tribes.  But  in  this  case 
some  of  the  totems  have  advanced  almost  to  the  grade  of 
sub-classes,  and  they  have  a  markedly  independent  existence. 

The  new  features  are  the  numerous  groups  of  sub- 
totems  attached  to  the  classes  Gamutch  and  Krokitch 
respectively.  It  seems  as  if  some  of  the  totems  of  a  two-class 
system  had  grown  in  importance,  leaving  the  remaining 
totems  behind  in  obscurity  ;  and  probably  this  has  arisen 
through  this  tribe  dividing  the  whole  universe  between  the  two 
classes,  as,  for  instance,  the  Wiraduri  do.  Another  peculiarity 
is  that  some  of  the  totems  have  synonyms.  Thus  Ngaui 
has  a  second  name,  Ngaui-na-guli,  or  men  of  the  sun. 
Moreover,  it  is  said  to  be  closely  attached  to  Garchuka, 
which  one  of  my  informants  claimed  as  a  "  second  name 
of  his  mil-"  in  fact,  that  both  Ngaui  and  Garchuka  were 
his  names,  but  he  said  that  Ngaui  was  specially  his  name, 
because  "  Garchuka  came  a  little  behind  it."  On  the  other 
hand,  another  informant,  who  also  claimed  to  be  both 
Ngaui  and  Garchuka,  said  that  he  was  specially  Garchuka,  and 
that  "  Ngaui  came  a  little  behind."  Wherein  the  difference 
lay  I  was  quite  unable  to  ascertain,  but  it  seemed  that 
Ngaui  and  Garchuka  were  in  fact  slightly  divergent  ap- 
pendages of  the  class  Krokitch,  under  new  names.  This 
view  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the  mortuary  totems 
which  will  be  referred  to  later  are  the  same  for  both  Ngaui 
and  Garchuka.  Gamutch -batchangal  has  also  a  second 
name,  which  is  said  to  be  only  a  name  and  not  a  mir.  Its 
members  are  called  "darau-yau-ngau-uing,"  "we  are  warming 
ourselves,"  because  Wanyip/'^VQ,"  is  one  of  their  sub-totems. 

The  system  as  tabulated  is  not  complete.  The  old  men 
who  were  my  informants  knew  their  own  mir  and  the 
various  objects  which  they  respectively  claimed  as  belong- 
ing to  the  mi]',  and  therefore  to  themselves,  but  they  were 
not  so  clear  as  to  the  other  totems,  excepting  Batya-ngal, 
as  to  which  they  knew  a  number  of  objects  it  claimed. 
They  said  that  it  was  formerh'  a  very  strong  mir.  Regard- 
ing the  totems  Bareivun,  "  a  cave  "  ;  Ngungul,  "  the  sea  "  ;  and 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


123 


Mmtya,  "  a  yam,"  they  could  not  remember  more  than  some 
of  the  mortuary  totems. 

The  class  and  totem  pass  from  mother  to  child,  and 
the  feminine  name  is  formed  by  the  postfix  Gui'k,  as 
Gamutch-gurk,  jalan-gurk.  Thus  each  individual  has  two 
names  when  living,  and  after  death  receives  another,  which 
I  have  called  the  mortuary  totem.  One  of  my  informants 
was  Krokitch-ngaui,  When  he  died,  he  would  become 
Wurti-ngaui,  which  means  '•  behind  the  sun,"  or  a  shadow 
cast  behind  the  speaker  by  the  sun. 

The  objects  which  are  claimed  by  each  totem  are  also 
called  niir,  but  no  one  is  named  after  them.  They  only 
belong  to  a  person  because  they  belong  to  the  totem  to 
which  the  person  belongs.  Thus  one  of  my  informants  was 
Krokitch-ngaui,  and  therefore  claimed  Kangaroos  as  belong- 
ing to  him.  Another  man  of  the  same  class  and  totem 
claimed  Bunjil  as  belonging  to  him,  but  he  is  not  Hunjil 
and  does  not  take  it  for  a  name  ;  he  is  Ngaui  but  not  Bunjil. 
The  true  totem  owns  him,  but  he  owns  the  sub-totem. 

The  system  of  the  Buandik  tribe,  with  the  classes  and 
totems  so  far  as  they  have  been  ascertained,  is  as  follows  : — 


BUANDIK  TRIBE » 


Classes. 

Totems. 

Sub-Totems. 

Wert'o 

ti-tree 

duck,  wallaby,  owl,  cray-fish,  etc. 

Wirmal 

an  owl 

? 

Kroki 

Murna 

an  edible  root 

bustard,  quail,  small  kangaroo,  etc. 

Kara.il 

white  crcstless  cockatoo 

kangaroo,  she-oak,  summer,  sun, 

autumn,  wind,  ctc.''^ 

/ 

Mula 

fish -hawk 

smoke,  Banksia,  etc. 

Parangal  pelican 

dog.    Acacia    inelatwxylon,    fire, 

frost,  etc. 

Kumite  - 

Waa 

crow 

lightning,    thunder,   rain,  clouds, 
hail,  winter,  etc. 

Wila 

black  cockatoo 

moon,  stars,  etc. 

Karato 

a  harmless  snake 

fish,  eels,  seals,  stringbark  tree. 

etc. 

•  Mrs.  J.  Smith,  op.  cit.  pp.  ix.  x.  ;  Kamilaroi  and  Kumai,  D.  S.  Stewart, 
p.  168. 

^  "  Autumn  "  and  "  wind  "  are  feminine. 


124        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Each  of  these  totems  has  the  prefix  burty  which  means 
"  dry,"  as  burt-wereo,  but  the  prefix  has  been  omitted  for 
clearness. 

In  this  tribe,  as  in  the  Wotjobaluk,  not  only  mankind 
but  things  in  general  are  subject  to  these  divisions,  and  Mr. 
Stewart's  remarks  as  follows  are  worth  quoting.^  "  All  this 
appears  very  arbitrary.  I  have  tried  in  vain  to  find  some 
reason  for  the  arrangement.  I  asked,  *  To  what  division 
does  a  bullock  belong  ? '  After  a  pause  came  the  answer, 
'  It  eats  grass ;  it  is  Boort-wereo!  I  then  said,  '  A  cray-fish 
does  not  eat  grass  ;  why  is  it  Boort-werco  ? '  Then  came 
the  reason  for  all  puzzling  questions,  '  That  is  what  our 
fathers  said  it  was.'  " 

According  to  the  Wotjobaluk,  the  tribes  to  the  south 
were  related  to  them,  and,  as  I  have  said,  may  have  formed 
another  nation,  which  can  be  distinguished  by  the  name  for 
"  man,"  in  their  language,  namely  Mara.  My  example  is  the 
Gournditch-mara. 


GOURNDITCH-MARA  TRIBE ^ 


Classes. 

Totems. 

Sub-Totems. 

Krokitch 
Kaputch 

white  cockatoo 
black  cockatoo 

pelican,    laughing    jackass,    parrot, 
owl,     niopoke,     large     kangaroo, 
native  companion 

emu,   whip -snake,  opossum,   brush- 
kangaroo,  native  bear,  swan,  eagle- 
hawk,  sparrow-hawk 

The  feminine  form  of  the  name,  either  of  the  class  or 
the  totem,  is  formed  by  the  postfix  Jarr,  thus  Krokitch  and 
Krokitch-jarr. 

This  system  evidently  connects  with  the  Wotjobaluk  to 
the  north,  the  Mt.  Gambier  tribe  on  the  west,  and  with  the 
tribes  described  by  Mr.  Dawson  on  the  east.  I  again  quote 
his  work  as  to  the  tribes  which  are  to  the  east  of  the 
Gournditch-mara,  and  to  which  the  latter  evidently  belongs. 

Mr.  Dawson   mentions  no  class  names  which   might  be 


'   Kamilaroi  and  Kurtiai,  p.  1 69. 


^  Rev.  J.  n.  Stahle. 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  125 

the  equivalents  of  those  of  the  Buandik  or  the  Wotjobaluk, 
and  it  may  be  inferred  from  his  long  experience  that  he 
would  not  have  overlooked  them  did  they  exist.  It  seems^ 
to  me  probable,  therefore,  that,  like  others  of  the  coast  tribes, 
these  have  undergone  social  changes  which  have  much 
modified  their  class  systems. 

He  gives  five  totems,  and  says  that  the  two  first  and 
the  third  and  fourth  form  respectively  "sister  classes": — 

Totems. 
Kuurokeetch         long-billed  cockatoo 
Kartpoerappa        pelican 
Kappatch  Banksian  cockatoo 

Kirtuuk  boa  snake 

Kuunamit  quail 

The  traditions  of  their  origin  say  that  the  first  progenitor 
of  the  tribes,  the  Kuhkur-minjer,  or  first  great-great-grand- 
father, was  by  descent  a  long-billed  cockatoo,  who  had  for 
wife  a  Banksian  cockatoo,  who  is  called  Kuurorappa-moel, 
or  "first  great-great-grandmother."  Their  sons  and  daughters 
belonged  to  the  class  of  their  mother.' 

The  first  four  are  totems  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  the  third 
is  one  of  the  totems  of  the  Gournditch-mara,  and  the  fifth 
is  one  of  the  sub-totems  of  the  Buandik.  Some  years  ago 
Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron  was  so  good  as  to  make  inquiries 
from  the  natives  near  Mortlake,  which  is  within  the  boundaries 
given  by  Mr.  Dawson,  and  found  that  they  had  the  following 
totemic  system  : —  Totems. 

Krokage         white  cockatoo,  red  crest 

Karperap        pelican 

Kubitch  black  cockatoo 

^         Kartuk  whip  snake 

He  says  that  Karperap  is  supplementary  to  Krokage, 
and  Kartuk  to  Kubitch.  Krokage  may  marry  either  Kubitch 
or*  Kartuk,  and  Kubitch  may  marry  cither  Krokage  or 
Karperap,  and  the  children  belong  to  the  mother's  totem. 
These  are  clearly  four  of  the  "classes  "  given  by  Mr.  Dawson, 
and  it  is  evident  that  in  "  Kuurokeetch  "  we  have  Krokage, 
and  that  Krokage  is  the  equivalent  of  Kroki  of  the  Buandik, 
and  Krokitch  of  the  Wotjobaluk  ;  while  Kaputch  of  the 
Gournditch-mara  is  Kubitch,  or  Gamutch  of  the  Wotjobaluk. 

^    op.  cit.  p.  26. 


126        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Tribes  with  the  Two-Class  System  and 
Male  Descent 

On  the  eastern  side  of  the  Wotjobaluk  and  the  tribes 
described  by  Mr.  Dawson,  which  together  occupy  western 
Victoria,  there  was  the  Kulin  nation  described  in  the  last 
chapter.  Very  little  has  been  recorded  as  to  the  class  or- 
ganisation of  this  nation,  and  all  that  I  have  been  able  to 
preserve  has  been  obtained  from  the  few  survivors  of  the 
VVurunjerri.  Thagunworung,  and  Galgalbaluk  tribes  which  are 
now  practically  extinct.  As  to  the  other  tribes  of  the  nation, 
all  that  I  can  say  is  that  they  had  the  two  class  names,  and 
that  no  totems  were  known  to  my  informants  other  than 


the  one  given  below  : — 

WURUNJERRI  TRIBE 

Classes. 

Totems. 

Bunjil                       eagle-hawk 
Waang                     crow 

Thara 
No  totem 

small  hawk 

I  must  here  draw  a  distinction  between  the  Kulin  nation 
and  a  number  of  other  tribes  with  these  class  names,  the 
languages  of  which  differed  in  so  far  that  their  word  for 
"  man  "  was  not  Kulin. 

Even  then  a  further  important  distinction  comes  into 
view  arising  out  of  the  local  organisation.  The  class  names 
Bunjil  and  Waang  are  common  to  all  with  slight  variation  ; 
for  instance,  with  the  Jajaurung  the  word  Wrepil  replaces 
Bunjil,  both  meaning  eagle-hawk.  The  extent  to  which  the 
class  names  occurred  over  Victoria  may  be  roughly  indicated 
by  the  extreme  points  known  to  me.  North  to  south,  from 
Echuca  to  the  Port  Phillip  Heads,  and  east  to  west,  from  St. 
Arnaud  to  Mount  Buffalo,  being  170  miles  by  200  miles  at 
least.  All  these  tribes,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain, 
had  descent  through  the  male  line  ;  but  in  the  northern  tribes, 
as  for  instance  the  Bangerang,  the  people  who  were  respec- 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


127 


tively  Bunjil  and  Waang  were  scattered  over  the  tribal  country 
in  the  same  manner  as,  for  instance, the  Krokitch  and  Gamutch 
people  of  the  Wotjo  nation.  In  the  southern  tribes,  however, 
such  as  the  Wurunjerri  and  the  Bunurong,  the  Bunjil  and 
Waang  people  were  segregated  into  separate  localities.  In 
this  they  resembled  the  Narrang-ga  and  the  Narrinyeri,  and 
the  following  table  shows  their  respective  distribution. 

I  am  not  able  to  indicate  how  much  farther  north  this 
peculiar  localisation  of  the  social  organisation  extended,  the 
intermediate  tribes  being  extinct. 


Name  and  Locality  of  Tribe. 

Class  Name. 

Language. 

I. 

Wurunjerri-baluk 
Yarra  River  watershed 

Waang    crow 

Woeworung. 

2. 

Gunung-willam-baluk 
The  western  end  of  Mount  Macedon, 

do. 

do. 

3- 

extending  to  Bullengarook 
Kurung-jang-baluk 
Werribee  River 

do. 

do. 

4- 
5- 

Ngaruk-willam 

South  side  of  Dandenong  Mountains 
Buluk-willam 

About  Cranboume 

do. 
do. 

do. 
do. 

6. 

Bunurong  coast 
From  Werribee  River  to  Anderson's 
Inlet,  and  inland  to  south  bound- 
aries of  I,  2,  3,  4,  and  5. 

Bunjil 

Bunurong. 

The  Bunurong  tribe  is  mentioned  by  the  name  of  its 
language,  and  those  numbered  i  to  5  might  also  be  all 
grouped  together  as  Woeworung.  The  Bunurong  certainly 
consisted  of  a  number  of  tribes  speaking  that  language. 
But  the  view  might  be  justified  that  there  are  here  merely 
two  tribes,  and  that  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  might  be  looked  upon  as 
clans  of  the  Woeworung-speaking  tribe. 

The  Wurunjerri  class  system  is  clearly  a  modification  of 
such  a  one  as  that  of  the  Murray  River  tribes,  or  the  Wolgal 
or  Ngarigo,  or  perhaps  it  would  be  better  expressed  if  I  were 
to  say  that  it  is  a  survival  of  such  a  system.  The  single 
totem  Thara  is  a  survival,  and  the  legends  seem  to  bear 
witness  of  the  others.      They    relate   the   doings   of  super- 


128        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Tadjeri 

Achernar 

Turnung 
Yukope 

a  Crucis 

Dantun 

Thara 

Jurt-jurt 

/3  Crucis 
a  Centauri 
^  Centauri 

natural  beings  such  as  Bunjil,  who  is  anthropomorphic,  while 
the  others  are  animal  and  yet  human.  The  legends  speak 
of  Bunjil's  "  sons,"  or  of  Bunjil's  "boys,"  who  are  said  to  have 
been  carried  up  with  him  when  he  went  aloft  in  a  whirlwind 
to  the  Tharangalk-bek.  When  I  came  to  inquire  further  as 
to  these  sons  of  Bunjil  I  found  that  *hey  are  stars.  The 
following  table  shows  what  they  are,  and  it  is  not  an  un- 
reasonable assumption  that  they  represent  some,  if  not  all, 
of  the  totems  of  the  class  Bunjil.  The  first  column  gives 
the  names  of  Bunjil's  sons,  and  the  second  that  of  the  star. 


Phascologale  pennicillata  Brush-tailed  Phascolo- 

gale. 

Petaurus  pigmasus  Flying  mouse. 

Zinchoglossus      porph}'rio-  Green  parroquet. 

cephalus 

Trychoglossus  multicolor  Blue  mountain  parrot. 

?  Swamp  hawk. 

Tinnunculus  cenchroides  Nankeen  kestrel. 


The  belief  that  these  stars  were  the  totems  is  strengthened 
by  the  fact  that  Thara,  the  one  remaining  totem  of  Bunjil, 
is  one  of  his  "  boys  "  in  the  above  list.  Bunjil  is  Altair  ;  ^ 
while  Nurong,  Bunjil's  brother,  is  Antares."  The  two  stars 
on  either  side  of  Bunjil  are  his  wives,  being  of  the  totem 
Ganewara  (black  swan).  The  stars  on  either  side  of  Nurong 
are  his  wives,  but  the  legend  does  not  record  their  totems. 
The  star  which  is  Turnung  was  pointed  out  to  me,  but  I 
cannot  now  identify  it. 

The  Wurunjerri  used  a  curious  atife  incmoire  for  Bunjil 
and  his  "  boys."  The  little  finger  of  the  left  hand  is 
Tadjeri,  the  ring-finger  Turnung,  the  middle  finger  Yukope, 
the  forefinger  Dantun,  the  thumb  Thara,  and  the  thumb  of 
the  right  hand  is  Jurt-jurt.      Here  the  record  ends. 

The  totems  which  the  class  Waang  must  have  had  seem 

'  I  have  here  to  correct  a  previous  statement  in  my  paper,  '*  Further  Notes 
on  the  Australian  Class  Systems,"  Journal  Anthrop.  Inst.,  August  1 888,  in 
which  I  said  that  Fomalhault  was  Bunjil.  Further  inquiries  have  satisfied  me 
that  Bunjil  with  the  Wurunjerri  was  Altair,  but  with  the  Wotjobaluk  it  was,  as  I 
have  said,  Fomalhault.  In  the  Western  District  tribes,  according  to  Dawson,  it 
was  also  Fomalhault.  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  the  principal  star  in  the 
constellation  Aquila  is  the  eagle-hawk  of  the  Wurunjerri. 

2  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Jas.  Shaw  for  kindly  taking  much  pains  to  ascertain 
this  for  me. 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  129 

to  have  become  totally  extinct,  with  the  exception  of  Gane- 
wara,  who,  as  the  wife  of  Bunjil,  must  have  been  of  the  other 
class  name.  My  informant,  Berak,  who  was  of  the  Waang 
class,  knew  of  no  totems  belonging  to  it.  He  was  an  extra- 
ordinary repository  of  information  as  to  his  tribe,  and  had 
there  been  any  legends  as  to  the  sons  of  Waang  I  am 
satisfied  that  he  would  have  known  of  them. 

Tribes  with  Anomalous  Class  Systems  and 
Male  Descent 

I  commence  this  series  with  the  Yerkla  tribe.  The  class 
system  of  this  tribe  has  some  peculiarities  to  which  I  drew 
the  attention  of  my  correspondent,  but  after  further  inquiries 
he  saw  no  reason  to  alter  the  statement  made.  I  have  not 
been  able  to  make  further  inquiries  to  explain  these 
peculiarities,  and  give  the  system  as  I  received  it.  Further 
reference  is  made  to  this  in  the  next  chapter. 

YERKLA  TRIBE' 

Totrms. 
Budera  root 

Hudu  digger  (one  who  digs)  ^ 

Kura  dingo 

Weniing  wombat 

These  totems  appear  to  be  localised,  because  the  Budera 
and  the  Budu  live  on  the  back  or  cliflf  country,  while  the 
Kura  and  Wenung  live  on  the  immediate  sea-coast.  In 
this  they  resemble  the  Yuin,  who  also  divide  their  people 
into  those  who  live  on  the  coast,  those  who  live  in  the  forest 
inland  from  the  coast,  and  those  who  live  in  the  mountains. 

The  tribes  which  live  on  the  coast  between  Eucia  and 
Spencer's  Gulf  evidently  belong  to  the  Lake  Eyre  group, 
having  the  same  class  names  in  variations  of  Mattcri  and 
Kararu.  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  fuller  particulars 
as  to  them. 

In   York's   Peninsula  were  the   Narrang-ga  whose  class 

system  is  as  follows  : — • 

'   D.  Elphinstone  Roe. 

■^  This   tribe   calls  itself  Mining,   '•  men."     And   fitidu  is  explained   thus  : 
Afining-hiidii,  "a  man  digs"  ;  Mining hudera  hudu,  "a  man  digs  roots." 

K 


I30        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


NARRANG-GA  TRIHE 


Classes. 


Kari — emu 


Totems. 


( I  Miduga 

Bolara 

Waltha 

Murtu 

Winta 

Waldaru 

V!  Kadli 


Local  Divisions. 


Waui—  I 

red  kangarool 

Wiltu— 
eagle-hawk 


Wilthuthii- 
shark 


All  totems 
the  class 
tinct. 

Wortu 
Wolda 
Nantu 
Multa 
Gua 

Maiabado 

Willi 

Kanghuna 

Monditii 

Walaitu 


swallow 

mullet 

wild  turkey 

magpie 

mopoke 

lark 

dingo 

tc^ether  with 
name  are  ex- 
wombat 
wallaby 
kangaroo 
seal 
crow 

wild  goose 

pelican 

butter-fish 

sting-ray 

whiting 


Kurnara — the  northern  part  of  the 
-     peninsula    south   of  Wallaroo, 
Kadina,  and  Clinton 


(Windera — the  eastern  part  of  the 
peninsulji 


Wari — the   western  part    of  the 
peninsula 


Idii. 

j      penir 


Dilpa — the  extreme   part  of  tlie 
linsula 


I  have  added  to  thi.s  table  the  local  divisions  in  order  to 
show  at  a  glance  how  the  class  organisation  and  the  local 
organisation  cover  the  same  ground. 

The  Narrinyeri  tribe  ^  was  divided  into  eighteen  local 
clans,  each  inhabiting  a  different  tract  of  country.  That  is 
to  say,  in  each  of  fourteen  there  was  one  totem  only  ;  in 
three  there  were  three  each,  and  in  one  there  were  two. 
From  this  wc  see  that  the  process  was  nearly  complete,  of 
confining  one  totem  to  one  locality.  In  the  Narrang-ga  tribe 
it  was  complete,  but  in  the  Narrinyeri  it  was  in  process  of 
completion.  In  this  process  of  localisation  the  class  or  sub- 
class, which  from  a  process  of  analogy  we  may  well  believe  once 
existed,  must  have  died  out.  With  the  Wurunjerri  it  was  the 
totems  all  but  one  which  disappeared,  the  class  names  having 
survived.  In  the  following  table  are  the  totems,  each  of 
which  represents  a  clan,  with  the  exceptions  before  mentioned. 

The  names  of  the  clans  are  such  as  might  have  been  at 
one   time    totems.       For    instance,    Piltinyeri,   which    means 

1  A'(?r«a/'=:  "  man,"  ///jwv  ="  belonging    to  or  of." — Rev.    G.  Taplin  and 
Mr.  F.  ^V.  Taplin. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


131 


"  belonging  to  ants,"  has  three  sub-totems — leech,  cat-fish, 
and  lace-lizard.  This  is  analogous  to  the  system  of  the 
neighbouring  Buandik,  and  to  the  totems  and  sub-totems 
of  the  Wotjobaluk.  In  others  the  name  is  strictly  local, 
and  resembles  the  local  designations  of  the  Narrang-ga  and 
of  the  Kurnai, 

NARRINYERI  TRIBE 


Name  of  Clan.l 

English  of  the  Nanie. 

Totem. 

Bamir-inyeri 

rumaii,  the  west 

wirulde  or  tangari 

wattle  gum 

Tanganarin 

where  shall  we  go  ? 

manguritpuri  or 
nori 

the  pelican 

Kandarl-inyeri 

whales 

kandarli 

whales 

Lungundararn 

seaside  men 

tyellityelli 

fern 

Turarorn 

coot  men 

turi  or  tettituri 

coot 

Park-inyeri 

deep  water 

kunguldi 

butter-fish 

Kanmeraorn 

mullet  men 

kanmeri 

mullet 

Kaikalab-inyeri 

watching 

(I)  ngulgar-inyeri 

bull-ant 

(2)  pingi 

a  water-weed 

Mungul-inyeri 

thick  or  muddy  water 

wanyi 

chocolatesheldrake 

Rangul-inyeri 

howling  dog 

turiit-pani 

dark -coloured 
dingo 

Karat-inyeri 

signal  smoke 

turiit-pani 

light-coloured 
dingo 

Pilt-inyeri 

ants 

nianinki 

leech 

pomeri 

cat-fish 

kallkalli 

a  lace-lizard 

Talk-inyeri 

fulness 

? 

leech!* 

? 

cat-fish 

Artemus  sp. 

tiyawi 

a  lace-lizard 

WuUoke 

the  wood-sparrow 

? 

leech 

? 

cat-fish 

? 

a  lace-lizard 

Karowalli 

gone  over  there 

waiyi 

wlii|)-snake 

Punguratpula 

place  of  bulrushes 

peldi 

musk  duck 

Wel-inyeri 

belonging  to  itself  or 

nakare 

black  duck 

by  itself 

ngumundi 

black    snake    with 
red  belly 

Luth-inyeri 

belonging  to  the  sun- 

kungari 

black  swan 

rising 

ngeraki 

seal 

kikinummi 

black    snake    with 
grey  belly 

Wunyakulde 

corruption  olwalkaiide, 
the  north 

nakkare 

black  duck 

Ngrangatari  or 

at   the  south-west    or 

waukawiye 

kangaroo  rat 

Gurrangwari 

at  the  south-east 

'  The  i^ostfix  yeri  or  inyeri,  *'  belonging  to,"  is  omitted  from  some  of  the 
names  in  the  translation. 

^  The  names  of  the  leech  and  cat-fish  totems  of  Talk-inyeri  and  WuUoke  have 
not  been  ascertained. 


132        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Tlie  Raminyeri  are  the  most  westerly  clan  of  the 
Narrinyeri. 

The  Tanganarin  occupy  the  country  at  the  bend  of  the 
Murray  mouth.  Tradition  says  that  the  tribe  was  non- 
plussed when  the\'  came  down  the  river  and  found  that  it 
went  into  the  sea,  and  said  to  one  another  "  Where  shall  we 
go  ?  "  The  Kandarl-inyeri  inhabit  a  tract  of  country  near 
the  Murray  mouth.  Whales  were  frequently  stranded  on 
their  coast,  being  possibly  flurried  by  getting  into  the  volume 
of  fresh  water  of  the  Murray  River.  The  Park-inyeri  owned 
the  deepest  part  of  the  Coorong.  The  Kaikalab-in\  eri 
occupied  a  promontory  running  partly  across  the  Coorong, 
and  were  in  a  good  position  to  watch  all  that  went  to  and 
fro.  The  Rangul-inyeri  and  the  Karat-inyeri  had  a  countr)' 
infested  by  wild  dogs.  The  Karat-inyeri  possess  a  bold 
bluff  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Alexandrina,  which  was  a  good 
position  for  making  and  observing  signals,  and  at  this  spot 
a  lighthouse  has  since  been  built.  The  Pilt-inyeri  is  the 
name  by  which  this  clan  is  usually  known,  Talk-inyeri  and 
Wulloke  being  in  .some  sort  sub-clans.  Their  arrangement 
of  totem  is  singular,  there  being  three  kinds  of  leeches,  cat- 
fish, and  lace-lizards,  and  each  one  of  these  has  a  distinct 
name.  Maninki  is  a  large  dark-coloured  leech  ;  Pomeri  is 
the  largest  kind  of  cat-fish,  and  also  is  the  name  of  cat-fish 
generally.  Kallkalli  is  the  dark-coloured  lace-lizard.  These 
are  the  totems  belonging  to  the  Pilt-inyeri.  The  Tiyawi, 
belonging  to  the  Talk-inyeri,  is  a  spotted  lace-lizard.  The 
Warrangumbi  belonging  to  the  Wulloke  is  a  very  large 
species  of  lace-lizard.  The  Luth-inyeri  called  themselves 
by  this  name,  but  their  neighbours  call  them  Kalatin-yeri. 
"  Kalatin  "  means  shining,  this  clan  having  grassy  slopes  that 
are  visible  at  a  long  distance  when  the  sun  shines  on  them. 
Lath-inyeri  is  probably  a  corruption  of  the  sanie  word. 
Wunyakulde  is  evidently  a  corruption  of  "  Walkandc,"  north  ; 
and  it  was  almost  impossible  to  distinguish  the  difference 
between  the  two  words  Ngrangatari  and  Gurrangwari, 
indeed  an  old  black  would  tell  you  to  sound  the  "  t  "  or  not 
as  you  liked.  The  narrow  sheet  of  water  which  trends  to 
the  sou«^h-east  from  the   Murray  mouth,  and  which  is  called 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION 


133 


Coorong  by  the  whites,  is  probably  a  corruption  of  the  word 
"  Gurrangh,"  which  means  south-east. 

The  Yuin  is  another  instance  of  a  tribe  in  which  the  class 
system  is  in  a  decadent  condition.  There  are  no  class  names, 
or  even  traces  of  them,  but  very  numerous  totems  scattered 
over  the  country,  as  is  the  case  in  the  tribes  with  descent  in 
the  female  line.  But  in  this  case  the  totem  names  are 
inherited  from  the  father,  and  not  from  the  mother.  The 
totem  name  was  called  Budjan,  and  it  was  said  to  be  more 
like  Joia,  or  magic,  than  a  name  ;  and  it  was  in  one  sense  a 
secret  name,  for  with  it  an  enemy  might  cause  injury  to  its 
bearer  by  magic.  Thus  very  few  people  knew  the  totem 
names  of  others,  the  name  being  told  to  a  youth  by  his 
father  at  his  initiation.  In  many  cases  I  found  that  men 
had  two  Budjan,  one  inherited,  and  the  other  given  by  some 
medicine-man  at  his  initiation.  The  following  is  the  list  of 
the  totems  which  I  obtained  from  the  Yuin  old  men  : — 


YUIN 

TRIBE 

Totem  Name^. 

Totem  Names. 

Kaual-gar 

? 

kangaroo 
emu 

Burimi 
Gumljera 

bream 
black  snake 

VVuiigalii 

bush-rat 

Umbnra 

black  duck 

(luragur 

Merig«ng 

Munyunga 

kangarot)  rat 

dingo 

eagle-hawk 

Jaruat 
Tiska 
Kumlio 

a  small  owl 
a  small  owl 
fat 

Wagora 
(iurung-aha 
15e  rim  harm  in 

crow 

pelicfn 

white-breasted 

cormorant 

Janan-galiatch 

Bilinga 

Merrit-jigga 

Echidna  histrix  (?) 
grey  magpie 
bandicoot 

IJurnagga 
Murumbui 

lace-lizard 
brown  snake 

Ngariba 
Gunimbil 

water-hen 
? 

Although  the  totem  was  little  more  than  a  name,  it  still 
followed  the  old  exogamous  rule  of  not  marrying  within 
itself,  although  in  this  tribe  the  locality  governed  marriage, 
as  m  other  tribes  with  male  descent,  such  as  the  Kulin  and 
Kurnai. 

F'rom  this  point  along  the  coast  northwards  the  evidence 
which  I  have  is  very  fragmentary,  and  affords  little  or 
nothing  to  show  the  social  organisation  of  the  coast  tribes 
north  of  Sydney. 


134        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch, 


Tribes  without  Class  Svstlms 

The  Kurnai  is  a  tribe  without  class  divisions.  There 
is,  therefore,  no  social  organisation  in  the  sense  in  which 
that  term  is  used  by  me,  and  the  local  organisation,  as  will 
be  explained  in  Chapter  V.,  controls  marriage  in  so  far 
that  it  can  only  properly  take  place  between  members  of 
certain  reciprocal  localities. 

The  question  arises  whether  the  Kurnai  ever  had  a  class 
system,  or  whether  having  had  one  it  has  died  out.  There 
is  no  direct  proof  of  the  former,  but  I  think  that  a  fair  case 
can  be  made  out  for  the  latter  assumption.  Similarity  of 
language  points  to  the  Kulin  tribes  as  the  stock  from  which 
the  Kurnai  were  an  offshoot.  Tradition  and  legend  both 
point  to  the  Bunurong  or  the  Wurunjerri  being  the  parent 
stock. 

At  the  time  when  Gippsland  was  settled  after  1842  the 
oldest  man  in  the  Kutwut  division  of  the  Rrataua  clan,  who 
lived  on  the  Albert  River,  said  that  the  fathers  of  his  people 
came  from  the  west,  from  a  country  where  there  were  a  great 
number  of  blacks.^  A  Wurunjerri  legend  relates  that  long 
ago  Loan,  who  may  be  described,  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Andrew 
Lang,  as  a  "non-natural  man,"  wandered  from  the  Yarra 
River,  following  the  migration  of  the  swans,  first  to  the  inlets 
of  Western  Port  Bay  and  then  to  Corner  Inlet,  between 
Wilson's  Promontory  and  the  mainland,  where  he  took  up 
his  abode.  This  is  far  within  the  country  of  the  Kurnai, 
whose  legends  also  speak  of  him  living  there  with  his  wife 
Loantuka,  as  the  guardian  of  the  Brataua  clan. 

To  judge  from  the  similarities  of  language,  from 
tradition,  and  from  common  customs,  the  Kurnai  may  be 
considered  an  offshoot  of  the  Kulin,  and  to  have  probably 
carried  with  them  the  Kulin  class  system.  If  the  Kurnai 
use  of  the  name  Bunjil  points  to  the  former  name  of  a  class, 
then  the  reverence  which  they  show  to  Ngarugal,  the  crow, 
may  also  indicate  the  second  class  name.  The  crow  is  said 
to  be  the  friend  of  the  Kurnai.     It  was  wrong  to  kill  a  crow, 

1  J.  M 'Alpine. 


in  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  135 

and  doing  so,  they  thought,  would  bring  on  stormy  weather. 
Tankowillin,  a  man  whom  I  have  mentioned  elsewhere,  said 
when  I  spoke  to  him  about  this  belief,  "  I  know  that  I 
should  not  kill  and  eat  crow,  but  I  have  often  eaten  his 
children  without  his  doing  me  any  harm."  Crows  have  a 
habit  of  following  people  in  the  bush,  flying  from  tree  to 
tree,  and  peering  down  at  the  person  followed  while  doing 
so  ;  the  Kurnai  say  that  a  crow  understands  their  language, 
and  answers  their  questions  by  its  caw,  which  is  their 
affirmative  ngaa. 

Each  Kurnai  received  the  name  of  some  marsupial,  bird, 
reptile,  or  fish,  from  his  father,  when  he  was  about  ten  years 
old,  or  at  initiation.  A  man  would  say,  pointing  to  the 
creature  in  question,  "  That  is  your  thundung ;  do  not  hurt 
it."  In  two  cases  I  know  of,  he  said,  "  It  will  be  yours  when 
I  am  dead."  The  term  thundung  means  "  elder  brother," 
and,  while  the  individual  was  the  protector  of  his  thundung, 
it  also  protected  its  "  younger  brother,"  the  man,  by  warning 
him  in  dreams  of  approaching  danger,  or,  by  coming  towards 
him  in  its  bodily  shape,  it  assisted  him,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
man  Bunjil-bataluk  mentioned  elsewhere, 'or  was  appealed 
to  by  song  charms  to  relieve  sickness. 

The  thundung  of  the  Kurnai  known  to  me  are  as 
follows  : — 


Narut 

wombat 

Jirha 

kangaroo 

Barlajan 

platypus 

Gliun 

water-hen 

Blit-burinj; 

a  small  bird 

Gwanamurrung  eagle-hawk 

Thurung  tiger-snake 

Bibing  sea-salmon 

Burra  small  conger-eel 

Noy  yang  large  conger-eel 

The  thundung  are  clearly  the  equivalents  of  the  totems 
of  other  tribes,  and  form  a  vestigiary  survival  of  a  class 
system,  but  I  have  no  means  of  saying  to  which  of  the 
moieties  of  the  tribe  they  once  belonged,  assuming  those 
moieties  to  have  been  distinguished  as  Hunjil  and  Ngarugal. 

On  the  Queensland  border  there  was  another  coast  tribe, 
the  Chepara,  who  stand   much   in   the  same   position  as  the 


136        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Kiirnai.  They  had  no  social  organisation  in  classes  or 
totems,  the  regulation  of  marriage  being  by  locality  and 
descent  of  name  in  the  male  line.  When  I  was  inquiring 
into  the  organisation  of  this  tribe,  the  absence  of  classes  and 
totems    seemed    to    me   so    remarkable    that    I    caused    my 


FIG.    8. — ONE    OK    THK    KR ALATL'NOALUNG    CLAN    OF    TIIK    KURNAl    TKIBK. 


correspondent  ^  to  make  further  investigation.  He  did  so, 
and  reported  to  me  that  his  informants  assured  him  that 
they  had  no  such  names.  His  principal  informant,  one  of 
the  oldest  of  the  men,  was  well  acquainted  with  the  Kanii- 
laroi  sub-class  names,  and  was  therefore  in  a  position  to 
speak  with  certainty,  and  he  said  that  there  were  no  such 
in   his  tribe.      It  was  apparently  the  same  with   the  Turrbal 

'  Jas.  Gibson. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  137 


tribe  on  the   Pine   River  near  Brisbane,  whose  country  over- 
lapped that  claimed  by  the  Chepara.^ 


The  Equivalence  of  Class  Names 

The  equivalence  of  class  or  sub-classes  long  ago  attracted 
my  attention  when  I  was  studying  the  organisation  of  the 
Kamilaroi  tribes.  I  found  on  comparing  the  class  divisions 
of  any  large  group  of  allied  tribes  such  as  the  Kamilaroi, 
that  the  several  tribes  have  more  or  less  marked  differences 
in  their  classes  and  sub-classes,  either  in  the  names  them- 
selves or  in  extreme  cases  in  their  arrangement.  These 
differences  are  often  merely  dialetic  variations  of  name  ;  but 
in  other  cases  they  amount  to  differences  in  the  structure 
of  the  system  itself  When  a  still  larger  group  of  tribes  is 
examined  the  variations  become  wider  and  the  differences 
greater.  Nevertheless  the  general  identity  of  structure  and 
of  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  classes  over  wide  areas 
proves,  beyond  doubt,  that  these  varied  forms  are  substanti- 
ally equivalent. 

I  may  note  here  that  the  boundaries  of  a  class  system 
are  usually  wider  than  those  of  a  tribe,  and  that  the  bound- 
aries of  any  one  type  of  system  have  a  still  wider  range,  and 
include  those  aggregates  of  tribes  which  I  have  termed 
nations.  All  such  aggregates  are  bound  together  bj'  a  com- 
munity of  class  organisation  which  indicates  a  community 
of  descent. 

A  few  instances  will  show  how  this  equivalence  of  class 
is  recognised.  In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  the  two  class  names 
are  Krokitch  and  Gamutch.  To  the  north  the  Wotjobaluk 
adjoined  the  Wiimbaio,  whose  class  names  are  Mukwara  and 
Kilpara.  A  Wotjobaluk  man,  who  was  Krokitch,  told  me 
that  when  he  went  to  the  latter  tribe  he  was  Kilpara,  and 
that  the  people  there  told  him  that  Gamutch  was  the  same 
as  Mukwara. 

A  similar  statement  was  made  to  me  by  a  man  of  the 
tribe  which  is  the  next  to  the  Wiimbaio  up  the  Murray  River. 

'  Tom  Petrie. 


138        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

He  said  that  he  was  Kilpara,  but  when  he  went  south  into 
the  Wimmera  country  he  was  Krokitc/h,  and  his  wife  added 
that,  being  Mukwara,  she  was  Gamutch. 

I  learned  from  a  survivor  of  the  Gal-gal-baluk  clan  of 
the  Jajaurung  tribe,  who  belonged  to  the  Avoca  River,  that 
two  sets  of  class  names  met  there,  Bunjil  and  Waang,  of  his 
tribe,  and  Krokitch  and  Gamutch  of  the  tribe  living  to  the 
west  of  that  river.  In  the  south-west  of  Victoria  the  same 
sets  of  class  names  meet  between  Geelong  and  Colac,  where 
Kroki  is  equal  to  Bunjil  and  Kumitch  to  VVaang.^ 

On  the  Maranoa  River,  in  southern  Queensland,  two 
types  of  the  four  sub-class  system  meet,  the  equivalents  of 
the  Kamilaroi  names  on  the  one  side,  and  of  the  northern 
Queensland  names  on  the  other.  There,  as  it  was  put  to 
me,  "  a  Hippai  man  is  also  Kurgilla,"  and  so  on  with  the 
other  names."  To  the  north-east  of  the  Maranoa  three  types 
of  the  four  class  systems  meet,  as  pointed  out  a  few  pages 
back.  The  Ungorri  names  are  on  the  one  side  the  equi- 
valents of  the  sub-class  names  Hipai,  Kombo,  Murri,  Kobi, 
and  on  the  other  those  of  the  Emon  tribe,  Urgilla,  Anbeir, 
Wungo,  and  Ubur. 

The  Maikolon  names  on  the  Cloncurry  River  are  the 
equivalents  of  those  of  the  Kugobathi  on  the  Mitchell  River, 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.^ 

West  of  the  Wiradjuri  nation  is  a  vast  area  occupied  by 
two-class  tribes.  The  names  Kilpara  and  Mukwara  e.xtend 
to  the  Grey  Range  in  a  north-west  direction,  and  there  adjoin 
the  class  names  of  tribes  such  as  the  Yantruwunta,  namely, 
Kulpuru  and  Tiniwa.  In  this  case  it  seems  that  Kulpuru  is 
the  equivalent  of  Kilpara,  and  Tiniwa  of  Mukwara.  The 
Yantruwunta  names  are  the  equivalents  of  the  Dieri  names, 
Tiniwa  being  the  same  as  Kararu,  and  Kulpuru  as  Matteri. 

This  identification  would  therefore  take  us  southwards 
through  a  number  of  tribes  to  Port  Lincoln,  where  those 
latter  names  occur. 

To  the  westward  of  Lake  Eyre  there  is  the  Urabunna 
tribe,  with  the  same  class  names  as  the  Dieri,  in  the  form 
given   by  Spencer  and   Gillen,  of  Matthurie  and   Kirarawa. 

1  A.  L.  P.  Cameron.  -  R.  Lethbridge.  ^  Edward  Palmer. 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  139 

This  tribe  adjoins  the  Arunta  on  the  north,  and  the  remarks 
of  those  authors  as  to  the  equivalence  of  the  four  sub-classes 
of  the  Arunta  and  the  two  classes  of  the  "Urabunna"  are 
so  apposite,  that  I  quote  them  to  exemplify  what  I  have 
said  on  this  subject. 

They  say  that  it  not  infrequently  happens  that  a  man 
from  the  neighbouring  Arunta  tribe  comes  to  live  among 
the  Urabunna.  In  the  former  there  are  four  sub-classes,  viz. 
Bukhara  and  Panunga,  Kumara  and  Purula,  and  in  addition 
descent  is  counted  in  the  male  line.  Accordingly  the  men 
of  the  Bukhara  and  Purula  sub -classes  are  regarded  as 
equivalent  to  the  Matthurie  moiety  of  the  Urabunna  tribe, 
and  those  of  the  Panunga  and  Kumara  sub-classes  as  the 
equivalents  of  the  Kirarawa.  In  just  the  same  way  a 
Matthurie  man  going  into  the  Arunta  tribe  becomes  either 
a  Bulthara  or  Purula,  and  a  Kirarawa  man  becomes  either 
Panunga  or  Kumara.  Which  of  the  two  a  Matthurie  man 
belongs  to  is  decided  by  the  old  men  of  the  group  into 
which  he  goes.  This  deliberate  change  in  the  grouping  of 
the  classes  and  sub-classes  so  as  to  make  them  fit  in  with 
the  maternal  line  of  descent,  or  with  the  paternal,  as  the  case 
may  be,  will  be  more  easily  understood  from  the  accom- 
panying table. 

Arunta.  Urabunna  Arrangement  of  the  Arunta  Sub-Class. 


?:l'^:}         "°i«^^  SD  M„ie.,A,.M.uhuri., 

J.  Kumara  )  ivi  •  .     u  Panunga)  xt   •  .     «  ,i.--  > 

I  I)      I       /  Moiety  B  i'  J  Moiety  B  (Kirarawa) 

I  I'urula     J  '  Kumara  /  ' 

The  working  out  of  this  has  the  result  that  the  children 
belong  to  the  right  moiety  of  the  tribe  into  which  the 
man  has  gone.^ 

The  authors  very  justly  observe  that  the  natives  are 
quite  capable  of  thinking  such  things  out  for  themselves, 
and  it  is  perhaps  not  without  a  degree  of  suggestiveness  in 
regard  to  the  difficult  question  of  how  a  change  in  the  line 
of  descent  might  be  brought  about. 

*   Op.  cit.  jip.  68,  69. 


I40        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Roth  for  the  following  particulars 
as  to  the  Annan  River  tribe.  The  sub-class  names  are  held 
to  be  equivalent  to  those  of  an  adjacent  tribe  belonging  to 
those  which  have  the  four  names,  Kurkilla,  Banbari,  Wungko, 
Kupuru,  but  arranged  in  the  following  order,  the  effect  being 
to  bring  out  descent  in  the  male  line,  thus  agreeing  with  the 
descent  in  the  Annandale  tribe.  It  follows  that  in  corre- 
sponding marriages  in  the  adjacent  tribe  the  arrangement 
of  the  .Annan  River  sub-class  names  would  be  reversed. 


.\nnan  River  Sub-Classe*.  Wakelbura  Sub-Classe>- 


\\  Alar  / 

\orTi  \  ^t    •    .      I) 

Kutchal)  ^''^'^^y  '' 


..     i*?,,     }  Moiety  A 

Kurkilla  /  ' 

BaX">  «"'B 


This  is  another  instance  of  a  change  made  intentionally 
to  effect  a  purpose. 

To  this  I  would  add  that  it  strengthens  the  view  which 
Dr.  Fison  and  I  long  ago  advanced,  that  the  changes  made 
in  the  social  organisation  of  the  tribes,  including  the 
classificatory  system  of  relation.ships,  were  matters  of 
deliberate  intention  and  not  the  result  of  chance. 

In  the  following  table  I  have  given  some  of  the  systems 
which  are  the  equivalents  of  each  other.  I  have  taken  the 
classes  and  in  some  cases  the  sub-classes  for  comparison, 
omitting  the  totems  which  are  not  essential  for  my  purpose, 
and  which  would  be  of  use  mainly  to  determine  some 
doubtful  case  of  equivalence.  For  the  purpose  of  bringing 
this  question  into  the  shortest  range  of  view,  I  have 
abbreviated  the  connected  chain  by  taking  those  cases 
which  are  most  typical,  and  which  I  have  specially  noticed 
in  this  section.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the 
tribes  noticed  touch  each  other  in  all  cases,  for  some  of 
them  are  hundreds  of  miles  apart.  It  is  the  class  system 
which  touches  another  class  system,  as  that  of  the 
Wotjobaluk  touches  that  of  the  Wiimbaio,  and  the 
equivalence  would  be  recognised   by  tribes  of  the  respective 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  141 

organisations,  who,  though  living  far  apart,  are  aware  of  the 
fact  by  seeing  men  of  the  other  class  at  the  great  tribal 
meetings.  In  the  south-west  of  Victoria,  if  a  man  of  the 
Lake  Bolac  tribe,  being  a  Krokitch,  were  to  marry  a  woman 
or  the  Woeworung -speaking  people,  she  would  be  of  the 
Bunjil  class,  that  being  the  equivalent  of  Krokitch,  while 
Krokitch  equals  Waang.  An  instance  of  the  manner  in  which 
this  works  is  within  my  own  experience.  I  happened  to  meet 
with  a  man  from  the  Upper  Diamantina  River  who  had  been 
brought  down  south.  In  speaking  to  him  of  the  place  he 
came  from,  I  said  that  I  thought  the  names  Kurgila,  Banbe, 
Wungo,  and  Kuburu  were  to  be  found  there.  He  said,  "  Ves, 
I  am  Wungo."  Then  I  said  that  away  farther  south  of  that 
place  there  were  four  names  different  to  those  of  his  tribe, 
Ipai,  Kumbo,  Murri,  and  Kubbi,  and  that,  if  I  were  there, 
blackfellows  might  call  me  Ipai,  and  that  Ipai  is  the  same 
as  Kurgila.  He  thought  for  a  moment  and  then  said, 
"  Then  you  are  the  same  as  brother  to  my  father."  This 
was  quite  correct,  for  Kurgila  marries  Kuburuan  and  their 
son  is  Wungo.  Among  themselves  this  would  have  formed 
a  real  class  relationship,  and  the  respective  rights  and  duties 
attached  to  it  would  have  been  recognised  and  acted  on  as 
a  matter  of  course. 

In  the  table  given  below  the  chain  apparently  ends  at 
the  Belyando  River,  but  in  fact  this  class  system  extends  to 
the  upper  waters  of  the  Flinders  River  in  a  slightly  varied 
form  of  name.s.  Its  furthest  point  occurs  on  the  Upper 
Cloncurry  River  where  it  is  followed  by  that  of  the 
Maikolon  tribe.^  I  have  not  been  able  to  make  out  the 
equivalence  of  the  Wakelbura  type  of  names  with  those  of 
the  Maikolon,  but  when  this  is  done,  the  link  will  be 
supplied  to  complete  the  chain  of  equivalent  systems  from 
Mount  Gambier  to  the  Mitchell  River  in  Queensland,  a 
distance  of  over  i  500  miles  in  a  straight  line. 

Wherever  two  systems  touch  each  other  the  members  of 
the  adjacent  tribes  invariably  know  which  of  the  neighbour- 
ing classes  corresponds  to  their  own,  and  therefore  the  indi- 
vidual knows  well  with  which  class  or  sub-class  of  the  other 

'   E.  Palmer. 


142        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

1 ., . 

tribe  his  own  intermarries  ;  and  he  knows  also,  though  perhaps 
not  quite  so  well,  the  marriage  relations  of  the  other  class  or 
sub-class  as  the  case  may  be. 

TABLE  SHOWING  THE   EQUIVALENCE   OF   THE   CLASSES 
AND   SUB-CLASSES 


Buandik 

Wotjobaluk 

Wiimbaio 

Kamilaroi 

Kaialiara 

Wakelbura 

Mount 
Gambier 

Wimmera 

Murray  River 

Gwydir  River 

Bunya 
Mountains 

Belyando 

South 
Australia 

Victoria 

Krokitch 
Gamutch 

New  South 
Wales 

New  South 
Wales 

Queensland 

Queensland 

Kroki 
Kumite 

Kilpara 
Mukwara 

Kupathin 
Dilbi 

Kubatine 
Dilebi 

Malera 
Wuthera 

I  have  endeavoured  to  bring  into  orderly  review  in  this 
chapter  the  various  states  of  development  of  the  social 
organisation  of  the  native  tribes,  and  so  to  arrange  my 
materials  that  the  tribes  should  form  a  series  commencing 
with  those  in  the  most  primitive  condition  socially,  and 
terminating  with  those  in  whose  organisation  the  greatest 
changes  have  taken  place.  The  series  commences  with  tribes 
in  which  the  two  organisations  are  in  existence  and,  of  the 
two,  the  social  is  inost  vigorous.  The  two  class  divisions 
into  which  we  may  suppose  the  hypothetical  Undivided 
Commune  was  segmented  control  marriage,  and  are  trans- 
mitted in  the  female  line  of  descent.  The  further  consecutive 
changes  are  in  two  directions,  one  by  the  segmentation  suc- 
cessively in  different  tribes  of  the  two  into  four  and  finally 
eight  sub-classes.  In  some  tribes  the  descent  continued  in 
the  female  line,  while  in  others  it  has  changed  to  the  male 
line.  In  the  other  direction  the  changes  are  of  various  kind 
and  degree,  but  all  tend  to  produce  what  I  may  term  atrophy 
in  the  classes  and  the  totems,  with  the  establishment  of 
descent  in  the  male  line,  finally  ending  in  such  tribes  as  the 
Kurnai  and  Chepara  with  the  extinction  of  the  classes  and, 
as  to  the  latter,  of  the  totems.  The  local  organisation 
remains  and  controls  marriage  by  requiring  it  to  be  between 
those  of  reciprocal  localities,  thus  continuing  the  principle  of 
exogamy,  which  is  established  by  the  class  law. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  143 


While  the  latter  series  of  changes  leads  to  the  extinction 
of  the  class  system,  the  process  of  development  by  the  seg- 
mentation of  the  sub-classes  seems  to  tend  to  permanence. 
Why  this  should  be,  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  It  may  be  because 
the  tribes  along  the  coast,  amongst  whom  the  extinction  of 
the  class  system  has  been  most  evident,  are  much  smaller 
and  more  isolated  than  the  tribes  on  the  great  inland  stretches 
of  country  where  the  same  conditions  extend  for  hundreds 
of  miles.  The  area  occupied  by  a  tribe  like  the  Kurnai  is 
small  and  very  isolated  in  comparison  to  that  occupied  by 
the  Lake  Eyre  tribes,  but  infinitely  better  watered  and  more 
prolific  in  food  supplies. 

The  two  exogamous  class  divisions  begin  the  series  of 
changes  which  I  have  described,  and  it  may  now  be  asked 
how  they  themselves  originated.  My  opinion  is,  that  it  was 
by  the  same  process  as  that  by  which  the  four  arose  from 
the  two,  namely  by  the  division  of  an  original  whole,  which 
I  have  referred  to  as  the  Undivided  Commune. 

The  two  classes  have  been  intentionally  divided  into 
four  and  eight  sub-classes,  so  that  it  docs  not  seem  to  me 
unreasonable  to  conclude  also  that  the  segmentation  of  the 
hypothetical  Commune  was  made  intentionally  by  the 
ancestors  of  the  Australian  aborigines. 

In  his  late  work  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  dissents  from  this 
hypothesis,^  and  quotes  a  number  of  writers  in  support  of 
his  opinion  to  prove  that  the  two  exogamous  classes  had 
their  origin  in  the  amalgamation  of  two  separate  and  in- 
dependent local  totem  groups.  Of  the  writers  he  has  quoted, 
only  one,  viz.  the  Rev.  John  Mathew,  has  or  had  a  personal 
acquaintance  with  the  Australian  blacks.  He  advances  a 
similar  theory  to  that  of  Mr.  Lang,  based  on  some  bird 
myths  and  legends  of  Victorian  tribes.'"^  He  sf>eaks  of  a 
pristine  conflict  between  two  races  of  men  contesting  for  the 
possession  of  Australia,  "the  taller  and  more  powerful  and 
more  fierce  Eagle-hawk  race  overcoming  and  in  places  ex- 
terminating the  weaker,  more  scantily  equipped  sable  Crows." 
This  hypothesis,  as  I  understand  it,  infers  that  the  two  class 

'  Op.  cit.  p.  36. 
*  Eagle-hawk  and  Crow,  p.  9. 


144        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EABT  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

divisions  arose  from  the  amalgamation  of  two  groups,  the 
totem  of  one  being  Eagle-hawk,  and  of  the  other  Crow.  I 
still  see  no  reason  to  vary  the  opinion  first  advanced  by 
Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  and  myself,  and  subsequently  endorsed 
by  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen,  than  whom  none  have  had 
better  opportunities  of  forming  an  independent  opinion  as 
to  the  probabilities  of  the  case.  I  say  "  probabilities " 
advi.sedly,  for  the  momentous  change  in  the  social  system 
must  have  occurred  in  the  far  distance  of  prehistoric  time. 
We  can  see  the  results,  but  can  only  infer  the  possible 
causes. 

Totems  and  Totemism 

In  speaking  of  the  social  organisation  I  have  given  a 
considerable  number  of  lists  of  totems  in  connection  with 
the  class  and  sub-class  divisions.  In  the  chapter  on  Marriage 
and  Descent  I  have  further  considered  the  totems  in  regard 
to  these  subjects.  Something  remains  to  be  said  as  to  the 
relations  of  the  individual  and  the  totem  when  it  is  a  living 
creature.  Each  totem  name  represents  a  group  of  persons, 
and  for  this  totem  the  term  "  group  totem  "  is  appropriate.  It 
represents  those  persons  who,  to  use  a  Wiradjuri  expression, 
are  all  of  the  same  budjan.  The  group  totem  is  in  some 
tribes  inherited  from  the  mother,  in  others  from  the  father  ; 
while  in  some,  such  as  the  Arunta,  it  is  not  inherited,  the 
child  being  the  reincarnated  Alcheringa  ancestor. 

But  there  is  another  totem  which  is  not  inherited,  but 
which  is  given  to  a  youth  at  his  initiation,  as  for  instance  at 
the  Burbung  of  the  Wiradjuri.  The  case  of  Murri-kangaroo, 
mentioned  elsewhere,  is  in  point.  His  group  budjan  was 
.Kangaroo,  inherited  from  his  mother  ;  his  personal  budjan 
was 'Tiger-snake,  which  he  received  during  the  apparently 
hypnotic  suggestions  to  which  his  father,  a  noted  medicine- 
man of  that  tribe,  subjected  him. 

A  third  totem  is  not  inherited,  nor  is  it  given,  because  a 
child  when  born  becomes  at  once  its  brother  if  a  boy,  or  its 
sister  if  a  girl.  This  is  the  sex  totem,  of  which  the  Wot- 
jobaluk  tribe  gives  one  of  the  best  examples.      In  it  the  Bat, 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  145 

Ngunun-ngunut,  is  the  brother  of  all  the  men,  and  Yartatgurk, 
the  Owlet-nightjar,  is  the  sister  of  all  the  women.  In  this 
tribe  the  group  totem  is  called  by  the  terms  Mir,  Ngirabtil, 
and  Yauruk,  the  latter  word  meaning  flesh,  frequently 
expanded  into  Yauruk-gologeitch,  that  is  "  flesh-of-all." 
These  terms  apply  equally  to  the  group  and  sex  totems.  I 
know  of  no  personal  totems  in  this  tribe,  probably  because 
it  had  no  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Burbung  type  at  which 
such  names  are  given. 

Very  little  came  under  my  notice  in  Victorian  tribes  as 
to  any  objection  to  kill  or  eat  the  totem.  This  is  partly 
due,  I  think,  to  the  fact  that  in  the  Kulin  tribes  there  was 
only  one  totem  attached  to  the  class  Bunjil,  and  none  to 
that  of  Waang.  These  tribes  covered  a  great  part  of  that 
State.  They  leave  only  the  tribes  of  the  Western  District, 
with  those  along  the  course  of  the  Murray  River  and  in  the 
extreme  North-eastern  District,  unaccounted  for. 

As  to  the  tribes  of  the  south-west,  they  have  been 
described  at  length  by  Mr.  James  Dawson,  but  there  appears 
not  to  be  any  mention  in  his  work  of  the  totems  in  connection 
with  any  subject  but  marriage.  His  acquaintance  with  these 
tribes  dated  back  to  such  an  early  time  in  the  settlement  of 
Victoria  that  I  can  scarcely  imagine  that,  if  there  had  been 
any  marked  beliefs  as  to  the  totem  names,  he  must  have 
become  acquainted  with  them.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
these  tribes  had  for  neighbours  on  the  west  the  Buandik, 
whose  beliefs  as  to  the  totems  I  shall  quote  shortly.  On 
the  north-west  the  tribes  which  Mr.  Dawson  describes  were 
the  neighbours  of  the  Wotjo  nation.  It  seems  therefore 
singular  that  the  tribes  of  South-west  Victoria  had  no  rules 
prohibiting  the  killing  of  the  totems. 

The  Wotjobaluk  would  not  harm  his  totem  if  he  could 
avoid  it,  but  at  a  pinch  he  would  eat  it  in  default  of  other 
food.  In  order  to  injure  another  person  he  would,  however, 
kill  that  person's  totem.  To  dream  about  his  own  totem 
means  that  some  one  has  done  something  to  it  for  the 
purpose  of  harming  the  sleeper  or  one  of  his  totemites. 
But  if  he  dreams  it  again,  it  means  himself,  and  if  he  there- 
upon falls  ill,  he  will  certainly  see  the  wraith  of  the  person 

L 


146        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

who  is  trying  to  "  catch  "  him.  The  same  beliefs  are  held 
by  the  other  tribes  of  this  nation. 

The  Buandik,  with  four  other  tribes  associated 
with  it,  have  the  same  organisation  as  the  Wotjobaluk,  the 
class  names  being  merely  in  a  different  dialect.  A  man 
would  not  kill  or  use  for  food  any  of  the  animals  of  the 
same  subdivision  with  himself,  excepting  when  compelled  by 
hunger,  and  then  he  expresses  sorrow  for  having  to  eat  his 
W'ingong  (friend),  or  Tumung  (his  flesh).  When  using  the 
latter  word,  the  Buandik  touch  their  breasts  to  indicate  the 
close  relationship,  meaning  almost  a  part  of  themselves. 

One  of  that  tribe  killed  a  crow.  Three  or  four  days  after- 
wards a  Boortwa  (Crow)  man  died.  He  had  been  ailing  for 
some  days,  but  the  killing  of  his  ^F/«^t?//j^ hastened  his  death.' 

These  statements  probably  apply  equally  to  the  other 
four  tribes. 

As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  Kurnai  have  the 
survivals  of  what  were  once  group  totems,  that  is,  certain 
marsupials,  and  birds,  fish,  and  reptiles,  which  are  the  thuii- 
dung  (elder  brothers)  of  men,  and  bauung  (elder  sisters)  of 
women.  Under  the  influence  of  male  descent  these  names 
are  restricted  to  certain  localities,  and  not  scattered  throughout 
the  tribal  country.  As  I  have  indicated  in  the  chapter  on 
Marriage,  a  man  brings  his  wife  to  his  own  locality  ;  she 
does  not  transmit  her  bauung  name  to  her  children,  but 
he  transmits  his.  The  names  are  therefore  perpetuated  from 
generation  to  generation  in  the  same  locality,  and  in  this 
manner  have  become  localised.  In  the  sense,  however,  that 
they  are  now  common  to  the  members  of  certain  families  in 
the  same  tract  of  country,  they  are  still  group  totems. 

Usually  the  bramung  or  younger  brother  of  one  of  these 
totems  will  not  injure  or  kill  his  thundung,  nor  willingly  see 
another  person  do  so,  but  there  are  exceptions  to  this  ;  for 
instance,  men  of  the  conger-eel  totem  at  the  Snowy  River 
eat  it,  and  I  have  known  a  man  of  the  kangaroo  totem  eat 
that  animal.  These  cases  may  be  taken  as  instances  of  the 
general  breaking  down  of  the  totemic  system,  possibly  through 
similar  causes  to  those  which  have  produced  such  changes 

1  D.  S.  Stewart. 


SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  147 


in  the  class  systems  of  the  coast  tribes  and  the  development 
of  local  exogamy  in  them. 

Among  the  Yuin  a  man  might  not  kill  or  eat  his  Jivibir, 
also  called  Budjan.  In  addition  to  the  group  totem,  the 
novice  receives  an  individual  totem  at  the  initiation  cere- 
monies from  some  one  of  the  Gommeras.  In  one  instance 
which  came  under  my  notice,  this  individual  totem  was 
Wombat,  and  the  medicine-man  who  gave  it  said  to  the 
novice,  "  You  must  not  eat  it."  The  novice  was  of  the 
Kaualgar  or  Kangaroo  totem  hy  inheritance  from  his  father. 
Another  man  of  the  Kangaroo  Jiinbir  believed  that  animal 
gave  him  warnings  of  danger,  by  hopping  towards  him,  and 
he  said  that  it  would  not  be  right  for  a  Kaualgar  man  to 
kill  a  kangaroo.      This  was  the  group  totem  of  that  man. 

That  in  this  tribe  the  totem  is  thought  to  be  in  some  way 
part  of  a  man  is  seen  clearly  by  the  case  of  Umbara,  before 
mentioned,  who  told  me  that,  many  years  ago,  some  one  of  the 
Burnagga  budjan  (Lace-lizard  totem)  sent  it  while  he  was  asleep, 
and  that  it  went  down  his  throat,  and  almost  ate  his  Budjan, 
which  was  in  his  breast,  so  that  he  nearly  died.  This  man 
could  not  eat  his  Budjan,  Black  Duck,  which  in  its  corporeal 
form  gave  him  warnings  against  enemies  or  other  dangers. 

The  Narrinyeri  totem  passes  from  father  to  child,  who 
might  not  kill  or  eat  it,  although  another  person  might  do  so,^ 
In  the  Wonghibon  tribe  a  man  would  not  kill  or  eat  his 
totem  unless  under  great  pressure  of  hunger."  In  the 
tribes  within  fifty  miles  of  Maryborough  (Queensland),  each 
boy  has  a  totem  called  Pinc/ia,  which  is  given  to  him  by 
his  father,  and  which  he  calls  Norn,  that  is,  "  brother." 
F"or  instance,  say  that  a  man's  Pincha  is  Fish-eagle  {kunkd), 
he  gives  to  each  of  his  sons  a  Pincha  ;  for  instance,  to  one 
a  kangaroo  {guruman),  to  another  a  large  white  grub 
ipu-yung)  which  is  found  in  gum-trees,  and  so  on.  A 
man  does  not  kill  or  eat  his  Pincha.  Moreover,  he  is 
supposed  to  have  .some  particular  affinity  to  his  father's 
Pincha,  and  is  not  permitted  to  eat  it' 

In  the  Wakelbura  tribe  the  totem  animal  is  spoken  of 
as   "  father."      For   example,  a   man    of   the   Binnung-  urra 

1  F,  W.  Taplin.  -  A.  L.  P,  Cameron,  3  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


148        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

(Frilled-lizard  totem)  holds  that  reptile  as  sacred,  and  he 
would  not  only  not  kill  it,  but  would  protect  it  by  preventing 
another  person  doing  so  in  his  presence.  Similarly  a  man 
of  the  Screech-owl  totem  would  call  it  "  father,"  and  like- 
wise hold  it  sacred  and  protect  it.  So  far  does  the  feeling 
go,  that  when  a  man  could  not  get  satisfaction  for  an 
injurious  action  by  another,  he  has  been  known  to  kill 
that  beast,  bird,  or  reptile  which  that  man  called  "  father," 
and  thus  obtain  revenge,  and  perhaps  cause  the  other  to  do 
the  same,  if  he  knew  of  it.  A  man  who  was  lax  as  to  his 
totem  was  not  thought  well  of,  and  was  never  allowed  to 
take  any  important  part  in  the  ceremonies.' 

Sex  Totem.*^ 

There  are  two  birds  which  the  Kurnai  reverence :  the 
Emu -wren  and  the  Superb  Warbler,  which,  are  the  sex 
totems,  and  no  man  would  think  under  any  circumstances 
of  injuring  his  "elder  brother,"  Yiirung,  or  any  woman  her 
"  elder  sister,"  Djiitguu.  Thus,  as  to  these  .sex  totems,  the 
usual  totemic  taboo  exists.  The  totem  is  the  protector  of 
the  individual,  and  the  individual  protects  his  totem. 

The  sex  totems  were  first  observed  and  reported  by 
me  among  the  Kurnai,  where  Yiirung,  the  Emu-wren,  is 
the  elder  brother  of  the  men,  and  Djiitgun  the  elder  sister 
of  the  women.  The  sex  totems,  when  first  seen,  presented 
a  novel  but  a  perplexing  problem,  because  they  merely  divide 
the  tribe  into  two  moieties,  one  including  all  the  males  and 
the  other  all  the  females. 

The  true  character  of  the  sex  totem  is  shown  by  the 
Wotjobaluk  expression,  "  The  life  of  a  bat  is  the  life  of  a 
man,"  meaning  that  to  injure  a  bat  is  to  injure  some  man, 
while  to  kill  one  is  to  cause  some  man  to  die.  The  same 
saying  applies  to  the  Owlet-nightjar  with  respect  to  women. 

There  is  a  very  peculiar  custom  connected  with  these 
totems,  namely,  that  they  are  the  cause  of  fighting  between 
the  sexes,  not  only  in  the  Kurnai  tribe  but  also  in  all  the 
tribes  in  which  I  have  found  them. 

1  J.  C.  Muirhead, 


in  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  149 

In  the  Kurnai  tribe  sometimes  ill-feeling  arose  between 
the  men  and  the  women,  and  then  some  of  the  latter  went 
out  and  killed  one  of  the  men's  brothers  to  spite  them.  On 
their  return  to  the  camp  with  the  victim,  the  men  attacked 
them  with  their  clubs,  and  they  defended  themselves  with 
their  digging-sticks.  Or  the  men  might  go  out  and  kill  a 
woman's  "  sister,"  whereupon  the  women  would  attack  them. 

But  the  most  remarkable  feature  of  these  fights  over 
the  killing  of  the  man's  brother  or  of  the  woman's  sister, 
was  when  there  were  young  women  who  were  marriageable, 
but  not  mated,  and  when  the  eligible  bachelors  were  back- 
ward. In  this  tribe,  as  I  have  explained  in  the  chapter  on 
Marriage,  there  was  no  practice  of  betrothal,  the  cases  thereof 
being  so  rare  as  to  prove  the  rule.  Marriage  was  by  elopement, 
and  therefore  the  young  woman  had  the  power  to  refuse, 
unless  constrained  by  the  incantations  of  the  Bunjil-yenjin. 

Under  such  circumstances  some  of  the  elder  women 
went  out,  and  having  killed  a  Yiirung,  returned  to  the  camp 
and  casually  let  some  of  the  men  see  it,  who  became  enraged 
at  one  of  their  brothers  being  killed.  The  young  men  and 
the  young  women  then  armed  themselves  with  clubs  and  sticks 
and  fought  together.  In  this  fight  it  was  only  those  young 
men  who  had  been  made  Jeraeil,  and  who  were  now  allowed 
by  the  old  men  to  marry,  who  took  part  in  these  affrays. 

On  the  following  day  the  young  men  went  out  and 
killed  a  Djiitgun,  which  would  occasion  another  fight  when 
they  came  back.  By  and  by,  when  the  bruises  and  perhaps 
wounds  received  in  these  fights  had  healed,  a  young  man 
and  a  young  woman  might  meet,  and  he,  looking  at  her, 
would  say,  for  instance,  "  Djiitgun  !  What  does  the  Djiitgun 
eat  ?  "  The  reply  would  be,  "  She  eats  kangaroo,  opossum," 
or  some  other  game.  This  constituted  a  formal  offer  and 
an  acceptance,  and  would  be  followed  by  the  elopement 
of  the  couple  as  described  in  the  chapter  on  Marriage. 

Fights  between  the  sexes  on  account  of  the  killing  of 
the  brother  or  sister  totem  occurred  in  a  great  number  of 
tribes,  and  probably  in  all  the  tribes  now  referred  to  ; 
but  it  is  only  in  the  Kurnai  tribe  that  I  have  met  with 
the  sex-totems  as  instrumental  in  promoting  marriage. 


I50        NATIVE  TRIHES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  such  fights  arose  out  of  some 
ill-feeling,  when  men,  for  instance,  would  kill  an  owlet-night- 
jar and  tell  of  doing  so  in  the  camp.  The  women  would  then 
in  their  turn  kill  a  bat,  and  carry  it  to  the  camp  on  the 
point  of  a  stick  which  had  been  thrust  through  it,  and  with  a 
piece  of  wood  in  its  mouth  to  keep  it  open.  This  was  held 
up  in  triumph,  the  oldest  woman  walking  first  and  the  younger 
ones  following,  and  all  shouting  "  Yeip  !  Yeip  !  "     (Hurrah  !) 

The  men  met  them  with  clubs  and  boomerangs,  the 
women  being  armed  with  their  digging-sticks,  and  a  great 
fight  would  ensue.  At  times  the  men  used  spears  against 
the  women,  who  defended  themselves  by  turning  them  aside 
or  breaking  them  with  their  sticks. 

In  such  a  fight,  which  might  last,  off  and  on,  for  an  hour, 
women  have  been  speared  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  have 
been  known  to  give  the  men  a  good  drubbing  with  their  sticks. 

I  have  traced  the  totems  as  far  as  the  Buandik,  but  the 
Narrinyeri  do  not  seem  to  have  had  them.  They  occur  in 
the  tribes  of  the  Murray  River  and  of  Riverina,  and  as  far 
as  the  northern  boundaries  of  the  Wonghibon.' 

In  South-Western  Victoria  the  men  look  upon  the  bat 
{Ngu7ig-7igutcli)  as  sacred  to  them,  and  the  women  claim  the 
small  nightjar  {Eratiycrky} 

The  Wurunjerri  not  only  had  the  Bat  (Ngunun-ngunut) 
and  the  Owlet-nightjar  (Ngari-barm-goruk),  but  the  Kurnai 
totems  also,  under  the  names  of  Bunjil-boroin,  meaning 
"  twilight,"  for  the  Emu-wren,  and  of  the  Wurn-goruk  for 
the  Superb  Warbler. 

The  Yuin  sex  totems  are  the  Bat  and  the  Emu-wren 
as  the  men's  brother,  and  the  Tree-creeper  {Tintc-galian)  as 
the  women's  sister. 

At  Port  Stephens  the  Bat  and  the  Tree-creeper  are  the 
Gimbai  or  "  friends "  of  the  men  and  women  respectively. 
The  men  took  the  bat  under  their  protection,  and  woe 
betide  any  woman  who  attempted  to  injure  one.  The  bat 
was  also  called  Kuri,  that  is  "  man."  ^ 

It  was  said  in  the  Turrbal  tribe  that  the  small  Bat  made 
the  men,  and  the  Night-hawk  made  the  women.      Mr.  Tom 

•  A.  L.  P.  Cameron.  2  /^^  3  William  Scott. 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  151 

Petrie  of  North  Pine  River,  Brisbane,  has  described  the 
fight  between  the  sexes  about  them,  by  saying  that  the  men 
out  of  mischief  would  kill  a  woman's  sister,  and  then  in  turn 
the  women  killed  a  man's  brother,  when  there  would  be  a 
fight,  or  rather  "  a  sort  of  jolly  fight,  like  skylarking."  As 
Mr.  Harry  E.  Aldridge  of  Maryborough  (Queensland)  has 
no  knowledge  of  the  sex  totems,  it  is  probable  that  they 
do  not  extend  farther  north  than  Brisbane. 

I  am  quite  unable  to  offer  any  suggestion  as  to  the 
origin  of  the  sex  totems.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  case 
in  which  they  have  been  eaten.  They  are  thought  to  be 
friendly  to  the  sex  they  are  akin  to,  and  are  protected  by  it. 

The  Wotjobaluk  saying  that  "  the  life  of  a  bat  is  the 
life  of  a  man  "  seems  to  me  to  explain  why  the  killing  of 
that  totem  causes  the  men  to  be  so  enraged.  To  injure  a 
bat  is  to  injure  some  man,  but  as  this  is  a  group  totem,  so 
far  as  in  that  it  includes  all  the  men,  each  of  them  may 
justly  fear  that  he  is  the  particular  one  whose  life  will  be 
affected. 

TOTEMISM 

As  totcmism  combined  with  exogamy  is  at  the  root  of 
the  social  organisation,  it  requires  some  special  mention 
here.  In  this  connection  I  may  now  say  that  I  entirely 
agree  with  the  opinion  expressed  by  Messrs.  Spencer  and 
Gillen/  that  the  relation  between  totemism  and  exogamy 
is  merely  a  secondary  feature,  the  primary  functions  of  the 
former  having  probably  been  in  existence  before  the  latter 
became  established. 

There  is  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  origin 
of  what  is  termed  totemism,  and  a  number  of  hypotheses 
have  been  framed  to  account  for  it. 

It  has  always  seemed  to  me  that  the  origin  of  totems 
and  totemism  must  have  been  in  so  early  a  stage  of  man's 
social  development  that  traces  of  its  original  structure 
cannot  be  expected  in  tribes  which  have  long  passed  out  of 
the  early  conditions  of  matriarchal  times.      Yet  if  anywhere 

•   "On  Totemism  as  applied  lo  Australian  Tuhc^"  Jotmial  Anthrop,  Inst. 
February  and  May  1899. 


152        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

in  the  still  savage  regions  of  the  world  there  are  any  living 
survivals  of  early  totemism,  surely  it  must  be  in  Australia 
that  they  are  to  be  sought  for. 

Therefore  there  are  but  three  of  the  hypotheses  referred 
to  with  which  I  feel  myself  concerned.  First,  that  advanced 
by  Messrs  Spencer  and  Gillen  ;  the  second,  which  is  sub- 
stantially the  same,  but  independently  arrived  at  by  Dr.  J. 
G.  Frazer  ;  and  the  third  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.  Professor 
Haddon  has  also  made  a  suggestion  bearing  on  totemism 
which  must  be  considered. 

Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  say,  that  in  Australian 
tribes  the  primary  function  of  a  totemistic  group  is  to 
ensure  by  magic  a  supply  of  the  object  which  gives  its 
name  to  the  totemistic  group.  There  is  an  important  series 
of  traditions  in  the  Arunta  tribe  which  deals  with  a  gradual 
development,  and  with  a  former  state  of  organisation  and 
custom  quite  different  from,  and  in  important  respects  at  vari- 
ance with,  the  organisation  and  customs  of  the  present  day. 

The  traditions  point  to  the  introduction  of  an  exogamic 
law  after  the  totemic  groups  were  fully  developed,  and  also 
that  the  introduction  of  that  system  was  due  to  the 
deliberate  action  of  certain  ancestors. 

The  hypothesis  starts  with  the  assumption  of  the  exist- 
ence of  totemic  groups  ;  but  these  legends  do  not  help  us, 
since  they  assume  the  descent  of  mankind  from  the  objects 
whose  names  they  bear.  But  I  think  that  we  may  safely 
go  so  far  as  to  consider  it  very  probable,  if  food  animals 
and  plants  were  totems  in  the  earliest  times,  that  magical 
practices  might  easily  arise  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the 
food  supply  of  the  pristine  totemic  groups.  Such  practices 
would,  to  use  the  words  of  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen,  as 
I  understand  them,  be  the  primary  function  of  such  groups. 

In  connection  with  this,  I  may  remark  that  the  very  great 
development  of  the  magical  ceremonies  of  Central  Australian 
tribes,  connected  with  the  "  primary"  functions  of  such  groups, 
appear  to  me  to  have  arisen  necessarily  out  of  the  climatic 
conditions  of  that  part  of  Australia  ;  while  their  absence  in 
the  tribes  of  South-Eastern  Australia  is  due  to  the  far  more 
favourable  conditions  under  which  they  have  lived. 


in  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  153 

Dr.  Frazer's  views  are,  shortly,  as  follows.^  The 
Intichiuma  ceremonies  appear  to  indicate  that  each  totem 
group  was  charged  with  the  superintendence  of  some 
department  of  nature,  from  which  it  took  its  name.  The 
control  was  by  magical  means  to  procure  for  the  members 
of  the  community,  on  the  one  hand,  a  plentiful  supply  of 
all  the  commodities  of  which  they  stood  in  need  ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  an  immunity  from  all  the  perils  and 
dangers  to  which  man  is  exposed  in  his  struggle  with  nature. 

Dr.  J.  G.  Frazer  informs  me  that  this  view  was  first 
suggested  by  him  in  a  letter  to  Professor  Baldwin  Spencer 
in  the  autumn  of  1898,  in  reply  to  which  the  latter  informed 
him  that  he  had  been  coming  to  the  same  conclusion. 

Accordingly,  when  Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  visited 
England  afterwards,  he  read  the  paper  already  quoted,  which 
contained  the  views  of  Mr.  Gillen  and  himself. 

Thus  Dr.  Frazer  independently  arrived  at  the  same 
conclusion,  and  raised  the  same  hypothesis  as  to  the 
primary  functions  of  the  pristine  groups. 

This  hypothesis  takes  us  back  far  into  the  time  when 
the  function  of  each  totem  group  was  to  secure  the  multiplica- 
tion of  the  particular  object  the  name  of  which  it  bore. 

But  the  totem  group  is  seen  there  to  be  fully  formed, 
and  the  question  still  remains,  How  was  it  that  men  assumed 
the  names  of  objects,  which  in  fact  must  have  been  the 
commencement  of  totemism  ? 

It  is  to  this  aspect  of  the  question  that  Mr.  Andrew 
Lang  has  addressed  himself  especially.^  He  holds  that  the 
problem  of  the  commissariat  must  have  kept  the  pristine 
groups  very  small.  They  were  at  first  anonymous,  and 
each  group  would  need  a  special  name  for  each  of  its 
unfriendly  neighbours.  He  considers  that  as  likely  as  not 
there  would  be  animal  names  given  for  various  reasons. 
Thus  the  plant  and  animal  names  would  be  impressed 
upon  each  group  from  without,  and  some  of  them  would 
stick,  would  be  stereotyped,  and  each  group  would  come 
to  answer  to  its  nickname. 

'    The  Fortiii_^/it/y  A'eview,  April  1899,  p.  646. 
-'  Soiidl  Origins,  p.  166. 


154        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

To  me,  judging  of  the  possible  feelings  of  the  pristine 
ancestors  of  the  Australians  by  their  descendants  of  the 
present  time,  it  seems  most  improbable  that  any  such 
nicknames  would  have  been  adopted  and  have  given  rise 
to  totemism,  nor  do  I  know  of  a  single  instance  in  which 
such  nicknames  have  been  adopted. 

I  could  more  easily  imagine  that  these  early  savages 
might,  through  dreams,  have  developed  the  idea  of  relation- 
ships with  animals,  or  even  with  plants.  Such  dreams  as 
those  of  the  medicine-man  Bunjil-bataluk,  who  was  a  Lace- 
lizard,  according  to  his  dreams  and  in  his  own  belief,  or 
of  the  Biraark  who  dreamed  that  he  was  a  Kangaroo,  and 
assisted  at  their  corrobboree,  are  cases  in  point. 

The  hypothesis  suggested  by  Professor  H addon '  is  that 
groups  of  people,  at  a  very  early  period,  by  reason  of  their 
local  environment,  would  have  special  varieties  of  food. 

This  receives  support  from  the  fact  that  analogous  names 
obtain  now  in  certain  tribes,  i\^.  the  Yuin. 

A  question  suggests  itself,  as  to  whether  the  ceremonies 
of  the  Dieri  and  other  Lake  Eyre  tribes,  which  are  the 
equivalents  of  the  Intichiuma  ceremonies,  may  be  considered 
as  the  survival  of  primitive  belief  and  custom,  or  whether  they 
are  a  peculiar  evolution  of  totemism.  The  Dieri  tribe  in  its 
organisation,  and  in  its  customs  and  beliefs,  is  one  of  the  most 
backward-standing  tribes  I  know  of,  and  therefore  it  would 
not  be  surprising  if  the  magical  food-producing  ceremonies 
were  retained,  while  other  tribes  have  departed  from  them. 

Assuming  that  the  Dieri  do,  in  fact,  continue  ceremonies 
which  belonged  to  the  primary  functions  of  the  early  totem- 
istic  groups,  it  may  be  worth  considering  whether  there  are 
any  apparent  reasons  why  the  native  tribes  in  other  parts  of 
Australia  have  abandoned  them.  I  have  before  pointed  out 
that  the  tribes  can  be  arranged  in  a  series  :  first  those  with 
Pirrauru  marriage  ;  then  those  in  which  that  form  of  marriage 
has  become  a  rudimentary  custom  ;  and  finally  those  which 
have  more  or  less  lost  their  class  organisation,  and  have 
developed  a  form  of  individual  marriage. 

Now  compare  such  a  series  of  tribes  with  regard  to  these 

*  Proceedings  of  British  Association,  1902. 


Ill  SOCIAL  ORGANISATION  155 

magical  food  -  producing  ceremonies,  and  also  as  to  the 
climatic  conditions  under  which  they  live.  We  shall  find 
that  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes  are  under  a  minimum  rainfall,  a 
very  high  temperature,  and  a  prevailing  aridity,  with  fertile 
intervals,  when  there  is  abundance  of  animal  and  vegetable 
food  supplies.  At  the  further  end  of  the  series,  whether  in 
Queensland,  New  South  Wales,  Victoria,  or  South  Australia, 
the  tribes  living,  say,  on  the  coast  lands,  are  under  climatic 
conditions  very  different  from  those  of  Central  Australia,  with 
a  good  rainfall,  a  more  temperate  climate,  and  a  plentiful 
and  constant  food  supply,  both  animal  and  vegetable.  This 
comparison  comes  out  clearly  when  the  tables  of  rainfall, 
given  in  the  introductory  chapter,  are  inspected. 

This  comparison  will  fall  in  line  with  former  conclu.sions, 
namely,  that  the  tribes  of  the  Lake  Eyre  basin  have  remained 
in  a  far  more  primitive  condition  socially  than  those  of  the 
south-east  of  Australia. 

If  so,  it  would  point  to  conditions  of  better  climate,  and 
more  abundant  and  regular  food  supply,  as  potent  causes  in 
the  advancement  of  the  social  condition  of  the  south-east 
tribes.  At  present  it  is  not  known  what  is  the  condition  of 
the  tribes  which  exist  in  the  great  western  deserts  between 
South  Australia  and  Western  Australia.  Their  social  organisa- 
tion would  be  of  the  greatest  interest  for  comparison  with  that 
of  tribes  living  in  the  more  fertile  parts  of  this  continent. 

Taking  all  into  consideration,  I  feel  that  the  most  prob- 
able conclusion  to  arrive  at  is,  that  the  Intichiuma  ceremonies 
represent  a  very  early  form  of  totem istic  beliefs  ;  but  beyond 
that,  there  are  not  sufficient  data  to  allow  of  a  safe  hypo- 
thesis as  to  the  origin  of  the  totemic  names. 

Yet  it  may  be  well  to  keep  in  view  that  no  two  tribes 
are  practically  at  the  same  point  of  development,  as  indicated 
for  in.stance  by  an  advance  from  group  marriage  to  some 
form  of  individual  marriage.  Thus  I  see  no  difficulty  in 
believing  that  while  the  Arunta  have  reached  male  descent 
with  segmentation  into  eight  sub-classes,  they  may  have 
retained  early  beliefs  as  to  their  totem  ancestors. 


CHAPTER    IV 

RELATIONSHIP    TERMS 

The  Classificatory  system — Its  significance — Table  of  Dicri  relationships — The 
Dieri  system — Its  jieculiar  development — The  A'adada-itoa  relationship — 
Kami  and  Noa — Anomalous  cases — Kurnai  relationships — Table  of  Kurnai 
terms — Archaic  form  of  relationships. 

The  Classificatory  System 

It  has  been  long  known  that  this  system  of  counting  re- 
lations, which  occurs  among  the  Australian  tribes,  also 
obtains  among  other  savage  and  barbarous  races.  Since  it 
was  first  brought  under  notice  by  the  late  Dr.  Lewis  H. 
Morgan,  "  the  classificatory  system  "  of  relationships,  as  he 
called  it,  has  been  the  subject  of  much  controversy,  and  the 
opinions  formed  as  to  the  origin  and  real  meaning  of  the 
system  have  been  various.  It  may  be  safely  said  that  there 
are  few,  even  of  those  who  have  been  brought  into  daily 
contact  during  the  course  of  a  lifetime  with  the  Australian 
blackfellow,  who  have  taken  the  trouble  to  master  the  details 
of  the  system  ;  or,  if  they  have  done  so,  they  have  not  been 
able  to  form  any  true  conception  of  the  true  foundation  on 
which  the  system  rests,  or  the  root  from  which  it  has  sprung. 
How  much  more  difficult,  therefore,  must  the  subject  be 
for  those  who  live  in  countries  separated  by  thousands  of 
miles  from  lands  where  they  could  become  personally  ac- 
quainted with  savage  life.  They  are  compelled,  if  they 
desire  to  study  the  subject  of  relationships,  to  have  recourse 
to  second-hand  information,  superficially  collected  by 
travellers,  or  by  local  residents,  who  have  brought  to  the 
investigation  the  ingrained  beliefs  as  to  relationships  which 
almost  form  a  part  of  the  mental  texture  of  civilised  man, 

156 


CH,  IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  157 

He  seems  to  consider  that  the  terms  of  relationship  which 
he  has  been  taught  to  use  are,  or  ought  to  be,  of  universal 
application  among  mankind. 

When  such  a  man  is  brought  first  into  contact  with  a 
race  of  savages  who  use  the  classificatory  system,  he  feels 
in  most  cases  surprise,  mingled  with  pity,  and  even  with  con- 
tempt, for  those  poor  creatures  who  are  so  low  in  intellect 
as  to  think  it  possible  for  any  one  to  have  several  fathers 
and  mothers,  and  a  vast  number  of  brothers  and  sisters. 

In  order  to  grasp  the  true  nature  and  bearing  of  the 
classificatory  system  of  relationships,  it  is  necessary  not  only 
to  free  oneself  from  misconceptions,  as  to  the  universal  use 
of  our  own  system,  but  also  to  have  such  an  acquaintance 
with  the  nature  of  a  savage  as  to  be  able  to  put  oneself 
mentally  into  his  place,  think  with  his  thoughts,  and  reason 
with  his  mind  ;  unless  this  be  done,  the  classificatory 
system  will  be  a  delusion  and  a  snare. 

It  is  upon  the  division  of  the  whole  community  into 
two  exogamous  intermarrying  classes  that  the  whole  social 
structure  is  built  up  ;  and  the  various  relationships  which 
are  brought  about  by  those  marriages  are  defined  and 
described  by  the  classificatory  system. 

In  order  to  bring  out  the  real  nature  of  the  relations 
which  it  defines,  it  is  necessary  to  clear  the  ground  by  some 
preliminary  remarks.  As  I  have  said  before,  the  social  unit 
is  not  the  individual,  but  the  group  ;  and  the  former  merely 
takes  the  relationships  of  his  group,  which  arc  of  group  to 
group.  The  relationship  terms  differ  very  much  in  their 
meaning  from  those  we  use,  and  moreover  the  natives  dis- 
tinguish between  some  which  we  confuse  under  one  collective 
term,  and  those  native  terms  are  distinguished  from  each 
other,  by  the  persons  whom  they  represent,  being  respectively 
in  one  or  the  other  of  the  two  moieties  of  the  tribe.  For 
instance,  our  term  "  uncle  "  includes  "  father's  brother  "  and 
"  mother's  brother."  In  the  classificatory  system  the  father 
and  the  father's  brother  are  of  the  same  class  name,  while 
the  mother  and  her  brother  are  in  the  other,  and  the  same 
thing  occurs  with  all  other  collective  terms  we  use.  Our 
collective   terms   have  been   the  cause  of  much    misunder- 


158        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Standing,  arising  through  the  mistakes  of  those  who  have 
gathered  information,  without  due  knowledge,  and  have 
confused  the  native  terms  with  ours. 

This  is  strongly  brought  out  in  the  late  Mr.  E.  M.  Curr's 
work  The  Australian  Race}  where  it  is  stated  that  there  are 
terms  in  the  native  tribes  which  are  the  equivalents  of  our 
collective  terms,  such  as  "  uncle,"  "  aunt,"  "  nephew,"  "  niece," 
"  sister-in-law,"  and  "  son-in-law." 

An  examination  of  the  table  given  at  p.  141  of  his 
work  shows  that  the  compilers  were  ignorant  of  the  meaning 
of  the  terms  they  gave,  as  well  as  of  the  principles  of  the 
classificatory  system.  They  seem  to  have  endeavoured  to 
give  a  term  as  near  as  possible  to  the  "  collective  terms,"  in 
Mr.  Curr's  circular  ;  but  one  contributor  (the  late  Rev.  George 
Taplin)  takes  the  trouble  to  distinguish  between  the  paternal 
and  maternal  uncles.  It  greatly  detracts  from  the  usefulness 
and  value  of  Mr.  Curr's  work  that  he  did  not  make  himself 
aware  of  the  native  system  of  relationships.  His  work 
requires  to  be  read  with  knowledge,  in  order  for  it  to  be 
a  safe  guide  in  Australian  anthropology. 

A  mere  list  of  the  terms  of  relationship  would  not  give 
all  that  I  desire  to  make  clear  regarding  the  system  in  use 
by  the  aborigines.  Deductions  from  such  lists  of  terms  are 
always  open  to  the  objection  of  being  more  or  less  theoretical, 
although  to  those  who  have  a  personal  knowledge  of  the 
Australian  savages  and  their  customs,  no  further  evidence  is 
now  necessary  to  prove  that  the  terms  represent  a  great 
living  fact. 

The  Dieri  System 

In  order  to  bring  into  view  the  relationships  of  an 
existing  people,  in  present  and  past  generations,  I  requested 
Mr.  Siebert  to  be  so  good  as  to  tabulate  four  generations  of 
the  Dieri  tribe,  taking  as  the  starting-point  the  marriages  of 
two  brothers  and  their  two  sisters,  and  their  descendants 
down  to  the  great-grandchildren.  He  most  kindly  not  only 
did  this,  but  also  tabulated  a  number  of  cases  illustrating 
points  which  arose  in  the  critical  examination  of  the  results. 

1  Vol.  i.  p.  140. 


IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  159 

The  various  marriages  and  descents  tabulated  are  in 
accordance  with  the  results  of  the  two  intermarrying  classes 
and  their  totems,  the  details  of  which  are  given  in  Chapters 
III.  and  V.  The  table  has  been  carefully  compiled  from 
particulars  given  by  four  old  aborigines  who  were  living  in 
the  year  i  898,  and  it  has  been  carefully  tested  by  comparing 
their  independent  statements,  and  by  the  consensus  of  their 
opinions. 

The  diagram  as  originally  drawn  up  gave  the  individual 
name  of  each  person,  the  tribe  to  which  he  or  she  belonged, 
or  belongs,  and  the  class  and  totem  names.  As  it  now  stands, 
the  individual  names  are  omitted,  having  served  their  purpose, 
which  was  to  make  the  foundation  of  this  account  of  the 
terms  of  relationship  one  of  facts  and  not  of  inference. 

The  tribes  referred  to  are  the  Dieri,  Urabunna, 
Wonkanguru,  Tangara,  and  Kuyani,  which  intermarried. 
The  class  names  are  indicated  by  the  Kararu  totems  being 
given  in  clarendon  letters  and  the  Matter!  in  italics.  The 
diagram  also  brings  into  view  two  facts,  namely,  that  a  child 
takes  the  Murdu  of  its  mother  but  belongs  to  the  tribe  of 
its  father,  unless  it  had  been  brought  up  in  another  tribe, 
and  speaks  its  language,  when  it  would  be  considered  as 
belonging  to  it.  Even  a  man  who  took  up  his  abode  with  his 
wife's  tribe,  or  one  where  he  had  relations  and  spoke  its 
language,  would  be  counted  as  belonging  to  it.  The  man 
No.  I  in  the  Table  is  an  example  of  such  a  case. 

All  these  details  are  given  for  the  reason  that  I  am 
dealing  with,  and  here  present  to  the  reader,  the  actual  data 
from  which  my  conclusions  are  drawn.  The  information 
goes  back  from  the  present  time  to  the  past,  when  the  Lake 
Eyre  tribes  were  in  a  perfectly  savage  condition  ;  when  the 
white  man  was  only  known  from  rumour,  or  to  some  of  the 
old  people  by  the  sight  of  Captain  Sturt  and  his  companions 
when  they  crossed  the  Yantruwunta  country  at  Cooper's 
Creek.  This  ensures  that  there  has  been  no  deviation  from 
the  ancestral  customs,  which  might  be  suspected  if  the 
particulars  referred  merely  to  later  times. 

The  relationship  terms  of  the  Dieri  arc  given  in  the 
following  list,  with  their  exact  meanings  in  our  terms,  and 


i6o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  ordinary  term  in  use  among  us.  The  terms  will  be 
considered  in  connection  with  the  table  given  of  marriages 
and  descents  in  this  tribe. 

DIERI   RELATIONSHIP  TERMS 


Dieri  Term. 

Exact  Equivalents  in  our  Terms. 

English  Terms. 

Kaia-Kaia 

Mother's  mother's  mother 

Maternal  great -grandmother, 
great-grandchild 

Nadada 

Mother's  father,  M.»  daughter's 

Maternal  grandfather,  grand- 

child 

child 

Yenku 

Father's  father,  father's  father's 

Paternal  grandfather,  paternal 

brother,  M.  son's  son 

grand  -  uncle,  grandchild, 
grand-nephew  or  -niece 

Kanini 

Mother's  mother,  F.  daughter's 

Maternal  grandmother,  mater- 

child 

nal  grand-aunt,  grandchild, 
grand-nephew  or  -niece 

Kadi 

Wife's  brother 

Brother-in-law 

Yiman 

F.  husband's  brother,  M.  wife's 
sister 

Brother-in-law,  sister-in-law 

Paiara 

F.    daughter's    husband,     M. 
wife's  mother 

Son-in-law,  mother-in-law 

Kalari 

F.  son's  wife,  husband's  mother 

Daughter-in-law,  mother-in- 
law 

Taru 

M.    daughter's    husband,    M. 
wife's  father 

Son-in-law,  father-in-law 

Ngaperi 

Father,  father's  brother 

Father,  uncle 

Ngata-mura 

M.  child,  F.  brother's  child 

Child 

Ngandri 

Mother,  mother's  sister 

Mother,  aunt 

Ngatani 

F.  child 

Child 

Yibi 

M.   or    F.    mother's   youngest 
unmarried  sister 

Aunt 

Neyi 

M.  or  F.  elder  brother 

Elder  brother,  cousin 

Kaku 

M.  or  F.  elder  sister 

Elder  sister,  cousin 

Ngatata 

M.   or  F.  younger  brother  or 

Younger  brother  or  sister,  or 

sister 

cousin 

Kamari 

Husband's  sister 

Sister-in-law 

Noa 

Potential  husband  or  wife 

Tippa-malku 

Those   who   are   promised    in 
marriage  to  each  other 

Betrothed 

Pirrauru 

Those  who  are  in  relation  of 
eroup-marriage 

Kami 


Papa 
Kaka 
Tidnara 
Buyulu 


Mother  father's,  M.  daughter's 
child,  mother's  brother's 
child,  father's  sister's  child 


Maternal      grandfather,      M, 
daughter's  child,  cousin 


Father's  sister 

Aunt 

Mother's  brother 

Uncle 

M.  sister's  child 

Nephew,  niece 

Mother's  sister's  child 

Cousin 

1  "  M."  means  *'  male  speaking"  ;  •'  F."  means  "  female  speaking." 


IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  .     i6i 

It  is  advisable,  in  order  to  avoid  any  misconception,  to 
say  in  advance  of  the  statements  to  be  made  in  the  chapter 
on  marriage  and  descent,  that  there  are  two  forms  of 
marriage  in  this  tribe.  One  I  have  termed  Tippa-malku 
marriage,  because  it  follows  upon  betrothal  or  exchange  of  a 
sister  for  a  wife  ;  the  other  is  the  Pii'rauru  marriage,  which 
follows  the  former,  and  is  the  group-marriage  of  the  Lake 
Eyre  tribes. 

It  is  also  well  to  say  that,  excepting  Tippa-vialku,  each 
term  represents  a  group,  and  not  merely  an  individual.  The 
relationships  of  the  individuals  shown  in  the  Table  will  be 
best  brought  out  by  considering  them  seriatitn^  beginning 
with  the  brothers  and  sisters  in  the  first  line.  It  will  be 
observed  that  in  all  cases  the  children  are  shown  as  a  son 
and  a  daughter,  who  in  the  two  instances  29  and  30  are  of 
different  totems,  their  father  No.  2  having  had  two  Tippa- 
malkti  wives.  In  former  times,  before  the  tribes  had  been 
broken  up  by  our  settlement  of  their  country,  it  was  not  rare 
for  a  man  to  have  more  than  one  wife.  In  such  a  case  he 
probably  was  so  fortunate  as  to  have  had  sisters  to  exchange, 
or  he  had  done  some  notable  service  ;  as,  for  instance,  bring- 
ing about  peace  between  his  tribe  and  some  other,  or  that 
some  one  fearing  vengeance  on  a  blood  feud  from  him  had 
pacified  him  by  a  present  of  a  wife.  In  one  or  two  cases  a 
couple  had  no  "  own  "  son  or  "  own  "  daughter,  and  a  "  tribal  " 
son  or  daughter  has  been  interpolated,  there  being,  from  a 
Dieri  point  of  view,  no  difference  in  the  relationship. 

The  men  Nos.  i  and  2  were  brothers,  the  former  being 
the  Neyi  or  elder,  and  the  latter  Ngatata  or  younger,  who, 
under  the  marriage  rules  of  this  tribe,  had  each  other's 
sisters  as  Tippa-malkti  wives.  Their  sisters  3  and  4  were 
the  wives  of  the  men  7  and  8,  the  brothers  of  the  women  5 
and  6,  the  latter  being  the  Kaku  of  5,  while  3  was  the 
Ngatata  of  4. 

The  terms  Neyi^  Kaku,  and  Ngatata  each  represent  a 
group  of  people  who  are  in  the  fraternal  relation  to  each 
other.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  two  persons  who  are  in 
that  relation  to  each  other  are  both  so  to  a  third  person. 
For  instance,  if  a  man   belonging  to  another  tribe  is  on  a 


i62        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

visit  to  the  Dieri,  and  is  the  guest  of  two  brothers  who  are 
of  the  same  totem  as  himself,  the  relative  ages  of  these 
three  men  will  determine  which  is  the  Neyi  and  which  are 
the  Ngatata. 

But  there  may  be  a  brother  of  the  two  who  is  not  in  the 
fraternal  relation  to  the  stranger.  Such  a  case  would  be 
like  that  referred  to  later  on,  in  which  the  kindred  altered 
the  mutual  relationships  of  a  man  and  a  woman  from  Kami 
to  Xoa.  Such  alterations  only  affect  the  persons  immedi- 
ately concerned,  and  not  their  brothers  and  sisters,  and  the 
new  relations  are  transmitted  by  their  descendants,  so  that 
in  time  it  is  not  possible  to  trace  the  older  relationships. 

The  Dieri  hold  that  the  relationship  of  the  children  of 
two  or  more  sisters  is  much  closer  than  that  of  the  children 
of  two  brothers,  although  both  these  groups  are,  as  between 
themselves,  "  brother  and  sister."  The  special  term  Buyulu 
applies  to  the  former. 

The  relations  of  Neyi,  Kakii,  and  Ngatata  in  the  Table 
are  between  1-2,  3-4;  5-6,  7-8;  9-10,  11-12;  13-14, 
15-16.  Other  examples  in  the  third  and  fourth  level  need 
not  be  further  specified. 

Besides  these,  which  may  be  termed  the  usual  instances 
in  any  line  of  descent,  there  are  others  which  arise  in  the 
tribe  through  a  remarkable  and  far-reaching  provision,  which 
places  the  grandchildren  on  the  same  level,  as  to  relation- 
ships, with  their  maternal  grandparents. 

This  is  so  important  in  its  consequences  that  it  is 
necessary  to  explain  it  at  some  length,  before  speaking 
further  of  the  fraternal  relations. 

Taking  the  man  No.  i  in  the  Table  as  an  illustration, 
he  and  27-28  are  Nadada-inara,  that  is,  in  ''  Nadada-sVv^" 
(the  postfix  inara  having  that  significance),  the  line  of 
descent  being  through  the  woman  10.  This  relationship  of 
Nadada  also  includes  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  No.  i. 
The  children  of  a  woman  are  considered  as  being  the 
younger  brothers  and  sisters  {Ngatata)  of  her  father.  More- 
over, this  carries  with  it  all  the  consequential  relationships. 
This  will  be  seen  when  other  relationships  are  considered, 
for  instance,  those  of  Papa  and  Ngataniura. 


IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  163 

There  is  a  Dieri  saying  that  '*  those  who  are  Noa  are 
Nadada  to  each  other." 

This  can  perhaps  be  best  brought  into  view  by  the 
following  little  diagram,  extracted  from  the  details  given  in 
the  Table,  and  prefixed  to  the  individuals  are  the  numbers 
from  the  Table. 

Diagram  III 

3F.^    ^^^7'.      -^2M. 
- —         Neatata 

I  ^  I 

14  F.<—      Kami      ->I2  F. 

35  >!.■«-       Noa       ->32  F. 

The  man  3  5  is  the  younger  brother  {^Kanini-ngatatd)  of  his 
maternal  grandmother  3,  and  therefore  is  the  younger 
brother  of  her  elder  brother  {tieyi)^  2,  and  thus  becomes 
the  Nadada- ngatata  or  the  maternal  grandfather  of  the 
woman  32,  and  is  also  her  Noa.  Thus  "  those  who  are  Noa 
to  each  other  are  also  Nadada  to  each  other." 

In  a  similar  manner  it  can  be  shown  that  $,  6,  7,  8  are 
included  in  the  Nadada-noa  relation  with  their  respective 
husbands,  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  all  the  other  married 
couples,  or  those  who  are  merely  Noa  to  each  other. 

Before  reverting  to  the  fraternal  terms  of  relationship, 
that  of  Kanini  must  be  explained.  The  Kanini  term  is 
reciprocal  between  a  woman  and  her  daughter's  children. 
She  is  sometimes  called  Kanini-kaku,  the  Kanini  elder  sister, 
apparently  because  her  grandchildren  are  regarded  as  being 
in  the  same  level  as  herself,  being  her  young  brothers  and 
sisters.  Thus  they  are  on  the  same  level  with  her  as  her 
brother's  children  are  to  him.  The  brother  of  the  Kanini 
is  called  also  the  Kanini-neyi,  that  is  the  Kanini  elder 
brother,  her  daughter's  children  being  his  younger  brothers 
and  sisters. 

In  the  Table  Nos.  5  and  6  are  the  Kanini  of  27-28  and 
of  31-32  respectively,  and  5  and  6,  being  sisters,  are  so 
collectively  as  to  the  Kanini  group  of  grandchildren. 

Similarly  7  and  8,  being  the  brothers  of  5  and  6,  are 
the  Kanini-neyi  o{  27-28  and  31-32. 


i64        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  Dieri  cannot  give  any  explanation  of  the  cause  of 
the  Nadada  arrangement.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  they 
could  do  so  as  to  any  ancient  practice,  nor  can  I  venture 
to  do  more  than  to  point  to  what  may  possibly  suggest  a 
reason  for  its  origin.  The  effect  of  bringing  the  grand- 
children up  to  the  level  of  their  grandparents  is  to  enlarge 
the  group  of  women  who  are  Noa  to  those  elders.  In  other 
words,  the  tribal  brothers  of  the  Nadada  and  the  tribal 
sisters  of  the  Kanini  have  a  further  possibility  of  wives  or 
husbands.  In  the  chapter  on  marriage  it  is  shown  how  the 
younger  brother  of  the  Nadada  obtains  a  wife,  she  being 
the  grand-daughter  in  the  female  line  of  his  elder  brother. 
But  neither,  for  instance,  the  Nadada  No.  i  nor  the  Kanini 
No.  4  is  permitted  to  participate  in  this  privilege,  which  only 
attaches  to  the  younger  brothers  of  the  former  and  the 
younger  sisters  of  the  latter. 

The  maternal  great -grandmother  is  Kaiakaia,  more 
commonly  called  Ngandri,  since  she  is  the  mother  of  the 
Kanini.  Through  the  female  line  in  the  ascendent  45-46 
are  Kaiakaia  to  3,  and  also  to  4,  her  sister.  This  term  of 
relationship  is  the  only  one  in  use  between  the  first  and 
fourth  levels. 

Reverting  to  the  fraternal  relationships,  it  will  be  seen 
that  since  27  and  28  are  Nadada- ngatata,  that  is,  the 
younger  brother  and  sister  of  No.  i,  and  31  and  32  are  the 
Nadada-ngatata  of  2,  the  brother  of  i,  they  are  the  Nadada- 
noa  of  5,  6,  7,  and  8.  Similarly,  it  can  be  seen  that  35-36 
and  39-40  are  the  Nadada-noa  of  3  and  4,  because  they  are 
the  Nadada-ngatata  of  7  and  8,  the  husbands  of  those 
women. 

The  relationship  term  Yenku  is  reciprocal  between  i 
and  2,  and  25-26,  29  and  30  ;  also  between  7  and  8,  and 
33-34,  37-38;  13  and  43-44  are  in  the  same 
relation. 

Kami  is  a  term  which  is  reciprocal  between  the  maternal 
grandfather  and  his  daughter's  children.  It  is  also  reciprocal 
between  the  children  of  a  man  and  those  of  his  sister,  they 
being  Kami-niara  to  each  other.  Instances  of  this  are  the 
following:  9,  10,  11,  12  are  brothers  and   sisters,  being  the 


IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  165 

children  of  two  brothers;  13,  14,  15,  and  16  are  also 
brothers  and  sisters,  being  the  children  of  two  sisters. 
These  groups  are  Kami  to  each  other.  Similar  groups  of 
Kami  occur  in  the  succeeding  levels,  the  last  being  43  and 
44,  who  are  Kami  to  45  and  46. 

These  Kami,  it  may  be  mentioned,  are,  among  the 
Dieri,  prohibited  from  intermarriage,  although  among  the 
Urabunna  certain  of  them  are  Nupa  to  each  other,  a  man 
being  "  only  Nupa  to  the  female  children  of  the  elder 
brothers  of  his  mother,"  or,  what  is  exactly  the  same  thing, 
to  those  of  the  elder  sisters  of  his  father.^ 

Noa  is  a  reciprocal  relation  which  may  be  explained  by 
the  term  "  potential  spouse."  For  instance,  when  a  child  is 
born,  say  No.  9  in  the  table,  it  is  thereby  a  member  of  a 
certain  group,  as  the  case  may  be,  of  males  or  females,  each 
of  whom  is  Noa  to  each  individual  of  another  analogous 
group  of  the  opposite  sex.  The  man  9  on  his  birth  became 
Noa  to  each  female  in  a  group  whose  brothers  were  Noa  to 
his  sisters.  Thus  there  is  on  either  side  a  group  of  women 
who  are  own  or  tribal  sisters,  and  who  are  Noa  to  a  group 
of  men,  on  the  other  side,  who  are  own  or  tribal  brothers. 
It  is  the  children  of  the  Kami  who  are  born  into  the  Noa 
condition. 

In  the  Table  i,  2,  3,  4  and  5,  6,  7,  8  are  Noa  ;  similarly 
9,  10,  II,  12  and  17,  18,  19,  20  are  Noa.  But  these 
are  in  the  Kami  relation  to  13,  14,  15,  16  and  21,  22, 
23,  24. 

In  the  succeeding  level  there  are  some  who  are  Noa  and 
some  who  are  Kami  to  each  other.  Of  the  former  are  27 
and  31,  who  are  Noa  to  36  and  40  ;  also  28  and  32,  who 
are  Noa  to  35  and  39. 

Imari  means  husband's  brother  or  male-speaking  wife's 
sister.  Those  shown  in  Table  are  1-6,  2-5,  3-8,  4-7, 
9-19,  10-20,  11-17,  12-18,  13-23,  14-24,  15-21.  and 
16-22. 

Kadi  is  wife's  brother.       In  this  relation  are    i    and   2 
to  7  and   8  ;  9  and    11    to  1 8   and    20  ;    13   and    15   to  22 
and    24;   27    and    31    to   35  and    39.      Under  the  Kanini 
'  Spencer  and  Gillen,  op.  cit.  p.  61. 


i66        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

relationship    35    becomes   Kadi   to    7;    similarly   27   to    i, 
and  31  to  2. 

Those  in  the  relation  of  Katnari,  husband's  sister,  are  3 
and  4  to  5  and  6  ;  also  36,  who,  being  the  Nadada-ngatata 
of  7,  is  the  Katnari  of  3,  as  40  is  of  4.  Other  similar 
relations  are  in  the  other  level. 

The  relation  of  Kaka  and  Tidnara  is  that  of  mother's 
brother  and  male-speaking  sister's  child.  Therefore  No.  i 
is  the  Kaka  of  13-14,  and  15-16.  No.  2  is  in  the  same 
relation  to  them,  because  he  is  in  the  relation  of  Ngaperi  to 
them.  The  man  No.  i  3  is  the  Kaka  of  35  and  36,  who  are 
Tidnara  to  him,  because  under  the  Kanini  arrangement  35 
and  36  become  the  Ngatata  of  his  mother  No.  3.  This 
man  No.  13  is  also  the  Kaka  of  39  and  40,  under  the 
Kanini  arrangement,  because  their  mother  is  the  sister  ot 
the  woman  No.  3,  the  mother  of  13,  and  therefore  stands  in 
the  relation  of  Ngandri  to  him.  Similar  relations  occur  in 
the  other  levels. 

The  reciprocal  relationships  of  Papa  and  Ngatamura  are 
the  following:  5  and  6  with  13,  14,  15,  16  ;  3  and  4  with 
9,  10,  I  I,  I  2  ;  14  and  16  with  33,  34,  37,  and  38  ;  2  i  and 
23  with  35,  36,  39  and  40. 

The  term  Paiara  is  reciprocal,  and  is  applied  as  follows  : 
Nos.  5  and  18,  6  and  20,  3  and  22,  4  and  24.  Nos.  28  and 
3  5  are  Noa-rnara  ;  were  they  to  marry,  then  i  o  would  be  the 
Paiara  of  the  latter.  Similarly  No.  i  2  would  be  the  Paiara 
of  39,  if  he  married  32,  who  is  Noa  to  him. 

Instances  of  the  relationship  of  Kalari,  which  is 
reciprocal,  are  5  and  17,  6  and  19,  3  and  21,  4  and  23. 
If  31  were  to  marry  36,  who  is  Noa  to  him,  then  12  would 
be  Kalari  to  the  latter. 

Taru  is  also  a  reciprocal  term,  and  the  following  are 
Tarti  to  each  other:  Nos.  i  and  18,  2  and  20,  7  and  22, 
8  and  24  ;  28  and  35  are  Noa-mara,  and  if  they  married 
18  and  35  would  be  Taru.  The  same  would  apply  to  20 
and  35,  or  39,  22  and  31,  22  and  27,  24  and  31,  and  24 
and  27. 

In  certain  cases  difficulties  have  arisen  among  the  Dieri, 
as  to  the  marriages  of  certain   persons,  whose  relationships 


IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  167 

prevented  an  otherwise  advisable  match.  Two  such 
instances  are  worth  quoting  as  showing  the  manner  in 
which  these  people  overcome  such  difficulties. 

There  were  two  men  who,  in  the  usual  manner,  married 
each  other's  sisters.  Each  had  a  daughter,  and  among  the 
grandchildren  there  was  a  son  on  one  side  and  a  daughter 
on  the  other.  This  is  a  typical  case  in  which  the  grand- 
children are  Noa  to  each  other.  It  was  proposed  that  they 
should  marry,  but  there  was  a  far-distant  Murdu  relation- 
ship traceable  between  them,  which  made  them  brother  and 
sister.  Thus  the  Noa  and  the  fraternal  relations  were  in 
conflict. 

The  kindred  on  both  sides,  that  is  the  two  mothers, 
their  brothers  and  those  of  the  girl,  decided  however 
that,  as  the  Murdu  relation  was  a  far-distant  one,  it  was 
not  so  strong  as  the  Nadada-noa  one,  and  the  two  were 
married. 

This  "  far-distant "  case  means,  as  I  see  it,  that  in  the 
past,  and  possibly  in  one  of  the  far-distant  intermarrying 
tribes,  some  man,  as  is  sometimes  the  custom,  gave  his 
Murdu  to  his  son,  who  then  was  of  two  Murdus,  that  of 
his  mother  by  inheritance,  and  that  of  his  father  by  gift 
from  him.  He  might  therefore  be  of  the  same  Murdu  as 
the  girl,  which  would  make  him  her  tribal  brother. 
Unfortunately  I  did  not  follow  out  this  line  of  inquiry,  and 
have  not  had  an  opportunity  since  of  doing  so. 

In  the  other  case  the  fundamental  facts  were  much  the 
same.  Two  brothers  married  two  sisters,  and  one  had  a  son 
and  the  other  a  daughter.  These  being  the  children  of  two 
brothers,  were  brother  and  sister.  Each  of  them  married, 
and  one  had  a  son  and  the  other  a  daughter,  who  were 
Kavii-mara. 

Under  the  Dieri  rules  these  two  could  not  lawfully 
marry  ;  but  since  there  was  no  girl  or  woman  Noa  to  the 
young  man  and  available,  he  could  not  get  a  wife. 

The  respective  kindreds,  however,  got  over  the  difficulty 
by  altering  the  relationships  of  the  two  mothers  from 
Kauiari  (brother's  wife)  to  Kami^  by  which  change  the 
two  young  people  came  into  the  Noa  relationship.      This 


i68        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

change,  however,  necessitated  some  consequential  alterations 
of  relationships,  namely,  of  two  of  his  kindred,  from  Kaka 
and  Tidnara  to  Neyi  and  Ngatata,  in  order  to  provide  him 
with  a  sister  to  exchange  for  his  wife. 

In  considering  the  peculiar  features  of  this  case  I 
requested  Mr.  Siebert  to  make  some  further  inquiries  as  to 
the  practice  of  changing  the  Kami  to  the  Noa  relationship. 
He  informed  me  that,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the 
Dieri  old  people,  this  is  not  a  new  practice,  but  that  it  is  an 
ancient  one  of  their  tribe.  They  attach  much  importance  to 
it,  and  the  mother-in-law  in  such  a  case  is  not  called  Paiara 
but  Kavii-paiara,  from  the  altered  relationship. 

This  seems  to  me  to  be  merely  a  reversion  to  the  older 
rule  which  obtains  with  the  Urabunna,  namel)',  that  a  man 
can  only  marry  a  woman  who  is  the  child  of  his  mother's 
elder  brother  or  of  the  elder  sister  of  his  father,  own  or 
tribal.  In  the  Dieri  tribe  there  are  men  who  have  married 
Dieri  women  in  accordance  with  this  earlier  rule,  but  they 
were  only  able  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  women's  kindred 
by  means  of  presents. 


KuRNAi  Relationships 

The  strongest  contrast  which  I  have  found  with  the 
Dieri  system  of  relationships  is  that  of  the  Kurnai.  This 
tribe  has  neither  classes  nor  sub-classes,  and  the  totems  do 
not  affect  marriage.  Marriage  is  between  individuals  of 
certain  local  groups,  but  with  traces  of  former  group-marriage. 
Descent  of  names  is  from  father  to  son. 

The  system  of  relationship  in  this  tribe  indicates  a 
social  condition  in  some  respects  of  a  more  primitive 
character  than  that  of  the  Dieri.  The  following  table 
gives  the  Kurnai  terms  : — 


RELATIONSHIP  TERMS 


169 


KURNAI  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS 


iurnai  Term. 

Exact  E^iuivalent  in  our  Terms. 

English  Terms. 

I. 

Wehntwin 

Father's    father — Father's    father's 

Grandfather  —  Great- 

brother 

uncle 

2. 

Wehntjun 

Father's  father's  sister 

Great-aunt 

3- 

Nallung 

Father's  mother — Father's  mother's 

Grandmother  —  G  r  ea  t- 

brother — Father's  mother's  sister 

uncle — Great-aunt 

4- 

Nakun 

Mother's  father  —  Mother's  father's 

Grandfather  —  Great- 

brother — Mother's  father's  sister 

uncle —  Great-aunt 

5- 

Kukun 

Mother's  mother — Mother's  mother's 

Grandmother  —  G  r  ea  t- 

brother — Mother's  mother's  sister 

uncle — Great-aunt 

6. 

Mungan 

Father — Father's  brother — Mother's 
sister's  husband 

Father — Uncle 

7- 

Yukan 

Mother — Mother's   sister — Father's 
brother's  wife 

Mother — Aunt 

8. 

Mummung 

Father's  sister — Mother's  brother's 

wife 
Mother's  brother — Father's  sister's 

Aunt 

9- 

Babuk 

Uncle 

husband 

10. 

Thundung 

Elder   brother — Father's   brother's 

Elder  brother —  Cousin 

son  —  F'ather's     sister's      son  — 

— Brother-in-law 

Mother's  brother's  son — Mother's 

sister's  .son — Wife's  sister's   hus- 

band— Husband's  sister'shusband 

1 1. 

Bramimg 

V'ounger  brother— (Also  all  the  re- 

Younger    brother — 

, 

lations  of  No,    10  which  follow 

Cousin  —  Brother  -in- 

" elder  brother  ") 

law 

12. 

Bauung 

Elder     sister  —  Father's     brother's 

Elder  sister  —  Cousin — 

daughter — Father's  sister's  daugh- 

Sister-in-law 

ter —  Mother's  brother's  daughter 

— Mother's     sister's    daughter — 

Wife's  i)rother's  wife — Husl)and's 

brother's  wife 

J3- 

Lunduk 

Younger  sister — (Also  all  the  rela- 

Younger sister — Cousin 

tions  of    No.     12    which    follow 

— Sister-in-law 

"elder  sister") 

14. 

Maian 

Wife— Wife's      sister— Husband's 
sister 

Wife — Sister-in-law 

15- 

Bennung 

Wife's  brother 

Brother-in-law 

16. 

Bra 

Husband — Husband's  brother 

Husband  —  Brother -in  - 
law 

«7. 

Lit 

(M.)»  Child— Brother's  child— (F.) 
Child— Sister's  child 

Child — Nephew — Niece 

18. 

Bengun 

(F.)  Brother's  child 

Nephew — Niece 

'9- 

Queabun 

(F. )    Daughter's    husband  —  (M.) 

Son-in-law — Mother-in- 

Wife's  mother 

law 

20. 

Ngaribil 

( M. )    Daughter's    husband  —  ( M. ) 

Son-in-law  —  Father-in- 

Wife's  father 

law 

'  (M.)  means  a  male  speaking.     (F.)  means  a  female  speaking. 


lyo        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Terms  i  to  5  are  inclusive  ;  that  is,  the  grand-ancestral 
terms  are  reciprocal.  They  conform  to  the  Dieri  terms,  with 
the  exception  that  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  paternal 
grandfather  and  the  paternal  grandfather's  sister.  Terms  6 
and  7  indicate  the  former  existence  in  the  Kurnai  tribe  of 
group-marriage,  and  also  the  exchange  of  sisters  for  wives, 
which  still  existed  among  them,  but  under  the  controlling 
influence  of  marriage  by  elopement. 

The  fraternal  terms,  10,  11,  12,  13,  are  far  wider  than 
those  of  the  Dieri,  and  appear  to  point  to  a  time  prior  to  the 
making  of  those  restrictions,  which  necessitated  the  use  of 
terms  to  distinguish  between  a  man's  own  children  and  those 
of  his  sister,  or  between  a  woman's  children  and  those  of 
her  brother.  It  may  be  thought  that  an  incipient  change 
in  this  direction  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  woman  uses  the 
term  Bengun  for  the  child  of  her  brother,  while  he  uses  the 
term  both  for  his  child  and  for  hers. 

The  marital  terms  14  and  16  indicate  a  former  condition 
of  group-marriage  ;  but  the  marital  relations  implied  by  the 
term  were  with  the  Kurnai  merely  nominal,  excepting  on  the 
very  rare  occasions  when  the  Aurora  Australis  was  seen. 
This  was  thought  by  them  to  be  a  sign  of  Mungan's  anger, 
and  the  old  men  ordered  an  exchange  of  wives  for  the  time, 
thus  reverting  to  the  ancient  practice  of  group-marriage. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  while  the  "  husband's  sister "  is 
included  in  the  group  of  Maian  when  addressed  by  her 
sister-in-law  (brother's  wife),  the  brother  of  the  wife  is 
distinguished  from  the  group-husband  {Ih'd)  by  a  distinct 
term. 

There  is  nothing  to  remark  as  to  the  terms  19  ^nd  20. 

The  Kurnai  terms  of  relationship  seem  to  bear  traces  of 
a  time  before  the  institution  of  some  of  the  earlier  restrictions 
on  marriage,  and  if  such  be  the  case,  then  they  must  date 
back  to  the  time  of  the  Undivided  Commune.  This,  how- 
ever, has  always  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  very  difficult  posi- 
tion to  maintain.  I  am  unable  to  quite  satisfy  myself  whether 
this  system  is  one  of  an  archaic  character,  retained  through 
extreme  isolation  of  the  Kurnai,  or  that  the  terms,  such  as 
those  equivalent  to  the  Dieri  Kami,  have  been  lost.      If  it 


IV  RELATIONSHIP  TERMS  171 

be  the  latter,  then  the  probability  arises  that  by  such  a  loss 
they  were  placed  in  difficulties,  which  have  produced  marriage 
by  elopement  and  the  employment  of  a  recognised  medicine- 
man to  promote  it. 

The  following  diagram  is  of  three  descents  from  two 
brothers  and  their  sister.  The  respective  terms  of  relation- 
ship are  added  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  into  view  the 
peculiar  character  of  this  system. 

Diagram  IV 
I.  Man  2.  Younger  brother  of  i  3.  Elder  sister  of  i  and  2 


4.  Son  -<-  Thundung  5.  Son      Bauung  ->■   6.  Daughter   ■<-  Bauung      7.   Daughter 


Bramung  ->■ 


-<-  Bramung  Lunduk  ->• 


8.  Son  -<- Thundung  9.  Son      Bauung ->■  10.  Daughter  ■<- Bauung     if.  Daughter 
Bramung  -->-         ■<-  Bramung  Lunduk  -^ 

The  diagram  is  drawn  up  to  compare  with  the  table  of 
marriages  and  descents  given  before  for  the  Dieri  tribe.  In 
this  one  there  is  a  total  absence  of  the  marked  distinction 
drawn  by  the  Dieri  between  the  children  of  a  man  and 
those  of  his  sister.  Were  the  Dieri  rule  applied  to  this  case, 
the  men  4  and  5,  being  the  sons  of  two  brothers,  would  be 
Kanii-inara  to  the  women  6  and  7,  the  daughters  of  3,  the 
sister  of  i  and  2.  Further,  8  and  9  would  be  in  the  Noa 
relation  to  10  and  i  i. 

It  is  a  striking  peculiarity  in  the  Kurnai  system  that 
in  each  level  of  the  descents,  as  far  as  they  can  be  traced 
out,  they  are  all  brothers  and  sisters,  own  or  tribal  ; 
and  such  fraternal  descent  continues  without  possible 
change.  Thus  in  the  successive  descents  produced  by  the 
intermarriage  of  individuals  of  certain  local  groups,  the 
fraternal  relations  would  necessarily  widen  out  and  ramify 
in  all  directions. 

The  systems  of  many  other  tribes,  which  I  have  collected, 
take  their  places  between  that  of  the  Dieri  and  that  of  the 
Kurnai.      Where  the   class,   sub- class    or   totem   marriages 


172        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA    ch.  iv 

have  been  altered  and  the  line  of  descent  changed  from  the 
female  to  the  male  line,  corresponding  changes  have  neces- 
sarily resulted.  But  there  are  always  clearly  to  be  recognised 
the  old  foundations  of  group  marriage  and  descent,  sur- 
mounted by  newer  edifices. 


CHAPTER  V 

MARRIAGE    RULES 

The  state  of  society  among  the  early  Australians  was  that  of  an  Undivided 
Commune — The  simplest  existing  form  of  social  organisation  is  the  division 
of  a  tribe  into  two  intermarrying  moieties — The  Dieri  as  an  example — The 
Noa  relationsliip — The  Tippa-malkii  marriage  and  the  Pirraiirtt  marriage 
—  Intermarrying  totems  of  the  Vendakarangu  tril)C — Urabunna  marriage 
rules — Class  rules  have  been  intentionally  altered  to  meet  difficulties  arising 
from  male  descent  in  one  tribe  and  female  in  another — Marriage  rules  of 
tribes  in  Western  New  South  Wales — Female  captives  were  the  projierty  of 
the  captor  if  class  rules  allowed  the  marriage — Infant  Ijetrothal  was  the 
general  rule,  but  elopemeats  frequently  occurred  —  Tribes  with  four  sub- 
classes and  female  descent — The  Kamilaroi — The  "half-sister"  marriage  of 
the  Kamilaroi — Table  of  anomalous  marriages — Table  of  Wiradjuri  marriages 
— Peculiar  marriages  of  the  North  Wiradjuri — Marriage  by  capture  at 
Wakelbura  ceremonies — Tril>es  with  four  sub-classes  and  male  descent  in 
Southern  Queensland  —  Trilies  with  anomalous  class  systems  and  female 
descent — Tribes  with  two-class  system  and  male  descent — Tril)es  without 
class  systems — The  Kurnai  of  Gippsland- — Marriage  by  elopement  —  The 
Chepara  of  Queensland  — All  regulations  were  made  to  prevent  near 
marriages  and  with  intention  to  meet  a  sense  of  tribal  morality — Female 
descent  was  an  earlier  form  than  male — Maternal  descent  and  the  Salic  law. 

A  STUDY  of  the  evidence  which  has  been  detailed  in  the 
last  chapter  has  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the  state  of 
society  among  the  early  Australians  was  that  of  an  "  Un- 
divided Commune."  Taking  this  as  a  postulate,  the  influence 
on  marriage  and  descent  of  the  class  division,  the  sub-classes 
and  the  totems  may  be  considered  on  the  assumption  that 
there  was  once  an  Undivided  Commune.  It  is,  however, 
well  to  guard  this  expression.  I  do  not  desire  to  imply 
necessarily  the  existence  of  complete  and  continuous  com- 
munism between  the  sexes.  The  character  of  the  country, 
the  necessity  of  moving  from  one  spot  to  another  in  search 
of  game  and   vegetable  food,  would    cause  any   Undivided 

"73 


174        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Commune,  when  it  assumed  dimensions  greater  than  the 
immediate  locality  could  provide  with  food,  to  break  up  into 
two  or  more  Communes  of  the  same  character.  In  addition 
to  this  it  is  clear,  after  a  long  acquaintance  with  the 
Australian  savage,  that  in  the  past,  as  now,  individual  likes 
and  dislikes  must  haveexisted ;  so  that,  admitting  the  existence 
of  common  rights  between  the  members  of  the  Commune, 
these  rights  would  remain  in  abeyance,  so  far  as  the 
separated  parts  of  the  Commune  were  concerned.  But  at 
certain  gatherings,  such  as  the  Bunya-bunya  harvest  in 
Queensland,  or  on  great  ceremonial  occasions,  all  the 
segments  of  the  original  community  would  re-unite.  In 
short,  so  far  as  the  evidence  goes  at  present,  I  think  that 
the  probable  condition  of  the  Undivided  Commune  may  be 
considered  to  be  represented  by  what  occurs  on  certain 
occasions  when  the  modified  Communes  of  the  Lake  Eyre 
tribes  re-unite.  It  will  be  shown  later  on  that  each  Divided 
Commune  carries  in  itself  strong  evidence  of  this  early 
condition.  ^ 

The  division  of  the  community  into  two  intermarrying 
moieties,  the  "  class  divisions,"  is  the  simplest  form  of  the 
social  organisation  in  the  native  tribes. 

This  fundamental  law  of  communal  division  underlies 
and  runs  through  all  the  more  developed  systems  of  four 
or  eight  sub -classes,  and  even  shows  traces  of  its  former 
existence  in  tribes  in  which  the  class  system  has  become 
decadent,  and  the  local  organisation  has  taken  place  and 
assumed  control  of  marriage. 

The  division  of  the  tribal  community  into  two  classes  is 
the  foundation  on  which  the  whole  structure  of  society  is 
built.  Indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  an  organised 
society  in  primitive  savagery  could  exist  without  a  control 
such  as  that  of  the  intermarrying  classes  and  the  strict  rules 
which  preserve  their  existence.  One  is  led  direct,  when 
inquiring  into  the  marriage  customs  of  the  native  tribes, 
to  a  further  inquiry  into  the  principles  of  the  complicated 
system  of  terms  which  define  their  relationships,  and  which 
connect  in  various  ways  the  different  members  of  the 
community. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  175 


Tribes  with  Two  Classes  and  Female  Descent 

As  before,  I  take  the  Dieri  tribe  as  my  starting-point. 
In  speaking  of  the  marriage  relations  I  shall  have  occasion 
to  use  the  terms  "husband"  and  "wife,"  and  it  must  be 
understood  that  in  doing  so  I  do  not  use  them  in  the  sense 
in  which  we  use  them,  but  in  the  Dieri  sense  as  '' tippa- 
malkii-vj'xie. "  or  " pirrauru-wife."  I  also  use  them,  in  a  sense, 
of  those  tribes  who,  while  they  retain  the  old  terms  of 
relationship,  have  lost  the  practice  they  define.  This  is 
pointed  out  in  the  chapter  on  relationships  ;  but  in  order  to 
avoid  any  chance  of  misconception,  I  direct  attention  to  it 
here. 

The  community,  that  is  the  tribe,  in  its  social  aspect  is 
divided  into  two  moieties,  each  of  which  has  a  distinguishing 
name,  and  has  attached  to  it  a  group  of  totems.  As  the 
native  speech  varies  in  dialects  or  even  languages  in  more 
or  less  divergent  directions,  so  do  the  names  of  the  classes 
and  totems  vary,  though  in  a  less  degree,  since  it  is  common 
to  find  the  same  class  names  extending  over  country  occu- 
pied by  a  number  of  tribes  speaking  different  dialects  even 
for  hundreds  of  miles. 

To  avoid  the  confusion  which  would  invariably  arise 
from  the  use  of  the  native  names  for  the  classes,  sub-classes, 
and  totems,  I  shall  avail  myself  in  the  diagrams  explaining 
the  rules  of  marriage  of  numerals  and  letters  as  I  have  done 
before. 

Diagram  V 

Classes.  Totems. 

(Kararu),  Moiety  A.  1,2,  3,  4,  etc. 

(Matteri),  Moiety  B.  I.,  II.,  III.,  IV.,  etc. 

In  this  diagram  A  represents  one  of  the  classes  of  the 
Dieri  tribe,  say  Kararu,  and  B  represents  Matteri.  The 
Arabic  figures  represent  the  totems  of  A  class,  and  the 
Roman  numerals  those  of  B.  The  marriage  law  is  that  the 
people  of  class  A  marry  those  of  B  class,  and  vice  versa,  and 
of  a  totem,  or  totems,  of  the  class  other  than  their  own.  It 
is  well  to  note  here  that  the  custom  as  to  the  marriage  of 


176        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  totems  varies  in  different  tribes.  In  some,  as  for 
example  the  Dieri,  a  man  of,  say,  class  A,  may  marry  a 
woman  of  any  of  the  totems  of  B,  and  I'icc  versa.  I  can 
speak  of  this  with  certainty,  as  the  Rev.  Mr.  Siebert  was  so 
good  as  to  draw  up  for  me  a  number  of  tables  of  descents,  in 
three  or  four  levels  of  a  generation,  of  actual  occurrence  in 
the  Dieri  tribe,  so  that  the  facts  brought  out  extended  back 
to  the  time  when  they  were  in  complete  savagery.  A  man 
could  therefore  only  obtain  a  wife  from  one  half  of  the  tribe, 
that  is  from  one  class ;  but  this  does  not  even  mean  so 
much  as  it  appears  to  do,  because,  as  I  shall  show  later  on, 
there  are  other  restrictions  arising  out  of  the  classificatory 
system  of  relationships  which  still  further  restrain  the  scope 
of  marriage. 

In  other  tribes,  such  as  the  Urabunna,^  a  man,  say,  of 
class  A,  is  restricted  to  women  of  certain  totems,  or  rather 
his  totem  intermarries  only  with  certain  other  totems  of  the 
other  class.  This  will  become  more  clear  as  the  marriage 
rules  of  other  tribes  are  detailed.  In  all  tribes  of  which  the 
Dieri  is  the  type  the  child  takes  the  class  and  totem  name 
of  its  mother  ;  and  it  may  be  as  well  to  point  out  here  that 
it  takes  the  tribal  name  of  its  father,  that  is,  it  is  of  its 
father's  tribe.  This  will  be  seen  on  reference  to  the  Table 
in  Chapter  IV.  By  using  the  letters  and  numerals  of  the 
above  diagram,  another  may  be  constructed  of  the  marriages 
and  descents  in  the  Dieri  tribe,  which  shows  how  the  descents 
run,  and  which  will  be  of  use  in  more  complicated  cases. 


Diagram 

VI 

m.  A 

f.  B 

m. 

1 
B       f. 

B 

etc. 

Males  are  indicated  by  m.  and  females  by  f.  In  the  upper 
line  A  represents  a  Kararu  man,  B  is  his  wife,  a  Matteri 
woman.  In  the  lower  line  are  their  son  and  daughter,  who 
are  of  the  same  class  as  their  mother,  so  that  descent  is  in 
the  female  line. 

'  Spencer  and  Gillen,  op.  cit.  p.  60. 


MARRIAGE  RULES'  177 


Here  we  have  the  segmentation  of  the  tribal  community 
into  two  groups  by  the  action  of  the  classes,  and  the  totems 
follow  the  classes  in  being  transmitted  from  the  mother  to 
her  children.  While  a  man  is  restricted  to  women  of  the 
section  of  the  tribe  opposite  to  his,  other  restrictions  arise 
out  of  the  relationships  and  further  restrict  the  matrimonial 
scope.  In  speaking  of  this  system  of  relationships,  I  point 
out  that  a  certain  group  of  men  and  a  certain  group  of 
women  are  born  into  the  relation  of  Noa  to  each  other, 
or,  to  use  the  Dieri  word,  they  are  Noa-inara  to  each  other, 
which  may  be  expressed  by  saying  that  there  is  "  spouseship  " 
between  them,  primarily  as  to  the  Noa  groups,  and  second- 
arily as  to  the  individual.  That  is,  the  individuals  of  one 
group  are  the  potential  spouses  of  those  of  the  other  group. 
How  they  individually  come  in  the  Dieri  tribe  into  the 
marital  relation  of  husband  and  wife  I  will  now  explain.^ 

(i)  The  Noa  relation  becomes  specialised  by  the  be- 
trothal "  of  two  children  who  have  been  born  about  the  same 
time,  arranged  by  their  respective  mothers,  with  the  con- 
currence of  the  brothers  of  the  mothers  of  the  girl.  The 
respective  fathers  have  no  part  in  the  arrangement.  In 
every  such  case  there  must  be  the  exchange  of  a  sister,  own 
or  tribal,  of  the  boy,  who  is  thereby  promised  as  a  wife  to 
the  brother,  own  or  tribal,  of  the  girl.^  The  new  relation 
thus  created  between  them  is  called  Tippa-malku,  and,  as 
a  sign  that  the  promise  has  been  made,  the  navel  strings  of 
the  two  children  are  tied  up  with  emu  feathers  and  different 
coloured  strings. 

(2)  If  a  man  has  a  daughter  who  also  has  a  daughter, 
who  is  not  promised  to  any  one,  and  he  has  a  younger 
brother,  own  or  tribal,  the  latter  is  the  Nadcuia-noa  of  his 
elder  brother,  and  he  may  become  her  Tippa-malku.  I  have 
not   hitherto   met   with   this   practice,  excepting   among  the 

'  Otto  Siebert. 

*  I  use  the  term  "  betrothal  "  merely  in  the  sense  th.nt  two  persons  of  opposite 
sexes  are  promised  to  each  other  in  marriage. 

^  I  use  the  terms  "  own  or  tribal"  in  the  sense  in  which  Spencer  and  Gillen 
use  the  expression  "blood  or  tiibal."  I  have  not  used  "  blood  or  tribal  "  because 
it  conveys  to  an  English  reiider  an  idea  which  is  not  what  the  Dieri  would  attacii 
to  it.  I  am  not  satisfied  with  the  terms  "own  or  tiibal,"  but  after  long  con- 
sideration I  have  not  found  any  better. 

N 


178        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Dieri,  but  it  may  possibly  occur  in  others  of  the  adjacent 
tribes.  It  is  based  upon  the  Nadada-noa  relationship,  which 
is  fully  described  in  the  chapter  on  Relationships. 

(3)  It  may  happen,  when  a  boy  has  been  circumcised, 
that  his  mother  arranges  with  some  other  woman,  who  is 
Kavii-mara  to  her,  and  who  has  an  unbetrothed  daughter, 
to  make  the  two  children  Tippa-malku,  there  being  also  the 
usual  promise  to  exchange  a  sister  of  the  boy.  The  girl's 
mother  is  then  painted  in  a  certain  manner,  which  indicates 
to  all  and  sundry  that  she  is  the  Paiara  (wife's  mother)  of 
that  woman's  son. 

(4)  There  are  certain  exceptions  to  the  otherwise  strict 
observance  of  the  Noa  relation.  Such  an  exception  would 
be  where  a  woman  had  only  daughters,  and  another  woman 
had  only  sons.  Moved  by  the  importunity  of  these  women, 
their  elder  brothers  {^Neyi)  and  the  brothers  of  these  women's 
mothers  {Kaka)  might  make  them  Kavii-mara  to  each  other, 
and  thus  alter  their  relationships,  so  that  their  children 
would  be  Noa  to  each  other  and  therefore  lawfully  marriage- 
able, and  might  be  promised  to  each  other  and  become 
Tippa-vialku. 

The  following  is  an  instance  of  an  exception  of  a  similar 
kind.  A  woman  having  four  sons  who  were  Kaini-niara  to 
two  unmarried  girls,  it  was  arranged  with  her  and  her 
brethren  that  one  of  her  sons  should  be  placed  in  the  Noa- 
inara  relation  with  one  of  the  girls,  while  still  remaining  in 
the  Kami  relation  with  the  other.  In  the  same  manner  the 
relation  of  the  three  other  sons  was  altered  to  Noa-mara  to 
the  other  girl  while  she  remained  Kami  to  the  Noa  of  her 
sister.     Thus  the  Tippa-inalku  relation  became  possible. 

(5)  If  a  man  persuades  a  Pinya,  when  on  its  mission  of 
revenge,  to  forgo  it  and  return,  the  assembly  of  old  men, 
or  he  who  is  the  nearest  of  the  kindred  of  the  man  marked 
out  for  vengeance,  may  give  a  woman  as  Tippa-malku  wife 
to  the  peacemaker  as  a  reward.  It  must  be  always  under- 
stood that  such  a  woman  must  be  of  that  group  which  is 
Noa-mara  to  the  group  to  which  the  man  belongs,  and  who 
are  therefore  potentially  husbands  and  wives  of  each  other. 

(6)  A  wife   is   promised   to  each  of  the   men  who  hold 


MARRIAGE  RULES  179 


the  body  on  their  heads  at  the  grave,  and  in  these  cases  it 
is  not  required  that  a  sister  shall  be  given  in  exchange  for 
her. 

In  all  these  cases  the  husband  and  wife  must  be  Noa  to 
each  other,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  a  man  has  been 
born  Noa  to  any  particular  woman.  He  is  one  of  a  group 
which  is  Noa  to  a  group  of  females  in  the  other  moiety  of 
the  tribe. 

By  the  practice  of  betrothal  two  Noa  individuals  of 
opposite  sexes  become,  if  I  mayxuse  the  term,  specialised 
to  each  other  as  Tippa-malku  for  the  time  being,  to  the 
exclusion  of  any  other  man  in  that  relation.  In  other 
words,  no  woman  can  be  Tippa-malku  to  two  or  more  men 
at  the  same  time.  It  seems  to  me  that  out  of  this  system 
of  specialisation  the  individual  marriage  of  some  tribes  has 
been  developed.  The  germ  of  individual  marriage  may  be 
seen  in  the  Dieri  practice ;  for,  as  I  shall  show  later  on,  a 
woman  becomes  a  Tippa-malku  wife  before  she  becomes  a 
Pirraiiru  or  group-wife.  But  at  the  same  time  it  must  be 
remembered  that  every  woman  is  potentially  a  group-wife, 
and  unless  she  dies  after  she  becomes  a  Tippa-malku  wife, 
she  becomes  actually  a  group-wife.  The  woman  is  one  of 
a  group,  over  whom  in  advance  a  man  is  given  special  rights 
by  being  made  Tippa-malku  to  her,  but  at  the  same  time 
with  the  fullest  knowledge  that  she  is  not  to  be  his  individual 
wife  as  we  understand  the  term.  These  explanations  are 
necessary  to  guard  against  misconception  from  using  the 
words  "  individual  wife." 

In  those  cases  in  which  the  kindred  altered  the  relations 
of  the  parties,  the  man  and  the  woman  were  necessarily 
of  the  opposite  class  and  might  have  lawfully  married 
were  they  of  the  Noa  groups.  A  diagram  will  show  how 
this  works. 

Diagram  VII 

1.  f.     Matter!     emu  -<-  Kaniaii  ->■  4.   f.    Kararu     cormorant 

2.  f.     Matteri     emu  -<-  Kami      ->-  5.    f.    Kararu     cormorant 

3.  m.   Matteri     emu  -<-  Noa        ->-  6.   f.    Kararu     cormorant 

I,  2,  and  3  are  mother,  daughter,  and  grandson.  Nos. 
I  and  4  are  Kamari,  which  is  brother's  wife.     Their  children 


i8o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

are  Kami-viara  to  each  other,  and  therefore  not  permitted 
to  marry.  Were  they  of  the  Urabunna,  they  would,  under 
the  rule  of  that  tribe,  be  Nupa  to  each  other,  and  marriage- 
able. As  I  have  pointed  out  elsewhere,  the  Dieri  Kami 
relation  has  removed  the  marriageable  groups  by  one  level 
in  the  generation.  The  alteration  of  Kaniari  to  Kami  is 
merely  a  reversion  to  the  older  rule. 

In  order  to  show  the  Noa  rule  in  practice  I  refer  to  the 
table  in  Chapter  IV.,  and,  as  there  said,  the  men  i,  2,  7,  8 
on  the  first  line  have  obtained  wives  by  exchange  of  their 
sisters.  The  several  couples  1-5,  2-6,  i-"] ,  and  4-8  were 
born  into  the  Noa  relation  with  each  other,  and  were 
specialised  by  betrothal.  The  children  of  the  couples  1-5 
and  2-6  are  in  the  fraternal  relation  to  each  other.  So 
also  are  those  of  the  couples  3-7  and  4-8.  They  form  two 
groups  who  are  in  the  relation  of  Kami  to  each  other,  and 
those  children  of  these  groups  who  are  respectively  of  a 
brother  on  one  side  and  of  his  sister  on  the  other  are  Noa- 
mara  to  each  other. 

The  rule  deducible  from  diagrams  compiled  by  tracing 
back  marriages  and  descents  in  a  number  of  th?  Dieri 
families  may  be  stated  as  follows,  and  can  be  traced  out  in 
the  Table  referred  to  : — 

Ego  being  male  am  Noa-mara  to 

(elder  brother's    \ 
or  I'  daughter's  daughter 

younger  brother's  J 
(    cider  sister's    "j 
My  mother's  father's  -J  or  >  daughter's  daughter 

(_  younger  sister's  J 
Or 

Ego  being  female  am  Noa  to 

(    elder  brother's    \  .  . 

My  mother's  mother's  ■'  or  >  daughter's  son 

\  younger  brother's  J 

{elder  sister's    '\ 
or  >  daughter's  son 

younger  sister's  J 

In  stating  this  rule  of  the  AW  relation,  I  must  again 
point  out  that  Ego  is  not  an  individual,  but  is  primarily  a 
group,  the  individual  merely  taking  the  relationship  as  being 
one  of  it. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


By  the  same  table  the  Nadada-noa  practice  is  explained, 
by  which  the  grandchildren  are  removed  back  into  a  level 
of  a  generation  to  which  their  respective  grandparents 
belong,  and  whose  younger  brothers  and  sisters  they  there- 
fore become. 

Besides  the  Tippa-malku  marriage  there  is  the  Pirrauru 
marriage,  the  character  of  which  is  now  to  be  described. 
As  I  have  said,  every  woman  becomes  a  Tippa-malku  wife 
before  she  becomes  a  Pirrauru  wife.  A  Pirrauru  is  always 
a  "  wife's  sister,"  or  a  "  brother's  wife,"  and  the  relation  arises 
through  the  exchange  by  brothers  of  their  wives.  When 
two  brothers  are  married  to  two  sisters,  they  commonly 
live  together  in  a  group-marriage  of  four. 

When  a  man  becomes  a  widower  {Topula)  he  has  his 
brother's  wife  as  Pirrauru,  making  presents  to  his  brother. 
A  man  being  a  visitor,  and  being  of  the  proper  class 
{Murdit),  is  offered  his  host's  Tippa-malku  wife  as  a 
temporary  Pirrauru,  that  is,  if  he  is  Noa  to  her. 

A  man  may  have  several  Pirrauru  wives,  and  this 
depends  on  the  consideration  in  which  he  is  held  by  his 
class-fellows,  whether  he  is  Poto-pir-nanto  (rich  in  great 
things),  or  Ngt4ru-nguru  (strong  and  powerful),  or  finally 
whether  he  is  in  great  favour  with  the  women.  In  such  a 
case  a  woman  might  even  ask  her  husband  to  give  her  such 
or  such  a  man  as  a  Pirrauru.  Should  he  refuse  to  do  this, 
she  must  put  up  with  it ;  but  if  he  agrees  to  do  so,  the 
matter  is  arranged.  After  it  has  been  talked  over  and 
agreed  to,  those  concerned  assemble  at  some  place  in  the 
camp  at  mid -day,  accompanied  by  their  friends.  If  the 
men  are  of  the  same  totem,  then  the  head  of  it  is  present, 
carrying  his  Kandri,  which  is  a  ceremonial  club,  made  of 
the  root  of  a  certain  tree.  It  is  used  in  ceremonies,  and 
might  even  be  called  a  ceremonial  or  magical  staff. 

The  head  of  the  totem,  or  heads  when  there  are  more 
than  one  totem  concerned,  make  two  ridges  of  sand  with 
the  Kandri,  each  of  the  two  who  are  to  be  placed  in  the 
Pirrauru  relation  being  represented  by  one.  The  ridges 
are  then  brought  together  so  as  to  form  one  ridge,  higher 
and  broader  than  the  two.      Finally  one  of  the  men,  and 


i82        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

usually  he  who  is  given  as  the  Pirraum,  takes  sand  from 
the  ridge  and  sprinkles  it  over  the  upper  part  of  his  thighs  ; 
and,  as  the  Dieri  express  it,  buries  the  Pirrauru  in  the 
sand.  In  the  case  of  two  men  who  exchange  their  Noas 
as  PirrauruSy  the  same  procedure  is  observed,  and  the 
ceremonies  are  completed  in  the  evening.  When  these 
take  place  at  mid-day,  they  are,  so  to  say,  in  the  family, 
the  men  being  present  ;  but  when  they  are  in  the  evening, 
all  the  people  in  the  camp  attend.  In  that  case  the  two 
heads  of  totems  stand  opposite  to  each  other,  about  50 
yards  apart,  and  each  holding  two  pieces  of  burning  wood. 
The  two  pairs  of  Pirraurus  are  loudly  announced  by  name, 
the  whole  assembly  loudly  repeats  them,  and  the  two  pieces 
of  wood  are  struck  together. 

But  commonly  it  is  not  merely  two  pairs  of  Pirrauru 
who  are  allotted  to  each  other,  but  the  whole  of  the 
marriageable  or  married  people,  even  those  who  have 
already  Pirraurus,  are  re- allotted,  the  Kandri  ceremony 
being  performed  for  batches  of  them  at  the  same  time.^ 

When  a  man  has  a  number  of  Pirrauru,  the  old  men 
may  recommend  him  to  confine  himself  to  one,  and  to  let 
the  others  go,  since  otherwise  there  might  be  strife  between 
the  women,  for  jealousy  attaches  to  the  Pirrauru  condition. 
Each  of  a  pair  of  Pirrauru  watches  the  other  to  prevent 
more  Pirrauru  relations  arising.  Each  warns  the  other 
against  forming  any  new  relations,  and  if  either  disregards 
this  injunction,  red-hot  coals  are  poured  over  him,  or  her,  as 
the  case  may  be.  In  modern  times  boiling  water  takes  the 
place  of  hot  coals,  but  such  punishments  are  often  inflicted 
by  either  party  on  mere  suspicion.  Such  a  case  was  the 
following.  A  Urabunna  man  was  sitting  in  the  camp 
talking  with  a  woman  who  was  Nadada-noa  to  him. 
Meanwhile  Kapaliana,  his  Pirrauru,  returned,  and  having 
prepared  his  supper,  called  him.  Of  this,  however,  he  tool 
no  notice,  and  went  on  talking.  Then  without  further  a^o 
she  poured  a  bowl  of  hot  coals  over  him. 

The  saying  of  one  of  the  old  Dieri  men  is  wokh 
quoting,  as  showing  what  his  feeling  was  to  his  Pirrauru 

1  Otto  Siebert. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  1S3 


wife,  and    as  to  the   jealousy  which    I   have  mentioned    as 
being  shown. 
He  said, 

"  Yakai!  yai!  Ngata  wata  tanana  ngantyai,  tananana  ttiru-etya." 
"  Oh  dear  !  I        not       her  love,  she       fire-person." 

The  Pirrauru  of  an  unmarried  young  man  looks  after 
him  strictly,  warns  him  perpetually,  and  makes  secret 
inquiry  of  his  doings  from  the  other  women.  She  requires 
him  to  camp  near  at  hand,  so  that  she  can  keep  an  eye 
upon  him.  It  is  commonly  said  that  such  a  Pirrauru 
never  sleeps  until  she  is  quite  sure  that  her  young  Pirrauru 
is  himself  soundly  in  that  state. 

The  elders  do  not  look  favourably  on  a  youth  having  a 
Tippa-malku  wife  or  a  Pirrauru  early,  as  they  think  that 
they  will  be  too  much  taken  up  with  each  other.  Young 
men  are  told  that  they  are  still  too  young  for  married  life, 
and  must  wait  till  they  have  a  full  beard. 

If  a  man  desired  to  obtain  a  particular  girl  or  woman 
for  his  wife,  and  she  were  refused  to  him,  and  he  then 
eloped  with  her,  her  kindred  would  make  up  a  party  and 
pursue  them.  On  overtaking  them  they  would  take  her 
from  him,  not  necessarily  by  violence  ;  but  if  he  refused  to 
part  with  her,  he  would  be  severely  dealt  with.  To  elope 
vyith  a  woman  of  the  same  Murdu  is  a  very  grave  offence. 
Cases  have  occurred  of  the  class -laws  being  thus  broken 
because  of  threats  by  some  man  to  a  woman  too  nearly 
related  to  him,  and  where  the  woman  did  not  dare  to  com- 
plain, fearing  to  be  charged  with  being  a  consenting  party. 

At  a  tribal  council,  at  which  Mr.  Gason  was  present,  a 
young  man  was  charged  with  having  transgressed  the  class- 
law  with  his  Ngatata,  that  is,  his  younger  sister,  who  was  in 
fact  the  daughter  of  his  mother's  sister.  The  old  men 
inquired  into  this  matter,  and  finding  the  charge  to  be  true, 
the  young  man  was  severely  punished,  indeed  almost  killed. 
He  would  have  been  put  to  death  had  not  some  of  the 
influential  tribesmen  interfered  on  his  behalf,  on  the  ground 
that  he  was  a  poor  idiot  who  was  not  accountable  for  his 
actions. 


i84        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

A  man  may  always  exercise  marital  rights  towards  his 
Pirrauru  when  they  meet,  if  her  Tippa-malku  husband  be 
absent  ;  but  he  cannot  take  her  away  from  him,  unless  by 
his  consent,  excepting  at  certain  ceremonial  times,  as  for 
instance  at  the  initiation  ceremonies,  or  at  one  of  the 
marriages  arranged  between  a  man  and  a  woman  of  two 
different  tribes. 

In  the  absence  of  the  Tippa-vtalku  husband,  the  Pirrauru 
husband  takes  the  wife  of  the  former,  and  protects  her 
during  his  absence. 

The  Tippa-malku  wife  takes  precedence  over  the  Pirrauru 
wife,  if  both  are  in  the  same  camp,  the  husband  sleeping 
next  to  the  fire,  the  Tippa-malku  next  to  him,  and  the 
Pirrauru  next  to  her. 

In  a  case  where  an  elder  and  a  younger  man  who  are 
Pirrauru  to  the  same  woman  are  in  the  same  camp,  and  the 
younger  man  has  with  him  his  Tippa-malku  and  also  a 
Pirrauru  wife,  the  elder  man,  if  alone,  would  have  the  right 
to  take  the  Pirrauru  wife  of  the  former.  Should  the 
younger  man  merely  have  his  Pirrauru  with  him,  the  elder 
man  might  take  her.  But  the  two  men  might  occupy  the 
same  hut  with  her,  and  she  would  share  with  both  the  food 
she  collected. 

The  leading  men  in  the  tribe  have  usually  more  Tippa- 
malku  and  Pirrauru  wives  than  other  men.  The  Pinnaru 
Jalina-piramurana,  elsewhere  mentioned,  who  was  the  head 
of  the  Dieri  tribe  when  I  knew  it  in  1861-62,  had  over  a 
dozen  Pirraurus  allotted  to  him,  and,  in  addition,  several 
women  were  assigned  to  him  in  each  of  the  neighbouring 
tribes  as  a  mark  of  respect,  as,  so  to  say,  honorary  Pirraurus. 
Men  were  considered  to  be  highly  honoured  if  any  of  his 
Pirrau7-us  were  allotted  to  them. 

In  the  event  of  a  Tippa-malku  wife  dying,  a  Pirrauru- 
wife  will  take  charge  of  her  children  and  attend  to  them 
with  affection,  and  not  in  any  manner  as  a  step-mother.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  a  man's  wives,  whether  Tippa- 
malku  or  Pirrauru,  are  in  the  relation  of  sisters,  either  own 
or  tribal. 

It  is  an  advantage  to  a  man  to  have  as  many  Pirraurus 


MARRIAGE  RULES  .185 


as  possible.  He  has  then  less  work  to  do  in  hunting,  as 
when  they  are  with  him  they  supply  him  with  a  share  of  the 
food  they  procure,  their  own  Tippa-malkn  husbands  being 
absent. 

He  also  obtains  great  influence  in  the  tribe  by  lending 
his  Pirraurus  occasionally,  and  receiving  presents  from  the 
younger  men  who  have  no  Pirraurus  with  them,  or  to  whom 
none  has  yet  been  allotted. 

Thus  a  man  may  accumulate  a  lot  of  property,  weapons 
of  all  kinds,  trinkets,  etc.,  which  he  in  his  turn  gives  away  to 
prominent  men,  such  as  heads  of  Murdus,  and  thus  adds  to 
his  own  importance. 

I  have  mentioned  marriage  between  Dieri  and  adjacent 
tribes,  and  these  are,  so  to  say,  "state  affairs." 

Such  a  marriage,  for  instance,  between  a  Dieri  man  and 
a  woman  of .  the  Mardula  tribe  would  be  the  subject  of 
negotiation  for  several  months.  Much  diplomacy  is  used,  as 
one  tribe  desires  if  possible  to  sift  out  the  real  reasons  which 
induce  the  other  tribe  to  desire  the  marriage.  As  a  pre- 
liminary, handsome  presents,  such  as  spears,  boomerangs, 
carved  shields,  bags  of  all  kinds,  etc.,  are  sent  to  the 
woman's  father,  to  the  head  man  of  the  tribe,  and  to  the 
other  principal  men.  In  the  event  of  these  negotiations 
falling  through,  these  presents  are  returned.  But  if  both 
sides  desire  to  terminate  disputes  and  settle  grievances,  the 
proposal  may  be*agreed  to  in  a  few  week.s.  The  young  man 
and  the  young  woman  have  no  voice  in  such  a  marriage, 
and,  whether  she  likes  it  or  not,  she  must  submit  to  the  will 
of  the  elders  of  the  tribe. 

In  the  tribe  itself  there  is  always  a  hot  opposition  to  a 
marriage  which  takes  a  girl  out  of  it,  and  the  fathers  in  it 
who  have  unmarried  and  eligible  sons  offer  every  objection 
to  the  arrangement. 

On  such  a  marriage  being  settled,  a  place  is  fixed  upon 
near  the  boundary  between  the  two  tribes,  when  a  grand 
Wima  (corrobboree)  is  held.  The  festivities  arc  kept  up  for 
several  days,  during  which  time  free  intercourse  is  allowed 
between  the  sexes,  without  regard  to  existing  marriage 
relations.      No  jealous  feeling  is  allowed  to  be  shown  during 


i86        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

this  time  under  penalty  of  strangling,^  but  it  crops  up 
afterwards  and  occasions  bloody  affrays. 

If  the  girl  does  not  take  kindly  to  her  husband,  she  very 
probably  tries  to  escape  home,  but  is  on  all  such  occasions 
pursued  ;  and,  if  captured,  is  brought  back  to  be  jeered  at  by 
the  other  women.      In  some  cases  she  is  also  cruelly  punished. 

If,  however,  the  girl  likes  her  husband,  and  makes  herself 
popular,  she  is  treated  well,  and  it  is  in  her  power  to  acquire 
influence  with  the  other  women.  Should  any  important  matter 
arise  between  her  husband's  tribe  and  that  of  her  parents,  she 
becomes  most  useful  in  negotiating  with  the  latter,  with 
which  she  has  naturally  more  influence  than  a  stranger." 

The  prohibited  degrees  of  relationship  among  the  Dieri 
include  parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  and  those 
who  are  called  Kami.  These  relations  are  called  Buyulu,  and 
one  of  the  greatest  insults  which  can  be  given  to  a  Dieri  is 
to  call  him  or  her  by  this  name  with  Parchana  added, 
implying  that  there  are  improper  relations  between  the 
person  spoken  to  and  his  or  her  nearest  relations.  This 
expression  is  never  used  by  one  person  to  another  unless  they 
have  been  worked  up  to  a  state  of  anger  approaching  frenzy. 
So  repugnant  is  this  subject  to  the  Dieri  that  they  will  become 
indignant  if  it  is  introduced  and  they  are  asked  about  it. 
The  elders  of  the  tribe,  old  men  and  old  women,  in  their 
leisure  hours  lecture  the  young  people  on  the  laws  of  the 
tribe,  impress  on  them  modesty  and  propriet)^  of  conduct,  and 
point  out  the  heinousness  of  incest.  Mr.  Gason  told  me  that 
he  had  often  listened  to  the  old  women  thus  instructing  the 
younger  ones  with  deep  interest. 

The  opinion  of  the  Rev.  Otto  Siebert  expressed  to  me  as 
to  the  Pirrauru  marriage,  formed  after  many  years'  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  Dieri,  is  worth  quoting.  He  said, 
"  The  practice  of  Pirrauru  is  worthy  of  praise  for  its  strength 
and  earnestness  in  regard  to  morality,  and  in  the  ceremonial 
with  which  it  is  regulated,  since  no  practice  could  be  less  in 
accord  with  the  hetairism  which  Lord  Avebury  has  imagined 
for  the  Australian  aborigines." 

'  Ntilina,  "  stianglinc; "  ;  Ntdinitthi,  "  to  strangle." 
2  S.  Gason. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  .187 


The  Pirrauru  relationship  is  clearly  group-marriage,  by 
which  a  man  is  privileged  to  obtain  a  number  of  wives  from 
his  Noas  in  common  with  other  men  of  his  group,  while  a 
woman's  wish  can  only  be  given  effect  to  by  the  consent  of 
her  Tippa-malku  husband.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  she 
cannot  refuse  to  receive  a  Pirrauru  husband  when  he  is 
assigned  to  her  by  the  ceremony  referred  to.  The  Dieri 
regard  it  as  being  lawful,  just  as  the  Tippa-malku  vc\?irndige  is 
lawful,  and  it  must  be  clearly  distinguished  from  irregular 
unions,  for  which  the  Dieri  have  special  terms,  and  which 
they  condemn  and  abhor. 

Standing  between  the  regular  and  irregular  intersexual 
relations,  but  nearer  to  the  former  than  the  latter,  is  the  access 
between  the  unmarried  girls  and  widows  and  those  men  who 
are  Noa-mara  to  them,  and  not  Tippa-malku^  as  to  those  girls. 
This  relation  is  called  Ngura-mundu, hom  Ngura,  "camp,"  and 
Mundii,  "  to  come  together." 

The  term  Ngura-mandretya  refers  to  sexual  licence  in  the 
camp  of  the  husband  during  his  absence.  It  is  from  Ngura^ 
"  camp  "  or  "  hut,"  A/andra,  "  body,"  and  Etja,  "  the  middle," 
colloquially  used  for  habitually,  or  habitually  recurring.  Such 
a  woman  is  called  Pala-ka/i/yi,  that  is,  "  without  shame,"  the 
term  being  really  "  a  breaker  of  marriage."  Such  persons  are 
hated  and  despised. 

Buka-pari  is  the  term  for  a  man  who  lies  in  wait  for  a 
woman,  either  with  or  without  her  con.sent,  and  not  caring 
whether  she  is  Noa  to  him  or  not.^ 

On  the  opposite  side  of  Lake  Eyre,  or  more  correctly, 
north-westerly  from  the  Dieri,  there  is  the  Urabunna  tribe,  the 
southern  division  of  which  is  called  the  Yendakarangu.^  The 
class  names  arc  said  to  be  those  of  the  Dieri,  but  the  rules  of 
marriage  of  the  totems  differ.  The  former  allow  a  marriage 
between  a  totem  of  one  class  and  any  totem  of  the  other  class, 
but  with  the  latter  the  rule  is  that  certain  totems  of  the  one 
class  are  assigned  to  certain  totems  of  the  other.  This,  so 
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  trace  it  out,  is  shown  in  the 
following  table  : — 

1  Otto  Siebert.  «  J.  Hogarth. 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


YENDAKARANGU   TOTEMS 


CUss. 

Totem. 

Marries  with 

Cloud       . 

Wadnamura. 

Crow 

Wadnanuira  and  Eagle-hawk. 

Red  ochre 

Cormorant  and  Eafi/e-fia'ok. 

Kararu  .          .    ■( 

Rat 

Wallaby  . 
Emu 
1     Musk  duck 
Snake 

Cormorant  and  Bull-frog. 
Iguana  and  Lizard. 
Eagle-hawk  and  Bull-frog. 
Eagle-haw  k  and  Dog. 
Wadnamura. 

Eagle-hawk 

Cormorant 

Iguana 

Red  ochre.  Musk  duck,  and  Croiv. 

Rat  and  Red  ochre. 

\Vallai)v. 

Matter!           .    . 

Dog 

Musk  duck. 

Wadnanuira 
;     Mulga  tree' 

Bull-frog  . 
1     Lizard 

Snake,  Cloud,  Crow. 

Emu. 

Rat. 

Wallaby. 

This  table  is  evidently  imperfect.  According  to  the 
almost  universal  rule,  which  obtains  also  with  the  Yendaka- 
rangu,  that  sisters  arc  exchanged  as  wives,  there  should  be 
reciprocity  between  the  totems  in  their  marriages.  In  the 
list  this  is  the  case  as  to  some  of  each  class,  and  therefore 
one  is  fairly  justified  in  believing  that  it  is  so  with  the  others. 
On  this  view  I  have  added  those  totems  which  have  been 
omitted,  but  which  appear  to  be  reciprocal  and  which  are 
in  italics  to  distinguish  them. 

Professor  Spencer  has  been  so  good  as  to  point  out  to 
me  that  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Urabunna  they  were 
very  emphatic  in  stating  that  a  man  of  one  totem  could  only 
marry  a  woman  of  a  certain  totem  of  the  other  class.  The 
marriages  of  that  tribe  are  given  as  follows" : — 


URABUNNA 

TOTEMS 

Matthurie. 

KiRARAWA. 

Dingo 

marries              Water-hen. 

Cicada 

J, 

Crow. 

Emu 

Rat. 

Wild  turkey 

Cloud. 

Swan 

" 

Pelican. 

^  Malka  is  Acacia  Atieiira,  anglicised  as  Mulga. 
'^  Spencer  and  Gillen,  op.  cit.  p.  60. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


189 


The  restriction  in  marriage  to  one  or  more  totems  is 
certainly  later  in  origin  than  the  Dieri  rule,  and,  as  will  be 
seen  in  my  further  statements,  in  many  tribes  with  two  class- 
divisions.  For  instance,  in  the  Itchumundi  nation,  which  is 
the  nearest  on  the  east  side  to  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes,  where 
the  class  names  are  Mukwara  and  Kilpara,  Mukwara-eagle- 
hawk  marries  Kilpara-emu  ;  and  Mukwara -dog  marries 
Kilpara-padi-melon.  The  tribes  of  the  Karamundi  nation 
have  a  similar  rule  by  which  a  member  of  the  one  class  may 
marry  only  in  one  totem  of  the  other  class.  For  instance, 
a  man  of  the  Mukwara -kangaroo  totem  marries  into  the 
Kilpara-emu  totem,  but  not  into  any  other.  Hut  in  some 
of  the  Barkinji  tribes  there  is  no  such  rule,  and  a  man  may 
marry  a  woman  of  any  totem  of  the  other  class,  always  pro- 
vided that  there  is  not  any  other  restriction,  such  as  those 
which  arise  out  of  relationships. 

Returning  to  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes,  an  interesting  com- 
parison may  be  drawn  between  the  marriage  rules  of  the 
Dieri  and  those  of  the  Urabunna,  which  arc  given  concisely 
in  the  following  diagrams  : — 


URABUNNA 

Diagram  VIII 

(l)  Father        (4)  Klder  brother  of  2 


DIERI 

Diagram  IX 

(I)  Father  (5)  Brother  of  2 


(2)  Mother         (5)  Elder  sister  of  i         (2)  Mother 


(6)  Sister  of  i 


(3)  Son -<-nupa->-(6)  daughter 


(3)  daughter  -<-  kami  ->-  (7)  daughter 


(4)  grandson -<-noa->-(8)  grand-daughter 


The  Dieri  rule  is  evidently  a  development  of  that  of  the 
Urabunna,  and  is  therefore  the  later  one.  This  is  also  shown 
by  the  practice  of  the  Dieri  of  which  I  have  spoken,  and 
which,  by  what  may  be  called  a  "  legal  fiction,"  converts  the 
relationship  of  two  people  who  are  Kami  to  each  other,  and 
therefore,  in  the  Dieri  custom,  not  marriageable,  into  the 
relation  oi Noa,  they  thus  becoming  eligible  for  marriage.  The 
Dieri  relation  of  Xoa  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Nupa  of  the 
Urabunna,  and  Nupa  and  Noa  are  equivalents,  because  those 


I90        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

who    are    in    that    relation    are    born    into   the    reciprocally- 
marriageable  groups. 

The  legal  fiction  referred  to  may  be  explained  here  to 
make  the  matter  clearer.  In  a  case  where  a  Dieri  man  had 
no  Noa  available  for  betrothal  to  him,  a  wife  might  be,  and 
was  in  certain  cases,  found  for  him  in  the  following  manner. 
Diagram  IX.  illustrates  this  practice.  Say  that  the  man  in 
question  was  the  brother  of  3,  and  that  the  kindred  wished 
to  find  a  wife  for  him.  The  brothers  own  and  tribal  of  the 
women  2  and  6  would  alter  their  relationships  from  that  of 
Kamari  to  Katni,  that  is  from  being  "  husband's  sister "  to 
"  daughter  of  mother's  brother."  Thus  these  women  being 
now  placed  in  the  relation  of  Kami,  their  children  are  N^oa- 
mara,  and  may  be  therefore  lawfully  promised  in  marriage  by 
their  respective  mothers,  and  come  into  the  relation  of  Tippa- 
vialku,  or,  as  I  have  elsewhere  called  it,  "  specialised  Noa." 

This  appears  to  be  an  old  practice  of  the  Dieri,  and  they 
have  a  special  term  for  the  relation  of  "  mother-in-law "  in 
the  above  case.  Under  the  usual  Dieri  practice,  shown  in 
Diagram  IX.,  No.  7  is  the  mother-in-law  {Paiara)  of  4,  but 
under  such  an  arrangement  as  that  just  spoken  of,  in  which, 
say,  the  brother  of  3  and  the  woman  7  would  become 
marriageable,  the  woman  6  would  be  the  Kami-paiara  of 
the  brother  of  3. 

When  I  say  that  this  practice  is  an  old  one  of  the 
Dieri,  I  mean  that  it  is,  so  far  as  the  old  men  now  living 
know.  But  antiquity  or  novelty  as  to  a  custom  in  a  native 
tribe  is  a  matter  of  comparison.  The  marriage  rule  of  the 
Urabunna  is  certainly  more  ancient  than  the  Noa  rule  of 
the  Dieri,  for  this  is  evidently  an  innovation  on  the  older 
rule.  Yet,  who  can  say  how  long  either  of  these  rules  has 
been  maintained  ?  The  newest  may  have  been  practised 
for  hundreds  of  years. 

In  speaking  of  the  restrictions  on  marriage  created  by 
the  class-division,  the  totemic  relationships,  and  local  rules, 
I  shall  refer  again  to  the  evidence  of  the  Urabunna  and 
Dieri  practice.  But  I  desire  to  say  here  that  there  is  clear 
evidence  that  these  tribes  have  intentionally  altered  the 
class  regrulations  to  meet   difficulties  arisinsr  out  of  female 


MARRIAGE  RULES  191 


descent  in  one  tribe  and  male  descent  in  another,  and  the 
restrictions  intended  to  bar  what  they  consider  to  be  in- 
cestuous marriages,  when  there  was  no  other  way  to  provide 
a  wife  for  some  tribesman. 

The  class  organisation  of  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes  extended 
south  to  the  Parnkalla  tribe,  whose  country  terminated  at 
Port  Lincoln. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  direct  evidence  as  to  the 
status  of  marriage  in  the  Parnkalla  tribe,  but  the  remarks 
made  on  this  subject  by  the  Rev.  C.  W.  Schlirmann  afford 
some  data  on  which  to  form  an  opinion  whether  the  Tippa- 
inalku  and  Pirrauru  marriage  of  the  Died  obtained  in  this 
tribe,  as  well  as  the  two  classes  "  Mattiri  and  Carraru."  He 
says  that  "  long  before  a  girl  arrives  at  maturity,  she  is 
affianced  by  her  parents  to  some  friend  of  theirs,  no  matter 
whether  young  or  old,  married  or  single.  Although  the 
men  are  capable  of  fierce  jealousy  if  their  wives  transgress 
unknown  to  them,  yet  they  frequently  send  them  out  to 
other  parties  or  exchange  with  a  friend  for  a  night  ;  and  as 
for  near  relatives,  such  as  brothers,  it  may  almost  be  said 
that  they  have  their  wives  in  common.  This  latter  practice 
is  a  recogyised  custom.  A  woman  honours  the  brothers  of 
the  man  to  whom  she  is  married  with  the  indiscriminate 
name  of  husbands  ;  but  the  men  make  a  distinction,  calling 
their  own  individual  spouses  Yungaras  and  those  on  whom 
they  have  a  secondary  claim,  Kartetis."  * 

This  appears  to  me  just  what  an  observer,  who  looked 
only  at  the  surface  of  things,  would  see,  indeed  much  as  the 
early  settlers  in  Central  Australia  regarded  the  female 
Pirraurus  of  the  Dieri  as  merely  "paramours."  If  we 
translate  Yimgara  as  Tippa-malku,  and  Karteti  as  Pirrauru, 
we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  the  Parnkalla  were,  as 
regards  marriage,  in  much  the  same  state  as  the  Lake  Eyre 
tribes.  If  that  is  so,  then  we  may  also  conclude  that  all 
the  tribes  between  Port  Lincoln  and  the  Yerkla-mining  at 
Eucla  have  group-marriage,  as  well  as  the  classes  Mattiri 
and  Carraru. 

•    7'he  Amative  Tribes  of  South  Australia^  ^879.      "The  .\l>original  Tribes  of 
Port  Lincoln."     C.  W.  Schiirmann,  p.  222. 


192        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  tribes  with  which  the  Dieri  intermarried  did  not 
extend  beyond  the  Yantruwunta  who  Hved  up  the  Cooper 
for  some  distance.  About  120  miles  further  there  was  a 
tribe,  now  extinct,  which  called  itself  Kurnandaburi. 

The  similarity  of  custom  and  organisation  between  the 
Dieri  and  the  Kurnandaburi  shows  that  the  intervening 
tribes  were  of  the  same  character.  The  Kurnandaburi 
class  names  were  Yungo  and  Matara,  which  may  be  compared 
with  the  Dieri  Kararu  and  Matted,  although  the  Yantruwunta 
Tiniwa  and  Kulpuru  intervene  ;  and  it  is  well  to  note  here 
that  the  equivalent  of  the  Dieri  "  murdu "  in  Yaurorka, 
Yantruwunta,  and  Marula  is  Kamiri.  In  the  following 
tribes,  Ngulubulu,  Yelyuyendi,  and  Karangura,  it  is  Kaura. 

In  the  Ngulubulu,  Karangura,  Yelyuyendi,  and  Marula, 
VVuturu  is  the  equivalent  of  Matteri,  and  Parkata  of  Kararu. 

The  classes  and  totems  of  the  Kurnandaburi  were  both 
called  Gaura}  and  the  child  took  the  class  and  totem  of  its 
mother.  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  marriage 
was  restricted  to  one  totem,  or  whether  it  was  permitted 
between  any  of  the  totems  of  the  opposite  class.  Gaura- 
moUi  is  the  relation  of  persons  of  the  same  class  or  totem." 
The  equivalent  of  the  Noa  of  the  Dieri  is  Abaija.  ^  A  female 
child  was  promised  by  its  parents  to  some  boy  or  man  who 
was  Abaija  to  her.  When  married,  their  relation  became 
Nubaia,  which  is  the  specialised  Noa  before  spoken  of 
Exchange  of  sisters  was  the  accompaniment  of  Nubaia. 
A  man  and  his  wife's  sister,  and  the  wife  of  his  brother,  were 
in  the  relation  of  Kodi-molli,  and  might  not  sit  in  the  same 
camp,  or  converse  freely,  but  must  -ostensibly  keep  apart 
from  each  other  as  far  as  circumstances  would  permit.  Yet 
sub  rosa  marital  relations  existed  between  them,  and  this  at 
times  caused  trouble  between  the  women.  This  is  clearly 
the  Pirrauru  relation  of  the  Dieri,  but  with  a  form  of 
apparent  tabu,  which  may  very  well  illustrate  a  passage 
from  group-marriage  to  the  ultimate  form  of  the  Tippa-malku 


^  Gau  also  means  "  yes,"  and  Gara  or  Gatira-eil  is  "  speecli  "or  "  language." 
*  Thus,  say  one   man   is    Taldra-gatira   (Kangaroo   totem),  and   another    is 

Kuntara-gaura,  they  are  both  Gaura-mol/i,  because  both  totems  are  of  the  same 

class. 


V  MARRIAGE  RULES  193 

marriage.      In  many  tribes,  e.g.  those  of  Victoria,  this,  so  far 
as  the  woman  is  concerned,  is  individual  marriage. 

Besides  the  Nubaia  marriage,  there  is  the  Dilpa-malli,  or 
group-marriage,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Pirraiiru  of 
the  Dieri,  in  which,  according  to  my  informant,^  a  group  of 
men  who  are  own  or  tribal  brothers,  and  a  group  of  women 
who  are  own  or  tribal  sisters,  cohabit  when  the  tribe  assembles, 
or  indeed  at  any  time  when  the  Dilpa-malli  group  are  all 
together. 

When  a  betrothed  girl  is  of  a  marriageable  age,  the  man 
to  whom  she  is  promised,  having  received  her  father's  consent, 
or  even  that  of  her  mother,  which  would  suffice,  took  her  away 
when  she  was  out  from  the  camp  with  the  other  women. 
He  was  accompanied  by  a  comrade,  who  was  Abaija  to  her. 
Having  seized  her,  they  dragged  her  away,  she  screaming 
and  biting  as  much  as  she  was  able.  No  one  interfered, 
the  other  women  looking  on  and  laughing.  Other  men,  who 
were  also  Abaija  to  her,  then  joined  them,  and  the  man 
returned  to  his  camp. 

The  marriage  was  then  consummated  by  the  Abaijas,  who 
remained  with  her  for  one  or  two  days.  On  their  return  to 
the  camp  there  were  several  days  of  ceremonial  dancing, 
during  which  time  there  was  between  her  and  the  men  of 
the  camp  a  period  of  unrestricted  licence,  not  even  excluding 
her  father.  After  that  she  joined  her  Xubaia  in  his  camp. 
The  women  used  to  boast  of  the  resistance  which  they  made 
before  being  Matnmara,  that  is,  stolen,  which  is  the  term 
for  the  ceremonial  taking  of  a  woman  as  a  Nubaia. 

When  a  man  died,"  the  widow  and  the  brother  of  the 
deceased  were  no  longer  Kodi-molli,  but  became  Nubaia. 

Cases  of  elopement  of  betrothed  girls  were  dealt  with  by 
the  man  to  whom  she  was  promised,  who  went  after  her 
with  his  tribal  and  own  brothers,  and  if  the  couple  were 
found,  took  the  woman  back.  In  one  case  reported  to  me 
he  severely  wounded  the  abductor. 

Tribes  with  the  same  customs  and  social  organisation 
extended  south  -  easterly  from  the  Kurnandaburi  to  the 
Wilson  River,  and  most  probably  beyond  the  lower   Bulloo 

1  W.  O'Donnell. 

O 


194        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

River  to  where,  between  it  and  the  Paroo,  they  would  meet 
tribes  belonging  to  the  Itchumundi  nation. 

This,  together  with  the  tribes  of  the  Karamundi  and 
Barkinji  nations,  extended  over  the  country  along  the 
Darling  River  between  it  and  the  Grey  and  Barrier  Ranges, 
and  for  some  50  miles  back  from  it  towards  the  Bogan  and 
Lachlan  Rivers. 

All  these  tribes  had  the  two  classes  named  Mukwara  and 
Kilpara,  and  the  marriage  rule  was  that  Mukwara  married 
Kilpara,  and  vice  versa. 

There  was  a  limitation  as  to  totem  marriage  :  for  instance, 
in  the  Itchumundi,  Mukwara-eagle-hawk  married  Kilpara- 
bone  -  fish  ;  Mukwara  -  kangaroo  married  Kilpara  -  emu  ; 
Mukwara-dog  married  Kilpara-padi-melon,  and  so  on. 

When  the  question  was  put  to  several  men  of  one  of 
these  tribes,  "  What  would  be  done  if  a  Mukwara  took  a 
Mukwara  for  his  wife  ?  "  the  reply  was  an  emphatic  "  No 
good — suppose  that,  then  we  kill  him." 

The  child  takes  the  class  and  totem  names  of  its 
mother.' 

The  Wiimbaio  tribe,  in  fact,  belonged  to  the  group  which 
occupied  the  lower  part  of  the  Darling,  for  its  language,  the 
Maraura,  e.xtended  far  up  that  river. 

It  had  the  same  rules  of  class  and  totemic  marriage. 
Girls  were  promised  when  infants,  and  there  was  inter- 
marriage between  the  Wiimbaio  and  the  adjoining  tribes 
both  in  the  Darling  and  Murray. 

Marriages  were  also  brought  about  by  elopement  of 
girls  who  preferred  other  and  younger  men  than  those  to 
whom  they  had  been  promised  as  children.  In  such  a  case 
the  girl  was  pursued  by  her  father  and  brothers,  and  the  man 
she  had  eloped  with  would  have  to  allow  them  to  strike  him 
on  the  head  with  a  club,  after  which  in  some  cases  he  would 
retain  her. 

But  in  other  cases  there  was  a  fight  between  her  kindred, 
male  and   female,  and  those  of  the  man  she  went  off  with. 
The  women  were  generally  the  most  excited,  and  would  stir 
up  the  men  and  assist  them  with  their  yam-sticks. 
>  J.  W.  Boultbee. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  195 


If  a  man  captured  a  woman  of  some  other  tribe,  he 
would  not  be  permitted  to  retain  her  unless  she  were  of  the 
class  with  which  his  class  married. 

♦  At  times  when  there  were  great  tribal  gatherings  wives 
were  exchanged,  but  always  within  class  limits.  But  they 
also  resorted  to  this  practice  to  avert  some  great  trouble 
which  they  fancied  was  about  to  come  upon  them  ;  for 
instance,  they  once  heard  that  a  great  sickness  was  coming 
down  the  Murray,  and  the  old  men  proposed  exchanging 
wives  to  ensure  safety  from  it.  Yet  at  all  other  times  men 
required  wives  to  be  faithful  to  their  husbands,  unless  by 
their  consent  and  command.  In  one  case  two  men  ex- 
changed wives  for  a  month  ;  this  was  called  Be-ama} 

Here  we  have  a  survival  of  the  practice  of  group-marriage, 
and  the  Wiimbaio,  as  I  have  said,  represent  the  other 
Maraiira-s^Qdikxng  tribes. 

The  series  of  two-class  tribes  which  extend  up  the 
Murray  River  from  the  Wiimbaio  have  been  described  by 
Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron,  who  says  that  any  totem  of  Mukwara 
among  the  Tatathi  and  Keramin  may  marry  any  totem  of 
Kilpara  and  vice  versa,  and  that  descent  is  in  the  female  line. 
Girls  are  very  frequently  promised  when  children,  and  when 
marriageable  are  taken  to  the  future  husband's  camp  by  the 
mother  or  mother's  brother.  The  father  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  disposal  of  his  daughter,  the  reason  given  being 
that  the  daughter  belongs  to  the  class  of  her  mother's 
brother,  and  not  to  that  of  her  father.  Notwithstanding 
this,  they  believe  that  the  daughter  is  of  the  father  solely, 
being  only  nurtured  by  her  mother. 

A  female  captive  belonged  to  her  captor  if  of  a  class 
from  which  he  might  take  a  wife.  No  one  was  permitted  to 
retain  one  of  the  class  to  which  he  belonged.  In  many 
instances  such  women  were  held  in  common  for  a  time  by 
all  the  members  of  the  tribe,  but  subject  to  the  class  laws, 
and  were  afterwards  allotted  to  those  who  might  lawfully 
marry  them." 

As   I   have  before  said,  the  class  names  Mukwara  and 

>  J.  Bulmer. 

*  Notes  on  some  Tribes  of  New  South  Wales,  p.  352.      A.  L.  1'.  Cameron. 


196        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Kilpara  extended  up  the  Murray  River  as  far  as  the 
Loddon  in  the  tribes  mentioned  in  Chapter  II.,  but  I  have 
not  obtained  a  list  of  the  respective  totems. 

From  that  point  the  tribes  up  the  river  were,  as  I  have 
pointed  out,  akin  to  the  Kulin  tribe  of  southern  Victoria. 
As  descent  was  with  them  in  the  male  line,  they  will  be 
further  considered  later  on. 

Tribes  with  the  two-class  system  lived  on  the  Murray 
River  above  Albury  on  the  Mitta-Mitta,  Kiewa,  and  Ovens 
Rivers  in  the  mountainous  country.  I  have  taken  the  Ya- 
itma-thang  and  Wolgal  tribes  as  representing  them.  In  the 
Theddora  branch  of  the  former  tribe  a  girl  was  promised  by 
her  father,  usually  at  or  after  her  birth,  and  was  given  to  her 
husband  when  grown  up.  A  man  to  whom  a  girl  had  been 
promised  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  lock  of  her  hair,  and  if  she 
refused  him  afterwards,  he  would  sometimes  wrap  an  eagle- 
hawk's  feather  in  the  hair,  and  then  put  it  in  a  water-hole. 
As  the  hair  decomposed,  the  woman  would  sicken,  and 
ultimately  die.^  The  rule  of  marriage  was  that  of  the  two- 
class  tribes  with  female  descent ;  but  I  do  not  know  whether 
a  man  might  marry  in  any  of  the  totems  of  the  class  other 
than  his  own,  or  whether  he  was  restricted  to  certain  of 
them. 

Not  only  was  there  the  practice  of  betrothal,  but  also 
the  Urabunna  rule  that  a  man  married  the  daughter  of  his 
mother's  brother. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  when  a  girl  liked  some  other  man 
better  than  him  to  whom  she  had  been  promised  in  infancy, 
elopement  was  not  an  uncommon  occurrence.  In  such  a 
case  her  male  relations  pursued  the  couple,  and  if  successful 
in  finding  them,  the  man  was  beaten  by  her  male  kindred. 
But  sometimes,  if  he  could  pacify  them,  and  also  the  man 
she  had  been  promised  to,  and  could  find  a  sister  to  exchange 
for  her,  his  offence  was  condoned. 

If  a  man  took  a  woman  contrary  to  the  tribal  customs, 
either  as  to  class  or  nearness  of  kinship,  the  tribes-people 
usually  killed  him. 

1   "  The  Omeo  Blacks,"  Richard  Helms.      Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of 
New  South  Wales,  1895,  vol.  x. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  197 


The  Ya-itma-thang  were  neighbours  on  the  west  to  the 
Wolgal,  who  were  on  the  upper  Murray  River  and  the  high 
Alps,  extending  to  Kiandra.  South  of  them  were  the 
Ngarigo,  who  occupied  the  Manero  tableland. 

Both  these  latter  tribes  had  the  two-class  system.  With 
the  Wolgal  the  names  were  Malian  (eagle-hawk)  and  Umbe 
(crow),  and  with  the  Ngarigo  Merung  (eagle-hawk)  and 
Yukembruk  (crow).  The  law  of  marriage  was  that  of 
the  tribes  with  female  descent,  and  a  man  might  marry  a 
woman  of  any  of  the  opposite  totems  ;  and,  as  was  the  case 
with  the  Omeo  tribe,  a  man's  proper  wife  was  the  daughter, 
own  or  tribal,  of  his  mother's  brother. 

A  characteristic  incident  occurred  at  the  Black  Mountain 
station  on  the  Snowy  River  about  the  years  1855-56.  A 
number  of  Theddora  (Ya-itma-thang)  blacks  had  come 
across  from  Omeo  and  there  met  a  woman,  known  to  me  as 
Old  Jenny,  of  their  tribe,  who  had  broken  their  law  by 
becoming  the  wife  of  a  man  to  whom  she  stood  in  the  tribal 
relationship  of  Najan  (mother).  She  had  been  away  for  some 
years,  and  this  was  the  first  time  that  her  own  kindred  had 
encountered  her.  The  wife  of  one  of  them  attacked  her  first 
with  a  digging-stick,  but  she  defended  herself  so  well  with 
the  same  weapon  that  the  woman  had  to  desist,  and  her 
husband  continued  the  attack  on  Old  Jenny,  who  had 
divested  herself  of  all  but  one  small  garment.  He  com- 
menced with  a  club,  but  finding  he  could  not  hit  her, 
changed  it  for  a  curved  club  with  which  he  tried  to  "  peck  " 
her  on  the  head  over  her  guard.  After  a  time  he  also  had 
to  give  it  up,  and  they  had  to  make  friends  with  the 
invincible  woman.^  This  is  an  instance  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  women  are  able  to  defend  themselves  with  their 
weapon  the  "  yam-stick,"  being  no  mean  opponents  of  a  man 
armed  only  with  a  club. 

In  the  Wolgal  tribe  it  was  usual  for  a  girl  to  be  promised 
as  a  mere  child  to  some  man  of  the  proper  class,  he  being 
then  perhaps  middle-aged  or  even  old.  How  such  a 
promise  might  be  brought  about  is  shown  by  the  remark 
which   I  once  heard  a  Wolgal  man  say  to  his  wife,  "  When 

»  J.  O'Rourke. 


198        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

our  girl  is  old  enough,  we  will  give  her  to  him,"  mentioning 
a  man  who  was  popular  with  the  people. 

When  the  girl  was  old  enough  to  be  married,  her  father, 
accompanied  by  his  brother,  took  her  to  her  future  husband's 
camp,  and  left  her  there  with  him, 

A  Wolgal  man  of  the  Malian  class,  in  speaking  to  me 
of  the  practice  of  betrothal,  said  that  a  father  could  do  what 
he  liked  with  his  daughter,  because  the  child  is  his,  and  "  he 
only  gives  it  to  his  wife  to  take  care  of  for  him."  This, 
which  is  at  variance  with  the  Dieri  custom,  where  the 
mother  has  full  disposal  of  her  infant  daughter,  is  an 
indication  of  an  advance  towards  paternal  descent. 

If  a  betrothed  girl  eloped  with  some  man,  her  father 
and  brothers,  but  not  her  promised  husband,  went  after  her  ; 
and,  if  the  escaping  couple  were  overtaken,  the  girl  was 
taken  from  him  back  to  the  camp,  and  then,  having  been 
severely  beaten  by  her  mother  with  a  digging- stick,  was 
handed  over  to  her  betrothed. 

I  heard  among  the  Wolgal  of  a  man  and  a  girl  who 
were  far-away  tribal  brother  and  sister,  and  who  ran  away 
together.  The  tribes-people  pursued  them,  and  they,  being 
overtaken,  were  both  severely  beaten,  and  the  girl  was  then 
handed  over  to  the  man  to  whom  she  had  been  promised. 
In  this  tribe  there  was,  in  the  case  of  elopements,  not  any 
practice  such  as  the  jus  pHmae  nociis  of  many  other  tribes  ; 
and  my  informants,  two  old  men,  expressed  great  disgust  at 
the  practice  of  the  Kurnai  in  such  cases,  and  also  of  their 
general  practice  of  marriage  by  elopement,  which  one  of 
them  said  was  "  very  bad  "  and  would  not  have  been  per- 
mitted in  their  tribe. 

With  the  Ngarigo  also  there  was  the  practice  of  betrothal 
in  accordartce  with  the  Urabunna  rule,  and  when  the  girl 
had  reached  the  marriageable  age  her  father  took  her  to  her 
husband's  camp  and  handed  her  over  to  him. 

In  cases  of  marriage  by  elopement,  there  was  a  similar 
practice  to  that  of  the  Kurnai  by  those  who  had  been 
initiated  at  the  same  ceremonies  as  the  eloper.  But,  after 
this  occasion,  no  further  access  was  allowed,  nor  were  women 
in  this  tribe  lent  to  friends  or  visitors. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  199 


The  avoidance  in  all  these  tribes  between  a  man  and 
the  mother  of  his  wife  was  very  marked,  and  the  Ngarigo 
practice  will  serve  as  a  good  illustration.  A  woman  from 
the  time  her  daughter  was  married  must  not  see  her  son-in- 
law,  or  even  hear  his  name  spoken.  If  she  heard  any  one 
mention  his  name,  she  would  put  her  fingers  in  her  ears  and 
say,  "  Gungo-wa"  that  is,  "  Be  quiet." 

When  a  Ngarigo  man  died  and  left  a  widow,  she  did  not 
go  to  his  brother  who  was  of  the  same  mother,  but  to  the 
son  of  his  father's  elder  brother.  This  was  in  fact  under 
their  system  of  relationship  to  his  elder  brother,  which  falls 
into  line  with  the  practice  of  other  tribes,  for  instance  the 
Kurnai. 

With  these  tribes  ends  the  sequence  of  the  two -class 
system  in  this  direction,  being  followed  by  the  four  sub-class 
system  of  the  Wiradjuri  to  the  north  and  the  four  sub-class 
system  of  the  Kamilaroi  to  the  north-east. 


Tribes  with  Four  Suh-Cl.\sse.s  and  Female  Descent 

I  now  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  tribes  which  have 
four  sub- classes  with  descent  in  the  female  line,  and  of 
which  the  Kamilaroi  may  be  taken  as  the  type. 

Although  a  comparatively  complete  list  of  sub- class 
names  of  the  Kamilaroi  were,  I  believe,  first  published  by 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Ridley,  his  attention  had  been  previously  called 
to  them  by  Mr.  E.  T.  Lance,  a  settler  living  on  the  Clarence 
River.  In  1871  Mr.  Ridley  pointed  them  out  to  Dr. 
Lorimer  Fison,  who  sent  a  memorandum  on  them  to  Dr. 
Lewis  H.  Morgan,  following  Mr.  Ridley's  method  of  spelling, 
and  in  that  guise  they  appear  in  Dr.  Morgan's  Ancient 
Society} 

Subsequently  Mr.  Lance  informed  Dr.  Fison  that  the 
spelling  aforesaid  did  not  represent  the  sound  of  the  words. 
After  careful  inquiry  the  spelling  now  given  was  adopted,' 
and  appears  to  come  as  near  as  possible  to  the  aboriginal 
pronunciation. 

'  P.  51.  '  Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai y  p.  57.      Fison  and  Howitt. 


200        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

A  careful  study  of  the  intermarriages  of  the  sub-classes 
and  a  comparison  of  the  inheritance  of  the  sub-class  names 
with  that  of  the  totem  names  associated  with  them,  convinced 
me  that  each  pair  into  which  the  four  sub-classes  fell  must 
represent  an  original  whole,  analogous  to  one  of  the  two 
classes  of  the  Dieri  tribe.  After  much  and  long-continued 
inquiry,  a  valued  correspondent,  Mr.  Cyrus  E.  Doyle,  found 
the  complete  system  in  a  tribe  of  the  Kamilaroi  nation  on 
the  Gwydir  River,  in  northern  New  South  Wales.  This 
system  is  given  in  Chapter  III.,  and  the  following  table 
gives  the  marriages  and  descents  under  it.  The  two  primary 
classes,  Kupathin  and  Dilbi,  are  omitted  for  shortness. 


Male 

Marries                              Children  are 

Ipai 
Kumbo 
Murri 
Kubbi 

Kubbith.i                    Murri  and  Matha 
Matha                         Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 
Butha                          Ipai  and  Ipatha 
Ipatha                        Kumbo  and  Butha 

The  diagram  which  I  have  used  to  explain  the  two-class 
system  can  be  applied  to  the  four  sub-classes,  represented 
by  the  letters  a,  d,  c,  d,  and  interpolated  between  the  two 
classes  and  the  totems.  Diagram  X.  gives  this  arrange- 
ment. The  class  Kupathin  is  represented  by  A,  and  Dilbi 
b)'  B. 

Diagram  X 


{:- 


—  {^ 


A  thus  represents  the  class  Kupathin,  and  a  and  b  the 
pair  of  sub-classes  Ipai  and  Kumbo  ;  B  represents  the  class 
Dilbi,  and  c  and  d  the  other  pair  Murri  and  Kubbi.  The 
totems  may  be  added  to  the  sub- class  by  the  use  of 
numerals,  as  in  the  case  of  the  two-class  systems. 

The  subjoined  diagram  I  have  found  useful  in  bringing 
before  the  mind's  eye  in  a  concise  form  the  marriages  and 
descents  in  this  system,  the  letters  being  those  used  in  the 
preceding  diagram. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


Diagram  XI 
Ipai  Aa       -^  pf  Murri  B<- 


\ 


Kumbo  SJb  ^ 


X 


^V  Kubbi  R/ 


The  diagonal  lines  show  the  reciprocal  marriages,  and 
the  vertical  lines  the  descent.  Ipai  marries  Kubbitha,  and 
their  children  are  Murri  and  Matha  ;  Kubbi  marries  Ipatha, 
and  their  children  are  Kumbo  and  Butha,  and  so  on  with  the 
others. 

Disregarding  the  names  and  using  the  letters  only,  the 
subjoined  marriage  of  Ipai  with  Kubbitha  and  the  consequent 
line  of  descents  may  be  compared  with  the  marriages  and 
descents  in  the  Dieri  classes,  which  are  their  equivalents. 


Diagram  XII 

DiERI. 

Kamii-aroi. 

ni.  A. 

m.  \a 

f.  B. 

1 

f.  R/ 

1 
f.  B. 

1 

1 
f. 

etc. 

B. 

m.  V,d f.  IW 

etc. 

m.  B. 


The  line  of  descent  runs  in  the  classes,  in  the  same 
manner  in  each  diagram,  in  the  female  line,  but  where  the 
sub-classes  are  developed,  it  runs  through  that  sub-class 
which,  with  the  sub-class  of  the  mother,  represents  her  class. 
The  new  arrangement  is  an  ingenious  restriction  on  marriage 
between  persons,  who  in  tribes  such  as  the  Urabunna  are 
marriageable,  but  in  other  tribes,  such  as  the  Dieri,  are 
prohibited  from  intermarriage,  by  a  custom  defined  by  a 
special  term  of  relationship.  The  same  prohibition  is  pro- 
vided automatically  by  the  arrangement  of  these  sub-classes, 
and  strengthens  the  belief  that  the  arrangement  of  the 
classes,  and  the  sub-classes,  has  been  made  intentionally  to 
prevent  the  marriage  of  those  who  have  been  considered  to 
be  too  near  to  each  other  in   blood,  or,  as  the  aborigines 


202        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

sometimes  put  it,  are  of  "  the  same  flesh."  Looking  at  the 
diagrams  of  the  Urabunna,  the  Dieri,  and  the  Kamilaroi,  the 
direction  of  their  progressive  development  appears  to  me  to 
be  unmistakable. 

If  we  compare  the  Kamilaroi  class  system  with  the  fore- 
going table,  it  will  be  seen  at  once  that  Ipai  and  Kumbo  are 
the  complements  of  the  class  Kupathin,  and  that  the  children 
of  Kupathin-Ipatha  take  the  name  of  Kupathin-Butha.  It 
shows  also  very  clearly  that,  underneath  all  this,  there  lies 
the  two-class  system,  for  the  children  of  Ipatha  are  as  much 
Kupathin  as  she  is.  It  has  been  the  absence  of  the  class- 
names  in  most  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes,  and  the  ignorance  of 
their  occurrence  in  others,  that  has  made  it  so  difficult  to 
work  out  the  principle's  on  which  the  four  sub-class  system 
rests. 

The  following  table  shows  the  marriages  and  descents  of 
the  Kamilaroi  sub-classes  and  totems  : ' — 


KAMILAROI  TRIBE— MARRIAGES  AND  DESCENTS 


Male 

M 

arries 

Children  are 

(I)  Ipai  of  any  totem, 
when   Ipai- Kumbo 
is  emu,  bandicoot, 
or  black  snake 

Kubbitha 
Kubbitha 
Kubbitha 

kangaroo 

opossum 

iguana 

Murri  and  Matha 
Murri  and  Matha 
Murri  and  Matha 

kangaroo 
opossum 
iguana 

(2)  Kumbo  of  any  to- 
tem,    when    Ipai- 
Kumbo     is     emu, 
bandicoot,  or  black 
snake 

Matha 
Matha 
Matha 

kangaroo 
opossum 
iguana 

Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 
Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 
Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 

kangaroo 
opossum 
iguana 

(3)  Murri  of  any  totem, 
when  Murri- Kubbi 
is  kangaroo,  opos- 

Butha 
Butha 
Butha 

emu 

bandicoot 
black  snake 

Ipai  and  Ipatha 
Ipai  and  Ipatha 
Ipai  and  Ipatha 

emu 

bandicoot 
black  snake 

sum,  or  Iguana 

( 4 )  Kubbi  of  any  totem , 
when  Murri-Kubbi 
is  kangaroo,  opos- 

Ipatha 
Ipatha 
Ipatha 

emu 

bandicoot 
black  snake 

Kumbo  and  Butha 
Kumbo  and  Butha 
Kumbo  and  Butha 

emu 

bandicoot 
black  snake 

sum,  or  Iguana 

Where   Ipai-Kumbo  is  emu,  bandicoot,  or  black  snake, 
then  Ipai  marries  Kubbitha-kangaroo,  and  go  on. 

1  Rev.  W.  Ridley,  yip«r//.  Anthrop.  Ins/,  vol.  ii.  p.  263. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  203 


In  one  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes  there  is  a  remarkable 
innovation  on  the  usual  marriages  in  the  sub-classes,  and  a 
table  showing  these  marriages  is  given  further  on.  It  was 
noted  in  the  first  instance  by  Mr.  T.  E.  Lance,^  who  observed 
the  facts  among  the  Kamilaroi  in  the  district  where  he  lived. 
He  informed  the  Rev.  William  Ridley,  who  communicated  it 
to  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  as  "  a  half-sister  marriage,"  and  we 
adopted  the  term  in  our  work  Kamilaroi  and  Kuniai^  for 
the  sake  of  convenience.  However,  extended  inquiries 
failed  to  give  us  any  other  instances  of  this  particular 
marriage.  Further  consideration  of  the  facts,  in  comparison 
with  other  marriage  rules  of  tribes  adjacent  to  the  Kamilaroi, 
has  shown  that  the  term  is  incorrect  and  objectionable.  In 
this  view  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  concurs. 

To  look  upon  this  as  a  half-sister  marriage  is  to  see  it 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  white  man.  But  considering  it 
from  the  native's  point  of  view,  we  see  that  it  is  altogether 
different. 

From  the  native's  point  of  view  all  the  members  of  a 
totem,  in  the  same  level  of  a  generation,  are  in  the  relation 
of  brother  and  sister.  Thus  in  the  totem  P2mu,  of  the  tribe 
in  question,  Ipai-emu  is  the  brother  of  Ipatha-emu,  and  could 
not  marry  her.  But  he  is  not  the  brother  of  Ipatha-black- 
snake,  because  they  are  not  of  the  same  totem. 

This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  principle  upon  which 
these  marriages  have  been  arranged,  and  the  remark  made 
by  one  of  Mr.  Lance's  native  informants  is  much  to  the 
point.  It  was  in  reply  to  an  objection  by  Mr.  Lance 
that  he  said,  "  What  for  you  stupid  like  it  that !  This 
feller  Ipatha  not  Emu  like  it  that  other  feller  Ipai  ;  this 
one  Blacksnake." 

It  is  the  totem  which  has  in  this  case  apparently  been 
Kept  in  view,  and  the  relationship  of  the  sub-class  has  been 
disregarded.  The  table  given  below  was  compiled  by  Mr. 
Ridley,  and  shows  that  Ipai  is  not  the  exception  to  a  general 

'  When  Mr.  Lance  communicated  the  above  facts  to  Dr.  Fison,  he  informed 
Mr.  Ridley,  who  subsequently  verified  them  when  in  the  interior  of  New  South 
Wales  (Kamilaroi  and  Kurnai,  pp.  46-48).  Mr.  I^nce,  it  should  be  noted, 
was  a  thoroughly  competent  and  trustworthy  informant. 

»  P.  45. 


204        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

rule,  but  that  all  the  marriages  of  all  the  four  sub-classes  are 
on  the  same  principle. 

The  rule  of  marriage  is  directly  in  contradiction  to  the 
fundamental  exogamous  principle  of  the  classes  and  sub- 
classes. The  rule  of  descent,  however,  remains  unaltered, 
since  the  children  of  these  marriages  take  the  sub-class 
names  and  the  totems  of  their  mother's  children,  as  by  the 
man  who  in  another  tribe  would  have  been  her  husband. 

Although  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  any  instance  in 
other  places,  the  fact  remains  that  this  marriage  was  noted 
by  an  experienced  observer,  such  as  Mr.  Lance,  and  may  be 
taken  as  an  established  fact  in  that  particular  locality. 

The  marriages  of  the  Wonghibon  tribe,  a  table  of  which 
will  be  found  a  few  pages  further  on,  will  serve  as  an 
example  of  how  such  innovations  are  made  to  meet  what  the 
tribes-people  find  to  be  a  difficulty. 


KAMILAROI    TRIBE— ANOMALOUS    MARRIAGES 


Male 

M 

arries 

Children  are 

Ipai 
Ipai 
Ipai 

emu 

bandicoot 
black  snake 

Ipatha 
Ipatha 
Ipatha 

black  snake 
black  snake 
emu 

Kumbo  and  Butha 
Kumbo  and  Butha 
Kumbo  and  Butha 

black  snake 
black  snake 
emu 

Kumbo 
KumlK) 
Kumlx) 

emu 

bandicoot 
black  snake 

Butha 
Butha 
Butha 

black  snake 
black  snake 
emu 

Ipai  ynd  Ipatha 
Ipai  and  Ipatha 
Ipai  and  Ipatha 

black  snake 
black  snake 
emu 

Murri 
Murri 
Murri 

kangaroo 

opossum 

iguana 

Matha 
Matha 
Matha 

iguana 
iguana 
kangaroo 

Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 
Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 
Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 

iguana 
iguana 
kangaroo 

Kubbi 
Kubbi 
Kubbi 

kangaroo 

opossum 

iguana 

Kubbitha  iguana 
Kubbitha  iguana 
Kubbitha  kangaroo 

Murri  and  Matha 
Murri  and  Matha 
Murri  and  Matha 

iguana 
iguana 
kangaroo 

The  Kamilaroi  tribes  extend  over  some  eight  hundred 
miles  north  and  south,  but  in  the  following  passages  I  speak 
of  those  more  particularly  in  the  south,  and  of  times  as  far 
back  as  seventy  years  ago. 

Mr.    C.    Naseby  ^    says   that  "  wives    were   not   obtained 

^  Per  Dr.  John  Frazer. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  205 


among  the  Kamilaroi  by  betrothal,  gift,  barter  or  exchange 
of  a  female  relative.  If  a  white  man  took  to  wife  a  native 
woman,  he  gave  to  the  parents  as  barter,  blankets,  hatchets, 
shirts,  trousers,  etc.,  but  a  black  man  gave  nothing.  The 
Murri^  has  a  right  to  choose  a  wife  from  the  class  permitted 
to  him,  by  the  native  laws.  He  comes  to  an  unmarried 
woman  whom  he  fancies,  and  says, '  Ngaia  kulade  kiira  inula 
yaralla,'  that  is  to  say,  '  I  myself  wife  will  take  (steal)  by 
and  by.'  This  he  says  in  the  presence  of  the  woman's 
parents,  and  they  cannot  refuse  his  demands.  They  wait 
until  he  comes  and  takes  her.  If,  however,  her  relations 
find  that  his  hands  are  stained  with  blood  of  her  kindred, 
then  they  object  to  her  marriage.  In  such  a  case  the  Murri 
comes  by  stealth  and  usually  alone,  and  carries  her  off. 
Her  relations,  ascertaining  where  he  is  camped,  send  a 
message  to  him  and  demand  that  he  shall  meet  their 
champion  in  single  combat.  This  he  must  do  if  he  wishes 
to  retain  his  wife.  It  might  be  that  the  man,  being  a 
warrior,  would  openly  go  to  the  camp  of  her  parents,  and, 
taking  her,  offer  to  fight  any  man,  the  best  in  her  tribe.  If 
a  fight  ensued,  the  matter  ended  there  ;  but  if  no  one  of  her 
relatives  would  venture  the  combat,  they  would  sneak  after 
him,  and  watch  so  as  to  kill  him  if  possible  when  asleep  or 
when  stooping  to  drink. 

"  The  relatives,  wishing  to  have  her  back,  might  also  wait 
till  the  two  were  camped  alone,  and  go  and  take  her  away 
by  force,  her  husband  being,  however,  permitted  to  retain 
her  if  he  could  make  good  his  claim  by  superior  prowess. 
This  procedure  would  not,  however,  be  adopted  when  the 
two  were  at  the  great  camp.  The  Murri,  exercising  his 
right  of  taking  a  wife,  can  compel  the  woman  to  go  with 
him,  and  if  necessary  beat  her.  When  a  Murri  goes  to  take 
a  wife  by  force,  he  is  accompanied   by  his  comrades,*  who 

•  The  word  Murri  as  used  here  means  "aboriginal  man"  in  the  Kamilaroi 
language,  bul  cannot  be  properly  used,  as  I  have  observed  it  to  be  by  some  writers, 
as  a  general  term  for  an  Australian  alxjrigine.  There  is  not  any  such  compre- 
hensive term. 

*  In  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  native  tribes,  these  must  lie  men 
who  might  have  lawfully  married  her,  and  may  have  been  at  the  same  Bora 
as  himself. 


2o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

on  this  occasion  have  access  to  her.  In  any  set  fight  between 
him  and  her  kindred  the  weapons  would  be  agreed  upon. 
If  a  single  combat,  it  would  be  club  and  shield  ;  but  if 
otherwise,  he  would  have  to  defend  himself  against  several 
spears  thrown  at  him  all  at  once.  If  he  is  defeated,  and 
unable  to  fight  any  longer,  he  loses  her.  It  was  only  the 
great  warriors  and  the  head  men  who  had  more  than  one 
wife." 

Mr.  Naseby  further  remarks,  "  One  of  my  black  servants 
had  been  with  me  about  six  years,  and  was  now  getting  to 
be  near  thirteen  years  of  age,  a  time  when  a  black  boy 
thinks  of  getting  married.  I  knew  the  feeling  to  be  so 
strong  in  the  aboriginal  nature  that,  if  not  indulged,  the  boy 
would  run  away.  I  therefore  said,  '  Wait,  Georgic,  until  we 
get  to  the  Gwydir  (we  were  then  at  Maitland),  and  you  shall 
have  a  gin.' '  Accordingly  when  we  reached  Yaggabri, 
George  went  by  my  directions  to  the  camp,  and  chose  a 
wife  according  to  the  Kamilaroi  practice,  and  brought  her 
with  him  on  the  return  trip  of  the  dray  to  Maitland. 
Scarcely,  however,  had  I  and  my  party  left  on  the  return 
journey  to  Maitland  than  a  band  of  blacks  was  seen  following 
the  drays,  and  with  loud  voices  and  hostile  demeanour 
demanding  that  Georgie  should  give  back  his  wife.  This 
I  was  very  unwilling  to  permit,  because  I  knew  that  thereby 
I  should  lose  a  very  valuable  servant.  The  blacks  still 
continued  to  follow  ;  and  after  a  few  days  I  held  a  parley 
with  them,  and  learned  that  Georgie  was  not  entitled  by 
their  laws  to  have  a  wife,  because  he  had  not  attended 
enough  Boras,  and  therefore  was  liable  to  be  put  to  death, 
and  they  would  do  so  as  soon  as  the  white  man  was  not 
there  to  protect  him.  By  my  influence  and  kindness  I 
succeeded  in  pacifying  them.  They  returned  home  and 
Georgie  was  safe." 

This  account  shows  to  us  the  custom  from  which  the 
often -accepted   account   of  Australian    marriages  has  been 

'  Gin  means  "woman"  or  "wife."  It  appears  as  din  in  the  Port  Jackson 
vocabularies,  and  lias  now  been  carried  by  white  settlers  and  their  black  boys  to 
distant  parts.  I  found  it  once  included  in  a  vocabulary  sent  to  me  from  the 
Darling  River  back  country.  On  querying  it,  my  correspondent  inquired,  and 
corrected  the  error  by  inserting  the  word  belonging  to  that  language. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  207 


derived  by  writers,  who  have  not  known  the  actual  facts 
of  forcible  abduction  of  wives  in  the  Kamilaroi  tribes. 
English  writers  have  followed  these  statements  and  have 
assumed  that  it  was  the  universal  custom  to  obtain  a 
wife  in  Australia  by  lying  in  wait  for  some  woman,  no 
matter  which,  knocking  her  down  with  a  club  and  carrying 
her  off. 

Mr.  Naseby  also  said  that  it  was  not  lawful  to  marry 
a  "  female  cousin,  or  a  half-sister  ;  but  the  former  did  not 
seem  half  so  shocking  as  the  latter."  The  unfortunate  use 
of  our  terms  of  relationship  when  speaking  of  aboriginal 
customs  or  practice  is  the  frequent  cause  of  misunderstanding. 
For  instance,  our  term  cousin  includes  two  distinct  relation- 
ships, according  to  the  aboriginal  manner  of  counting  them, 
namely,  that  of  the  children  of  two  or  more  brothers,  or  of 
two  or  more  sisters,  which  is  that  of  brother  and  sister  ;  and 
that  of  the  children  of  a  man  on  the  one  side,  and  the 
children  of  his  sister  on  the  other,  who  are  in  a  quite  different 
relation  to  the  former.  I  take  Mr.  Na.seby's  female  cousin 
to  mean  one  of  the  latter,  because  he  says  that  such  a 
marriage  would  be  to  them  less  shocking  than  that  with 
a  half-sister,  which  might  be  one  of  the  former. 

Mr.  Cyrus  E.  Doyle  says:  "The  Northern  Kamilaroi 
placed  great  emphasis  on  this,  that  a  Dilbi  could  not  marry 
a  Dilbi,  nor  a  Kupathin  a  Kupathin. 

"  A  widow  did  not  by  any  Kamilaroi  law  belong  to  her 
deceased  husband's  brother.  She  accompanied  the  tribe  in 
its  wanderings,  and  got  her  own  living.  She  might  indeed 
go  of  her  own  accord  as  the  wife  of  some  great  man,  warrior 
or  headman,  some  of  whom  had  four  or  five  wive.s,  and 
were  considered  rich  in  proportion  to  their  number. 

"  But  an  unmarried  woman  might  be  taken  in  the 
tribal  manner  by  any  man  who  was  not  too  nearly  related 
to  her. 

"  The  punishment  for  adultery  was  that  when  a  woman 
was  taramu,  that  is,  shifty,  wanton,  adulterous,  the  husband 
complained  to  his  kindred,  who  carried  the  matter  before 
the  headman,  and  if  the  charge  was  found  to  be  true,  her 
punishment  was  to  be  taken  without  the  camp,  and  to  be 


2o8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

handed  over  to  all  comers  for  that  night,  and  her  cries  were 
not  heeded, 

"  Women  were  lent  to  friends,  or  to  friendly  visitors  from 
a  distance,  but  it  had  to  be  with  the  consent  of  the  woman. 
If,  however,  the  husband  consented,  the  woman  submitted  to 
his  will. 

"  A  female  captive  would  be  the  property  of  her  captor, 
if  she  were  of  the  proper  class-name  ;  but  in  any  case  he 
must  be  a  noted  fighting- man  to  be  allowed  to  have  more 
than  one  wife.  If  the  woman  did  not  belong  to  the  proper 
class,  he  had  to  give  her  back  to  her  relations. 

"  If  a  man  among  the  Kamilaroi  took  a  woman  to  wife 
contrary  to  the  tribal  laws,  her  kindred  would  complain  to 
the  local  division  to  which  he  belonged,  and  they  were  bound 
to  take  the  matter  up.  If  they  did  not  do  this,  a  fight 
would  be  sure  to  arise  between  members  of  the  two  sub- 
classes concerned.  In  some  cases,  however,  if  a  man 
persisted  in  keeping  a  woman  as  his  wife  who  was  of  one 
of  the  sub-classes  with  which  his  sub-class  could  not  marry, 
he  was  driven  out  of  the  company  of  his  friends.  If  that 
did  not  induce  him  to  leave  the  woman,  his  male  kindred 
followed  him  and  killed  him.  The  female  kindred  of  the 
woman  also  killed  her," 

The  Kamilaroi  of  the  Gwydir  River  appear  to  have 
been  exceptionally  severe,  for  the  penalty  of  death  was 
inflicted  by  the  tribe  upon  a  man  who  spoke  to,  or  had 
any  communication  with,  his  wife's  mother.^ 

To  the  west  and  south-west  of  the  Kamilaroi  are  the 
Wiradjuri,  whose  class  system  is  almost  identical  with  that 
of  the  former,  and  is  given  in  Chapter  III. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  a  full  statement  of  the 
intermarriages  and  the  descents  of  all  the  totems  given  for 
the  southern  branch  of  this  tribe.  Those  which  I  obtained 
are  noted  in  the  following  statement,  and  were  given  me 
by  one  of  the  Wiradjuri,  a  man  of  the  Murri  sub-class  and 
red  kangaroo  totem. 

'  Cyrus  E.  Doyle. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


209 


WIRADJURI  TRIBE 
Southern  Branch 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

(Aa) 

{Bd) 

(Be) 

Yibai 

eagle- 
hawk  (i) 

Kubbitha    bush-rat  (5) 

Murri  and  Matha 

bush- 
rat  (5) 

Yibai 

mallee-hen 

Kubbitha    flying- 
squirrel 

Murri  and  Matha 

flying- 
squirrel 

Yibai 

opossum 

Kubbitha    bush-rat 

Murri  and  Matha 

bush-rat 

Yibai 

opossum 

Kubbitha    flying- 
squirrel 

Mnrri  and  Matha 

flying- 
squirrel 

Wumbi 

blood- 
sucker 
lizard 

Matha         young  emu 

Kubbi  and  Kubbitha 

young  emu 

(B.) 

(AS) 

(Aa) 

Murri 

young 

Butha          blood- 

Yibai and  Yibatha 

blood- 

emu (3) 

sucker 
lizard  (8) 

sucker 
lizard  (8) 

Kubbi 

bush-rat 

Yibatha       eagle-hawk 

Wumbi  and  Butha 

eagle-hawk 

Kubbi 

flying- 
squirrel 

Yibatha       mallee-hen 

Wumbi  and  Butha 

maiiee-hen 

Kubbi 

bush-rat 

Yibatha       opossum 

Wumbi  and  Butha 

opossum 

Kubbi 

bandicoot 

Yibatha       opossum 

Wumbi  and  Butha 

o^xissum 

As  an  example  I  give  a  diagram  of  one  marriage  in 
each  class,  namely,  the  first  in  Yibai,  and  that  in  Murri. 


I) 

1  AG RAM 

XIII 

Viiai 

Afurri 

m.  Aa  I 
f.  Bds 

m.  Bf3 
f.  A*  8 

m.  and  f.  Be 

5 

m. 

and  r.  Aa  8 

etc.  etc. 

This  shows  that,  in  the  first  place,  descent  is  in  the 
female  line  ;  in  the  second,  that  while  the  class  and  the 
totem  descend  direct  from  mother  to  child,  the  sub-class 
is  alternatively  one  of  the  two  which  represent  the  class. 
Each  totem  is  restricted  to  marriage  with  certain  totems  of 
the  other  class,  and  not,  as  in  the  Dieri  tribe,  for  instance, 
allowed  to  marry  any  of  those  totems. 

P 


2IO        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  totems  were  given  to  me  in  the  manner  recorded, 
certain  of  them  being  said  to  belong  to  Yibai,  others  to 
Kumbo,  to  Murri,  and  to  Kubbi.  But  when  the  marriages 
and  descents  are  considered,  it  appears  that  the  totems  are 
common  to  the  pair  of  sub-classes  forming  a  class,  and  in 
the  successive  descents  belong  to  one  and  then  the  other. 
There  could  be  no  other  result  under  the  cross  descents  in 
the  sub-classes.  The  class  and  totem  never  change,  but 
the  sub-class  does.  The  point  of  importance  is  that  the 
totem  belongs  alternatively  to  each  of  the  sub-classes  ;  but 
I  have  not  been  able  to  find  an  explanation  for  the  state- 
ment which  is  constantly  made  that  such  and  such  totems 
belong  to  some  particular  sub-class,  unless  it  is  that  the 
individual  considers  that  his  totem  belongs  to  the  sub-class 
to  which  he  belongs,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  It  must  be 
noted  also  that  this  list  is  incomplete. 

A  statement  made  by  one  of  my  Wiradjuri  informants 
is  worth  recording,  as  showing  that  all  the  restrictions  or 
enlargements  of  privileges  are  the  result  of  thought.  He  said 
"  Kubbi-guro  (bush-rat)  and  Kubbi-butherung  (flying-squirrel) 
can  each  marry  Yibatha-gurimul  (opossum),  because  they  are 
very  near  to  each  other  in  the  Kubbi-budjan  "  (that  is  sub- 
class). It  was  also  said  that  Kubbi-bandicoot  cannot  marry 
Yibatha-opossum,  but  may  marry  Yibatha- kangaroo,  or 
Yibatha-mallee-hen  ;  but  for  this  no  reason  could  be  given 
other  than  "  our  fathers  said  it  was  so." 

There  is  always  a  difficulty  in  working  out  the  totemic 
marriages  unless  there  are  persons  present  (especially  old 
men  or  old  women)  of  the  different  sub-classes  and  totems. 
A  man  knows  with  which  his  totem  marries,  and  he  knows 
those  of  his  kindred  of  either  side,  but  less  of  more  distant 
persons.  My  Wiradjuri  informants  were  too  few  to  admit 
of  working  out  those  data  completely. 

One  point  must  be  noted,  namely,  that  the  totem  name 
passes,  at  each  level  in  a  generation,  from  the  sub-class  of 
the  mother  to  that  of  the  child. 

Among  the  southern  Wiradjuri,  girls  are  promised  by 
their  fathers  to  the  sons  of  other  men,  the  children  being 
very  young.      When  the  boy  is  old  enough  to  marry,  that  is 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


when  his  beard  has  grown  again  after  the  Burbuiig  ceremony, 
and  the  consent  of  the  kindred  on  both  sides  has  been  given, 
he  fetches  his  promised  wife,  and  usually  her  brother  returns 
with  him  to  his  part  of  the  tribe,  and  receives  the  sister  in 
exchange.  This  exchange  of  sisters  was  called  "  Gun-gun- 
mur."  ,  At  times  when  the  father  of  a  girl  refused  to  give 
his  consent  to  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  to  some  man, 
she  eloped  with  him  ;  and  if  they  could  remain  away  for  a 
long  time,  say  a  year,  they  were  forgiven  on  their  return. 

In  the  Baraba-baraba  tribe,  which  was  probably  an  off- 
shoot of  the  Wiradjuri,  the  marriages  in  the  sub-classes  were 
as  follows,  according  to  Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron  : — 


Yipai  and  Butha 
Muri  and  Kubetha 


Wumbai  and  Yipatha 
Kubi  and  Matha 


This,  however,  requires  further  confirmation,  being  quite 
contrary  to  the  general  class  law. 

In  the  northern  section  of  the  Wiradjuri,  whose  country 
is  on  the  Lachlan  River,  the  rules  of  marriage  and  descent 
have  marked  differences  from  those  of  the  southern  Wirad- 
juri or  the  Kamilaroi. 

The  marriages  and  descents  are  shown  in  the  subjoined 
table,  which  exhibits  both  the  regular  and  the  anomalous 
marriages  : — 


MARRIAGES    AND   DESCENTS,    WIRADJURI    TRIBE, 
LACHLAN    RIVER! 


Male 

M 

iirrics 

Children  are 

Ipai 

mallee-hen 

Kubbitha 

black  duck 

The  children  are   always 

Ipai 

or 
padi -melon 

Kubbitha 
Kubbitha 

red  kangaroo 
lace-lizard 

of  the    complementary 
sub  -  class    to    that    of 

or  (anomalous) 

their    mother,    and    of 

Matha 

bandicoot 

her  totem. 

Ipai 

opossum 

Kubbitha 
Matha 
.Matha 
Matha 
or  (an 

bandicoot 
black  duck 
red  kangaroo 
snake 
omalous) 

'   A.  L.  P.  Cameron. 


212        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 


MARRIAGES  AND  DESCENTS,  WIRADJURI  TRIBE, 
LACHLAN  Rl\ER— continued 


Male      • 

Marries 

Children  are 

Kumbo 
Kumbo 

mallee-hen 

or 
emu 

Matha          red  kangaroo 
Matha          black  duck 
Matha          snake 

or  (anomalous) 
Kubbitha     bandicoot 

Kumbo 

opossum 

Matha          bandicoot 
Kubbitha     black  duck 
Kubbitha     red  kangaroo 
Kubbitha     lace-lizard 
or  (anomalous) 

o 

S 

v  .a 

Murri 
Murri 

Murri 

red  kangaroo 
black  duck 

or 
snake 

Butha           mallee-hen 
Bulha           emu 

or  (anomalous) 
Ipatha          opossum 

III 

rt   O  ♦- 

Murri 

bandicoot 

Ipatha          mallee-hen 
Ipatha          padi-melon 

or  (anomalous) 
Butha           opossum 

g     U     0 

Kubbi 
Kubbi 

Kubbi 

red  kangaroo 
black  duck 

or 
lace-lizard 

Ipatha          padi-melon 
Ipatha          mallee-hen 

or  (anomalous) 
Butha           opossum 

E 

1 

Kubbi 

bandicoot 

Ipatha          opossum 
Butha           mallee-hen 
Butha           emu 
or  (anomalous) 

There  is  another  totem  belonging  to  Ipai  and  Kumbo, 
which  Mr.  Cameron  was  unable  to  obtain. 

The  class  system  has  been  given  in  the  previous  chapter. 

The  peculiar  feature  in  these  marriages  is  that  a  man  is 
permitted  to  marry  into  both  of  the  sub-classes  of  the 
opposite  class — that  is,  in  fact,  to  revert  partially  to  the  old 
law  of  the  classes.  But  it  may  be  perhaps  done  from  other 
reasons — for  instance,  the  small  number  of  the  people  of 
certain  totems  compelling  those  who  otherwise  would  have 
married  in  accordance  with  the  general  rule  of  the  sub- 
classes   to    follow   the    older    law.       This    will    come    again 


V  MARRIAGE  RULES  213 

under  notice  in  considering  the  marriage  rules  of  the  tribe 
adjacent  to  the  northern  Wiradjuri,  namely,  the  Wonghibon. 

The  exceptional  marriages  of  this  branch  of  the 
Wiradjuri  may  be  illustrated  by  two  diagrams,  showing 
first  the  marriage  of  Ipai-mallee-hen  with  Kubbitha-black- 
duck,  which  is  according  to  the  usual  law  of  the  sub-class  ; 
second,  the  marriage  of  Ipai-mallee-hen  with  Matha- 
bandicoot,  which  is  indeed  contrary  to  the  law  of  the 
sub-classes. 

The  following  diagram  will  show  how  these  unusual 
marriage  rules  work  out : — 

Diagram  XIV 
m.  Aa  I  m.  Aai 

f.  Hi/ 3  f.  B72 

m.  and  f.  Br  3  m.  and  f.  B</2 

etc.  etc. 

The  letters  and  numerals  are  those  attached  to  the  class, 
sub-class,  and  totem  in  the  table  in  Chapter  III. 

Whatever  the  marriages  are,  the  children  take  that 
sub-class  name  which  they  would  have  under  the  usual 
marriage  law ;  that  is,  Matha's  children  are  Kubbi  and 
Kubbitha  of  the  same  totem  as  their  mother.  The 
difference  is  that  under  the  usual  marriage  of  Ipai  with 
Kubbitha  his  children  would  be  Murri  and  Matha. 

To  the  north  of  the  country  of  the  Lachlan  Wiradjuri 
there  is  the  Wonghibon  tribe,  which  in  fact  appears  to  be  a 
branch  of  the  former  under  another  name.  The  sub-classes 
are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Wiradjuri,  but  the  marriages  of 
the  sub-classes  differ  in  their  arrangement  from  the  rules  of 
the  southern  Wiradjuri  and  the  Kamilaroi,  but  agree  with 
the  practice  just  mentioned  of  their  neighbours,  the  northern 
Wiradjuri.  The  subjoined  table  gives  them  as  made  out 
by  Mr.  Cameron  and  carefully  revised  by  me. 

The  diagrammatic  statement  of  the  Wonghibon  class 
system  is  as  follows.  The  two  primary  classes  are  Ngielbu- 
murra,  which  divides  into  Ipai  and  Kumbo,  and  Mukumurra, 
which  divides  into  Murri  and  Kubbi. 


214        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch 


WONGHIBON  CLASS  SYSTEM* 


Classes. 

Sub-Classes. 

Totems. 

Ngielbumurra-! 
MukumurraJ 

Ipai 
Kumbo 
Murri 
Kubbi 

Mallee-hen 

Emu 

Opossum 

Black  duck 
Bandicoot 
Red  kangaroo 

The  marriages  and  descents  are  as  follows,  including 
the  anomalous  unions,  which  are  marked  *.  The  normal 
marriages  are  placed  first. 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Ipai 

mallee-hen 

Kubbitha 
♦Malha 

black  duck 
kangaroo 

*Malha 

bandicoot 

E 

Ipai 

emu 

Kubbitha 

black  duck 

o 

Kubbitha 

bandicoot 

c 

*Matha 

kangaroo 

CD 

Ipai 

opossum 

Kubbitha 

kangaroo 

♦Matha 

black  duck 

"ta  ■" 

*Matha 

l)andicoot 

O  T". 

Kumbo 

mallee-hen 

Matha 

black  duck 

c  V 

♦Kubbitha 

bandicoot 

it 

♦Kubbitha 

kangaroo 

g,2 

Kumbo 

emu 

Matha 

black  duck 

*^ 

Matha 

bandicoot 

^  ^ 

♦Kubbitha 

kangaroo 

Kumbo 

opossum 

Matha 

kangaroo 

£  § 

♦Kubbitha 

black  duck 

2 

♦Kubbitha 

bandicoot 

^ 

u 

Murri 

kangaroo 

Butha 
♦Ipatha 
♦Ipatha 

opossum 
mallee-hen 

emu 

'  A.  L.  P.  Cameron. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


215 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Murri 

bandicoot 

Butha 

emu 

. 

*Ipatha 

mailee-hen 

J 

♦Ipatha 

opossum 

•J" 

Murri 

black  duck 

Butha 

mallee-hen 

-Si 

Butha 

emu 

♦Ipatha 

opossum 

1^^ 

Kubbi 

wild  duck 

Ipatha 

mallee-hen 

1^^ 

Ipatha 

emu 

*   c   S5 

♦Butha 

opossum 

»    rt   S 

tt  '0  v. 

Kubbi 

bandicoot 

Ipatha 

emu 

♦Butha 

ojwssimi 

c  *" 

♦Butha 

mallee-hen 

2i 

Kubbi 

kangaroo 

Ipatha 

opossum 

1 

♦Butha 

mallee-hen 

♦Butha 

emu 

H 

A  diagram  constructed  as  in  the  case  of  the  Wiradjuri 
shows  similar  features, 

Mr.  Cameron  directed  my  attention  about  the  year  1883 
to  the  difference  in  the  marriage  arrangements  of  the  Wonghi- 
bon  from  those  of  the  Kamilaroi,  and  said  that  he  had  made 
every  endeavour  to  discover  whether  there  was  any  mistake, 
but  found,  after  inquiry,  that  the  statements  were  correct. 
His  Wathi-wathi  informant  at  that  time  told  him  that  if  a 
Wongi  went  to  the  Wiradjuri  for  a  wife,  the  difficulty  could 
be  got  over  by  considering  the  totemic  names  of  the 
individuals.^ 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  child  always  takes  the 
mother's  totem,  and  that  the  sub-class  of  the  child  is  the 
fellow  sub-class  to  that  of  the  mother,  the  two  together 
representing  their  class.  What  appears  to  have  been 
intended  by  this  arrangement  is  that  a  wider  choice  should 
be  given  for  marriage,  for  the  result  as  to  descent  is  that,  as 
the  class  and  totem  follow  the  female  line  direct,  it  is  the 
sub-class  which  changes  in  each  level  of  a  generation.  The 
marriages  are  within  the  class,  and  the  older  law  is  followed 

•  See  also  A.  L.  P,  Cameron's  "Notes  on  Some  Tribes  of  New  South  Wales," 
Jotini.  Anthrop.  Inst.  January  1885,  p.  350. 


2i6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

as  to  the  class  and  totem.  The  explanation  may  perhaps 
be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  totems  are  irregularly  distri- 
buted. For  instance,  about  Mossgiel  the  opossum  totem  is 
almost  extinct,  while  in  other  parts  of  the  Wonghibon 
country  its  members  are  numerous,  and  the  emu  totem  and 
mallee-hen  are  correspondingly  scarce.  Such  at  any  rate  was 
the  explanation  given  by  the  Wonghi  informants,  who  also  said 
that  the  action  of  these  two  totems  is  to  cause  the  bearer  to 
change  his  "  budjan "  (totem),  as  then  Ipai-willi  (opossum) 
ranks  as  a  Kumbo,  and  Kumbo-willi  as  Ipai  ;  Murri-gurung 
(bandicoot)  as  Kubbi,  and  Kubbi-gurung  as  Murri.  This 
explanation  seems  to  me  to  be  probable,  since  we  know  that 
the  native  tribes  will  resort  to  rearrangements  of  the  class 
divisions  and  totems  to  meet  marriage  difficulties,  or  will 
even  alter  the  status  of  relationships  of  two  or  more  persons 
for  that  purpose. 

In  the  Geawegal  ^  tribe  on  the  Hunter  River  (which  had 
the  Kamilaroi  sub-class  names)  marriage  was  ordinarily  by 
gift  of  the  woman,  and  by  consent  of  both  fathers,  if  the 
future  husband  was  a  boy  or  youth,  and  would  be  arranged 
years  before  the  time  for  marriage.  Girls  were  also  affianced 
in  childhood  to  men  much  older  than  themselves.  Wives 
were  also  exchanged  by  their  husbands.  Some  strong  or 
popular  men  had  a  number  of  wives.  Elopement  of  un- 
married girls  was  occasional,  and  in  such  cases  the  man 
would  have  to  fight  the  intended  husband  or  his  male 
relatives.  If  he  proved  to  be  the  victor,  he  kept  the  girl. 
She  in  such  cases  ran  the  risk  of  being  beaten  by  her 
relatives,  or  even  killed.  In  the  event  of  female  captives 
being  taken,  they  belonged  to  their  captors,  if  of  a  class 
from  which  wives  might  be  legally  taken  by  them.  If  of  a 
forbidden  class,  my  informant  thought  the  captor  might 
make  an  exchange  with  some  one  of  the  proper  class  who 
had  a  woman  at  his  disposal.  The  class  of  the  female 
captive  would  be  known  if  she  belonged  to  any  of  the  tribes 
with  which  the  Geawegal  were  familiar.  If  the  class  could 
not  be  ascertained,  then  there  would  not  be  any  objection  to 
her  captor  retaining  her. 

1  G.  W.  Rusden 


MARRIAGE  RULES  217 


As  a  man  had  power  of  life  and  death  over  his  wife,  so  in 
the  process  of  violent  seizure  he  assumed  the  same  power.  The 
only  risk  he  ran  was  from  the  rage  of  her  relatives  and  friends. 

In  all  cases  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  a  woman 
should  be  married  according  to  tribal  law.  The  contrary 
would  be  inconceivable  to  the  Geawegal.  For  instance,  were 
the  question  put,  "  Could  not  so-and-so  marry  ?  "  mentioning 
some  man  or  woman  of  forbidden  class,  the  reply  would  in- 
variably be,  "  It  cannot  be." 

Occasionally  saturnalia  took  place,  at  which  wives  were 
exchanged  or  lent  to  young  men,  so  that  intercourse  was 
almost  promiscuous,  subject  to  the  class  laws.  When  they 
admitted  this  to  my  informant  they  did  so  as  if  they  were 
ashamed  of  it.  This  occurred  not  in  the  daylight  but  at 
night.      It  might  not  happen  for  years. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  more  than  the  fact  that 
the  Wollaroi,  Unghi,  and  Bigambul  tribes  have  the  same 
sub-class  names  as  the  Kamilaroi,  and  that  their  marriage 
laws  are  practically  the  same  as  those  of  the  latter. 

In  the  Wollaroi '  it  is  the  mother  who  promises  her 
daughter  to  some  man  of  her  selection,  but  to  this  rule  there 
is  the  exception  that  brothers  also  exchanged  their  sisters 
without  the  direct  intervention  of  their  mothers.  Here  we 
may  perhaps  see  the  transition  from  the  older  practice  of  the 
Lake  Eyre  tribes,  where  the  two-class  system  still  maintains, 
to  that  of  tribes  in  which  the  father  disposed  of  his  daughter, 
or  of  the  daughter  of  his  younger  brother. 

In  cases  of  elopement  with  the  wife  of  another  man,  it 
was  the  Wollaroi  practice  for  the  abductor  to  stand  out 
before  a  number  of  the  woman's  kindred,  who  were  armed 
with  spears,  he  having  merely  a  spear  for  his  protection,  to 
turn  them  aside.  If  he  passed  through  the  ordeal  safely  he  was 
allowed  to  keep  the  woman.  Among  the  Wollaroi  a  widow 
went  to  the  brother,  own  or  tribal,  of  her  deceased  husband. 

In  the  Unghi  tribe  it  was  the  father  who  promised  his 
daughter  when  she  was  a  child,  and  she  remained  with  her 
parents  till  ^e  was  marriageable,  which  was  usually  about 
the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen,  when   the  man  to  whom  she 

'   R.  Crowthers. 


2i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 


had  been  promised  went  for  her,  accompanied  by  his  totemic 
comrades.^ 

The  sub-class  marriage  rule  in  the  Unghi  tribe  was  as 
follows  : — 


Male 

Marries                                         Children  are 

Hipai 
Kombo 
Muri 
Kttbi 

Kubutha 
Mata 
Butha 
Hipatha 

Muri  and  Mata 
Kubi  and  Kubutha 
Hipai  and  Hipatha 
Kombo  and  Butha 

The  system  of  four  sub-classes  with  descent  in  the 
female  line  is  succeeded  in  southern  Queensland  by  four 
other  sub-classes  with  male  descent.  These  continue  to 
somewhere  about  Rockhampton,  and  are  succeeded  by  tribes 
having  also  four  sub-classes,  but  with  descent  in  the  female 
line.  Of  these  latter  I  take  the  Kuinmurbura  tribe  which 
lived  in  the  peninsula  between  Broad  Sound  and  Shoalwater 
Bay  as  the  representatives.  The  following  table  gives  the 
marriages  of  the  sub-classes  and  totems  : — 

KUINMURBURA    MARRIAGES    AND    DESCENTS'^ 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Kurpal 

eagle-hawk 

Karilburan 

hawk 

Munal 

hawk 

Kurpal 

laughing- 
jackass 

Karilburan 

curlew 

Munal 

curlew 

Kuialla 

eagle-hawk 

Munalan 

hawk 

Karilbura 

hawk 

Kuialla 

laughing- 
jackass 

Munalan 

curlew 

Karilbura 

curlew 

Karilbura 

curlew 

Kurpalan 

laughing- 
jackass 

Kuialla 

laughing- 
jackass 

Karilbura 

water 

Kurpalan 

eagle- hawk 

Kuialla 

eagle-hawk 

Karilbura 

wallaby 

Kurpalan 

laughing- 
jackass 

Kuialla 

laughing- 
jackass 

Karilbura 

hawk 

Kurpalan 

eagle-hawk 

Kuialla 

eagle-hawk 

Munal 

curlew 

Kuiallan 

laughing- 
jackass 

Kurpalan 

laughing- 
jackass 

Munal 

water 

Kuiallan 

laughing- 
jackass 

Kurpalan 

laughing- 
jackass 

Munal 

hawk 

Kuiallan 

eagle-hawk 

Kurpalan 

eagle-hawk 

1  A.  L.  P.  Cameron. 


2  W.  H.  Flowers. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  219 


Marriage  in  these  tribes  was  commonly  by  betrothal  of  a 
girl  often  when  a  mere  infant.  The  actual  ceremony  of 
betrothal  is  by  the  male  cousin  ^  of  the  girl  taking  her  to 
the  camp  of  her  future  husband,  and  seating  her  there  at  his 
back,  and  close  to  him  ;  who,  however,  according  to  their 
etiquette,  takes  no  notice  of  her.  She  is  painted  and 
decorated  with  feathers  in  her  hair.  After  a  time  her 
conductor  takes  the  feathers  from  her  hair  and  fastens  them 
in  that  of  the  man,  and  then  leads  her  back  to  the  camp  of 
her  father.  The  feathers  remain  in  the  man's  hair  for  about 
a  day. 

The  future  husband,  after  this,  sends  presents  of  fruit, 
game,  or  other  food  to  her,  and  she  goes  occasionally  to  eat 
it  at  his  camp.  When  her  father  thinks  she  is  old  enough 
to  be  married,  he  informs  her  betrothed  and  sends  the  girl 
out  to  gather  food  with  the  other  women.  The  man  having 
painted  himself,  and  taken  his  weapons,  follows  her,  accom- 
panied by  all  the  unmarried  men  in  the  camp  of  the  same 
class  and  totem  as  himself  to  help  him.  When  they  find 
her,  he  goes  forward,  and  takes  her  by  the  hand,  telling  her 
that  he  has  come  for  her.  The  women  at  once  surround 
her  and  try  to  prevent  him  from  taking  her.  She  cries,  and 
tries  to  get  away  from  him,  and  if  she  does  not  like  him 
she  bites  his  wrist,  thus  refusing  him.  If  she  does  this  he 
throws  her  from  him  and  leaves  her.  After  a  few  days,  he 
again  tries  her,  and  if  he  can  prevent  her  from  biting,  his 
wrist,  or  if  she  does  not  do  so,  he  calls  the  men  to  help  him, 
and  while  they  hold  the  women,  he  takes  her  away  to  his 
camp.  The  next  day  he  goes  out  to  hunt,  and  in  his 
absence  the  men  who  had  gone  with  him  to  take  her,  and 
who  are  of  the  same  class  and  totem  as  himself,  go  to  his 
camp  and  have  access  to  her  as  a  right.  They  and  her 
husband  are  all  in  the  relation  of  Durki  to  her.  One  may 
infer  that  this  custom  is  a  vestigiary  one,  indicating  a 
time  when  there  was  group-marriage  in  this  tribe,  and  that 
the  relation  of  Durki  is  analogous  to  that  of  Noa  in  the 
Dieri  tribe.  Indeed,  such  customs  may  explain  the  jus 
priuiae  noctis,  which  Lord   Avebury  truly  explains  as  expia- 

'  This  cousin  is  the  mother's  brother's  son  or  the  father's  sister's  son. 


220        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

tion  for  individual  marriage.  In  the  Kurnandaburi  tribe 
we  see  the  practice  in  force  on  the  occasion  of  marriage, 
and  also  sub  rosa  between  the  woman  and  her  husband's 
brothers,  while  it  is  in  the  Dieri  tribe  a  living  fact  among 
all  the  tribes-people  as  one  of  the  two  recognised  forms  of 
marriage,  namely  that  following  the  Tippa-vialku  relation, 
and  the  other  the  Pinaurn  marriage  ceremony. 

In  the  Kuinmurbura  tribe  a  widow  went  to  the  elder 
brother  {inurang)  or  the  younger  {woern)  of  her  deceased 
husband. 

A  man  had  to  make  presents  of  game  to  the  parents  of 
his  wife.  When  a  Kuinmurbura  married  a  woman  of 
another  tribe  he  lived  with  hers,  but  would  not  take  part 
in  intertribal  fights  with  his  own,  on  such  occasions  being 
merely  a  spectator.  A  female  captive  was  the  property  of 
her  captor,  if  of  the  proper  class  and  totem. 

The  marriages  and  descents  in  the  Kongulu  tribe,  which 
occupied  the  country  between  the  Mackenzie  River  and  the 
lower  Dawson,  were  as  follows '  : — 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Bunya 
Tarbain 
Kaiyara 
Bunjur 

Kaiyaragun 
Bunjurgun 
Bunyagun 
Tarbaingun 

Bunjur  and  Bunjurgun 
Kaiyara  and  Kaiyaragun 
Tarbain  and  Tarbaingun 
Bunya  and  Bunyagun 

Bunya  and  Tarbain  represent  the  class  name  Yunguro, 
and  Kaiyara  and  Bunjur  the  class  Wutthuru. 

I  have  no  information  as  to  the  totem  marriages  ex- 
cepting that  the  totem  always  descends  from  the  mother 
to  her  child.  The  child  therefore  takes  its  mother's  class 
and  totem  and  the  sub-class  name  which  with  hers  re- 
present her  class.      Descent  is  therefore  in  the  female  line. 

Inland  from  the  Kuinmarbura  tribe  there  are  other 
tribes  with  another  set  of  class,  sub-class,  and  totem  names. 
The  most  southern  representative  of  these  is  the  before- 
mentioned   Emon  tribe.     The  best  example  of  these  tribes 

^   "  Girroonbah,"  The  Qiieenslander^  28th  December  1895. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


221 


known  to  me  is  the  Wakelbura,  whose  class-names,  sub- 
classes, and  totems  I  have  given. 

The  rules  of  marriage  and  descent  in  this  tribe  have  a 
peculiar  feature  in  the  totem  of  the  child  being  different 
both  to  that  of  its  father  and  its  mother.  Unfortunately 
Mr.  J.  C.  Muirhead  was  unable  to  give  me  a  reason  for  it, 
and  the  tribe  is  now  extinct. 

The  following  table  was  compiled  from  data  furnished 
by  the  marriages  and  descents  in  four  generations  in  one 
case,  five  in  another,  and  two  in  a  third.  The  two  class 
names  are  omitted. 


WAKELBURA   TRIBE 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Kurgilla 

opossum 

Obuan        emu 

Wungo  and  Wungoan 

carpet- 
snake 

Kurgilla 

plains-turkey 

Obuan        carpet-snake 

(?) 

Kui^illa 

plains-turkey 

Obuan        hill  kangaroo 

(?) 

Kurgilla 

small  honey- 
bee 

Obuan         carpet-snake 

(?) 

Banbe 

iguana 

Wungoan   carpet-snake 

Obu  and  Obuan 

emu 

Wungo 

carpet-snake 

Banbean     iguana 

Kurgilla  and  Kurgillan 

opossum 

Obu 

emu 

Kurgillan   opossum 

Hanbe  and  Hanbean 

emu 

This  list  is  evidently  incomplete  as  to  the  totems,  and 
apparently  incorrect  in  giving  emu  as  a  totem  of  both  the 
Banbe  and  Obu  sub-classes  ;  but  it  shows  in  all  instances 
that  the  child  was  of  another  totem  than  that  of  either  of  its 
parents.  The  only  instances  of  a  similar  kind  known  to 
me  are  those  of  the  Arunta  and  other  Central  Australian 
tribes  made  known  by  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen.  There 
is  no  possibility  now  of  ascertaining  what  the  belief  of  the 
Wakelbura  was  as  to  the  re-incarnation  of  the  ancestor. 

I  have  again  to  point  out  that  although  it  is  said  that 
a  certain  totem  belongs  to  a  certain  sub-class,  in  fact  it 
belongs  to  both  of  the  pair,  but  alternates  in  succeeding 
generations  from  one  to  the  other. 

A  wife  was  not  obtained  in  this  tribe  in  any  other  way 
than  by  betrothal,  excepting  the  rarer  cases  of  elopement 
and  capture. 


222        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

It  was  the  mother  who  chose  a  husband  for  her  daughter 
as  soon  as  she  was  born — some  man  who  had  been  a  true 
friend  to  her  father,  brother,  husband,  or  some  one  near  to 
her,  in  the  hour  of  need  ;  and  the  man  to  whom  she  was 
promised  took  her  away  when  she  was  old  enough  to  carry 
his  baggage  about  the  bush,  that  is,  about  twelve  years  of 
age.  In  cases  of  elopement  the  man  to  whom  she  was 
promised  claimed  her  from  the  man  she  had  gone  with, 
and  there  was  a  set  fight  between  them.  The  victor  kept 
her,  but  there  were  usually  two  or  three  fights  before  the 
matter  was  settled.  If,  after  she  had  consented  to  marry 
the  man  to  whom  she  had  been  promised,  she  eloped  with 
some  other  man,  of  the  proper  class  and  totem,  or  even  if 
she  had  been  compelled  to  go  by  force,  she  would  be  almost 
cut  to  pieces  by  her  own  brothers,  and  father's  brothers,  as 
also  by  the  men  of  her  promised  husband's  totem.  Her 
brothers  might  even  almost  kill  her,  because  they  would 
thereby  lose  the  woman  by  whose  exchange  they  would 
obtain  a  wife  for  one  of  them. 

The  tribal  law  was  extremely  strict  as  to  unlawful 
connections  or  elopements  between  persons  too  nearly 
related  to  each  other.  Such  persons  would  be,  for  instance, 
those  whom  we  call  cousins,  both  on  the  father's  and  the 
mother's  side,  or  who  are  of  the  class,  sub-classes,  or  totems 
which  do  not  intermarry.  For  instance,  if  a  Kurgilla-tunara 
man  ran  off  with  an  Obuan-wallaroo  (hill  kangaroo)  woman 
who  ought  properly  in  due  course  to  have  married  a  Kurgilla- 
burkum  (plains-turkey)  man,  his  own  and  tribal  brothers  would 
be  against  him,  as  well  as  the  brothers  own  and  tribal  of  the 
woman,  and  those  also  of  the  promised  husband.  In  short, 
he  would  have  to  fight  with  all  of  them.  They  would  fight 
in  the  camp,  or  wherever  they  happened  to  meet.  Commonly 
the  woman's  brothers  called  on  the  promised  husband,  or,  if 
she  was  married,  on  her  husband,  to  come  forward  and  fight 
the  offender,  but  sometimes  it  happened,  if  the  promised 
husband  was  a  very  strong  or  able  fighting  man,  that  he 
would  follow  the  man  who  had  taken  his  promised  wife  to 
his  camp.  The  mother  of  the  woman  would  cut,  and  perhaps 
kill  her,  and  the  man's  own  brothers  would  challenge  him  to 


MARRIAGE  RULES  223 


fight  them,  by  throwing  boomerangs  and  other  weapons 
about  him.  If  he  did  not  accept  the  challenge,  they  would 
turn  on  the  woman,  who  unless  she  could  escape  into  the 
bush,  would  be  probably  crippled,  or  even  killed,  by  their 
weapons.  The  next  proceeding  would  be  that  the  promised 
husband  and  the  offender  would  fight,  both  being  fully  armed 
with  shield,  spear,  boomerang,  and  knife.^  The  offender  in 
such  a  fight  would  be  sure  to  come  off  worst,  for  even  if  he 
proved  to  be  a  better  man  than  his  antagonist,  the  brothers 
of  the  latter,  or  even  his  own  brothers,  would  attack  him 
and  he  would  be  probably  gashed  with  their  knives, 
since  his  own  brothers  would  not  mind  if  they  killed 
him,  for  under  such  circumstances  his  death  would  not  be 
avenged. 

When  in  such  a  fight  the  missile  weapons  were  exhausted, 
recourse  was  had  to  knives.  A  dense  ring  of  blacks  gener- 
ally formed  round  the  combatants,  to  see  fair  play,  and  to 
separate  the  men  when  unfair  cutting  was  attempted.  But 
even  here  the  proper  husband  would  have  an  advantage,  if 
any  advantage  were  possible,  for  the  blacks  know  before- 
hand which  is  the  better  man,  and  the.  lookers-on  would  take 
care  that  the  offender  did  not  do  any  serious  harm  to  his 
adversary.  If  he  did,  then  his  relations  would  suffer  for 
him,  when  their  tribe  came  on  a  visit,  for  their  motto  is 
"  Death  for  death,"  unless  it  were  in  some  fair  fight, 
or  between  comrades  over  some  game  killed.  In  such  a 
case  the  man  who  killed  the  other  would  be  only  roughly 
spoken  to. 

But  in  such  a  fight  as  that  above  mentioned,  if  one  of 
the  combatants  were  in  such  a  position  that  his  antagonist 
could  put  his  knife  against  a  vital  part,  at  the  same  time 
calling  to  him  to  give  in,  and  he  would  not  yield,  he  would 
probably  plunge  his  knife  into  him  and  kill  him.  It  is  in 
such  a  case  that  the  relatives  of  the  man  in  danger,  if  they 
observed  it,  would  close  in  and  separate  the  two,  taking  their 
knives  from  them,  and  thereby  end  the  fight. 

But  the  woman   would    in    any  case   receive    a   terrible 

*  These  knives  were  formerly  made  of  stone,  but  in  later  times  iron  knives 
were  used,  sometimes  made  of  a  sheep-shears  blade  and  ground  to  a  sharp  edge. 


224        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

punishment  by  cutting  with  their  knives,  and  would  be  com- 
pelled to  go  with  her  promised  husband,  or  her  husband 
if  she  were  married,  or  she  might  even  be  killed  in  the 
fight. 

At  festive  meetings  of  the  tribe,  men  of  the  same 
totem  exchanged  wives  for  two  or  three  days,  and  they 
also  lent  women  to  friendly  visitors,  who  must  of  course 
be  of  the  proper  class,  sub-class,  and  totem.  A  widow 
went  to  the  brother  of  the  deceased  husband,  or  if  there 
were  not  any,  to  his  best  friend  of  the  same  totem.  The 
brother  must  be  of  the  same  mother,  but  might  be  by  a 
different  father. 

A  child  of  an  unlawful  amour,  or  unlawful  marriage,  if 
it  were  not  killed,  would  be  called  Kongara,  that  is,  mongrel. 
For  instance,  if  the  mother  were  Wungoan,  and  the  child 
were  a  boy,  he  would  be  Wungo,  but  would  not  have  any 
totem. 

In  this  tribe,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  example, 
there  was  group-marriage.  Say  that  there  are  seven  men, 
all  Mallera-kurgilla-small-bee,  and  who  are,  some  own,  and 
some  tribal  brothers.  .One  of  these  men  is  married,  his  wife 
being  Wutheran-obukan-carpet-snake.  None  of  the  other 
six  men  is  married.  They  and  the  woman  married  to  their 
brother  call  each  other  husband  and  wife,  and  the  six  rnen 
have  and  exercise  marital  rights  as  to  her.  Her  child  calls 
each  of  these  six  men  father,  as  well  as  the  seventh  man,  who 
is  the  actual  husband  of  its  mother,  and  the  six  men  have 
to  protect  the  child.  This  clearly  is  a  form  of  the  Pirrauru 
marriage  of  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes.  The  importance  of  this 
occurrence  in  a  tribe,  so  distant  from  those  of  Lake  Eyre,  is 
that  the  Wakelbura  is  one  of  a  large  group  of  tribes  who 
have  the  same  organisation. 

In  cases  where  there  was  an  elopement  between  persons 
of  two  different  tribes,  the  woman  was  sometimes  left  with 
her  abductor  if  she  survived  the  cutting  she  received  ; 
but  he  would  then  probably  leave  his  own  tribe  and  join 
some  other,  for  otherwise,  whenever  his  and  her  tribe 
met,  there  would  be  renewed  contests  between  his  and 
her  relatives. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  225 


If  a  man  from  a  distant  tribe,  say  from  the  Barcoo  or 
the  Mackenzie  River,  running  off  with  an  unmarried  Wakel- 
bura  woman,  got  away  safely  to  his  distant  home  before  the 
woman's  kindred  could  catch  him,  and  meanwhile  her  promised 
husband  died,  the  other  must  forsake  his  own  tribe  and  join 
hers,  or  her  relatives  would  call  him  to  combat.  In  all  cases 
known  of  this  nature  the  man  forsook  his  tribe,  and  by 
doing  so  he  was  safe  from  molestation  by  them,  and  his  own 
kindred  would  not  feel  any  anger  against  him.  From  this 
time  forward  he  would  be  called  by  the  name  of  the  tribe 
which  he  had  joined,  and  would  take  part  in  their  ceremonies 
and  fight  on  their  side,  even  against  his  former  tribe. 

Women  were  captured  by  tribes  who  came  from  a  dis- 
tance to  attend  an  Uinba  or  other  ceremony,  and  this  was 
done  when  the  ceremonies  were  over,  and  the  people  were 
going  homewards.  That  is,  the  visitors  captured  women 
from  their  hosts,  not  the  latter  from  the  former.  Their  turn 
came  when  they  were  visitors.  But  it  is  not  always  that 
the  opportunity  offer,  for,  the  practice  being  well  known,  the 
women  were  closely  guarded.  Yet  at  times  a  woman  would 
wait  till  the  visitors  were  two  or  three  days  distant  on  their 
homeward  route,  and  then  follow  the  man  she  had  become 
attached  to,  and  who  had  lingered  behind  for  her.  When 
she  overtook  him  they  hastened  forward  and  joined  the 
main  body. 

In  the  case  of  a  captured  woman,  her  captor  would  only 
keep  her  if  she  were  of  that  class  and  totem  with  which  his 
might  marry.  But  there  was  an  exception  to  this  general 
rule,  namely,  when  she  had  been  severely  cut  with  knives. 
The  issue  of  such  a  marriage  was  called  Ungkara  or  Ungura, 
also  meaning  mongrel. 

The  subjoined  table  shows  the  intermarriages  of  the 
Wakelbura  and  allied  tribes,  which  are  based  upon  locality, 
and  are  regulated  also  by  the  class  system  and  totems. 
Thus  both  the  social  and  the  local  organisations  govern 
marriage. 


226        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 


Tribe 

Obtains  wives  from 

Gives  wives  to 

I 

Wakelbura 

3  and    8 

2  and    3 

1 

2 

Auanbura                     i     , 

,     14 

S   . 

6 

3 

Mutherabura 

2    , 

.     13 

13    . 

I 

4 

Dorobura 

II    . 

>      12 

lO    , 

II 

5 

Tilbabura 

6    , 

,      8 

6    , 

2 

1 

6 

Terrabura 

8    , 

,        2 

5    . 

8 

7 

Mutabura 

8    , 

.    9 

9    . 

6 

8 

Kumbukabura 

6    . 

,      lO 

7    . 

I 

9 

Munkibura 

8    . 

>    II 

I    , 

4 
lO 

lO 

Boanbura 

4    . 

,     lO 

12     , 

" 

Bingabura 

1 1     1 

>      4 

II     , 

2 

12 

Babingbura 

3    . 

.    13 

3    . 

»3       ' 

1 

.3 

Buthalibura 

Not  asc( 

;rtained. 

In  seven  instances  there  is  reciprocity  between  one  of 
each  of  the  intermarrying  tribes,  in  one  between  both.  The 
latter  is,  I  think,  the  most  usual  custom. 

The  marriages  and  descents  in  the  Bnntamurra  tribe  of 
the  Bulloo  River  are  as  follows  :  ' — 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Gurgela 
Banbari 
Won  go 
Gulieru 

Guberugun 
Wongogun 
Banbarigun 
Gurgelagun 

Wongo  and  Wongogun 
Guberu  and  Guberugun 
Gurgela  and  Gurgelagun 
Banbari  and  Banbarigun 

This  falls  in  with  the  normal  marriage  system  of  the 
four  sub-class  tribes  with  female  descent. 

The  totemic  marriages  are  also  with  descent  in  the 
female  line,  the  child  taking  the  totem  of  its  mother.  But 
1  J.  H.  Kirkham. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  227 


there  is  the  same  pecuhar  statement  by  the  native  informant, 
that  certain  totems  belong  to  his  sub-class,  thus  dividing  the 
totems  into  four  groups,  while  the  totem  is  in  fact  attached 
to  one  sub-class  in  one  generation  and  to  the  other  in  the 
next.  This  is  seen  from  the  subjoined  diagram  of  marriage 
and  descent  in  this  tribe. 

Diagram  XV 
VVongo-opossum 


banbarigun-kangaroo 

G  urgela-kangaroo 
Guberugun-bandicoot 

Wongo-i)andicoot 

This  shows  that  while  the  sub-class  name  alternates  with 
each  generation,  the  totem  name  remains  fixed  in  the  female 
line  direct.  While  Gurgela-kangaroo  takes  the  fellow  sub- 
class name  to  that  of  his  mother,  he  takes  her  totem.  This 
is  one  of  those  points  which  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to 
satisfactorily  settle,  namely,  why  is  it  that  a  man  of  a  certain 
sub-class  claims  certain  totems  as  belonging  to  it  ?  It  seems 
that  he  sees  only  his  sub-class,  to  which  the  totem  certainly 
belongs  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  but  in  the  next  generation 
his  sister's  children  will  bear  it,  together  with  another  sub- 
class name. 

In  the  Dalebura  tribe  a  widow  went  to  the  eldest  brother 
of  the  deceased  husband,  not  necessarily  as  a  wife,  but  if 
not,  then  to  place  her  family  under  his  protection.  For 
instance,  if  there  were  a  daughter  who  had  been  betrothed 
by  the  deceased,  it  would  be  the  duty  of  the  brother  to  see 
that  the  promise  should  be  carried  out.  If  the  daughter 
were  not  betrothed,  then  the  brother  of  the  deceased  would 
have  the  disposal  of  her.  The  sons  of  the  widow  would  be 
protected  by  their  father's  brother.  This  arrangement  would 
be  of  advantage  to  the  widow's  brother-in-law,  because  as 
long  as  she  remained  under  his  care  he  would  have  another 
hand  to  assist  in  providing  the  daily  necessary  food.^ 

'  R.  Christison. 


228        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Tribes  with   Four  Sub-Classes  and  Male  Descent 

Tribes  organised  in  this  manner  are  found  in  southern 
Queensland,  extending  westward  from  the  coast,  between 
Brisbane  and  Port  Curtis,  as  far  at  least  as  the  Bunya  bunya 
Mountains, 

Fortunately  the  class  names  have  been  preserved  in  some 


FIG.   9. — A    WOMAN    OF   THE    DALEBURA    TRIBE. 

of  these  tribes  ;  for  instance,  in  the  Kaiabara,  who  lived  in 
the  Widji-widji  or  Bunya  Mountain  district.  The  two 
class  names  were  practically  those  of  the  Kamilaroi,  namely, 
Kubatine  and  Dilebi,  and  by  them  it  is  possible  to  make  a 
direct  comparison  of  the  rule  of  marriage  and  descent  in  the 
classes  and  totems  of  these  tribes.  The  sub-class  marriages 
are  as  follows  :  ^ — 

*  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


!29 


I 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Bulkoin 
Bunda 
Baring 
Turowain 

Turowain 
Baring 
Bunda 
Bulkoin 

Bunda 
Bulkoin 
Turowain 
Baring 

Bulkoin  and  Bunda  are  called  brothers,  so  are  also 
Baring  and  Turowain. 

Bulkoin  and  Bunda  are  the  subdivisions  of  Kubatine, 
and  Baring  and  Turowain  of  Dilebi.  The  following 
diagram  compares  the  Kaiabara  and  Kamilaroi  marriages 
and  descents  : — 

Diagram  XVI 

Kamilaroi  Kaiabara 

m.  Aa  m.  Aa 

ITtid  ITBd 


m.  and  f.  Be  m.  and  f.  Ai 

etc.  etc. 

It  is  clear  that  in  these  tribes,  while  the  class  name 
descends  from  father  to  child,  the  sub-class  name  of  the 
child  is  that  which,  together  with  that  of  its  father,  repre- 
sents the  class  of  the  latter.  Therefore  descent  is  in  the 
male  line.  The  sub-classes  of  this  tribe  are  the  equivalents 
of  those  of  the  Kamilaroi,  Bulkoin  and  Bunda  of  Ipai- 
Kumbo,  and  Baring  and  Turowain  of  Murri-Kubbi. 

But  when  one  comes  to  the  totemic  marriages,  a  peculiar 
feature  shows  itself.  The  following  table  was  carefully 
taken  down  from  the  statements  of  some  of  Mr.  Brooke's 
native  police,  as  to  themselves,  they  being  Kaiabara  : — 


Male 

Marries 

Child 

ren  are 

Bulkoin 

carpet-snake 

Turowain 

black  eagle- 
hawk 

Bunda 

white  eagle- 
hawk 

Bunda 

native  cat 

Hating 

rock  carpet - 
snake 

Bulkoin 

scrub  carpet- 
snake 

Baring 

turtle 

Bunda 

white  eagle- 
hawk 

Turowain 

black  eagle- 
hawk 

Turowain 

bat 

Bulkoin 

female     car- 
pet-snake 

Baring 

scrub  carpet - 
snake 

230        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

This  shows  that  while  there  is  male  descent  in  the  classes 
and  sub-classes,  it  is  in  the  female  line  in  the  totems,  with  the 
peculiarity  that  while  the  child  takes  the  same  beast  or  bird  as 
its  mother,  it  is  of  a  different  colour  or  gender.  Another 
peculiarity  is  that  the  same  totem  appears  to  belong  to 
Bulkoin  and  Baring,  that  is  to  both  classes.  This  suggests  an 
inaccuracy,  which  I  was  not  able  to  check. 

I  could  not  ascertain  whether  the  Kaiabara  marriage  law 
was  of  the  Urabunna  or  the  Dieri  type,  but  did  so  as  to  that 
of  the  Muruburra  tribe  living  at  the  White  Cliffs  at  Great 
Sandy  Island.  There  the  proper  wife  of  a  man  is  the 
daughter  of  his  mother's  brother.  The  following  instance 
shows  how  this  is,  the  man  in  question  being  Therwain- 
wurumi  (fire),  his  wife  being  Balgoingun,  and  his  son  being 
Baring.  His  wife  was  given  to  him  by  her  father .  Bunda, 
who  was  the  brother  of  Bundagun,  the  mother  of  Therwain- 
wurumi,  thus  : — 

Diagram  XVII 
Bundagun  -<-  sister brother  ->-  Bunda 

Therwain-wurutni  -<-  marriageable  ->  Balgoingun 

This  diagram  may  be  compared  with  those  given  of  the 
Urabunna  and  Dieri  rules. 

It  was  the  old  men  in  the  Kaiabara  who  instructed 
the  children  in  the  marriage  laws,  about  the  boundaries  of 
their  country,  and  what  they  might  eat.  The  boys  stood  in 
one  row  and  the  girls  in  another,  and  an  old  man  would  walk 
between  them  and  ask  the  boys  which  of  the  girls  they  would 
choose  for  a  wife.  If  they  selected  one  of  the  forbidden 
class,  they  were  abused  ;  but  if  of  the  right  one,  they 
were  praised. 

The  Kaiabara  had  an  ingenious  method  of  recording  the 
four  sub-classes  and  their  marriages  in  a  diagrammatic  form 
on  a  piece  of  wood,  about  four  inches  in  length,  as  figured 
on  next  page,  the  markings  being  made  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  represent  a  man  with  his  arms  crossed. 

The  family  represented  in  the  upper  quadrant  is  called 
Avang,  or  mother,   the  right-hand   quadrant    is    Yerome,  or 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


231 


father's  sister  ;  the  left-hand  one  is  Gumuii,  or  mother's 
brother ;  and  the  lower  one  Malauini,  or  husband.  No  reason 
could   be  given   for  these 


names  beyond  that  it  was, 
as  one  man  said,  "  Bunda 
and  Therwain  in  each 
family  speak  of  the  upper 
family  as  Avatig." 


Tribes  within  Fifty 
Miles  of  Mary- 
borough (Queens- 
land) 


Bee's -wax 


Bight  arm 


Baring  W 

Bunda  Vni 

Turowam  K 


Bunda  X 
Baring  XI 
BulkoinM 


'I  Bulkoin. 
B  Turowain 
M  Bunda 


TV  Turowain 
V  Bulkoin 
Vr  Baring 


These  tribes  have  the  same  two 
class  names,  Kupathin  and  Tilby,  as 
the  Kaiabara.  The  four  sub -classes 
are  also  the  same. 

Mr.  Harry  E.  Aldridge  sent  me  a 
number  of  tables  of  marriages  and 
descents  which  he  had  collected  in 
the  tribes  around  Maryborough,  and  on 
Frazer's  Island  (Great  Sandy  Island). 

These,  however,  differed  consider- 
ably amongst  themselves  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  sub-classes  and  in  the  marriages  and  descents.     So 
much  so  that  the  correctness  of  some  of  them  seemed  doubtful. 

One  of  them,  however,  was  seemingly  correct,  and  agreed 
with  those  of  the  Kaiabara  and  of  the  White  Cliff  tribe 
(Muruburra)  on  Great  Sandy  Island,  and  is  as  under  :— 

MARRIAGES    AND   DESCENTS    AT    MARYBOROUGH 
(QUEENSLAND) 


Beeswax 


KIG.    10.  —  KAIABARA    RECORD   OK 
THE    SLb-CLASS    NAMES. 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Balgoin 
Bunda 
Parang 
Theirwain 

Theirwain 
Parang 
Bunda 
Balgoin 

Bunda 
Balgoin 
Theirwain 
Parang 

232        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Marriages  occur  in  different  ways.  A  girl,  when  a  mere 
infant,  may  be  promised  to  some  suitable  man.  For  instance, 
a  young  man  may  distinguish  himself  in  some  manner,  as  a 
fine  dancer,  or  a  successful  hunter,  or  an  expert  fighting-man, 
or  in  some  other  manner.  Some  man  having  a  daughter  of 
that  sub-class  with  which  the  young  man  may  marry,  and  being 
pleased  with  him,  may  say  to  his  father,  "  I  have  a  daughter, 
and  will  give  her  to  your  son."  Or  he  may  say  so  to  some  man 
who  is  eminent  in  the  tribe,  and  whose  son  is  old  enough  to 
marry.  Taking  such  a  case  as  the  latter  as  an  instance,  when 
the  youth  in  question  has  been  admitted  to  the  privileges  of 
manhood  at  the  Dora  ceremonies,  and  sufficient  time  has 
elapsed  to  allow  his  beard  to  have  grown  again,  he  will  be 
allowed  to  take  the  girl  for  his  wife.  If  he  were  to  attempt  to 
do  so  before,  he  would  not  be  permitted,  and  the  girl's  father 
might  say  to  him,  "  Go  away  !  What  are  you  thinking  about 
—  taking  a  wife  without  any  hair  on  your  face  ?  " 

The  old  men  had  usually  several  wives  each,  but  always 
keeping  to  the  "  old  original  ones,"  or  rather  the  old  original 
ones  keeping  to  them. 

In  these  tribes  not  only  were  the  children  of  brothers, 
or  the  children  of  sisters  forbidden  to  marry,  being  too  near 
to  each  other,  but  the  children  of  a  man  and  those  of  his 
sister  were  also  forbidden  to  marry,  for  the  same  reason. 
But  it  sometimes  happened  that  two  persons  in  those  relation- 
ships fell  in  love  with  each  other,  and  ran  away  together. 
Such  cases  were  always  severely  punished.  In  one  instance 
the  girl  was  taken  away  twice  from  the  man,  and  both  were 
very  severely  dealt  with.  They  then  went  off  again,  and 
her  Kummi  (mother's  brother)  killed  her.  The  man  escaped 
and  left  his  district  for  some  years,  or  he  would  have  been 
killed  by  his  kindred. 

It  was  permitted  to  the  unmarried  girls,  if  they  wished  to 
do  so,  to  encamp  away  by  themselves  at  a  little  distance, 
or  they  and  some  widows  might  make  such  a  camp.  It 
would  face  away  from  the  main  encampment,  and  its  situa- 
tion is  a  sign  that  the  young  women  are  there  waiting  for 
the  young  men  to  come  and  court  them.  The  young  men 
visit  them,  and  a  couple,  a  girl  and  a  young  man,  will  often 


MARRIAGE  RULES  233 


be  in  the  girls'  camp  for  several  evenings  talking,  before  she 
will  consent  to  his  wishes.  This  practice  is  not  thought  to 
be  wrong  unless  it  is  done  so  openly  that  it  is  patent  to 
the  other  people,  when  the  young  couple  are  subject  to 
ridicule.  Any  girl  may  join  this  camp,  but  many  of  them 
do  not  do  so,  and  numbers  remain  perfectly  virtuous,  until 
their  promised  husband  fetches  them.  This  is  certain, 
because  such  things  are  the  subject  of  conversation. 

Of  course  the  young  man  and  woman  must  be  of  the 
proper  marriageable  class  and  eligible  on  the  score  of  relation- 
ship. Otherwise  it  would  be  considered  very  disgraceful. 
All  this  is  pretty  well  known,  because  they  talk  over  their 
amours  with  their  particular  friends. 

A  man  is  ruled  in  his  desire  for  a  particular  woman  by 
being  of  the  class,  sub-class,  and  totem  from  which  he  may 
lawfully  take  a  wife.  On  his  persisting  in  a  contrary  course, 
the  influence  of  the  members  of  the  tribe  would  be  brought 
to  bear  on  him,  and  on  these  occasions  of  debate,  each  man 
interested  would  make  a  speech,  sometimes  very  ably,  and 
standing  near  the  opening  of  his  hut,  grasping  his  spear  with 
one  hand  as  it  rested  on  the  ground. 

In  some  cases  a  girl  will  run  off  with  a  favoured  lover, 
rather  than  become  the  wife  of  the  promised  husband.  If 
the  couple  arc  then  captured,  or  if  they  return  voluntarily, 
the  young  man  has  to  fight  all  her  male  relatives  who  choose 
to  take  the  matter  up.  The  girl  is  at  the  same  time  severely 
beaten  by  her  kindred.  But  a  young  man,  who  has  thus 
carried  off  a  girl,  may  placate  her  relations,  and  also  her 
promised  husband,  if  he  sends  presents  to  them  before  he 
returns. 

If  it  were  a  married  woman  who  eloped  with  some  man, 
they  would  be  followed,  and  if  caught  would  be  both  nearly 
killed.  Such  women  as  these,  who,  as  the  blacks  say,  are 
always  "  looking  out  for  men,"  and  who  become  notorious 
for  their  immorality,  are  looked  down  upon  as  the  prostitutes^ 
of  the  tribe,  and  are  lent  to  visitors  as  temporary  wives. 

There  is  a  curious  ceremonial  practice  connected  with 
marriage  which  occurs  at  the  termination  of  the  Dora 
ceremonies.      At  the  end  of  the  dancing  corrobboree,  held 


234        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


on  the  last  evening,  the  assemblage  disperses,  spreading  out 
like  a  fan  from  the  ceremonial  ground,  and  it  is  then  that 
the  young  men,  of  both  sides  of  the  community,  lie  in  wait 
in  the  darkness  to  capture  women,  by  rushing  out  and  carry- 
ing them  off  as  they  return  to  their  camps.  This  has  to  be 
done  quietly,  otherwise  the  girls'  friends  will  return  and 
rescue  them.  If  the  attackers  feel  themselves  sufficiently 
strong  in  numbers,  they  defend  their  captures  ;  if  not,  they 
let  them  go,  and  escape  for  their  lives,  sometimes  receiving 
very  ugly  wounds.  The  women  captured  may  be  cither 
married  or  single,  but  a  preference  is  always  given  to  the 
latter,  and  husbands  with  any  regard  for  their  wives  always 
keep  a  good  look-out  on  them  at  this  time,  for  otherwise  it 
is  more  than  probable  that  they  would  be  missing.  A 
young  man  "  from  information  received  "  gets  the  right  girl. 
He  also  asks  when  he  has  seized  her  of  what  class  she  is, 
and  if  not  suitable,  immediately  lets  her  go.  His  object  is 
to  get  a  wife  of  the  right  class.  When  these  tribelets  meet, 
there  is  always  some  one  who  knows,  and  can  tell  every- 
thing about  the  other  classes,  sub-classes,  or  totems,  as  well 
as  his  own. 

When  a  man  marries  a  woman  from  a  distant  locality, 
he  goes  with  her  tribelet,  and  identifies  himself  with  her 
people,  and  this  is  a  rule  with  very  few  exceptions.  He 
becomes  part  of  her  family  and  kindred.  In  the  event  of 
a  ceremonial  combat  occurring,  between  the  tribe  of  the 
woman  and  that  of  her  husband,  the  latter  acts  as  a  blood 
relation  of  her  people,  and  will  fight  with,  and  even  if  possible 
kill,  his  own  relations  of  his  former  tribe.  A  father  and  his  son 
have  been  seen  fighting  under  such  circumstances,  and  the  son 
would  have  killed  his  father,  if  he  had  not  been  prevented. 

Fighting  being  a  pastime  with  them,  a  few  blows  or  a 
deep  cut  or  two  are  considered  as  nothing,  and  the  men 
being  in  first-rate  physical  condition,  the  wounds  soon  heal. 

A  man  travelling  from  a  distance,  who  can  speak  the 
language  of  the  people  in  a  place  at  which  he  arrives,  and 
thus  make  himself  known  to  them,  will  be  hospitably  treated. 
People  meeting  him  and  who  do  not  know  him  will  ask 
him.  who  he  is.      He  says,  for  instance,  "  I  am  Bunda  ;  the 


MARRIAGE  RULES  235 


name  I  received  at  the  Dora  is  so  and  so."  He  tells  them 
who  his  father  is,  and  what  his  name  is,  and  where  his 
mother  came  from,  and  some  one  is  almost  sure  to  know 
something  about  him.  If  he  cannot  satisfactorily  tell  them 
who  he  is,  he  will  be  almost  certainly  killed.  But  a  man 
who  has  satisfactorily  made  himself  known,  and  who  is  a 
fine  dancer  or  singer,  or  a  great  fighting-man,  or  has  some 
special  qualifications,  may,  if  he  is  generous  and  makes 
presents  to  his  entertainers,  be  provided  with  a  temporary 
wife,  it  being  of  course  understood  that  she  is  of  the  class 
with  which  his  own  intermarries.  Such  a  woman  would, 
however,  be  one  of  those  who,  the  blacks  say,  are  "  always 
looking  out  for  men."  The  old  men  would  order  her  to  go 
with  the  stranger,  and  if  she  objected,  it  would  be  the  worse 
for  her.  A  man  would  arrange  this,  and  thus  reserve  his 
wife  from  the  stranger,  and  any  intercourse  between  a 
stranger  and  a  woman  without  the  consent  of  her  husband 
would  cause  trouble.  The  husband,  father,  or  brother  of 
such  a  woman  would  receive  the  presents  if  any  were  given. 

Sometimes  men  were  lured  in  this  way  to  be  killed. 
In  one  case  two  black  boys  were  so  lured  and  killed,  who 
were  in  Mr.  Aldridge's  service,  and  their  bodies  were  cut  up 
and  left  lying  on  a  log. 

A  man  might  in  the  manner  described  make  himself 
known  over  a  tract  of  country  having  a  radius  of  about 
one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  Maryborough,  that  is 
to  say,  to  the  confines  of  the  next  tribe  to  that  to  which  the 
man  belonged.  But  say  that  two  tribes,  a  hundred  miles  apart, 
met  at  a  corrobboree,  or  a  ceremonial  fight,  and  that  some 
man  of  one  tribe  was  much  admired  for  his  dancing  or  other 
qualifications,  a  man  of  the  other  tribe  might  say  to  him, 
"  I  will  give  you  my  daughter."  The  other  man,  agreeing, 
would  return  with  him,  and  thus  pick  up  another  language, 
which  would  carry  him  another  hundred  or  a  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  further  out.  He  could  then  go  still  further, 
and,  by  making  presents,  or  by  making  himself  agreeable  to 
the  tribe  in  some  way,  they  also  would  receive  him  hospitably, 
and  entertain  him  as  before  mentioned. 

A  woman  taken  in  a  hostile  attack  belonged  to  the  man 


236        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

who  captured  her,  if  she  were  of  the  proper  class.  Nearly 
all  their  fights  were  the  result  of  the  capture  of  women,  either 
after  the  ceremonial  combats,  or  in  raids  made  for  that 
special  object. 

A  brother  of  a  deceased  man  could  take  the  widow, 
and  he  might  be  either  the  elder  or  the  younger  brother,  but 
he  must  be  of  the  same  father  and  mother,  or  of  the  same 
father  and  another  mother,  of  the  same  mother  and  another 
father,  and  not  merely  a  tribal  brother.  When  a  man  took 
his  deceased  brother's  widow  he  was  compelled  to  support 
the  children  who  went  with  her  to  his  camp.  A  widow 
without  children  was  looked  upon  as  the  same  as  an  un- 
married girl.  A  w^idow  with  children  was  considered  as 
independent  of  the  control  of  father  or  mother.  A  widow 
always  remarried,  but  was  not  considered  such  a  prize  as  an 
unmarried  girl. 

A  man  and  his  wife's  mother  would  never  look  at  or  in 
the  direction  of  each  other.  The  man  would  hide  himself 
anywhere  or  anyhow  if  she  were  about.  This  relation  was 
called  Mulong. 

Such  were  the  marriage  customs  of  the  tribes  within  a 
radius  of  about  fifty  miles  from  Maryborough.  On  the 
coast  northwards,  and  in  the  Wide  Bay  district,  the  customs 
were  as  follows  :  ^ — 

Female  children  were  always  allotted  to  certain  men 
when  they  were  very  young  by  their  parents,  and  a  girl  so 
allotted  was  obliged  to  go  with  the  man  when  he  came  for 
her.  This  relationship  was  called  Kunki.  If  the  girl  had 
no  Kunki,  and  her  father  was  a  vigorous  fighting-man,  the 
young  men  on  the  look-out  for  a  wife  would  solicit  his 
consent  ;  and  he  giving  it  to  some  one,  his  daughter,  if  she 
liked  the  young  man,  would  comply.  But  sometimes  she 
liked  a  man  to  whom  her  father  objected,  and  the  difference 
was  settled  by  a  fight  between  the  men.  If  the  girl  had 
been  promised  to  another  man,  the  suitor  had  to  settle 
matters  with  him.  But  eloping  with  a  woman,  and  then 
keeping  out  of  the  way  as  long  as  possible,  was  as  common 
a  way  as  any  of  obtaining  a  wife.       Even  if  such  a  couple 

*  E.  Palmer. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  237 


remained  away  a  long  time  it  generally  ended,  when  they 
returned  and  met  her  father,  by  an  all-round  fight.  Clubs 
and  shields  were  the  weapons  used  on  each  other,  and  knives 
were  used  on  women,  being  drawn  across  thick  or  muscular 
parts,  such  as  the  thigh,  with  a  long  gash.  Another  way  of 
obtaining  a  wife  was  by  the  exchange  of  a  female  relative. 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe,  which  occupied  the  country  about 
Brisbane,  girls  were  betrothed  when  three  or  four  years  of 
age.  Thus  wives  were  obtained  by  gift  or  the  exchange  of 
female  relations,  sometimes  also  by  abduction.  Girls  who 
had  been  betrothed  were  given  to  their  future  husbands  when 
of  nubile  age.  When  the  Wide  Bay,  Burnet,  and  Brisbane 
tribes  met  for  the  purpose  of  "  making  young  men,"  the 
daughters  of  one  tribe  were  given  to  the  great  men,  or  their 
sons,  of  the  other  tribe.  In  such  a  marriage  all  the  respective 
relations  on  each  side  were  considered  to  be  related  to  each 
other,  and  could  travel  in  the  country  of  either  tribe  without 
danger.  A  woman  was  sometimes  given  as  a  reward  for 
some  heroic  action.  In  making  these  marriage  arrangements 
the  mothers  were  seldom  or  never  consulted.  The  marriage 
ceremony  was  merely  that  the  father  and  mother  led  their 
daughter  up  to  their  son-in-law's  hut,  and  left  her  there. 
From  this  time  the  mother  and  her  daughter's  husband  never 
looked  at  or  spoke  to  each  other.  It  was  considered 
monstrous  for  a  man  to  marry  his  brother's  widow,  and  it 
was  never  done,  but  he  had  a  voice  in  giving  her  to  another.' 

Tribes  with  Eight  Sub-Classes  and  Male  Descent 

North  of  Lake  Eyre,  and  commencing  at  the  northern 
boundary  of  the  Urabunna  tribe,  there  is  a  vast  series  of 
tribes  with  descent  in  the  male  line.  They  extend  not  only 
through  Central  but  also  into  Northern  Australia. 

Not  only  have  these  tribes  the  four  sub-class  system, 
but,  as  mentioned  in  a  previous  chapter,  there  has  been  a 
further  division,  making  eight. 

Those  in  Central  Australia  which  are  represented  by  the 
Arunta  are  described  fully  in  the  great  work  of  Spencer  and 

^  Tom  Petrie. 


238        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Gillen.  I  have  to  thank  Professor  Spencer  for  the  further 
details  as  to  the  marriage  regulations  of  both  the  four  and 
the  eight  sub-classes. 

The    following   table   gives    the    Arunta    marriages    and 
descents  : — 


Male 

Marries 

Children  are 

Panunga 
Bulthara 
Purula 
Kuniara 

Purula 
Kumara 
Bulthara 
Panunga 

Bulthara 
Panunga 
Kumara 
Purula 

This  gives  a  rule  similar  to  that  of  the  Kaiabara  sub- 
classes, in  which  descent  is  in  the  male  line.  In  this  case 
also  the  child  is  of  that  sub-class  which  is  the  fellow  of  that 
of  its  father. 

But  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  point  out  that  to  a 
Panunga  man,  for  instance,  the  Purula  women  are  divided 
into  two  groups,  the  members  of  one  of  which  stand  to  him 
in  the  relationship  of  Unawa,  whom  he  may  marry,  while 
the  members  of  the  other  stand  in  the  relationship  of  Unkulla 
whom  he  may  not  marry.^  Each  of  the  four  sub-classes  is 
thus  divided  into  two  other  sub-classes,  with  one  of  which 
marriage  is  forbidden.  Thus  a  Panunga  man  is  only 
permitted  to  marry  a  woman  of  one  of  the  two  divisions  of 
Purula.  In  the  northern  part  of  the  tribe  matters  are 
simplified  by  the  existence  of  distinct  names  for  the  two 
groups.  In  the  following  table  the  eight  divisions  thus 
arising  are  laid  down,  and  it  will  be  noted  that  the  old  name 
is  used  for  one  half  and  a  new  name  adopted  for  the 
other." 

Diagram  XVIII.— THE  ARUNTA  TRIBE 

A-! 

" "  '  IV 


I  jj  /3.   Bulthara 


,  4.   Apungata 


5.  Purula 

6.  Ungalla 

7.  Kumura 

8.  Umbitchana/ 


III.-j 


Although  the  existence  of  classes  is  not  known,  it  may 
be  said  that  since  the  eight  sub-classes  are  derived  from  the 
'   op.  cit.  p.  71.  -Op.  cit.  p.  72. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


239 


segmentation  of  four  sub-classes,  so  these  latter  were  formed 
by  the  division  of  two  primary  classes.  The  letters  A  and 
B  have  been  added  by  Professor  Spencer  to  indicate  the 
original  two  classes.  By  making  use  of  letters  and  numbers 
as  before,  the  manner  in  which  the  marriages  and  descents 
run  in  the  eight  sub-classes  of  the  Arunta  tribe  can  be  shown 
in  the  same  way  as  I  have  done  in  the  cases  of  the  two-class 
and  the  four  sub-class  systems.      I  give  one  in  each  of  class 

A  and  class  B. 

Diagram  XIX 

B.JII.  5. 

A.  I.  i. 

I 

B.  IV.  7- 

A.  ii.  3.' 


A. 

I. 

I. 

R 

Ill 

5- 

A. 

II. 

4. 

B. 

Ill 

1 

8. 

A 

i 
I. 

I. 

B.  III.  5. 


It  is  now  evident  that  the  child  of  the  man  Panunga  and 
the  woman  Purula  takes  the  name  of  one  of  the  divisions  of 
the  sub-class  which  with  that  of  its  father  represents  the 
primary  class.  So  also  with  the  other  divisions  of  the  sub- 
classes, which  can  easily  be  worked  out  in  the  same  manner. 
It  is  also  clear  that  descent  in  the  male  line  governs  this 
system. 

In  order  to  complete  the  view  of  the  systems  of  these 
northern  tribes,  I  add  particulars  of  the  Waramunga  tribe, 
which  has  the  eight  sub-classes  fully  developed,  and  also  a 
peculiarity  which  occurs  in  some  northern  tribes,  namely  that 
there  are  different  names  for  the  sisters  and  brothers.  The 
following   table    has    been    kindly   given    me    by    Professor 


Spencer  : — 

Diagram 

X.\ 

'I 

/T 

( 

Thapanunga 
Napanunga 

Chupilla 
Naralu 

} 

A    - 

u,. 

( 

Chunguri 
Namagili 

Thungali 
Nungali 

} 

r 

Kabidji 
Nalkari 

Thakomara 
Nakomara 

} 

f 

Thapungerta 
Napungerta 

Chambein 
Laml)ein 

\ 
] 

'1 

\  III.' 


J" 


ivJ 


240        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


The   diagram  of  the   Arunta   marriages   serves    for  the 
Waramunga  also. 

Diagram  XXI 
Waramunga  Marriage  Kiile 
m.  Kabidji  m.  Thakoniara 

f.  Nakomara  f.  Nalkari 

m.  Chunguri  m.  Chupilla  • 


m.  Kabidji  j  f.  Nalkari      m.  Thakomara 


f.  Nakomara 


It  is  as  well  to  mention  here  that  the  difficulty  which  is 
felt  in  cases  of  tribes  which  have  not  classes  or  totems  affect- 
ing descent,  is  not  experienced  with  the  tribes  now  under 
consideration.  Their  ceremonies  and  customs  make  clear 
the  manner  in  which  the  sub-classes  are  associated  in  pairs, 
thus  indicating  the  original  divisions. 

A  comparison  with  former  diagrams,  especially  those  of 
the  Urabunna  and  Dieri,  shows  that  the  Waramunga  rule  is 
precisely  that  of  the  latter.  The  term  of  relation  "  Wankili  " 
is  the  same  as  the  Dieri  "  Kami,"  and  the  term  "  Kula-kula  " 
is  the  same  as  "  Noa."  Thus  the  children  of  Chunguri  are 
born  into  the  marriageable  group  formed  by  the  children  of 
Chupilla,  and  Chunguri  and  Chupilla  are  also  groups  in  a 
wider  sense. 

These  examples  will  suffice  to  show  the  sequence  of 
changes  made  in  the  class  systems  of  the  tribes  of  Central 
Australia  from  the  starting-point  of  the  two  class  divisions. 
These  changes  have  been  made  intentionally  for  some 
purpose,  and  the  remarkable  feature  is  the  uniformity  of  the 
progression,  and  the  vast  extent  of  country  over  which  these 
changes  have  been  made. 

Tribes  with  Anomalous  Class  Systems  and 
Female  Descent 

In  Victoria,  south  of  the  River  tribes,  before  spoken  of, 
there  were  the  tribes  which  have  been  referred  to  as  the 
Wotjo  nation.      Of  these   I   take  the    Wotjobaluk    tribe  as 


MARRIAGE  RULES  241 


the  principal  example,  perhaps  not  so  much  because  I  have 
taken  their  name  for  the  nation,  as  that  I  have  more 
knowledge  of  them  than  of  the  other  tribes. 

In  this  tribe  the  two  class  names  are  Krokitch  and 
Gamutch,  which  are  the  equivalents  of  the  classes  Kilpara 
and  Mukwara,  and  descent  is  in  the  female  line.  The  rule 
of  marriage  is  shown  in  the  diagram  given  in  the  next  page. 
But  it  must  be  noted  that  in  all  marriages  the  first  question 
is,  "  What  is  the  Yauerin  "  of  the  respective  parties  ?  Ymurin 
is  flesh,  but  also  class,  and  totem,  for  no  marriage  could  take 
place  if  the  class  or  totem  were  wrong  on  either  side.  Further 
than  this  there  are  the  prohibited  degrees  of  relationship 
to  be  considered.  Among  these  I  found  much  stress  laid 
on  that  of  Marrup  and  Marrup-gurk,  that  is,  the  son  or 
daughter  of  the  mother's  brother  or  the  father's  sister.  These 
and  their  respective  children,  as  far  as  they  can  be  traced, 
are  prohibited  from  intermarriage.  Another  restriction  de- 
pends on  locality,  for  a  man  cannot  marry  a  woman  from 
the  same  place  as  his  mother,  as  it  is  said  that  his  Yauerin 
is  too  near  to  that  of  those  there.  Hence  it  is  necessary 
that  a  wife  shall  be  sought  from  some  place  in  which  there 
is  no  Yauerin  near  to  his.  The  same  is  the  case  as  to  the 
woman. 

All  these  matters  having  been  considered,  the  initial 
step  is  by  the  mutual  betrothal  of  a  girl  with  some  boy  or 
man.  This  is  done  by  the  fathers,  and  their  consent  is 
essential.  Yet  it  is  the  respective  elder  brothers  who  make 
the  arrangements.  That  the  father  has  a  right  of  disposal 
is  shown,  however,  by  cases  in  which  he  has  by  his  own 
proper  motion  promised  his  daughter  to  the  son  of  some 
particular  friend. 

Such  matrimonial  arrangements  might  be  made  at 
any  time,  but  were  most  commonly  entered  into  at  the 
great  tribal  gatherings  for  ceremonial  or  festive  purposes, 
at  which  the  intermarrying  tribes  met. 

At  such  gatherings  there  was  a  place  called  Jim,  at 
which  the  men  assembled  to  talk  over  tribal  matters,  as 
when  some  man  had  committed  an  offence,  such  as  a 
breach  of  the  sexual   regulations  between   the  classes,  and 


242        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

it  was  here  that  matrimonial  matters  were  settled.  When 
the  time  arrived  for  the  people  to  return  to  their  homes,  the 
principal  Headman  lit  a  fire  at  the  ///;/,  around  which  all 
the  men  sat  down  promiscuously,  most  of  them  having 
things  which  they  had  brought  with  them  for  barter.  The 
Headman  would  commence  by  saying,  for  instance,  *'  You 
can  now  exchange  your  things  and  be  friends."  In 
anticipation  of  this  meeting  the  young  men  have  found 
out  the  unmarried  girls  who  have  not  been  promised,  and 
who  are  of  the  class  with  which  theirs  may  marry,  and 
also  from  places  from  which  a  wife  may  be  taken.  Besides 
this  such  marriages  were  discussed  beforehand  by  the  fathers 
of  the  marriageable  girls,  and  the  young  men  knew  well  the 
arrangements  which  would  be  sanctioned.  Two  such  young 
men  now  sit  down  beside  each  other,  and  on  the  announce- 
ment being  made,  one  hands  to  the  other  the  things  he 
» desires  to  exchange.  During  the  day  they  keep  together 
and  make  much  of  each  other.  Towards  evening  they 
have  become  good  friends,  and  one  will  say  to  the  other, 
"  I  will  give  you  my  sister  for  a  wife."  In  such  a  manner 
the  preliminary  steps  are  taken.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  these  are  the  elder  brothers  who  are  acting  as  proxies, 
so  to  sa}',  for  their  younger  brothers. 

The  following  is  a  case  which  I  investigated  in  order 
to  ascertain  the  precise  manner  in  which  the  respective 
marriages  had  been  brought  about : — 

Diagram  XXII 
I.   m.  Krokitch  2.   ni.  Krokitch  8.   m.  Gamutch  q.   m.  Gamutch 


3.   f.  Gamutch        4.   f.  Gamutcbgurk       10.   f.  Krokitchgurk      11.   i.  Krokitchgurk 


5.   m.  Gamutch         6.   f. 


7.   m.       12.   m,  krokitch  13.   f. 


14.   m. 


"Gamutchgurk — Gamutch  Krokitchgurk — Krokitch 

Nos.  I  and  2  are  brothers,  No.  i  being  the  elder.  So 
also  are  8  and  9,  the  former  being  the  elder.  No.  5  is  the 
son  of  the  elder  brother,  and  is  therefore  the  elder  brother 
of  6  and  7,  the  children  of  2  and  4  ;  for  the  children  of 
brothers  are  all   brothers  and   sisters.      No.  1 2  is  therefore, 


MARRIAGE  RULES  243 


for  the  same  reasons,  the  elder  brother  of  13  and  14.  It 
was  the  elder  brother  5  and  the  elder  brother  i  2  who  met 
in  the  manner  mentioned  at  the  fun,  and  agreed  to  exchange 
sisters  as  wives  for  their  younger  brothers. 

This  marriage  rule  of  the  VVotjobaluk  is  a  great  remove 
from  that  of  the  Urabunna,  as  it  disqualifies  not  only  those 
who  are  each  other's  proper  husbands  and  wives  according 
to  the  rule  of  that  tribe,  but  also  excludes  all  their  descend- 
ants, as  far  as  their  descent  can  be  counted.  In  order  to 
be  on  perfectly  safe  ground  in  such  an  important  conclusion, 
I  made  special  inquiries  ;  and  so  that  I  might  deal  with 
actual  facts,  I  tabulated  the  descents  of  several  of  the 
Wotjobaluk  families  to  ascertain  whether  any  of  the  wives 
were  in  the  relation  of  Marrup  to  their  husbands.  In  none 
of  them  did  I  find  this  to  be  the  case,  and  my  informants, 
after  long  consideration,  said  that  a  man  and  a  woman, 
being  Marrup  and  Marrup-gurk,  could  not  mix  their  flesh, 
their  Yauerin  being  too  near.  But  they  added  that  they 
remembered  that  one  or  two  cases  had  occurred  in  which 
such  a  marriage  had  been  permitted,  but  in  them  the  parties 
were  from  places  far  distant  from  each  other,  for  instance  the 
Wimmera  and  Murray  Rivers,  and  that  in  those  cases  their 
respective  parents  were  distant  tribal  brothers  and  sisters. 

The  Jupagalk,  a  tribe  adjoining  the  Wotjo  nation,  were 
however  more  decided  in  this  matter,  holding  that  the 
proper  wife  for  a  man  would  be  a  woman  who  stood  in  the 
relation  of  Maap-gortik  ^  to  him,  but  that  she  should  be 
obtained  from  a  distant  locality,  and  not  be  too  near  to  him 
in  "  flesh." 

With  the  Jupagalk  marriages  were  also  by  the  exchange 
of  sisters,  and  the  exchange  was  made  by  the  respective 
fathers,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  elder  brothers  of  the  girl. 

In  the  Mukjarawaint  tribe,  which  was  the  southern 
branch  of  the  Wotjo  nation,  living  in  the  northern  parts  of 
the  Grampian  mountains,  and  on  the  sources  of  the 
Wimmera  River,  I  found  a  variation  of  this  practice  in  so 
far  that  the  paternal  grandparents  had  a  voice  in  the  dis- 
posal   of    their    granddaughter.       This    is    an    exceptional 

*  The  equivalent  in  the  Jupagalk  language  of  Marrup-gurk. 


244        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

instance  of  the  power  of  the  paternal  grandparents  ;  but  it 
is  accentuated,  and  perhaps  explained  in  part,  by  the  fact 
that  it  depended  on  the  paternal  grandfather,  and  failing 
him  the  maternal,  whether  under  certain  circumstances  a 
child  should  be  brought  up  or  killed. 

An  old  Wotjobaluk  man  gave  me  an  instance  of  how, 
under  certain  circumstances,  a  man  might  obtain  a  wife. 
If  at  one  of  their  festive  gatherings,  to  which  people  came 
from  a  distance,  one  of  the  young  men  distinguished  himself 
as  a  dancer,  the  parents  and  grandparents  of  a  girl  whom 
he  desired  to  have  as  a  wife  would  be  influenced  in  his 
favour  by  his  skill.  But  even  in  this  case,  the  arrangements 
would  be  made  by  the  brothers,  and  the  young  man  would 
have  to  find  a  sister  to  exchange  for  his  wife. 

Cases  were  known  where  a  man  compelled  the  kindred 
of  a  girl  to  give  her  to  him  as  a  wife,  by  obtaining  some  of 
her  hair  and  threatening  to  burn  it,  this  phrase  indicating 
one  of  the  Wotjobaluk  practices  of  evil  magic.  In  such  a 
case  her  kindred  would  either  have  to  give  her  to  him,  as 
sometimes  happened,  or  run  the  risk  of  her  being  done  to 
death  by  means  of  Guliwil,  or  they  would  have  to  prevail 
on  him  to  give  up  the  hair.  If,  however,  he  persisted  in  the 
attempt,  and  the  girl  became  ill,  or  died,  he  suffered  the 
consequences  of  having  killed  her  by  magic. 

A  curious  practice  connected  with  this  obtained  in  the 
most  eastern  branch  of  the  Jupagalk  tribe  which  at  the  Avon 
River  adjoined  the  Jajaurung.  When  it  had  been  agreed 
that  a  boy  and  a  girl  should  be  promised  to  each  other,  the 
boy  went  to  the  girl,  and  with  a  mussel-shell  cut  some  of  her 
hair  off,  which  he  gave  to  his  mother  to  take  care  of  for  him. 
If  the  girl  refused  to  become  his  wife,  or  if  she  ran  off  with 
some  man,  then  her  promised  husband  took  this  hair,  and 
rubbing  some  fat  from  a  black  snake  on  it,  tied  it  up  with  a 
Gulhvil  and  set  it  up  before  his  fire  when  no  one  was  about. 
After  a  time  he  would  hear  the  girl's  voice  in  a  complaining 
tone  proceeding  from  the  hair.  He  then  put  it  up  in  the 
bark  covering  of  his  camp,  and  watched  it  at  night  till  he 
could  see  the  Gulkan-gulkan  (ghost,  spirit)  of  the  girl  sneak- 
ing near,  trying  to  get  the  parcel  with  her  hair. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  245 


The  Wotjobaluk  marriage  ceremony  was  simply  that  the 
bridegroom's  father,  father's  brothers,  brothers,  and  male 
paternal  cousins  all  went  together  to  the  bridegroom's  camp. 
With  them  went  the  bride's  father  holding  her  by  the  arm. 
At  about  ten  paces  from  the  camp  they  sat  down,  and  her 
father's  sister  said  to  her  after  this  manner,  "  That  is  your 
Manitch  (husband),  he  will  give  you  food,  you  must  stop 
with  him."  They  then  went  away  leaving  the  girl  there. 
On  the  following  day  the  girl's  friends  gave  a  dancing 
corrobboree,  at  which  the  bride's  relatives  were  present  as 
spectators. 

No  one  had  access  to  the  bride  in  this  tribe,  as  was  the 
case  in  some  others  ;  and  only  in  the  case  of  misconduct  of 
a  wife  did  she  become  common  to  others. 

In  the  Mukjaravvaint  tribe  the  marriage  ceremony  differed 
in  detail  from  that  of  the  Wotjobaluk.  The  bride's  paternal 
grandfather,  father,  or  brother  who  had  given  her  away,  or 
had  the  disposal  of  her,  took  her  in  the  evening  to  her 
husband's  camp  and  left  her  there,  where  she  was  supposed 
to  lie  on  the  ground  outside  all  night.  On  the  following 
evening  there  was  a  corrobboree,  as  in  other  branches  of  the 
Wotjo  nation,  and  the  bridegroom  danced  at  this,  and  ex- 
hibited his  skill  in  other  performances,  while  the  bride's 
friends  looked  on. 

Among  the  Wotjobaluk  it  was  not  usual  for  men  to  have 
more  than  one  wife,  and  they  were  very  strict  in  requiring 
fidelity  from  her,  and  did  not  lend  a  wife  to  a  friend  or  to  a 
visitor  from  a  distance.  If  a  married  woman  misconducted 
herself,  she  was  most  commonly  killed,  together  with  the 
"  co-respondent,"  if  he  could  be  found. 

It  was  not  uncommon  that  a  girl  who  had,  as  an  infant, 
been  promised  in  marriage,  liked  some  other  man  better, 
and  in  consequence  eloped  with  him.  In  all  the  branches 
of  the  Wotjo  nation  the  procedure  was  much  the  same, 
and  the  following  instance  of  what  occurred  in  the 
Mukjarawaint  tribe  will  serve  for  all.  A  White-cockatoo 
man  eloped  with  a  Black-cockatoo  girl,  who  was  promised 
to  another  man.  Before  starting,  he  gave  notice  of  his 
intention  to  the  young  men   of  his  totem  who  were  at  the 


246        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

place.  This  was  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  of  the  right 
of  access  which  they  had  in  accordance  with  custom  in  this 
tribe  to  the  bride  ;  and  second,  because  if  they  had  remained 
behind,  the  girl's  kindred  would  have  attacked  them  as  being 
participators  in  the  elopement.  In  cases  of  elopement  all 
the  girl's  male  kindred,  both  paternal  and  maternal,  followed 
the  couple,  and  if  they  found  them,  brought  them  back  with 
them.  The  man  had  then  to  stand  out  and  fight  her  male 
kindred,  being  armed  with  a  shield  and  spear-thrower,  the 
former  to  stop  spears  thrown  at  him,  and  the  latter  to  turn 
them  aside.  It  was  the  girl's  father  and  brothers  who  first 
threw  their  spears  at  him,  and  subsequently  the  other  men 
did  likewise.  If  skilful,  he  probably  remained  uninjured. 
The  girl  when  brought  back  was  beaten  by  her  father  and 
brothers,  as  also  by  her  mother  and  sisters,  against  all  of 
whom  she  defended  herself  as  best  she  could  with  a  digging 
stick.  After  this  ordeal,  the  man  was  permitted  to  keep 
her,  but  he  had  to  find  a  sister  to  give  in  exchange  for  her. 
These  facts,  occurring,  as  has  been  already  shown,  in  so 
many  places,  show  the  wide  extension  of  the  ordeal. 

Such  cases  of  elopement  were  between  those  who  might 
lawfully  marry,  if  the  necessary  consent  had  been  obtained 
on  both  sides.  The  combat,  or  rather  the  ordeaL  by  spears, 
with  the  relatives  of  the  woman,  and  especially  with  her 
brothers,  was  clearly  an  expiation  for  the  injury  done  to 
them  in  thus  depriving  them  of  a  valuable  asset.  But  there 
were  other  cases  in  which  the  parties  were  in  the  prohibited 
degrees  of  relationship,  and  therefore  on  an  entirely  different 
footing,  the  offence  being  against  tribal  morality,  which  with 
the  Wotjobaluk,  as  in  all  other  tribes  with  which  I  am 
acquainted,  is  punished  with  great  severity.  In  such  a  case 
there  was,  in  addition  to  the  moral  offence,  the  fact  that  her 
brother  was  deprived  of  the  benefit  which  he  would  have 
derived  by  her  exchange  for  a  wife  for  himself 

Some  instances  will  show  how  this  class  of  offences  was 
dealt  with  by  the  component  tribes  of  the  Wotjo  nation.  I 
take  a  case  where  a  Wotjo  man  ran  off  with  a  woman  who 
stood  in  the  relation  of  sister,  or  was  of  the  same  Yauerin 
with  him.     All  the  men  of  both  of  the  class  names  would 


MARRIAGE  RULES  247 


pursue  him,  and  if  he  were  caught  they  would  kill  and  bury 
him.  My  Wotjobaluk  informants  said  that  this  was  always 
done  in  the  old  times  before  white  men  came  ;  but  that  they 
did  not  do  as  their  western  neighbours  did,  namely,  eat  him. 
It  was  the  duty  of  the  woman's  father  and  brothers,  in  such 
a  case,  to  kill  her.  This  was  confirmed  to  me  by  a 
Mukjarawaint  man,  who  said  that  if  a  man  took  a  woman 
who  was  of  the  same  Yauerin  as  himself,  the  pursuers,  if 
they  caught  him,  killed  him,  and  with  the  exception  of  the 
flesh  of  the  thighs  and  upper  arms,  which  were  roasted  and 
eaten,  they  chopped  the  body  into  small  pieces,  and  left 
them  lying  on  a  log.  The  flesh  was  eaten  by  his  totemites, 
including  even  his  brothers.  This  he  said  was  also  the 
custom  of  the  Jupagalk. 

A  Krokitch  man  from  the  Tatiara  country,  being  on  a 
visit  to  the  Wotjobaluk,  carried  off  a  Krokitch  girl  from  the 
Wimmera  River  ;  but,  although  pursued,  he  made  his  escape 
to  his  own  country.  The  pursuers  felt  it  to  be  a  great  disgrace 
to  them,  not  only  that  one  of  their  women  should  have  so 
misbehaved,  but  that  they  had  not  been  able  to  overtake 
and  punish  the  man  who  had  taken  her  away. 

When  a  man  ran  off  with  the  wife  of  another,  the 
husband,  accompanied  by  all  the  men  at  the  camp,  married 
and  single,  who  were  not  related  to  her,  pursued  the 
fugitives.  If  caught,  the  man  would  be  severely  beaten  by 
the  pursuers,  and  the  woman  either  speared,  perhaps  in  the 
legs,  or  be  given  to  the  men  who  had  followed  her  to  be 
common  to  them  for  a  time.  It  sometimes  happened  that 
such  a  case  was  made  up  by  the  man  giving  presents  to  the 
husband,  such  as  opossum  rugs,  weapons,  and  other  things 
as  her  equivalent. 

The  following  shows  how  marriage  by  capture  occurred 
in  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe.  A  W'hite-cockatoo  man,  who  lived 
at  a  place  called  Ledcort,^  dreamed  that  a  Black-cockatoo 
man  of  Mukpilli "  had  burned  some  of  his  hair.  This  he 
told  to  the  men  of  his  totem,  and  it  was  arranged  that  an 
armed  party  ( Yul-yul)  should  be  made  to  kill  that  man,  and 

1  Now  called  Ledcourt. 

-  A  place  on  the  Upper  Wimmera  now  called  Mukbilly. 


248        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

if  possible  to  get  that  hair  back.  Spies  having  preceded 
the  party,  his  camp  was  attacked  before  daylight,  and  he 
was  killed.  His  wife  was  captured,  and  became  the  wife  of 
the  leader  of  the  party,  a  White-cockatoo  man. 

In  these  tribes  a  widow  plastered  her  head  with  clay,  or 
burned  gypsum,  and  renewed  it  for  six  or  seven  months.  It 
was  not  customary  among  the  Wotjobaluk  for  a  widow  to  be 
taken  by  her  deceased  husband's  brother.  They  had  a 
feeling  against  this  practice,  which  was  explained  to  me  once 
by;  one  of  the  old  men,  because  it  was  unpleasant  to  lie  in 
the  camp  in  the  place  of  the  deceased  brother,  and  thus  to 
be  always  reminded  of  him. 

The  widow  did  not  remarry  for  two  or  three  months 
after  the  white  clay  or  gypsum  had  worn  off,  when  her 
deceased  husband's  brother  might  say  to  her,  "  I  think  that 
it  is  time  that  you  looked  out  for  a  husband."  The  case  of 
one  of  my  native  informants  is  worth  quoting,  not  only 
because  of  the  tribal  intermarriages  of  which  it  is  an  instance, 
but  also  showing  the  position  of  some  men  belonging  to  the 
borderland  of  one  tribe,  as  to  the  tribes  beyond.  He  was  one 
of  the  Jajaurung  living  on  their  extreme  eastern  boundary, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  Arnaud.  To  the  west  of  the 
river  Avon  was  the  eastern  division  of  the  Jupagalk  tribe, 
with  the  class  names  Krokitch  and  Kaputch,  his  class  name 
being  Bunjil,  or  in  the  Jajaurung  language  Wrappil,  which  is 
eagle-hawk. 

His  grandfather  went  to  a  place  in  the  Jupagalk  country, 
now  called  Pine  Plains,  where  he  obtained  a  wife,  and  lived 
with  her  tribe  most  of  his  time.  His  son  was,  however,  born 
in  the  Jajaurung  country,  but  also  claimed  the  country  of 
his  mother.  He  lived  in  part  of  it  and  obtained  his  wife  from 
Morton  Plains.  She  was  the  daughter  of  a  woman  of  the 
Leitchi-leitchi  tribe  from  Kulkaine,  on  the  south  side  of  the 
Murray  River,  on  the  opposite  side  to  Euston.  This  woman 
was  Kilpara,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  Krokitch,  from  her 
mother.  He  speaks  the  languages  of  the  three  tribes  in 
each  of  which  he  had  relatives.  The  country  which  he 
claims  is  firstly  that  of  his  grandfather  and  father,  namely, 
Marr    in    the   Jajaurung   country,  and   a    place  in   it  called 


MARRIAGE  RULES  249 


Turpanni,  where  he  was  born.  He  claims  the  Pine  Plains^ 
because  his  grandfather  obtained  his  wife  thence  and  Hved 
there  himself.  Also  the  Morton  Plains,  because  his  father 
obtained  his  wife  there,  and  the  Leitchi-leitchi  country  of  his 
maternal  grandmother. 

He  is  Bunjil  from  his  father  and  grandfather,  Krokitch 
from  his  mother,  and  Kilpara  from  his  maternal  grandmother. 
In  him  two  lines  of  descent  run,  one  in  the  male  line  from 
his  father,  the  other  from  his  mother,  and  according  to  where 
he  was  the  one  or  the  other  was  counted. 

As  I  have  elsewhere  said,  the  Gournditch-mara  border  or> 
the  one  side  the  Buandik  tribes  and  on  the  other  those  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  Dawson,  indeed  part  of  the  country  claimed 
by  the  Gournditch-mara  was  also  claimed  by  the  Kaurn- 
kopan  and  Peek-wuurong  tribes  who  belonged  to  those 
described  by  him.  With  the  Gournditch-mara  marriage  was 
between  Krokitch  and  Kaputch-jarr,  and  the  child  took  the 
class  and  totem  name  of  its  mother,  but  was  of  the  local 
division,  that  is,  of  that  part  of  the  tribe  to  which  its  father 
belonged. 

Wives  were  obtained  from  distant  places  as  not  being  so 
"  close  in  flesh  "  as  those  in  or  near  to  the  same  localities. 
Marriage  was  by  betrothal  of  children  by  their  respective 
parents,  therefore  by  exchange  of  sisters. 

It  occasionally  happened  that  a  young  man  ran  off  with 
a  girl  without  her  parents'  consent.  The  father  pursued^ 
and  if  caught  he  brought  her  back.  In  other  cases,  if  the 
young  man  belonged  to  one  of  the  neighbouring  tribes,  and 
the  fugitives  had  gone  to  a  distance,  no  pursuit  was  made. 
The  girl  if  brought  back  received  a  severe  beating  by  her 
relatives,  and  the  young  man  also  if  they  caught  him. 

A  man  was  not  restricted  to  one  wife,  but  could  have  as 
many  as  he  could  get. 

There  was  no  sexual  licence  allowed  at  any  time  in  this 
tribe,  although  occasionally  a  man  lent  his  wife  to  others,, 
but  this  was  always  the  occasion  of  fight  between  him  and 
the  better-thinking  of  the  tribes-people.^ 

The  Gournditch-mara  belonged  to  a  large  group  of  tribes^ 
•   Rev.  J.  H.  Stable. 


250        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

in  south-western  Victoria  described  by  Mr.  Dawson,  from 
whom  I  quote  some  passages  to  complete  this  part  of  the 
subject.^ 

The  laws  forbid  a  man  marrying  into  his  mother's  tribe, 
or  into  an  adjoining  one,  or  one  that  spoke  his  own  dialect. 
A  man  is  allowed  to  marry  his  brother's  widow,  or  his  own 
deceased  wife's  sister,  or  a  woman  of  her  tribe  ;  but  he  is 
not  permitted  to  do  so  if  he  divorced  or  killed  his  wife.  He 
may  not  marry  his  deceased  wife's  daughter  by  a  former 
husband. 

When  a  married  man  dies  his  brother  is  bound  to  marry 
his  widow  if  she  have  a  family,  as  it  is  his  duty  to  protect 
her  and  rear  his  brother's  children. 

The  class  names  given  by  Mr.  Dawson  are  evidently 
derived  from  a  system  like  that  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  or  from 
the  Buandik,  which  is  practically  the  same.  The  descent 
runs  in  the  female  line,  as  in  them.  There  are  what  Mr. 
Dawson  calls  five  "  classes,"  each  of  which  is  a  bird  excepting 
one,  the  carpet-snake  (boa  snake).  Kuurokeetch  is  evidently 
Krokitch,  and  Kartpocrap,  the  pelican.  He  says  these  are 
looked  upon  as  "sister  classes,"  and  no  marriage  between 
them  is  permitted.  In  the  more  complete  system  of  the 
Wotjobaluk  Garchuka,  the  long-billed  cockatoo,  is  one  of  the 
principal  totems  of  Krokitch,  and  therefore  could  not  marry 
with  any  of  the  other  Krokitch  totems.  In  the  same  manner 
Kappatch  is  Gamutch,  and  I  take  it  that  Mr.  Dawson's  "  boa 
snake  "  is  Kirtuuk,  and  is  the  Moiwuk,  the  carpet-snake,  of 
the  Wotjobaluk,  which  is  a  totem  belonging  to  Wartwut,  hot 
wind,  a  principal  totem  of  Gamutch,  and  therefore  not  able 
to  marry  any  totem  of  that  class. 

This  seems  to  me  to  be  an  instance  of  a  peculiar  de- 
velopment of  the  social  organisation. 

In  these  tribes,  according  to  Mr.  Dawson,  wives  were  to 
be  got  from  a  distance,  the  rule  thus  falling  in  line  with 
that  of  the  Wotjo  nation.  In  addition  to  the  law  of  the 
classes,  there  was  one  which  prohibited  a  man  from  marrying 
into  his  mother's  or  grandmother's  tribe,  or  into  a  tribe  that 
spoke  his  own   dialect.      The  grandmother  here   spoken   of 

'   Op.  cit. 


V  MARRIAGE  RULE-S  251 

must  be  the  mother's  mother,  since  descent  runs  in  the 
female  Hne.  .  One  can  see  in  these  restrictions  the  local 
rules,  which  I  have  mentioned  in  speaking  of  the  Wotjobaluk, 
carried  out  so  far  as  to  taboo  to  a  man  any  woman  speaking 
the  dialect  of  his  mother's  locality. 

Mr.  Dawson  further  says  that  children  were  betrothed 
when  just  able  to  walk.  The  proposal  was  made  by  the 
father  of  the  girl,  and  if  the  boy's  father  approved,  he  gave 
the  girl  a  present  of  an  opossum  rug,  showed  her  attentions, 
and  gave  her  nice  things  to  eat  when  he  saw  her  at  great 
meetings.  The  courtship  of  those  who  have  not  been 
betrothed  is  under  strict  regulations.  As  no  personal  com- 
munication is  allowed  between  marriageable  persons,  outside 
the  limits  of  consanguinity,  a  mutual  friend  called  a 
Gnapunda,  "  matchmaker,"  is  employed  to  carry  messages  ; 
but  this  can  only  be  done  with  the  approval  of  the  parents 
and  kindred  of  both  parties.  When  a  man  falls  in  love  with 
a  young  woman,  he  does  not  always  consult  her  wishes,  or 
procure  her  consent  to  marriage,  but  makes  his  proposal  to 
the  father  through  her  uncle  or  cousins.^  If  the  father 
approves,  he  informs  the  suitor  that  he  may  marry  his 
daughter,  and  to  this  decision  she  must  submit  whether  she 
admires  the  man  or  not. 

The  reader  who  desires  to  learn  more  of  the  marriage 
customs  of  these  tribes  will  find  them  very  fully  described  in 
Mr.  J.  Dawson's  book. 

To  the  west  of  these  tribes  there  were  the  Buandik,  who 
lived  about  Mt.  Gambler.  It  is  the  only  one  of  a  group  of 
kindred  tribes  of  which  any  record  has  been  made." 

From  the  little  which  I  have  been  able  to  learn  of  their 
marriage  rules,  I  may  summarise  them  by  saying  that  the 
usual  law  of  the  class  system  obtained  between  the  classes 
Kumit  and  Kroki,  and  that  descent  was  in  the  female  line. 
As  the  class  system  of  the  Buandik  was  practically  the  same 

'  This  statement  of  Mr.  Dawson's  is  an  instance  of  the  unfortunate  practice 
of  using  oui  collective  terms,  which  include  two  entirely  distinct  relations,  kept 
separate  by  the  native  tribes.  Probably  the  context  requires  the  "uncle"  to  be 
the  father's  brother  and  the  cousin  to  be  his  son,  thus  falling  in  with  the 
Wotjobaluk  rule. 

'^  The  Buandik  tribe,  Mrs.  J.  Smith. 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


as  that  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  it  may  be,  in  the  absence  of  more 
accurate  knowledge,-  that  the  customs  of  marriage  as  to 
betrothal  were  broadly  the  same  as,  or  at  least  analogous  to, 
those  of  that  tribe. 

One  significant  fact  has  been,  however,  preserved  in  the 
account  of  the  Biiandik}  that  a  woman  after  the  death  of 
her  husband  was  common  for  a  time  to  certain  of  the  men^ 
and  that  the  exchange  of  sisters  accompanied  marriage. 

Tribes  with  Two  Cl.asses  and  Male  Descent 

To  the  east  of  the  W'otjo  nation  and  of  the  tribes  of 
south-western  Victoria  there  was  a  group  of  tribes  which  had 
the  class  names  Bunjil  and  Waang.      These  were  the  Kulin. 

The  usual  law  of  the  class  obtained,  namely,  that  Bunjil 
married  Waang  and  Waang  married  Bunjil,  but  in  these 
tribes  the  name  passed  from  the  father  to  the  child,  and  not, 
as  in  the  more  primitive  tribes  with  two  classes,  from  the 
mother  to  her  children.  As  in  these  tribes  there  was  only 
one  totem  of  Bunjil,  Thara,  the  swamp-hawk,  and  none  of 
Waang,  no  question  of  totem  marriage  arises.  l^ut  in 
addition  to  the  class  law  referred  to,  there  was  a  local  rule 
which  required  marriages  to  take  place  between  certain 
reciprocating  localities.  In  the  last  section  I  referred  to  a 
similar  rule  of  the  Jajaurung  tribe,  in  speaking  of  the 
relations  of  men  on  the  border  between  the  Jajaurung  and 
the  tribes  belonging  to  the  Wotjo  nation.  The  subjoined 
diagram  gives  the  result  of  the  application  of  the  local  rule 
in  the  case  of  my  informant  Berak,  who  was  a  Waang  of  the 
Wurunjerri  tribe. 

Protector  Thomas  says  that  "  between  the  five  nearest 
tribes  to  Melbourne  there  is  a  kind  of  confederacy  or 
relationship.  Thus  the  Yarra,  Western  Port,  Geelong, 
Goulburn,  and  Devil's  River  tribes,  though  continually 
quarrelling,  nevertheless  are  in  a  degree  united.  A  Yarra 
black  must  get  himself  a  wife,  not  out  of  his  own  tribe,  but 
either  of  the  other  tribes.  In  like  manner  a  Goulburn  man 
must  get  his   lubra  from  the  Yarra,  Devil's   River,  Western 

1  op.  cit.  p.  13. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  253 


Port,  or  Geelong  tribe.  Thus  a  kind  of  social  compact  is 
formed  against  any  distant  tribe  who  might  intrude  upon 
their  country,  when  all  united  to  expel  the  intruder."  ^ 

Diagram  XXIII 

I.   m.  Bunjil  -<- 2.   m.  Bunjil  8.  m.  Waang  ->  9.   m.  Waang 

(elder  brother)  (elder  brother) 

3.     f.  Waang  4.     f.  Waang  10.     f.  Bunjil  11.     f.  Bunjil 

5.   ni,  Bunjil       6.   m.  Bunjil     7.   f.  Bunjil      12.   m.  Waang      13.   f.  Waang      14.   m.  Waang 

This  diagram  may  be  compared   with  that  given  for  the 

Wotjobaluk.      No.  1  2  is  Berak,  and  8  is  his  father,  Bebejern. 

The  two  elder  brothers,  Bunjil   No.    i,  and   Waang  No.  9, 

arranged  for  the  mutual  exchange  in  marriage  of  the  children 

6  and  13,  and  7  and  12  of  their  respective  younger  brothers. 

The  man  Bebejern,  No.  8,  and  his  elder  brother,  No.  9,  were 

Wurunjerri,  living  on   the  Yarra  River,  and    i  and  2  were  of 

the  Ngurai-ilam-baluk,  living  on  the  Upper  Goulburn  River. 

In  making  these  matrimonial   arrangements  the  brothers  of 

the  girl  had  a  voice,  and  we  may  perhaps  recognise  in  this  a 

trace  of  maternal   descent,  as  well   as  the  exercise  of  their 

individual  interest.      It  was  the  father  of  a  girl  who  disposed 

of  his  daughter  through  and  by  his  elder  brother,  but  before 

doing  so  he  talked   the   matter  over  with  his  wife.      In  the 

example  given,  it  was   No.   14,  the  son  of  Bebejern's  elder 

brother,  who  gave  away  the  sister  of  No.   i  2,  while  similarly 

it  was  the  elder  brother,  No.  5,  of  the  Ngurai-ilam  girl.  No.  7, 

who  gave  her  in  exchange.      But  this   actual    exchange  of 

the  girls  took  place  only  by  the  authority  of  the   respective 

fathers,  when  the  assembled  old   men  had   decided  that  the 

girls  were  old  enough  to  be  married.      Each  girl  would  then 

be  sent  away  under  the  care  of  her  elder  brother,  who  brought 

back  his  brother's  future  wife.      It  is  as   well   to  note  that 

5  and   6,  being  the  sons  of  brothers,  are  also  brothers,  and 

that  5,  being  the  son  of  the  elder  brother,  is  also  the  elder. 

These    marriages    were   of  much    importance   to  the  tribes, 

since  in  the  case  mentioned,  the  men  to  whom  the  Ngurai-ilam 

'   Evidence  taken  before  a  Committee  of  the  Legislative  Council  of  Victoria, 
JS58,  p.  68. 


254 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


and  VVurunjerri  girls  were  given,  became  recognised  means 
of  communication  between  the  tribes. 

It  must  be  noted  here  that  in  these  tribes  marriages 
not  only  between  the  children  of  two  brothers,  or  of  two 
sisters,  but  also  between  those  of  a  brother  on  one  side  and 

of   a  sister    on    the  other 


H   "4 


side,  were  absolutely  pro- 
hibited, it  being  held  that 
they  were  too  near  to  each 
other. 

If  a  young  man  were 
a  good  hunter,  dancer,  or 
fighting-man,  or  had  some 
other  distinctive  qualities, 
some  man  of  one  of  the 
intermarrying  local  groups 
might  take  a  fancy  to  him, 
and  if  he  were  not  in  the 
prohibited  degrees  of  rela- 
tionship, and  of  the  proper 
class,  might  fix  upon  him 
as  the  future  husband  of 
his  daughter,  and  make  his 
choice  known  to  the  kin- 
dred and  to  the  tribe. 
Such  arrangements  were 
made  especially  at  the  great  tribal  assemblies,  where,  as 
Berak  in  speaking  of  them  said,  "  People  gave  each  other 
presents  to  make  friends." 

If  a  girl,  being  promised  in  marriage,  ,ran  away  with 
another  man,  it  was  her  brothers,  own  and  tribal,  who  fol- 
lowed her,  and  it  was  with  one  or  all  of  them  that  the 
abductor  had  to  fight.  This  took  place  at  some  time  and 
locality  fixed  upon,  at  which  the  kindred  of  both  sides  were 
present.  The  two  men  were  each  armed  with  boomerang, 
club,  and  shield.^  The  boomerang  having  been  thrown, 
they  fought  with  club  and  shield,  and  when  one  of  them 
had     been     wounded     so    that    blood    was    drawn,    to    the 

1  This  was,  of  course,  the  shield  used  in  club-fighting,  called  malku. 


-BERAK,  ONE  OK  THE  WURUNJERRI 
TRIBE. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  255 


satisfaction  of  the  old  men,  they  interfered  to  stop  the  fight, 
saying,  as  Berak  put  it,  "  You  have  both  got  blood  ;  it  is 
enough  ;  now  make  friends."  This  would  be  done  by  each, 
assuming  that  both  had  been  wounded,  taking  some  of  his 
own  blood  and  rubbing  it  over  his  antagonist.  The  girl 
was  in  such  cases  severely  beaten  by  her  mother  and  sisters. 
It  was  within  Berak's  recollection  that  a  girl  so  persistently 
objected  to  the  man  chosen  for  her  husband,  that  she  was 
finally  permitted  to  remain  with  the  one  chosen  by  herself. 
But  the  man  in  that  case  had  to  find  a  sister  to  exchange 
for  her. 

The  actual  ceremony  of  marriage  was  by  the  girl's 
father  and  some  of  the  old  men  taking  the  girl  to  the  camp 
of  her  promised  husband,  and  there  saying  to  her,  "  That  is 
your  husband  ;  if  you  run  away  from  him,  you  will  be 
punished." 

The  line  of  descent  runs  through  males.  As  it  was  put 
to  me,  "  The  child  comes  from  the  man,  and  the  woman 
only  takes  care  of  it."  Berak  said  in  regard  to  this,  "  I 
remember  what  old  Boberi,  the  brother  of  Billi-billeri,  said 
at  Dandenong,  when  some  of  the  boys  were  grumbling  and 
would  not  mind  him.  The  old  man  got  vexed,  and  said 
to  his  son,  '  Listen  to  me  !  I  am  here,  and  there  you  stand 
with  my  body.'  "  ^ 

In  cases  of  elopement  with  a  girl  within  the  forbidden 
degrees,  the  course  followed  was  the  same  as  with  the 
Jajaurung.  All  the  young  men  hunted  for  them,  and,  if 
found,  they  would  be  severely  handled,  if  not  killed.  In 
one  case,  which  happened  in  the  Kulin  tribe,  near  Benalla, 
an  old  man  had  a  grown-up  son,  and  a  girl  lived  with  them 
who  was  in  the  relation  of  daughter  to  the  old  man,  and 
therefore  in  the  relation  of  sister  to  his  son.  The  man's 
friends  told  him  to  get  the  girl  married,  because  it  was  not 
right  to  have  her  living  single  in  the  same  camp  with  his 
son.  He  did  not  do  this,  and  his  son  took  the  girl.  Then 
the  old  man  was  very  angry,  and  said,  "  I  am  ashamed  ; 
every  one  will  hear  of  this  ;  why  have  you  done  this  thing  ? 

*  ^^  Indara  ngananf^titi,   mtin   ngurlik  munnti-numbuti,   vturrumbkk  koiuil 
wanthutiara  murrumbiek. " 


256        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

I  have  done  with  you  altogether."  Then  he  speared  his  son, 
who  died  soon  after.  Berak,  in  telling  me  this,  added  that 
at  that  time  he  was  a  boy  without  whiskers.  This  would 
make  the  time  about  when  Melbourne  was  established. 

Women  were  stolen  from  one  place  or  another.  When 
this  happened,  the  Headman  {Xgjirnngaeta)  there  sent  a 
messenger  to  the  offender  to  come  and  fight.  On  this  the 
people  on  both  sides  met  and  fought — the  men  on  one  side 
with  the  men  on  the  other — with  boomerangs,  spear,  and 
shield  ;  and  the  women  with  the  women  with  their  digging- 
sticks.  Such  thefts  of  women  were  between  tribes  of  the 
Kulin  nation.  But  more  serious  cases  were  those  in  which 
attacks  were  made  on  the  Kulin  by  outside  tribes,  such  as 
the  Berbira  '  from  Gippsland. 

Such  a  case  was  when  these  blacks  came  over  the  Great 
Dividing  Range  to  where  Mansfield  now  is,  and  in  the  night 
surrounded  some  of  the  Yirung-ilam  tribe.  The  Berbira, 
said  my  informant,  were  round  them  in  a  double  line,  and 
killed  a  number  of  men  and  a  number  of  the  children,  whose 
heads  were  left  in  a  row  on  a  log,  and  they  carried  off  five 
women. 

I  may  add  that  I  had  heard  of  this  raid  from  the 
Kurnai,  and  was  told  that  it  was  made  in  revenge  for  one 
made  by  the  Brajcrak  some  time  before. 

It  was  not  common  for  a  man  to  have  more  than  one 
wife,  but  Berak  remembered  one  who  had  three,  one  who 
had  four,  and  one  who  had  six.  In  the  latter  case  the  man 
was  a  noted  hunter  of  game,  and  men  gave  him  their 
daughters  because  he  could  supply  them  with  much  food. 
It  was  the  duty  of  a  man  to  care  for  his  wife's  father,  to  give 
things  to  him,  such  as  opossum  rugs,  and  to  provide  him 
with  game,  which  was  under  this  practice  called  Ngul-lurp. 
If  the  old  man  was  ill,  it  was  the  duty  of  his  son-in-law  to 
go  and  take  care  of  him.  If  there  were  a  fight  in  which  they 
took  opposite  sides,  the  son-in-law  would  take  care  not  to  do 
his  father-in-law  any  harm.  As  in  all  other  tribes,  a  man 
could  not  have  any  communication  with  his  wife's  mother,  or 
her  sister  ;  nor  could  a  woman  look  at  or  speak  to  her 
1  Berbira,  a  nickname  given  l)y  the  Kulin  to  the  Gippsland  Kurnai. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  257 


daughter's  husband,  nor  his  brother.  If  she  did  so,  it  was 
thought  that  her  hair  would  turn  white.  In  order  to  prevent 
such  consequences,  a  woman  would,  when  the  son-in-law 
sent  game  by  his  wife  to  her  husband,  rub  charcoal  over  her 
face,  especially  over  her  mouth,  and  she  could  then  safely  eat 
of  the  game  without  suffering  any  harm. 

A  widow  went  to  the  brother  of  her  deceased  husband  ; 
if  there  were  no  brother,  then  her  father  or  her  brother 
disposed  of  her. 

The  Bunurong  at  Anderson's  Inlet  intermarried  with  the 
Jato-wara-wara  division  of  the  Brataua  clan  of  the  Kurnai, 
but  I  have  no  knowledge  how  such  marriages  were  arranged. 
The  Bunurong  were  Bunjil,  the  Kurnai  had  no  class 
names,  but  both  had  the  regulation  requiring  marriages  to  be 
formed  only  between  people  of  certain  localities.  Possibly  it 
was  on  this  basis  that  the  inter-tribal  marriages  were  arranged. 

As  to  the  tribes  along  the  Murray  River,  which  had  the 
classes  Bunjil  and  Waang,  I  know  that  they  intermarried 
with  the  Kulin  tribes,  and  that  their  marriage  regulations 
were  analogous  to  those  of  the  Wurunjerri  and  Thagun- 
worung,  with  descent  in  the  male  line.  The  Bangerang, 
who  lived  about  the  junction  of  the  Goulburn  and  Murray 
Rivers,  are  an  instance  with  them.  Not  only  was  it  for- 
bidden to  the  children  of  a  brother  on  the  one  side,  and  a 
sister  on  the  other,  to  marry,  but  their  descendants,  as  far  as 
they  could  be  reckoned,  were  equally  debarred.  It  was  held 
that  they  were  "  too  near,"  and  only  a  little  removed  from 
"  brother  and  sister." 

Tribes  with  Anomalous  Social  Organisation 
AND  Male  Descent. 

The  Ycrkla- mining  do  not  intermarry  in  a  friendly 
manner  with  the  adjoining  tribes  ;  but  this  does  not  refer 
to  the  western  division  of  the  tribe  at  Eyre's  Sandpatch. 
Girls  are  promised  when  quite  children,  and  may  be  claimed 
at  any  time.  It  is  the  father  who  gives  his  daughter,  but 
he  may  be  overruled  by  his  elder  brother,  especially  if  the 
latter  has   the  support  of  the  principal,  that  is,  the  oldest 

s 


258        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

medicine- man  of  the  local  group.  In  such  a  case  a 
messenger  is  sent  into  the  bush,  carrying  five  feathers  or 
charred  sticks,  each  with  a  mark  on  it  made  by  the  Head- 
man, who  is  the  oldest  medicine- man.  If  the  girl's  father 
and  his  brothers  are  equally  divided  in  opinion,  the  Head- 
man decides  which  of  the  two  men  proposed  shall  have  the 
girl.  They  are  told  that  he  who  finds  the  greater  number 
of  feathers  or  sticks,  which  have  been  scattered  in  the  bush, 
is  to  have  her.  The  man  favoured  by  the  Headman  always 
goes  in  the  right  direction. 

A  wife  is  bound  to  be  faithful  to  her  husband.  For  the 
first  offence  she  is  branded  with  a  fire-stick.  For  a  second 
offence  she  is  speared  in  the  leg  ;  for  further  offences  she  is 
killed.     But  no  penalty  attaches  to  the  man. 

It  is  very  rarely  that  women  are  lent,  excepting  to 
visitors,  but  it  is  occasionally  done  for  a  friend  who  has  no 
wife  ;  but  in  all  cases  only  to  one  who  is  of  the  proper 
class  name.  The  most  frequent  case  is  when  one  of  the 
Headmen  (medicine-men)  requests  a  loan  for  some  friendly 
visitor. 

When  a  man  dies,  his  widow  goes  to  his  brother. 

In  cases  of  elopement,  the  old  men  give  chase,  and  when 
the  girl  is  caught  she  is  severely  beaten,  and  the  man  who 
took  her  away  has,  if  her  promised  husband  wishes  it,  to 
fight  with  him.  The  number  of  spears  to  be  thrown  is 
determined  by  the  medicine-men.^ 

In  the  Narrang-ga  tribe  of  Yorke  Peninsula,  the  restric- 
tions which  affect  marriage  are  neither  class,  totem,  nor 
locality,  but  relationship.  The  class  and  totem  names  pass 
from  father  to  child,  the  totems  having,  as  in  some  other 
cases  of  male  descent,  become  attached  to  localities  instead 
of  being  scattered  over  the  tribal  country.  In  tabulating 
the  marriages  and  descents  in  this  tribe  from  the  data  given 
by  the  old  men,  I  found  that  descent  is  in  the  male  line, 
and  that  a  man  might  marry  a  woman  even  of  his  own 
totem.  As  in  all  tribes,  sister- marriage  was  strictly  for- 
bidden. This  rule  of  course  included  the  father's  brother's 
daughter  and  the  mother's  sister's  daughter,  but  a  prohibition 
'  D.  Elphinstone  Roe. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


259 


also  attached  to  the  daughter  of  the  mother's  brother  and 
of  the  father's  sister.  But  while  in  this  they  forbade  the 
marriage  allowed  by  the  Urabunna,  they  followed  the  rule 
of  the  Dieri  in  allowing  those  in  the  next  succeeding  level, 
that  is,  those  who  in  the  Dieri  tribe  are  Noa,  to  marry. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  in  this  tribe  there  are  four 
classes,  or  perhaps  four  primary  totems,  under  which  the 
other  totems  are  arranged.  Using  the  term  class  for  the 
former,  then  there  was  no  restriction  in  their  marriages. 
The  following  table  gives  the  marriages  and  descents  of  the 
oldest  men  of  the  tribe  who  were  living  when  I  obtained 
this  information  : — 


Name. 

Class. 

Married 

Children  were 

King  Tom  (60  years  old) 

Kan 

VViltu 

Kari 

His  fiilher 

Kari 

Kari 

Kari 

His  father's  father 

Kari 

Wihu 

Kari 

Corporal  Joe  (6o  years  old) 

Wilthufha 

Wiltu 

Wilthutha 

His  father 

Wilthutha 

Kari 

Wilthutha 

Harry  Richards  (45  years  old) 

Kari 

Kari 

Kari 

His  father 

Kari 

Kari 

Kari 

His  father's  father 

Kari 

Kari 

Kari 

Old  man  (70  years  old) 

Wortu 

Wortu 

Wortu 

As  these  notes  were  made  in  the  year  1887,  and  the 
figures  bracketed  after  the  names  give  their  probable  ages, 
King  Tom  must  have  been  born  somewhere  about  the  year 
1827.  Wortu,  the  oldest  man  in  the  tribe,  supposed  to  be 
about  seventy,  would  have  been  born  about  1 8 1 7.  Thus 
they  belonged  to  the  generation  whose  early  days  saw  their 
country  settled  by  the  white  men,  and  they  grew  up  under 
the  old  laws  under  which  their  fathers  and  grandfathers 
grew  up,  and  probably  died  before  the  white  men  came  and 
disturbed  their  customs. 

When  a  man  obtained  a  wife  by  eloping  with  a  woman 
who  would  have  been  otherwise  refused  to  him  because  of 
nearness  of  kinship,  he  would  be  permitted  to  retain  her  if 
the  relationship  were  a  distant  one,  and  if  they  remained 
away  till  a  child  was  born.  But  if  the  relationship  were  too 
near,  then  she  would  be  taken  from  him. 


26o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

According  to  the  old  men  whose  memories  went  back 
to  the  times  before  Yorke  Peninsula  was  settled,  there  were 
then  wars  between  them  and  the  tribes  outside  their  country. 
In  them,  men  were  allowed  to  keep  women  whom  they 
captured,  because  there  was  no  law  which  restricted  a  man 
to  any  particular  class  or  totem. 

When  the  local  totem  clans  met  at  some  tribal  cere- 
mony, brothers  exchanged  wives  for  a  time,  but  did  not 
lend  them  to  strangers. 

A  man  is  only  permitted  to  communicate  with  his 
wife's  mother  through  the  former,  and  a  breach  of  this  rule 
is  a  cause  of  quarrelling.^ 

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  Gulf  of  St.  Vincent  was  the 
Narrinyeri  tribe,  or  that  part  of  it  which  extended  to  Cape 
Jervis.  As  before  stated,  it  was  composed  of  local  totem 
clans.- 

Marriage  was  not  permitted  within  these  clans,  but 
where  one  was  divided  into  three  parts,  as  the  one  following 
Karat-inyeri  in  the  list  already  given,  then  these  divisions,  or 
perhaps  speaking  more  correctly,  these  sub-clans,  might 
intermarry  just  as  if  they  were  independent  of  each  other. 
Thus  Pilt-inyeri,  Talk-inyeri,  and  WuUoke  might  intermarry, 
always  premising  that  the  parties  were  not  too  closely 
related.  But,  as  contrasted  with  this,  where  there  were  two 
or  more  totems  in  a  totem  clan,  marriage  was  totally  for- 
bidden between  them,  for  they  only  formed  parts  of  the 
same  totem  clan.  This  is  another  instance  of  the  attach- 
ment of  the  totem  to  the  locality,  under  the  action  of  male 
descent,  and  of  the  transfer  of  the  prohibition  of  marriage 
within  the  totem  to  the  totem  clan,  that  is,  to  the  locality. 

A  girl  was  given  in  marriage,  usually  at  an  early  age, 
sometimes  by  her  father,  but  generally  by  her  brother,  and 
there  was  always  an  exchange  of  a  sister,  or  other  female 
relative,  of  the  man  to  whom  she  was  promised.  A  man 
had  the  right  to  exchange  his  wife  for  the  wife  of  another 
man,  but  the  practice  was  not  looked  upon  favourably  by 
his  clan. 

1  T.  M.  Sutton. 
2  Rev.  Geo.  Taplin  and  Mr.  F.  \V.  Taplin. 


MARRIAGE  RULEJj  261 


Marriage  by  elopement  occurred,  but  the  woman  was 
looked  on  with  disfavour,  because  there  had  been  no  ex- 
change of  a  sister  for  her.  In  the  cases  of  elopement  the 
young  man  might  call  in  the  aid  of  his  comrades,  who  then 
had  the  right  of  access  to  the  girl,  and  his  male  relatives 
would  only  defend  him  from  the  girl's  kindred  on  the 
condition  of  access  to  her.  In  regard  to  this,  I  may  point 
out  here  that  the  initiated  youth,  during  the  time  he  was 
nariunbc,  had  complete  licence  as  to  the  younger  women, 
and  could  even  approach  those  of  his  own  class  and  totem. 
This  shows  a  survival  of  older  customs,  and  at  the  same 
time  marks  the  distinction  between  the  mere  inter-sexual 
intercourse  and  the  proprietary  right  of  marriage. 

I  was  told  that  the  Narrinyeri  clans  did  not  take  captive 
the  women  of  other  clans  with  which  they  were  at  war,  it 
not  being  according  to  their  ideas  of  what  was  fair  ;  but  if 
they  met  with  a  few  women  of  the  hostile  clan,  they  treated 
them  as  common  to  themselves  for  a  time,  and  then  let  them 
go.  This  statement  .seemed  to  mc  to  be  doubtful,  and  I 
requested  my  correspondent,  the  late  Mr.  F.  W.  Taplin,  to 
make  further  inquiry,  which  he  did,  with  the  result  that  the 
old  men  and  old  women  maintained  that  it  was  so. 

A  great  stretch  of  country  intervenes  along  the  coast  of 
Southern  Australia  between  the  Narrinyeri  and  the  next 
tribes  which  come  within  this  section.  These  are  the 
Murring  tribes  on  the  south  coast  of  New  South  Wales. 

These  tribes  had  only  traces  of  a  class  organi.sation. 
Totem  names  were  inherited  by  children  from  their  fathers, 
and  they  .still  regulated  marriage,  in  so  far  that  a  person 
could  not  marry  one  of  the  same  totem  name  as  himself. 
Yet  the  Murring  distinctly  said  that  these  names  were  not 
like  the  personal  names  which  each  individual  had,  but  were 
more  like  a  Join,  that  is,  like  something  appertaining  to 
magic.  In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  restriction,  the 
prohibition  of  marriage  between  persons  of  the  same  locality 
exists  here  as  in  the  tribes  of  Western  Victoria,  the  Kurnai 
of  Gippsland,  and  other  tribes  which  I  have  mentioned. 
Particulars  of  these  local  regulations  are  given  later  on  as  to 
the  latter,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred. 


262        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

A  girl  was  frequently  promised  when  still  a  little  child, 
and  her  future  husband  claimed  her  when  she  was  grown  up, 
a  sister  being  exchanged  for  the  woman  he  received  as  a 
wife.  Marriage  was  permitted  between  the  father's  sister's 
child  and  the  mother's  brother's  child,  so  that  we  find  here 
a  trace  of  the  older  Urabunna  rule  still  remaining  among  the 
later  changes  accompanying  paternal  descent.  But  in  the 
case  of  the  Yuin  tribes  this  was  only  if  they  belonged  to 
intermarrj'ing  localities. 

As  an  illustration  of  their  marriage  lules  I  quote  the 
principles  laid  down  for  his  son's  guidance  by  an  old  Braid- 
wood  man.  "  No  one  should  marry  so  as  to  mix  the  same 
blood,  but  he  must  take  a  woman  of  a  different  name 
{Mum,  totem)  than  his  own  ;  and  besides  this,  he  must  go 
for  a  wife  to  a  place  as  far  as  possible  from  his  own  place." 
This  man,  being  of  Braidwood,  went  to  Moruya,  and  he  had 
to  give  a  sister  to  the  brother  of  his  wife.  The  old  men, 
when  at  the  initiation  ceremonies,  told  me  that  the  rule  was 
that  the  "  waddy-men,"  that  is,  those  who  get  their  living  by 
climbing  trees  for  game,  must  go  down  to  the  sea-coast  and 
obtain  wives  from  the  people  who  get  their  living  by  fishing. 
Thus  these  people,  by  their  reciprocating  local  divisions,  and 
the  rules  relating  to  them,  supply  each  other  with  wives. 
The  limits  of  the  district  within  which  wives  were  thus 
obtained  by  exchange  of  sisters  is  indicated  by  the  round 
which  the  boy's  tooth,  which  is  knocked  out  at  the  initiation 
ceremonies,  is  carried,  the  tooth  being  passed  on  from  one 
Headman  to  another.  In  the  old  times  the  limits  were — 
Bem  Lake,  Delegate,  Tumut,  Braidwood,  and  so  on  to 
Shoalhaven,  and  thence  following  the  sea-coast  to  Bem  Lake. 
This  Bem  Lake,  however,  was  within  the  country  of  the 
Krauatungalung  Kurnai,  and  its  inclusion  shows  that  inter- 
marriage took  place  between  the  latter  and  the  Yuin.  That 
this  was  so  is  also  shown  by  what  I  heard  some  of  the  Yuin 
say  of  the  mother  of  one  of  them.  When  she  was  just 
marriageable,  say  about  twelve  or  thirteen  years  of  age,  she 
was  brought  by  the  Krauatun-Kurnai  to  Twofold  Bay  as  a 
wife  for  one  of  the  Yuin  of  that  place.  She  ran  away  from 
that  place  with  the  father  of  the  man  first  mentioned,  and 


V  MARRIAGE  RULES  263 

they  escaped  by  getting  on  board  of  a  whaler  which  was  on 
the  point  of  sailing.  At  that  time  it  was  customary  for  the 
Twofold  Bay  Yuin  to  go  as  harpooners,  or,  as  they  put  it, 
to  go  "  spearing  whales."  The  men,  in  telling  me  of  this 
occurrence,  were  unanimous  in  saying  that,  in  those  times, 
if  a  man  disregarded  the  above  rules  as  to  marriage,  he  would 
be  killed. 

I  have  heard  it  said  by  the  Yuin  that  the  child  belongs 
to  the  father,  because  his  wife  merely  takes  care  of  his 
children  for  him,  and  that  therefore  he  can  do  what  he  likes 
with  his  daughter.  Marriages  were  solely  arranged  by  the 
father,  by  promising  his  daughter  as  an  infant,  or  in  a 
manner  of  which  the  following  will  serve  as  a  good  instance. 
At  the  termination  of  the  initiation  ceremonies,  at  which  the 
whole  intermarrying  community  was  present,  a  meeting  was 
held  near  the  camp  at  which  things  were  bartered.  At  this 
assemblage  of  the  initiated  men,  amongst  other  things, 
marriages  were  discussed.  A  man  whose  son  had  been 
admitted  to  the  status  of  manhood,  and  who  would  be  in 
due  time  permitted  to  take  a  wife,  would  announce  that  he 
wanted  a  wife  for  his  son.  As  every  one  knew  the  relation- 
ship of  the  man  and  his  son  towards  others,  and  as  the 
matter  had  almost  certainly  been  discussed  in  the  camp  by 
those  interested,  some  other  man  would  say,  "  I  will  give  my 
daughter."  This  also  implied  that  the  father  of  the  boy 
would  on  his  part  give  a  daughter,  own  or  tribal,  to  the 
brother,  own  or  tribal,  of  the  girl.  The  two  being  thus 
promised  to  each  other,  the  girl  is  looked  upon  as  the  future 
wife  of  the  boy  ;  and  when  he  has  completed  his  period  of 
probation  after  initiation,  the  marriage  may  be  permitted. 
The  Goinuiera  (medicine -man.  Headman)  and  the  boy's 
father  having  consented,  the  latter  would  say  to  his  son, 
"  Here  is  your  sister  ;  take  her,  and  go  and  get  your  wife." 
Thus  the  actual  exchange  of  sisters  is  made  by  the  two 
young  men.  Occasionally  the  girl  rebelled,  and  having  a 
fondness  for  some  other  man,  eloped  with  him.  If  they 
could  escape  and  remain  away  until  a  child  was  born, 
nothing  would  be  done  to  them,  especially  if  the  man  could 
find  a  sister  to  exchange  for  her.     These  cases  are  said   to 


264        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTHEAST  AUSTRALIA     ch.  v 

have  been  common  among  the  Yuin,  but  not  so  frequent  as 
marriage  by  the  exchange  of  sisters.  On  such  an  elopement 
a  man  would  start  well  armed  for  fear  of  consequences. 

The  following  occurrence  was  discussed  by  some  of  the 
Yuin  old  men  in  my  presence.  A  Kangaroo  man  ran  off 
with  a  Brown-snake  girl  who  had  been  promised  to  another 
man.  So  soon  as  it  was  discovered,  all  the  men  there — 
Kangaroo,  Brown-snake,  and  other  totems — followed  them. 
The  runaways  were  caught,  and  the  girl's  father  and  brothers, 
and  her  mother's  brother,  fought  with  him,  and  the  girl  was 
beaten  by  her  kindred.  Subsequently  her  mother  and  sisters 
attacked  her  with  their  digging  -  sticks,  against  whom  she 
defended  herself  as  well  as  she  could,  until  she  was  knocked 
down. 

Such  a  fight  takes  place  sometimes  on  the  return  of  the 
eloping  couple  to  the  camp.  The  offender  is  armed  with  a 
shield  and  club,  and  the  aggrieved  kindred  with  shield,  club, 
and  boomerang.  They  fight  man  to  man,  and  man  after  man, 
until  the  offender  has  been  knocked  down  four  times,  or  he 
has  knocked  down  all  his  antagonists,  one  after  the  other. 
In  either  case  he  is  free  from  further  feud  ;  but  probably  he 
would  not  be  allowed  to  retain  the  girl  unless  he  had  been 
so  fortunate  or  so  skilful  as  to  have  knocked  down  all  her 
men.  Even  then,  he  would  have  to  find  a  sister  to  ex- 
change. The  girl,  when  caught,  became  for  the  time 
common  to  all  the  men  who  pursued  her,  that  is,  who  might 
have  lawfully  become  her  husband.  If  in  such  a  case  a 
man  who  was  too  nearly  related  to  her,  or  who  was  of  some 
locality  with  which  those  of  hers  did  not  intermarry,  or  who 
was  of  the  same  totem  name,  attempted  to  exercise  this 
right,  then  he  would  be  compelled  to  fight  with  all  her  male 
relatives  at  the  same  time.  One  of  the  old  Murring,  in 
speaking  of  these  matters  in  the  old  days,  said,  "  If  a  man 
were  to  run  away  with  a  woman  who  was  one  of  his  sisters, 
all  the  men  would  pursue  him,  and  if  he  were  caught,  and 
did  not  give  her  up  at  once,  all  his  own  relatives  would  be 
against  him.  If  he  still  refused  to  give  her  up,  the 
Gommera  of  his  place  would  probably  say  to  his  men, 
"  This  man   has  done  very  wrong,  you   must  kill  him,"  and 


FIG.    12. — NATIVE    VVE.VroNS. 


1.  Weet-weet    of    tribes    of    Victoria. 

The  Wona  of  the  Dieri  tribe. 

2.  Kujerung  or  Kallak  of  the   Kurnai 

irilx;. 

3.  Tundiwung  of  the  Kurnai  tribe. 


4.  Laiangel  of  tribes  of  Western  Victoria. 

5.  Kujemng  of  the  Kurnai  trifje. 

6.  Kiinnin  of  the  Kurnai  tribe. 

7.  Kanciri  of  the  Dieri  trilje. 

8.  Woman's  digging-stick,  Victoria. 


266        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

if  the  offender  were  present,  some  one  would  probably  drive 
a  spear  into  him.  His  relatives  would  not  interfere,  lest 
they  might  have  the  same  done  to  them. 

Many  of  the  old  men  among  the  Yuin,  especially  the 
principal  Gommeras,  had  more  than  one  wife,  and  there  was 
one  man  who  had  ten,  but  not  at  the  same  time.  He  was 
in  the  habit  of  giving  a  wife  to  some  poor  fellow  who  had 
not  any,  and  thus  securing  his  adherence,  and  at  the  same 
time  reducing  the  number  he  had  to  hunt  for. 

Men  did  not  lend  their  wives  to  their  brothers,  but  when 
a  man's  Kuben,  that  is,  wife's  brother,  came  on  a  visit,  being 
unmarried,  or  had  not  brought  his  wife  with  him,  his  Kuben 
found  him  a  temporary  wife  by  borrowing  one  from  a  friend. 
I  remember  a  somewhat  analogous  case  in  the  Kurnai  tribe. 
Bunbra,  whom  I  have  mentioned  elsewhere,  had  two  wives, 
and  when  a  friend  of  his  was  about  to  make  a  long  journey 
in  the  mountains  by  himself,  Bunbra  lent  him  the  least 
useful  of  his  wives,  saying,  "  Poor  fellow,  he  is  a  widower, 
and  has  a  long  way  to  go,  and  will  feel  very  lonely." 

A  widow  went  to  her  husband's  brother  if  he  had  one. 
If  not,  her  male  kindred  gave  her  to  some  man  chosen  by 
them. 

The  universal  rule  which  forbade  a  man  to  hold  any 
communication  with  his  wife's  mother  was  very  strict  in 
these  tribes.  He  might  not  look  at  her,  nor  even  in  her 
direction.  If  his  shadow  happened  to  fall  on  her,  he  would 
have  to  leave  his  wife,  who  would  return  to  her  parents.  A 
case  happened  at  Jervis  Bay  which  I  heard  of,  where  a 
man  in  a  drunken  state  accidentally  ran  up  against  his 
mother-in-law,  and  the  Gommera  made  him  leave  his  wife. 
This  law  is  one  of  those  told  to  the  novices  at  the  initiation 
ceremonies,  and  strongly  impressed  on  them. 

On  the  Hunter  there  were  tribes  which  have  been  made 
known  to  me  under  the  names  Geawe-gal,  Gringai,  etc., 
whose  boundaries  are  given  in  Chapter  II.  Most  of  the 
Gringai  were  named  Kumbo,  but  there  were  some  Ipai, 
Kubbi,  and  Murri  among  them.  It  has  not  been  possible 
for  me  to  obtain  sufficient  information  to  tabulate  their 
class  system  under  the  sub-class  rules,  but  there  are  certain 


MARRIAGE  RULES  267 


facts  which  are  suggestive.  One  family  of  Kubbi  took 
their  name  from  their  father,  and  not  from  their  mother. 
Another  family  consisted  of  an  Ipai  married  to  a  Kubbitha. 
In  another  case  Kubbi  was  married  to  Kubbitha,  and 
again  in  another  Kubbi  married  Kubbitha,  and  their  child 
was  Kumbo.^ 

Two  explanations  may  be  suggested  at  least.  These 
marriages  and  descents  may  indicate  a  complete  breaking 
down  of  the  old  Kamilaroi  organisation  in  a  manner  similar 
to  that  which  I  have  noticed,  for  instance,  in  the  Yuin.  Or 
it  may  be  the  result  of  the  breaking  up  of  the  tribe  under 
our  civilisation.  The  only  point  which  seems  to  me  to  be 
worth  much  consideration  is  that  the  child's  name  was  that 
of  the  father,  or  of  a  sub-class  which,  together  with  his, 
represented  his  class.  There  were  also  totems  in  these 
tribes,  for  instance,  Black-snake,  Black-crow,  Eagle-hawk^ 
and  Stingaree. 

Marriages  were  arranged  by  the  parents  and  kindred, 
and  a  wife  was  chosen  from  a  neighbouring  tribe  ;  for 
instance,  a  man  living  at  Gresford  obtained  a  wife  from 
the  Hunter  River.  The  woman  about  to  be  married  makes 
a  camp  and  a  fire  to  which  the  man  is  led  by  his  father  or 
any  other  old  man  ;  after  they  have  camped  together,  the 
ceremony  is  complete.  Capture  of  women  from  other  tribes 
and  marriages  by  elopement  were  common. 

A  man  is  not  permitted  to  speak  to  his  wife's  mother, 
but  can  do  so  through  a  third  party.  In  former  days  it  was 
death  to  speak  to  her,  but  now  a  man  doing  so  is  only 
severely  reprimanded  and  has  to  leave  the  camp  for  a 
certain  time — that  is,  to  camp  away  from  the  main  camp, 
say  one  hundred  yards  or  so.'"^ 

It  may  be  worth  while,  in  the  absence  of  more  definite 
information  as  to  these  tribes,  to  quote  from  the  work  of 
R.  Dawson,  dating  from  the  year  1830.  In  the  Port 
Stephens  tribe  they  generally  took  their  wives  from  other 
tribes  if  they  could  find  opportunities  to  steal  them.  The 
consent  of  the  female  was  never  made  a  question  in  the 
transaction.  When  the  tribes  appeared  to  be  in  a  state  of 
>  J.  W.  Boydell,  per  Dr.  J.  Fraser.  2  c.  p.  Holmes,  per  Dr.  J.  Fraser. 


268        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

peace  with  each  other,  friendly  visits  were  exchanged,  at 
which  times  the  unmarried  females  were  carried  off  by  either 
party.  The  friends  of  the  girl  never  interfered,  and  in  the 
event  of  her  making  any  resistance,  which  was  frequently 
the  case,  her  abductor  silenced  it  by  a  severe  blow  on  the 
head  with  his  club  while  carrying  her  off.  He  kept  her  at 
a  distance  till  her  friends  were  all  gone,  and  then  returned 
with  her  to  his  tribe.  But  if  the  girl  had  no  objection  to 
her  suitor,  or  had  no  one  else  in  her  eye  that  she  liked 
better,  she  agreed  to  become  his  gin,  thus  rendering  abduc- 
tion unnecessary.  The  husband  and  wife  were,  in  general, 
remarkably  constant  to  each  other,  and  it  rarely  happened 
that  they  separated  after  having  considered  themselves  man 
and  wife.  When  an  elopement  or  the  stealing  of  another 
man's  gin  took  place,  it  created  a  great  and  apparently 
lasting  uneasiness  in  the  husband.^ 

According  to  Collins,  wives  "are  always  selected  from  the 
women  of  a  different  tribe,  with  whom  they  are  at  enmity. 
Secrecy  is  necessarily  observed,  and  the  poor  wretch  is  stolen 
upon  in  the  absence  of  her  protectors.  .  .  .  The  women  thus 
ravished  become  their  wives,  are  incorporated  into  the  tribes 
to  which  their  husbands  belong,  and  but  seldom  quit  them 
for  others."  '^ 

I  have  with  some  hesitation  placed  these  tribes  on  the 
Hunter  River  and  at  Port  Stephens  in  this  section  of  the 
chapter.  Mr.  Dawson's  account  of  the  abduction  of  women 
during  friendly  visits  between  the  tribes  appears  to  me  to  be 
an  outsider's  view  of  what  I  take  to  be  a  case  analogous  to 
that  spoken  of  by  Mr.  Aldridge  as  occurring  at  the  Dora 
ceremonies  of  the  Maryborough  (Queensland)  tribes. 

The  Kombaingheri  tribe  of  the  Bellinger  River  had  four 
sub-classes,  each  with  a  distinct  female  name,  the  rules  of 
marriage  and  descent  being  those  shown  in  the  following 
table  : '— 

1   R.  Dawson,  o/>.  cit.  p.  154. 

2  Collins,  op.  cit.  p.  362,  speaking  of  the  tribes  of  Port  Jackson. 

3  E.  Palmer,  op.  cit.  p.  40. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  269 


Male. 

Marries. 

Children  are. 

Kurbo 
Wombo 
Maro 
Wiro 

Wirikin 
Kuran 
1          Wongan 
t          Kurgan 

Wiro  and  Wongan 
Maro  and  Kurgan 
Wombo  and  Wirikin 
Kurbo  and  Kuran 

In  the  absence  of  further  information  either  as  to  the  two 
classes  or  the  totems,  it  is  not  possible  to  say  how  these  four 
sub-classes  are  placed  in  pairs,  representing  the  two  moieties 
of  the  tribe  ;  or,  without  knowing,  for  instance,  which  pair 
played  in  some  game  against  the  other  pair,  or  camped  apart 
from  it,  or  aided  it  in  some  tribal  combat.  Without  such 
knowledge  it  cannot  be  said  whether  descent  is  in  the  male 
or  the  female  line.  Either  can  be  produced  by  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  four  sub-classes  in  two  pairs. 

Tribes  without  Class  Systems 

The  Kurnai  had  no  class  divisions.  And  although 
there  are  survivals  of  totems  in  this  tribe,  they  do  not 
affect  marriage.  Under  the  influence  of  paternal  descent 
these  animal  names  are  segregated  into  localities  somewhat 
in  the  manner  that  the  class  names  of  the  Wurunjerri  and 
Bunurong  tribes  were. 

This  is  easily  seen  when  one  considers  that  a  man  brought 
his  wife  into  his  own  district,  excepting  in  the  occasionally 
occurring  cases  among  the  Kurnai  where  a  man  joined  the 
clan  of  his  wife  ancT  lived  in  her  district. 

But  in  taking  her  to  his  own  district  she  did  not  transmit 
her  name  to  her  children,  but  he  did.  and  as  this  would  be 
done  generation  after  generation  under  paternal  descent,  the 
thiinduni:;  names  (totems)  became  fixed  in  definite  localities. 

As,  moreover,  a  man  could  not  marry  a  woman  belonging 
to  his  own  district,  he  necessarily  married  some  woman  whose 
thtindiing  name  differed  from  his,  thus  still  following  un- 
consciously the  exogamous  rule. 

There  was  no  betrothal  in  this  tribe,  nor  was  there  an 
exchange  of  sisters  by  those  men   who  married,  except  in 


270        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

such  rare  cases  as  to  prove  the  rule.  Therefore  there  was 
no  social  organisation  in  this  tribe  in  the  sense  in  which  I 
use  the  term. 

Looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of  marriage,  the  organ- 
isation of  the  Kurnai  on  a  geographical  basis,  in  local 
groups,  contrasts  strongly  with  the  Dieri  organisations  in 
class  divisions.  A  Dieri  by  birth  becomes  one  of  a  group 
of  the  same  class,  and  is  of  the  same  local  group  as  his 
father.  One  of  the  Kurnai  belongs  only  by  birth  to  that  group 
of  people  of  the  local  organisation  to  which  his  father  and 
father's  father  belonged.  As  there  is  no  class  organisation, 
he  cannot,  to  use  a  Dieri  term,  be  A^oa  to  any  group  of 
women  of  the  other  class  ;  but,  what  amounts  to  much  the 
same  in  principle,  he  belongs  to  a  local  group  which  marries 
only  with  certain  other  local  groups,  and  to  which,  to  apply 
the  Dieri  term,  he  is  Noa.  As  he  obtains  a  wife  from  one 
of  those  groups,  so  does  his  sister  go  as  a  wife  to  some  man 
of  one  or  other  of  them.  In  this  diagram  the  two  inter- 
marrying local  groups  are  designated  A  and  B. 

Diagram  X.\I\' 

Group  ./  Group  B 

1.  m.  A  5.  m.  B 

^riTH  6.T'a 

I  I 

3.  m.  .AK-broiher  and  sister->-7.  f.  b 

4.  m.  A-<-l)rother  and  sister->-8.   f.  B 

I  and  6  are  brother  and  sister,  own  or  tribal  ;  so  are  5  and 
2.  Although  2  is  the  Miuninung  of  7,  who  is  her  Benduk, 
and  5  is  the  Barbtik  of  3,  yet  3  and  7  are  brother  and  sister, 
3  being  the  Lit^  or  child,  of  5.  The  same  is  the  case  as 
to  the  two  lower  levels,  the  fraternal  relation  counting 
between  those  in  each  level. 

In  consequence  of  this  restricted  system  of  relationship 
the  whole  community  was,  so  to  say,  enclosed  in  a  net,  the 
meshes  of  which  were  so  small  that  very  few  could  escape. 
That  such  cases  were  very  rare  can  be  understood  when  one 


V  MARRIAGE  RULES  271 

considers  the  effect  of  this  system  of  relationship,  the 
restriction  of  marriage  to  certain  localities,  and  that  the  old 
people,  especially  the  old  women,  carefully  kept  in  memory 
all  the  marriages,  descents,  and  resultant  relationships,  which 
were  specially  considered  at  such  times  as  the  Jeraeil 
ceremonies. 

The  intermarrying  localities  are  shown  in  the  following 
table,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain  the  rules  of 
marriage  between  them.  The  table  shows  that  marriage 
was  forbidden  in  the  division,  but  not  always  in  the  clan  or 
tribe,  as  for  instance  between  the  Brabralung  divisions/,^, 
or  in  a  more  limited  manner  between  the  Tatungalung 
divisions  s,  t,  and  the  Brataualung  divisions  /,  q.  It  was 
also  a  general  rule  that  those  living  on  the  course  of  the 
same  river  were  considered  to  be  too  nearly  related  to  each 
other  to  marry,  but  there  was  an  exception  in  the  divisions 
f  and  g,  which  adjoined  each  other.  An  inspection  shows 
that  the  rule  was  that  the  divisions  mutually  obtained  wives 
from  each  other,  where  the  right  of  intermarriage  existed. 
Yet  to  this  general  rule  I  have  found  an  exception. 
Gliunkong,  the  survivor  of  the  Bunjil-baul,  who  lived  'on 
Haul,  now  called  Raymond  Island,  in  Lake  King,  Gippsland, 
said  to  me  that  they  did  not  travel  far  from  the  Lakes  for 
wives,  but  that  men  from  distant  places  had  to  come  to  Baul 
for  theirs.  Although  this  list  is  incomplete,  I  feel  no  doubt 
that  in  all  cases  where  it  shows  that  wives  were  obtained 
from  a  certain  locality,  or  that  wives  were  supplied  to  it, 
there  was  reciprocity  between  them.  That  this  reciprocity 
is  not  always  shown  in  the  list  merely  proves,  what  I  am 
quite  aware  of,  that  my  information  is  incomplete,  by  reason 
of  some  of  the  divisions  of  the  tribe  having  died  out. 


[Table 


272        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


KURNAI  TRIBE— EXOGAMOUS  INTERMARRYING  LOCALITIES 


Clans. 

Divisions. 

Wives  from. 

Wives  to. 

(a)  Beri-Sydenham  Inlet     . 

(6)  Durn  -  Orbost,       about 

twelve    miles    up    the 

f>,  c,  d 

Yuin  tribe 

Snowy  River  from  the 

"x. 

Krauatungalung  « 

sea    . 
(c)  Wurnunggatti   —   Lake 

(,  a,  t 

r,  rt,  / 

Tyers 

e,  /;  k 

e,f,k 

(</)  Brt  -  britla  —  Jimmy's 

Point,  now  called  Ka- 

limna 

e,t. 

b.t 

{e)  Bruthen,  on  the  Tambo 

River 

f>,  c,  </,  k 

^  <">  /.  S 

(/)  Waiung —  Bairnsdale 

<•.  e,  g,  t 

'•.  'y  S 

Brabralung 

{j^j  Wuk-Wuk — Lindenow 
(/i)  Munji— north  shore  of 

f 

f 

Lake  Victoria     . 

? 

? 

(/)  Dairgo — Dargo  River    , 

? 

? 

(i)  Kutbuntaura    —   Bushy 

Park 

d,  /,  e,  h,  I 

</,  /,  / 

(/)  Bunjii-nuUung — country 

l^etween  the  Avon  and 

Providence  Ponds 

k 

k 

Brayakaulung  .   < 

i  (///)  Bunjil    -    daan    —    the 
country    lietween    the 
Avon,  Macalister,  and 

Thompson  Rivers 

f,  0 

e,  0 

(//)  Bunjil -Kraura  —  all  the 

country    of    the    clan 

west  of  (w) 

i,  0,  q 

i,  0,  q 

(o)  Kut  -  wut  —  the     Agnes 

River'       . 

m 

m 

Brataualung      . 

(/)  Vau-ung    —    Warrigal 

Creek 
(y)  Drelin    —     Merriman's 

n 

//,  q 

Creek 

iy  P,  t 

P 

(r)  Yun  -  thur  —  adjoining 

and  east  of  (^)    . 

m 

m 

Tatungalung    .   - 

{s)  Ngarawut  —  the    south 

side  of  Lake  Victoria  . 

I,  in,  q,  t 

I,  m,  t 

(/)  Binna-jerra,  Baul-Baul  . 

d,  e,  /,  g 

d,g 

1  There  was  another  division  called  Jato-wara-wara  of  the  Brataualung  clan, 
which  occupied  the  country  east  of  Anderson's  Inlet,  being  the  neighbours  of  the 
Bunurong  to  the  west  of  it.  Here  the  Kulin  and  the  Kurnai  intermarried,  but  I 
do  not  know  with  which  of  the  other  Kurnai  divisions  the  Jato-wara-wara 
exchanged  women  as  wives. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  273 


The  Kurnai  man,  with  the  rare  exceptions  mentioned, 
could  acquire  a  wife  in  one  way  only,  namely,  by  running  off 
with  her  secretly  and  with  her  own  consent.  Marriage, 
therefore,  was  by  elopement,  and  this  was  brought  about  in 
different  ways.  A  young  man  who  was  so  fortunate  as  to 
have  an  unmarried  sister,  and  who  also  had  a  friend  similarly 
provided,  might  arrange  with  him  that  they  should  take 
each  other's  sisters,  these  being  of  course  consenting  parties, 
for  under  the  peculiar  conditions  of  this  tribe  the  choice  of 
a  husband  rested  altogether  with  the  woman.  Or  a  man 
might  send  a  message  to  a  girl  he  fancied,  or  a  girl  might 
even  send  a  message  to  a  young  man,  such  as,  "  Will  you 
find  me  some  food  ?  " 

A  young  man  who  had  been  initiated  at  the  Jcradl,  and 
had  served  a  certain  probation,  was  qualified  thereby  to 
take  a  wife.  He  would  go  on  a  visit  to  his  relatives  in 
that  locality  from  which  his  mother  had  come,  or  to  one  of 
the  other  localities  with  which  his  own  had  marriage  rela- 
tions ;  and  seeing  some  girl  that  he  fancied,  and  the  feeling 
being  reciprocated,  the  two  would  elope.  Of  the  numerous 
ways  in  which  marriage  by  elopement  was  brought  about, 
there  are  two  which  are  worthy  of  special  notice.  If  it 
happened  that  there  were  marriageable  girls,  but  that  the 
marriageable  young  men  did  not  take  the  initiative,  the 
women  set  it  going  by  killing  a  Yiirung  (emu-wren),  that 
is,  one  of  the  "  men's  brothers,"  and  casually  letting  the 
men  see  it.  Then  the  men  became  very  angry  because 
one  of  their  brothers  had  been  killed.  The  young  men 
who  might  be  suitors  got  sticks,  the  girls  took  their  digging- 
sticks,  and  a  fight  commenced  between  them,  at  which  many 
blows  were  struck,  heads  were  broken,  and  blood  flowed. 
Even  the  married  men  and  women  joined  in  the  fight. 
The  following  day  the  young  men  killed  a  Djiitgnn  (superb 
warbler),  that  is,  a  "  woman's  sister,"  and  in  consequence 
caused  another  fight,  perhaps  worse  than  the  former.  After 
a  time,  the  wounds  and  bruises  having  healed,  one  of  the 
eligible  young  men  and  one  of  the  girls  meeting,  and  being 
inclined  towards  each  other,  he  looking  at  her  would  say 
^^  Djiitgnn?"  to  which,  if  she  responded   to  the  understood 

T 


274        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

meaning  of  the  term  so  used,  she  would  reply  "  Yiirmig ; 
what  does  the  Yiiriing  eat  ?  "  He  in  reply  says,  "  He  eats 
so  and  so,"  mentioning  kangaroo,  opossum,  or  some  other 
game.  This  constitutes  an  offer  and  its  acceptance,  and 
the  couple  then  on  a  favourable  occasion  elope. 

The  second  instance  to  be  given  is  that  of  the  Bunjil- 
yenjin,  a  medicine-man,  whose  specialty  was  the  arrangement 
of  marriages  by  elopement  spells.  Bunjil  is  a  pra^nomen 
applied  to  men  who  have  some  special  qualification  ;  in  this 
case  the  marriage  spells  were  called  Yenjin,  as  Gunyeru  is 
the  term  for  those  songs  which  accompany  dancing,  usually 
called  by  us  corrobborees.  Probably  the  office  of  Biinjil- 
yenjin  has  been  vacant  since,  if  not  before,  1855.  Before 
that  time  there  was  at  least  one  in  each  division  of  the 
tribe.  Some  men  were  more  celebrated  than  others,  and  of 
them  Bunjil-gworan,  before  mentioned,  had  a  great  name. 
The  following  account  is  derived  from  the  statements  of  the 
Kurnai,  and  from  those  of  old  residents  of  Gippsland,  who 
as  boys  in  the  early  days  were  much  with  the  blacks  in 
their  camps,  and  thus  conserved  and  remembered  many 
practices  which  are  now  obsolete.^ 

It  seems  from  these  statements  that  almost  the  last 
time  when  the  Bunjil-yenjm  exercised  their  office  on  a 
large  scale  was  at  the  holding  of  a  Jcraeil  on  the  south  side 
of  Lake  Wellington,  about  the  year  1855.  At  it  ten  or  a 
dozen  young  couples  ran  off  under  the  influence  of  love  and 
the  songs  of  the  Bunjil-yenjin.  Some  of  the  people  who 
were  there  were  well  known  to  me,  and  from  them,  and 
especially  from  a  woman  who  was  a  girl  at  that  time,  and 
who  then  ran  off  with  her  future  husband,  I  have  received 
very  full  accounts  of  what  was  done. 

The  substance  of  those  statements  is  as  follows.  It 
was  the  business  of  the  Bunjil-yenjin  to  aid  the  elopement 
of  young  couples.  For  instance,  when  a  young  man  wanted 
a  wife,  and  had  fixed  his  mind  on  some  girl,  whom  he  could 
not  obtain  from  her  parents,  he  must  either  go  without  her, 
persuade  her  to  run  off  with  him,  or  call  in  the  aid  of  the 
Bunjil-yenji?t.      In  the  latter  case  his  services  were  retained 

^  J.  Macalpine  and  W.  Lucas. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  275 


by  presents  of  weapons,  skin  rugs,  or  other  articles.  The 
Bunjil-yenjin  then  lay  down  on  the  ground  in  or  near  the 
encampment  ;  next  to  him  was  the  young  man,  and  beyond 
him  his  comrades.  The  Bunjil-yenjin  then  sang  his  song, 
and  the  others  all  joined  in  with  him. 

The  following  is  one  of  these  songs,  of  which  there 
were  very  many  used  on  such  occasions,  and  it  is  said  to 
have  been  a  very  powerful  one.  One  of  my  Kurnai 
informants,  whose  wife  was  one  of  the  girls  that  eloped  at 
the  Jeraeil  above  mentioned,  said  in  speaking  of  it,  "  That 
Yenjin  made  the  women  run  in  all  directions  when  they 
heard  it." 

Bara-btirni  Wangtir  violla  tallo-burni 

Roll  up  the  twine,  Jaw,*  down  there  little  twine 

tallo  karagan  tigella-galli  kemanga  gola  yintia 

little         sweetheart  I  go  first  the  hollow  (to)         before  you. 

Another  of  these  songs,  also  said  to  be  a  most  powerful 
charm,  is  as  follows  : — 

Kaiaki-jirai        yendu  Yiirung         malhretung 

Why  cut  off         beard,  Yiirung,  long  ago  ? 

Djiitgttn-djiitf^un  muna  hetjunoiga 

Djiitgun  there  (at  that  place)  the  place  where  the  girl 

sleeps  in  her  mother's  hut. 

Or,  freely  translated,  "  Why  did  the  young  man  cut  off  his 
beard  long  ago  ?  the  maiden  sleeps  in  her  camp." 

This  performance — ceremony  it  might  even  be  called — 
was  well  known  to  all  the  camp,  for  there  was  no  conceal- 
ment, and  even  if  done  at  a  little  distance,  there  was  always 
some  female  friend  to  carry  the  news  to  the  girl,  and  say, 
"  There  is  so  and  so  singing  a  Yenjin  about  you." 

When  the  Bunjil-yenjin  thought  his  magic  was  strong 
enough,  he  ceased  his  song.  In  one  case,  when  one  of  my 
informants  was  present,  Bunjil-gworan  was  the  Bunjil-yenjin, 
and  the  girl's  parents  covered  themselves  as  if  asleep." 

Before  the  youth  could  avail  himself  of  the  spell, 
something  more  had  to  be  done,  and  probably  in  the 
above-mentioned  case  it   preceded  the  covering  up  of  the 

'  Wangur  was  the  name  of  the  girl  to  whom  this  yenjin  was  addressed. 
■*  W.  Lucas. 


276        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

parents.  Another  medicine- man  had  to  use  his  art  to 
send  them  to  sleep.  At  the  time  of  the  Jcraeil  which  I 
mentioned  a  few  pages  back,  this  man  w^as  the  renowned 
Bunjil-daua-ngun  mentioned  later  on,  and  his  proceeding  was 
as  follows.  Being  paid  by  the  youth  with  weapons,  opossum 
rugs,  and  other  things,  he  stuck  his  magical  spear-thrower 
into  the  ground,  slanting  towards  the  camp  of  the  parents, 
and  with  such  an  inclination  that  after  a  time  it  fell  down. 
By  its  side  he  placed  his  Bulk,  and  at  a  little  distance  his 
Ycrhmg}  and  beside  it  his  Guuibart  (nose-peg).  He  then 
sang  his  song,  and  when  the  spear-thrower  fell  down  the 
charm  was  completed,  and  the  parents  were  believed  to  be 
in  a  magical  sleep.  Tulaba,  before  mentioned,  was  the 
youth  in  this  case,  and  might  now  run  off  with  his  sweet- 
heart, but  only  after  a  formality  which  shows  that  the  final 
choice  rested  with  her.  Stealing  round  to  the  back  of  her 
parents'  camp,  in  which  she  was  sitting,  he  touched  her  with 
a  long  stick,  and  she  being  ready  to  run  ofif,  pulled  the  end 
as  a  signal.  He  then  left,  and  the  girl,  having  her  bag 
{Batung)  packed  up,  in  fact,  having  her  trousseau  ready, 
flitted  after  him. 

In  the  case  which  I  am  now  describing,  the  proceedings 
were  not  yet  over.  After  a  time  the  old  people,  according 
to  my  informant  Mr.  Lucas,  woke  up,  and  finding  their 
daughter  gone,  the  old  man  summoned  those  of  his  kindred 
who  were  at  the  camp,  to  assist  him  in  singing  a  song  which 
should  make  the  young  man's  legs  become  so  weary  that  he 
would  not  be  able  to  effect  his  escape.  Finally,  he  took  his 
spear-thrower,  and,  holding  it  loosely  in  his  hand,  made  blows 
with  it  towards  different  points  of  the  horizon.  When  it 
made  a  sound  like  a  crack,  it  indicated  the  direction  in 
which  the  runaways  had  gone. 

On  the  occasion  of  the  elopement,  the  man  gave  notice 
to  his  Brogan,  that  is,  those  who  were  initiated  at  the  same 
Jeraeil  as  himself  They  met  him  and  the  girl  at  some 
appointed  place,  and  had  the  right  of  access  to  her.  This 
right,  having  been  exercised,  is  at  an  end.  No  sexual 
licence  occurred    in   this   tribe   beyond    this  ;    except   when 

'  A  small  bone  instrument  used  forextiacting  splinters  from  the  hands  or  feet. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


^n 


the  Aurora  Australis  was  seen,  when  they 
thought  it  to  be  Mnngans  fire,  which 
might  burn  them  up.  The  old  men  then 
told  them  to  exchange  wives  for  the  day, 
and  the  Bret  (the  dried  hand  of  one  of 
their  dead  kinsfolk)  was  swung  backwards 
and  forwards  with  cries  of  "  Send  it  away." 
While  there  were  medicine-men  who 
assisted  those  who  wished  to  elope,  there 
were  other  medicine-men  who  aided  the 
pursuing  kindred  to  discover  them.  Such 
a  one  was  Bunjil-bataluk,^  whose  familiar 
was  a  tame  lacc-lizard,  which  is  said  to 
have  gone  in  front  of  him  to  show  where 
the  pursued  couple  were.  If  such  a  couple 
could  escape,  and  remain  away  for  a  long 
time,  their  offence  against  the  tribal  customs 
might  be  overlooked,  especially  if  a  child 
had  been  born  to  them  while  away.  But 
if  caught,  the  girl  was  severely  punished. 
The  women,  including  her  female  kindred, 
beat  her  with  their  digging -sticks,  her 
father  or  brother  might  spear  her  through 
one  or  both  feet,  to  prevent  her  running 
away  again,  or  she  might  be  cut  down  the 
back  by  a  blow  from  a  Tundhvung;  or 
be  even  killed.  Her  husband  would  be 
attacked  by  the  men,  and  even  by  the 
women,  other  than  his  own  kindred,  the 
men  with  their  weapons,  and  the  women 
with  their  digging-sticks,  sharpened  at  the 
point,  to  stab  him  in  the  stomach  if 
pos3ible.  His  friends  would  try  to  prevent 
the  others  from  attacking  him,  and  usually 
a  severe  fight  was  the  result.      He  might 


'   Bataluk  is  the  lace-li/.ard. 

'^  This  weapon  is  called  in  Central  and  Western 
\'ictoria  l.aiatii^el,  being  formed  with  a  sharp  iioint,  at 
almost  a  right  angle  with  the  handle. 


FIG.   13. 

SPEAR-THROWKR    lSEr> 

AT     KUKNAI     yi-.RAKII., 

ANIl      CONSIDKKED     To 

BE    VEKV    STRONG 

MAGICALLY. 


278        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 

even  have  to  save  himself  by  flight.  Yet  after  all  this  the 
two  would  go  away  again  on  the  first  opportunity.  Finally 
the  affair  blew  over  and  they  settled  down  among  the 
married  people,  who  indeed  had  themselves  gone  through 
the  same  experience. 

In  cases  where  they  returned  after  the  first  anger  of  the 
girl's  relatives  had  subsided,  the  procedure  was  somewhat 
different.  A  good  instance  was  one  which  occurred  among 
the  Tarra  blacks,  South  Gippsland,  in  the  year  1856.  The 
young  man  concerned  was  working  as  a  stock-keeper  on  a 
station  near  Tarraville.  He  ran  off  with  a  girl  of  the  Tara- 
tara  division  of  the  Brataualnng  clan.  As  was  customary 
there,  they  went  to  Snake  Island,  and  remained  there  some 
time.  When  they  returned,  there  was  such  a  disturbance  in 
the  camp  that  my  informant  ^  went  to  see  what  it  was  about. 
The  young  man  was  standing  naked  about  sixty  yards 
distant  from  the  camp,  holding  a  shield  in  his  hand.  A 
number  of  his  friends  were  standing  further  back.  Some 
women  were  drumming  on  rolled-up  skin  rugs,  and  the  Head- 
man Bunjil-gworan  -  and  other  men  stood  facing  the  young 
man  and  his  friends.  Much  speaking  went  on.  Bunjil- 
gworan  made  an  oration,  and  an  old  woman  followed  him. 
Then  came  a  speech  from  another  old  man  and  another  old 
woman,  and  so  on  alternately  for  about  two  hours,  after  which 
several  men  stood  out,  each  having  a  spear  and  a  boomerang. 
In  succession  each  threw  a  spear,  and  immediately  after  a 
boomerang,  which  were  warded  off  or  dodged  by  the  offender. 
When  each  had  thrown  his  weapons,  the  matter  ended,  and 
the  young  man  was  permitted  to  retain  his  wife.  This  was 
one  of  those  regulated  expiations  which  I  have  spoken  of 

Snake  Island  was  the  place  of  refuge  of  the  Brataualung, 
not  only  in  cases  of  elopement,  but  also  when  raids  were  made 
on  them  by  the  other  clans  of  the  Kurnai.  It  lies  off  the 
mouths  of  the  Tarra  and  the  Agnes  Rivers. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  old  people  of  the  Kurnai 
winked  at  this  practice  of  marriage  by  elopement.  In  by  far 
the  greater  number  of  cases  they  themselves  had  obtained  a 
wife  or  husband  in  this  manner,  and  yet  when  their  daughter 

1  W.  Lucas.  2  Civoran  is  "thunder." 


MARRIAGE  RULES  279 


married  in  the  same  way  they  were  furious  at  it,  and 
punished  her  with  severity. 

The  explanation  of  this  extraordinary  state  of  matri- 
monial affairs  is  to  be  found  in  the  deadlock  brought  about 
by  the  widespread  system  of  the  Kurnai  relationships,  the 
universally  held  abhorrence  of  sister  marriage,and  the  practice 
of  exogamy  in  the  local  groups  only.  The  prohibition,  thus 
arising  out  of  the  prohibited  degrees  and  from  locality, 
rendered  it  next  to  impossible  for  a  man  to  find  a  woman  who 
was  not  so  related  to  him  that  she  was  forbidden  to  him  as 
a  wife.  Where  such  was  the  case,  and  where  the  consent  of 
the  parents  and  the  kindred  could  not  be  obtained,  recourse 
was  had  to  the  only  other  alternative,  namely,  elopement,  and 
the  office  of  the  Bunjil-yenjin  arose  to  give  sanction  to  the 
practice. 

This  system  of  elopement  continued  till  as  late  as  1875, 
about  which  time  I  met  two  old  men  in  the  mountain  country 
between  Buchan  and  the  Snowy  River  in  search  of  the 
daughter  of  one  of  them,  who  had  eloped  with  a  young  man 
from  Lake  Tyers. 

The  strength  of  feeling  in  the  Kurnai  tribe  against  a 
man  speaking  to  his  wife's  mother  is  well  shown  by  an 
instance  which  occurred  in  the  Brabralung  clan.  A  man  who 
had  become  a  member  of  the  Church  of  England  was  talking 
to  me,  as  his  wife's  mother  was  passing  us  at  a  little  distance, 
and  I  called  to  her.  Suffering  at  the  time  from  a  cold,  I 
could  not  make  her  hear,  and  said  to  the  Brabralung  man, 
"  Call  Mary  !  I  want  to  speak  to  her."  He  took  no  notice 
whatever,  but  looked  vacantly  on  the  ground.  I  spoke  to 
him  again  sharply,  but  still  without  his  replying.  I  then  said, 
"  What  do  you  mean  by  taking  no  notice  of  me  ?  "  He  then 
called  out  to  his  wife's  brother,  who  was  at  a  little  distance  : 
"  Tell  Mary  that  Mr.  Howitt  wants  her  "  ;  and  turning  to  me, 
continued  reproachfully,  "  You  know  very  well  I  could  not 
do  that ;  you  know  that  I  cannot  speak  to  that  old  woman." 

A  man  had  always  to  provide  his  wife's  father,  when  they 
were  camped  together,  with  a  certain  share  of  flesh  food, 
which  was  called  Neborak.  I  remember  that  Tulaba  on 
one  occasion  gave  his  father-in-law  five  opossums.    Therefore 


28o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

a  man  with    several   daughters  well  married  found  himself 
provided  for. 

I  may  repeat  what  I  said  in  the  last  chapter  as  to  the 
Chepara,  namely,  that  they  had  no  class  divisions  or  totems, 
thus,  as  to  the  former,  resembling  the  Kurnai.  In  marriages 
it  was  usual  for  the  consent  of  the  parents,  the  mother's 
brother,  and  of  the  girl,  to  be  obtained,  but  strictly  speaking 
the  last  was  not  essential.  It  was  also  necessary  for  the 
consent  of  the  man's  father  and  mother  to  be  given.  I  was 
told  that  the  consent  of  the  Headman  of  the  local  division 
was  necessary,  and  on  further  inquiries  this  was  confirmed. 
A  wife  was  obtained  from  any  clan,  even  that  of  the  husband. 

It  was  against  the  tribal  custom  for  a  man  to  have  more 
than  two  wives  at  the  same  time.  If  he  persisted  in  taking 
a  third,  the  Headman  and  the  elders  on  their  parts  also 
insisted  on  his  sending  her  back  to  her  parents  ;  and  if  he 
still  refused  to  do  so,  the  strength  of  public  opinion  usually 
compelled  him  to  obey. 

At  the  Bora  wives  were  obtained  from  the  friendly  tribes 
attending  it. 

Should  a  man  take  a  girl  without  the  consent  of  her 
parents,  there  would  be  a  great  quarrel,  ending  in  a  fight 
between  the  relations  of  both  parties,  in  which  the  women 
also  took  part.  This  being  over,  the  pair  were  married,  and 
the  woman  was  not  punished  by  spearing  or  otherwise,  as 
in  some  tribes. 

If  a  single  girl  was  captured  in  a  raid  on  one  of  the 
clans,  or  from  one  of  the  neighbouring  tribes,  she  was  the 
property  of  her  captor,  and  there  was  no  common  right  of 
access  exercised  by  his  companions.  Wives  were  not  ex- 
changed under  any  circumstances,  nor  were  lent  to  friendly 
visitors.^ 

A  woman  is  not  permitted  to  see  her  daughter's  husband 
in  camp  or  elsewhere.  When  he  is  present  she  keeps  her 
head  covered  with  an  opossum  rug.  The  camp  of  the 
mother-in-law  faces  in  a  different  direction  to  that  of  her 
son-in-law.  A  screen  of  high  bushes  is  erected  between 
both  huts,  so  that  no  one   can   see  over  from   either,  and 

1  J.  Gibson. 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


conversation  between  him  and  his  wife  is  carried  on  in  a 
tone  which  her  mother  cannot  overhear.  When  the  mother- 
in-law  goes  for  firewood,  she  crouches  down  as  she  goes  in 
or  out,  with  her  head  covered.  If  the  son-in-law  should 
climb  a  tree  to  take  a  hive  of  native  bees,  his  wife  may  sit 
at  the  butt  of  the  tree,  but  her  mother  stays  a  long  way 
behind  with  her  head  covered.  When  he  has  got  the  hive, 
he  goes  away,  and  then  she  comes  up  and  helps  her  daughter 
to  cut  up  the  comb  and  carry  it  away.^ 

In  connection  with  the  remarriage  of  widows,  which 
has  been  incidentally  referred  to  in  this  chapter,  special 
mention  may  be  made  of  the  practice  which  is  probably 
universal  in  all  the  native  tribes,  by  which  a  widow  becomes 
the  wife  of  a  brother,  usually  the  older  one,  of  her  deceased 
husband.  The  most  primitive  form  is  evidently  that  of  the 
Lake  Eyre  tribes,  where  a  man's  Tippa-uialku  wife  becomes 
the  Pirrauru  wife  of  his  brother  during  his  lifetime.  This 
practice  is  part  of  the  system  of  group-marriage,  traces  of 
which  are  still  discernible  in  the  systems  of  relationships  of 
tribes  whose  marriage  rules  have  progressed  far  from  the 
older  practice.  In  the  Kurnai  tribe,  for  instance,  a  woman 
is,  by  their  terminology  of  relationship,  the  titular  Maian,  or 
spouse,  of  each  of  the  own  or  tribal  brothers  of  her  husband, 
and  after  his  death  becomes  the  actual  Maian  of  his  elder 
surviving  brother.  In  this  instance  we  can  recognise  the 
familiar  features  of  the  Dieri  Pirrauru  marriage. 

The  late  Mr.  M'Lennan  considered  that  the  Levirate 
was  derived  from  the  practice  of  polyandry.  It  seems  to 
me  that  we  may  with  more  reason  seek  it  in  the  practice  of 
group-marriage,  which  I  venture  to  forecast  will  be  ultimately 
accepted  as  one  of  the  primitive  conditions  of  mankind. 

The  evidence  adduced  in  this  chapter  seems  to  show 
beyond  doubt  some  of  the  stages  of  social  change  through 
which  the  native  tribes  have  passed.  This  is  specially 
evident  when  one  considers  the  marriage  customs  in  con- 
nection with  the  development  of  the  class  organisation,  and 
the  change  of  descent  from  the  female  to  the  male  line. 

The  social  changes  are  relatively  small  in  degree,  and 
»  J.  Gibson. 


282        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

have  not  been  accompanied  by  much,  if  any,  advance  in 
culture,  but  they  mark  collectively  a  really  great  advance 
from  the  status  of  group-marriage  in  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes 
to  more  than  incipient  individual  marriage  in  such  tribes  as 
the  Kurnai. 

Summary  of  Limitations 

It  may  be  well  to  summarise  briefly  the  limitations 
which  affect  marriage  in  the  series  of  tribes  spoken  of  in 
this  chapter. 

There  is  first  of  all  the  segmentation  of  a  whole  com- 
munity into  two  exogamous  intermarrying  moieties,  thus 
limiting  the  choice  of  a  wife  to  one-half  of  the  women  in 
a  tribe.  The  broad  principle  of  intermarriage  between  the 
two  exogamous  moieties  is  controlled  by  a  prohibition  of 
marriage  between  parents  and  children,  brother  and  sister. 
Next  we  find  a  further  limitation  by  which  the  choice  is 
again  restricted  to  a  certain  group  of  those  women  ;  for 
instance,  the  Noa  group  of  the  Dieri  tribe. 

While  in  some  tribes,  such  as  the  Urabunna,  the  marriage 
of  the  children  of  a  man  and  those  of  his  sister  is  permitted, 
in  others,  such  as  the  Dieri,  it  is  forbidden  on  the  ground 
that  they  are  "  too  near  in  flesh."  In  other  tribes,  for 
instance,  the  Bangcrang,  the  children  of  such  persons  are 
also  forbidden  to  marry  on  the  same  grounds,  and  so  also 
are  their  descendants  as  far  as  they  can  be  traced. 

In  the  tribes  with  four  sub-classes,  the  choice  of  a  wife 
is  restricted  to  one  sub-class,  much  in  the  same  manner  as 
it  is  done  in  the  two-class  tribes.  In  eight  sub-class  tribes 
this  choice  is  again  lessened  by  the  segmentation  of  the 
sub-class. 

When  we  turn  to  the  totems,  we  find  that  there  also 
this  system  of  limitation  obtains,  for  in  some  tribes  marriage 
is  only  permitted  between  certain  totems  on  either  side,  and 
not,  as  for  instance  in  the  Dieri,  between  any  of  the  totems 
on  one  side  and  any  of  the  totems  on  the  other.  This 
again  lessens  the  number  of  women  otherwise  available. 

So  much,  briefly,  as  to  the  limitations  provided  for  by 
the  social  organisation.      But  the  local  organisation  in  some 


MARRIAGE  RULES  283 


tribes  adds  to  them  by  only  allowing  certain  localities  to 
intermarry,  and  this  is  especially  marked  in  those  tribes 
where  the  social  organisation  has  more  or  less  or  completely 
died  out,  as  with  the  Kurnai. 

Such  is,  shortly,  a  statement  of  the  position  of  the 
marriage  rules  of  different  tribes,  and  the  position  may  be 
summed  up  by  saying  that  all  these  sexual  limitations, 
whether  imposed  by  the  social  or  the  local  organisation, 
have  the  effect,  no  doubt  intended,  of  preventing  marriages 
of  persons  who  are  of  "  too  near  flesh."  All  these  compli- 
cated and  cumulative  restrictions  were  certainly  made 
intentionally  to  meet  a  tribal  sense  of  morality. 

It  may  seem  to  some  that  there  is  no  inherent  reason 
why,  if  a  child  is  to  take  the  name  of  one  of  its  parents,  it 
should  be  that  of  its  mother  rather  than  its  father,  and 
especially  where  group- marriages  are  the  rule,  unless  it  be 
that  in  the  latter  case  the  individual  mother  is  a  certainty. 

However  that  may  have  been,  there  is  the  significant 
fact  that  in  Australia  female  descent  is  associated  with 
group-marriage,  while  male  descent  occurs  in  tribes  in  which 
group-marriage  is  either  merely  a  vestigiary  survival  or  re- 
mains only  in  evidence  in  the  terminology  of  relationships. 

My  own  view  is  that  female  descent  was  the  earlier,  and 
male  descent  the  later,  institution,  the  latter  being  one  of  a 
series  of  social  changes  which  have  profoundly  affected  the 
organisation  of  Australian  tribes. 

If  one  can  judge  in  this  question  of  the  past  by  the 
present,  I  should  say  that  the  practice  of  betrothal,  which  is 
universal  in  Australia,  must  have  produced  a  feeling  of 
individual  proprietary  right  over  the  woman  so  promised. 
When  accentuated  by  the  Tippa-malku  marriage,  it  must 
also  tend  to  undermine  the  Pirrauru  marriage.  Indeed  I 
find  that,  as  the  practice  of  group- marriage  disappears,  so 
does  the  practice  of  individual  marriage  grow.  This  is  not 
individual  marriage  as  we  know  it,  but  the  marriage  practice 
of  certain  tribes,  which  was  clearly  indicated  by  an  old  black- 
fellow,  when  he  said  to  me,  "  A  woman  can  only  have  one 
husband,  but  a  man  can  have  as  many  wives  as  he  can  get." 

Another  phase  of  this  feeling  is  clearly  shown  by  the 


2S4        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

remark  made  to  me  in  several  cases,  that  a  woman  is  only  a 
nurse  who  takes  care  of  a  man's  children  for  him. 

A  step  further  is  when  a  man  gives  his  totem  name  to 
his  son,  who  then  has  those  of  both  mother  and  father.  This 
has  been  done  even  in  the  Dieri  tribe.  Such  a  practice 
leads  directly  to  a  change  in  the  line  of  descent. 

Whatever  cause  has  led  to  the  change  from  the  female 
to  the  male  line,  the  result  has  been  to  attach  the  class  and 
totem  names  to  the  paternal  locality.  In  tribes  with  female 
descent,  a  woman  living  in  her  husband's  local  division 
transmits  to  her  children  her  class  and  totem ;  and  her 
husband's  sister,  who  is  exchanged  for  her,  likewise  transmits 
her  class  and  totem  to  her  children  in  the  new  locality. 
Thus  the  classes  and  totems  alternate  between  intermarrying 
localities  with  each  generation.  Under  female  descent  the 
class  and  totem  names  are  scattered  over  the  tribal  territory. 
It  is  so  with  male  descent  also,  only  that  they  are  fixed  to 
localities,  while  in  some  cases,  such  as  the  Narrang-ga,  the 
Narrinyeri,  the  Wurunjerri,  the  Bunurong,  and  perhaps  other 
tribes,  the  classes  and  totems  are  segregated  into  separate 
localities.  How  this  has  come  about  I  am  not  at  present 
able  to  explain. 

While  this  work  has  been  going  through  the  press,  it 
has  been  my  great  privilege  to  discuss  many  salient  points 
with  Dr.  J.  G.  Frazer.  Such  discussions  arc  stimulating, 
and  clarify  views  which  otherwise  might  remain  obscure. 
A  case  in  point  is  my  statement  on  p.  282,  that  the 
segmentation  of  a  whole  community  into  two  exogamous 
intermarrying  moieties  limits  the  choice  of  a  wife  to  one 
half  of  the  women  of  the  tribe,  and  that  the  broad  principle 
of  intermarriage  between  the  two  exogamous  moieties  is 
controlled  by  a  prohibition  of  marriage  between  parents  and 
children,  brothers  and  sisters. 

Dr.  Frazer  pointed  out  to  me  that  the  effect  of  dividing 
the  community  into  two  exogamous  intermarrying  sections 
was  to  prevent  the  marriage  of  brothers  with  sisters,  and 
that  the  effect  of  further  subdividing  the  community  into 
four  exogamous  intermarrying  sections  was  to  prevent  the 
marriage    of    parents  with    children.      This  view  he    briefly 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


285 


indicated  in  his  paper,  "The  Origin  of  Totemism"  {Fortnightly 
Review,  May  1899,  p.  841,  note  2).  Dr.  Frazer  also  called 
my  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  The  Mystic  Rose  (London, 
1902),  pp.  469  sqq.,  Mr.  E.  Crawley  has  independently 
reached  nearly  the  same  conclusions,  though  he  has  given 
an  undue  extension  to  the  exogamous  prohibitions  which 
result  from  the  subdivision  of  the  community  into  four 
exogamous  sections.  That  Dr.  Frazer  is  right  in  his  view 
of  the  effect  of  the  successive  segmentation  of  the  com- 
munity into  two  and  four  exogamous  sections,  will  be  seen 
from  the  following  diagrams  : — 


Diagram  XXV 

1.  m.  A 

2.  f.    B 

3.   m.   B                 4,  f. 

B 

f.    A                     m. 

A 

This  gives  the  marriages  and  descents  in  tribes  having 
female  descent,  which  extend  over  a  great  part  of  south- 
east Australia.  It  shows  the  universal  practice  of  exchange 
of  sisters  which  in  those  tribes  accompanies  exogamy.  This 
segmentation  prevents  the  marriage  of  brother  and  sister, 
but  not  that  of  parent  and  child,  as  for  instance  i  and  4,  or 
2  and  3. 

The  next  step  in  providing  restrictions  on  marriages 
which  are  deemed  incestuous,  is  the  resegmentation  of  the 
two  classes  into  four.  This  is  shown  by  the  two  *bllowing 
diagrams  : — 

Dia(;ram  XXVI 


This  shows  the  marriages  and  descents  under  the  exogamous 
law  of  the  four  sub-classes  with  female  descent,  which  may 
be  more  clearly  seen  in  the  following  diagram  : — 


286        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Diagram  XXVII 
I.  m.  A  (7 


2.  f.     B  rf 


3- 

m.  B  r 

4- 
5- 

f.   A  /' 

1 
m.  A  a 

etc. 

6 

.  f. 

B 

<" 

7- 

m. 

A 

d 

8. 

f. 

B 

d 

etc. 

The  woman  6,  who  under  the  exogamous  law  of  the  two 
classes  is  the  potential  wife  of  her  father,  is  now  no  longer 
of  that  group  which  is  marriageable  with  his,  and  it  is  only 
in  his  granddaughter  (8)  that  she  reappears. 

By  the  next  following  segmentation  into  eight  exogamous 
sub-classes,  or  as  Dr.  Frazer  terms  them,  sections,  a  man's 
potential  wife  is  removed  still  further. 

I  venture  to  suggest  as  a  reasonable  conclusion  to  be 
drawn  from  these  successive  restrictions  that  the  initiative 
movement  may  have  been  brought  about  by  an  objection  to 
intermarriage  between  children  of  the  same  mother. 

I  am  pleased  to  be  able,  through  Dr.  Frazer's  far-seeing 
suggestion,  to  place  my  views  in  this  amended  form. 

A  belief  in  the  soundness  of  my  view  that  all  these  and 
following  restrictions  upon  what  the  native  tribes  regard  as 
incestuous  marriages  have  been  the  result  of  intention,  is 
much  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the  same  conclusions 
have  been  independently  formed  by  Dr.  J.  G.  Frazer,  Mr.  E. 
Crawley,  and  myself 

Maternal  Descent  in  the  Salic  Law 

I  now  draw  attention  to  one  of  the  ancient  Teutonic 
laws  which  seems  to  be  capable  of  illumination  by  Australian 
custom. 

In  working  out  the  details  of  the  tribal  systems  of  relation- 
ship, and  the  marriage  rules  given  in  this  chapter,  I  was 
struck  with  an  apparent  analogy  to  one  of  the  laws  of  the 
Salian  Franks,  and  therefore  also  probably  to  the  customs  of 
other  Teutonic  tribes. 

In  following  this  out,  I  had  recourse  to  the  oldest  avail- 
able literature  of  the  Teutonic  peoples,  namely,  the  so-'called 


MARRIAGE  RULES  287 


Barbarian  Laws,  which  were,  as  regards  the  oldest  of  them, 
apparently  compiled  before  the  tribes  accepted  the  Christian 
religion,  at  which  time  these  laws  assumed  their  Latin 
versions. 

These  codes  of  customary  laws  are  rich  storehouses  of 
facts,  illustrating  the  social  condition  of  the  Teutonic  tribes 
on  the  continent  of  Europe  and  of  those  which  settled  in 
Britain. 

They  picture  peoples  who  had  passed  out  of  savagery 
into  barbarism,  and  with  descent  in  the  male  line  strongly 
marked,  although  that  in  the  female  line  was  still  recognised 
in  certain  customs,  such  as  the  allocation  of  the  Wergeld  by 
the  Salic  law,  one  half  going  to  the  sons  of  the  man  who 
was  killed,  and  the  other  divided  between  the  paternal  and 
maternal  kindreds.  There  is  no  indication  as  to  the  pro- 
portion which  each  received,  but  some  light  is  thrown  upon 
the  matter  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws.  The  first  instalment 
of  the  Wer,  namely,  the  Halsfang,  went  to  the  children,  the 
brothers,  and  the  paternal  uncles  ;  the  remainder  was 
divided  between  the  paternal  and  the  maternal  msegs,  two- 
thirds  to  the  former  and  one -third  to  the  latter.  This 
evidence  is  the  more  valuable  because  the  Anglo-Saxons  had 
not  been  in  contact  with  the  romanised  provincials,  as  the 
Salian  Franks,  the  Burgundians,  Visigoths,  and  others  had 
been,  and  thus  carried  to  liritain  their  old  tribal  customs, 
which  were  there  reduced  to  writing.  Next  in  value  to 
the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  are  those  of  the  Salian  Franks,  and 
it  is  one  enactment  in  these  laws  that  I  have  taken  for 
consideration. 

There  are  five  recensions  of  the  Salic  law  extant,  of 
which  I  have  been  able  to  consult  two.^  The  passage  to 
which  I  desire  to  invite  attention  is  the  law  entitled  De 
Reippus.  This  term  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as 
being  the  price  paid  on  the  remarriage  of  a  widow. 

The  two  versions  of  this  law  agree  as  to  the  procedure 
to  be  followed  by  a  man  who  desired  to  marry  a  widow,  but 

•  "  Pactus  Legis  Salicae  Antiquior,"  in  Canciani,  Barharorum  Lef^cs  Atttiquae, 
vol.  ii.,  and  the  "Lex  Salica  Refoimata  "  in  the  same  vohime.  The  "Pactus 
Legis  Salicae  "  is  the  same  version  as  the  "Liber  Legis  Salicae  "  of  Bignon's 
edition,  and  also  the  earlier  one  of  Lindenbrog. 


288        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

they  differ  materially  in  some  of  the  later  clauses,  and  these 
differences  are  interesting  in  their  bearing  on  the  question 
now  under  discussion.  In  order  to  bring  this  out  clearly,  I 
shall  state  concisely  the  provision  of  the  law  as  it  stands  in 
the  "  Lex  Salica  Reformata,"  and  then  the  version  in  the 
"  Pactus  Legis  Salicae  Antiquior." 

When  a  man  desired  to  marry  a  widow  he  was  required 
to  take  certain  procedure  before  the  Tunginus  or  the 
Centenarius.^ 

This  was  to  be  done  at  a  public  assembly,  and,  no 
objection  being  raised,  three  solidi  and  one  denarius  were 
paid  to  the  person  entitled  to  receive  them  as  the  "bride- 
price."  Rules  are  then  laid  down  as  to  which  person  is 
entitled  to  receive  this  payment.  In  the  note  to  this  law  in 
the  Pactus  there  is  a  convenient  diagram,  of  which  I  avail 
myself  to  explain  the  points  which  I  desire  to  make.  But 
to  adapt  it  to  my  purpose  I  have  rearranged  the  order  of 
the  persons  referred  to,  and  I  have  numbered  them  for  con- 
venient reference. 

Diagram   XXVIII 

I.   Avunculus 2.    Mater 3.    Soror 

viduae  viduae  iiiatris  viduae 

I  I 

4.   Frater 5.   Vidua 6.   Soror  7.   Consobrina 

mariti  viduae 

prions  8.   Maritus  I 

prior  I 

9.   Nepos...io.   Neptis  11.   Filius 

filius,  I 

senior  | 

12.    Filius 
senior 

The  following  is  the  sequence  in  which  the  right  to  the 
Reippus  runs  consecutively  : — 

1.  The  nephew  (9),  being  the  eldest  son  of  the  widow's 
sister  (6). 

2.  The  eldest  son  (12)  of  the  daughter  (10)  of  the 
widow's  sister  (6). 

3.  The  son  (11)   of  the  female   cousin  (7)  of  the  widow 

on  the  mother's  side. 

^  Canciani,  vol.   ii.   p.   86.     Eccard  speaks  of  the  Centenarii   as  "  niinores 
judices." 


MARRIAGE  RULES  289 


4.  The  brother  (i)  of  the  widow's  mother. 

5.  The  brother  (4)  of  the  widow's  deceased  husband, 
provided  he  had  not  inherited  the  property  of  the  deceased. 

6.  Failing  these,  he  who  was  nearest  after  the  above- 
named  in  the  -given  order  of  relationship,  down  to  the 
sixth  "joint "  (grade),  if  he  have  not  come  into  the  inheritance 
of  the  deceased. 

7.  Failing  all  these,  the  Reippus  is  to  go  to  the  King's 
purse. 

It  is  quite  evident  that  in  this  matter  the  female  line  is 
preferred,  and  is  followed  down  to  the  utmost  limit  to  which 
the  Teutonic  tribes  counted  their  relationships.  To  make 
this  clear,  I  must  explain  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
done.^ 

The  complete  generation  commenced  with  the  parents, 
and  the  method  of  counting  the  relations  was  by  using  the 
joints  of  the  body  as  grades,  beginning  with  the  head,  at 
which  the  parents  were  placed.  The  complete  enumeration 
on  this  basis  was  as  follows  : — 

Father  and  mother  The  head 

Children  The  neck 

First  grade  (grandchildren)  The  shoulders 

Second  grade  The  ell)ow 

Third  grade  The  wrist 

Fourth  grade  The  knuckle 

Fifth  grade  The  middle  joint  of  the  middle  finger 

Sixth  grade  The  first  joint  of  the  middle  finger 

In  the  next  stage  there  is  no  joint  but  a  nail,  and  it 
was  called  the  naghel-viaghe  or  "  nail  kindred,"  because  there 
the  kindred  ended  ;  sib  or  "  relationship "  was  contained 
between  the  nail  and  the  head.  This  must  be  a  relic  of 
the  very  early  times,  and  it  is  perhaps  worth  noting  as  an 
instance  of  similarity  of  practice  in  tribes  in,  or  emerging 
from,  savagery,  that  the  system  of  counting  by  the  parts  of 
the  human  body  was  also  practised  by  the  native  tribes  of 
the  State  of  Victoria.  Their  enumeration  commenced  at 
the  little  finger  of  the  one  hand,  and  went  over  the  head 
to  the  little  finger  on  the  other  hand. 

'  A.   'L.wf^\x.n,  Der  Sachsenspiegel.     Oldenburg,   1879.     After  the  "Codex 
picturatus  "  of  1336. 

U 


290        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

There  is  no  allocation  in  the  Salic  law  of  the  bride-price 
of  a  woman  on  her  first  marriage.^ 

The  bride-price  evidently  was  for  the  purchase  of  a  woman 
from  her  kindred,  or  for  compensation  to  them  for  her  loss. 
This  comes  out  clearly  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  custom,  which, 
in  the  absence  of  direct  evidence  of  detail,  may  be  looked  at 
for  the  general  Teutonic  practice.  The  betrothal,  which  was 
the  essential  part  of  marriage,  was  arranged  by  the  respective 
kindreds  (ma^g)  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride  ;  the  bride- 
price  was  agreed  upon,  the  bridegroom's  maeg  guaranteed 
it,  and  the  bride's  kindred  might  also  require  a  guarantee  for 
her  good  treatment  if  she  were  taken  into  "  another  thene's 
land."  '^  Indeed,  as  in  other  transactions,  it  was  the  group 
which  acted  for  the  individual,  protected  him  or  her  against 
wrong,  or  avenged  his  or  her  death. 

It  is  quite  clear,  from  the  law  of  the  Reippus,  that  it  was 
the  kindred  of  the  widow,  on  the  mother's  side,  who  had  a 
claim  to  the  bride-price  ;  and  the  same  principle  may  be 
fairly  assumed  to  have  governed  the  price  at  her  first 
marriage.  It  is  clearly  laid  down  that  the  line  of  maternal 
descent  is  to  be  followed,  the  one  exception  being  the 
brother  of  the  deceased  husband.  As  to  this,  it  may  not  be 
an  unreasonable  conjecture  that  he  was  included,  for  the 
reason  that  in  past  times  he  had  a  personal  claim  over  the 
widow.  The  practice  of  the  Levirate  seems  to  have  been 
common  in  Teutonic  tribes  before  they  came  under  the 
control  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  numerous  successive 
enactments  which  forbid  marriage  between  persons  within 
certain  degrees  of  relation  show  what  the  previous  practice 
was,  and  instances  in  the  writings  of  Beda,  and  of  Gregory 
of  Tours,  show  how  common  marriages  of  this  character 
were  both  in  Prankish  Gaul  and  in  Anglo-Saxon  England. 
Even  as  late  as  the  time  of  Henry  I.  of  England,  the 
marriage  of  a  woman  with  two  brothers  is  referred  to  in  one 
of  his  laws  as  "  humbling  her  to  the  day  of  her  death."  ^ 

It    is    easily    understood,    however,    why   the    husband's 

*  Canciani,  vol.   ii.    p.    85,  footnote   8,  and    quoting    Eccard,    says:    "  De 
puellae  vero  pretio,  quod  mireris,  Lex  Salica  nihil  habet." 
-  Dr.  Ke\nho\dSchmid,  Die  Gese^ze  der  A>i^e/s(u/isen,]).  390.     Leipzig,  1858. 
^  Schniid,  Leges  Henrici  Pit  mi,  Consuetudo  West-Sexae,  cap.  70,  17,  )i.  471 


MARRIAGE  RULES 


291 


brother  is  included  among  those  who  are  entitled  to  the 
bride-price,  because  under  maternal  descent  he  always  occupies 
a  prominent  position.  Under  this  descent  the  widow,  her 
sister,  and  the  "  consobrina  "  are  all  on  the  same  level,  being 
sisters  ;  and  the  nepos,  the  neptis,  and  the  filius  consobrinae 
are  also  in  the  relation  of  brother  and  sister.  The  fact  that 
these  persons,  from  the  widow's  maternal  uncle  down  to  the 
individual  indicated  by  the  last  "joint,"  are  all  links  in  a 
line  of  maternal  descent,  most  strongly  suggests  that  this 
law  is  a  vestigiary  custom  carrying  us  back  to  a  time  when 
the  ancestors  of  the  Franks  had  not  emerged  from  that 
level  of  savagery  in  which  descent  through  the  mother  is 
alone  recognised.  But  this  enumeration  of  successive 
individuals,  to  whom  the  Reippus  is  due,  failing  each 
predecessor,  shows  a  strong  departure  in  the  direction  of 
individualisation  from  the  group,  which,  however,  still 
remains  in  evidence  in  many  of  the  laws.  Such  an  instance 
is  the  law  entitled  De  Chren-ceuda,^  which  provides  a  formal 
procedure  by  which  a  man  might  shift  his  share  of  the 
Wergeld  for  homicide  from  his  own  shoulders  on  to  those 
of  his  paternal  and  maternal  groups  of  kindred. 

The  second  version  of  the  law  of  Reippus,  which  I  shall 
now  quote,  is  the  same  as  the  one  which  I  have  given  from 
the  first  up  to  the  fourth  clause.  The  fifth  to  the  eleventh 
differ,  and  those  of  the  Pactus  are  as  follow.  Diagram  XXIX. 
is  that  given  in  Eccard's  note.' 


Avunculus 
viduae 


Diagram  XXIX 


2.   Mater 
viduae 


3.   Soror 
niatris  viduae 


8.   Consobrinus 


Frater  5.    Vidua    6.   Fraler    7.   Soror 

mariti  viduae  viduae 

prioris  9.   Maritus 

prior 


10.    Filius     II.  Nejx)s    12.  Nepos     13.  Neptis    14.    Filius 
viduae         senior  | 

15.  Filius 
senior 


'  Pactus  I.egis  Sdlicae,  tit.  Ixi.  ;  Canciani,  vol.  ii. 
■^  Canciani,  vol.  ii.  p.  88. 


292        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  following  is  the  sequence  of  individuals  : — 

1.  The  eldest  son  (12)  of  the  widow's  sister  (7). 

2.  The  eldest  son  (15)  of  the  widow's  sister's 
daughter  (13). 

3.  The  son  (14)  of  the  male  cousin  (8)  of  the  widow 
on  the  mother's  side. 

4.  The  brother  of  the  widow's  mother  ( i ). 

5.  The  brother  of  the  widow's  deceased  husband  (4), 
provided  that  he  has  not  succeeded  to  the  property  of  the 
deceased. 

6.  He  who  is  nearest  after  the  above-mentioned,  taken 
consecutively  down  to  the  sixth  "  joint  "  of  kindred,  if  he  have 
not  succeeded  to  the  property  of  the  deceased  husband. 

7.  Failing  these,  the  King's  purse. 

The  difference  between  this  law  and  that  of  the  other 
version  is  the  introduction  of  the  male  cousin  (8)  and  his 
son  ( 1 4)  instead  of  the  female  cousin  and  her  son.  The 
former  certainly  belong  to  the  kindred  counted  through  the 
female  line,  and  this  is  probably  a  survival  of  the  old 
custom. 

But  the  commentators  seem  not  to  be  satisfied  with  it,^ 
and  have  introduced  further  corrections,  which  are  shown 
in  the  diagram  by  the  individuals  numbered  6,  10,  11, 
being  the  widow's  son,  her  brother,  and  her  son.  I  find  it 
difficult  to  understand  how  under  female  descent  the  widow's 
son  can  be  one  of  the  group  which  would  have  a  claim  upon 
her  Reippus.  Her  brother  under  the  customs  of  tribes 
having  that  form  of  descent  would  certainly  be  of  that 
group.  His  son  would  also  come  in  under  the  arrangement 
which  admitted  14.  But  there  seems  to  be  a  further 
departure  from  the  original  principle  of  a  group  of  kindred 
bound  together  by  female  descent,  who  claimed  a  compensa- 
tion for  the  loss  of  one  of  their  members. 

Eccard  suggests  that  "  parentella  "  in  the  third  clause  of 
this  law  implies  "  familia,  cognatio,  consanguinitas,"  but  he 
naturally  refers  to  the  Roman  customs  with  which  he  was 
well  acquainted,  while  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  customs 

^  Canciani,   vol.   ii.   p.    88,   footnote  4,   quoting    Eccard,   who  refers  to  the 
Codex  Guelferbytanns,  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  consult. 


MARRIAGE  RULES  293 


of  tribes  with  maternal  descent.  His  suggestion  does  not 
seem  to  fit  this  case.  The  cognati  were  all  those  who 
sprung  from  one  person,  whether  male  or  female.  The 
consanguinei  were  those  who  had  a  common  father,  while 
those  who  had  a  common  mother  only  were  the  uterini.  As 
to  the  familia,  it  was  that  which  distinguished  certain  of  the 
cognati  from  the  above  definition,  namely,  those  who  had 
their  descent  through  males  and  were  of  the  same  familia.^ 
That  which  we  have  here  is  a  group  of  kindred,  who  have 
the  same  ancestors  from  whom  they  descend  in  the 
"  generatio  matris."  On  this  view  the  group  indicated  by 
the  law  of  the  Reippus  appears  to  be  the  first  stage  from 
a  time  when  maternal  descent  prevailed  to  that  time  when, 
as  now,  paternal  descent  was  the  only  one  recognised. 
Between  these  two  periods  there  would  be  a  time  when  a 
child  had,  to  use  the  Anglo-Saxon  term,  two  mnegs,  one 
being  the  paternal  and  the  other  the  maternal. 

The  law  of  Reippus  suggests  such  a  case,  for  the  widow's 
mxg  evidently  followed  that  line. 

It  seems  a  far  cry  from  the  Teutonic  tribes  to  the  native 
tribes  of  Australia  ;  nor  do  I  suggest  any  ethnical  connection 
between  them,  but  I  do  say  that  many  customs  of  savagery 
at  the  present  time  are  evidently  the  same  in  character  as 
those  of  peoples,  now  civilised,  who  practised  them  within 
the  knowledge  of  classical  writers. 

If  I  am  right  in  my  conjecture  that  the  law  of  the 
Reippus  is  a  survival  from  the  time  when  descent  was 
counted  in  the  female  line,  then  there  are  certain  similarities 
of  custom  in  Australian  tribes  which  may  serve  as  sidelights 
on  the  Prankish  custom. 

I  have  shown  in  this  chapter  how  universal  the  exchange 
of  a  sister  for  a  wife  is  in  Australian  tribes,  and  each  woman 
is,  so  to  say,  the  "  bride- price  of  the  other." 

In  tribes  with  descent  in  the  female  line,  such  as  the 
Dieri,  it  is  practically  the  group,  consisting  of  the  own 
mother,  and  the  own  and  tribal  brothers  of  the  mother,  and 
of  the   daughter,  which  betroths  the  girl  on  either  side.      A 

'  Dictionary   of  Greek  and   Roman   Antiquities,    William    Smith,    second 
edition,  1878,  p.  309. 


294        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA     ch.  v 


woman  by  betrothal  becomes  the  speciahsed  A^oa  {Tippa- 
malku)  of  a  certain  man,  but  subsequently  becomes  the 
Pirrauru,  or  group-wife,  of  a  number  of  men  who  are  his 
own  or  tribal  brothers.  This  practice  of  betrothal,  which 
specialises  the  female  N^oa,  overrides  temporarily  the  right  of 
Pirraiiru,  or  group-marriage,  which  is  the  practice  of  this 
tribe,  and  is  evidently  the  more  primitive  one. 

If  we  now  look  at  Diagram  XXVIII.  by  the  light  of  the 
Dieri  practice,  wc  may  be  able  to  see  why  the  sister  of  the 
widow  and  of  the  widow's  mother  should  be  introduced 
prominently,  for  under  female  descent  and  the  classificatory 
system  of  relationships,  the  women  2  and  3  are  own  or 
tribal  mothers  of  5  ;  and  5,  6,  and  7,  who  are  so  like- 
wise as  to  9,  10,  and  11,  who  are  consequently  in  the 
fraternal  relation  to  each  other.  The  mother's  brother  (i)  is 
properly  included  in  the  group,  and  the  brother  of  the  widow 
has  personal  rights  over  her.  Such  an  association  of  persons 
as  that  under  the  Law  of  the  Reippus  would  seem  quite 
natural  to  an  Australian  savage  living  under  maternal 
descent  That  the  male  members  of  such  a  group  should 
participate  in  some  benefit,  to  the  exclusion  of  its  females, 
would  also  seem  to  him  quite  proper. 

Among  the  Teutonic  tribes  a  woman  was  the  property 
of  her  kindred,  who  exchanged  her  for  a  valuable  considera- 
tion.^ In  the  time  of  the  Salic  law  it  was  a  money  payment, 
but  in  earlier  times  it  was  doubtless  made  in  kind,  as 
described  by  Tacitus,  in  the  cases  of  compensation  for 
homicide.  If  we  imagine  a  still  earlier  period  when  these 
tribes  were  in  a  complete  state  of  savagery,  and  when  there 
was  little  or  no  personal  property  beyond  the  rude  weapons 
of  the  individual,  one  may  safely  conjecture  that  the  most 
probable  bride-price  would  be  a  woman  for  a  woman.  Then 
we  should  reach  the  precise  condition  of  very  many,  if  not 
the  majority,  of  the  Australian  tribes. 

'  In  the  earliest  laws  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  the  bride  was  sold  by  her  father, 
a  later  social  stage  than  that  recorded  by  the  Law  of  the  Ueippus. 


/ 


CHAPTER   VI 

TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT 

The  aborigines  obeyed  their  laws  and  customs  from  fear  of  triljal  as  well  as  super- 
natural punishment — Executive  jxjwcr  of  trilial  councils  of  old  men — Jalina- 
piramurana,  Headman  of  the  Dieri — Old  men  and  women  Ixjth  instruct  the 
young  people  in  laws  of  conduct — Powers  and  qualifications  of  Headmen  of 
various  tribes — In  all  tril)es  men  were  recognised  as  having  control  over 
their  tribes-people  and  who  were  obeyed  —  In  some  tribes  there  was  a 
tendency  for  the  office  to  l)ecome  hereditary — The  term  '*  Headman  "  is  to 
be  preferred  to  that  of  Chief — The  tribal  councils — Punishment  of  offences — 
Blood-feuds  between  the  Kurnai  clans  and  with  neighbouring  tribes. 

When  an  Australian  tribe  is  looked  at  from  the  standpoint 
of  an  ordinary  observer,  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no 
recognised  form  of  government  seems  to  be  justified. 
Apparently  no  person,  or  group  of  persons,  has  the  right  to 
command,  under  penalties  for  disobedience,  or  who  is  obeyed 
by  the  community.  There  seems  to  be  no  person  to  whom 
the  whole  community  yields  submission,  who  has  peculiar 
privileges  which  are  patent  to  observation,  or  who  is  sur- 
rounded by  more  or  less  of  savage  pomp  and  ceremony. 
All  that  is  seen  by  a  general  superficial  view  of  an  Australian 
tribe  is,  that  there  is  a  number  of  families  who  roam  over 
certain  tracts  of  country,  in  search  of  food,  and  that  while 
they  appear  to  show  a  considerable  respect  to  the  old  men, 
all  the  males  enjoy  such  liberty  of  action,  that  each  may  be 
considered  to  do  what  seems  best  to  himself 

A  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  such  a  tribe,  however, 
shows  that  there  must  be  some  authority  and  restraint  behind 
this  seeming  freedom,  for  it  is  found  that  there  are  well- 
understood  customs,  or  tribal  laws,  which  are  binding  on  the 
individual,  and   which  control   him,  as  well   as  regulate  his 

295 


296        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

actions  towards  others.  I  have  shown  in  the  chapters  on 
marriages  and  on  the  initiation  ceremonies  that  there  are 
stringent  laws  which  regulate  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes, 
which  relate  to  the  secret  ceremonies  of  the  tribe,  which 
restrict  the  choice  of  food,  and  so  on  ;  and  these  laws  or 
customs  are  enforced  by  severe  penalties,  even  in  some  cases 
by  death  itself 

It  is  quite  true  that  many  such  laws  or  customs  are 
obeyed  without  the  dread  of  physical  punishment  being 
inflicted  for  their  breach,  by  any  tribal  authority,  individual 
or  collective.  But  such  laws  or  customs  are  obeyed  because 
the  native  has  been  told,  from  his  earliest  childhood,  that 
their  infraction  will  be  followed  by  some  supernatural 
personal  punishment  Take,  for  instance,  the  universal  law 
of  mutual  avoidance  of  each  other  by  the  man  and  his  wife's 
mother.  I  know  of  no  rule  which  is  more  implicitly  obeyed. 
The  belief  is  that  some  result  of  a  magical  nature  will  follow 
a  breach  of  this  rule,  for  instance  that  the  person's  hair  will 
become  prematurely  grey.  The  nearest  approach  to  a  personal 
punishment  for  this  offence,  if  it  can  be  so  called,  which  I 
have  met  with,  was  in  the  coast  Murring  tribes,  where  any 
personal  contact,  even  accidental  touching  of  one  by  the 
other,  was  punished  by  the  man  being  compelled  to  leave  the 
district,  his  wife  returning  to  her  parents. 

This  rule  of  avoidance  would  properly  come  within  the 
statement  made  by  Mr.  E.  M.  Curr^  where  he  says,  "  the  power 
which  enforces  custom  in  our  tribes  is  for  the  most  part  an 
impersonal  one."  This  impersonal  authority  must  have  been 
either  public  opinion  or  a  supernatural  sanction.  According 
to  Mr.  Curr,  it  is  "  education,"  that  is  to  say,  a  blackfellow  is 
educated  from  infancy  in  the  belief  that  a  departure  from  the 
customs  of  his  tribe  is  invariably  followed  by  one,  at  least,  of 
many  possible  eviLs,  such  as  becoming  prematurely  grey, 
being  afflicted  with  ophthalmia,  skin  eruptions,  or  sickness, 
but  above  all,  that  it  exposes  the  offender  to  the  danger  of 
death  from  sorcery.-  This  is  undoubtedly  true  as  to  such  a 
case  as  that  of  the  mother-in-law,  or  as  to  a  breach  of  the 
rule  that  a  novice  must  not  receive  food  from  the  hand  of  a 

1   Op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  52.  2  /^,  p,  54, 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  297 

woman  (Kurnai),  or  speak  in  the  presence  of  one,  without 
covering  his  mouth  with  the  corner  of  his  skin  rug  or  blanket 
(Yuin),  but  it  does  not  account  for  the  corporal  punishments 
inflicted  for  other  offences. 

I  shall  detail  these  cases  at  length  further  on,  but  as  an 
instance  will  refer  to  the  Pinya,  or  armed  party,  of  the  Dieri 
tribe,  which  goes  out  to  kill  some  man  who  is  considered  by 
the  old  men  of  the  tribe  (tribal  council)  to  have  brought 
about  the  death  of  some  one  by  evil  magic.  Such  offences 
as  these  are  therefore  punished  by  the  actual  authority  of 
persons  in  the  tribe,  and  not  merely  by  public  opinion  or 
the  effect  of  "  education,"  and  it  is  evident  that  there  must 
be  some  executive  power  by  which  such  offences  as  these  are 
dealt  with  and  punished. 

I  shall  now  show  what  this  executive  power  is,  and  how 
it  acts  in  an  Australian  tribe. 

In  the  Dieri  tribe,  as  in  all  others  of  those  kindred  to  it, 
the  oldest  man  of  a  totem  is  its  Pintiaru,  or  head.  In 
each  horde  there  is  also  a  Pinnaru^  who  may  happen  also  to 
be  the  head  of  a  totem.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
head  of  a  totem  or  of  a  local  division  has  necessarily  much, 
or  even  any,  influence  outside  his  totem  or  division.  I 
remember  such  an  instance  at  Lake  Hope  where  the  Pintiaru 
was,  by  reason  of  his  great  age,  the  head  of  the  eagle-hawk 
totem,  but  he  had  otherwise  little  personal  influence,  for  he 
was  neither  a  fighting-man,  a  medicine-man,  nor  an  orator. 
He  was  the  head  of  his  totem  by  reason  of  his  age,  but  was 
not  the  Pinnaru  of  the  local  division.  The  Pinnarus  are 
collectively  the  Headmen  of  the  tribe,  and  of  them  some  one 
is  superior  to  the  others.  At  the  time  when  I  knew  the 
tribe,  in  1862-63,  the  principal  Headman  was  one  Jalina- 
piramurana,  the  head  of  the  Kunaura  totem,  and  he  was 
recognised  as  the  head  of  the  Dieri  tribe.  Subsequently 
Mr.  S.  Gason,  as  an  officer  of  the  South  Australian  Mounted 
Police,  was  stationed  in  the  Dieri  country  for  six  years,  and 
was  well  acquainted  with  this  man.  He  has  described  him 
to  me  as  a  man  of  persuasive  eloquence,  a  skilful  and  brave 
fighting- man,  and  a  powerful  medicine-man.  From  his 
polished   manner  the  whites   called    him   "  the   F'renchman." 


298        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

He  was  greatly  feared  by  his  own  and  the  neighbouring 
tribes.  Neither  his  brothers  (both  of  them  inferior  to  him  in 
bravery  and  oratorical  power)  nor  the  elder  men  presumed 
to  interfere  with  his  will,  or  to  dictate  to  the  tribe,  except  in 
minor  matters.  He  decided  disputes,  and  his  decisions  were 
received  without  appeal.  The  neighbouring  tribes  sent 
messengers  to  him  with  presents  of  bags,  Pitcheri,  red  ochre, 
skins,  and  other  things.  He  decided  when  and  where  the 
tribal  ceremonies  were  to  be  held,  and  his  messengers  called 
together  the  tribe  from  a  radius  of  a  hundred  miles  to  attend 
them,  or  to  meet  on  inter-tribal  matters. 

His  wonderful  oratorical  powers  made  his  hearers  believe 
anything  he  told  them,  and  always  ready  to  execute  his 
commands.  He  was  not  by  nature  cruel  or  treacherous,  as 
were  many  of  the  Dieri,  and  when  not  excited  was  consider- 
ate, patient,  and  very  hospitable.  No  one  spoke  ill  of  Jalina- 
piramurana,  but  on  the  contrary  with  respect  and  reverence. 
This  is  understood  when  Mr.  Gason  adds  that  he  distributed 
the  presents  sent  to  him  amongst  his  friends  to  prevent 
jealousy.  He  used  to  interfere  to  prevent  fights,  even 
chastising  the  offender,  and  being  sometimes  wounded  in  so 
doing.  On  such  an  occasion  there  would  be  great  lamenta- 
tion, and  the  person  who  had  wounded  him  was  not  infre- 
quently beaten  by  the  others. 

As  the  superior  Headman  of  the  Dieri,  he  •presided  at 
the  meetings  of  the  Pinnarus,  sent  out  messengers  to  the 
neighbouring  tribes,  and  even  had  the  power  of  giving  away 
young  women,  not  related  to  him,  in  marriage,  of  separating 
men  from  their  wives,  when  they  could  not  agree,  and  of 
making  fresh  matrimonial  arrangements. 

He  periodically  visited  the  various  hordes  of  the  Dieri 
tribe,  from  which  he  also  periodically  received  presents. 
Tribes  even  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  miles  sent  him 
presents,  which  were  passed  on  to  him  from  tribe  to  tribe. 

He  was  one  of  their  great  Kunkis  or  medicine-men,  but 
would  only  practise  his  art  on  persons  of  note,  such  as  heads 
of  totems  or  his  personal  friends. 

He  was  the  son  of  a  previous  Headman,  who  was  living 
during    Mr.    Gason's    residence    in    the    country,    and    who, 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  299 

although  too  infirm  to  join  in  the  ceremonies,  gave  advice  to 
the  old  men.  He  boasted  that  he  had  the  command  of  the 
tribe  before  his  son  acquired  it.  He  was  believed  to  be 
proof  against  magical  practices,  such  as  "  striking  with  the 
bone." 

Jalina-piramurana  had  succeeded  to  and  indeed  eclipsed 
his  father.  He  was  the  head  of  the  Kunaura  innrdu,  and 
boasted  of  being  the  "  tree  of  life,"  for  the  seed  Kunaura 
forms  at  times  the  principal  source  of  vegetable  food  of 
these  tribes.  He  was  also  spoken  of  as  the  "  Manyura 
murdul'  ^  that  is,  the  plant  itself  of  which  the  Kunaura  is 
the  seed. 

I  knew  Jalina-piramurana  when  in  the  Died  country 
before  Mr.  Gason  went  to  it.  He  was  at  Lake  Hope, 
(Pando)  as  I  was  returning  to  the  South  Australian  settle- 
ments, and,  to  use  the  language  of  the  present  day,  inter- 
viewed me,  together  with  a  deputation  of  his  Pinnarus,  with 
two  requests.  The  first  was,  that  I  would  go  with  him  and 
kill  all  the  "  Kunabura-kana,"  that  is,  the  men  of  Kunabura; 
who  were  "  Malingki  kana"  that  is,  bad  men  ;  the  second, 
that  I  would  tell  the  white  men  who  were  coming  up  to  his 
country,  according  to  the  information  sent  him  by  the  tribes 
further  down,  that  they  should  "  sit  down  on  the  one  side  of 
Pando,  and  the  Kana  would  sit  down  on  the  other,  so  that 
they  would  not  be  likely  to  quarrel."  I  can  say  also,  that 
he  was  a  courteous  blackfellow,  with  plenty  of  conversation. 
He  walked  with  me  for  some  miles  on  our  next  day's 
journey  round  Lake  Hope,  and  was  much  amused  at  my 
remark,  when  the  horse  I  was  leading  suddenly  terrified 
him  by  neighing  close  to  his  ear, — "  Wotta  yappali  yenni, 
nanto  yattana,"  that  is,  "  Do  not  fear  ;  the  horse  is  talking." 

I  observed  that  there  were  such  Pinnarus  in  the  tribes 
to  the  north  and  north-east  of  the  Dieri,  for  instance  the 
Yaurorka  and  Yantruwunta. 

When  going  northward  from  my  depot  at  Cooper's 
Creek,  on  the  occasion  of  my  second  expedition,  I  obtained 
the  services  of  a  young  Yantruwunta  man,  who  knew  the 
country  as  far  north  as  Sturt's  Stony  Desert.      He  belonged 

'   Manyura  is  Claytonia  sp. 


300        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

to  the  small  tribal  group  in  whose  country  my  depdt  was 
fixed.  My  first  stage  was  to  a  pool  of  water,  from  which  I 
could  make  a  good  departure  northwards.  At  this  place 
the  young  man  ran  away  after  dark,  being  alarmed,  as  he 
afterwards  told  me,  at  the  precautions  I  took  for  the  safety 
of  the  party  during  the  night.  With  my  own  blackboy  I 
tracked  him  in  the  morning  to  a  camp  of  his  tribe  at  a  small 
pool  in  the  river-bed,  about  two  miles  distant.  Here  the 
PinnarUy  after  satisfying  himself  that  I  meant  no  harm  to  the 
guide  or  to  his  people,  sent  two  of  his  men  to  bring  the 
refugee  from  the  place  where  he  was  concealed,  and  handed 
him  over  with  an  admonition  not  to  run  away  again.  Here 
was  an  exercise  of  authority,  and  obedience  to  it. 

When  in  the  Yaurorka  country  I  camped  for  the  night 
near  the  encampment  of  one  of  the  small  groups  of  that 
tribe.  Some  of  the  old  men,  the  Pinnanis  of  the  place, 
came  to  visit  me,  and  asked  me  to  go  with  them  to  see  the 
Pinna-pinnant  (the  "  Great-great-one  "),  who  could  not  come 
to  see  me.  I  went  with  them  and  found,  sitting  in  one  of 
the  huts,  the  oldest  blackfellow  I  had  ever  seen.  The  other 
Piiinarus  were  mostly  grey-headed  and  bald,  but  he  was  so 
old  as  to  be  almost  childish,  and  was  covered  with  a  grizzly 
fell  of  hair  from  head  to  foot.  The  respect  with  which  he 
was  treated  by  the  other  old  men  was  as  marked  in  them 
as  the  respect  which  they  received  from  the  younger  men. 
They  told  me  that  he  was  so  old  that  he  could  not  walk, 
and  that  when  they  travelled  some  of  the  younger  men 
carried  him. 

Such  Headmen  as  those  of  the  Dieri  tribe  appear  to  be 
found  in  the  neighbouring  tribes,  but  no  doubt  Jalina-pira- 
murana  was  an  exceptionally  able  and  therefore  an  unusually 
influential  man. 

It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  the  old  men,  in  their 
leisure  time,  instructed  the  younger  ones  in  the  laws  of  the 
tribe,  impressing  on  them  modesty  of  behaviour  and  propriety 
of  conduct,  as  they  understood  it,  and  pointing  out  to  them 
the  heinousness  of  incest.  The  old  women  also  instructed 
the  young  ones  in  the  same  manner.^ 

»  S.  Gason. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  301 

In  the  Tongaranka  tribe  of  the  Itchumundi  nation, 
authority  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Headman  and  the  elders, 
who  have  much  to  say  in  the  management  of  affairs,  such  as 
the  allotment  of  wives,  ceremonies  for  making  rain,  and 
such  like. 

It  is  said  that  in  the  Karamundi  nation  there  were  no 
Headmen,  but  when  anything  important  had  to  be  settled 
all  the  initiated  men  gathered  together  and  decided  what 
was  to  be  done.^ 

In  the  Wiimbaio  tribe  a  Headman  must  have  age,  personal 
prowess,  talents  as  a  leader,  and  a  clever  tongue.  If  a  man 
had  magical  powers,  he  might  be  feared,  but  he  would  not 
be  thereby  a  Headman.  In  one  of  their  tribal  councils  the 
old  men  spoke  first,  after  them  the  younger  men,  then  the 
old  men  directed  what  should  be  done.  There  were  also 
meetings  of  the  whole  community,  who  might  be  camped 
together.  At  an  assembly  of  that  kind  all  the  men  sat  in 
a  circle  near  the  camp,  old  men  and  young  men  together, 
and  most  of  them  carried  something  in  their  hands,  such  as 
a  club.  At  one  of  these  councils,  which  occurred  about  the 
year  1850,  one  of  the  oldest  men,  named  Pelican,  went  into 
the  ring  with  spear  and  shield  and  exhibited  an  imaginary 
combat,  using  his  weapons  to  explain  to  the  young  men 
how  to  fight.  This  old  man  had  not  any  special  claim  to 
authority  excepting  that  he  was  old  and  skilful  in  fighting. 
At  times,  in  the  evening,  an  old  man  might  rise  up  in  his 
camp,  holding  his  spear  or  some  other  weapon  in  his  hand, 
and  make  an  oration.  Once  when  they  feared  that  another 
tribe  might  come  up  against  them,  an  old  man  stood  up  in 
the  evening  in  this  manner  and  made  a  speech  on  the  subject.^ 

The  Theddora,  who  lived  on  the  sources  of  the  Mitta- 
Mitta,  Tambo,  and  Ovens  Rivers,  were  practically  extinct  by 
the  year  i860,  and  all  I  can  now  say  is  that  they  had 
Headmen,  who  were  called  Turki,  and  whose  authority  was 
much  of  the  same  degree  as  that  of  the  Gweraeil-kurnai  of 
the  Kurnai  tribe. 

I  heard  much  from  the  few  survivors  of  one  Metoko,  who 
combined  the  office  of  Medicine-man  and  Headman,  and  thus 

'  J.  W.  Boulthee.  2  j.  Bulmer. 


302        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

was  the  analogue  of  the  Gomineras  of  the  Yuin  tribe.  Some 
interesting  particulars  are  given  of  the  tribe  by  Mr.  Richard 
Helms,  from  whom  I  quote.  The  oldest  man  of  the  tribe 
was  recognised  as  a  kind  of  chief,  but  whenever  an  attack 
on  some  enemy  was  planned,  the  ablest  warrior  was,  as  a 
rule,  chosen  to  lead,  and  his  advice  then  received  the  endorse- 
ment of  the  old  men.^ 

Some  of  these  old  men  were  known  to  me  by  repute, 
not  only  from  the  survivors  of  the  tribe,  but  also  from  the 
Kurnai,  Wolgal,  and  Ngarigo,  with  whom  I  was  acquainted, 
and  who  had  known  them.  The  principal  one  seems  to 
have  been  the  Metoko  before  mentioned,  who,  it  is  said, 
could,  in  his  character  of  medicine-man,  blow  a  thread,  "  like 
a  spider's  web,"  up  to  the  sky  and  ascend  by  it.  The  principal 
fighting-man  was  '"  Kobbon  Johnny,"  that  is  "  Big  Johnny," 
whose  native  name  I  never  heard.  Other  Headmen  are 
mentioned  in  the  account  of  the  great  Kurnai  blood- feud. 

In  sp>eaking  of  the  tribal  councils,  I  have  described  at 
length  the  Headmen  {Gonnneras)  of  the  Yuin.  Similarly 
there  were  Headmen,  who  combined  the  office  with  that  of 
medicine-man,  in  the  Ngarigo  and  Wolgal  tribes.  When  the 
Wolgal  went  to  fight  they  had  no  regular  leader.  Their 
fights  generally  'commenced  with  a  single  combat,  and  when 
one  or  the  other  was  beaten  the  fight  would  become  general. 
The  old  men  would  direct  operations,  but  in  actual  fighting 
the  combatants  would  not  be  in  any  state  to  be  controlled.'^ 

As  to  the  southern  tribes  of  the  Kamilaroi,  situated  to 
the  northward  of  Maitland,  I  have  evidence  dating  back  to 
about  1830.  There  might  be  two  or  three  Headmen  in 
each  division  of  the  tribe.  Their  position  was  one  of  influ- 
ence and  authority,  and  depended  on  the  valour  of  the 
individual.  It  was  not  hereditary,  but  a  man  who  dis- 
tinguished himself  as  a  warrior  or  orator  would  become  a 
leader  by  mere  force  of  character,  and  his  son,  if  valiant, 
would  be  very  highly  thought  of.  The  oldest  Headman 
would  be  the  chief  or  principal  man  in  the  council  of  elders. 
He  could  carry  a  measure  by  his  own  voice,  as  the  Kamilaroi 

1  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Nnu  South  Wales,  1895,  vol.  x.  p.  387. 

-  J.  Bulmer. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  303 

have  great  respect  for  age.  The  Headman  had  a  great 
amount  of  authority,  and  all  the  disputes  among  the  members 
of  his  division  of  the  tribe  would  be  settled  by  him,  such  a 
man  being  the  Headman  of  his  division,  not  because  he  was 
the  oldest  man  in  it,  but  for  the  reasons  stated.  In  the 
early  days  of  settlement  of  New  South  Wales  a  white  man 
could  not  be  marked  down  for  death  excepting  by  the  voices 
of  the  Headmen ;  and  the  Bora  ceremonies  are  held  by 
their  orders.^ 

In  the  southern  Wiradjuri  a  Headman  is  called  Bidja- 
bidja,  and,  as  I  have  heard  him  described,  is  one  who  "  gives 
orders  to  people,"  there  being  a  Headman  of  this  sort  in 
each  local  division.  The  Bidja-bidja  was  always  a 
medicine-man.  If,  for  instance,  he  were  the  oldest  Yibai, 
and  a  medicine-man,  he  would  be  the  head  of  the  Yibai 
sub-class  ;  but,  assuming  that  he  also  became  the  Headman 
of  the  local  group,  then  all  the  people  of  that  division,  not 
only  of  this  "  Budjan  "  (sub-class),  would  obey  him.  Each 
totem  also  had  its  Headman.  I  have  heard  the  Bidja-bidja 
spoken  of  by  a  term  equivalent  to  "  master,"  this  being  the 
analogue  of  the  Biamban  of  the  Yuin.  The  office  of  Head- 
man was  in  a  sense  hereditary,  for  a  son  would  inherit  the 
position  of  his  father,  if  he  possessed  any  oratorical  or  other 
eminent  ability.  But  if  not,  then  the  son  of  the  brother  of 
the  deceased  Headman  would  probably  hold  the  position, 
and  failing  him  some  qualified  relative  of  the  same  sub- 
class. But  this  was  with  the  consent  of  the  community, 
for  the  office  went  in  fact  by  election  in  each  division. 

The  Headman  called  his  people  together  whenever  it 
was  necessary  for  them  to  assemble  ;  for  instance,  to  hold 
the  Burbung  ceremonies.  At  such  great  meetings  of  the 
tribe,  matters  relating  to  its  interests  were  discussed,  and  the 
course  of  action  as  to  murders,  abduction  of  women,  adultery, 
or  raids  on,  or  by,  other  tribes  were  discussed. 

So  far   as    I    have   been    able    to   ascertain,  there  were 
not  any  recognised    Headmen   in  the  Wakelbura  tribe  ;   the 
strongest    and    best    fighting- men    were    listened    to    in    a 
debate,  and  the  aged  men  held  some  little  authority."' 
1  C.  Naseby.  '■*  J.  C.  Muirhead. 


304        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  said  that  in  the  Dalebura  tribe 
the  government  appeared  to  be  in  the  hands  of  Headmen 
called  Bubi-beri.  But  beyond  this  I  have  not  been  able  to 
learn  anything,  even  from  my  correspondent,  who  had  ex- 
ceptionally favourable  opportunities  of  becoming  acquainted 
with  his  "  faithful  Dale-buras."  ^ 

In  the  Unghi  tribe  there  are  no  chiefs  ;  such  a  thing 
is  unknown  to  them,  although  a  black  of  more  than  average 
courage  may  be  looked  upon  with  greater  respect  than  the 
rest.  They  are  a  community  where  all  are  equal  ;  their  law 
is  communism  ;  whatever  one  gets  is  shared  with  the  others. 
But  it  is  communism  regulated  and  restricted  by  recognised 
rules." 

The  Headman  of  the  Bigambul  tribe  was  the  best 
fighting-man  with  the  strongest  following,  but  a  certain 
degree  of  respect  was  shown  to  the  old  men  and  medicine- 
men.^ 

In  the  Kaiabara  tribe  there  were  two  Headmen,  one 
being  of  the  Kubatine  and  the  other  of  the  Dilebi  class, 
and  they  ruled  their  classes  respectively.  When  one  of 
them  died,  his  son,  or  one  of  the  next-of-kin,  inherited  the 
office  of  the  deceased.  The  Headman  wore  a  band  round 
his  arm  made  of  Bunya  fibre,  as  the  mark  of  his  office.'* 

In  the  tribes  of  the  Wotjo  nation  the  oldest  man  of 
the  local  group  was  its  head  ;  and  the  people,  not  only  of 
his  own  totem,  but  also  of  others  in  the  same  group,  listened 
to,  and  obeyed  hnn.  When  two  or  more  local  groups  were 
together,  their  respective  Headmen  met  and  talked  over 
matters  of  importance.  The  oldest  of  them  was  their  head 
for  the  time,  just  as  the  oldest  man  of  a  totem  is  its  head. 
Such  a  man  sent  out  messengers  on  matters  requiring  an 
assemblage  of  the  totem,  or  of  the  people  of  the  local  group. 

Among  the  MuViarawaint  some  of  the  heads  of  totems 
were  also  Headmen  of  local  groups,  but  unless  such  a  man 
possessed  qualifications  for  the  position,  some  younger  man 
would  be  chosen  in  preference  to  him.  When  the  Headman 
of  a  totem  died,  all   the  totemites  were  called   together  by 

1  R.  Christison.  '  J.  Lalor. 

2  A.  L.  P.  Cameron.  *  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  305 

the  man  next  in  age  ;  and  not  only  the  men  of  the  totem, 
but  every  one — men,  women,  boys,  and  girls.  The  women 
of  the  totem  who  were  married  were  necessarily  with  their 
husbands,  and  were  not  notified.  The  assembly  was  called 
together  in  the  manner  I  have  spoken  of  in  relation  to 
"  messengers." 

When  all  were  assembled  at  the  appointed  place,  they 
formed  a  ring,  the  old  men  with  their  wives  in  the  front 
row,  the  younger  men  with  their  wives  in  the  next,  and 
outside  were  the  young  men  and  the  girls  to  look  on,  but 
not  to  take  any  other  part  in  the  proceedings.  These  were 
commenced  by  one  of  the  elders  speaking,  followed  by  other 
men  ;  finally,  the  .sense  of  the  meeting  was  taken,  and  then 
the  old  men  stated  who  should  be  the  Headman.  The 
choice  being  thus  made,  presents  were  given  to  the  new 
head  by  the  other  Headmen,  who  had  collected  things  from 
their  people,  such  as  opossum  or  pther  skin  rugs  or  weapons. 

If  a  Headman  offended  the  tribes-people,  or  was  in  some 
respects  very  objectionable  to  them,  the  other  Headmen 
would  at  some  great  tribal  meeting  consult  at  the  Jun  or 
council-place,  and  perhaps  order  him  to  be  killed.  This 
probably  would  be  carried  out  under  the  personal  direction 
of  one  of  them. 

I  was  not  able  to  learn  of  an  instance  where  a  son 
necessarily  succeeded  liis  father  in  this  office. 

As  the  totems  were  scattered  over  the  whole  of  the 
country,  and  as  there  was  a  Headman  in  cch  local  division, 
the  men  of  totems  other  than  his  had  to  obey  him  as  to 
general  matters,  while  they  had  to  obey  the  head  of  their 
own  totem  in  matters  relating  to  it.  This  will  be  brought 
out  in  speaking  of  the  ordeal  by  combat  in  this  tribe. 

When  important  matters  are  discussed  by  the  old  men 
of  the  Jupagalk  tribe,  a  fire  is  made  at  the /<?/«,  or  meeting- 
place.  Here  they  would  talk  over  such'  cases  as  that  of  a 
man  who  had  approached  a  woman  who  was  of  too  near 
Yaiierin  (flesh)  to  him,  and  whom  he  could  not  therefore 
marry.      The  Jajaurung  call  the  Jain^  Ulambara. 

The  office  of  Headman  was,  in  the  Gournditch-mara 
tribe,    hereditary,  and   when  a   Headman    died,  his  son,  or 

X 


3o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


failing  him  a  near  male  relative,  became  Headman.  This 
was,  as  the  Gournditch-mara  say,  the  law  of  the  tribe  before 
the  white  men  came  to  the  country.  He  had  the  power  of 
declaring  hostilities  against  other  tribes,  and  when  he  did  so 
the  tribes-people  followed  him.  He  settled  all  quarrels  and 
disputes,  and  when  he  had  done  this  no  one  questioned  it. 
When  forays  had  been  made  on  some  neighbouring  tribe, 
and  spoil  had  been  taken,  he  divided  it,  taking  the  best  for 
himself.  The  men  of  his  tribe  were  obliged  to  provide  him 
with  food,  and  to  make  presents  to  him,  such  as  skin  rugs, 
stone  tomahawks,  flint  knives,  weapons,  etc.^ 

This  tribe  is  one  of  those  which  Mr.  Dawson  described 
in  his  work  before  quoted. 

As  to  those  tribes,  Mr.  Dawson  says  that  every  tribe 
has  its  chief,  who  is  looked  on  in  the  light  of  a  father,  and 
whose  authority  is  supreme.  He  consults  with  the  best  men 
of  the  tribe,  but  when  he  announces  his  decision,  they  dare 
not  contradict  or  disobey  him.  If  a  chief  leaves  home  for 
a  short  time  he  is  always  accompanied  by  a  friend,  and  on 
his  return  is  met  by  two  men  who  conduct  him  to  his 
Wuz/rn  (hut).  When  a  tribe  is  moving  from  one  part  of 
the  country  to  another,  the  chief,  accompanied  by  a  friend, 
precedes  it,  and  obtains  from  the  next  chief  permission  to 
pass,  before  his  followers  cross  the  boundary.  When 
approaching  a  friendly  camp  the  chief  walks  at  the  head  of 
his  tribe  ;  a  strange  chief  approaching  a  camp  is  met  at  a 
short  distance  by  the  chief,  and  invited  to  come  and  sit 
down  ;  a  fire  is  made  for  him,  and  then  he  is  asked  where  he 
comes  from  and  what  is  his  business. 

When  a  chief  dies,  the  best  male  friend  of  the  deceased 
is  appointed  to  take  charge  of  the  tribe  until,  at  its  next 
great  meeting,  the  succession  is  decided  by  the  votes  of  the 
chiefs.  The  eldest  son  is  appointed,  unless  there  is  some 
good  reason  for  setting  him  aside.  Failing  him,  the  office 
goes  to  the  deceased  chief's  eldest  brother,  or  to  his  younger 
brothers  and  their  successors." 

I  have  quoted  from   Mr.  Dawson  in  his  own  words,  but 

1  J.  H.  Stable. 
^  J.  Dawson.      7'/ie  Australian  Aborigines,  pp.  5,  6. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  307 

if  the  word  "Chief"  is  replaced  by  the  term  "Headman," 
his  description  falls  in  with  much  that  I  have  said  as  to 
the  office  of  Headman  in  the  Wotjobaluk  and  other 
tribes  of  Western  Victoria.  But  in  the  tribes  described  by 
Mr.  Dawson,  the  succession  by  the  eldest  son  seems  to  have 
been  much  more  established,  and  as  he  had  such  exceptional 
opportunities  of  observation,  from  nearly  the  settlement  of 
the  State,  I  accept  his  account  as  accurate. 

The  Wurunjerri  serve  as  an  example  of  the  practice  of 
the  tribes  which  formed  the  Kulin  nation.  The  old  men 
governed  the  tribe,  and  among  them  there  were  men  called 
Ngurungaeta.^  If  a  man  was  sensible  and,  as  Berak  put  it, 
"  spoke  straight,"  and  did  harm  to  no  one,  people  would 
listen  to  him  and  obey  him.  Such  a  man  would  certainly 
become  a  Ngurungaeta,  if  his  father  was  one  before  him. 
It  was  he  who  called  the  people  together  for  the  great  tribal 
meetings,  sent  out  messengers,  and,  according  to  his  degree 
of  authority,  gave  orders  which  were  obeyed.  Such  a  man 
was  always  of  mature  age,  and  possessed  of  some  eminent 
qualities,  for  which  he  was  respected. 

At  an  expiatory  combat  he  could  put  an  end  to  it,  if  he 
thought  that  enough  had  been  done.  There  is  a  passage  in 
the  life  of  Buckley  which  bears  on  the  powers  of  the 
Ngurungaeta."  He  says,  "  I  had  seen  a  race  of  children 
grow  up  into  women  and  men,  and  many  of  the  old  people 
die  away,  and  by  my  harmless  and  peaceable  manner 
amongst  them  had  acquired  great  influence  in  settling  their 
disputes.  Numbers  of  murderous  fights  I  had  prevented  by 
my  interference,  which  was  received  by  them  as  well  meant ; 
so  much  so  that  they  would  often  allow  me  to  go  among 
them  previous  to  a  battle  and  take  away  their  spears  and 
waddies  and  boomerangs."  This  shows  that  Buckley  had, 
by  reason  of  age  and  consideration,  grown  into  the  position 
of  a  Ngurungaeta  or  Headman.  So  far  as  my  inquiries 
have  gone,  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  out  that  such  an 
interference  by  a    Ngurungaeta,  as  spoken   of  by  Buckley, 

1  This  term  was  used  by  the  Thagunworung  also.  The  Jajaurung  term  was 
Nge-im-etch. 

'^  John  Morgan,  Life  and  Adventures  of  William  Buckley,  p.  loi.  Hobart, 
1852. 


3o8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

would  be  ineffective.  The  Kulin  would  not  have  refused  to 
obey  such  an  interference,  unless  in  a  case  where  public 
opinion  happened  to  be  very  strongly  divided  and  one  side 
were  against  him.  In  the  case  of  ceremonial  ordeals  and 
expiations,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  later  on, 
such  interference  by  a  Headman  has  been  effectual  in  staying 
the  hands  of  his  own  men,  and  apparently  those  of  the  other 
side  also. 

Among  the  Kulin  there  was  a  Headman  in  each  local 
group,  and  some  one  of  them  was  recognised  as  being  the 
head  of  all.  Some  were  great  fighting- men,  others  were 
orators,  and  one  who  lived  at  the  time  when  Melbourne  was 
established,  w'as  a  renowned  maker  of  songs  and  was  con- 
sidered to  be  the  greatest  of  all. 

If  a  Headman  had  a  son  who  was  respected  by  the 
tribes-people  he  also  would  become  a  Ngurungaeta  in  time. 
But  if  he  were,  from  the  native  point  of  view,  a  bad  man, 
or  if  people  did  not  like  him,  they  would  get  some  one  else, 
and  most  likely  a  relative  of  some  former  Headman,  such 
as  his  brother  or  brother's  son. 

A  Headman  could  order  the  young  men  of  the  camp  to 
do  things  for  him  and  they  would  obey  him.  He  might,  as 
I  have  heard  it  put,  say  to  the  young  men,  "  Now  all  of  you 
go  out,  and  get  plenty  of  'possums  and  give  them  to  the  old 
people,  not  raw  but  cooked."  Similarly  the  wife  of  the 
Ngurungaeta  could  order  the  young  women  about. 

Each  Headman  had  another  man  "  standing  beside 
him,"  as  they  say,  to  whom  he  "  gave  his  words."  This 
means  that  there  was  a  second  man  of  somewhat  less 
authority,  who  was  his  comrade,  or  rather  "  henchman,"  who 
accompanied  him  when  he  went  anywhere,  who  was  his 
mouthpiece  and  delivered  his  orders  to  those  whom  they 
concerned.  When  the  Headman  went  out  to  hunt  with  his 
henchman,  or  perhaps  with  two  of  them,  if  he  killed  game, 
say  a  wallaby,  he  would  give  it  to  one  to  carry  ;  if  he  killed 
another,  the  other  man  would  carry  it,  and  it  was  only  when 
he  obtained  a  heavy  load  that  he  carried  anything  himself. 

The  account  of  these  Headmen  given  by  William 
Thomas,  who  was  Protector  of  the  Blacks  in  the  early  years 


TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  309 


of  the  settlement  of  Port  Phillip,  falls  into  line  with  the 
particulars  which  I  have  given.  I  have  condensed  his 
statements  as  follows  :  ^  "  Each  tribe  has  a  Chief  who  directs 
all  its  movements,  and  who,  wherever  he  may  be,  knows 
where  all  the  members  of  the  community  are.  The  Chief, 
with  the  aged  men,  makes  arrangements  for  the  route  each 
party  is  to  take,  when  the  tribe,  after  one  of  its  periodical 
meetings,  again  separates. 

"  Besides  the  Chiefs,  they  have  other  eminent  men,  as 
warriors,  counsellors,  doctors,  dreamers  who  are  also  inter- 
preters, charmers  who  are  supposed  to  bring  or  drive  rain 
away,  and  also  to  bring  or  send  away  plagues,  as  occasion 
may  require." 

Such  are  Mr.  Thomas's  statements.  He  had  great 
opportunities  for  obtaining  information,  for,  as  he  says,  he 
was  "  out  with  them  for  months,"  but  it  is  much  to  be 
regretted  that  he  did  not  place  on  record  the  very  many 
facts  which  he  must  have  seen  as  to  their  beliefs  and 
customs,  which  would  have  been  invaluable  now. 

The  Wurunjerri  tribe  of  the  Woeworung-speaking  people 
gives  a  good  example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  lesser 
divisions  (clans)  were  arranged,  and  of  the  relation  to  them 
of  the  Ngurungaeta.  In  order  to  make  clearer  what  I  shall 
have  to  say  about  the  Headman,  it  will  be  necessary  to  say 
that  when  Melbourne  was  established,  the  tribe  was  divided 
into  three  parts.  One,  called  Kurnaje-berring  was  sub- 
divided into  those  who,  under  their  Headman  Bebejern, 
occupied  the  country  from  the  Darebin  Creek  to  the  sources 
of  the  Plenty  River,  and  those  who,  under  their  Headman 
Billi-billeri,^  lived  on  the  east  side  of  the  Saltwater  River, 
up  to  Mt.  Macedon.^  The  second  division  lived  about  the 
Yarra  Flats,  under  their  Headman  Jakki-Jakki,^and  occupied 

'  Letters  from  Victorian  Pioneers,  p.  65,  Thomas  Francis  Bride,  LL.D., 
Government  Printer,  Melbourne,  1899. 

*  William  Thomas  says  of  this  man  ^^  Bi-li-bel-la-ri  was  the  Chief  of  the 
Yarra  tribe.  He  stands  foremost,  and  justly  so,  as  ever  having  been  the  white 
man's  friend,  generous,  frank  and  determined  as  he  was"  (op.  cit.  p.  70). 
"The  good  old  Billi-billary  "  [Impressions  of  Australia,  Richard  Howitt,  1845). 

■''  Jtirawait  is  the  name  of  this  mountain. 

*  This  is  one  of  those  men  whose  names  2&  Jagajaga  appear  as  grantors  in 
Batman's   celebrated   deed.      My   Woeworung,    Thagunworung,  and   Jajaurung 


3IO        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

also  the  country  on  the  northern  slopes  of  the  Dandenong 
Mountains.  The  third  division  was  the  "  real  Wurunjerri," 
who  dwelt  on  the  western  side  of  the  Saltwater  River,  and 
as  far  as  Mt.  Macedon,  under  their  Headman  Bungerim. 

Immediately  adjoining  the  Wurunjerri  country,  on  the 
west  side,  was  that  of  the  Kurnung-willam  ^  who  were  also 
Woevvorung,  and  whose  Headman  was  called  Ningu-labul,^ 
but  was  named  by  the  white  men  "  Captain  TurnbuU."  He 
was  a  great  maker  of  songs,  which,  as  Berak  said,  "  made 
people  glad  when  they  heard  them,"  but  when  he  sang  one 
of  them  to  me,  it  had  the  contrary  effect,  for  it  made  hfm 
shed  tears.  Ningu-labul  came  of  a  family  of  gifted  singers, 
for  his  father  and  grandfather  had  been  renowned  song- 
makers,  and  this,  as  well  as  his  own  poetical  power,  was  the 
cause  of  his  great  authority  as  a  Ngurungaeta,  not  only  in 
his  own  tribe,  but  also  in  those  adjoining.  The  case  of  this 
man  shows  how  headmanship  was  hereditary  in  a  family, 
whose  members  were  gifted  beyond  their  fellows. 

On  the  northern  side  of  Mt.  Macedon  were  the  Gal-gal- 
bulluk  part  of  the  Jajaurung  tribe,  whose  Headman  was 
known  by  the  white  people  as  "  King  Bobby,"  and  who  was 
the  "partner"^  of  Ningu-labul.  If  the  latter  wished  to 
bring  people  from  further  north,  he  sent  "  his  word "  to 
Bobby,  who  in  his  turn  sent  it  on  by  the  next  near  Headman. 
To  the  westward  of  Ningu-labul  was  the  country  of  the  Kri- 
balluk,  whose  Headman  was  a  great  medicine-man  called 
Doro-bauk  mentioned  in  Chap.  VHI. 

To  the  south  of  the  Wurunjerri  was  a  clan  of  the  Bunurong 
tribe,  called  the  Yalukit-willam,  whose  Headman  was  Benbu.* 

Most  of  the  Headmen  were  related  to  each  other  by 
marriage,  and  thus  in  a  family  such  as  that  of  Ningu-labul, 
where  there  was  a  tendency  for  authority  to  become 
hereditary,  there  was  the  germ  of  a  practice  which,  under 

informants  ridiculed  the  idea  of  the  marks  appended  by  them  to  the  deed  having 
any  meaning,  beyond  that  of  imitation  of,  or  compliance  with,  what  Batman 
showed  them. 

1  Ktirnnng  means  "creek,"  and  willam  is  "camp." 

2  This  name  means  ''shining,"  as  explained  to  me,  "like  the  sun  shining  on 
a  smooth  stone,"  that  is,  reflected  from  it. 

3  Letters  from  Victorian  Pioneers,  Thomas,  p.  70. 
*  Op.  cit.  Thomas,  p.  70. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  ,311 

favourable  circumstances,  might  have  estabhshed  a  privileged 
family,  such  as  some  of  my  correspondents  have  spoken  of 

In  tracing  out  these  connections  between  the  several 
Headmen,  it  became  clear  to  me  that  they  exercised  much 
influence  in  making  the  Ngurungaetas.  Thus  it  was  Ningu- 
labul,  whose  influence  made  Bebejern  and  Billi-billeri  Head- 
men. The  former  and  other  old  men  made  Bungerim  a 
Ngurungaeta. 

The  right  to  hunt  and  to  procure  food  in  any  particular 
tract  of  country  belonged  to  the  group  of  people  born  there, 
and  could  not  be  infringed  by  others  without  permission. 
But  there  were  places  which  such  a  group  of  people  claimed 
for  some  special  reason,  and  in  which  the  whole  tribe  had 
an  interest.  Such  a  place  was  the  "  stone  quarry  "  at  Mt. 
William  near  Lancefield,  from  which  the  material  for  making 
tomahawks  was  procured.  The  family  proprietorship  in  this 
quarry  had  wide  ramifications,  including  more  than  Wurunjerri 
people.  On  the  one  side  it  included  the  husband  of  Billi- 
billeri's  sister,  one  of  the  Headmen  of  the  Kurnung-willam, 
who  lived  at  Bacchus  Marsh,  and  who  was  named  Nurrum- 
nurrum-biin,^  that  is,  "moss  growing  on  decayed  wood."  On 
another  side  it  included  Ningu-labul,  and  in  another  direction 
Bebejern,  the  son  of  an  heiress  in  quarry  rights,  from  whom 
an  interest  came  to  Berak  through  his  father  Bebejern.  But 
it  was  Billi-billeri,  the  head  of  the  family  whose  country  in- 
cluded the  quarry,  who  lived  on  it,  and  took  care  of  it  for 
the  whole  of  the  Wurunjerri  community.  When  he  went 
away,  his  place  was  taken  by  the  son  of  his  sister,  the  wife 
of  Nurrum-nurrum-biin,  who  came  on  such  occasions  to  take 
charge,  when  it  may  be  assumed,  like  Billi-billeri,  he  occupied 
himself  in  splitting  stone  to  supply  demands.  The  enormous 
amount  of  broken  stone  lying  about  on  this  mountain  shows 
that  generations  of  the  predecessors  of  Billi-billeri  must  have 
laboured  at  this  work. 

When  neighbouring  tribes  wished  for  some  stone  they 
sent  a  messenger  to  Billi-billeri  saying  that  they  would  send 
goods   in  exchange   for  it,  for   instance,  such   as  skin-rugs. 

'   Probably  the  Mttr-niin-Miir-rum-bcau,  mentioned  by  Thomas  in  Letters 
from  Vutorian  Pioneers,  p.  73. 


312        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

When  people  arrived  after  such  a  message  they  encamped 
close  to  the  quarry,  and  on  one  occasion  Berak  heard  Billi- 
billeri  say  to  them,  "  I  am  glad  to  see  you  and  will  give  you 
what  you  want,  and  satisfy  you,  but  you  must  behave  quietly 
and  not  hurt  me  or  each  other." 

If,  however,  people  came  and  took  stone  without  leave, 
it  caused  trouble  and  perhaps  a  fight  between  Billi-billeri's 
people  and  them.  Sometimes  men  came  by  stealth  and 
stole  stone.  I  have  heard  Berak  speak  of  such  a  case,  and 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  met  is  described  further  on. 

Stone  tomahawks  and  axes  are  made  either  from  water- 
worn  pebbles  or  pieces  split  from  larger  blocks  of  stone. 
The  former  was  the  practice  in  Gippsland,  where  suitable 
material  is  very  plentiful  in  the  mountain  streams.      Both 


FIG.    14. — STONE   AXE,    GROUND. 

methods  were  used  by  the  Kulin  tribes.  The  material  for 
the  latter  of  the  two  was  supplied  by  the  stone  quarry  at 
Mt.  William. 

A  Kurnai  man  having  found  a  waterworn  stone  suitable 
for  his  purpose,  first  of  all  chipped  or  pounded  the  part 
intended  for  the  cutting  edge  with  a  hard  rounded  pebble, 
then  having  brought  it  somewhat  into  shape,  he  rubbed  it 
down  on  a  suitable  rock  in  the  bed  of  a  stream  until  he  had 
produced  a  good  edge.  This  process  was  much  more  ex- 
peditious than  might  be  expected.  Pieces  of  grinding-stone 
which  abraded  quickly  were  kept,  and  even  carried  from 
camp  to  camp  for  the  purpose  of  sharpening  the  edge  when 
necessary. 

Such  methods  are  also  used  in  Central  Au.stralia  by 
tribes  inhabiting  hilly  country,  such  as  the  Mardala,  to  the 
southward  of  Lake  Eyre. 

A  side-light  is  thrown  on  the  position  and  powers  of  these 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  .  313 

Headmen  by  a  passage  in  Knopwood's  account  of  Colonel 
Collins'  attempt  to  form  a  settlement  in  Port  Phillip  Bay 
in  the  year  1803.^  A  party  who  were  surveying  "at  the 
north-west  point  of  the  bay  "  were  met  by  a  number  of  natives, 
who,  on  a  shot  being  fired  over  their  heads,  "  ran  away  a 
small  distance,  but  soon  approached  again  with  the  king, 
who  wore  a  very  elegant  turban  crown  and  was  always 
carried  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  men.  Whenever  he  desired 
them  to  halt,  or  to  approach,  they  did  it  immediately."  The 
fact  that  he  was  carried  by  his  men  may,  however,  mean  no 
more  than  that  he  was  from  some  cause  unable  to  walk. 

In  reference  to  the  office  of  the  man  for  which  I  have 
thought  the  expression  "  henchman "  not  inappropriate,  it 
may  be  observed  that  he  stands  a  little  at  one  side  of,  and 
to  the  rear  of,  his  principal.  The  henchman  of  Ningu-labul 
was  the  brother  of  Berak's  father,  Bebejan,  whose  henchman 
was  a  man  named  Winberi.'*  These  men  seem  to  have  had 
the  same  position  as  "  the  friend,"  who,  Mr.  Dawson  says, 
accompanied  the  "  Chief"  of  one  of  the  tribes  described  by 
him. 

In  the  Yerkla- mining  tribe  the  medicine-men  are  the 
Headmen,  and  are  called  Mobung-bai,  from  mobung,  "  magic." 
They  decide  disputes,  arrange  marriages,  and,  under  certain 
circumstances,  settle  the  formalities  to  be  observed  in 
combats  by  ordeal,  and  conduct  the  ceremonies  of  initiation. 
They  cut  the  gashes  which,  when  healed,  denote  the  class  of 
the  bearer,  or  his  hardihood  and  prowess.  In  fact,  they 
wield  authority  in  the  tribe,  and  give  orders  where  others 
only  make  requests.^ 

In  the  Narrang-ga  tribe  the  office  of  Headman  was 
hereditary  from  father  to  son,  and  there  was  one  in  each  of 
the  four  tribal  divisions.  The  eldest  of  them  was  most 
considered.  One  Headman,  who  was  living  in  the  year  1887, 
was  a  man  probably  over  eighty  years  of  age,  and  therefore 
was    alive    before   the   establishment    of   Adelaide,  and    he 

'  Journal  of  the  Rev.  Knojnvood :  Historical  Records  of  Port  Phillip,  p.  92. 
J.  Shillinglaw,  Government  Printer,  Melbourne,  1870. 

2  As  to   Wiuheri,  Thomas  says,  op,  cit.   p.  74,   "  the  unfortunate   Winbai 
(shot  by  Major  Lettsonvs  party)." 

3  D.  Elphinstone  Roe. 


314        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

inherited  his  office  from  his  father.  His  son  had  in  that 
year  already  some  authority  in  the  tribe.  Other  old  men 
of  nearly  the  same  age  were  unanimous  in  affirming  the 
above  statements  as  to  the  Headmanship  in  this  tribe.^ 

According  to  the  account  given  to  me  by  the  Rev.  George 
Taplin,  and  afterwards  confirmed  and  extended  by  his  son, 
the  late  Mr.  W.  Taplin,  there  was  a  Headman  in  each  of 
the  clans,  who  was  called  Riipulli.  He  was  the  leader  in 
war,  and  in  battles  he  was  carefully  guarded  by  the  warriors 
of  his  clan.  The  office  was  not  hereditary,  but  a  Headman 
was  elected  by  the  heads  of  families,  who  chose  either  the 
son  or  brother  of  the  deceased  Headman  as  seemed  best.^ 

In  the  Yuin  tribe  there  was  a  Headman  in  each  of  the 
local  divisions.  He  was  called  Govnnera,  and,  to  be  fitted 
for  the  office,  must  be  a  medicine-man,  be  aged,  able  to 
speak  several  languages  (dialects),  be  skilful  as  a  fighting- 
man,  and  be,  above  all,  able  to  perform  those  feats  of  magic 
which  the  Govimeras  exhibit  at  the  initiation  ceremonies. 

Although  there  were  totems,  they  differed  from  the 
totems  of  other  tribes,  in  so  far  that  they  were,  as  the  Yuin 
say,  "  more  like  a  Join  than  a  name,"  and  there  was  no 
totemic  Headman,  such  as  those  who  were  found  in  the 
Wotjobaluk  tribe. 

The  Gommera  was  also  called  Biatnban,  which  may  be 
rendered  as  "  master,"  and  in  his  particular  locality  he 
dictated  to  his  people.  All  the  Gommeras  were  Biamban, 
and  the  greatest  was  he  who  could,  as  the  Yuin  say,  "  bring 
the  greatest  number  of  things  up  out  of  himself"  at  the 
ceremonies. 

There  was  a  head  Gommera,  named  Waddyman,^  who 
died  about  1884  at  a  great  age.  His  account  of  himself 
was  that,  when  a  little  boy,  he  was  taken  by  the  then  head 
Gommera,  and  trained  by  him,  so  that  he  might  take  his 
place  when  he  died. 

The  power  of  these  men  is  riveted  on  the  younger  men 

1  T.  M.  Sutton. 

^  See  also  The  Narrinyeri,  by  Rev.  G.  Taplin.     Adelaide,  1873. 

3  IVaddyman  is  a  free  translation  of  the  term  applied  to  those  of  the  Yuin 
who  live  back  from  the  sea,  and  gain  their  food  mainly  by  climbing  trees  for  it. 
A  waddy  is  a  "  tree,"  "  wood,"  hence  also  a  "  stick,"  a  "  club." 


^ 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  315 

by  the  impressive  instructions  which  are  given  at  the  initia- 
tion ceremonies,  as  to  the  impHcit  obedience  to  be  given  to 
their  orders,  and  also  by  the  apparently  supernatural  powers 
which  they  exhibit  thereat.  But  the  Gouinieras  also  ad- 
monish their  people  directly,  as  when  one  of  them  stands  up 
by  his  camp  fire  and  tells  those  present  about  the  old  laws 
which  they  must  obey. 

When  Sydney  was  established  in  1788,  the  natives  of 
Botany  Bay,  Port  Jackson,  and  Broken  Bay  were  found  to 
be  living  distributed  into  families,  the  head,  or  senior,  of 
which  exacted  compliance  from  the  rest.  When  the  English 
met  with  families,  they  were  always  accosted  by  the  person 
who  appeared  to  be  the  eldest  of  the  party,  while  the  women, 
youths  and  children  were  kept  at  a  distance.  The  word 
which  in  their  language  signifies  "  father "  was  applied  to 
their  old  men  ;  and  when  after  .some  time,  and  by  close 
observation,  they  perceived  the  authority  with  which  Governor 
Phillip  commanded,  and  the  obedience  which  he  exacted, 
they  bestowed  on  him  the  distinguishing  appellation  of 
Bc-anna  or  "  father."  The  title  being  conferred  solely  on  him 
(although  they  perceived  the  authority  of  masters  over  their 
servants)  places  the  true  sense  of  the  word  beyond  a  doubt, 
and  proves  that  to  those  among  them  who  enjoyed  that 
distinction  belonged  the  authority  of  a  Chief 

When  any  of  them  went  into  the  town,  they  were  im- 
mediately pointed  out  by  their  companions,  or  those  natives 
who  resided  in  it,  in  a  whisper,  and  with  an  eagerness  of 
manner  which,  while  it  commanded  the  attention  of  those  to 
whom  it  was  directed,  impressed  them  likewise  with  an  idea 
that  they  were  looking  at  persons  remarkable  for  some 
superior  quality  even  among  the  savages  of  New  South 
Wales.^ 

In  the  Gringai  tribe  there  was  a  Headman  called  Nur- 
jain,  who  must  have  been  an  aged  man  before  he  was  much 
thought  of  The  ofifice  is  said  to  have  been  in  a  certain 
family,  the  members  of  which  were  either  Ipai  or  Kumbo. 
Assuming  this  to  have  been  so,  it  follows  that  descent  must 
have  been  in  the  male  line  in  this  tribe,  which  is  a  departure 

'  Collins,  op.  cit.  p.  35. 


3i6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

from  the  Kamilaroi  practice.  This  is  not,  however,  improb- 
able, for,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  male  descent  is  common  in 
some  of  the  tribes  of  south  Queensland,  which  have  the 
Kamilaroi  class  names.  The  medicine-man  {Kuratchi)  was 
not  necessarily  a  Headman.^ 

Among  the  Geawe-gal,  the  best  man  in  war  would  be 
recognised  by  them  as  principal  adviser,  and  would  have 
authority  by  consent  of  the  elders.  When  the  son  proved 
himself  a  capable  warrior,  the  office  has  been  hereditary,  but 
without  such  proof,  there  was  no  possibility  of  his  being 
accepted.  A  Koradji  (medicine-man)  might  be  such  a 
leader.  In  every  case,  however,  the  leading  or  chief  man 
would  be  only  primus  inter  pares,  and  be  liable  to  be 
set  aside  by  the  old  men,  if  his  directions  were  disap- 
proved of.^ 

Mr.  Dawson,  in  speaking  of  the  tribes  at  Port  Stephens 
as  they  were  about  the  year  1830,  says  positively  that 
there  were  no  Chiefs,  but  that  there  were  certain  leading 
characters  who  had  more  influence  than  others  among  the 
multitude  when  assembled.  No  one  was  invested  with  or 
assumed  any  authority  whatever  in  the  tribe.^ 

In  the  Kurnai  tribe,  age  was  held  in  reverence,  and  a 
man's  authority  increased  with  years.  If  he,  even  without 
being  aged,  had  naturally  intelligence,  cunning  and  courage, 
beyond  his  fellows,  he  might  become  a  man  of  note,  weighty 
in  council,  and  a  leader  in  war  ;  but  such  a  case  was  ex- 
ceptional and,  as  a  rule,  authority  and  age  went  together. 
The  authority  of  age  also  attached  to  certain  women  who 
had  gained  the  confidence  of  their  tribes-people.  Such 
women  were  consulted  by  the  men,  and  had  great  weight 
and  authority  in  the  tribe.  I  knew  two  of  them,  who  being 
aged,  represented  the  condition  of  the  Kurnai  before  Gipps- 
land  was  settled.  Together  with  the  old  men,  they  were 
the  depositaries  of  the  tribal  legends  and  customs,  and  they 
kept  alive  the  stringent  marriage  rules  to  which  I  have 
referred  elsewhere,  thus  influencing  public  opinion  very 
strongly.      Possibly  the   reason   for  this  may  have   been    in 

1  J.  W.  Boydell.  ^  G.  W.  Rusden. 

3  Op.  cit.  p.  327. 


TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  317 


part  that  in  this  tribe  the  women  take  part  in  the  initiation 
ceremonies  up  to  a  certain  point. 

When  Gippsland  was  settled  in  1842,  there  were  two 
principal  Headmen  who  were  recognised  as  their  Gwcraeil- 
kuruai,  or  Great  Men.  One  lived  in  the  northern  and  the 
other  in  the  southern  part  of  the  district.  These  men  were 
the  recognised  leaders.  One  was  a  great  fighting-man  ;  the 
other  less  so,  but  he  was  also  a  great  medicine-man.  There 
were  also  Gweraeil-kurnai  in  the  local  divisions,  and  it  is 
significant  that  some  of  these  men  gave  their  names  to  the 
divisions,  of  which  they  were  respectively  the  Headmen. 
This  may  be  seen  on  inspection  of  the  table  of  clans  in 
Chapter  H. 

How  a  man  gradually  increased  in  influence  as  he 
increased  in  years  is  shown  by  the  case  of  the  last  Gweraeil- 
kurnai.  He  was  the  man  Bunbra,  whom  I  shall  mention 
when  speaking  of  the  expiatory  combats  later  on  in  this 
chapter.  I  watched  this  man's  career  during  many  years. 
Since  the  time  of  the  expiatory  combat,  in  which  he  was  the 
defendant,  the  old  men,  who  were  successively  the  leaders  of 
the  people,  had  died  off,  until  Hunbra  came  to  be  the  oldest 
man  left.  The  name  by  which,  apart  from  his  English 
name,  he  was  known,  is  Jetbolan,  or  the  Liar  ;  but,  by  reason 
of  age,  he  finally  became  the  Gweraeil-kurnai.  During  the 
same  time  Tulaba,  the  tribal  son  of  the  former  great  Head- 
man IJruthen-munji,  had  also  grown  into  age,  and  much 
consideration  attached  to  him  in  his  twofold  character,  as 
one  of  the  elders  and  as  being  a  worthy  son  of  the  former 
Headman.  During  this  time  the  pressure  of  our  civilisation 
had  broken  down  the  tribal  organisation  ;  the  white  man's 
vices,  which  the  Kurnai  had  acquired,  had  killed  off  a  great 
number,  the  remainder  had  mostly  been  gathered  into  the 
mission -stations,  and  only  a  few  still  wandered  over  their 
ancestral  hunting-grounds,  leading  their  old  lives  in  some 
measure,  and  having  apparently  abandoned  their  ancestral 
customs.  When,  however,  it  was  decided  that  the  Jeraeil 
ceremony  should  be  revived  for  the  instruction  of  their  young 
men,  I  observed  with  much  interest,  that  the  old  tribal 
organisation  arose  again,  so   to   say,  out  of   the  dust,  and 


3i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

became  active.  Bunbra  who,  at  the  time  when  Bruthen- 
munji  directed  the  proceedings  of  the  Nungi-nungit  against 
him,  was  a  comparatively  young  man,  and  without  any 
consideration  in  the  tribe,  was  now  by  reason  of  his  age  its 
Headman,  to  whom  all  matters  were  referred.  To  him 
messengers  were  sent,  he  gave  orders  as  to  the  time  for 
assembling,  and  the  others  obeyed  them.  Indeed,  without 
him  they  would  not  have  moved  at  all. 

At  the  Jeraeil  ceremonies  he  was  the  leader,  and  it  was 
mainly  his  voice  that  decided  questions  which  arose  and 
were  discussed  at  meetings  of  the  initiated  men.  When 
during  the  ceremonies  two  of  the  novices  were  brought  before 
the  old  men  charged  with  having  broken  some  of  the 
ceremonial  rules,  it  was  Bunbra  who  spoke  last,  and  his 
directions  as  to  them  were  followed. 

In  one  of  the  intervals  of  the  ceremonies  at  the  Jeraeil, 
when  I  was  sitting  with  some  of  the  old  men  ;  they  spoke  of 
the  old  times,  and  what  was  very  unusual,  of  the  old  men 
who  were  now  dead,  and  of  their  great  actions.  I  could 
understand  then  how  they  came  to  be  the  Gweraeil-kurnai 
of  the  tribe.  One  of  those  they  mentioned  was  a  man  of 
the  Brataualung  clan,  who  in  a  fight  with  one  of  the  other 
clans,  ran  ahead  of  his  men  and  broke  the  legs  of  some  of 
the  enemy  with  his  hands,  leaving  them  to  be  killed  by  his 
followers.  So  also  another  man  of  the  Brayaka,  who  lived 
near  where  Rosedale  now  is,  used  in  wet  winters,  when  the 
ground  was  very  soft  with  rains,  to  run  down  the  old  men 
kangaroos,  and  thus  catch  them  with  his  hands,  and  kill 
them.  Another  old  hero  was  Bruthen-munji,  whom  I  have 
mentioned  before.  It  was  said  that  he  ran  down  one  of  the 
Brajerak,  at  a  place  now  known  as  Blackfellow's  Gully,  near 
Buchan,  and  held  him  till  his  brother,  another  fighting- man 
of  renown,  came  up  and  killed  him  with  his  club. 

In  the  Chepara  tribe  there  was  a  Headman  called 
Kulumba-mutta,  that  is,  "  Great  Man,"  and  in  the  Chepara 
clan  of  the  tribe  it  was  the  Kulumba-mutta  of  it  who  was 
superior  to  any  of  the  other  Headmen. 

The  office  of  Headman  descended  to  the  son  ;  if  there 
were  no  son,  then   to  the  daughter's  son  ;  and,  failing  this. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  319 

to  the  brother  of  the  deceased.  If  a  Headman  became 
incapacitated,  or  for  some  other  reason  did  not  fill  his  office 
satisfactorily,  the  old  men  would  set  him  aside,  and  select 
some  one  of  the  above  mentioned  in  his  place,  but  the 
medicine-man  did  not  necessarily  become  a  Headman.^ 

These  instances  extend  over  a  great  part  of  the  south- 
eastern quarter  of  Australia,  and  they  have  been  recorded 
either  from  my  own  observation  or  from  that  of  competent 
correspondents.  I  have  also  as  in  former  chapters  quoted 
from  certain  authors,  either  because  their  remarks  have  a 
special  bearing  on  tJie  subject-matter  in  question,  or  to 
complete  more  fully  the  details  of  my  subject.  But  in  those 
cases  I  have  exercised  my  judgment  as  to  the  individual 
value  of  their  evidence,  when  compared  with  that  of  others. 

I  have  shown  that  there  are,  and  were,  men  recognised 
as  having  control  over  the  tribes-people,  and  whose  directions 
are  obeyed.  Such  men  receive  designations  which,  in  some 
cases,  may  be  translated  "  Elder "  or  "  Great  One."  This 
evidence  justifies  the  conclusion  that  in  other  tribes  within 
the  area  which  my  evidence  covers  there  were  also  such 
Headmen.  No  doubt,  in  some  tribes,  their  power  and 
authority  have  been  better  established  than  in  others,  while  in 
certain  of  them  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  office  of  Headman 
to  be  transmitted  from  father  to  son,  if  the  latter  be  found 
worthy.  But  the  area  to  which  my  evidence  refers  is  but 
one  quarter  of  the  continent,  and  the  investigations  of 
Spencer  and  Gillen  show  that,  in  the  Arunta  and  others  of 
the  same  group  of  tribes,  there  is  not  such  a  marked  authority 
attaching  to  certain  leading  men  as  I  have  found  to  be 
especially  the  case  in  the  coast  tribes  of  south-eastern 
Australia. 

Simply  as  a  question  of  terminology,  it  is  well  to  avoid 
the  use  of  the  word  Chief,  because  it  inevitably  suggests  by 
its  associations  the  hereditary  chieftainship,  with  which  we 
are  familiar  in  some  of  the  South  Sea  tribes.  But  the 
statement  of  some  authors  is  most  certainly  erroneous  that 
there  are  no  men  who  have  controlling  powers,  and  that 
each  man   may  do  what   is   right  in   his  own   eyes,  without 

'  J.  Gibson. 


320        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


regard  to  other  considerations  than  retaliation  by  the  in- 
dividual, or  his  kindred,  who  may  suffer  by  his  action. 

I  have  chosen  the  term  Headman  as  being  less  likely  to 
be  misunderstood  than  that  of  Chief,  which  has  associations 
not  applicable  to  the  Australian  savage.  But  if  we  must  use 
the  word  Chief  to  imply  a  person  having  power  to  direct  the 
people  of  his  class  or  tribe,  and  that  his  directions  or  orders 
are  obeyed  by  them,  then  I  say  that  the  Pinnaru,  Gweraeil- 
kuntai,  the  Ngitrutigaeta,  and  the  Govimcra  are  Chiefs. 
Although  when  compared  with  those  of  well-known  tribes  in 
other  parts  of  the  world,  their  power  is  limited,  yet  it  is  an 
actual  power  to  command,  coupled  with  a  certain  measure  of 
ability  to  compel  obedience. 

Such  are  the  Headmen  of  certain  tribes  ;  but  there  are 
other  men  of  mature  age  who  exercise  a  degree  of  authority 
associated  with  them,  and  beyond  them  there  is  a  large 
group,  composed  of  all  "  full  men,"  that  is,  of  all  the  men 
who  have  been  initiated  in  the  sacred  mysteries  of  the  tribe. 

The  Tribal  Council 

I  have  constantly  observed  in  those  tribes  with  which  I 
have  had  personal  acquaintance,  that  the  old  men  met  at  some 
place  apart  from  the  camp  and  discussed  matters  of  import- 
ance, such  as  arrangements  to  be  made  for  hunting  game, 
for  festive  or  ceremonial  meetings,  or  indeed  any  important 
matter.  Having  made  up  their  minds,  one  of  them  would 
announce  the  matter  at  another  meeting,  at  which  all  the 
men  would  be  present,  sitting  or  standing  round,  the  younger 
men  remaining  at  the  outside.  At  such  a  meeting,  the 
younger  the  man  the  less  he  would  have  to  say,  indeed,  I 
never  knew  a  young  man  who  had  been  only  lately  admitted 
to  the"  rights  of  manhood  presume  to  say  anything  or  to 
take  any  part  in  the  discussion.  All  that  they  have  to  do 
as  part  of  the  assembly  is  to  listen  to  what  the  elders  have 
to  say. 

In  the  Dieri  tribe  such  meetings  as  these  are  composed 
of  the  heads  of  totems  or  local  divisions,  fighting- men, 
medicine-men,  and,  generally  speaking,  of  old  men  of  stand- 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  321 

ing  and  importance.  That  is  to  say,  of  the  men  who  have 
been  present  at  the  series  of  ceremonies  described  in  an- 
other chapter.  The  younger  men  look  forward  for  years  to 
the  time  when,  having  been  present  at  the  great  Mindari 
ceremony,  they  will  be  permitted  to  appear,  and  ultiipately 
to  speak  at  the  council  of  men.  These  meetings  are  so 
secret  that  to  reveal  what  takes  place  at  them  is  punished  by 
death.^ 

Mr.  Gason,  speaking  of  these  councils,  informed  me  that 
it  was  only  after  a  long  time,  and  when  he  had  learned  to 
speak  the  Dieri  language,  that  he  was  permitted  to  be 
present  at  these  meetings.  The  proceedings  were  directed 
by  the  principal  Headman,  and  among  the  matters  which  it 
dealt  with  were  :  procuring  death  by  magic,  as  for  instance, 
*'  by  the  bone,"  murder,  breach  of  the  tribal  moral  code, 
offences  against  tribal  customs,  revealing  the  secrets  of  the 
tribal  council,  or  the  secrets  of  the  initiation  ceremonies  to 
women  or  to  the  uninitiated. 

Offences  against  the  moral  code  would  be  intercourse 
with  a  woman  of  the  same  uiurdu,  or  who  was  too  nearly 
related  to  the  accused.  Interference  with  the  wife  of 
another  man,  she  being  Noa-inara  to  the  offender,  would  be 
merely  a  personal  matter  to  be  revenged  by  the  injured 
husband,  or  by  the  kindred  in  a  fight. 

When  a  person  had  been  adjudged  guilty  of  having 
caused  the  death  of  another  by  magic,  he  was  killed  by  an 
armed  party  (Pinya)  sent  out  by  the  Headman. 

The  council  also  made  arrangements  for  holding  the 
great  ceremonies,  and  on  ceremonial  occasions  it  reallotted 
the  several  pairs  of  Pirraurus,  as  before  explained. 

Such  a  meeting  was  summoned  by  some  old  man, 
instructed  by  the  Headman.  If  the  matter  was  of  import- 
ance, he  introduced  it,  and  in  doing  so  he  adhered  to  the 
ancient  customs  of  their  fathers.  If  all  were  agreed  to  some 
course  the  council  separated,  if  not,  then  it  met  at  some 
future  time. 

Everything  relating  to  the  council  is  kept  profoundly 
secret  from  those  who  have  not  the  right  to  be  present  at  it. 

'  S.  Gason. 

y 


322        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

As  I  have  before  said,  Mr.  Gason  was  for  over  two  years 
unable  to  obtain  permission  to  be  present  at  it.  He  sought 
permission  in  the  broken  English  usually  spoken  to  the 
natives  by  the  white  men,  he  tried  intimidation,  and  he  tried 
the  effect  of  presents,  without  avail.  It  was  only  when  he 
had  acquired  a  command  of  the  Dieri  language,  and  a 
knowledge  of  their  customs,  that  he  attained  his  wish. 
The  tribe  then  said  that  Kiichi  must  have  instructed  him  ; 
and,  as  he  worked  on  their  superstitions  by  favouring  this 
idea,  the  Dieri  at  length  permitted  him  to  attend  their 
council,  and  assist  at  their  ceremonies,  until  at  length  he 
was  accepted  as  a  fully  initiated  man  when  any  great 
ceremony  was  about  to  take  place.  My  own  experience 
is  much  in  line  with  that  of  Mr.  Gason.  It  was  only  after 
I  became  one  of  the  initiated  in  the  Yuin  tribe,  that  I  was 
present  at  meetings  of  the  old  men  at  places  apart  from  the 
camp,  at  which  matters  of  tribal  importance  were  discussed. 
The  meeting-place  where  these  councils  are  held  is  called  by 
various  names  in  different  tribes.  For  instance  by  the  Yuin 
it  is  Katir-than}  Jnn  by  the  Wotjobaluk,  and  Jain  by  the 
Jajaurung.  In  order  to  announce  a  meeting,  I  have  seen 
the  leading  man  pick  up  a  lighted  stick  from  his  camp  fire, 
and,  looking  round  at  the  other  men,  walk  off  to  the 
appointed  place. 

It  is  well  to  quote  Mr.  Gason's  own  description  to  me  of 
the  proceedings  of  a  council  at  which  he  was  present : — 

I  have  frequently  attended  at  their  councils  by  invitation,  and 
on  occasions  they  gave  me  permission  to  speak.  I  was  thus  able 
to  save  the  life  of  a  man  who  was  charged  with  having  caused  the 
death  by  magic  of  another  person.  Two  of  the  members  of  the 
council  also  dared  to  speak  in  favour  of  their  friend,  the  accused, 
and  they  afterwards  made  me  presents  of  several  bags  and  weapons 
for  my  advocacy  of  him.  Three  years  after,  however,  he  was 
cruelly  killed  by  order  of  the  council,  for  an  offence  which  he  had 
not  committed,  but  with  which  his  enemies  had  charged  him. 

After  the  principal  Headman  has  spoken,  the  heads  of  totems 
address  the  assembly.  The  manner  of  speaking  is  by  the  repetition 
of  broken  sentences,  uttered  in  an  excited  and  at  times  almost 
frenzied   manner.      Those   who   coincide  with   the  speaker  repeat 

'  Quick  Speech. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  323 

his  sentences  in  a  loud  voice,  but  no  one  comments  on  what  he 
says  until  it  comes  to  his  turn  to  speak. 

The  council  always  breaks  up  peaceably,  but  quarrels  sometimes 
follow  it,  although  the  camp  is  not  allowed  to  know  the  real  cause 
of  disagreements,  for  the  secrets  of  the  council  are  always  kept  as 
sacredly  as  those  of  a  masonic  lodge.  The  greatest  cruelties  are 
threatened  against  any  one  who  should  divulge  its  secrets,  which  are 
many.  I  have  never  heard  the  younger  men  or  the  women  utter 
a  word  which  could  convey  the  idea  that  anything  had  been 
communicated  to  them, 

I  have  often  been  cautioned  not  to  divulge  what  I  had  there 
heard  and  seen,  nor  to  repeat  to  strangers  any  words  uttered  there, 
until  they  had  convinced  me  that  they  had  passed  through  the 
ceremony  of  Karawali  wonkana. 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe,  as  my  valued  correspondent  Mr. 
T.  Petrie  tells  me,  there  was  no  regular  council,  but  the  old 
men  met  and  consulted  on  such  matters  as  hunting,  fishing, 
or  the  death  of  any  person.  They  sent  out  messengers 
when  the  time  for  making  Kippers  came  round,  or  when  the 
mullet  came  in,  or  the  Bunya-bunya  fruit  was  ripe.  What 
he  describes  is,  however,  the  council  of  which  I  speak,  and 
it  falls  in  with  other  instances.  In  speaking  of  the  "  Bunya 
tribe,"  he  also  says  that  when  the  "  council  "  of  old  men  has 
met,  and  decided  on  holding  a  Bunya  feast,  they  send  out 
two  medicine-men  as  messengers  to  friendly  tribes. 

In  the  tribes  within  a  radius  of  about  fifty  miles  of 
Maryborough  ^  the  old  men  made  up  their  minds  as  to  the 
course  to  be  followed  in  any  matter,  by  having  afternoon 
meetings  held  in  private,  a  little  way  from  the  camp,  women 
and  young  men  not  daring  to  approach  within  hearing. 
Those  of  the  old  men  who  choose  attend  such  secret 
councils,  and  in  the  evening  they  orate,  standing  in  their 
camps,  and  some  of  them  make  fine  speeches. 

The  old  men  governed  the  tribe,  but  also  consulted  the 
people  on  matters  which  had  to  be  decided.  This  they  did 
by  standing  at  their  fires  and  speaking  to  all  on  the  questions 
under  consideration. 

As  the  tribes  spoken  of  by  Mr.  Aldridge  met  with  the 
Turrbal  at  great  tribal  gatherings,  his  remarks  as  to  the 
»  H.  E.  Aldridge. 


324        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

council  of  old  men  illustrates  Mr.  Petrie's  statements,  and 
seem  to  show,  as  I  have  said,  that  the  old  men  in  it  met 
and  consulted  in  secret  on  matters  relating  to  the  tribe. 

In  the  Kaiabara  tribe  the  old  men  held  conferences  on 
all  matters  of  importance,  sitting  in  a  circle,  with  their  clubs 
placed  on  the  ground  before  them,  the  younger  men  being 
allowed  to  stand  round  and  listen,  but  not  to  laugh  or  speak. 
One  man  at  a  time  made  a  speech,  while  the  others  listened.^ 

The  Buntamurra  tribe  on  the  Bulloo  River,  Queensland, 
hold  a  council,  sitting  within  a  circle  of  spears  stuck  in  the 
ground,  inside  of  which  the  young  men  must  not  come, 
neither  must  they  talk  or  laugh." 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  the  old  men  formed  a  kind  of 
council,  and  the  oldest  man  among  them  was  their  head. 
The  place  where  these  men  met  was  called  /««,  whether  it 
was  the  meeting-place  of  the  old  men  of  a  small  local  group, 
or  of  those  of  the  whole  tribe  when  it  met  on  some  great 
occasion.  The  younger  men  are  permitted  to  come  to  the 
Jun,  but  not  on  all  occasions,  and,  if  admitted,  are  expected 
to  sit  near  and  listen,  but  are  not  allowed  to  take  part  in 
the  discussion. 

The  various  Ngurungaeta  of  the  Kulin  tribes,  when  they 
met,  decided  when  the  great  tribal  meetings  should  take 
place,  and  also  consulted  about  matters  of  tribal  importance, 
such  as  the  initiation  of  the  boys,  marriages,  etc. 

The  government  of  the  Narrang-ga  tribe  is  in  the  hands 
of  the  old  men  who,  with  the  Headmen,  form  a  council 
which  deals  with  tribal  matters,  such  as  the  initiation 
ceremonies,  and  from  time  to  time  meets  to  discuss  some- 
thing of  importance.  That  this  council  is  formed  only  by 
those  men  who  have  an  inherited  authority,  is  emphasised 
by  the  fact  that  the  medicine-men  {Guriidra)  are  not,  as 
such,  entitled  to  be  present,  nor  are  the  young  men  allowed 
to  be  present  at  these  meetings,  unless  specially  invited. 
Women  are  altogether  excluded  from  them.  Cases  have, 
however,  occurred  where  men,  distinguished  perhaps  by 
great  oratorical  powers,  have  been  invited  to  join  the 
deliberations  of  this  council.      It  decides  what  shall  be  done 

^  Jocelyn  Brooke.  ^  J.  H.  Kirkham. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  325 

in  cases  of  breach  of  tribal  laws,  the  punishment  for  some 
breaches  being  in  olden  times,  death.^ 

In  the  Narrinyeri  each  clan  has  a  council  of  its  elders, 
called  Tendi.  When  a  member  of  a  Tendi  dies,  the 
surviving  members  select  a  suitable  man  from  the  clan  to 
succeed  him.  The  Headman  {Rupullt)  of  the  clan  presides 
over  this  council.^ 

In  the  Yuin  tribe  the  initiated  men  assemble,  when 
circumstances  require  it,  at  some  place  apart  from  the  camp, 
where  matters  are  discussed  relating  to  the  tribe.  Women 
or  children,  that  is,  the  uninitiated  members  of  the  tribe, 
dare  not  come  near  the  spot.  I  have  been  present  at  such 
meetings  ;  the  elder  men  sit  in  the  front  line,  the  younger 
farther  off,  and  the  Gomvieras  usually  a  little  apart  from  the 
others,  although  with  them,  and  take  a  prominent  part  in 
the  discussion.  I  was  struck  by  the  restrained  manner  of 
the  younger  men  at  these  meetings. 

At  other  times  the  Gouimeras  meet  alone,  to  arrange 
matters  for  future  discussion  in  the  general  meeting  of  the 
initiated  men. 

In  the  Geawe-gal  tribe  the  old  men  met  in  council  at  night, 
when  the  younger  men  might  be  present,  but  were  not 
allowed  to  speak.^ 

In  the  Gringai  tribe  the  tribal  council  consists  of  the 
oldest,  and  as  a  rule  the  most  intelligent  men.  Mr.  A. 
Hook  once  came  suddenly  upon  a  group  of  old  men  sitting 
in  a  circle  in  deep  deliberation,  and  was  told  by  one  of 
them  in  a  whisper  not  to  tell  the  other  blacks  what  he  had 
seen. 

In  the  old  times  the  Headmen,  and  other  prominent  men 
of  the  Kurnai  tribe,  took  an  active  part  in  dealing  with 
breaches  of  tribal  customs  or  native  morality.  It  was  by  the 
Gweraeil-kurnai  and  the  other  old  men  that  important 
matters  were  decided,  such  as  the  Jeraeil  ceremonies,  the 
arrangement  of  the  Nungi-nimgit^  and  raids  on  other  clans, 
or  neighbouring  tribes.  But  in  all  cases  these  men  were  in 
touch  with  the  men  somewhat  younger  than  themselves,  and 

1  T.  M.  Sutton.  2  Rev.  G.  Taplin  and  F.  W.  Taplin. 

3  G.  W.  Rusden. 


326        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

had  probably  discussed  with  them  the  matters  which  the 
elders  dealt  with. 

The  elder  men  of  the  clan  formed  a  council  in  the  Chepara 
tribe.  This  council  recognised  the  Headman  of  the  clan  as 
its  head.  In  momentous  proceedings  such  as  the  Bora,  they 
were  all  subordinate  to  the  Headman  ^  of  the  tribe.  In  this 
they  were  analogous  to  the  Yuin,  where  there  was  a  principal 
Gouiuiera,  who  was  the  leader  of  the  others  when  they  were 
all  assembled  together. 

Such  are  the  powers  that  govern  the  tribe,  and  I  shall 
now  relate  the  punishments  for  tribal  and  individual  offences 
and  the  manner  in  which  those  punishments  are  carried  out. 

The  Punishment  of  Offences 

When  a  man  dies  in  the  Dieri  tribe,  it  is  thought  he  has 
been  killed  by  some  one  through  the  action  of  evil  magic,  for 
instance,  by  "  pointing  with  the  bone,"  or  "  striking  with  the 
bone,"  as  it  is  called,  a  practice  which  I  have  described  else- 
where. 

When  a  man  has  been  adjudged  by  the  council  to  have 
killed  some  one  by  evil  magic,  an  armed  party  called  Pinya  is 
sent  out  to  kill  him. 

The  appearance  at  a  camp  of  one  or  more  natives  marked 
with  a  white  band  round  the  head,  with  the  point  of  the  beard 
tipped  with  human  hair,  and  with  diagonal  red  and  white 
stripes  across  the  breast  and  stomach,  is  the  sign  of  a  Pinya. 
These  men  do  not  speak,  and  their  appearance  is  a  warning 
to  the  camp  to  listen  attentively  to  the  questions  they  may 
think  it  necessary  to  put  regarding  the  whereabouts  of  the 
condemned  man.  Knowing  the  discipline  of  a  Pinya  and  its 
remorseless  spirit,  any  and  every  question  is  answered  in 
terror,  and  many  a  cowardly  man  in  his  fear  accuses  his 
friend  or  even  his  relative,  and  it  is  on  this  accusation  that 
the  Pinya  throw  the  whole  of  the  responsibility  of  the  death 
they  inflict.  When  the  deed  is  done,  the  Pinya  is  broken  up, 
and  each  man  returns  to  his  home.^ 

A  recent  instance  of  a  Pinya  and  its  course  of  action  is 

'  J.  Gibson.  2  s_  Gason. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  327 

the  following,  and  it  must  be  premised  that  under  all 
circumstances  the  Neyi  (elder  brother)  is  the  protector  of  his 
Ngatata  (younger  brother).  For  instance,  if  there  is  some 
trouble  in  the  "  fighting  place  "  with  a  man,  his  elder  brother 
hastens  to  it,  and  calls  on  the  adversary  to  deal  with  him. 
Similarly  when  a  Pinya  has  judicially  condemned  some  native 
to  death,  the  penalty  of  death  does  not  fall  upon  the  offender, 
but  on  his  eldest  brother  at  that  place.  In  the  case  referred 
to,  a  man  with  several  companions  came  to  a  camp  near  Lake 
Hope.  A  man  had  lately  died  at  Perigundi,  from  whence 
they  came,  and  in  order  that  they  might  be  received  by  the 
people  at  Lake  Hope,  they  halted  twenty  yards  from  the 
camp  and  there  gathered  the  spears  and  boomerangs  that 
were  thrown  at  them  ceremonially  by  one  of  the  Lake 
Hope  men,  they  being  as  usual  easily  warded  off.  Then 
going  nearer,  they  again  halted  and  warded  off  the  weapons 
thrown,  and  again  moved  on,  until,  being  close  together,  the 
man  from  Perigundi  and  the  man  from  Lake  Hope  should 
have  taken  hold  of  each  other,  and  sat  down  together.  But 
the  former,  not  taking  heed  of  the  position  of  the  sun  and 
being  dazzled  by  its  rays,  was  unable  to  ward  off  the  spear 
thrown  at  him,  which  entered  his  breast,  and  he  died  in  the 
night.  His  companions  fled  to  Perigundi  and  there  formed 
a  Pinya  of  a  number  of  men,  and  returned  to  Lake  Hope. 
The  leader  of  this  was  a  man  called  Mudla-kupa,  who  sud- 
denly appearing  one  evening  placed  himself  before  him  who  had 
killed  the  Perigundi  man,  and  seizing  his  hand  announced  his 
sentence  of  death.  An  elder  brother  of  this  man  drew  Mudla- 
kupa  to  one  side,  saying,  "  Don't  seize  my  Ngatata,  nor  even 
me,  for  see,  there  sits  our  Neyi ;  seize  him."  At  the  same 
time  he  threw  a  clod  of  earth  in  the  direction  in  which  the  man 
was.  Mudla-kupa  now  turned  to  him,  seized  him  by  the 
hand,  and  spoke  the  death  sentence  over  him,  which  he 
received  with  stoical  composure.  Mudla-kupa  led  him  to  one 
side,  when  the  second  man  of  the  Pinya  came  up,  and  as 
Mudla-kupa  held  the  man  out  to  him  as  the  accused,  he 
struck  him  with  a  maru-iviri^  and  split  his  head  open.    The 

'  A  weapon  shaped  like  a  great  boomerang,  which  is  used  with  both  hands  like 
a  sword. 


328        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

whole  Pinya  then  fell  upon  him  with  spears  and  boomerangs. 
In  order  that  they  should  not  hear  how  he  was  being  killed, 
the  other  men,  women,  and  children  in  the  camp  made  a 
great  rustling  with  boughs  and  broken-off  bushes. 

The  same  Pinya  executed  about  the  same  time  two 
Pinnarus  (elders),  who  lived  at  other  places.  It  was 
reported  that  they  strangled  one,  and  brought  him  to  life 
again  (that  is,  they  allowed  him  to  recover),  and  the  following 
night  they  burned  the  froth  which  came  from  his  mouth 
when  he  was  being  strangled.  It  was  supposed  that  this 
caused  his  death.  In  another  case  the  Pinya  thrust  a  spear 
into  the  side  of  the  condemned  man,  so  that,  as  the  Kunki 
(medicine-man)  said,  "  his  heart  was  pierced,"  and  then 
withdrew  it.  The  Kunki  closed  the  wound  with  sinew  and 
the  man  lived  for  several  days  before  he  died.  It  was  then 
said  that  the  Kunki  killed  him,  brought  him  to  life,  and 
finally  killed  him  again.* 

As  coimected  with  the  Pinya,  it  may  be  well  to  state  here 
the  manner  in  which  the  blood  revenge  is  avoided  by  the  Dieri. 

When  a  death  occurs  which  would  be  followed  up  by 
the  Pinya  as  just  explained,  there  is  a  practice  which  may 
be  said  to  act  as  a  sort  of  peacemaking,  in  so  far  that  the 
two  parties  show  that  by  a  respective  bartering  of  goods, 
they  put  aside  all  enmities,  and  will  shed  no  more  blood 
on  account  of  the  man  killed,  whether  by  "  giving  the  bone  " 
or  otherwise.  A  late  instance  of  this  practice  called  Ynt- 
yunto  at  Kopperamana,  will  show  how  it  acts. 

A  Lake  Hope  man,  one  Ngurtiyilina,  who  had  lived  for 
a  long  time  at  Kopperamana,  died  in  the  year  1899,  ^^  a 
place  half-way  between  there  and  the  Salt  Creek.  His 
elder  brother  was  one  Mandra-pirnani,^  much  feared  for  his 
strength,  and  the  blacks  among  whom  Ngurtiyilina  lived 
sent  to  him  through  their  Headman  a  Yut-yunto,  a  "  cord," 
which  being  tied  round  his  neck,  authorised  him  to  collect 
articles  for  barter  with  them.  These  were  collected  from 
the  Kumari-kana  ^  belonging  to  Kopperamana,  Kilallpanina, 
and    the    surrounding    country.       When    he    had    collected 

^  O.  Siebert.  2  ]\fandra,  "belly";  firnani,  "great." 

^  Kumari,  "blood";  Kana,  "men." 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  329 

sufficient  articles  for  barter,  messengers  were  sent  out  to 
carry  information  as  to  where  and  when  the  meeting  would 
take  place,  Mandra-pirnani  with  a  large  following  proceeded 
to  the  appointed  spot,  sending  off  and  also  receiving 
messengers  by  the  way.  Meanwhile  a  great  number  of  men 
and  women  had  collected  at  the  "  bartering  place,"  awaiting 
the  arrival  of  the  Yut-yunto-kana  and  his  companions.  These 
had  made  their  last  camp  a  few  miles  off  in  order  to  arrive 
at  the  appointed  place  early  in  the  day. 

On  the  following  morning  they  approached  it  in  a  column, 
with  the  Yut-yunto-kana  as  its  leader,  as  if  prepared  for 
combat,  and  the  two  contingents  of  the  other  party,  also 
under  their  leaders.  The  men  were  all  armed  with  boom- 
erang, shield  and  spear,  and  fully  painted  as  a  Pinya.  Those 
of  them  who  had  participated  in  the  funeral  feast  had  a  ring 
of  charcoal  powder  drawn  round  the  mouth.  Immediately 
behind  this  armed  band  were  the  women  carrying  all  the 
articles  provided  for  barter. 

The  two  parties  being  now  near  to  each  other,  the  leader 
of  the  Yut-yunto  danced  his  war-dance,  pointing  now  to  the 
left  and  now  to  the  right  with  his  spear,  while  stamping 
rhythmically  with  his  feet.  The  leader  of  the  other  party 
now  came  forward,  and,  approaching  the  leader  of  the  Yut- 
yunto,  ceremonially  seized  the  cord  round  his  throat,  and 
breaking  it,  cast  it  into  a  fire.  This  being  done,  he  said, 
"  Wordari yindi  workarai  ?  "  (How  do  you  come  ?)  "  Yindi 
tiri  workarai?"  (Do  you  come  in  enmity?)  To  which  the 
Yut-yunto  answered,  "Aai!  nganai  murlari  workarai^  (Oh 
no  !  I  come  peacefully  !)  Then  the  other  said,  "  That  being 
so,  we  will  exchange  our  things  in  peace."  As  a  sign  of 
peace,  they  embraced  each  other,  and  then  sat  down  amicably 
together.  While  this  was  going  on,  the  inferior  leaders  had 
been  dancing  their  war-dance  opposite  each  other,  and  the 
party  of  Mandra-pirnani  was  led  round  by  the  inferior 
Headman  to  the  left  side  of  the  bartering  place,  where  they 
sat  down  behind  him.  The  other  party  then  moved  on  to 
it,  and  sat  down  behind  their  Headman.  The  women  of 
each  party  crouched  behind  it,  carefully  concealing  the 
articles  for  barter  from  the  eyes  of  the  opposite  side. 


330        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA   ch.  vi 

Now  the  leader  of  one  of  the  parties  caused  one  of  the 
articles,  a  shield  or  boomerang,  to  be  handed  to  him.  It 
was  passed  from  the  last  man  to  the  first,  all  standing  in  a 
row,  and  each  man  passing  it  between  the  legs  of  the  man 
in  front  of  him,  so  that  it  was  not  seen  until  produced  to 
the  leader,  who  stood  at  the  head  of  the  line.  He,  on 
receiving  it,  threw  it  down  between  the  parties  with  an 
important  air.  Then  one  of  the  other  side  threw  on 
it  some  article  in  exchange,  for  instance,  a  bundle  of  cord 
for  tying  up  the  hair.  In  this  way  article  after  article  was 
exchanged,  and  then  the  Kumari-kai^a  asked,  "Are  you 
peaceable?"  In  this  case  the  reply,  I  believe,  was,  "Yes, 
we  are  well  satisfied."  Each  person  took  the  articles  he 
had  obtained  by  barter. 

If  in  these  cases  the  parties  are  not  satisfied,  there  is 
first  an  argument,  and  then  a  regulated  combat  between  all 
the  men  present.^ 

Men  of  a  Pinya  use  bunches  of  emu  feathers  in  a 
decoration  called  Kalmlurn.  The  head  net  is  called  Kaka- 
billi.     The  name  applied  to  emu  feathers  is  JMaltara. 

These  are  also  used  for  dance  decoration,  called  either 
Maltara  or  Ngaru.  The  decoration  is  a  large  bunch  fastened 
to  the  head,  or  single  feathers  worked  into  a  band  which 
encircles  the  head.  They  are  not,  however,  used  in  decora- 
tions which  consist  mainly  of  white  cockatoo  feathers. 

The  emu  dance  of  the  Dieri  tribe  is  called  Maltara. 
In  the  Molongo  dance,  which  was  brought  down  to  the 
Dieri  country  from  the  north-east,  bunches  of  Maltara  were 
worn  suspended  from  the  hips  (Fig.  15). 

An  instance  of  what  seems  to  have  been  the  punishment 
of  an  offense  against  the  tribe  came  partly  under  my  own 
knowledge.  On  my  second  expedition  I  had  with  me  one  of 
the  Dieri  from  Blanch- water,  which  was  at  that  time  the  farthest 
out-station  in  the  far  north  of  South  Australia.  He  ac- 
companied me  through  the  country  of  his  tribe,  and  beyond 
it  as  far  as  the  Diamantina  River,  and  when  about  where 
Birdville  now  is,  he  ran  away  fearing,  as  he  told  me  after- 
wards, that  1  was  going  still  farther  north.      Some  time  after 

'  Otto  Siebert. 


332        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

I  returned  from  the  expedition,  I  learned  that  he  had  been 
killed  by  an  armed  party  from  his  own  tribe,  who  chased 
him  for  some  nine  miles  before  he  was  overtaken  and  killed. 
The  reason  given  for  this,  was  that  he  had  been  too  familiar 
with  the  white  men,  and  served  them  as  guide.  This  I  have 
mentioned  elsewhere. 

In  the  Tongaranka  tribe  offences  against  the  marriage 
laws  and  class  rules  were  punished  by  death,  and  the  whole 
tribe  took  the  matter  in  hand.  Individual  offences,  such  as 
theft,  were  dealt  with  by  the  individual  wronged,  by  spear  or 
other  weapon.^ 

In  the  southern  Kamilaroi  disputes  about  hunting- 
grounds,  and  trespasses  on  them,  occasioned  numerous 
parleys,  which  sometimes  settled  the  matter.  At  one  such 
meeting,  some  fifty  years  ago,  there  were  two  white  men 
with  guns  in  the  camp  of  the  weaker  party,  who  boasted 
that  with  their  assistance  ihey  would  kill  all  their  opponents. 
These  declared  that  they  did  not  care,  but  would  fight.  The 
friends  of  the  white  men  then  advised  them  to  go  home, 
because  if  any  disaster  happened  in  the  fight,  their  lives 
would  be  certainly  taken  for  it.  They  left,  and  a  messenger 
was  sent  to  tell  their  adversaries  that  the  white  men  had 
gone.  It  was  then  decided  that  an  equal  number  from  each 
side  should  fight  the  next  day.  But  after  all,  this  dispute 
was  settled  by  single  combat." 

In  the  Wiradjuri  tribes  there  is  an  assembly  of  the 
initiated  men,  at  which  the  Headmen  discuss  matters  and 
decide  what  is  to  be  done.  Such  matters  are,  for  instance, 
disputes  with  other  tribes,  dealing  with  tribal  offences,  and 
similar  circumstances.  In  cases  of  abduction  of  women, 
adultery,  or  murder,  and  where  the  offender  has  escaped  to 
his  own  local  division,  or  to  a  neighbouring  tribe,  the  course 
is  as  follows.  If  the  Headman  decide  that  he  is  to  be 
killed,  the  people  with  whom  he  has  taken  refuge  are  re- 
quired by  messenger  to  give  him  up.  If  they  refuse  to  do 
so,  there  is  a  fight  between  them.  If  in  this  the  offender's 
tribe  is  routed,  no  more  is  done,  but  the  offender  is  always 
in  danger  of  being  killed,  if  possible. 

1  J.  W.  Boultbee.  2  c.  Naseby. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  333 

There  was  ordeal  by  combat  in  the  tribes  living  within 
fifty  miles  of  Maryborough  (Queensland).  A  man  died,  and 
a  relative  saw  in  a  dream  the  person  who  had  killed  him  by 
magic.  He  walked  up  to  this  man,  who  was  of  another 
camp,  while  he  was  blowing  up  his  camp  fire,  and  striking 
him  on  the  back  of  the  neck,  nearly  killed  him.  The 
friends  of  this  man  then  sent  a  messenger  to  the  offender 
telling  him  that  "  he  was  afraid  to  come  to  their  camp." 
He  went  and  fought  with  them,  one  after  the  other,  with 
club  and  shield.  This  case,  however,  differed  from  the  usual 
custom,  in  so  far  that  both  men  were  armed,  whilst  in  the 
expiatory  fights  the  defendant  merely  had  a  shield,  to  defend 
himself  against  the  attacks  of  the  aggrieved  people.^ 

Among  the  Buntamurra  all  offences  are  punished  by 
the  tribe.  The  relations  of  the  injured  man  fight  and  thrash 
the  offender.^ 

When  two  divisions  of  the  Kaiabara  tribe  fell  out  about 
some  man's  offence,  and  his  people  supported  him,  a 
challenge  was  sent  to  them.  The  challenge  is  vouched 
for  by  a  boomerang-shaped  piece  of  wood,  the  two  ends  of 
which  are  coloured  white,  while  the  middle  is  coloured  with 
red  ochre,  and  has  a  shell  tied  to  one  of  the  ends.  If  the 
challenge  is  accepted  by  the  people  to  whom  it  is  sent,  they 
keep  the  stick  and  shell.  If  however  they  do  not  feel 
themselves  sufficiently  strong,  and  are  afraid  to  meet  the 
other  side,  they  break  the  shell  on  a  stone,  as  a  sign  that 
they  acknowledge  themselves  to  be  beaten,  and  send  the 
stick  back. 

If  two  blacks  quarrel  over  a  woman,  the  tribe  does  not 
interfere  if  they  are  of  the  same  class,  and  the  stronger  of 
the  two  keeps  the  woman.  But  if  the  men  are  of  different 
classes,  then  the  tribe  interferes  and  settles  the  matter.* 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe  individual  quarrels  were  settled  by 
a  stand-up  fight.  Ceremonial  combats,  and  also  expiatory 
combats,  arose  at  the  initiation  ceremonies,  or  out  of  abduc- 
tion of  women,  or  the  belief  that  a  person  had  been  killed 
by  magic.      At  the  ceremonial  combats  the  men  were  painted 

'   H.  E.  Aldridge.  2  J.  H.  Kirkham. 

3  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


334        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        en. 

black  on  one  side  of  their  bodies  and  white  on  the  other 
side.  The  face  was  as  black  as  charcoal  and  grease  could 
make  it,  except  the  nose,  which  was  re.d-ochred.^ 

A  man  of  one  of  the  neighbouring  tribes  was  living  with 
the  Wiimbaio,  but  became  suspected.  They  thought  that 
he  might  return  to  his  own  tribe  and  take  something  with 
him  which  had  belonged  to  some  Wiimbaio  person,  and  by 
which  he  might  do  that  person  harm.  They  also  thought 
that  he  might  take  away  with  him  one  of  their  women. 
Tlierefore  he  was  doomed  by  the  old  men,  and  when  out 
hunting  with  the  other  men,  they  all  threw  their  spears  at 
him  and  killed  him." 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  private  quarrels  were  settled  on 
the  spot  by  the  parties.  If  their  anger  was  very  hot,  pos 
sibly  in  the  camp,  otherwise  in  the  open  near  it.  Each  man 
would  be  armed  with  the  weapon  called  by  them  the  Lai-au- 
wil  (the  Laiangal  of  the  Wurunjerri),  and  they  would  fight 
till  blood  was  drawn  and  their  anger  appeased.  The  friends 
would  interfere  if  it  seemed  likely  that  their  man  would  be 
injured  or  killed.  After  the  combat,  if  they  still  remained 
at  variance,  some  woman,  such  as  the  mother  or  sister  of 
one  of  them,  would  go  to  them,  and  reason  with  them,  and 
persuade  them  to  be  friends. 

When  a  serious  offence  occurred  and  the  offender  be- 
longed to  some  one  of  the  other  local  divisions,  the  custom 
was  to  send  a  messenger  {Wirri-gir)  to  call  on  him  to  come 
forward  and  undergo  punishment.  In  such  a  case,  if  he 
were  a  man  of  consequence,  or  if  the  affair  caused  much 
feeling  among  the  people,  all  the  totemites  of  each  of  the 
men  assembled  under  their  respective  Headmen  at  the 
place  agreed  on. 

Such  a  case  occurred  in  the  Mukjarawaint  tribe,  and  was 
reported  to  me  by  a  man  of  the  Garchuka  totem,  whose 
brother  and  maternal  grandfather  had  for  some  matter  of 
personal  offence  killed  a  man  of  the  black  snake  ( Wulernunf) 
totem.  They  speared  him  at  night,  when  sleeping  in  his 
camp,  and  escaped,  but  were  seen  and  recognised  by  his 
wife.     The  relatives   of  the   deceased   sent  a    Wirri-gir  to 

'  Tom  Petrie.  ^  Dr.  M'Kinlay. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  335 

the  offenders,  telling  them  to  look  out  for  themselves  and  be 
prepared  for  revenge.  A  messenger  was  sent  in  reply  saying 
that  they  should  come  with  their  friends,  and  that  they 
would  be  prepared  to  stand  out  and  have  spears  thrown  at 
them.  There  was  then  a  great  meeting  of  the  respective 
totems,  the  Garchuka  being  that  of  the  offenders  and  the 
Wulernunt  that  of  the  avengers. 

Having  met  as  arranged,  at  the  time  and  place  fixed, 
with  their  respective  kindreds,  the  Garchuka  Headman  stood 
out  between  the  opposed  totemites  and  made  a  speech, 
calling  upon  his  men  not  to  take  any  unfair  advantage  in 
the  encounter.  Then  he  appointed  a  spot  near  at  hand 
where  the  expiatory  encounter  should  take  place  that  after- 
noon, it  being  agreed  that  so  soon  as  the  offenders  had  been 
struck  by  a  spear  the  combat  should  cease.  Then  the 
offenders  stood  out,  armed  with  shields,  and  received  the 
spears  thrown  at  them  by  the  dead  man's  kindred,  until  at 
length  one  of  them  was  wounded.  The  Headman  of  the 
Garchukas  then  threw  a  lighted  piece  of  bark,  which  he  held, 
into  the  air,  and  the  fight  ceased.  If  it  had  been  con- 
tinued there  would  have  been  a  general  fight  between 
the  two  totems. 

Among  the  tribes  of  south-western  Victoria,  in  cases  of 
blood-feud,  if  the  murderer  be  known  and  escapes  the  pursuit 
of  the  victim's  kindred,  he  gets  notice  to  appear  and  undergo 
the  ordeal  of  spear-throwing  at  the  first  great  meeting  of 
the  tribes. 

If  he  pays  no  attention  to  the  summons,  two  strong 
active  men,  called  Paet-paet,  accompanied  by  some  friends, 
are  ordered  by  the  chief  to  visit  the  camp  where  he  is  sup- 
posed to  be  concealed  and  to  arrest  him.  They  approach 
the  camp  about  the  time  when  the  people  are  going  to  sleep, 
and  halt  at  a  short  distance  from  it.  One  of  the  Paet-paets 
goes  to  one  side  of  the  camp  and  howls  in  imitation  of  a 
wild  dog.  The  other  at  the  opposite  side  answers  him  by 
imitating  the  cry  of  the  Kuurka  (owl).  These  sounds  bring 
the  Chief  to  the  front  of  his  Wuurn  (hut)  to  listen.  One  of 
the  Paet-paets  then  taps  twice  on  a  tree  with  his  spear,  or 
strikes  two  spears  together  as  a  signal   that  a  friend  wishes 


336        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA    ch.  vi 

to  speak  to  him.  He  then  demands  the  culprit,  but  as  the 
demand  is  generally  met  by  a  denial  of  his  being  there,  they 
return  to  their  friends,  who  have  been  waiting  to  hear  the 
result.  If  they  still  believe  him  to  be  concealed  in  the  camp, 
they  surround  it  at  dawn,  stamping  and  making  a  hideous 
noise  to  frighten  the  people.  In  the  meantime  the  Chief, 
anticipating  the  second  visit,  has  very  likely  aided  the  culprit 
to  escape  while  it  was  dark. 

Persons  accused  of  wrong-doing  get  one  month's  (sic) 
notice  to  appear  before  the  assembled  tribes  and  be  tried  on 
pain  of  being  outlawed  and  killed.  When  a  man  has  been 
charged  with  an  offence,  he  goes  to  the  meeting  armed  with 
two  war  spears,  a  flat  light  shield,  and  a  boomerang.  If  he 
is  found  guilty  of  a  private  wrong,  he  is  painted  white,  and 
his  brother,  or  near  male  relative,  stands  beside  him  as  his 
second.  The  latter  has  a  heavy  shield,  a  Liangle,  and  a 
boomerang,  and  the  offender  is  placed  opposite  to  the  injured 
person  and  his  friends,  who  sometimes  number  twenty 
warriors.  These  range  themselves  at  a  distance  of  fifty 
yards  from  him,  and  each  individual  throws  four  or  five 
spears  and  two  boomerangs  at  him  simultaneously  "  like  a 
shower."  If  he  succeeds  in  warding  them  off,  his  second 
hands  him  his  heavy  shield,  and  he  is  attacked  singly  by  his 
enemies,  who  deliver  each  one  a  blow  with  a  Liangle.  As 
blood  must  be  spilt  to  satisfy  the  injured  party,  the  trial 
ends  when  he  is  hit. 

If  the  accused  refuses  to  be  tried,  he  is  outlawed,  and 
may  be  killed,  and  his  brother  or  nearest  male  relative  is 
held  responsible,  and  must  submit  to  be  attacked  with 
boomerangs.^ 

In  the  Wurun Jerri  tribe  when  a  man,  say  a  Bunjil,  was 
called  on  to  appear  and  answer  for  having  killed  some  other 
man,  say  of  the  IVaang  class,  all  the  Bunjil  men,  his  kindred, 
stood  at  one  side,  and  all  the  Waang  men,  the  kindred  of 
his  victim,  at  the  other,  each  party  under  their  Headman. 

The  avengers  would  throw  spears  at  him  until  he  was 
killed,  or  so  injured  that  he  could  no  longer  defend  himself, 
or  until  his  Headman  called  out  "  Enough." 

*  J.  Dawson,  op.  cit.  p.  76. 


KIG.    l6.— NOS.     I.    2,    4,    5,    SHIKLDS    USKD   TO    WARD    OFF    SPEARS;     3,    6.    7, 
SHIKt.DS   FOR   CLUB   FIGHTING. 


338        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  following  account  of  one  of  these  ordeals  in  expiation 
was  given  to  me  by  Berak,  who  was  present  at  it.  So  far 
as  I  am  able  to  fix  the  time,  it  must  have  been  about  the 
year  1840,  and  the  locality  was  the  Merri  Creek  near 
Melbourne.  It  arose  out  of  a  belief  by  the  Bunurong  who 
lived  at  Western  Port,  that  a  man  from  Echuca,  on  the 
Murray  River,  had  found  a  piece  of  bone  of  an  opossum 
which  one  of  their  tribe  had  been  eating,  and  then  thrown 
away.  They  were  told  that  he,  taking  up  this  bone  between 
two  pieces  of  wood,  had  placed  it  aside  until,  having  pro- 
cured the  leg-bone  of  a  kangaroo,  he  put  the  piece  of  opossum 
bone  into  its  hollow  and  roasted  it  before  his  fire.  He  and 
others  then  sang  the  name  of  the  Western  Port  man  for  a 
long  time  over  it,  until  the  spear-thrower  fell  down  into  the 
fire  and  the  magic  was  complete.  This  news  was  brought 
down  to  the  Bunurong  and  some  time  after  the  man  died. 
His  friends  did  not  say  anything,  but  waited  till  a  young 
man  of  the  Echuca  tribe  came  into  the  Western  Port 
District,  when  they  killed  him.  News  of  this  was  passed 
from  one  to  the  other  till  it  reached  his  tribe,  who  sent  down 
a  messenger  to  the  Bunurong  tribe,  saying  that  they  would 
have  to  meet  them  near  Melbourne.  This  was  arranged, 
and  the  old  men  said  to  the  man,  "  Now,  don't  you  run 
away  ;  you  must  go  and  stand  out,  and  we  will  see  that 
they  do  not  use  you  unfairly."  This  message  had  been 
given  in  the  first  instance  by  the  Meymet  ^  to  the  Nira- 
baluk,  who  sent  it  on  by  the  Wurunjerri  to  the  Bunurong. 
It  was  sent  in  the  winter  to  give  plenty  of  time  for  the 
meeting,  which  took  place  on  the  Melbourne  side  of  the 
Merri  Creek.  The  people  present  were  the  Meymet,  whose 
Headman  had  not  come  with  them,  the  Bunurong  with  their 
Headman  Benbu,  the  Mt.  Macedon  men  with  their  Headman 
Ningu-labul,  the  Werribce  people  with  the  Headman  of  the 
Bunurong  ;  finally  there  were  the  Wurunjerri  with  their 
Headman  Billi-billeri. 

All  these  people  except  the  Meymet  and  the  Bunurong 

1  The  Wurunjerri  called  the  tribes  about  the  junction  of  the  Goulburn  and 
Catnpaspe  Rivers  with  the  Murray  by  the  name  of  Meymet,  as  they  called  the 
Gippsland  natives  Berbira,  thus  distinguishing  both  from  the  Kulin,  who  were 
their  friends. 


VI 


TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT 


339 


were  onlookers,  and  each  party  camped  on  the  side  of  the 
meeting-ground  nearest  to  their  own  country,  and  all  the 
camps  faced  the  morning  sun. 

When  the  meeting  took   place,  the  women   were   left  in 


HG.    17.— BOOMERANGS    OK    VICTORIAN    TKIBKS. 

the  camps,  and  the  men  went  a  little  way  off  The 
Bunurong  man  stood  out  in  front  of  his  people  armed  with 
a  shield.  Pacing  him  were  the  kindred  of  the  dead  Meymet 
man  some  nine  or  ten  in  number,  who  threw  so  many  spears 
and    boomerangs   at    him    that   you  could   not  count  them 


340        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

At  last  a  reed  spear  went  through  his  side.  Just  then  a 
Headman  of  the  Buthera-baluk  who  had  heard  what  was  to 
take  place,  and  had  followed  the  Meymet  down  from  the 
Goulburn  River,  came  running  up,  and  went  in  between  the 
two  parties,  shouting  "  Enough  !  "  and  turning  to  the  Meymet 
said,  "  You  should  now  go  back  to  your  own  country."  This 
stopped  the  spear-throwing  ;  they  had  had  blood,  and  all  were 
again  friends.      A  great  corrobboree  was  held  that  night. 

Buckley  gives  an  account  of  a  somewhat  similar  case 
which  happened  in  his  tribe  the  Wudthaurung,  and  is  worth 
quoting  in  this  connection.^ 

In  speaking  of  an  elopement,  he  thus  describes  the 
expiation  which  followed  it,  "  At  length  the  young  man 
advanced  towards  us,  and  challenged  our  men  to  fight,  an 
offer  which  was  accepted  practically  by  a  boomerang  being 
thrown  at  him,  and  which  grazed  his  leg.  A  spear  was  then 
thrown,  but  he  warded  it  off"  cleverly  with  his  shield.  He 
made  no  return  to  this,  until  one  of  our  men  advanced  very 
near  to  him,  with  only  a  shield  and  waddy,  and  then  the  two 
went  to  work  in  good  earnest,  until  the  first  had  his  shield 
split,  so  that  he  had  nothing  to  defend  himself  with  but  hi.s 
waddy.  His  opponent  took  advantage  of  this  and  struck 
him  a  tremendous  blow  on  one  side  of  the  head,  and  knocked 
him  down  ;  but  he  was  instantly  on  his  legs  again,  the  blood,, 
however,  flowing  very  freely  over  his  back  and  shoulders. 
His  friends  then  cried  out,  'Enough!'  and  threatened 
general  hostilities  if  another  blow  was  struck.  This  had  the 
desired  effect,  and  they  soon  after  separated  quietly." 

As  a  good  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  trespasses  by 
a  person  of  one  tribe  on  the  country  of  another  tribe  were 
dealt  with,  I  take  the  case  of  a  man  of  the  Wudthaurung 
tribe,  who  unlawfully  took,  in  fact  stole,  stone  from  the  tribal 
quarry  at  Mt.  William  near  Lancefield.  I  give  it  in  almost 
the  exact  words  used  by  Berak  in  telling  me  of  it,  and  who 
was  present  at  the  meeting  which  took  place  in  consequence, 
probably  in  the  late  forties. 

It  having  been  found  out  that  this  man  had  taken  stone 
without    permission,    the    Ngurungaeta    Billi-billeri    sent    a 

*  J.  Morgan,  op.  cit.  p.  63. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  ,341 

messenger  to  the  Wudthaurung,  and  in  consequence  they 
came  as  far  as  the  Werribee  River,  their  boundary,  where 
Billi-billeri  and  his  people  met  them.  These  were  the  men 
who  had  a  right  to  the  quarry,  and  whose  rights  had  been 
infringed.  The  place  of  meeting  was  a  little  apart  from  the 
respective  camps  of  the  Wurunjerri  and  the  Wudthaurung. 

At  the  meeting  the  Wudthaurung  sat  in  one  place,  and 
the  Wurunjerri  in  another,  but  within  speaking  distance. 
The  old  men  of  each  side  sat  together,  with  the  younger  men 
behind  them.  Billi-billeri  had  behind  him  Bungerim,  to 
whom  he  "  gave  his  word."  The  latter  then  standing  up 
said,  "  Did  some  of  you  send  this  young  man  to  take  toma- 
hawk stone?"  The  Headman  of  the  Wudthaurung  replied, 
"  No,  we  sent  no  one."  Then  Billi-billeri  said  to  Bungerim, 
"  Say  to  the  old  men  that  they  must  tell  that  young  man 
not  to  do  so  any  more.  When  the  people  speak  of  wanting 
stone,  the  old  men  must  send  us  notice."  Bungerim  repeated 
this  in  a  loud  tone,  and  the  old  men  of  the  Wudthaurung 
replied,  "  That  is  all  right,  we  will  do  so."  Then  they  spoke 
strongly  to  the  young  man  who  had  stolen  the  stone,  and 
both  parties  were  again  friendly  with  each  other. 

At  such  a  meeting  all  the  weapons  were  left  at  the 
respective  camps,  and  each  speaker  stood  up  in  addressing  it. 

In  the  Narrinyeri  tribe  offenders  were  brought  before  the 
Tcndi  (council  of  old  men)  for  trial.  Yox  instance,  if  a 
member  of  one  clan  had  been  in  time  of  peace  killed  by  one 
of  another  clan,  the  clansmen  of  the  latter  would  send  to  the 
friends  of  the  murderer,  and  invite  them  to  bring  him  for 
trial  before  the  united  Tendis.  If,  after  trial,  he  were  found 
guilty  of  committing  the  crime,  he  would  be  punished  accord- 
ing to  his  guilt  ;  if  it  were  murder,  he  would  be  handed  over 
to  his  clansmen  to  be  put  to  death  by  spearing  ;  if  for  what 
we  should  call  "  manslaughter,"  he  would  receive  a  good 
thrashing,  or  be  banished  from  his  clan,  or  be  compelled  to 
go  to  his  mother's  relations.  A  common  sentence  for  any 
public  offence  was  so  many  blows  on  the  head.^  I  was  not 
informed  by  Mr.  Taplin  what  he  included  in  the  term 
"  public  offence." 

'   Rev.  G.  Taplin  and  Mr.  1'.  \V.  Taplin. 


342        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Among  the  Yuin  there  was  the  same  practice  of 
expiatory  ordeals  as  among  the  other  tribes  1  have  quoted, 
and  the  old  men  preferred  this  to  armed  parties  being  sent 
out  to  exact  blood-revenge  in  a  feud.  But  the  kindred  of 
the  deceased  frequently  revenged  themselves  by  lying  in  wait 
for  the  suspected  person,  and  killing  him  when  out  hunting 
alone.  This  naturally  led  to  reprisals,  and  thus  to  complica- 
tions such  as  those  which  caused  the  great  blood-feud  in  the 
Kurnai  tribe. 

An  instance  is  known  to  me  of  an  expiatory  meeting  in 
the  Yuin  tribe,  in  consequence  of  a  Moruya  man  being  killed 
by  a  man  from  Bodalla,  but  I  am  not  aware  whether  by 
violence  or  by  magic. 

The  Bodalla  Gomvicra  sent  a  Jirri  (messenger)  to  the 
Moruya  man,  telling  him  he  must  come  to  a  certain  place 
and  stand  out.  Meanwhile  the  men  of  Bodalla  were 
preparing  their  spears  and  heating  their  boomerangs  in  hot 
ashes  to  make  them  tough.  At  the  time  fixed  the  man 
appeared,  armed  with  two  shields.  As  he  was  charged 
with  killing  some  one,  he  had  to  stand  out  alone  ;  but  if 
he  had  been  only  charged  with  injuring  him,  or  with  having 
used  Joias,  that  is,  magical  charm,  without  actually  killing 
the  person,  he  would  have  been  allowed  to  have  a  friend  to 
help  him.  His  friends  with  their  Gommera  stood  at  one  side, 
a  little  out  of  spear  range,  while  the  Moruya  men  and  their 
Gommera  were  at  one  side  of  the  friends  of  the  dead  man. 

It  having  been  arranged  how  many  of  the  fathers  and 
brothers  (own  or  tribal)  ^  of  the  dead  man  should  attack 
the  defendant,  the  Gommera  then  told  them  what  to  do, 
and  they  went  forward  towards  the  Bodalla  man,  who  stood 
alone  expecting  them.  At  about  thirty  yards'  distance  from 
him  they  halted  for  a  while  to  give  him  time  to  prepare  him- 
self for  defence,  then  standing  in  a  line  facing  him,  they 
threw  their  boomerangs  and  then  their  spears  at  him.  He 
being  wounded,  his  Gommera  shouted  out  ^^ Jin  nil"  that  is, 
"  Enough  ! "  and  they  ceased.  There  was  no  further  action 
in  this  matter,  for  blood  had  been  taken. 

'  There  is  individual  marriage  in  this  tribe,  but  the  relationship  terms  class  a 
man  and  all  his  brothers  as  fathers  of  their  respective  children. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  343 

In  certain  cases  the  Goimnera  took  action  to  punish 
offences  directly.  If  a  man  was  in  the  habit  of  "catching 
people "  by  evil  magic,  the  Gommera  might  say  to  his 
young  men,  "  That  man  is  very  bad,  he  is  catching  people 
with  Jotas,  you  must  kill  him."  He  would  then  be 
surrounded  at  some  convenient  place  and  killed.  Umbara, 
in  speaking  of  this,  said  that  he  had  seen  such  a  man  after 
he  had  been  killed  look,  with  the  spears  in  him,  "  like  a 
Jannang-gabatch,"  that  is,  a  spiny  ant-eater.  If  a  man 
killed  another  of  his  own  local  group,  or  if  a  man  revealed 
the  bull-roarer  to  a  woman,  or  any  of  the  secrets  of  the 
Bunan  or  the  Kuringal,  he  was  killed  by  the  order  of  the 
Gommera.  In  such  cases  there  was  no  expiatory  meeting, 
even  when,  as  was  within  the  knowledge  of  my  Yuin  friends, 
none  of  the  culprit's  kindred  was  among  those  who  carried 
out  the  Gommerds  orders.  Nor  was  there  any  expiation 
when  a  man  killed  one  who  had  murdered  his  kinsman,  the 
former  being  of  the  same  local  group. 

In  the  Kamilaroi  tribes,  if  serious  complaints  were  made 
of  the  conduct  of  a  Murri  {i.e.  a  man),  a  council  of  the 
Headmen  might  decree  his  death.' 

In  the  Gringai  tribe  individuals  fought  a  personal 
quarrel  with  any  weapons  nearest  at  hand,  but  in  cases  of 
serious  offences  which  concerned  the  tribe,  the  offender  had 
to  stand  out,  with  a  shield  {Hieia-man),  while  a  certain 
number  of  spears,  according  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
offence,  were  thrown  at  him.  If  he  could  defend  himself, 
well  and  good  ;  if  not,  then  he  was  either  injured  or  killed.^ 

The  principal  social  restrictions  in  the  Geawe-gal  tribe 
were  laws  which  demanded  satisfaction  for  injury  done,  by 
the  offender  submitting  to  an  ordeal.  According  to  the 
magnitude  of  his  offence,  he  had  to  receive  one  or  more 
spears  from  men  who  were  relatives  of  the  deceased  person  ; 
or  when  the  injured  person  had  recovered  strength,  he  might 
himself  discharge  the  spears  at  the  offender.  Obedience  to 
such  laws  was  never  withheld  ;  but  would  have  been 
enforced,  without  doubt,  if  necessary,  by  the  assembled 
tribe.  Offences  against  individuals,  or  blabbing  about  the 
«  C.  Nasehy.  '^  }.  W.  Boydell. 


344        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


sacred  rites  of  the  tribe,  and  all  breaches  of  custom,  were 
visited  with  some  punishment.  Such  punishments,  or  such 
ordeals,  were  always   coram  publiio,  and    the   women    were 

present.  Not  so  the  ad- 
judication according 
to  which  the  penalty 
was  prescribed.^ 

Among  the  Kur- 
nai,  when  a  man  had 
been  called  upon  to 
appear  and  submit 
to  an  ordeal  by 
weapons,  for  some 
death  which  he  had 
been  supposed  to 
have  caused  by  magic, 
for  instance  by  Bulk, 
Murriwun,  or  Barn, 
he  was  attended  by 
his  kindred  and  by 
that  branch  of  the 
tribe  to  which  he 
belonged.  He  was 
called  Wa  it  -ju  rk^ 
and  the  aggrieved 
person,  that  is,  one  of 
the  near  kindred,  was 
called  Nungi-nungit, 
which  also  applied  to  all  his  kindred  who  took  part  in  the 
ordeal.  They  also  were  respectively  supported  by  their 
section  of  the  tribe. 

In  the  proceedings,  the  aggrieved  party  and  the  accused 
were  each  at  the  ordeal  accompanied  by  the  Gzvcraeil-kiirnai 
of  their  section  of  the  tribe.  The  proceedings  were  conducted 
by  the  old  men  according  to  the  ancient  traditions,  that  is, 
as  they  would  put  it,  "  as  their  fathers  did."  An  open  and 
level  piece  of  ground  was  chosen  for  the  meeting.  The  two 
bodies  of  people  assembled,  facing  each  other,  and  some  two 
'  G.  W.  Rusden.  -  "  Murderer." 


FIC.   i8.- 


-TULABA,    ONE   OF    THE    KUKNAI,    AS    A 
WAIT-JURK. 


TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT 


345 


hundred  yards  apart.  The  aggressor  stood  out  in  advance  of 
his  party,  painted  with  red  ochre  over  his  face,  with  two 
broad  stripes  from  the  shoulders  down  the  breast,  where  tliey 
met  horizontal  alternat- 
ing bands  of  white  and 
red  across  the  stomach 
as  far  as  the  hips  on 
each  side.  According 
to  the  rules,  he  was 
onlyarmed  with  a  shield, 
or  in  some  cases  with 
a  club  or  a  bundle  of 
spears  in  addition. 
Some  men  presented 
themselves  to  their  ad- 
versaries, dancing  and 
twirling  their  shields  in 
a  defiant  manner,  others 
crouched  down  awaiting 
the  attack.  Beside  the 
Wait -jurk  his  wife 
stood,  if  he  had  one, 
with  her  digging-stick, 
to  help  in  turning  aside 
or  breaking  the  weapons 
discharged  at  him,  and 
at  one  side  of  the 
ground   the  women  sat 

beating  their  skin  rugs  in  measured  time.  The  body  of 
people  stood  behind  the  women  with  the  old  men  at  hand 
to  observe  and  direct  the  proceedings.  At  a  distance  of 
some  two  hundred  yards  were  the  aggrieved,  who  might 
be  a  numerous  party,  including  widely  ramifying  relation- 
ships. These  men  were  painted  white  in  token  of  their 
kinsman's  death.  Each  man  was  armed  with  his  shield,  a 
bundle  of  spears,  several  boomerangs,  and  various  clubs  used 
for  throwing.  Their  women  sat  in  front,  drumming  on  their 
folded  rugs,  and  singing  at  the  same  time  some  song 
appropriate    to   the    occasion.      In   a  Nungi-nungit,  which   I 


IIU.  19.- 


T.VNKOWIl.LIN,  oNK  <JK  TIIK  KLKXAI, 
AS  A  NUNGl-NUNGIT. 


346        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

saw  represented  in  an  alleged  case  of  death  by  magic,  the 
following  song  was  sung,  while  the  wife  of  the  accused 
made  abusive  speeches  to  the  advancing  party  : — 

Nana-mulk  eed-janung  dinne-bra-niittel 

Why  you  thought  old  husband  mine 

waitjurk-jaiidu  dinn-din  baia-qtning 

to  murder  you  bad  orphan 

or,  freely  translated,  "  Why  did  you  think  to  murder  my  old 
husband,  you  worthless  orphan  ?  "  i.e.  "  person  without  any 
kindred." 

The  ordinary  word  used  for  "  orphan  "  is  Yetherun^  but 
Baia-quiing,  which  also  has  that  meaning,  is  one  of  the  most 
offensive  terms  which  can  be  applied  to  a  Kurnai,  and  in  the 
old  times  would  require  to  be  expiated  by  spear-throwing,  or 
other  recourse  to  weapons. 

After  singing  such  a  song,  the  women  got  up  and  went 
forward  some  thirty  or  forty  paces,  drumming  their  rugs  as 
they  carried  them,  and  then  sat  down  again  and  sang.  As 
they  walked  forward,  the  men  followed  them  closely,  crouch- 
ing down  behind  them,  as  if  seeking  concealment. 

All  this  time  the  aggressor  was  dancing  his  defiance,  and 
the  Nungi-tiungit  came  on  by  short  stages  until  about  sixty 
yards  from  him,  when  the  women  moved  off  to  one  side, 
leaving  them  and  the  Wait-jurk  face  to  face.  While  the 
latter  continued  to  dance,  or  sat  crouched  behind  his  shield, 
the  former  extended  their  line  in  the  form  of  a  crescent  so 
as  to  hem  him  in.  The  oldest  of  the  Nungi-ntmgit  now 
addressed  him,  with  a  formal  statement,  as  for  instance, 
"  Why  did  you  kill  our  brother  with  bulk  ? "  The  reply 
might  be,  "  I  never  did  anything  to  him  ;  it  is  d\\  jetbolan  " 
(lies).  Then  the  aggrieved  made  motions  as  if  spear- 
throwing,  so  that  the  defendant  might  place  himself  on  his 
guard.  The  ordeal  then  commenced  by  a  shower  of  spears. 
The  Wait-jurk  might  be  at  once  transfixed,  or  his  shield  be 
so  full  of  spears  as  to  be  useless.  If  he  escaped  the  spears, 
he  was  assailed  with  a  shower  of  boomerangs,  to  be  followed, 
if  by  his  skill   in  defence  or  by  good    fortune  he    was   still 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  347 

uninjured,  by  weapons  such    as    Kumiin^    being  thrown   at 
him. 

If  it  was  a  case  in  which  the  Wait-jurk  might  be  armed 
with  spears,  he  might  throw  them,  or  he  might  hurl 
back  those  of  his  adversaries,  but  it  was  seldom  that 
he  had  the  chance  of  doing  so,  if  his  adversaries  were 
numerous.  When  disabled,  his  friends  would  certainly 
interfere,  or  if  he  had  enough  of  it,  he  might  run  to  them  for 
security.  It  not  infrequently  happened  that  a  N imgi-nungit 
became  a  general  combat  in  which  men  and  women  on  both 
sides  fought  furiously.  In  such  fights  a  woman  was  not 
always  at  a  disadvantage  against  a  man  armed  with  a  club 
and  shield,  for  an  active  woman  armed  with  her  digging-stick 
is  a  formidable  opponent,  using  her  weapon  much  as  a  man 
would  do  a  quarter-staff. 

When  the  Nungi-nungit  ended  either  with  the  single 
ordeal  of  the  Wait-jnrk  or  by  a  general  fight,  the  matter  was 
set  at  rest  and  friendly  relations  were  restored.  There  is  a 
great  difference  between  such  legalised  fights  as  the  Nuiigi- 
nungit  and  those  cases  where  fights  occurred  during  the 
prosecution  of  a  blood-feud,  without  these  ceremonies. 

The  shields  used  were  either  the  Bnniaruk,  for  turning 
aside  spears,  or  the  Turnmung^  which  is  used  in  club- 
fighting. 

A  good  instance  of  the  Nungi-nungit  was  one  in  which 
the  man  Bunbra,  otherwise  Jetbolan,  was  the  defendant,  and 
which  occurred  about  the  year  1850. 

A  brother  of  the  Tulaba  before  mentioned  awoke  in  the 
night  and  saw  Bunbra  standing  over  him,  who  said  that  he 
had  come  for  some  fire.  The  next  day  the  man  fell  sick, 
and  told  his  friends  that  Bunbra  had  "  caught  him,"  that  is, 
that  he  had  placed  some  magical  spell  on  him.  By  and 
by  he  died,  and  his  male  kindred  sent  a  message  to  Bunbra 
desiring  him  to  come  to  a  Nungi-nungit.  At  the  time  and 
place  appointed  he  duly  appeared,  accompanied  by  many 
of  his  clan,  the  Tatungalung,  and  also  of  the  Krauatungalung, 
who  were  their  friends. 

•  The  A'lintiiu  is  about  eighteen  to  twenty  inches  in  length,  in  the  middle  two 
to  two  and  a  half  inches  in  diameter,  and  sloping  to  a  point  at  each  end. 


348        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA    en.  vi 

The  meeting  was  held  on  the  Tambo  River  between 
Swan  Reach  and  Lake  King.  The  two  parties  faced  each 
other  at  a  Httle  distance,  in  the  manner  described,  and 
Bunbra  had  two  shields  for  his  defence,  one  for  use  and  the 
other  in  reserve.  The  other  side  were  armed  with  Kunnin 
for  throwing,  and  boomerangs.  It  may  be  mentioned  that 
the  latter  used  in  these  ordeals  are  not  those  which  return 
to  the  thrower,  but  the  fighting  boomerang  which  does  not 
return.  The  proceedings  commenced  by  Bunbra  saying, 
"  I  want  to  tell  you  that  I  did  not  hurt  that  poor  fellow." 
The  reply  was,  "  You  must  fight."  Boomerangs  were  then 
thrown,  as  my  informant  said,  "  like  a  flight  of  parrots." 
Bunbra  dodged  or  successfully  warded  them  off.  At  last  a 
Kunnin  was  thrown,  which  passed  through  his  thigh,  but 
which  he  drew  out,  and  threw  back  at  his  assailants.  The 
women  then  rushed  in  between  the  two  parties  and  stopped 
the  fight,  and  the  feud  was  at  an  end. 

Sometimes  a  blood-feud  has  spread  until  the  whole  tribe 
was  involved,  and  the  feud  went  beyond  the  power  of  a 
Nungi-nungit  to  heal.  Such  was  one  which  arose  shortly 
after  the  settlement  of  Gippsland,  and  not  only  brought  in 
all  the  tribes  on  one  side  or  the  other,  but  also  the 
Thcddora  of  Omeo  and  the  Mogullum-bitch  of  the  Buffalo 
River.  It  was  so  much  talked  of  among  the  Kurnai,  even 
years  after,  that  I  carefully  traced  the  course  to  its  end  in  a 
battle  between  the  Kurnai  clans  about  the  year  1855. 

When  the  Gippsland  and  Omeo  natives  had  become 
better  acquainted  with  each  other,  through  the  white  settlers, 
and  were  thus  more  or  less  friendly,  one  of  the  Theddora 
men  named  Billy  Blew  obtained  a  Brayaka  woman  for  his 
wife.  When  on  a  visit  to  his  wife's  people,  he  ill-used  her, 
and  in  consequence  her  father,  Kaiung,  fought  with  him  and 
speared  him,  so  that  he  died.  Billy  Blew's  kindred  came 
down  from  the  mountains  and  killed  Kaiung,  together  with 
another  Brayaka  man,  called  Lohni,  the  brother  of  Bundawal 
(Bite-spear),  mentioned  elsewhere.  In  revenge  for  this, 
Jimmy,  a  man  of  the  Dargo  division  of  the  Brabralung  clan, 
the  sister's  son  of  Kaiung's  wife,  killed  a  man  called  Johnny. 
Then  Planner,  one  of  the  Bunjil-baul,  and  other  relations  of 


350        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Johnny,  finding  his  skin  hanging  in  a  tree  at  Aitken's  Straits, 
at  the  Gippsland  Lakes,  where  the  Dargo  man  had  hung  it, 
followed  him  southward  and  killed  him  at  Erin  Vale  Station 
on  Merriman's  Creek. 

At  this  point  I  take  up  the  narrative  given  of  this  feud 
by  Bundavval.      He  said  : — 

"  I  had  two  wives,  both  from  Brt-britta.  One  of  these 
had  been  married  to  the  man  who  killed  my  brother  Johnny 
at  Aitken's  Straits.  I  then  collected  all  the  men  from 
Bruthen,  Wy-Yung,  and  Binnajerra,  for  all  my  own  men  had 
died  or  been  killed,  so  that  there  were  only  boys  left.  But 
those  others  were  like  my  own  people.  We  all  sneaked 
round  to  Merriman's  Creek,  where  we  found  a  Dargo  man, 
and  Planner  speared  him.  We  let  him  lie  there,  and  did 
not  eat  his  skin,  because  he  was  a  Kurnai  like  ourselves. 
As  he  was  a  friend  of  the  Brayaka,  we  went  up  to  the  Heart  ^ 
to  look  for  them.  W'e  found  a  number  of  Dargo,  Brayaka, 
and  Bratua  there,  and  we  fought  them  ;  but  we  were  beaten, 
because  they  had  guns  as  well  as  spears,  and  were  helped 
by  two  of  the  black  police,  and  one  police  trooper.  We  ran 
away,  and  left  everything  behind  us,  only  taking  our  spears. 
We  had  left  our  women  near  to  the  Lake's  Entrance,  at 
Metung,  where  the  wild  dog  turned  the  Kurnai  into  stone. 
Our  enemies  and  the  police  followed  us  as  far  as  Lake  Tyers, 
but  they  could  not  cross,  and  so  we  escaped.  For  a  long 
time  we  were  quiet,  but  at  last  we  went  to  Manero  to  get 
the  Brajerak  to  come  and  help  us.  By  this  time  the  white 
men  had  brought  so  many  Brajerak  from  Manero  and  Omeo 
with  them  into  Gippsland  that  we  and  they  had  become 
friendly.  So  we  got  the  Manero  men  to  promise  to  help  us, 
and  we  went  round  the  mountains  to  Omeo  witl\  them. 
There  we  got  Nukong,  their  Headman,  also  to  help  us,  and 
he  sent  a  messenger  to  the  men  at  the  Ovens  River  and 
Mount  Buffalo  to  send  help,  and  it  was  arranged  that  we 
should  meet  them  at  the  Bushy  Park  Station.  When  we  got 
back  we  went  to  the  meeting-place,  where  the  men  from  the 
Ovens    River   and    Mount    Buffalo  met  us.      We  had  gone 

'  A  Station  near  to  Sale,  and  so  named  because,  when  it  was   first  occupied, 
the  outline  of  a  heart  was  found  cut  in  the  soil  where  the  Homestead  was  fixed. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  351 

there  to  get  some  food,  and  to  see  some  of  the  Brabralung  and 
the  Dargo  men.  There  could  not  have  been  fewer  than  two 
hundred  of  us  ;  at  least  the  white  men  there  counted  us,  and 
told  us  so.  From  that  place  we  went  round  the  country,  look- 
ing for  our  enemies.  We  sent  out  four  spies  in  the  daytime, 
while  the  main  body  lay  concealed  in  the  scrub,  and  only 
travelled  by  night.  Sometimes  I  was  one  of  the  spies,  and 
sometimes  it  was  Tankowillin.  We  went  all  over  the 
country,  even  down  to  the  Tarra  River,  but  could  not  meet 
our  enemies.  At  length  we  pretended  to  be  friends  and 
returned  to  the  Mitchell  River.  We  waited  a  while  and 
then  sent  to  the  Snowy  River  men,  who  came  to  us,  but  the 
Brajerak  from  Manero  and  the  Ovens  River  went  home ; 
only  a  few  of  the  Omeo  men  stayed  to  help  us. 

"  While  this  was  going  on,  the  Dargo  and  Brayaka  men 
had  sent  Lcwin  (a  message)  to  me,  saying  that  we  would 
fight,  and  then  be  friends.  It  was  decided  by  the  Dargo  old 
men  that  the  fight  should  take  place  near  Dighton.  We 
went  there,  and  fought,  but  no  one  was  killed.  They  were 
too  strong  for  us,  and  ran  us  back  to  the  Mitchell  River. 
We  now  waited  again  for  a  time,  and  one  of  the  Brataualung 
brought  a  message  from  the  Headman  at  Dargo  that  we 
should  be  friends.  It  was  their  custom  to  do  this  by  sending 
a  spear  jagged  with  quartz  with  a  Bridda-bridda  (man's  kilt) 
hanging  on  it  as  a  token,  but  the  one  he  sent  was  jagged 
with  glass.  We  said  amongst  ourselves,  *  We  will  pretend 
to  be  friends,  and  wait  till  by  and  by.'  The  spear  was 
carried  on  farther  by  way  of  Bruthen,  and  up  to  Omeo, 
and  so  round  to  Dargo.  Then  we  all  gathered,  but  the 
Snowy  River  men  would  not  come,  for  they  were  frightened, 
two  of  their  men  having  been  speared. 

"  Bruthen-munji  told  us,  '  We  must  send  a  message  to 
the  Dargo  men  where  to  meet  us,  but  we  must  be  quick 
and  get  to  Bushy  Park.'  We  had  with  us  some  Omeo 
men,  with  their  Headman,  Nukong.  Our  Headman  was 
Bruthcn-munji. 

"  On  the  morning  on  which  we  were  to  fight,  we  were  all 
ready,  and  were  painted  with  pipe-clay,  because  we  were 
very  angry  at  our  men  being  killed,  and  also  to  frighten  our 


352        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

enemies.  They  were  painted  with  red  ochre,  because  they 
had  killed  our  men.  We  were  seated  in  a  long  row  with 
our  spears  ready  on  the  ground.  Our  women  were  in  front 
beating  on  the  '  'possum  rugs.*  Nukong  was  at  one  end, 
just  behind  his  row.  Bruthen-munji  was  at  the  other  end  of 
the  row,  just  behind  me.  It  was  about  noon,  and  he  looked 
up  at  the  sun  and  said,  '  We  will  eat  first.'  The  enemy 
were  not  in  sight,  but  were  not  far  off.  Then  a  Brabralung 
man  came  to  us  ;  he  was  a  messenger  sent  to  us ;  we  knew 
him  and  he  was  our  friend,  and  the  husband  of  Old  Nanny.^ 
He  said, '  There  are  not  many  of  you.'  Bruthen-munji  replied, 
'  Never  mind,  we  will  see.'  He  then  ordered  the  women  to 
go  back  out  of  danger  and  made  a  great  speech.  He  told 
us  that  we  should  beat  them.  Then  we  fought,  and  a 
Kutbuntaura  man  was  speared  and  the  others  ran  away. 
There  was  a  running  fight  as  they  ran,  leaving  all  their 
things  behind  them.  By  and  by  I  shot  one  man,  and  others 
were  speared.  Several  women  were  caught,  and  some  of  the 
Brabralung  young  men  ran  down  a  Brt-britta  woman,  but 
could  not  keep  her,  because  they  were  too  nearly  related  to 
her,  and  as  she  wanted  to  have  me,  her  Breppa-mungan  "^ 
gave  her  to  me,  and  this  was  how  I  got  my  first  wife  from 
Brt-britta." 

This  must  have  been  about  fifteen  years  after  the  settle- 
ment of  Gippsland,  and  it  was  a  little  more  than  fifteen 
years  after  that  time  that  Bundawal  gave  me  this  account. 
During  that  time  most  of  the  old  men  of  the  tribe  had  died 
off,  and  the  tribe  itself  had  been  almost  broken  up. 

An  instance  of  revenge  for  blood  occurred  almost  within 
my  actual  knowledge,  about  the  year  1865.  The  blacks 
told  me  of  it  when  it  happened,  but  as  it  was  then  supposed 
to  have  been  in  New  South  Wales,  I  did  not  pay  any  special 
attention  to  it.  The  locality  was  in  the  extreme  eastern 
part  of  Gippsland  in  the  Biduelli  country,  where  there  was  a 
small  tract  of  grazing  ground  surrounded  by  almost  im- 
penetrable scrubs   and    jungles,  excepting   one   side,  where 

1  Old  Nanny  has  been  already  mentioned.      She  had  great  influence  in  the 
tribe. 

2  Mungan  is  father  ;  Breppa-mungan  is  some  one  who  is  in  the  relation  of 
father,  such  as  the  father's  brother  or  mother's  sister's  husband. 


VI  TRIBAL  GOVERNMENT  353 

there  was  forest,  through  which  a  bush  track  led  to  the 
settlements  in  New  South  Wales.  This  country  is  now 
opened  up  by  tracks  cut  in  various  directions,  and  is  partly 
occupied  by  settlers,  and  in  a  few  other  places  by  gold- 
miners,  but  at  the  time  spoken  of  it  was  a  veritable  terra 
incognita,  from  which  a  bush  track  led  to  the  nearest  cattle 
station  in  New  South  Wales.  Two  white  men  occupied  this 
spot,  and  had  a  blackboy  from  the  Yuin  tribe  as  a  stock- 
keeper.  Some  of  the  Kurnai  of  the  Snowy  River  occasionally 
went  to  Twofold  Bay,  to  assist  in  whale-fishing  as  harpooners. 
Their  road  followed  the  sea-coast,  and  thus  passed  within 
about  twenty  miles  of  the  tract  of  grazing  country  spoken  of 
A  party  of  Kurnai,  thus  travelling,  were  invited  by  the 
Yuin  boy  to  visit  him,  which  they  did,  and  he  took  the 
opportunity,  under  the  protection  of  the  white  men,  to  shoot 
one  of  the  Kurnai  called  Bobuk  (water),  and  to  carry  off  his 
daughter  Bolgan  from  the  midst  of  the  other  Kurnai.  These 
escaped  to  their  own  country,  and  the  Yuin  blackboy  kept 
Bolgan  as  his  wife.  The  relatives  of  the  murdered  man, 
however,  prepared  for  revenge.  Men  both  of  the  male  and 
female  side  formed  a  party  under  the  guidance  of  Bobuk's 
brother,  and  finding  the  cattle  station  where  the  murder  had 
taken  place  deserted,  they  tracked  the  Yuin  to  the  nearest 
Station,  where  they  killed  him  and  recovered  Bolgan.  It  was 
the  sister's  son  who  revenged  his  uncle,  after  chasing  the 
offender  for  several  miles. 

Some  years  after  I  went  through  this  country  with  these 
men  and  visited  the  scenes  of  this  tragedy. 

Upwards  of  fifty  years  ago,  four  of  the  Theddora 
(Omeo),  accompanied  by  some  of  the  Dargo  clan,  went  on  a 
visit  to  the  Kutbuntaura  division  of  the  Brayakaulung,  and 
when  there  they  quarrelled  with  their  hosts  and  were  killed. 
In  revenge  some  of  their  tribes-people  came  down  to  the  low 
country  and  killed  some  of  the  Brayaka.  They  returned  by 
way  of  the  Snowy  River  so  as  to  avoid  pursuit,  and  called  on 
their  way  home  at  the  Black  Mountain  Station.  It  was  there 
observed  that  they  had  with  them  pieces  of  human  flesh, 
apparently  cut  from  the  calf  of  the  leg  or  thigh,  wrapped  up 
in  stringy -bark,  and    hung  from    the   end  of   their   spears. 

2  A 


354        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA    ch.  vi 

They  were  taking  these  trophies  to  show  their  people  at  the 
Mitta-Mitta  River.^ 

With  the  Chepara,  offences,  if  not  trivial,  were  seriously 
dealt  with  ;  and  if  a  man  became  insane,  or  was  in  the  habit 
of  idiotically  muttering  to  himself,  they  killed  him,  because 
they  thought  that  it  was  Wulle'  that  was  influencing  him, 
and  that  disaster  might  happen  to  the  camp.  The  Head- 
man of  the  division  might  kill  him  while  he  slept  in  his 
camp,  or  he  might  be  told  to  do  so  by  the  superior  Head- 
man of  the  tribe. 

If  a  man  showed  the  bull-roarer  to  a  woman,  both  were 
killed  by  the  Bujenim  himself;  and  offenders  against  tribal 
law  were  punished  by  death.^ 

To  the  preceding  evidence  may  be  added  the  instances 
given  in  another  chapter  of  the  punishments  inflicted  for 
breaches  of  the  class  laws,  or  for  incest.  It  will  be  evident 
that  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  offences  which  merely 
affect  the  individual,  and  are  therefore  left  for  him  to  redress, 
and  those  which  may  be  called  tribal  offences,  such  as 
murder  by  evil  magic,  breaches  of  the  exogamous  law,  or 
revealing  the  secrets  of  the  initiation  ceremonies.  Such 
offences  were  dealt  with  by  the  elders  and  their  leaders,  the 
Headmen  of  the  tribe. 

'  J.  O'Rourke.  '^  An  evil  being.  ^  J.  Gibson. 


CHAPTER    VII 

MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC 

Term  "medicine-man"  explained — In  all  tribes  there  is  a  belief  that  the  medicine- 
men can  project  objects  invisibly  into  their  victims — The  Dieri  A'uttki — 
•«  "  Pointing  the  bone  " — Roasting  charms  for  the  purpose  of  harming  others — 
The  Wotjobaluk  Gttliivil — The  Wurunjerri  Wirrarap — The  Wiimbaio  Mckigar 
— The  Wotjobaluk  Bangui — The  use  of  human  fat  in  magic — The  Yuin 
Gommera — The  Wiradjuri  Bugin — Magic  of  Buttjil-Barn  and  Bulk  among 
the  Kurnai — Curative  practices  of  the  medicine-men — Kurnai  Birraark  dis- 
tinguished from  the  Mulla-multiug — Kain-makers  and  weather-changers — 
Charms  to  influence  food -supply  —  Omens  and  warnings  —  The  "Bad 
Country" — The  making  of  medicine-men — Use  of  rock-crystal  and  human 
fat  in  magic — Conclusions  as  to  the  powers  of  medicine-men — Songs  and 
song-makers. 

I  HAVE  adopted  the  term  "  medicine-men  "  as  a  convenient 
and  comprehensive  term  for  those  men  who  are  usually  spoken 
of  in  Australia  as  "  Blackfellow  doctors  " — men  who  in  the 
native  tribes  profess  to  have  supernatural  powers.  The  term 
"  doctor "  is  not  strictly  correct,  if  by  it  is  meant  only  a 
person  who  uses  some  means  of  curing  disease.  The  powers 
which  these  men  claim  are  not  merely  those  of  healing,  or 
causing  disease,  but  also  such  as  may  be  spoken  of  as 
magical  practices  relating  to,  or  in  some  manner  affecting, 
the  well-being  of  their  friends  and  enemies.  Again,  the 
medicine-man  is  not  always  a  "  doctor  "  ;  he  may  be  a  "  rain- 
maker," "  seer,"  or  "  spirit-medium,"  or  may  practise  some 
special  form  of  magic. 

I  may  roughly  define  "  doctors  "  as  men  who  profess  to 
extract  from  the  human  body  foreign  substances  which, 
according  to  aboriginal  belief,  have  been  placed  in  them  by 
the  evil  magic  of  other  medicine-men,  or  by  supernatural 

355 


356        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

beings,  such  as  Brewin  of  the  Kurnai,  or  the  Ngarrang  of 
the  Wurunjerri.  Ngarrang  is  described  as  being  like  a  man 
with  a  big  beard  and  hairy  arms  and  hands,  who  lived  in 
the  large  swellings  which  are  to  be  seen  at  the  butts  of  some 
of  the  gum-trees,  such  as  the  Red  Gum,  which  grows  on  the 
river  flats,  in  the  Wurunjerri  country.  The  Ngarrang  came 
out  at  night  in  order  to  cast  things  of  evil  magic  into 
incautious  people  passing  by  their  haunts.  The  effect  of 
their  magic  was  to  make  people  lame.  As  they  were 
invisible  to  all  but  the  medicine-men,  it  was  to  them  that 
people  had  recourse  when  they  thought  that  a  Ngarrang  had 
caught  them.  The  medicine-man  by  his  art  extracted  the 
magic  in  the  form  of  quartz,  bone,  wood,  or  other  things. 

Other  medicine-men  were  bards  who  devoted  their  poetic 
faculties  to  the  purposes  of  enchantment,  such  as  the  Bunjil- 
venjin  of  the  Kurnai,  whose  peculiar  branch  of  magic  was 
composing  and  singing  potent  love  charms. 

At  first  sight  the  subject  of  this  chapter  might  seem  to 
be  a  very  simple  one,  since  the  practices  of  the  medicine-man 
may  appear  to  be  no  more  than  the  actions  of  cunning  cheats, 
by  which  they  influence  others  to  their  own  personal  benefit. 
But  on  a  nearer  inspection  of  the  subject  it  becomes  evident 
that  there  is  more  than  this  to  be  said.  They  believe  more 
or  less  in  their  own  powers,  perhaps  because  they  believe  in 
those  of  others.  The  belief  in  magic  in  its  various  forms — 
in  dreams,  omens,  and  warnings — is  so  universal,  and  mingles 
so  intimately  with  the  daily  life  of  the  aborigines,  that  no 
one,  not  even  those  who  practise  deceit  themselves,  doubts 
the  power  of  other  medicine-men,  or  that  if  men  fail  to  effect 
their  magical  purposes  the  failure  is  due  to  error  in  the 
practice,  or  to  the  superior  skill  or  power  of  some  adverse 
practitioner. 

Allowing  for  all  conscious  and  intentional  deception  on 
the  part  of  these  men,  there  still  remains  a  residuum  of  faith 
in  themselves  which  requires  to  be  noticed,  and  if  possible 
to  be  explained. 

It  is  in  this  aspect  that  the  question  has  shown  itself  as 
being  most  difficult  to  me.  The  problem  has  been  how  to 
separate  falsehood  from  truth,  cunning  imposture  from  bona 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  357 

fide  actions,  and  deliberate  falsification  from  fact.  The 
statements  which  I  have  made  in  these  pages  are  the  result 
of  long-continued  inquiries  as  well  as  personal  observation. 
I  must  say  for  my  aboriginal  informants,  that  I  have  found 
them  truthful  in  their  statements  to  me  whenever  I  have 
been  able  to  check  them  by  further  inquiries,  and  in  only 
one  instance  did  I  notice  any  tendency  to  enlarge  the  details 
into  proportions  beyond  their  true  shape.  Even  this  instance 
was  very  instructive.  The  man's  information  as  to  the 
customs  of  his  tribe,  and  especially  as  to  the  initiation 
ceremonies,  I  found  to  be  very  accurate,  but  it  was  when  he 
began  to  speak  of  the  magical  powers  of  the  old  men  of  the 
past  generation  that  I  found  his  colouring  to  be  too  brilliant, 
and  more  especially  as  regarded  his  tribal  father,  the  last 
great  warrior-magician  of  the  tribe.  In  his  exaggeration  of 
the  exploits  of  this  man  one  might  see  an  instructive  example 
of  how  very  soon  an  heroic  halo  of  romance  begins  to  gather 
round  the  memory  of  the  illustrious  dead. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how,  amongst  savages  having  no 
real  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  disease,  which  is  the  common 
lot  of  humanity,  the  very  suspicion  of  such  a  thing  as  death 
from  natural  causes  should  be  unknown.  Death  by  accident 
they  can  imagine,  although  the  results  of  what  we  should 
call  accident  they  mostly  attribute  to  the  effects  of  some  evil 
magic.  They  are  well  acquainted  with  death  by  violencej 
but  even  in  this  they  believe,  as  among  the  tribes  about 
Maryborough  (Queensland),  that  a  warrior  who  happens  to 
be  speared  in  one  of  the  ceremonial  fights  has  lost  his  skill 
in  warding  off  or  evading  a  spear,  through  the  evil  magic  of 
some  one  belonging  to  his  own  tribe.  But  I  doubt  if,  any- 
where in  Australia,  the  aborigines,  in  their  pristine  condition, 
conceived  the  possibility  of  death  merely  from  disease. 
Such  was  certainly  not  the  case  with  the  Kurnai. 

In  all  the  tribes  I  refer  to  there  is  a  belief  that  the 
medicine-men  can  project  substances  in  an  invisible  manner 
into  their  victims.  One  of  the  principal  projectives  is  said 
to  be  quartz,  especially  in  the  crystallised  form.  Such  quartz 
crystals  are  always,  in  many  parts  of  Australia,  carried  as  part 
of  the  stock-in-trade  of  the  medicine-man,  and  are  usually 


358        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

carefully  concealed  from  sight,  especially  of  women,  but  are 
exhibited  freely  to  the  novices  at  the  initiation  ceremonies. 
Since  the  advent  of  white  men  pieces  of  broken  bottle  have 
sometimes  taken  the  place  of  quartz  crystals.  Among  the 
Yuin  the  hair  of  deceased  relatives,  for  instance  of  father  or 
brother,  is  used  for  making  bags  in  which  to  carry  quartz 
crystals,  called  by  them  Knigulliing. 

When  travelling  in  the  country  back  of  the  Darling 
River,  before  it  was  settled,  I  came  across  a  blackfellow 
doctor,  who  accompanied  me  for  the  day,  and  he  greatly 
alarmed  my  two  black  boys  by  seemingly  causing  a  quartz 
crystal  to  pass  from  his  hand  into  his  body. 

The  Kunki  or  medicine-man  of  the  Dieri  tribe  is  sup- 
posed to  have  direct  communication  with  supernatural 
beings  called  Kutchi,  and  also  with  the  Mura-muras.  He 
interprets  dreams,  and  reveals  to  the  relatives  of  the  dead 
the  person  by  whom  the  deceased  has  been  killed.  Kutchi 
was  the  cause  of  sickness  and  other  evils,  but  could  be 
driven  out  by  suitable  means  applied  by  the  Knnki.  On 
one  occasion  Mr.  Gason  had  caught  cold,  and  Jalina- 
piramurana,  hearing  of  it,  sent  to  him  to  ask  permission  to 
"  drive  Kutchi  out  of  the  Police  camp  "  before  he  came  to 
examine  Mr.  Gason  professionally  as  a  medicine-man.  If 
a  Dieri  has  had  a  dream,  and  fancies  he  has  seen  a 
departed  friend  during  the  night,  he  reports  the  circum- 
stance to  a  Kunki,  and  most  likely  embellishes  the  details. 
The  Kunki  probably  declares  that  it  is  a  vision  and  not  a 
dream,  and  announces  his  opinion  in  camp  in  an  excited 
speech.  For  the  Dieri  distinguish  between  what  they  con- 
sider a  vision  and  a  mere  dream.  The  latter  is  called 
Apitcha,  and  is  thought  to  be  a  mere  fancy  of  the  head. 
The  visions  are  attributed  to  Kutchi,  the  powerful  and 
malignant  being,  who  gives  to  the  Ktinki  hi^  power  of 
producing  disease  and  death,  or  of  healing  that  which  has 
been  brought  about  by  some  other  Kunki.  If  the  Kunki 
declares  that  he  has  had  a  real  vision  of  his  departed  friend, 
he  may  order  food  to  be  placed  for  the  dead,  or  a  fire  to  be 
made  so  that  he  can  come  and  warm  himself.  But  it  de- 
pends largely  on  the  manner  in  which  the  interpretation  is 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  359 

received  by  the  elders  whether  the  Kunki  follows  it  up. 
The  Kunki  say  that,  like  a  Kutchi,  they  can  fly  up  to  the 
sky  by  means  of  a  hair  cord,  and  see  a  beautiful  country 
full  of  trees  and  birds.  It  is  said  that  they  drink  the  water 
of  the  sky-land,  from  which  they  obtain  the  power  to  take 
the  life  of  those  they  doom.^ 

One  of  the  most  common  spells  used  by  the  Dieri  is 
"  pointing  with  the  bone "  (human  fibula),  and  this  practice 
is  called  Mukuelli-Dukana,  from  Muku,  "  a  bone,"  and  Dukana^ 
"  to  strike."  Therefore,  as  soon  as  a  person  becomes  ill,  there 
is  a  consultation  of  his  friends  to  find  out  who  has  "  given 
him  the  bone."  If  he  does  not  get  better,  his  wife,  if  he  has 
one,  if  not,  then  the  wife  of  his  nearest  relative,  accompanied 
by  her  Pirrauru,  is  sent  to  the  person  suspected.  To  him 
she  gives  a  small  present,  saying  that  her  husband,  or  so- 
and-so,  has  fallen  ill,  and  is  not  expected  to  get  better. 
The  medicine-man  knows  by  this  that  he  is  suspected  ;  and, 
fearing  revenge,  probably  says  that  she  can  return,  as  he 
will  withdraw  all  power  from  the  bone,  by  steeping  it  in 
water.  If  the  man  dies,  and  especially  if  he  happens  to  be 
a  man  of  importance,  the  suspected  man  is  certain  to  be 
killed  by  the  Pinya.  When  the  tribe  wished  to  kill  some 
one  at  a  distance,  the  principal  men  have  joined  in  pointing 
their  respective  bones,  wrapped  in  emu  feathers  and  fat,  in 
the  direction  of  the  intended  victim,  and  at  the  same  time 
naming  him  and  the  death  they  desired  him  to  die.  All 
those  present  at  such  a  ceremony,  which  lasts  about  an  hour, 
are  bound  to  secrecy.  Should  they  hear  after  a  time  that 
the  intended  victim  continues  to  remain  alive  and  well,  they 
explain  it  by  saying  that  some  one  in  his  tribe  stopped  the 
power  of  the  bone." 

It  is  almost  always  the  case  for  two  persons  to  act 
together  in  "  giving  the  bone."  One  of  them  points  with  it, 
and  also  ties  the  end  of  the  hair  cord,  which  is  fastened  to  it, 
tightly  round  his  upper  arm  in  order  that  the  blood  may  be 
driven  through  it  into  the  bone.  The  other  person  holds 
the  end  of  another  cord  fastened  to  the  bone,  and  goes 
through  the  same  motions  as  he  who  is  holding  the  bone. 

1  O.  Siebert.  *  S.  Gason. 


36o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

This  is  done  because  the  legend  which  accounts  for  the 
origin  of  this  practice  in  the  Mura-mura  times  recounts 
how  two  of  the  Mura-muras,  acting  together,  revenged  the 
murder  of  a  Mura-mura  boy  by  "  giving  the  bone  "  to  those 
who  had  killed  him.^ 

In  the  Tongaranka  tribe,  and  in  all  the  tribes  of  the 
Itchumundi  nation,  pointing  with  the  bone  is  practised. 
The  medicine-man  obtains  the  fibula  of  a  dead  man's  leg, 
which  is  scraped,  polished,  and  ornamented  with  red  ochre, 
and  a  cord  of  the  dead  man's  hair  is  attached  to  it.  It  is 
believed  that  any  person  towards  whom  the  bone  is  pointed 
will  surely  die,  and  a  medicine-man  who  is  known  to  have 
such  a  bone  is  feared  accordingly.  Another  way  of  point- 
ing the  bone  is  by  laying  a  piece  of  the  leg-bone  of  a 
kangaroo  or  an  emu,  sharply  pointed  at  one  end,  on  the 
ground  in  the  direction  of  the  intended  victim  when  he  is 
asleep.  After  a  time  this  is  removed  and  placed  in  some 
secret  place,  point  downwards,  in  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground 
filled  up  with  sticks  and  leaves,  and  then  burnt.  As  the 
bone  is  consumed,  it  is  thought  to  enter  into  the  victim,  who 
then  feels  ill,  and  falls  down  and  dies.  As  the  bone  is 
believed  to  cause  pain,  sickness,  and  ultimately  death,  so  a 
victim  can  be  cured  by  a  medicine-man  sucking  the  cause 
out  of  him,  and  producing  it  as  a  piece  of  bone.  Apart 
from  the  direct  removal  of  the  bone  by  the  medicine-man, 
another  remedy  is  to  rub  the  victim  with  the  ashes  of  the 
bone,  if  they  can  be  found.^ 

There  is  a  peculiar  form  of  pointing  among  the  Wirad- 
juri.  Some  of  the  medicine-men  use  a  small  piece  of  wood 
shaped  like  a  bull-roarer,  placed  close  to  the  fire  but  pointing 
towards  the  intended  victim,  with  the  belief  that  when  this 
instrument,  which  is  called  Dutimal,  becomes  quite  hot, 
it  springs  up  and  enters  the  victim  without  his  being  aware 
of  it.  Others  of  the  Wiradjuri  believe  that  people  are  killed 
by  a  medicine-man  getting  a  piece  of  a  man's  clothes  and 
roasting  it,  wrapped  up  with  some  of  a  dead  man's  fat,  in 

1  "Some  Native    Legends  from  Central    Australia,"    Mary  E.  B,  Howitt. 
Folk-Lore,  vol.  xiii.  No.  4,  p.  403. 

2  J.  W.  Boultbee. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  361 

front  of  a  fire.  This  is  said  to  catch  the  smell  of  the  person 
from  his  clothing.  The  former  wearer  of  it  is  then  expected 
to  fall  ill  and  die  shortly  after.  This  form  of  evil  magic  is 
called  M?trrai-illa. 

The  medicine-man  of  the  Wiradjuri  also  uses  a  kind  of 
charm  called  Yangura,  consisting  of  the  hair  of  a  dead  man 
mixed  with  his  fat  and  that  of  the  lace-lizard,  rolled  into  a 
ball  and  fastened  to  a  stick  about  six  inches  long.  This  is 
carefully  concealed  by  the  medicine-man  until  he  wishes  to 
make  a  person  ill,  or  cause  his  death.  Then  it  is  unwrapped 
and  laid  before  a  fire,  pointing  in  the  direction  of  the  in- 
tended victim,  ft  is  believed  that  the  spirit  of  the  dead 
man  whose  fat  has  been  used  will  help  the  charm  to  act. 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  when  a  man  was  believed  to 
have  "  pointed  the  bone  "  at  another,  the  friends  of  the  latter 
would  request  the  former  to  place  the  bone  in  water  so  as 
to  undo  the  mischief  which  he  might  have  caused.  If  a 
man  died  from  "  pointing  the  bone,"  his  friends  would  take 
measures  to  kill  the  offender  by  the  same  means,  or  by 
direct  violence. 

The  Kurnai  fastened  some  personal  object  belonging  to 
the  intended  victim  to  a  spear-thrower,  together  with  some 
eagle-hawk's  feathers  and  some  kangaroo  or  human  fat. 
The  spcar-thrower  was  then  stuck  slanting  in  the  ground 
before  a  fire,  and  over  it  the  medicine-man  sang  his  charm. 
This  was  generally  called  "singing  the  man's  name"  until 
the  stick  fell,  when  the  magic  was  considered  to  be  com- 
plete. Those  who  used  this  form  of  evil  magic  were  called 
Bunjil-uiurrhvun,  the  latter  word  being  the  name  of  the  spear- 
thrower.  It  was,  as  the  Kurnai  say,  made  strong,  that  is, 
magically  powerful,  by  being  rubbed  with  kangaroo  fat. 
Although  most  commonly  used  for  roasting  things,  it  could 
be  also  used,  as  the  Kurnai  think,  in  a  very  fatal  manner, 
by  sticking  it  in  the  ground  where  the  victim  had  attended 
to  a  call  of  nature,  and  in  such  a  case  the  medicine-man 
sang  the  name  of  the  victim,  mentioning  also  the  death 
which  he  was  to  die. 

An  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  the  spear-thrower  is 
used,  or  rather  in  which  Tankowillin  wished  to  use  it,  came 


362       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

under  my  notice  in  the  year  1888.  He  came  to  me  and 
asked  for  the  loan  of  a  spfear-thrower  which  I  had,  and 
which  he  thought  to  be  of  special  magical  power,  because 
it  had  been  used  at  the  Jeraeil  ceremonies.  He  informed 
me  that  he  wanted  it  to  catch  one  of  the  tribe  who  had 
married  a  relation  of  his,  a  widow,  without  the  consent  of 
her  kindred,  and  also  far  too  soon  after  the  death  of  her 
husband,  indeed  so  soon  that  "  it  had  made  all  the  poor 
fellow's  friends  sad,  thinking  of  him."  When  I  refused  him 
the  use  of  the  Muithvun,  he  said  it  did  not  matter,  for  he 
and  his  friends  had  made  a  very  strong  stick  to  point  at 
him  with,  singing  his  name  over  it,  and  spitting  strong 
poison  over  it. 

He  used  the  word  "  poison  "  for  "  magic,"  but  I  think  that 
in  some  tribes  actual  poison  was  used.  For  instance,  in  the 
Yuin  tribe  the  Gommeras  are  credited  with  killing  people 
by  putting  things  in  their  food  and  drink.  I  was  informed 
that  one  of  these  substances  is  a  yellow  powder.  My 
informant  said  that  he  once  obtained  some  of  it  from  one 
of  the  old  Gommeras^  and  having  rubbed  it  on  some  meat, 
he  gave  it  to  a  kangaroo  dog,  who  fell  down  and  died  very 
shortly. 

A  similar  statement  comes  to  me  from  the  Kamilaroi  on 
the  Gwydir  River,^  About  Moree  it  is  said  that  the 
medicine-men  have  two  kinds  of  poison,  which  they  use  to 
kill  people  with.  The  poisons  are  called  Wuru-kahrel  and 
Dinna-kurra,  from  Dinna,  "  a  foot,"  and  Kurra,  "  to  catch." 
It  is  said  that  they  get  these  poisons  by  putting  the  dung 
of  the  native  cat  in  a  hole  in  an  ant-hill,  covered  up  with 
gum-leaves.  After  a  while  a  white  mossy  powder  comes  on 
it,  which  they  say  is  the  poison.  It  is  said  to  be  very  slow 
in  its  action,  taking  three  weeks  to  operate.  I  give  this  for 
what  it  is  worth. 

I  may  note  also  that  the  Rev.  George  Taplin  mentions 
in  his  account  of  the  Narrinyeri  tribe  the  Neilyeri,  or  poison 
revenge,  which  is  by  using  a  spear-head  or  a  piece  of  bone 
which  has  been  stuck  in  the  fleshy  part  of  a  putrid  corpse, 
and  kept  there  for  some  weeks.     This  weapon  is  used  by 

*  Cyrus  E,  Doyle. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  363 

pricking  an  enemy  when  asleep,  and  thus  inoculating  him 
with  the  virus  of  death/ 

Such  are  the  beliefs  as  to  poisons  from  widely  separated 
places.  I  have  no  means  of  testing  their  truth,  but  my 
informants  fully  believed  in  their  effects,  and  there  is  no 
special  improbability  in  their  use  by  the  medicine-men. 

Returning  again  to  the  practice  of  roasting  things  for 
the  purpose  of  harming  the  owners  of  them,  I  mention 
another  form  of  it  by  the  Wotjobaluk.  In  this  they  used 
a  small  spindle-shaped  piece  of  wood  called  Gulhvil,  in  the 
same  manner  as  other  tribes  used  the  spear-thrower  or 
yam-stick.  The  name  Guliwil  was  not  used  for  these 
pieces  of  wood,  usually  of  the  Bull-oak  {Casuanua  glauca) 
alone,  but  also  for  the  whole  implement,  which  consisted  of 
three  or  four  of  the  pieces  of  wood,  and  was  tied  up  with 
some  article  belonging  to  the  intended  victim  and  human 
fat.  Each  Guliwil  has  on  it  some  marks,  such  as  a  rude 
^^gy  of  the  victim,  and  of  some  of  the  poisonous  snakes. 
The  bundle  was  roasted  for  a  long  time,  or  for  several  times 
at  intervals. 

I  am  told  that  after  the  whites  settled  on  the  Wimmera 
River  the  Wotjobaluk  employed  on  the  stations  found  the 
great  chimneys  of  the  huts,  especially  of  those  which  were 
used  as  kitchens,  unrivalled  places  in  which  to  hang  their 
Guliwils  so  as  to  expose  them  to  a  prolonged  heat." 

The  following  is  an  account,  by  one  of  the  Wotjobaluk 
old  men,  of  the  effects  produced  by  such  a  Gulixvil^  or  the 
belief  in  it,  which  amounts  to  the  same  thing.  "  Sometimes 
a  man  dreams  that  some  one  has  got  some  of  his  hair,  or  a 
piece  of  his  food,  or  of  his  'possum  rug,  or  indeed  anything 
that  he  has  used.  If  he  dreams  this  several  times,  he  feels 
sure  that  it  is  so,  and  he  calls  his  friends  together  and  tells 
them  he  is  dreaming  too  much  about  '  that  man,'  who  must 
have  something  belonging  to  him.  He  says,  *  I  feel  in  the 
middle  of  the  fire  ;  go  and  ask  him   if  he  has  anything  of 

'   Op.  at.  p.  23. 

2  Guliwil  is  apparently  from  gitlt,  "anger,  rage,"  not  from  guli  or  kuli, 
which  is  "man."  For  example,  j^uliyan,  "I  am  enraged";  giiliyarra,  "thou 
art  enraged  "  ;  guliya,  "he  is  enraged  "  ;  giiliyaugal,  "  we  two  are  enraged  "  ; 
guliyangtio,  "  we  all  are  enraged,"  and  gtiliyatgalik,  "  you  three  are  enraged." 


364        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

mine   in   the   fire.'       His   friends   do   his   bidding,  probably 
/  2 


FIG.  21. — NOS.  I  AND  2  IN  THE  UPPER  ROW  ARE  OPPOSITE  SIDES  OF  A 
GULIWIL  OF  THE  WOTJOBALUK  TRIBE.  NO.  3  IN  THE  UPPER  LINE  AND 
ALL    THOSE    IN   THE    LOWER    LINE    ARE   GULIWILS. 


adding,  '  You  need  not  deny  it,  he  has  dreamed  of  it  three 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND   MAGIC  365 

times,  and  dreams  are  generally  true.'  Sometimes  the  sus- 
pected Bangui  (medicine-man),  seeing  no  other  way  out  of 
it,  admits  that  he  has  something  that  he  is  burning,  but 
makes  the  excuse  that  it  was  given  to  him  to  burn,  and  that 
he  did  not  know  to  whom  it  belonged.  In  such  a  case  he 
would  give  the  thing  to  the  friends  of  the  sick  man,  telling 
them  to  put  it  in  water  to  put  the  fire  out  ;  and  when  this 
had  been  done,  the  man  would  probably  feel  better." 

In  the  Jupagalk  tribe  the  method  was  to  tie  the  thing, 
or  fragment  which  had  belonged  to,  or  been  touched  by,  the 
intended  victim,  to  the  end  of  a  digging-stick,  by  a  piece  of 
cord.  This  was  stuck  in  the  ground  in  front  of  a  fire  ;  and 
as  it  swung  there,  the  Bangal  sang  over  it  till  it  fell,  which 
was  a  sign  that  the  spell  was  complete. 

Among  the  Kulin  tribes  the  practice  was  to  use  a  spear- 
thrower  for  this  purpose  instead  of  a  digging-stick,  and  it 
was  called  Kalbura-tnurrhvun,  or  broken  spear-thrower. 

The  Wurunjerri  believed  firmly  that  the  Wirrarap 
(medicine-man)  could  kill  persons,  far  or  near,  by  means  of 
Mung,  or  evil  magic,  through  the  agency  of  many  substances, 
among  which  the  Thundal,  or  quartz  crystals,  stood  first. 
This  he  could  project,  either  invisibly,  or  else  as  a  small 
whirlwind  a  foot  or  so  high.  The  effect  on  a  man  caught 
in  such  a  way  was,  according  to  Berak,  that  he  felt  a  chill, 
then  pains  and  shortness  of  breath.  A  medicine-man,  being 
consulted,  would  look  at  him  and  say,  "  Hallo  !  there  is  a 
lot  of  Mung  in  you."  Then  alone,  or  with  other  medicine- 
men, he  sat  near  and  watched  the  man,  until  one  of  them 
saw  the  magical  substance  trying  to  escape,  it  might  be  in 
the  middle  of  the  night.  Then  he  would  run  after  it,  catch 
it,  and  breaking  a  piece  off  it  to  prevent  it  escaping  again, 
put  it  into  his  magic-bag  for  future  use.  Any  article  once 
belonging  to,  or  having  been  used  by,  the  intended  victim, 
would  serve  to  work  an  evil  spell.  A  piece  of  his  hair,  some 
of  his  faeces,  a  bone  picked  up  by  him  and  dropped,  a  shred 
of  his  opossum  rug,  would  suffice,  and  am6ng  the  Wotjobaluk, 
if  he  were  seen  to  spit,  this  would  be  carefully  picked  up 
with  a  piece  of  wood,  and  used  for  his  destruction. 

The  old  beliefs  are  also  adapted  to  their  new  surround- 


366        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

ings  since  the  settlement  of  Australia  by  the  whites.  The 
Wurunjerri  dreaded  a  practice  attributed  to  the  native  tribes 
about  Echuca  whom  they  called  Meymet.  This  was  the 
pounded  flesh  of  a  dead  man  with  cut-up  tobacco.  This, 
given  to  the  unsuspecting  victim,  caused  him,  when  he 
smoked  it,  to  fall  under  a  deadly  spell,  which  no  Wirrarap 
could  cure.  The  result  was  the  internal  swelling  of  the 
smoker  till  he  died.  Another  instance  of  evil  magic  peculiar 
to  the  Wudthaurung  tribe,  the  western  neighbours  of  the 
Wurunjerri,  was  to  put  the  rough  cones  of  the  She-oak 
{Casuixrina  quadrivalvis)  into  a  man's  fire,  so  that  the  smoke 
might  blow  into  his  eyes  and  blind  him.  The  idea  seems  to 
have  been  that  the  eidolon  of  the  rough  seed  cones  would 
magically  produce  injury,  as  the  object  itself  might  do.  This 
belief  points  to  an  attempted  explanation  of  ophthalmia. 

Besides  these  applications  of  evil  magic,  there  was 
another  form  of  this  practice,  namely,  by  placing  sharp  frag- 
ments of  quartz,  glass,  bone,  or  charcoal  in  a  person's  foot- 
prints, or  in  the  impression  of  his  body  where  he  has  lain 
down.  Rheumatic  affections  are  often  attributed  to  this 
cause.  Once,  seeing  a  Tatungalung  man  very  lame,  I  asked 
him  what  was  the  matter.  He  replied,  "  Some  fellow  put 
bottle  into  my  foot."  I  found  out  that  he  had  acute 
rheumatism,  and  he  believed  that  some  enemy  had  found 
his  footprint  and  buried  in  it  a  fragment  of  a  broken  bottle, 
the  magic  of  which  had  entered  into  his  foot. 

One  of  the  practices  of  the  Wiimbaio  J/^Xrj-^^r  (medicine- 
man) was  to  step  among  the  crowd  at  a  corrobboree,  and 
pick  up  something  off  the  ground,  saying  that  it  was  a  piece 
of  nukalo  (quartz)  which  some  Mekigar  at  a  distance  had 
thrown  at  them.^ 

When  following  down  Cooper's  Creek  in  search  of  Burke's 
party,  we  were  followed  by  a  number  of  wild  blacks,  who 
appeared  much  interested  in  examining  and  measuring  the 
footprints  of  the  horses  and  camels.  My  blackboy,  from 
the  Darling  River,  rode  up  to  me  with  the  utmost  alarm 
exhibited  in  his  face  and  said,  "  Look  at  those  wild  black- 
fellows  ! "      I   said,  "  Well,  they   are   all    right."       Then    he 

^  J.  Bulmer. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  367 

replied,  "  I  am  sure  they  are  putting  poison  in  my  footsteps." 
This  is  another  instance  of  the  use  of  our  word  "  poison  " 
for  "  magic." 

Use  of  Human  Fat  in  Magic 

The  practice  of  using  human  fat  as  a  powerful  magical 
ingredient  is  widely  spread  over  Australia,  and  consequently 
the  belief  is  universal  that  the  medicine-men  have  the  power 
of  abstracting  it  magically  from  individuals,  or  also  of  actually 
taking  it  by  violence  accompanied  by  magic.  This  is  usually 
spoken  of  by  the  whites  as  taking  "  the  kidney  fat,"  but  it 
appears  to  be  the  caul-fat  from  the  omentum. 

It  is  said  by  the  Wiimbaio  that  the  medicine-men  of 
hostile  tribes  sneak  into  the  camp  in  the  night,  and  with  a 
net  of  a  peculiar  construction  garrotte  one  of  the  tribe,  drag 
him  a  hundred  yards  or  so  from  the  camp,  cut  up  his 
abdomen  obliquely,  take  out  the  kidney  and  caul-fat,  and 
then  stuff  a  handful  of  grass  and  sand  into  the  wound.  The 
strangling-net  is  then  undone,  and  if  the  victim  is  not  quite 
dead,  he  generally  dies  in  twenty-four  hours,  although  it  is 
said  that  some  have  survived  the  operation  for  three  days. 
The  fat  is  greatly  prized,  and  is  divided  among  the  adults, 
who  anoint  their  bodies  with  it  and  carry  some  of  it  about, 
as  they  believe  the  prowess  and  virtues  of  the  victim  will 
pass  to  those  who  use  the  fat.^ 

But  they  also  say  that  the  Mekigar  of  such  tribes  can 
knock  a  man  down  in  the  night  with  a  club  called  Yiiri- 
battra-piriy  that  is,  ear-having-club,  a  club  having  two  corners, 
i.e.  ears.  The  man  being  thus  knocked  down,  his  assailant 
would  remove  his  fat  without  leaving  a  sign  of  the  operation. 
They  had  a  great  horror  of  those  men  of  other  tribes  who, 
they  believe,  prowled  about  seeking  to  kill  people.  They 
called  them  Thinau-vialkin,  that  is,  "  one  who  spreads  a  net 
for  the  feet,"  and  Kurinya-matola,  "one  who  seizes  by  the 
throat."  These  were  their  real  enemies,  and  when  they 
caught  them  they  blotted  them  out  by  eating  part  of  their 
bodies.      Once  when  the  Wiimbaio  feared  that  their  enemies 

»  Dr.  M'Kinlay. 


368        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

from  the  south,  the  Wotjobaluk,  might  come  and  attack 
them,  they  requested  a  white  man  who  was  with  them  to 
sleep  in  the  opening  of  a  horseshoe-shaped  screen  of  boughs, 
which  they  built  round  their  camp.  They  said  that  their 
enemies  would  not  step  over  a  white  man,  but  would  other- 
wise come  in  among  them  and  put  cords  on  their  throats, 
and  thus  having  choked  them,  would  carry  them  off  and 
take  their  fat. 

One  old  Mekigar  of  this  tribe  was  seen  sitting  in  the 
camp  with  a  piece  of  reed  in  his  hand,  which  he  stuck  from 
time  to  time  in  the  ground,  bringing  up  on  it  something  like 
meat.  It  was  said  that  he  was  catching  some  one  at  a 
distance,  and  bringing  up  some  of  his  fat.^ 

The  Wotjobaluk  practised  this  fat-taking  apparently  to  a 
great  extent.  Here  is  the  account  of  the  fat-taking  powers 
of  their  medicine-men  {Bangal)  as  given  to  me  by  one  of  the 
old  men  of  the  tribe.  As  usual,  the  favourite  plan  is  to 
sneak  on  the  victim  when  asleep.  As  soon  as  the  Bangui  is 
near  enough  to  see  the  man  by  the  light  of  the  fire,  he 
swings  the  Yulo  (bone)  round  his  head,  and  launches  it  at 
him.  It  is  supposed  to  dart  into  him  invisibly,  and  compel 
him  to  come  out  of  his  camp  to  the  medicine-man,  who 
throws  him  over  his  shoulder  and  carries  him  to  a  convenient 
spot.  Or,  if  he  was  acquainted  with  the  man,  he  would 
manage  to  arrive  at  his  camp  late,  so  as  to  be  asked  to 
remain  for  the  night.  Pretending  to  sleep,  he  watches  until 
his  host  is  in  a  sound  slumber,  when  he  passes  his  Yulo  under 
his  knees,  round  his  neck,  and  through  the  loop  of  the  cord 
attached  to  it,  and  so  carries  him  a  little  way  from  the  camp. 

This  old  man  also  gave  me  an  account  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  fat  is  always  taken,  whether  the  victim  was  noosed 
by  the  Yulo  or  knocked  down  by  a  blow  on  the  back  of  the 
neck  with  the  Breppen,  that  is  a  club  with  a  knob  at  the  end. 
The  victim  is  laid  on  his  back  and  the  medicine-man  sits 
astride  of  his  chest,  cuts  him  open  on  the  right  side  below 
the  ribs,  and  abstracts  the  fat.  Then  bringing  the  edges 
together,  and  singing  his  spell,  he  bites  them  together  to 
make  them  join  without  a  visible  scar.      Then  he  retires  to  a 

'  John  Bulmer. 


\ 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  369 

distance,  leaving  the  man  lying  on  his  back.  The  medicine- 
man then  sings  a  song  with  the  following  effect.  At  the 
first  singing  the  victim  lifts  one  leg,  at  the  second  the  other, 
at  the  third  he  turns  over,  at  the  fourth  a  little  whirlwind 
comes,  and  blowing  under  his  back,  lifts  him  up.  At  the 
same  time  a  star  falls  from  the  sky,  called  Yerigauil,  with 
the  man's  heart.  He  thereupon  rises  and  staggers  about, 
wondering  how  he  came  to  be  sleeping  there.  This  process 
is  called  Deking-ngalluk,  or  "  open  side." 

Whenever  the  Wotjobaluk  see  a  falling  star,  they  believe 
that  it  is  falling  with  the  heart  of  a  man  who  has  been 
caught  by  a  Bangal  and  deprived  of  his  fat. 

The  Yulo  was  used  by  all  the  tribes  of  the  Wotjo  nation. 
By  the  Mukjarawaint  it  was  made  in  the  following  manner. 
When  the  corpse  of  a  man  had  remained  on  the  funeral 
stage  so  long  that  it  had  become  dry,  his  father,  own  or 
tribal,  made  "  magic  "  of  the  fibula.  He  pointed  it  at  one 
end,  and  tied  some  of  the  dead  man's  flesh  to  it  with 
kangaroo  sinews,  and  anointed  the  whole  with  some  of  the 
dead  man's  fat  mixed  with  raddle.  Being  then  hung  over  a 
fire  to  make  it  "  strong,"  it  was  tied  up  tight  in  a  bag  made 
of  opossum-fur  string,  until  required  for  use.  When  used  it 
was  swung  round  by  a  length  of  about  five  feet  of  kangaroo 
sinew,  and  then  thrown  in  the  direction  of  the  intended 
victim,  who  was  supposed  in  consequence  to  swell  up  and 
die.  This  instrument  was,  as  a  whole,  called  Yulo  or  J  inert 
(sinew),  and  the  victim  was  believed  generally  to  learn  in  a 
dream  who  had  "  caught  him,"  and  he  then  informed  his 
friends.  In  the  extreme  verge  of  the  country  occupied  by 
the  Wotjo  tribes,  on  the  borderland  between  them  and  the 
Jajaurung  tribe,  there  was  the  same  practice  and  the  same 
belief  as  to  the  falling  star. 

The  song  which  the  Bangal  would  use  to  make  his 
victim  regain  his  senses,  and  go  away,  is  such  a  one  as  the 
following,  which  belongs  to  the  Jajaurung  of  the  St.  Arnaud 
district.  But  in  this  case  it  is  the  man's  ghost  which  is  to 
get  up  and  go  away. 

Moronga  moroi'e  Uanijulin  willain-gitrk     krota-bartgalo. 

Rainbow     spirit  (ghost)     like  a  knife  cutting       swallow  curlew. 

2  B 


370        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

If  the  victim  were  a  stranger,  the  Bangui  would  not  take 
the  trouble  to  bring  him  back  to  life,  but  would  leave  him 
where  he  lay.  But  if  he  were  some  one  whom  he  knew,  he 
would  do  as  described,  and  moreover  he  would  be  careful 
when  laying  him  out,  preparatory  to  operating  on  him,  to 
place  him  in  that  direction  in  which  the  dead  of  his  totem 
are  buried. 

The  following  account  was  given  to  me  by  one  of  the 
oldest  of  the  Wotjobaluk  people,  who  was  one  of  the 
principal  actors  in  it. 

Before  the  white  men  came  to  the  Wimmera  River,  a 
man  died  at  a  place  beyond  Lake  Hindmarsh,  from  having 
his  fat  taken  by  a  Battgal.  My  informant  went  out  with 
a  party  of  his  friends  into  the  bush  surrounding  the  place 
where  the  dead  man's  camp  was,  and  watched  in  the  dark. 
He  said  that,  after  a  time,  they  saw  the  figure  of  a  man 
sneaking  among  the  trees,  and  as  he  came  nearer,  they 
recognised  him  as  the  maternal  uncle  of  the  deceased. 
That  is,  they  believed  it  to  be  the  Gulkan-gulkan,  the 
wraith,  or  spirit,  of  the  suspected  Bangal,  sneaking  to  the 
camp  where  his  victim  lay.  The  brother  of  the  murdered 
man  struck  at  the  Gulkan-gulkan,  when  it  disappeared.  It 
had  just  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  carried  its  spear  in 
rest  in  the  throwing -stick,  just  as  when  he  speared  the 
victim,  who  was  his  sister's  son,  for  his  fat. 

The  belief  that  the  Bangal  always  watches  at  the  place 
where  he  has  killed  a  victim  is  common  to  all  the  Wotjo 
tribes,  and  extends  to  their  neighbours,  the  Jajaurung. 

In  the  case  mentioned,  the  relatives  of  the  deceased, 
knowing  who  the  murderer  was,  buried  the  body  and  made 
up  a  party  to  kill  him.  He  was  found  near  to  where  Nhill 
is  now  situated,  and  a  false  Wirriki,  or  messenger,  a  tribal 
brother  of  the  deceased,  was  sent  on  ahead  to  the  camp. 
The  avengers  followed,  led  by  the  brothers  of  the  victim. 
It  was  arranged  that  the  Wirriki  should  have  three  days' 
start  in  which  to  find  the  offender,  and  if  possible  to  get 
him  to  go  out  hunting  with  him  to  a  certain  place.  He, 
however,  could  not  do  this,  and  he  met  his  party,  and  they 
agreed  that  they  would  surprise  the  camp  at  night.     This 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  371 

was  done,  and  at  a  signal  from  the  IVirriki  the  man  was 
speared. 

The  Mukjarawaint  had  a  similar  belief  as  to  the  fat- 
taking  by  medicine-men.  The  account  given  to  me  was 
almost  identical  with  that  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  the  only 
difference  being  that,  unless  the  Bangui  takes  precautions, 
the  victim  will  follow  him  when  he  regains  his  senses.  He 
therefore  hides  till  he  sees  him  rise  and  stagger  towards  him, 
when  he  turns  him  away  homewards,  by  throwing  some 
earth  at  him.  The  time  to  elapse  before  the  victim  dies  is 
fixed  by  the  Bangal  walking  along  the  nearest  fallen  tree- 
trunk.  Its  length  in  strides  fixes  the  number  of  days  he 
has  to  live.  The  victim  goes  home,  feels  ill,  does  not  know 
what  ails  him,  but  just  before  he  dies  dreams  of  the  man 
or  men  who  have  taken  his  fat,  and  so  is  able  to  tell  his 
friends,  who  forthwith  make  up  an  avenging  party. 

This  belief  in  a  sort  of  clairvoyance  just  before  death 
seems  to  be  very  general  among  the  aborigines.  I  have 
found  it  with  the  Wiradjuri,  where  a  man,  just  before  his 
death,  said  to  his  friends,  who  were  standing  round  him, 
"  Go  on  one  side  so  that  I  may  be  able  to  see  who  it  is  who 
has  caught  me." 

It  also  occurred  in  Gippsland,  where  a  few  years  ago 
one  of  the  Kurnai  died  from  the  effects  of  drinking  and 
exposure.  When  so  near  death  that  he  was  lying  speech- 
less in  his  camp,  his  great  friend,  the  before -mentioned 
Tankowillin,  besought  him  earnestly  to  tell  him  who  it  was 
who  had  caused  his  death,  and  was  inconsolable  because  the 
sick  man  died  without  being  able  to  do  so. 

In  speaking  of  the  powers  of  the  Gomineras  with  a 
number  of  the  old  men  after  the  ceremonies  in  the  Yuin 
tribe,  they  all  agreed  that  they  could  throw  Joins  at  people, 
invisibly — "  like  the  wind,"  as  they  said.  A  victim  could 
not  therefore  know  when  he  was  hurt,  but  a  man  who  was 
so  killed  might  be  able  to  tell  his  friends,  before  he  died, 
who  it  was  who  had  hurt  him.  But  often  some  one  was 
able  to  say  in  such  a  case,  "  I  saw  so-and-so  going  behind 
him  throwing  Joins.  The  Govimera  could  tell  the  Yuin 
who   had    "  caught "  a  deceased    man.       So,   if  they   knew 


372        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

that  he  had  been  at  some  place  shortly  before  he  died — if, 
for  instance,  a  Moruya  man  had  been  to  Bodalla — then 
his  father,  or  brothers,  and  a  Gouunera  would  sneak  down 
to  that  place  and  look  out  for  blacks.  It  would  not 
matter  whom  they  caught,  any  man  from  that  place 
would  do.  I  remember  hearing  from  one  of  the  Yuin 
that  in  a  case  of  this  kind  some  blacks  from  Tumut  or 
Goulburn  came  and  killed  about  twenty- five  Braidwood 
people — men,  women,  and  children.  They  put  some 
Gubburra  (evil  magic)  in  their  grog,  and  as  they  were 
having  a  drunken  spree,  all  sucking  out  of  one  bottle,  they 
all  died. 

A  very  intelligent  Jupagalk  man  gave  me  the  following 
account  of  what  he  saw,  as  a  boy  of  about  ten  years  of  age, 
of  the  fat-taking  practice  by  the  medicine-men  of  his  tribe. 
He  spoke  as  follows  : — 

"  When  I  was  a  boy,  I  went  out  one  day  with  some  of 
the  men  to  hunt.  We  were  all  walking  in  a  line,  when  one 
of  them  hit  the  man  in  front  of  him  on  the  back  of  the  neck 
and  knocked  him  down.  Two  or  three  of  the  men  held  me 
tight  so  that  I  could  not  run  away,  for  I  was  very  frightened. 
Then  the  man  cut  open  the  one  he  had  knocked  down,  by  a 
little  hole  in  his  side  below  his  ribs,  and  took  out  his  fat. 
After  that  he  bit  the  two  edges  of  the  cut  together,  and 
sang  to  make  them  join,  but  he  could  not  succeed.  He 
then  said  he  could  not  do  this  because  some  one  had  already 
taken  this  man's  fat  before,  as  he  could  see  by  the  marks  on 
the  liver,  and  that  whenever  a  man  had  been  opened  and 
closed  up,  no  one  could  do  it  again.  As  they  could  not 
wake  the  man  up,  they  buried  him.  They  smoked  the  fat 
over  a  fire  and  took  it  away  wrapped  up  tightly  in  a  cloth. 
They  wanted  it  to  carry  with  them  to  make  them  lucky  in 
hunting." 

The  Kurnai  called  this  practice  Bret-bung,  or  "  with  the 
hand."  The  men  who  practised  it  were  called  Burra-burrak, 
or  "  flying,"  and  also  Bret-bung  mungar  worugi,  or  "  with  the 
hand  from  a  long  distance."  They  were  believed  to  throw 
their  victims  into  a  magic  trance  by  pointing  at  him  with 
the   Yertung,  which  is  a  bone  instrument,  made  of  the  fibula 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  373 

of  a  kangaroo,  corresponding  to  the  Yulo  of  the  natives  of 
north-western  Victoria.  In  the  Kurnai  tribe  men  have  died 
believing  themselves  to  have  been  deprived  of  their  fat, 
although  there  were  no  signs  of  violence  on  their  bodies. 
At  the  same  time  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  taking  of  fat 
was  actually  practised.  An  informant  on  whom  I  can  rely 
tells  me  that  when  a  boy,  not  long  after  Gippsland  was 
settled,  he  saw  an  old  man  roasting  fat  which  they  had  taken 
from  a  blackfellow,  whom  they  had  knocked  down  with  a 
club.  This  they  ate,  and  told  the  boy  that  they  would  now 
have  the  strength  of  the  other  man.  The  alleged  victim  of 
this  action  did  not  die,  but  was  killed  some  time  after  by  his 
own  people  for  some  tribal  misdemeanour. 

The  effect  of  dreams  in  which  the  sleeper  believed  that 
he  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  such  a  medicine-man  may 
be  seen  from  a  remark  made  by  my  Wuruiijerri  informant, 
that  "  Sometimes  men  only  know  about  having  their  fat 
taken  by  remembering  something  of  it  as  in  a  dream." 

The  Omeo  blacks  used  to  take  out  the  kidney  fat  of  their 
slain  enemies  and  rub  themselves  with  it  when  they  went 
out  to  fight.  They  used  to  grease  their  clubs  and  put  them 
out  in  the  sun  to  dry.  In  reference  to  this  practice  my 
informant  said,  "  Once  I  was  going  to  take  hold  of  a  waddy 
(club),  which  was  being  treated  in  this  way,  when  the  owner 
ran  to  me  and  said  that,  if  I  touched  it,  I  should  get  a  very 
sore  hand."  ^ 

I  feel  no  doubt  that  the  property  of  evil  magic  attributed 
to  this  weapon  was  derived  from  its  being  anointed  with 
human  fat. 

The  Yuin  called  the  fat -takers  Bukin,  and  the  belief 
extends  with  the  same  name  in  dialectic  forms  across  the 
Manero  tableland  to  Omeo  and  down  the  Murray  and 
Murrumbidgee  waters.  The  Wolgal  medicine -man  Yibai- 
malian  had  the  character  among  the  Kurnai  of  being  a  Bukin, 
or,  as  they  call  it,  a  Buna-burrak. 

The  Wiradjuri  greatly  dreaded  the  Bugin,  as  they  call 
them,  and  their  practices,  and  attributed  to  them  all  kinds  of 
supernatural    powers.     They  are    generally  believed    to   be 

>  J.  Buntine. 


374        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  medicine- men  of  neighbouring  tribes  lower  down  the 
Murray  and  the  Murrumbidgee  Rivers.  These  are  called 
Dulu-dnrrai,  from  Dulu,  the  great  jag-spear,  and  are  said  to 
carry  the  pointed  bone,  and  the  long  end  of  plaited  sinew, 
called  by  the  Wiradjuri  Gufigur,  the  analogue  of  the 
Wotjobaluk  Yulo. 

Watching  till  the  victim  sleeps,  the  Bugi?i  is  supposed 
to  creep  to  him,  pass  the  bone  under  his  knees,  round  his 
neck,  and  through  the  loop  end  of  the  cord  of  sinew.  Thus 
having  secured  his  victim,  the  Bugin  carries  him  away  to 
extract  his  fat.  This  is  said  to  be  done  in  the  manner 
already  described. 

The  Bugin  is  thought  to  be  able  to  walk  invisibly,  and 
to  turn  himself  into  an  animal  at  will.  My  Wiradjuri 
informant,  Murri-kangaroo,  in  speaking  of  this  practice  of 
the  Bugin,  of  which  he  expressed  great  dread,  said  as 
follows  : — "  If  I  saw  an  old  man  kangaroo  come  hopping 
up,  and  sit  and  stare  at  me,  I  should  keep  my  eyes  fixed  on 
him  and  try  to  get  out  of  his  way,  lest  he  might  be  a  Bugin, 
who,  getting  behind  me,  would  have  me  at  a  disadvantage." 

The  Bugin  when  hard  pressed  is  believed  to  be  able  to 
turn  himself  it|to  a  stump,  or  other  inanimate  object,  or  to 
go  down  into  the  ground  out  of  sight,  to  escape  his  pursuers. 
Yibai-malian,  the  before-mentioned  medicine-man,  professed 
to  have  saved  himself  from  the  pursuit  of  his  enemies  by 
having  entered  into  a  horse  and  thus  galloped  off,  a  feat 
which  was  thought  much  of  by  the  Murring  to  whom  he 
told  it. 

Once  when  a  feud  was  in  progress  between  the  Omeo 
people  and  those  living  at  Bruthen  in  Gippsland,  the  former 
accounted  for  their  enemy  coming  upon  them  unawares  by 
saying  that  the  medicine-men  of  the  Gippsland  blacks  could 
turn  themselves  into  crows,  and  fly  about  to  watch  the 
motions  of  the  Omeo  men^ 

A  very  dangerous  practice  attributed  to  the  Bugin  is  to 
get  inside  a  tree,  and  when  a  blackfellow  is  climbing  it  to 
cause  a  limb  of  which  he  has  laid  hold  to  break  off  suddenly, 
so  that  he  falls  to  the  ground  and  becomes  an  easy  victim. 

^  J.  Buntine. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  375 

When  a  Wiradjuri  man  feels  his  flesh  twitch,  he  knows  that 
a  Bugin  is  near,  and  thus  is  of  the  same  opinion  as  the 
second  witch  in  Macbeth,  who  says,  "  By  the  pricking  of  my 
thumbs,  something  wicked  this  way  comes," 

The  fat-taking  practice  of  the  Wurunjerri  Wirrarap  or 
medicine-men  has  been  fully  described  to  me.  It  was  called 
Burring,  and  was  carried  out  by  means  of  an  instrument 
made  of  the  sinews  of  a  kangaroo's  tail  and  the  fibula  of  its 
leg  {Ngyelling\  which  had  the  same  name.  The  sinew  cord 
had  a  loop  worked  at  one  end,  and  the  pointed  bone  was 
attached  to  the  other.  Armed  with  this,  the  medicine-man 
would  sneak  up  to  the  camp  during  a  man's  first  sleep.  I 
am  told  that  the  most  favourable  time  would  be  when  the 
sleeper  snored.  The  assailant  would  then  place  his  fingers 
on  the  forehead  of  the  sleeper.  If  it  felt  cool,  he  would  not 
wake  up,  but  if  warm,  the  assailant  waited.  If  the  time 
was  propitious,  the  cord  was  passed  lightly  round  the 
sleeper's  neck,  and  the  bone  being  threaded  through  the 
loop,  was  pulled  tight.  Another  Burring  was  then  passed 
round  his  feet  and  the  victim  carried  off  into  the  bush, 
where  he  was  cut  open  and  the  fat  extracted.  The  opening 
was  magically  closed  up,  and  the  victim  left  to  come  to  him- 
self with  the  belief  that  he  had  had  a  bad  dream.  If  the 
fat  thus  extracted  was  heated  over  a  fire,  the  man  died  in  a 
day  or  two,  but  otherwise  he  would  linger  for  some  time. 

At  other  times  the  human  fat  was  obtained  by  violence 
without  recourse  to  the  Burring,  While  out  hunting  with 
some  pretended  friends,  one  of  them  would  engage  the 
attention  of  the  victim  in  conversation  ;  suddenly  another 
would  say,  "  Look  at  those  birds  !  "  or  something  of  the  sort, 
to  take  his  attention,  while  a  third  man  would  fell  him  with 
a  blow  by  a  club  {Kugering).  Then,  according  to  my 
informant,  he  would  be  rolled  about  on  the  ground  to  make 
his  Murup  (spirit)  come  out  of  him.  The  fat  was  then 
extracted  in  the  usual  way.  If  not  actually  killed  by  the 
blow,  the  man  might  come  to  himself  and  be  able  to  return 
to  his  camp.  I  was  told  of  such  a  case,  where  an  old  man 
of  the  Wurunjerri  tribe  had  been  thus  caught  by  some  of  the 
Jajaurung,  but  got  back  to  his  camp  before  he  died.      In  all 


376        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

cases  where  such  acts  were  said  to  have  been  done  by  a 
medicine-man,  and  the  wound  closed  magically  and  invisibly, 
and  the  man  died  in  the  belief  that  his  fat  had  been  taken, 
we  may  feel  assured  that  the  origin  of  the  belief  was  a 
dream,  as  in  this  particular  case. 

Among  the  Kamilaroi  the  taking  of  the  fat  was  called 
Krammergorai^  or  stealing  fat.^ 

The  Yuin  believed  that  their  Goinmeras  could  make  a 
man  go  to  sleep,  and  then  take  his  fat,  closing  up  the  wound 
so  as  not  to  leave  a  mark,  and  then  sending  him  home.  He 
wakes  up  there,  feels  very  ill,  and  dies.  This  they  call 
Buggiin.  When  a  spear  was  rubbed  over  with  such  fat,  it 
became,  as  the  Yuin  say,  "  poisoned,"  that  is,  infected  with 
evil  magic. 

The  blacks  living  about  Dungog  believed  that  when  a 
person  became  ill  and  wasted  away,  the  medicine-man 
{Kroji)  of  some  hostile  tribe  had  stolen  his  fat.'^ 


The  Bunjil-Barn  of  the  Kurnai 

Death  is  attributed  by  the  Kurnai  not  only  to  the  action 
of  evil  magic,  but  also  to  the  combination  of  evil  magic  and 
violence.  Such  is  the  magical  proceeding  called  Bain,  a 
practice  much  affected  by  the  Kurnai,  who  called  those  who 
carried  it  out  Bunjil-barn. 

Here  is  an  instance  which  took  place  in  1874.  Some 
Brabralung  Kurnai,  among  whom  were  Tankowillin  and 
Turlburn,  had  a  grudge  against  Bundawal,  and  they  deter- 
mined to  catch  him  with  Barn.  They  chose  a  young 
He-oak  tree,^  lopped  the  branches  and  pointed  the  stem, 
then  drawing  the  outline  (  Yaviboginni)  of  a  man  as  if  the 
tree -stump  grew  out  of  his  chest,  they  also  cleared  the 
ground  for  a  space  round  the  tree,  making  a  sort  of  magical 
circle.  Then  they  stripped  themselves  naked,  rubbed  them- 
selves over  with  charcoal  and  grease,  a  common  garb  of 
magic,  and  danced  and  chanted  the  Barn  song.  They  told 
me  afterwards  that  they  did  this  for  several  days,  but  that, 

*  C.  Naseby.  ^  £)r_  M'Kinlay.  ^  Casuarina  suberosa. 


vn  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  377 

as  Tankowillin  expressed  it,  they  "  were  not  strong  enough." 
Under  the  influence  of  their  magic  spells,  Bundawal  was 
expected  to  rise  from  his  camp  and  walk  to  them  in  a 
trance,  "like  it  sleep."  When  the  victim  entered  the  magic 
circle  the  Bunjil-barn  would  throw  small  pieces  of  He-oak 
wood,  shaped  like  the  Guliwils  before  mentioned,  at  him. 
When  he  fell  to  the  ground  they  would  cut  out  his  tongue, 
or  rather,  as  the  Bunjil-barn  explained  to  me,  would  have 
pulled  out  a  great  length  of  it,  cutting  it  free  at  each  side  as 
it  was  protruded,  and  so  sent  him  home  to  die.  The  Brabra 
clan  of  the  tribe  called  this  practice  Jellun-daiun,  or  tongue- 
choke.  The  great  Headman  Bruthen-munji  is  said  to  have 
been  the  last  known  victim  of  this  form  of  evil  magic.  His 
tribal  son  Tulaba  has  repeated  to  me  his  counter  charm 
against  Barn,  which  runs  as  follows :  "  Nuviba  jellung 
barnda"  literally,  "  Never  sharp  barn,"  or  anglicised,  "  Never 
shall  sharp  barn  catch  me."  This  was  repeated  in  a 
monotonous  chant. 

The  secrecy  with  which  personal  names  are  often  kept 
arises  in  great  measure  from  the  belief  that  an  enemy,  who 
knows  your  name,  has  in  it  something  which  he  can  use 
magically  to  your  detriment. 

I  have  been  told  of  a  certain  way  of  catching  a  person 
with  Barn,  namely,  to  find  the  place  where  he  has  sat  down 
on  the  ground  and  left  an  impression  on  it.  But  the 
incantation  must  be  commenced  immediately  after  his  de- 
parture. 

One  of  the  spells  sung  by  the  Bunjil-barn  is  as  follows: — 


Mtinang 

ngiai             (then  the  person's  name), 

Coming 

he  is 

loutigattda                 haruda.         • 

biar 

along 

swinging  him               iKirn  is. 

A  practice  analogous  to  that  of  Barn  obtained  in  the 
Yuin  tribe,  where  medicine -men,  when  it  was  deemed 
advisable  to  kill  some  one,  or  attack  people  in  secret,  went 
into  the  bush  and  made  a  Talmaru  or  magic  fire.  Round 
this  they  danced,  rubbed  with  charcoal,  and  shouting  the 
name  of  the  person,  and  showing  Joia,  that  is,  exhibiting 
magical    objects   after   their   fnanner  at  the  initiation   cere- 


378        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTHEAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

moiyes.  Having  done  this  sufficiently,  they  piled  a  high 
mound  of  earth  over  the  fire  and  drove  a  stake  into  the 
centre  of  it.  This  performance  was  to  make  the  person  or 
persons  stupid  and  easily  surprised. 

A  practice  of  evil  magic  much  practised  by  the  Kurnai 
is  that  of  Bulk.  This  is  a  rounded  and  generally  black 
pebble,  which  the  medicine-man  carried  about  and  occasion- 
ally showed  to  people  as  a  threat.  One  method  of  using  it 
was  to  find  the  fresh  excreta  of  the  intended  victim  and  to 
place  the  Bulk  in  it,  the  expected  result  being  that  he  would 
receive  the  evil  magic  in  his  intestines  and  die.  To  touch  it 
is  thought  to  be  highly  injurious  to  any  one  but  the  owner. 
I  have  seen  women  and  girls  beside  themselves  with  terror  at 
an  attempt  to  put  one  of  these  Bulk  in  their  hands. 

How  a  man  might  become  possessed  of  a  Bulk  is  seen 
from  the  account  given  to  me  by  Tulaba  as  to  how  he 
obtained  one.  It  was  when  he  was  gathering  wild  cattle  for 
a  settler  on  the  Upper  Mitchell  River,  and  he  dreamed  one 
night  that  two  Mrarts  (ghosts)  were  standing  by  his  camp 
fire.  They  were  about  to  speak  to  him,  or  he  to  them  (I 
now  forget  which),  when  he  woke.  They  had  vanished,  but 
on  looking  at  the  place  where  they  had  stood  he  perceived 
a  Bulk,  which  he  kept  and  valued  much. 

A  Bulk  is  believed  to  have  the  power  of  motion.  For 
instance,  Tankowillin  and  another  man  told  me  that  the 
evening  before  they  had  seen  a  Bulk  in  the  form  of  a  bright 
spark  of  fire  cross  the  roof  of  a  house  and  disappear  on  the 
other  side.  ^Also  that  they  had  run  round  to  catch  it,  but 
it  had  vanished. 

Curative  Practices  of  Medicine-men 

I  have  now  spoken  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
medicine -men,  according  to  the  beliefs  of  the  aborigines, 
are  accustomed  to  work  ill  upon  them.  It  remains  to 
show  these  men  in  a  more  favourable  light,  as  alleviating 
suffering,  and  shielding  their  friends  from  the  evil  magic 
of  others.  One  of  the  special  functions  of  the  medicine- 
man is  to  counteract  the  spells  made  by  others. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  379 

Their  method  of  procedure  is  that  common  in  savage 
tribes,  and  which  has  been  so  often  described  that  it  may 
be  dismissed  in  a  few  words,  being,  in  perhaps  the 
majority  of  cases,  a  cure  effected  by  rubbing,  pressing  or 
sucking  the  affected  part,  possibly  accompanied  by  an 
incantation  or  song,  and  the  exhibition  of  some  foreign 
body,  extracted  therefrom,  as  the  cause  of  the  evil.  Or  the 
evil  magic  may  be  sucked  out  as  a  mouthful  of  wind  and 
blown  away,  or  got  rid  of  by  pinching  and  squeezing  to 
allay  the  pain.  In  some  cases  the  "  poison,"  as  they  now 
call  it  in  their  "  pidgin  English,"  is  supposed  to  be  extracted 
through  a  string,  or  a  stick,  by  the  doctor  from  the  patient^ 
who  then  spits  it  out  in  the  form  of  blood.  A  few  instances 
may  be  given  from  various  tribes,  which  will  show  the 
similarity  in  the  curative  practice,  and  its  range  in  the 
quarter  of  Australia  with  which  I  am  now  dealing. 

Some  years  ago  a  party  of  Brajerak  from  Manero  and 
some  Biduelli  came  down  into  Gippsland  to  see  me,  and 
were  friendly  with  the  Kurnai.  The  two  Headmen  of  the 
former  were  the  before  -  mentioned  Yibai  -  malian  and 
Mragula.  After  they  left  on  their  return  home,  one  of 
the  Kurnai,  in  speaking  of  them  said,  that  Yibai  Nvas  a 
most  powerful  Mulla-mullung,  or  medicine-man,  and  he 
explained  that  during  their  visit  his  brother  had  become 
very  ill,  and  Mragula  had  extracted  from  his  body  something 
like  a  glass  marble  which  Yibai-malian  had  put  into  him. 
It  was  perhaps  as  well  for  Yibai  that  the  patient  recovered, 
otherwise  he  would  have  been  held  answerable  for  his 
death. 

As  an  instance  of  the  methods  used  by  the  Kurnai,  I 
give  the  practice  of  Tankli  the  son  of  Bunjil-bataluk.  His 
method  of  cure  was  to  stroke  the  affected  part  with  his  hand 
till,  as  he  said,  he  could  "  feel  the  thing  under  the  skin." 
Then,  covering  the  place  with  a  piece  of  some  fabric,  he 
drew  it  together  with  one  hand,  and  unfolding  it  he  ex- 
hibited a  piece  of  quartz,  bone,  bark,  or  charcoal,  even  on 
one  occasion  a  glass  marble  as  the  cause  of  the  disease. 
The  use  of  the  fabric  was  quite  evident  to  any  one  but  a 
blackfellow. 


38o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  Tongaranka  medicine-man,  when  about  to  practise 
his  art,  sits  down  on  the  windward  side  of  his  patient,  and 
his  power  is  supposed  to  pass  to  the  sick  person  "  like 
smoke,"  The  doctor  then  sucks  the  affected  part,  and 
withdraws  his  power  out  of  him,  and  also  at  the  same  time 
the  pain,  usually  in  the  form  of  a  quartz  crystal.^ 

One  of  the  curative  practices  of  the  Wiimbaio  was 
curiously  associated  with  the  offender.  If,  for  instance,  a 
man  had  nearly  killed  his  wife  in  a  paroxysm  of  rage,  he  was 
compelled  to  submit  to  bleeding.  The  woman  was  laid  out 
at  length  on  the  ground  in  some  convenient  spot,  and  her 
husband's  arms  were  each  bound  tightly  above  the  elbow. 
The  medicine-man  opened  the  vein  and  the  blood  was 
allowed  to  flow  over  the  prostrate  body  of  the  woman 
till  the  man  felt  faint.^ 

The  Wiimbaio  medicine-man  was  called  Mekigar,  from 
Mekt,  "  eye,"  or  "  to  see,"  otherwise  "  one  who  sees,"  that  is, 
sees  the  causes  of  maladies  in  people,  and  who  could 
extract  them_  from  the  sufferer,  usually  in  the  form  of  quartz 
crystals.^ 

The  extraction  of  pain  by  means  of  a  cord  tied  to  the 
sick  person  was  also  done  by  the  Mekigar,  The  cord  was 
made  of  his  hair,  and  he  rubbed  it  over  his  gums  for  a  time. 
The  blood  thence  resulting  was  believed  to  be  from  the 
patient,  and  the  remedy  seemed  to  give  relief  For  in- 
flammatory affections  of  the  lungs  or  bowels,  the  Mekigar 
laid  the  patient  out  and  commenced  to  shampoo  him, 
breathing  and  sucking  over  the  affected  part,  and  apparently 
extracting  pieces  of  stone,  bone,  glass,  as  the  cause,  and  as  in 
other  cases,  often  gave  relief. 

In  one  case  in  this  tribe  the  Mekigar  made  use  of  a 
long  slender  reed,  one  end  of  which  he  placed  on  the  spot 
in  which  the  pain  was,  while  he  held  the  other  in  his  mouth. 
After  sucking  some  time  he  produced  a  piece  of  glass  as  the 
cause  of  the  pain. 

In  such  cases  as  these,  if  the  patient  was  not  benefited 
by  the  procedure,  the  Mekigar  had  the  patient  carried  out  of 
the  camp,  while  his  friends  swept  the  ground  after  him  with 

»  J.  W.  Boultbee.  2  Dr.  M'Kinlay.  3  J.  Bulmer. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  381 

boughs,  to  drive  away  the  evil  influence  which  had  caused 
the  disease.  This  evil  influence,  which  may  be  called  evil 
magic,  was  attributed  to  an  invisible  supernatural  being 
called  Bori. 

A  severe  headache  was  sometimes  treated  by  digging 
out  a  circular  piece  of  sward,  and  the  patient  laying  his  head 
in  the  hole,  the  sod  was  replaced  over  his  head,  on  which  the 
Mekigar  sat,  or  even  stood  for  a  time,  to  squeeze  out  the 
pain.  Even  under  this  practice  the  patient  sometimes 
declared  himself  relieved.^ 

In  the  Wurun Jerri  tribe,  when  a  man  believed  himself  to 
be  under  some  evil  spell,  or  suspected  that  harm  was  im- 
pending to  him,  and  if,  as  was  likely,  he  felt  ill,  he  had 
recourse  to  the  Wirrarap.  My  VVurunjerri  informant, 
speaking  of  this,  said,  "  The  Winamp,  looking  at  him, 
might  say,  '  Yes,  the  fire  is  up  so  high,'  pointing  to  his 
waist.  '  It  is  well  that  you  came  to  me,  the  next  time  they 
burn  it,  it  might  be  up  to  your  neck,  and  then  you  would 
be  done  for.' "  The  next  time  the  wind  blew  towards  the 
north,  the  Wirrarap  would  go  through  the  air  to  the  place 
where  the  man  was  burning  something  belonging  to  that 
poor  fellow,  and  where  that  Yaruk  (magic)  was,  pull  up  the 
spear-thrower,  with  which  the  spell  was  being  worked,  and 
bring  it  home.  Giving  the  Yaruk  to  the  sick  man,  he 
would  say  something  like  this,  "  You  go  and  put  this  in  a 
running  stream  to  wash  all  the  Yaruk  out  of  it,  and  I  will 
go  up  and  put  this  Murriwun  (spear-thrower)  in  some  water 
up  there."  The  reference  to  the  wind  blowing  northwards 
is  because,  in  this  case,  the  offending  medicine-man  belonged 
to  some  tribe  in  that  direction,  for  the  Wurunjerri  believed 
that  the  tribes  on  the  Murray  frontage,  called  by  them 
Meymet,  were  of  all  others  the  most  inclined  to  evil  magic. 
The  "  going  up  "  by  the  Kulin  Wirrarap  refers  to  the  belief 
that  such  men  could  travel  invisibly  through  space  ;  by  this 
means  ascending  through  the  sky  to  the  Tharaugalk-bek 
beyond  it. 

By  the  Ngarigo  the  medicine-man  is  called  Murri- 
malundra,  or  Budjan-belan,  but  the  former  was  specially  a 

1  Dr.  M'Kinlay. 


382        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

doctor  who  extracted  the  evil  substances  which  a  Murri- 
maliindra  had  placed  in  the  sick  man.  These  were  specially 
white  stones  called  Tliaga-kurha^  and  black  stones  called 
Thaga  -ku  ribong.  ^ 

The  Yuin  medicine-men  are  the  Gomvieras,  but  there 
are  here,  as  in  many  other  tribes,  specialists  who  practise 
the  art  of  extracting  evil  substances,  and  are  called  Nuga- 
munga,  the  nearest  translation  of  which  that  I  can  give  is 
"  doctor-he-is."  One  of  them  sucked  the  place  on  a  man 
where  there  was  a  pain,  and  spat  out  a  mouthful  of  blood, 
by  which  the  patient  felt  much  relieved.  He  also,  in  other 
cases,  alleviated  pain  by  warming  his  hands  at  the  fire  and 
placing  them  on  the  affected  part.  Some  of  these  men 
dissipate  the  evil  influence  by  blowing  the  place  with 
short  puffs. 

One  of  the  Yuin  explained  to  me  what  his  people  did  if 
they  thought  that  they  were  the  victims  of  evil  magic.  He 
said,  "  If  you  thought  that  some  one  had  put  Joia  on  you, 
the  only  way  would  be  to  go  to  a  Gounnera  and  ask  him  to 
watch  for  the  man  when  out  hunting,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
throw  a  Joia  at  him.  This  would  be  done  by  the  friendly 
medicine-man  climbing  up  a  big  tree  and  "spitting"  2,  Joia 
at  him  as  he  passed  under  it.  Such  was  the  remedy  one  of 
my  Yuin  friends  proposed  to  apply  to  a  man  whom  he 
thought  to  have  designs  upon  himself.  It  was  thought  that 
one  of  the  very  great  Gounueras  could  get  Daramulun  to 
slay  his  enemies  for  him. 

Collins,  in  speaking  of  the  natives  of  Port  Jackson,^ 
mentions  a  matter  which  is  worth  quoting  here.  He  says, 
"  During  the  time  that  Booroong,  a  native  girl,  lived  at 
Sydney,  she  paid  occasional  visits  to  the  lower  part  of  the 
harbour.  From  one  of  these  she  returned  extremely  ill. 
On  being  questioned  as  to  the  cause,  she  said  that  the 
women  of  Cam-mer-ray  had  made  water  in  a  path  which 
they  knew  that  she  was  to  pass,  and  it  had  made  her  ill. 
Not  recovering,  though  bled  by  a  surgeon,  she  underwent  an 
extraordinary  and  superstitious  operation.  She  was  seated 
on  the  ground  with  one  of  the  lines  worn  by  the  men  passed 

1  Kurha,  "white,"  and  Kuribong,  "black."  ^  op.  cit.  p.  382. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  383 

round  her  head  once,  taking  care  to  fix  the  knot  in  the  centre 
of  her  forehead  ;  the  remainder  of  the  line  was  taken  by 
another  girl,  who  sat  at  a  small  distance  from  her,  and  with 
the  end  of  it  fretted  her  lips  until  they  bled  very  copiously  ; 
Booroong  imagining  all  the  time  that  the  blood  came  from 
her  own  head,  and  passed  along  the  line  until  it  ran  into  the 
girl's  mouth.  This  operation  they  term  Be-anny,  and  it  is 
the  peculiar  province  of  the  women." 

The  Geawe-gal  believed  in  the  mysterious  power  of  the 
Koradji,  but  it  is  hard  to  say  what  special  means  of  using 
it  they  ascribed  to  him  as  exercising  it  in  his  own  tribe.  If 
one  of  them  wasted  away,  his  ailment  was  almost  always 
imputed  to  the  evil  influence  of  some  Koradji  of  another 
tribe.  Their  own  Koradji  would,  after  resort  to  seclusion 
or  mystery,  pronounce  from  what  quarter  the  malign  influence 
had  come,  and  then  the  whole  tribe  was  committed  to  feud 
or  revenge.  The  Koradji  was  supposed  in  some  undefined 
way  to  have  preternatural  knowledge  of,  or  power  of  com- 
munication with,  supernatural  influence.^ 

In  the  tribe  about  Dungog  the  Koradji  were  supposed 
to  be  possessed  of  supernatural  powers,  and  also  to  be  capable 
of  curing  people  of  all  ills,  and  of  causing  disasters  to  others. 
Sickness  they  believed  to  be  caused  by  the  incantations  and 
magic  of  the  Koradjis  of  some  hostile  tribe.' 

At  Port  Stephens  the  Koradji  treated  a  sick  person  by 
winding  round  him  a  cord  of  opossum  fur,  and  then  round 
the  body  of  some  female  relative  or  friend,  who  held  the  end 
of  it  in  her  hands,  and  passed  the  cord  to  and  fro  between 
her  lips,  until  the  blood  dropped  into  a  bowl,  over  which  she 
held  her  head.  It  was  believed  that  the  evil  magic  which 
caused  the  disease  passed  up  the  cord  into  the  body  of  the 
operator,  and  thence  with  the  blood  into  the  bovvl.^ 

The  tribes  which  extended  inland  from  Port  Stephens 
believed  in  the  curative  powers  of  the  Koradjis,  or  Gradjis, 
as  they  were  also  called,  to  suck  out  evil  magic  projected 
into  others  by  the  medicine-men  of  other  tribes,  in  the  form 
of  pieces  of  stone  or  charcoal.  In  one  case  a  man  was  under 
the  belief  that  when  passing  a  grave,  the  ghost  of  a  man 
1  G.  W.  Rusden.  2  d,.  M'Kinlay.  3  w.  Scott. 


384        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

buried  there  had  magically  thrown  a  pebble  into  him,  and 
the  Koradji,  after  sucking  the  place,  produced  a  small  pebble 
as  the  cause  of  the  mischief.  In  another  case,  this  same 
Koradji  extracted  the  pain  from  a  boy's  foot  which  had  been 
burned,  in  the  form  of  a  piece  of  charcoal.^ 

Among  the  Kamilaroi,  who  lived  to  the  north  of  the 
last-named  tribe,  the  Koradji  was  the  medicine-man  and 
doctor,  and  practised  the  same  methods  of  sucking  the  part 
in  pain  as  before  described.  But  I  have  learned  that  these 
Koradjis  also  applied  herbs  as  remedies,  and  treated  snake- 
bite by  sucking  and  then  rinsing  out  their  mouths  with 
water.  They  also  used  the  "  earth  bath  "  as  a  cure  for  colds, 
which  was  effective,  unless  the  patient  were  weak  and  died. 
In  this  treatment  a  hole  was  dug  in  moist  earth,  and  the 
sick  man  or  woman  placed  in  it  erect,  and  surrounded  with 
earth  to  the  waist.  The  patient  was  kept  therein  for  four 
or  five  hours,  and  draughts  of  water  were  supplied,  for  this 
treatment  causes  great  thirst,  and  the  body  sweats  profusely. 
Usually  the  patient  shouts  with  pain  when  in  the  earth  bath.^ 
About  fifteen  miles  from  Yanga  station,  near  Balranald,  is  a 
limestone  cave  at  Talla  Lake.  A  number  of  blacks  of  the 
Wathi-wathi  tribe  were  here  put  in  the  ground  alive  and 
buried,  all  but  their  heads,  as  a  cure  for  some  disease,  and 
great  numbers  died.^ 

The  sucking  practice  is  also  found  in  the  Yualaroi  and 
Bigambul  tribes,  the  medicine-men  in  the  former  strengthen- 
ing their  magical  practice  by  a  plentiful  application  of  saliva.^ 

The  Turrbal  medicine-man  cured  wounds  by  filling  his 
mouth  with  water,  then  sucking  the  wound  and  spitting  the 
blood  and  water  over  the  face  of  the  wounded  man.  Some 
sicknesses  were  attributed  to  the  evil  magic  of  the  medicine- 
men of  other  tribes,  even  as  far  distant  as  one  hundred  miles, 
who  had,  as  they  said,  "  caught "  the  person  suffering,  and 
cut  him  to  pieces  internally  with  a  sharp  stone.  To  extract 
this,  the  doctor  filled  his  mouth  with  water  and  sucked  the 
place  in  pain  until  he  could  squirt  out  of  his  mouth  blood 
and    water,   he    finally    produced    a   sharp    stone,  ostensibly 

1  J.  W.  Boydell.  ^  d^.  M'Kinlay. 

3  Captain  Garside.  *  R.  Crowthers. 


vii  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  .385 

through  a  cord  tied  to  the  patient,  and  up  which  it  was 
sucked,  as  the  Turrbal  believed,  into  his  mouth,  and  thence 
produced  as  the  cause.  For  consumption,  a  rope  made  of 
opossum  fur  was  tied  round  the  patient's  body  ;  a  woman 
seated  herself  three  or  four  feet  from  him  with  a  pot  of  water 
between  her  legs  and  the  end  of  the  hair  rope  in  her  hands. 
She  dipped  this  end  in  the  water  and  rubbed  her  lips  and 
gums  with  it  until  they  bled.  The  patient  believed  that  the 
blood  came  from  his  body,  and  is  said  to  have  been  relieved 
by  the  procedure.^ 

The  Chepara  believe  in  an  evil  being  called  Wulle,  who 
was  believed  to  influence,  or  to  aid,  the  medicine-men  in 
killing  people.  If  a  man  died  in  spite  of  the  medicine-man, 
they  said  it  was  Wulle  who  killed  him.  The  medicine-man 
is  called  Y a-gul-kubba,  and  turns  the  patient  about,  presses 
his  body  all  over,  pinches  him,  and  also  anoints  his  body 
with  saliva,  all  the  time  muttering  incantations  in  a  low  tone  of 
voice,  finally  producing  some  object,  usually  a  piece  of  stone.^ 

In  the  Kaiabara  tribe  a  black  with  a  headache  would 
have  a  rope  or  cord  tied  tightly  round  the  head,  and  be  bled 
with  a  shell  or  flint,  the  head  being  beaten  with  a  small  stick 
to  cause  the  blood  to  flow  freely.  A  pain  in  the  back  would 
be  cured  by  another  man  standing  on  the  back  of  the  patient. 
Certain  herbs,  bruised  and  soaked  in  water,  are  used  as 
medicine,  also  the  gum  from  the  Blood-wood  tree  dissolved 
in  water.  An  aching  tooth  is  pulled  out  with  a  string  if  a 
back  one  ;  if  an  incisor,  it  is  knocked  out  with  a  stone,  a  stick 
being  used  as  a  chisel.  They  dress  sores  with  mud,  or  down 
from  a  duck  or  hawk. 

The  medicine-men,  in  addition  to  the  usual  magical 
practices  which  have  been  described,  also  administered  gum 
dissolved  in  water.^ 

In  the  Dalebura  tribe  it  was  common  to  find  people 
with  a  circular  scar  round  the  leg  just  below  the  knee  and 
above  the  calf,  showing  that  the  person  had  been  bitten  on 
the  leg  by  a  venomous  snake.  The  operation  was  thus 
described  by  an  eye-witness  :  "  A  woman,  bitten  by  a  snake, 
called  to  her  husband,  who  upon  seeing  the  reptile  got  a 
'  Tom  Petrie.  ,  *  J.  Gibson.  ^  Jocelyn  Brooke. 

2  C 


386        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

cord  and  tied  it  above  the  knee,  twitching  it  tighter  with  a 
stick.  He  then  picked  up  a  quartz  pebble,  cracked  it  in 
two,  and  with  the  sharp  edge  cut  a  circle  right  round  the 
leg,  severing  the  skin.  Blood  oozed  out,  and  though  the 
woman  became  drowsy  and  ill,  she  eventually  recovered. 
The  blackfellow  was  asked  if  he  would  cut  the  arm  in  the 
same  way  if  the  bite  were  on  the  wrist,  and  his  answer  was  : 
'  Baal,  me  stupid  fellow,  too  much  blood  run  away ! '  The 
blacks  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  what  snakes  are 
venomous  and  what  harmless,  but  in  either  case  when 
hunting  always  smash  the  head  to  a  pulp  before  hanging 
the  body  round  the  neck  to  carry  it."  ^ 

The  medicine-men  Bubiberi  of  the  Dalebura  tribe  pro- 
fessed to  call  down  rain,  and  also  to  cure  disease.  They 
professed  to  be  safe  from  harm,  excepting  from  death.  They 
have  been  seen  to  crunch  up  hot  coals  taken  from  fires  of 
Gidyea  wood,  to  show  their  immunity  from  fire." 

The  curative  powers  of  the  medicine-men  were  in  some 
cases  of  a  much  higher  order  than  those  which  I  have 
recorded.  The  following  account  of  the  practice  of  a 
celebrated  Bangui  of  the  Jupagalk  tribe  is  an  instance  of 
this,  and  was  given  to  me  by  one  of  the  men  who  were 
present,  and  I  record  it  as  nearly  as  possible  in  his  own 
words.  "  A  blackfellow  was  very  ill,  and  at  dusk  the  Bangal 
came  to  see  him.  At  dark  he  went  off  for  a  time.  By 
and  by  we  saw  a  light  afar  off,  and  as  it  seemed  to  be 
above  the  tree-tops  to  the  eastward,  it  looked  at  first  like  a 
star.  Then  it  went  round  to  the  west,  and  kept  coming 
nearer  and  nearer.  At  last  we  saw  the  Bangal  walking 
along  the  ground  carrying  a  piece  of  burning  rag  in  his 
hand.  His  legs  were  covered  with  something  like  feathers, 
which  could  be  seen  by  the  firelight,  and  the  people  said 
that  they  were  Bangals  feathers.  He  sat  down  by  the  poor 
fellow,  saying  that  he  had  been  over  to  the  Avoca  River, 
where  he  found  a  man  who  had  the  rag  tied  on  a  yam-stick 
roasting  it  before  a  fire.  He  then  rubbed  the  place  where 
the  man  was  sick,  and  sucked  out  some  pieces  of  stone  and 
glass.      The  man  then  soon  got  better." 

J   R.  Christison.  ^  /^/^. 


vii  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  387 

I  also  heard  of  one  of  these  higher  branches  of  the 
medicine-men's  art  in  the  Wurunjerri  tribe.  Soon  after  the 
white  men  came  to  Melbourne,  a  blackfellow  living  near 
where  Heidelberg  now  is,  was  nearly  dead.  His  friends 
sent  for  Doro-bauk,^  who  lived  to  the  west  of  Mount 
Macedon.  When  he  arrived,  he  found  the  man  just  breathing 
ever  so  slightly,  and  his  Murup  (spirit,  ghost)  had  gone  away 
from  him,  and  nothing  remained  in  him  but  a  little  wind. 
Doro-bauk  went  after  the  Murup,  and  after  some  time 
returned  with  it  under  his  'possum  rug.  He  said  that  he 
had  been  just  in  time  to  catch  it  round  the  middle,  before  it 
got  near  to  the  Karalk?  The  dead  man  was  just  breathing 
a  little  wind  when  Doro-bauk  laid  himself  on  him  and  put 
the  Murup  back  into  him.  After  a  time  the  man  came 
back  to  life. 

These  were  the  practitioners  of  the  higher  magic,  and 
were  credited  with  powers  of  which  the  case  of  Doro-bauk  is 
a  striking  instance.  But  there  were  others  who  practised  in 
other  directions,  and  in  a  lesser  degree.  Such  was  a  man  of 
the  Brataua  clan  of  the  Kurnai  tribe,  who  dreamed  several 
times  that  he  had  become  a  lace-lizard,  and,  as  such,  had 
assisted  at  a  corrobboree  of  those  reptiles.  Thus  it  was 
that  he  acquired  power  over  them,  and  he  had  a  tame  lace- 
lizard  about  four  feet  in  length  in  his  camp,  while  his  wife 
and  children  lived  in  another  close  by.  As  he  put  it,  his 
Bataluk  (lace-lizard)  and  himself  were  like  the  same  person, 
as  he  was  a  Bataluk  also.  The  lizard  accompanied  him 
wherever  he  went,  sitting  on  his  shoulders  or  partly  on  his 
head,  and  people  believed  that  it  warned  him  of  danger, 
assisted  him  in  tracking  his  enemies,  or  young  couples  who 
had  eloped,  and  in  fact  was  his  friend  and  protector.  As 
might  have  been  expected,  people  also  believed  that  he  could 
send  his  familiar  lizard  at  night  into  their  camps  to  injure 
them  while  they  slept.  In  consequence  of  the  comrade- 
ship with  lace-lizards  he  acquired  the  name  oi  Bunjil-bataluk. 

A  medicine-man   belonging  to  the  Dairgo  clan  of  the 

*  DorOy  a  certain  kind  of  grub,  and  Bank,  "high  up." 

2  Karalk  is  the  bright  colour  of  sunset,  and  is  said  to  be  caused  by  spirits  of 
the  dead  going  in  and  out  of  Ngainat,  which  is  the  receptacle  of  the  sun  just 
beyond  the  edge  of  the  earth. 


388        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Kurnai  had  a  tame  Thuriing  (brown  snake)  which  he  fed  on 
frogs.  People  were  very  much  afraid  of  him,  because  they 
believed  he  sent  it  out  at  night  to  hurt  others. 

I  remember  that  many  years  back  there  was  an  old 
woman  of  the  Biduelli  tribe  who  was  much  feared  because 
she  had  a  tame  native  cat  which  she  carried  about  with  her, 
and  which  was  believed  to  injure  people  during  sleep  at  her 
wish. 

One  of  the  most  curious  practices  of  the  lesser  magic 
which  has  come  under  my  notice  was  that  of  the  Bunjil- 
yenjin  of  the  Kurnai,  which  I  have  not  met  with  elsewhere. 
I  have  spoken  of  them  at  length  in  another  part  of  this 
work,  and  need  not  again  refer  to  the  particulars. 

As  part  of  the  magical  practices  of  the  native  tribes,  the 
use  of  charms  is  not  to  be  overlooked.  As  an  instance 
which  came  under  my  notice  I  give  a  charm  to  drive  away 
pains,  which  Tulaba  learned  from  his  deceased  father  in  a 
dream.  One  evening  when  I  was  at  the  Jeraeil  ceremonies 
I  heard  a  most  extraordinary  song  proceeding  from  his 
camp.  I  found  that  he  was  driving  away  pains  which  were 
troubling  his  old  wife,  and  he  told  me  that  he  was  singing  a 
most  powerful  song  which  his  father  Bruthen-munji  had 
taught  him  while  he  slept.  The  words  are  as  follows,  an 
extraordinary  emphasis  being  laid  on  the  last  word  : — 

Minyan  buhinma  naranke. 

Show  belly  moon  to. 

The  medicine-men  were  everywhere  credited  with  the 
power  of  flying  through  the  air — perhaps  "  being  conveyed  " 
would  be  a  better  term — either  to  distant  places,  or  to  visit 
the  "sky- land,"  where  dwelt,  according  to  a  widespread 
belief,  their  allies  the  ghosts  and  supernatural  beings,  such  as 
Daramiilun,  from  whom,  in  some  tribes,  their  magical  powers 
were  supposed  to  be  derived.  If  not  conveying  themselves 
by  art  of  magic,  they  were  supposed  to  climb  up  by  means 
of  a  cord,  which  they  threw  up,  or  which  was  let  down  to 
them  from  above  ;  or,  as  the  Theddora  medicine-men  were 
said  to  do,  they  blew  up  a  thread  like  a  spider's  web  out  of 
their  mouths  and  climbed  up  thereby.  The  Kurnai  Birraark 
was  conveyed  by  friendly  Mrarts  or  ghosts  on  the  Marrang- 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  389 

rang ;  a  Ta-tathi  Bangal  was  carried  aloft  by  the  ghost  of  a 
woman,  whose  powers  he  invoked  by  chewing  a  piece  of  skin 
which  he  had  cut  from  her  stomach  after  death,  and  cured  in 
the  smoke  of  his  camp  fire. 

A  peculiar  feature  in  the  Kurnai  magic  is  that  the 
functions  of  the  Birraark  are  separated  from  those  of 
the  medicine-man  {Mulla-inulung).  The  former  combined 
the  functions  of  the  seer,  the  spirit-medium,  and  the  bard, 
for  he  foretold  future  events,  he  brought  the  ghosts  to  the 
camp  of  his  people  at  night,  and  he  composed  the  songs 
and  dances  which  enlivened  their  social  meetings.  He  was 
a  harmless  being,  who  devoted  himself  to  performances 
which  very  strikingly  resembled  those  of  the  civilised 
"  mediums."  A  man  was  supposed  to  become  a  Birraark 
by  being  initiated  by  Mrarts  or  ghosts,  when  they  met  him 
hunting  in  the  bush  ;  but,  that  they  might  have  power  over 
him,  he  must  at  the  time  be  wearing  a  Guvibarty  that  is,  one 
of  those  bone  pegs  which  the  Australian  aborigine  wears 
thrust  through  the  septum  of  his  nose.  By  this  they  held 
him  and  conveyed  him  through  the  clouds.  Some  say  that 
he  was  conveyed  hanging  to  a  Marrangrang,  which  was 
described  as  being  either  like  a  rope  or  else  something  on 
which  the  Birraark  can  sit.  But  whatever  it  was  like,  the 
Mrarts  went  first  and  the  Birraark  last.  It  is  said  that, 
when  they  reached  the  sky,  the  leading  Mrart  gave  a  signal, 
and  some  one  inside  opened  a  hole  and  looked  out.  This,  it 
is  said,  was  a  Gweraeil-inrart,  in  fact  a  Headman  of  ghost- 
land,  as  a  Kurnai  man  remarked  to  me  when  speaking  of 
this  matter,  "  like  a  Giveraeil-kurnai."  As  the  Birraark 
climbs  through  the  hole  last,  the  Mrarts  put  a  rug  over  his 
head,  all  but  a  place  through  which  he  can  see  the  people 
there,  the  women  beating  their  rugs,  and  the  men  dancing. 
Looking  on,  he  learns  new  songs  and  dances  {Gunyeru), 
which  he  afterwards  teaches  to  the  Kurnai.  But  he  must 
not  on  any  account  laugh.  One  Birraark  was  away  from 
his  camp  for  a  time,  and  on  returning  he  told  his  people 
that  when  aloft  with  the  Mrarts  he  could  not  help  laughing, 
because  two  Mrarts  caught  hold  of  him  by  the  sides 
and  tickled  him.      As  a  penalty  they  kept  him  with  them 


I 


390        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

for    some    time,   after  which   his   tribes -people   called    him 
Brewin. 

A  Birraark  might  not  eat  any  part  of  a  kangaroo  that 
had  blood  on  it,  nor  carry  home  a  kangaroo  that  he  had 
killed.  Others  did  this  for  him,  and  gave  him  some  part  of 
it  free  from  blood.  Nor  might  he  kill  any  man.  If  he  did 
any  of  these  things,  the  Mrarts  would  never  again  take  him 
up  aloft. 

Having  been  thus  introduced  to  the  land  of  ghosts,  he 
could  return  there  at  will,  calling  on  the  Mrarts  to  carry  him 
on  the  Marrangrangy  or  as  I  have  heard  it  said,  to  take  him 
along  the  Wau-unga-nurt,  the  path  or  track  to  the  sky,  along 
which  the  Yainho  (spirit)  travels  after  death. 

One  of  the  best  remembered  of  the  Birraarks  was  a  man 
of  the  Brabralung  clan  named  Mundauin.  It  is  related  of 
him  that  he  became  a  Birraark  by  dreaming  three  times  that 
he  was  a  kangaroo,  and  as  such  participating  in  a  kangaroo 
Gunyeru,  or  dancing  corrobboree.  He  said  that  after 
dreaming  of  the  kangaroos,  he  began  to  hear  the  Mrarts 
drumming  and  singing  up  aloft,  and  that  finally  one  night 
they  came  and  carried  him  away.  A  man  who  was  in  the 
camp  on  the  occasion  of  one  of  his  manifestations  said  as 
follows  : — 

"  In  the  night  his  wife  shouted  out,  '  He  is  gone  up.' 
Then  we  heard  him  whistling  up  in  the  air,  first  on  one 
side  of  us  and  then  on  the  other,  and  afterwards  sounds  as 
of  people  jumping  down  on  the  ground.  After  a  time  all 
was  quiet.  In  the  morning  we  found  him  lying  on  the 
ground,  near  the  camp  where  the  Mrarts  had  left  him. 
There  was  a  big  log  lying  across  his  back,  and  when  we 
woke  him  and  took  the  log  off,  he  began  to  sing  about  the 
Mrarts^  and  all  he  had  seen  up  there." 

In  another  account  of  a  stance  by  Mundauin,  the  same 
account  was  given  of  his  departure  in  the  night.  Then  his 
voice  was  heard  shouting  to  them,  and  then  noises  of  people 
in  the  tree-tops,  and  then  of  them  jumping  down  on  to  the 
ground.  The  Mrarts  answered  questions  put  to  them,  as 
to  the  movements  of  the  Brajerak  and  the  Lohan  (white 
men),  and  whether  the  former  were  pursuing  them.      Finally, 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  391 

the  ghosts  said,  "  We  must  now  go  home  {Mellagati)^  or  the 
west  wind  might  blow  us  into  the  sea."  In  the  morning 
the  Birraark  was  found  lying  on  the  ground  outside  the 
camp,  and  round  him  were  the  footprints  of  the  Mrarts. 

A  third  account  of  one  of  these  seances  I  give  in  the 
words  of  my  informant,  "  I  was  once  at  Yunthur  at  the 
Lakes,  and  the  Dinna-birraark^  Brewin  was  there  with  his 
wife.  In  the  night  she  woke  up,  and  shouted  out  that  he 
was  gone  up  to  the  Mrarts.  We  all  got  ready,  and  soon 
some  one  shouted  out,  '  Where  are  you  ? '  He  replied, 
'  Here  I  am,  I  am  coming  down.'  He  said  that  he  had 
heard  the  Mrarts  having  a  great  Gtinyeru  and  making  a 
great  noise,  and  he  had  gone  up  to  them.  Then  the  Mrarts 
came  down  with  him,  and  conversed  with  us  as  to  where  the 
other  mobs  of  the  Kurnai  were,  and  whether  any  Brajerak 
were  coming  after  us.  When  the  Mrarts  went  away,  we 
found  Brewin  lying,  as  if  asleep,  where  we  had  heard  them 
speaking  to  us.      The  Mrarts  talked  in  very  curious  voices." 

Another  case  was  when,  on  a  certain  night,  the  people 
were  in  their  camps,  and  strict  silence  was  maintained  by  the 
direction  of  the  Birraark.  The  fires  were  let  go  down,  and 
then  the  Birraark  uttered  a  loud  coo-ee  at  intervals.  At 
length  a  shrill  whistle  was  heard,  then  the  shrill  whistlings 
of  the  Mrarts,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other. 
Shortly  after  the  sound  as  of  persons  jumping  down  to  the 
ground,  in  succession.  This  was  the  Mrarts,  and  a  voice 
was  then  heard  in  the  gloom,  asking  in  a  strange  muffled 
tone,  "  What  is  wanted  ? "  Questions  were  asked  by  the 
Birraark,  and  replies  given.  At  the  termination  of  the 
stance,  the  voice  said,  "  We  are  going."  Finally,  after  all 
was  over,  the  Birraark  was  found  in  the  top  of  an  almost 
inaccessible  tree,  apparently  asleep,  where  he  said  the  Mrarts 
had  left  him  when  they  went  away.  At  this  si'ance  the 
questions  related  to  the  movements  of  absent  friends,  and 
of  their  enemies  the  Brajerak. 

Besides  learning  news  about  absent  friends  and  possible 
enemies  from  the  ghosts,  the  Birraarks  were  material  bene- 
factors to  their  tribesmen,  as,  for  instance,  when  the  Mrarts 

'  Dinna-birraark  is  the  old  Birraark — that  being  his  name. 


392        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

informed  them  of  a  whale  stranded  on  the  shore,  for  it  was 
in  such  cases  thought  that  the  whales  were  killed  by  the 
Mrarts  and  sent  ashore  for  the  Kurnai. 

At  such  times  messengers  were  sent  out,  and  the  people 
collected  to  feast  on  the  food  sent  them.  No  doubt  the 
Birraark  was  at  such  times  not  forgotten. 

The  last  Birraark  was  killed  in  the  troubles  which 
occurred  in  the  early  years  of  settlement  in  Gippsland. 
My  information  has  therefore  been  derived  from  the  old 
people,  and  such  of  the  younger  who  were  brought  up  in 
the  primitive  conditions  of  the  tribe,  and  who  saw  the 
changes  consequent  upon  the  inroad  of  the  white  men  into 
their  country,  and  who  still  remembered  the  old  beliefs  and 
customs. 

As  the  Birraark  brought  new  songs  and  dances,  he  was 
the  master  of  the  ceremonies  in  the  Gunyeru,  and  chose  the 
place  at  which  it  was  to  be  held.  I  remember  how  one  of 
the  Kurnai  who  was  a  noted  dancer  spoke  with  enthusiasm 
of  the  Gunyerus  of  the  old  times  at  which  a  Birraark 
officiated.  He  said,  "  When  the  Birraark  comes  to  the 
place,  he  has  a  Kunnin  ^  in  each  hand,  which  he  beats 
together.  All  the  men  and  women  then  say,  '  Hallo  !  we 
shall  have  some  fun.  We  must  dance  ;  we  must  make  our 
legs  light.'  Each  woman  gets  her  rug  to  drum  upon — a 
lot  of  blacks  dancing." 

When  the  whites  first  came  into  Gippsland  in  1842  the 
following  were  the  Birraarks,  of  whom  there  was  one  in  each 
clan.  They  were  all  called  Dinna-birraark,  the  prefix 
implying  age,  and  according  to  the  old  men,  my  informants, 
they  were  located  as  follows  : — 

(i)  Bunjil-brindjat-  at  Lake  Tyers,  that  is,  he  was  of 
the  W^umungati  division  of  the  Krauatungalung  clan. 

(2)  Mundauin  at  Bruthen-munji,  that  is,  of  the  Bruthen 
division  of  the  Brabralung  clan. 

1  Kunnin  is  a  pointed  stick  about  1 8  inches  to  2  feet  in  length,  which 
is  used  as  a  missile  weapon  by  the  men.  The  name  is  also  applied  to  the 
digging-stick  used  by  the  women,  which  is  their  special  weapon.  It  is  about 
7  to  8  feet  in  length,  flattened  on  one  side  and  pointed  at  one  end.  It  is  made 
of  Barlan,  the  Melileuca  ericifolia. 

2  Brindjat  is  a  fish,  the  Flathead. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  393 

(3)  Batti-batti  at  Dairgo,  that  is,  of  the  Dairgo  division 
of  the  Brabralung  clan. 

(4)  Takit-berak  in  the  district  round  what  is  now  called 
Rosedale,  that  is,  of  the  Bunjil-kraura  division  of  the 
Brayakaulung  clan. 

(5)  Brewin  of  the  Ngarawut  division  of  the  Tatungalung 
clan. 

(6)  Bunjil-narran  at  Boney  Point,  on  the  Lower  Avon 
River,  that  is  of  the  Bunjil-nullung  division  of  the  Brayakau- 
lung clan. 

(7)  Bunjil-bamarang  at  the  Inlet  from  Lake  Victoria 
called  Newlands  Backwater,  of  the  Dairgo  division  of  the 
Brabralung  clan. 

(8)  There  was  also  at  least  one  Birraark  belonging  to  the 
Brataualung  clan,  but  whose  name  I  was  unable  to  ascertain. 

Men  like  the  Birraarks  were  also  found  in  the  tribes 
of  the  Wotjo  nation.  I  take  the  following  from  the 
Mukjarawaint  tribe.  The  medicine-man  in  question  was 
the  maternal  grandfather  of  my  informant.  He  was  of  great 
repute  in  the  tribe  because  of  his  power  of  communication 
with  Nung-yiin  or  ghosts,  that  is  with  the  spirits  of  deceased 
tribesmen.  He  occasionally  disappeared  from  the  camp, 
saying  on  his  return  that  he  had  been  up  to  the  Nutig-yim, 
and  he  brought  back  with  him  an  account  of  their  deceased 
relations  and  friends.  My  informant  remembered  one  moon- 
light night  in  particular,  when  his  grandfather  went  from  the 
camp,  and  disappeared  from  sight.  After  a  time  the  sound 
as  of  some  one  jumping  down  on  to  the  ground  was  heard, 
and  the  medicine-man  walked  into  the  camp,  and  told  of  his 
meeting  with  the  Nung-yitn,  and  what  they  had  said  to  him. 
But  this  man  was  not  merely  a  medium,  he  also  practised 
the  curative  branch  of  the  medicine-man's  art,  extracting 
from  those  afflicted  with  pain,  quartz,  broken  glass,  or  a 
tooth,  in  the  manner  I  have  described.  Having  extracted 
such  substances,  he  rubbed  them  with  red  ochre,  and  placed 
them  in  his  bag  where  he  kept  his  magical  things. 

In  this  tribe  there  was  also  a  female  seer,  who  went  up 
aloft,  being  supported,  as  it  was  believed,  by  ghosts,  from 
whom  she  gleaned  information  as  to  the  dead. 


394        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Rain-makers 

Rain-makers  and  weather-changers  are  important  persons 
in  most  parts  of  Australia,  but  especially  in  those  parts  of 
the  continent  which  are  subject  to  frequently  recurring 
periods  of  drought. 

In  the  Dieri  country  the  whole  tribe  joins  under  the 
direction  of  the  medicine-man  in  "  making  rain."  The  sky 
is  supposed  to  be  a  vast  plain  inhabited  by  wild  savage 
tribes,  between  whom  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  there 
is  no  connection.  But  the  legends  tell  of  former  inhabitants 
of  the  earth,  especially  the  Mura-inuras,  who  live  up  there, 
some  in  constellations,  others  in  hideous  forms,  such  as 
snakes  with  feet.  The  Kunkis  sometimes  relate  their 
wanderings  in  that  country  in  the  form  of  crows,  snakes, 
and  other  creatures,  perhaps  the  result  of  nightmare.  The 
clouds  are  supposed  to  be  bodies  in  which  rain  is  made  by 
the  rain-making  Mura-muras,  influenced  by  the  ceremonies 
of  the  Dieri.  The  clouds  are  called  Thallara-paulka,  or  the 
body  or  substance  of  rain.^ 

In  time  of  severe  drought  Mr.  Gason  has  witnessed  the 
Dieri  calling  upon  the  rain-making  Mura-muras  to  give 
them  power  to  make  a  heavy  rainfall,  crying  out  in  loud 
voices  the  impoverished  state  of  the  country,  and  the  half- 
starved  condition  of  the  tribe,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty 
in  procuring  food  in  sufficient  quantity  to  preserve  life. 

During  such  a  drought,  to  which  the  Dieri  country  is 
much  subject,  the  rain-making  ceremonies  are  considered  of 
much  consequence.  Mr.  Gason  witnessed  them  many  times, 
and  gave  the  following  account  of  them. 

When  the  great  council  has  determined  that  such  a 
ceremony  is  to  be  held,  women,  accompanied  by  their 
Pirraurus,  are  sent  off  to  the  various  subdivisions  of  the 
tribe,  to  summon  the  people  to  attend  at  some  appointed 
place.  When  the  tribe  is  gathered  together,  they  dig  a  hole 
about  two  feet  deep,  twelve  long,  and  from  eight  to  ten  feet 
wide.  Over  this  they  build  a  hut  of  logs  with  the  inter- 
stices filled  in  with  slighter  logs,  the  building  being  conical 

*  S.  Gason. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  395 

in  form  and  covered  with  boughs.  This  hut  is  only 
sufficiently  large  to  contain  the  old  men,  the  younger  ones 
being  seated  at  the  entrance  or  outside.  This  being  com- 
pleted, the  women  are  called  together  to  look  at  the  hut, 
which  they  approach  from  the  rear,  and  then  separating, 
some  go  one  way  and  some  the  other  round  the  building, 
until  they  reach  the  entrance,  each  one  looking  inside,  but 
without  speaking.  They  then  return  to  their  camp,  about 
five  hundred  yards  distant. 

Two  Kunkis,  who  are  supposed  to  have  received  an 
inspiration  from  the  rain-making  Mura-viuras^  are  selected 
to  have  their  arms  lanced.  These  are  tightly  bound  near 
the  shoulders  to  prevent  a  too  profuse  effusion  of  blood. 
This  being  done,  all  the  old  men  huddle  together  in  the  hut, 
and  the  principal  Kunki  of  the  tribe  bleeds  each  of  the  men 
inside  the  arm  below  the  elbow  with  a  sharp  piece  of  flint. 
The  blood  is  made  to  flow  on  the  men  sitting  round,  during 
which  the  two  Kunkis  throw  handfuls  of  down  into  the  air, 
some  of  which  becomes  attached  to  the  blood  on  the  men, 
while  some  still  floats  about.  The  blood  is  to  symbolise  the 
rain,  and  the  down  the  clouds.  Two  large  stones  are  placed 
in  the  centre  of  the  hut,  representing  gathering  clouds  pre- 
saging rain.  The  women  are  now  called  to  visit  the  hut 
again,  and  after  having  looked  in  and  seen  its  inmates, 
they  return  to  their  camp. 

The  main  part  of  the  rain-making  ceremony  being  now 
concluded,  the  men  who  were  bled  carry  away  the  two  stones 
and  place  them  as  high  as  possible  in  the  branches  of  the 
largest  tree  about.  In  the  meantime  the  other  men  gather 
gypsum,  pound  it  fine,  and  throw  it  into  a  water-hole.  The 
Mura-Diura  is  supposed  to  see  this,  and  thereupon  to  cause 
the  clouds  to  appear  in  the  sky.  Should  no  clouds  appear 
as  soon  as  expected,  the  explanation  given  is  that  the  Miira- 
mura  is  angry  with  them  ;  and  should  there  be  no  rain  for 
weeks  or  months  after  the  rain -making  ceremony,  they 
suppose  that  some  other  tribe  has  stopped  their  power. 

After  the  ceremony,  the  hut  is  thrown  down  by  the  men, 
old  and  young  butting  at  it  with  their  heads.  The  heavier 
logs  which  withstand  this  are  pulled  down  by  all  dragging 


396        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

at  the  bottom  end.  The  piercing  the  hut  with  their  heads 
symbolises  the  piercing  of  the  clouds,  and  the  fall  of  the  hut 
symbolises  that  of  the  rain. 

In  the  rainy  seasons  which  are  too  wet,  the  Dieri  also 
supplicate  the  Mura-inuras  to  restrain  the  rain,  and  Mr. 
Gason  has  seen  the  old  men  in  a  complete  state  of  frenzy, 
believing  that  their  ceremonies  had  caused  the  Mura-muras 
to  send  too  much  of  it. 

The  prepuce,  which  is  carefully  kept  from  the  Kurawali 
ceremony,  is  also  believed  to  have  great  power  of  producing 
rain.  The  great  council  has  always  several  of  them  for  use 
when  required.  They  are  kept  carefully  concealed,  wrapped 
up  in  feathers,  with  the  fat  of  the  wild  dog  and  the  carpet- 
snake.  Mr.  Gason  has  seen  such  a  parcel  unwrapped,  while 
the  men  watched  with  cat-like  vigilance  that  no  woman 
should  be  near,  although  they  knew  that  no  woman  was 
nearer  than  half-a-mile.  They  implored  him  not  to  reveal 
the  contents  of  the  parcel  to  a  woman. 

After  the  ceremonial  opening  of  the  parcel,  and  the 
exhibition  of  the  prepuce,  it  is  buried,  its  virtue  being 
exhausted. 

If  no  rain  follows,  the  explanation  is  that  some  neigh- 
bouring tribe  has  influenced  the  Mura-viura  not  to  grant  it 
to  them.  During  the  time  of  partial  drought  the  Dieri 
do  not  feel  anxiety  if  they  have  a  prepuce,  believing  that 
with  its  aid  they  can  cause  rain  to  come  before  long.^ 

The  principal  rain-making  Mura-muras,  according  to  the 
Lake  Hope  Dieri,  are  the  two  Daras  {Dara-ulu),  and  the 
two  Pampas  (^Pampo-ulti),  as  to  whose  rain-making  powers 
there  are  legends,  which  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix. 

It  is  universally  believed  by  the  tribes  of  the  Karamundi 
nation,  of  the  Darling  River,  that  rain  can  be  brought  down 
by  the  following  ceremony.  A  vein  in  the  arm  of  one  of 
the  men  is  opened  and  the  blood  allowed  to  drop  into  a 
piece  of  hollow  bark  until  there  is  a  little  pool.  Into  this 
is  put  a  quantity  of  gypsum,  ground  fine,  and  stirred  until 
it  has  the  consistency  of  a  thick  paste.  A  number  of  hairs 
are  pulled  out  of  the  man's  beard  and  mixed  up  with  this 

*  S.  Gason. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  397 

paste,  which  is  then  placed  between  two  pieces  of  bark  and 
put  under  the  surface  of  the  water  in  some  river  or  lagoon, 
and  kept  there  by  means  of  pointed  stakes  driven  into  the 
ground.  When  the  mixture  is  all  dissolved  away,  the 
blackfellows  say  that  a  great  cloud  will  come,  bringing  rain. 
From  the  time  that  this  ceremony  takes  place  until  the  rain 
comes,  the  men  are  tabooed  from  their  wives,  or  the  charm 
will  be  spoiled,  and  the  old  men  say  that  if  this  prohibition 
were  properly  respected,  rain  would  come  every  time  that  it 
is  done.  In  a  time  of  drought,  when  rain  is  badly  wanted, 
the  whole  tribe  meets  and  performs  this  ceremony.^ 

Among  the  Kurnai  there  were  rain-makers,  and  also 
those  who  caused  rain  and  storms  to  cease.  The  former 
were  to  be  found  in  each  clan,  and  the  methods  used  for 
producing  rain  by  the  Bunjil-ivillting,  or  rain-men,  were  to 
fill  the  mouth  with  water  and  then  squirt  it  in  the  direction 
appropriate  to  the  particular  clan,  and  each  one  sang  his 
especial  rain-song.^  The  Brayaka  squirted  water,  and  sang, 
towards  the  south-west  {Krauun)  ;  the  Brayaka  and  Tatun- 
galung  did  this  in  the  same  direction  ;  the  Brabralung  and 
the  Krauatungalung  squirted  water  towards  the  direction  of 
the  south-east,  the  east  winds  {Belling)  being  from  their 
rainy  quarter.  From  these  several  directions  the  rain  came 
in  Gippsland  ;  and  when,  for  instance,  a  south-westerly  rain 
came  to  the  Brabralung  they  said  that  it  was  the  Brayaka 
who  sent  it,  and  so  on  with  the  others.  These  rain-makers 
could  also  bring  thunder,  and  it  was  said  of  them,  as  of  the 
other  medicine- men,  that  they  obtained  their  songs  in 
dreams.  I  have  before  spoken  of  one  of  the  Brayaka  Head- 
men who  was  credited  with  the  power  of  calling  up  the 
furious  west  winds,  whence  he  derived  his  name  of  Bunjil- 
kraura.  His  song  by  which  he  stopped  the  gales  which 
prevented  his  tribes-people  from  climbing  the  tall  trees  in 
the  western  forest,  ran  thus — 

•'  Kutbuna-wang  K'ratira," 

>  J.  W.  Boultbee. 

2  IVillttng^  is  rain.  Tlie  Kurnai  say  that  the  frogs  when  croaking  in  chorus 
in  the  swamps  are  "singing  for  rain,"  and  that  the  big  sonorous  bull-frogs  are 
the  Bunjil-willung. 


398        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

from  Kutbun  to  bear  or  carry,  Wang  a  bond,  or  something 
tied,  and  Kraura,  the  west  wind.  I  did  not  hear  the  song 
by  which  he  caused  the  western  gales  to  arise,  but  I  have 
no  doubt  that  it  was  of  the  same  character.  When  these 
gales  came,  he  was  propitiated  by  presents  to  send  them 
away.^ 

Another  instance  of  the  practice  of  rain  -  making  in 
Victorian  tribes  is  that  of  the  Wotjobaluk.  There  the  rain- 
maker was  not  necessarily  a  medicine-man  or  a  doctor  ;  in 
fact,  so  far  as  I  know,  few  of  them  were.  The  office  of 
rain-maker  and  medicine-man  were  distinct.  To  produce 
rain  he  took  a  bunch  of  his  own  hair  which  he  carried  about 
with  him  for  the  purpose.  Soaking  it  in  water,  he  then 
sucked  the  water  out  and  squirted  it  to  the  westward.  Or 
he  twirled  it  round  his  head,  so  that  the  water  passed  out 
like  rain.  In  this  somewhat  arid  district  the  oflfice  was 
much  thought  of,  and  an  instance  came  under  my  notice  in 
which  the  rain-maker  scored  a  success  from  a  white  man,  in 
a  severe  time  of  drought.  He  and  others  of  his  tribe  were 
camped  at  Morton's  plains,  and  on  his  boasting  of  his  power 
to  produce  rain,  the  then  owner  of  the  station  said  to  him  : 
"  I  will  give  you  a  bag  of  flour,  some  tea,  and  half  a  bullock, 
if  you  will  fill  my  tank  before  to-morrow  night."  The  tank 
was  a  large  excavation  just  finished.  This  was  early  in  the 
morning,  and  the  rain-maker  set  to  work  at  once,  saying, 
"  All  right,  me  make  him  plenty  rain  come."  The  next  day 
there  was  a  tremendous  thunderstorm,  the  rain  fell  over  all 
the  run  and  the  tank  was  filled.  Then  the  rain-maker  went 
to  the  owner  of  the  run  saying,  "  You  see,  plenty  rain  come." 
It  was  to  the  honour  of  the  white  man  that  he  made  him 
happy  with  the  gifts  which  he  had  promised  him. 

In  the  tribe  at  Port  Stephens  the  medicine-men  used  to 
drive  away  the  rain  by  throwing  fire-sticks  into  the  air,  and 
at  the  same  time  puffing  and  shouting.' 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe  when  a  rainbow  was  seen  at  the 
river,  the  medicine-man  went  to  the  place  to  "  cut  the  rain- 
bow off  where  its  stem  held  it  down  to  the  river  bottom." 
There  was  only  one  part  of  the  Brisbane  River  where  this 
1  M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  MS.  ^  Robt.  Dawson,  op.'cit. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  399 

was  done,  and  each  medicine-man  had  his  own  part  of  the 
river  where  he  could  do  this  when  a  rainbow  placed  itself  in 
a  favourable  position.  Whenever  rain  squalls  came  it  was 
thought  that  the  medicine -men  {Kundri)  had  sent  them. 
And  to  clear  away  storms  the  Kundri  threw  up  fire-sticks 
into  the  air.^ 

In  the  Wakelbura  tribe  there  were  men  who  professed 
to  bring  or  send  away  rain.  This  was  by  magical  practices, 
just  as  the  same  men  professed  to  destroy  their  enemies  by 
magic.  In  performing  these  functions  the  medicine-man 
must  only  use  things  of  the  same  class  as  himself.  As  I 
have  before  stated,  in  that  tribe  everything  is  thought  to 
belong  to  one  or  the  other  of  the  classes  Malera  and 
Wuthera.' 

The  Buntamurra  believed  that  their  "  doctors "  could 
cause  rain  to  fall  and  cure  diseases,  death  being  caused  by 
an  evil  spirit  choking  the  person. 

In  the  Kuinmurbura  tribe  there  are  also  men  who  pro- 
fess to  make  rain.  There  is  usually  one  in  each  totem,  but 
there  were  three  or  four  in  the  Bau  totem.  The  power  is 
apparently  hereditary,  for  although  a  young  man  will  not 
profess  to  use  the  power,  he  will  do  so,  and  the  older  he 
gets  the  more  powerful  he  becomes.  In  one  case  the 
power  descended  to  a  daughter,  there  being  no  son.  The 
rain-maker  is  called  Kalli  (water),  but  has  neither  power  nor 
authority  as  a  member  of  the  tribe.^ 

Charms  to  influence  Food-Supply 

The  Dieri  have  certain  ceremonies  which  are  performed 
for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  food-supply.  Such  is  the 
Minkani  ceremony  described  in  the  legends  of  the  Anti-etya 
and  the  Ngardu-etya  given  in  the  Appendix. 

The  Wiimbaio  were  afraid  of  blood  falling  into  lakes  or 
rivers,  lest  great  storms  and  other  disasters  should  result, 
not  the  least  of  which  would  be  the  destruction  of  fish,'* 

There   is   a  spot    at   Lake  Victoria,  in   the    Narrinyeri 

1  Tom  Petrie.  ^  W.  H.  Flowers. 

2  J.  C.  Muirhead.  ♦  Dr.  M'Kinlay. 


4CXD        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

country,  where  when  the  water  is,  at  long  intervals,  excep- 
tionally low,  it  causes  a  tree-stump  to  become  visible.  This 
is  in  the  charge  of  a  family,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  one 
of  the  men  to  anoint  it  with  grease  and  red  ochre.  The 
reason  for  this  is  that  they  believe  that  if  it  is  not  done  the 
lake  would  dry  up  and  the  supply  of  fish  be  lessened.  This 
duty  is  hereditary  from  father  to  son. 

Near  Dandenong  there  is  a  rock  on  which  the  Ngaruk- 
willam  clansmen  of  the  Wurunjerri  tribe  used  to  place  leafy 
boughs  when  going  out  hunting  kangaroos,  to  ensure  a  good 
catch. 

A  tribe  at  White  Cliffs,  Frazer's  Island,  on  the  coast  of 
Queensland,  held  a  ceremony  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring 
plentiful  supplies  of  fish  and  honey,  in  which  both  men  and 
women  took  part,  swinging  bull-roarers. 

Omens  and  Warnings 

Omens  and  warnings  are  in  some  measure  connected 
with  magic,  and  may  therefore  follow  the  lesser  magic.  I 
have  before  mentioned  the  belief  that  kangaroos  can  give  a 
warning  of  coming  danger.  A  young  man  of  the  Yuin 
tribe  who  had  served  me  as  a  messenger  about  initiation 
matters,  had  a  bag  of  what  he  said  were  powerful  charms 
(Jo'ia)  which  had  been  given  to  him  by  a  Gouunera,  his 
relative,  and  which,  by  the  way,  on  inspection  I  found  to 
have  among  them  the  round  part  of  a  decanter-stopper. 
When  I  asked  him  in  what  manner  they  would  serve  him, 
he  gave  me  the  following  explanation: — "If  I  were  going 
along  and  I  saw  an  old-man  kangaroo  hopping  towards  me, 
and  looking  at  me,  I  should  know  that  he  was  giving  me 
warning  that  enemies  were  about.  I  should  get  my  spear 
ready,  and  I  should  hold  my  Jo'ia  bag  in  my  hand,  so  that 
if  a  man  were  to  throw  something  at  me,  I  should  be  safe." 
The  throwing  of  a  Jo'ia  is,  in  other  words,  the  projection  by 
some  medicine-man  of  a  magical  substance,  such  as  a  quartz 
crystal,  invisibly  at  the  intended  victim.  When  he  said  that 
he  should  get  his  spear  ready,  this  was  merely  a  figure  of 
speech,  for  the  Yuin  have  long  ago  abandoned  the  spear  for 


vir  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  401 

the  gun.      But   it  was  curious  to  note  how  the  old  saying 
recurred  in  this  connection. 

In  this  case  the  young  man  had  the  kangaroo  for  his 
totem,  having  inherited  it  from  his  father,  descent  being  in 
this  tribe  in  the  male  line. 

The  Kurnai  also  believe  in  kangaroo  warnings,  and  for 
one  to  dream  that  a  number  of  old-man  kangaroos  are 
sitting  round  his  camp,  is  to  receive  a  serious  warning  of 
danger. 

Instances  have  been  made  known  to  me  which  show 
that  there  is  a  magical  influence  peculiar  to  the  persons  of 
one  class,  which  is  injurious  to  those  of  the  other.  But  this 
evil  personal  influence  attaches  not  to  the  men  alone. 
There  is  the  same  between  men  on  one  side  and  women  on 
the  other.  In  the  Wurunjerri  tribe,  when  it  happened  that 
Btmjil  and  Waang  men  were  camped  at  the  same  fire,  each 
one  had  his  own  stick  to  stir  it,  and  to  cook  his  food  on  it 
with,  A  man  would  not  touch  any  other  man's  stick, 
especially  if  he  were  of  the  other  class  name,  lest  his  fingers 
should  swell.  If  this  happened,  he  had  to  go  to  the  Wirra- 
rap,  who  would  draw  out  the  piece  of  wood  from  his  hand. 

The  Narrang-ga  believed  that  if  a  person  killed  a  snake 
and  gazed  too  long  upon  it,  it  would  magically  enter  his 
body  and  make  him  ill.' 

If  a  Kamilaroi  black  saw  a  whirlwind,  he  rushed  to  a  tree 
and  held  on,  remembering  that  "  blackfellows  have  been 
carried  up  by  them  and  have  never  come  back."^  And  a 
Gringai  when  on  a  journey,  and  it  seemed  that  night  would 
overtake  him,  placed  a  stone  in  the  fork  of  a  tree,  and  felt 
sure  that  he  would  finish  his  journey  by  daylight,  as  they 
have  a  dread  of  travelling  in  the  dark.^ 

Among  the  Turrbal  "*  the  chirping  of  insects  foretold  the 
coming  of  blacks,  while  if  a  Wakelbura  man  dreamed  of 
seeing  a  kangaroo,  he  would  expect  a  person  of  the  Banbe 
sub-class  to  arrive  next  day,  and  so  on  with  the  other  totems. 

Another  Wakelbura  superstition  relates  to  eggs  that  have 
been  laid  on  the  ground.      Although  they  would  take  and 

1  T.  M.  Sutton.  3  Dr.  M'Kinlay. 

2  C.  Naseby.  *  Tom  Petrie. 

2  D 


402        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

eat  other*  food  placed  on  the  ground  some  50  yards  from 
the  camp,  none  of  the  men  would  touch  eggs  left  in  the  same 
position. 

During  initiation  a  Wakelbura  youth  was  not  allowed  to 
drink  water  out  of  a  water-hole  unless  through  a  kangaroo 
bone.  Before  drinking  he  must  make  sure  that  no  woman 
has  been  near  to  or  drunk  of  the  water. 

One  of  the  Wakelbura  was  observed  to  take  the  tongue 
out  of  a  certain  grey-and-white  lizard  called  Bungah,  and 
give  to  his  little  son,  a  child  of  about  thirteen  months  old, 
and  gave  as  a  reason  for  doing  so  that  after  eating  the  tongue 
his  child  would  soon  be  able  to  talk.' 

In  the  Unghi  tribe  a  man  would  not  drink  out  of  a 
place  where  a  woman  drank.  Certain  holes  were  dug  at 
the  water,  small  circular  holes  for  the  men  and  oval  holes 
for  the  women.      Each  sex  kept  to  its  own  drinking-place.'^ 

In  the  tribes  about  Maryborough  (Q.)  a  woman  must  not 
on  any  account  step  over  anything  belonging  to  a  man. 
For  instance,  if  a  man  were  making  a  fishing-line  and  left  it 
on  the  ground,  and  a  woman  stepped  across  it,  he  would 
throw  it  away.' 

This  reminds  one  of  the  prohibition  at  the  initiation 
ceremonies — for  instance,  the  Kurnai  Jeraeil — as  to  the 
novices  having  anything  to  do  with  a  woman  during  their 
probation.  They  are  specially  warned  against  touching  a 
woman,  or  letting  a  woman  touch  them,  or  receiving  any- 
thing from  one.  Even  the  shadow  of  one  falling  on  him 
would  be  evil  magic.  The  intention  of  this  is  evidently  to 
keep  the  novices  apart  from  the  women. 

The  practice  of  magic,  or  the  belief  in  the  harmful 
magic  of  others,  pervades  the  daily  life  of  the  aborigines. 
Either  it  is  the  baleful  influence  of  a  stranger  or,  as  I  have 
just  shown,  of  a  man  of  the  other  class,  or  of  one  of  the 
other  sex,  or  as  I  shall  now  show,  of  some  tract  of  country 
acting  injuriously  on  strangers. 

^  J.  C.  Muirhead.  ^  a,  L.  P.  Cameron. 

3  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  403 


The  "Bad  Country" 

Such  a  tract  of  country  is  that  lying  along  the  coast 
between  the  La  Trobe  River  and  the  Yarra  River,  and  extend- 
ing to  the  sources  of  those  rivers.  It  therefore  includes  two 
tribes,  the  Kurnai  and  the  Bunurong,  and  the  knowledge  of 
it  extended  from  the  latter  to  the  tribes  at  least  as  far  as 
Kilmore.  In  Gippsland  it  was  called  Wea-wnk  or  the 
"  Bad  Country,"  the  Kulin  tribes  called  it  Marine-bek  or  the 
"  Excellent  Country."  It  was  by  this  name  that  it  was 
known  to  the  Wurunjerri  and  the  Jajaurung. 

That  part  of  the  tract  referred  to,  which  is  in  Gippsland, 
belonged  to  the  Brayaka  and  the  Brataua  clans.  If  a 
stranger,  that  is  a  man  of  one  of  the  other  Kurnai  clans, 
came  into  it  as  a  visitor,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should 
have  some  one  to  look  after  him.  During  his  first  visit, 
before  he  became,  so  to  say,  acclimatised,  he  did  nothing 
for  himself  as  to  food,  drinking-water,  or  lodging.  He  was 
painted  with  a  band  of  white  pipe-clay  across  the  face  below 
the  eyes,  and  had  to  learn  the  Nulit  language  before  going 
further.  If  his  guardian  went  away  from  the  camp,  he 
deputed  some  one  to  take  his  place.  He  slept  on  a  thick 
layer  of  leaves  so  that  he  should  not  touch  the  ground  ;  he 
was  fed  with  flesh -meat  from  the  point  of  a  burnt  stick, 
and  when  he  drank,  it  was  water  contained  in  a  hollow 
piece  of  bark  and  stirred  with  a  burnt  stick. 

The  knowledge  of  the  Marine-bek  extended  as  far  at 
least  as  the  Bangerang  and  Wotjo.  A  Jajaurung  gave  the 
following  account  of  the  ceremonies  connected  with  a  visit 
to  it.  The  visitor  draws  water  out  of  a  small  hole  made  in 
the  ground  by  his  entertainers,  and  which  they  made  muddy 
by  stirring  round  with  a  stick.  He  was  only  allowed  to 
take  three  mouthfuls  at  a  time,  each  of  which  he  must  let 
slowly  trickle  down  his  throat.  If  he  did  otherwise,  his 
throat  would  close  up.  He  was  fed  with  small  pieces  of 
roasted  flesh  put  into  his  mouth  on  a  pointed  stick  and 
removed  by  his  teeth,  not  his  lips. 


404        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


The  Making  of  Medicine-Men 

In  the  Tongaranka  tribe  the  office  of  medicine-man 
passed  from  a  man  to  his  son.  The  eldest  son  was  the 
successor  to  his  father,  but  only  practised  the  office  at  the 
death  of  the  latter. 

Among  the  Wiimbaio  one  man,  being  a  Mekigar,  could 
initiate  another  and  make  him  a  Mckigar  in  the  following 
manner.  They  procured  the  body  of  a  man,  usually  by 
digging  one  up.  The  bones  were  pounded  up  and  chewed. 
One  of  my  correspondents '  saw  one  of  these  men  being 
initiated  in  the  office  of  Mekigar.  He  was  plastered  with 
human  excrement,  and  carried  about  with  him  the  humerus 
of  a  disinterred  body  wrapped  round  with  twigs,  and  he 
kept  gnawing  it.  These  men  are,  at  such  times,  brought  to 
a  state  of  frenzy,  their  eyes  are  bloodshot,  and  they  behave 
like  maniacs. 

In  the  Mukjarawaint  branch  of  the  Wotjo  nation  the 
medicine-man  was  trained  for  the  office.  For  instance,  if  it 
became  known  that  a  boy  could  see  his  mother's  ghost 
{Nungim)  sitting  by  her  grave,  a  medicine-man  would  take 
him  for  the  purpose  of  making  him  a  Lanyingel^  or  medicine- 
man. Part  of  the  process  of  making  a  boy  a  Lanyingel  was 
to  smoke  him  with  the  leaves  of  the  native  cherry  {Exocarpus 
aipressifonnis)  and  anoint  him  with  red  ochre  and  grease. 
These  were  public  acts,  but  my  native  informants  did  not 
know  what  the  real  training  was. 

The  VVotjobaluk  believed  that  a  man  became  a  Bangal 
by  being  met  by  a  supernatural  being  called  by  them 
Ngatya,  who  is  said  to  live  in  hollows  in  the  ground,  in  the 
mallee  scrubs.  They  think  that  the  Ngatya  opens  the  man's 
side  and  inserts  in  it  such  things  as  quartz  crystals,  by  which 
he  obtains  his  power.  From  that  time  on  he  can,  as  they 
say,  "  pull  things  out  of  himself  and  others,"  such  as  quartz, 
wood,  charcoal,  etc.,  and  also  out  of  his  arms  something  like 
feathers,  which  are  considered  to  have  healing  properties. 
In  the  case  quoted  elsewhere,  these  feathers  are  spoken  of  in 

»  Dr.  M'Kinlay. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  405 

connection  with  a  medicine-man  of  the  Jupagaik  tribe,  which 
belongs  to  the  Wotjo  nation. 

In  the  Jajaurung  tribe  the  office  of  doctor  is  alleged  to  be 
obtained  by  the  individual  visiting  the  world  of  the  spirits 
while  in  a  trance  of  two  or  three  days'  duration,  and  there 
receiving  the  necessary  initiation.^ 

The  Wurunjerri  believed  that  their  medicine-men  became 
such  by  being  carried  by  the  ghosts  through  a  hole  in  the 
sky  to  Bunjil,  from  whom  they  received  their  magical 
powers. 

The  Theddora,  Wolgal,  and  Ngarigo  believed  that 
Daraniulun  was  the  source  of  the  magical  powers  of  their 
medicine-men. 

Among  the  Narrang-ga  the  Gurildra  or  medicine-men 
were  said  to  be  able  to  communicate  with  departed  spirits, 
and  to  receive  from  them  the  power  of  inflicting  evil  magic 
on  others  by  songs.  It  is  also  said  that  a  Gurildra  could 
not  remove  the  evil  magic  which  he  had  inflicted  ;  but  that 
it  could  only  be  removed  by  another  Gurildra? 

The  Yuin  thought  that  a  boy  could  be  trained  to  be  a 
Gommera.  The  Gommera  Waddiman  said  of  himself  that 
he  was  taken  as  a  boy  by  a  great  Gommera,  who  taught  him 
to  be  one,  and  that  he  obtained  his  power  from  Daramulun. 

Collins  says  of  the  Port  Jackson  tribe  that  the  general 
idea  was  that  a  man  became  a  Car-rah-di  by  sleeping  at  the 
grave  of  a  deceased  person.  "  During  that  awful  sleep  the 
spirit  of  the  deceased  would  visit  him,  seize  him  by  the 
throat,  and  opening  him,  take  out  his  bowels,  which  he 
replaced,  and  the  wound  closed  up."  ^ 

The  Wiradjuri  medicine -men  professed  to  go  up  to 
Baiame  for  their  powers.  But  they  also  trained  their  sons 
to  follow  in  their  steps.  The  account  which  follows  was 
given  to  me  by  a  Wiradjuri  of  the  Murri  sub-class  and  the 
Kangaroo  totem,  and  is  an  excellent  instance  of  the  beliefs 
held  as  to  such  matters.  The  narrative  was  given  voluntarily 
during  a   conversation    I   had   with  him  about  the  Burbung 

'  "  Some  particulars  of  the  general  characteristics  of  the  tribes  in  the  central 
part  of  Victoria,"  W.  E.  Stanbridge,  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of 
London,  1 86 1,  p.  300.  -  Julius  Kuhn.  =*  Op.  cit.  p.  383. 


4o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

ceremonies  of  his  tribe.  He  had  been  careful  not  to  betray 
anything  unlawfully,  until  he  found  from  my  answers  to  his 
questions  that  I  was  indeed  one  of  the  initiated.  He  then, 
as  I  have  always  found  to  be  the  case  under  such  circum- 
stances, became  communicative  and  gave  me  a  full  account 
of  the  Wiradjuri  Burbuug,  and  from  previous  knowledge  I 
was  able  to  check  his  statements  and  found  that  he  was 
quite  accurate.  He  then,  when  we  were  talking  of  the 
magical  exhibitions  by  the  medicine-men  at  the  ceremonies, 
said,  "  I  will  tell  you  how  my  old  father  began  to  make  a 
blackfellow  doctor  of  me." 

My  impression  of  his  account  is  that  it  was  bona  fide ^ 
and  from  my  experience  I  should  say  that  it  would  be  an 
unheard-of  thing  for  a  man  to  falsify,  when  speaking  of 
matters  relating  to  such  sacred  subjects  as  the  initiation 
ceremonies,  to  one  of  the  initiated.  I  mention  this  because 
I  have  not  been  able  to  check  his  statements. 

I  give  his  account,  so  far  as  possible,  in  his  own  words,  and 
leave  it  to  my  readers  to  form  their  own  opinion  of  its  value. 

"  My  father  is  Yibai-dthulin}  When  I  was  a  small  boy 
he  took  me  into  the  bush  to  train  me  to  be  a  Wulla-mullung. 
He  placed  two  large  quartz  crystals  ^  against  my  breast,  and 
they  vanished  into  me.  I  do  not  know  how  they  went,  but 
I  felt  them  going  through  me  like  warmth.  This  was  to 
make  me  clever  and  able  to  bring  things  up.  He  also  gave 
me  some  things  like  quartz  crystals  in  water.  They  looked 
like  ice  and  the  water  tasted  sweet.  After  that  I  used  to 
see  things  that  my  mother  could  not  see.  When  out  with 
her  I  would  say  "  What  is  out  there  like  men  walking  ? " 
She  used  to  say,  "  Child,  there  is  nothing."  These  were  the 
Jir  (ghosts)  which  I  began  to  see. 

"  When  I  was  about  ten  years  old,  I  was  taken  to  the 
Bmbung  and  saw  what  the  old  men  could  bring  out  of 
themselves  ;  and  when  my  tooth  was  out  the  old  men  chased 
me  with  the  zvallungs  in  their  mouths,  shouting  '  IVgai, 
Ngaz','  and  moving  their   hands   towards  me.      I    went  into 

•  Dthulin  is  a  lizard,  and  I  think  the  lace-lizard, 

2  Called  wallung.  This  word  may  be  spoken  anywhere  or  by  any  one,  but 
its  equivalents,  gimahillung  and  iigtilin,  may  not  be  uttered  before  uninitiated 
persons. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  407 

the  bush  for  a  time,  and  while  there  my  old  father  came  out 
to  me.  He  said,  '  Come  here  to  me ' ;  and  he  then  showed 
me  a  piece  of  quartz  crystal  in  his  hand,  and  when  I  looked 
at  it  he  went  down  into  the  ground  and  I  saw  him  come  up 
all  covered  with  red  dust.  It  made  me  very  frightened. 
He  then  said,  '  Come  to  me,'  and  I  went  to  him,  and  he  said, 
'  Try  and  bring  up  a  Wallung!  I  did  try,  and  brought  one 
up.  He  then  said,  '  Come  with  me  to  this  place.'  I  saw 
him  standing  by  a  hole  in  the  ground,  leading  to  a  grave. 
I  went  inside  and  saw  a  dead  man,  who  rubbed  me  all  over 
to  make  me  clever,  and  who  gave  me  some  Wallung.  When 
we  came  out,  my  father  pointed  to  a  Gunr  (tiger- snake) 
saying  '  That  is  your  budjan  ;  it  is  mine  also,'  ^  There  was  a 
string  tied  to  the  tail  of  the  snake,  and  extending  to  us.  It 
was  one  of  those  strings  which  the  doctors  bring  up  out  of 
themselves,  rolled  up  together. 

"  He  took  hold  of  it,  saying,  '  Let  us  follow  him.'  The 
tiger -snake  went  through  several  tree  trunks,  and  let  us 
through.  Then  we  came  to  a  great  Currajong  tree,"  and 
went  through  it,  and  after  that  to  a  tree  with  a  great  swelling 
round  its  roots.  It  is  in  such  places  that  Daramulun  lives. 
Here  the  Gunr  went  down  into  the  ground,  and  we  followed 
him,  and  came  up  inside  the  tree,  which  was  hollow.  There 
I  saw  a  lot  of  little  Daraviuluns,  the  sons  of  Baiame.  After 
we  came  out  again  the  snake  took  us  into  a  great  hole  in 
the  ground  in  which  were  a  number  of  snakes,  which  rubbed 
themselves  against  me,  but  did  not  hurt  me,  being  my  Budjan. 
They  did  this  to  make  me  a  clever  man,  and  to  make  me  a 
Wulla-niullung.  My  father  then  said  to  me,  '  We  will  go  up 
to  Baiame' s  camp.  He  got  astride  of  a  Mauir  (thread)  and 
put  me  on  another,  and  we  held  by  each  other's  arms.  At 
the  end  of  the  thread  was  Wombu,  the  bird  of  Baiame.  We 
went  through  the  clouds,  and  on  the  other  side  was  the  sky. 
We  went  through  the  place  where  the  Doctors  go  through, 
and  it  kept  opening  and  shutting  very  quickly.  My  father 
said  that,  if  it  touched  a  Doctor  when  he  was  going  through, 
it  would  hurt  his  spirit,  and  when  he  returned  home  he  would 

•  Budjan  is  totem.    This  is  his  secret  personal  totem..   His  totem  of  i<angaroo 
is  not  so.      It  is  derived  from  his  mother.  ^  Brachychiton  populneum. 


4o8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

sicken  and  die.  On  the  other  side  we  saw  Baiame  sitting  in 
his  camp.  He  was  a  very  great  old  man  with  a  long  beard. 
He  sat  with  his  legs  under  him  and  from  his  shoulders 
extended  two  great  quartz  crystals  to  the  sky  above  him. 
There  were  also  numbers  of  the  boys  of  Baiame  and  of  his 
people,  who  are  birds  and  beasts. 

"  After  this  time,  and  while  I  was  in  the  bush,  I  began 
to  bring  things  up,  but  I  became  very  ill  and  cannot  do 
anything  since." 

There  are  some  few  things  to  notice  in  connection  with 
this  man's  statement  which  I  shall  for  convenience  refer  to 
later  on  in  this  chapter. 

The  belief  of  the  Kurnai  is  that  the  Mulla-mullung 
obtains  his  power  in  dreams.  The  ancestral  ghosts  either 
visited  the  sleeper,  and  communicated  to  him  harmful  or 
protective  chants  and  knowledge,  or  they  completed  his 
education  elsewhere.  One  of  the  old  Kurnai  explained  it  in 
this  way : — He  is  shown  the  things  which  kill  people,  such 
as  Groggin  (quartz  crystals)  and  Bulk  ;  and  songs  are  taught 
him,  for  there  is  a  song  for  everything  the  Mulla-viullung 
uses.  For  instance,  suppose  some  man  has  got  Groggin  in- 
side him,  or  bottle  (that  is,  a  piece  of  glass)  in  his  arm,  the 
Mulla-mullung  straightens  it  out,  and  rubs  it  downwards,  and 
then  sings  his  song,  and  sucks  the  place,  and  brings  the 
Groggin  out,  or  the  bottle,  or  whatever  it  is. 

Tankli,  the  son  of  Bataluk  the  Lace-Lizard,  gave  me  an 
account  of  how  he  became  a  Mulla-mullung^  which  is  as 
follows : — 

"  When  I  was  a  big  boy  about  getting  whiskers  I  was 
at  Alberton  camped  with  my  people.  Bunjil-gworan  was 
there  and  other  old  men.  I  had  some  dreams  about  my 
father,  and  I  dreamed  three  times  about  the  same  thing. 
The  first  and  the  second  time,  he  came  with  his  brother  and 
a  lot  of  other  old  men,  and  dressed  me  up  with  lyre-bird's 
feathers  round  my  head.  The  second  time  they  were  all 
rubbed  over  with  Naial  (red  ochre),  and  had  Bridda-briddas 
ox\}      The    third    time    they    tied    a   cord    made    of  whale's 

'  A  Bridda-bridda  is  a  kind  of  kilt  which  the  men  wore  in  front  and  behind 
hanging  from  the  cord  which  was  wound  round  the  waist  as  a  belt. 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  409 

sinews  round  my  neck  and  waist,  and  swung  me  by  it  and 
carried  me  through  the  air  over  the  sea  at  Corner  Inlet,  and 
set  me  down  at  Yiriik)  It  was  at  the  front  of  a  big  rock 
like  the  front  of  a  house.  I  noticed  that  there  was  some- 
thing like  an  opening  in  the  rock.  My  father  tied  something 
over  my  eyes  and  led  me  inside.  I  knew  this  because  I 
heard  the  rocks  make  a  sound  as  of  knocking  behind  me. 
Then  he  uncovered  my  eyes,  and  I  found  that  I  was  in  a 
place  as  bright  as  day,  and  all  the  old  men  were  round 
about.  My  father  showed  me  a  lot  of  shining  bright  things, 
like  glass,  on  the  walls,  and  told  me  to  take  some.  I  took 
one  and  held  it  tight  in  my  hand.  When  we  went  out  again 
my  father  taught  me  how  to  make  these  things  go  into  my 
legs,  and  how  I  could  pull  them  out  again.  He  also  taught 
me  how  to  throw  them  at  people.  After  that,  he  and  the 
other  old  men  carried  me  back  to  the  camp,  and  put  me  on 
the  top  of  a  big  tree.  He  said,  '  Shout  out  loud  and  tell 
them  that  you  are  come  back.'  I  did  this,  and  I  heard  the 
people  in  the  camp  waking  up,  and  the  women  beginning  to 
beat  their  rugs  for  me  to  come  down,  because  now  I  was  a 
JMulla-mullung.  Then  I  woke  up  and  found  that  I  was  lying 
along  the  limb  of  a  tree.  The  old  men  came  out  with  fire- 
sticks,  and  when  they  reached  the  tree,  I  was  down,  and 
standing  by  it  with  the  thing  my  father  had  given  me  in  my 
hand.  It  was  like  glass,  and  we  call  it  Kiin'}  I  told  the 
old  men  all  about  it,  and  they  said  that  I  was  a  doctor. 
From  that  time  I  could  pull  things  out  of  people,  and  I 
could  throw  the  Kiin  like  light  in  the  evening  at  people, 
saying  to  it  Blappan  (go !).  I  have  caught  several  in  that 
way.  After  some  years  I  took  to  drinking,  and  then  I  lost 
my  Kiin  and  all  my  power,  and  have  never  been  able  to  do 
anything  since.  I  used  to  keep  it  in  a  bag  made  of  the  skin 
of  a  ring-tail  opossum,  in  a  hole  of  a  tree.  One  night  I 
dreamed  that  I  was  sleeping  in  the  camp,  and  my  wife  threw 
some  Kruk  ^  at  me,  and  after  that  my  Kiin  went  out  of  my 
bag,   I   do  not  know  where.      I    have  slept  under  the  tree 

'   Wilson's  Promontory. 

•^  Kiin  is  a  word  of  the  Niilit  language  which  was  spoken  by  the  Brataua  clan 
to  which  Tankli  belongs.  ^  Kruk  is  menstrual  blood. 


4IO        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

where  I  left  it,  thinking  that  my  power  might  come  back, 
but  I  have  never  found  the  Kiin,  and  I  never  dream  any 
more  about  it." 

The  general  belief  as  to  the  powers  of  the  medicine-man 
are  much  the  same  in  all  the  tribes  herein  spoken  of.  He 
is  everywhere  believed  to  have  received  his  dreaded  power 
from  some  supernatural  source,  or  being,  such  as  Baiame, 
Daramulun,  or  Bunjil,  or  the  ancestral  ghosts. 

In  all  cases  he  is  credited  with  being  able  to  see  men 
in  their  incorporeal  state,  either  temporarily  as  a  wraith,  or 
permanently  separated  from  their  body  as  a  ghost,  which 
is  invisible  to  other  eyes.  He  can  ascend  to  ghost-land 
beyond  the  sky,  or  can  transport  himself,  or  be  transported 
by  the  ghosts,  from  one  spot  of  earth  to  another  at  will, 
much  after  the  manner  of  the  Buddhist  Arhat.  The  powers 
thus  conferred  on  him  he  can  use  to  injure  or  to  destroy 
men,  or  to  preserve  them  from  the  secret  attacks  of  other 
medicine-men.  He  can,  it  is  also  thought,  assume  animal 
forms  and  control  the  elements. 

In  these  beliefs  there  is  a  striking  resemblance  to  those 
which  have  been  recorded  concerning  wizards,  sorcerers,  and 
witches  in  other  parts  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  to  the  beliefs 
of  savages  the  world  over,  nor  can  it  be  said  that  they  have 
altogether  died  out  even  in  the  most  civilised  peoples. 

Some  of  the  practices  described  are  found  all  over  the 
Australian  continent,  locally  if  not  generally.  For  instance, 
the  use  of  human  fat,  and  the  belief  in  the  magical  properties 
of  the  quartz  crystal.  But  as  to  the  latter  the  use  of  the 
crystal  globe  is  still  with  us  also,  and  may  have  been 
handed  down  from  the  distant  times  when  our  ancestors 
were  savages.  I  have  found  it  somewhat  difficult  to  explain 
satisfactorily  the  taking  of  human  fat  ;  but  after  considering 
all  my  evidence,  it  has  seemed  that  it  may  have  been  the 
outcome  of  two  beliefs  which  are  generally  held  by  the 
blackfellows.  One  is  as  to  the  nature  of  dreams,  and 
the  other  as  to  the  position  which,  in  their  estimation,  fat 
holds  in  the  human  economy.  When  the  blackfellow 
sleeps  by  his  camp  fire  and  has  dreams,  he  explains  them 
by  saying  that  while  his  body  lies  motionless,  his  spirit  goes 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  411 

out  of  him  on  its  wanderings.  I  have  fully  gone  into  this 
matter  in  the  chapter  on  "  Beliefs,"  and  need  now  only  say 
that  his  view  of  the  reality  of  dreams  enables  him  to  reach, 
by  a  natural  stage  of  reasoning,  the  conception  of  the 
individual  apart  from  the  body.  The  second  belief  is  that 
a  man's  fat  and  his  strength  and  vitality  are  connected. 
Health,  strength,  and  vitality  run  together,  and  therefore 
the  wasting  of  the  body,  and  disease,  are  the  result  of  the 
absence  of  fat,  perhaps  followed  by  death.  This  belief  that 
a  man's  vitality  and  his  fat  have  some  connection  seems  to 
be  shown  by  the  widespread  practice  of  eating  the  fat  of  the 
dead  and  of  those  slain.  By  eating  a  man's  fat,  and  thus 
making  it  part  of  himself,  the  blackfellow  thinks  that  he 
also  acquires  the  strength  of  the  deceased.  So  also  they 
think  that  human  fat  brings  success  in  hunting,  causes 
spears,  which  are  anointed  with  it,  to  fly  true,  or  the  club  to 
strike  irresistible  blows. 

It  is  a  common  belief  that  when  two  things  are  associ- 
ated together,  any  magical  power  possessed  by  the  one  will 
be  communicated  to  the  other. 

The  possession  of  human  fat  is  therefore  much  desired 
by  these  aborigines,  especially  those  who  feel  age  or  disease, 
or  who  wish  to  be  successful  in  magical  arts.  But  it  is  not 
only  the  human  fat  which  is  thus  utilised.  The  desire  to 
use  those  portions  of  the  human  body  in  which  they  believe 
the  vital  strength  resides  leads  them  to  use  not  only  fat, 
but  also  another  source  of  strength,  which  may  be  inferred 
when  it  is  stated  that  it  is  practised  by  tribes  who  subincise. 
The  tribes  to  which  I  refer  are  the  Kurnandaburi,  and,  as 
described  to  me  by  the  late  Mr.  C.  M.  King,  formerly  the 
Police  Magistrate  at  Milperinka,  in  New  South  Wales,  in 
the  Wilya  tribe. 

The  most  difficult  matter  with  which  I  have  had  to  deal 
in  this  inquiry  has  been  to  determine  how  far  the  medicine- 
men believe  in  their  own  power?.  All  explanations  con- 
cerning them  must  be  given  either  by  themselves  or  by  their 
tribes-people  ;  and  when  they  are  given  by  the  former,  one 
has  to  distinguish  between  those  explanations  which  are 
truthful   and    those   which   are    not,    and  which   have    been 


412        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

made  with  the  intention  of  blinding  the  tribe.  Herein  the 
great  difficulty  lies.  The  class  of  blackfellow  doctors  was 
almost  extinct  in  the  tribes  of  which  I  had  a  personal 
knowledge  ;  and  in  the  tribes  which  were  in  their  quite 
wild  state  there  was  little  or  no  opportunity  of  an  acquaint- 
ance with  the  medicine-men.  In  those  tribes  with  which  I 
had  friendly  relations,  the  medicine-men  were  of  the  second 
generation,  that  is,  it  was  their  predecessors  who  had 
practised  their  arts  in  the  wild  state  of  the  tribe.  The  real 
old  Gommeras  of  the  Coast  Murring  became  extinct  when 
the  before-mentioned  "  Waddiman  "  died.  The  Wtrrarap  of 
the  VVurunjerri,  and  the  Bangal  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  dis- 
appeared about  the  time  of  the  early  gold-diggings  in 
Victoria.  But  I  think  that  the  amount  of  evidence  which 
I  have  been  able  to  rescue  from  oblivion  will  enable  a  fair 
estimate  to  be  made  of  the  powers  claimed  by  the  medicine- 
men, and  their  influence  on  the  tribal  life  to  be  judged. 

As  to  the  two  men  Murri-kangaroo  and  Tankli,  the 
case  is  somewhat  different,  and  they  represent  a  class  which 
was  larger  in  the  tribes  formerly.  Granting  all  that  can  be 
said  as  to  the  intentional  fraud  of  the  medicine-men,  and 
admitting  that  many  of  them  are  mere  cheats  and  frauds, 
there  remain  some  who  really  have  belief  in  their  own 
powers  as  well  as  in  those  of  other  men.  I  feel  strongly 
assured  that  both  the  Wiradjuri  and  the  Kurnai  man 
believed  that  the  events  which  he  related  were  real,  and 
that  he  had  actually  experienced  them.  As  to  Tankli,  it 
seems  that  his  case  was  one  of  nervous  exaltation,  combined 
with  somnambulism,  and  that  upon  the  "  subjective  realities  " 
in  that  state  he  built  up  a  structure  of  deceit  in  the  practice 
of  his  curative  art.  That  he  also  believed  in  the  reality 
of  the  dream  which  caused  him  to  lose  his  Kiin  and  his 
magical  powers  seems  most  probable,  when  one  considers 
that  he  voluntarily  relinquished  the  practice  of  an  art  which 
brought  him  great  consideration. 

The  case  of  Murri-kangaroo  seems  to  point  to  the 
practice  of  some  form  of  hypnotic  suggestion  among  the  old 
class  of  medicine-men.  The  youth,  at  the  time  of  initiation, 
is  in  a  peculiar  and  an  abnormal  mental  state.      He  is  fed 


MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  413 


full  of  magical  ceremonies  and  beliefs.  He  has  undergone 
fearful  and  impressive  ceremonies,  and  is  in  a  condition 
which  would  be  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  practice  of 
hypnotism. 

One  can  understand  that  a  youth  who  has  passed 
through  such  an  experience  could  never  doubt  the  reality  of 
the  magic  powers  of  others,  even  when  he  is  conscious  that 
he  himself  has  no  such  power. 

Songs  AND  Song-makers 

The  songs  and  dances  of  the  Australian  aborigines  are 
usually  spoken  of  by  our  own  people  as  "  corrobborecs,"  and 
this  word  is  also  frequently  applied  to  any  of  their  social 
gatherings.  This  application  is,  however,  not  correct,  for 
the  songs,  the  songs  with  dances,  and  the  assemblies  for 
social  or  other  purposes  have  each  its  own  distinctive  name. 
The  word  "  corrobboree "  was  probably  derived  from  some 
tribal  dialect  in  the  early  settled  districts  of  New  South 
Wales,  and  has  been  carried  by  the  settlers  all  over  Australia. 
It  may  be  now  considered  as  being  engrafted  on  the  English 
language. 

The  word  "corrobboree"  probably  meant  originally  both 
the  song  and  the  dance  which  accompanied  it,  which  is  the 
meaning  of  the  word  Gunyeru  in  the  Kurnai  tongue. 

The  songs  are  very  numerous,  and  of  varied  character, 
and  are  connected  with  almost  every  part  of  the  social  life, 
for  there  is  little  of  Australian  savage  life,  either  in  peace  or 
war,  which  is  not  in  some  measure  connected  with  song. 
Some  songs  are  only  used  as  dance  -  music,  some  are 
descriptive  of  events  which  have  struck  the  composer,  some 
are  comic  or  pathetic.  There  is  also  an  extensive  class  of 
songs  connected  with  magic,  and  of  these  many  are  what 
may  be  called  *'  incantations  " — words  of  power,  chanted  in 
the  belief  that  supernatural  influence  is,  not  asked,  but  com- 
pelled, by  them,  an  influence  for  evil,  or  for  warding  off  evil. 

There  are  also  songs  which  are  only  heard  at  the 
initiation  ceremonies,  and  which  are  therefore  not  known  to 
the  uninitiated,  or  to  women.    To  English  ears,  unaccustomed 


414       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA    ch.  vii 

to  the  simple  and  somewhat  monotonous  airs  to  which  the 
words  are  set,  there  seems  but  little  melody  in  the  chants. 
But  with  custom  they  grow  upon  one,  until  at  length  one 
feels  in  some  measure  the  effect  which  they  produce  upon 
an  aboriginal  audience  in  so  powerful  a  manner.  There  is 
a  wild  and  pathetic  music  in  some  of  the  songs  which  I  have 
heard  chanted  by  a  number  of  voices  together.  Such  was 
the  song  of  Ngalalbal,  as  I  heard  it  at  the  Murring  Kuringal, 
and  the  song  of  the  bat,  in  which  at  early  dawn  the  whole 
of  the  men  joined  one  by  one  in  chorus,  the  words  describing 
the  bats  "  flitting  about  in  the  dim  light  which  shows  between 
the  upper  boughs  of  the  trees." 

The  makers  of  Australian  songs,  or  of  the  combined 
songs  and  dances,  are  the  poets,  or  bards,  of  the  tribe,  and 
are  held  in  great  esteem.  Their  names  are  known  in  the 
neighbouring  tribes,  and  their  songs  are  carried  from  tribe 
to  tribe,  until  the  very  meaning  of  the  words  is  lost,  as  well 
as  the  original  source  of  the  song.  It  is  hard  to  say  how 
far  and  how  long  such  a  song  may  travel  in  the  course  of 
time  over  the  Australian  continent. 

A .  good  example  of  such  far  -  travelled  songs  is  the 
following,  of  which  I  have  heard  two  versions.  One  runs  as 
follows : — 

Malla-malle  taria-rara         uananga 

Nguinheranga  ye-yandaba 

I  heard  it  first  sung  by  one  of  the  Narrinyeri  in  1861,  and 
afterwards  Mr.  G.  W.  Rusden  sang  it  for  me  from  memory, 
having  heard  it  in  the  Geawe-gal  tribe  many  years  before. 
In  neither  case  was  the  meaning  of  the  words  known. 

The  second  version  I  heard  sung  at  the  Murring 
Kuringal  in  1880  by  Yibai-malian,  who  said  that  it  came 
to  his  tribe,  the  Wolgal,  many  years  before,  having  been,  he 
believed,  originally  brought  from  the  Richmond  River  in 
New  South  Wales.  The  air  to  which  it  was  sung  was  the 
same  as  I  had  before  heard,  but  the  words  differed  from 
those  of  the  first  version  given,  being  : — 


Mtilla-mulle 

kuruitba 

tarria-rara 

Platypus 

large  rock 

bend  of  river 

Gniltura 

nanga 

ebenneranga 

r 


4i6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA  ch.  vii 

He  said  that  the  words  spoke  of  a  platypus  sitting  on 
a  rock  in  the  river,  but  he  could  not  explain  the  second 
line. 

Whether  his  explanation  is  correct  I  am  unable  to  say, 
but  he  spoke  with  certainty  and  apparent  candour. 

With  some  songs  there  are  pantomimic  gestures  or 
rhythmical  movements,  which  are  passed  on  from  performer 
to  performer,  as  the  song  is  carried  from  tribe  to  tribe. 

Within  the  last  few  years  a  corrobboree  dance  was 
brought  to  the  Dieri  by  a  party  of  men  from  that  part  of 
Queensland  which  is  north-easterly  from  the  Dieri  country. 
It  is  the  Molongo  dance  mentioned  by  Dr.  Roth. 

Another  instance  is  a  song  that  was  accompanied  by  a 
carved  stick  painted  red,  which  was  held  by  the  chief  singer. 
This  travelled  down  the  Murray  from  some  unknown  source. 
The  Rev.  John  Bulmer  tells  me  that  he  saw  this  performance 
in  the  Wiimbaio  tribe.  Such  a  song,  accompanied  by  a  red 
stick,  was  brought  into  Gippsland  from  the  Melbourne  side, 
and  may  have  even  been  the  above-mentioned  one  on  its 
return. 

In  the  tribes  with  which  I  have  acquaintance  I  find  it 
to  be  a  common  belief  that  the  songs,  using  that  word  in 
its  widest  meaning,  as  including  all  kinds  of  aboriginal 
poetry,  are  obtained  by  the  bards  from  the  spirits  of  the 
deceased,  usually  of  their  kindred,  during  sleep  in  dreams. 
Thus,  as  I  have  before  said,  the  Birraark  professed  to 
receive  his  poetic  inspirations  from  the  Mrarts,  as  well  as 
the  accompanying  dances,  which  he  was  supposed  to  have 
seen  first  in  ghost-land. 

In  the  Narrang-ga  tribe  there  are  men  who  profess  to 
learn  songs  and  dances  from  departed  spirits.  These  men 
are  called  Gurildras) 

In  the  Yuin  tribe  some  men  received  their  songs  in 
dreams,  others  when  waking.  Of  the  latter  was  Umbara, 
the  Murring  bard,  who  composed  his  songs  when  in  his 
boat,  tossing  on  the  waves.  Some  of  these  Murring  song- 
makers  compose  social  songs,  others  make  songs  for  the 
initiations,  but  many  of  all   kinds  have  been   handed  down 

1  J.  Kuhn. 


m 


^ 


2  E 


4i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

from  time  immemorial,  or  have  been  brought  from  an   un- 
known distance. 

According  to  the  tribes  near  Maryborough  (Queensland), 
it  is  Birral  who  inspires  the  makers  of  corrobboree  songs.^ 

The  medicine-men  who  made  songs  in  the  Turrbal  tribe 
either  obtained  them  when  they  went  underground,  or  when 
they  went  up  in  the  air.  But  there  were  other  men  who 
made  songs  under  ordinary  circumstances  in  their  camps.^ 
The  former  class  of  men  had  clearly  the  attributes  of  the 
medicine-men,  perhaps  of  the  Birraark. 

I  found  an  interesting  example  of  the  "  inspired  song  " 
in  the  Wurunjerri  tribe.  According  to  Berak,  it  was  composed 
by  Wenberi,  the  henchman  of  the  Ngurungaeta  (Headman) 
Bebejan,  Berak's  father,  to  lament  the  death  of  his  brother 
by  evil  magic,  near  Geelong.  This  is  a  good  instance  of 
that  class  of  song,  and  also  of  the  belief  of  the  composer, 
that  he  was  inspired  by  something  more  than  mortal  when 
composing  it.  In  this  case  it  is  Bunjil  himself  who  "  rushes 
down  "  into  the  breast  of  the  singer. 

Once  when  I  asked  for  the  origin  of  a  song,  it  was  said 
that  the  person  who  sang  it  "  got  it  from  his  grandfather, 
who  got  it  from  his  parents,  who  got  it  from  the  old  people, 
who  got  it  from  Bunjil." 

I  am  under  very  great  obligations  to  the  Rev.  Dr 
Torrance  for  most  kindly  writing  down  the  music  of  this, 
and  two  other  songs,  from  the  lips  of  the  singer  Berak,  and 
for  his  most  valuable  remarks  on  them  and  on  the  singer's 
musical  powers,  which  follow  : — 

"  Being  the  result  of  but  a  single  interview  with  a  native 
bard,  the  particulars  here  noted  are  of  necessity  imperfect 
and  superficial.  Such  as  they  are,  however,  it  is  hoped  that 
they  may  prove  of  some  little  historic  value,  and  lead  to 
further  inquiry  into  a  subject  which  cannot  fail  to  be  one  of 
interest  to  the  anthropological  student. 

"  Generally  speaking,  the  rude  attempt  at  melody 
exhibited  by  those  untaught  natives  may  be  described  as  a 
kind  of  nasal  monotone  or  chant,  usually  preceded  by  a 
downward  progression  somewhat  resembling  the  '  intonation  ' 

1  H.  E.  Aldridge.  "^  Tom  Petrie. 


MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  419 


in  Gregorian  music.  The  songs  are  marked  throughout  by 
sudden,  frequent,  and  ever -varying  inflections  of  voice,  in 
compass  rarely  exceeding  the  distance  of  a  third,  and  minor 
intervals  predominating. 

"  Much  of  the  character  of  the  music  depends  upon  the 
rhythm,  which,  while  very  strongly  marked,  is  also  most 
irregular,  changing  suddenly,  and  alternating  frequently 
between  double  and  triple  ;  the  changes,  moreover,  being 
sometimes  introduced  by  a  slackening  of  the  time,  and  a 
curious  sliding  of  one  sound  into  another,  not  unlike  the 
slow  tuning  of  a  violin  string. 

"  In  the  corrobboree  the  rhythmic  measures  are  empha- 
sised by  clapping  of  hands  and  stamping  of  feet.  When 
one  singer  or  set  of  singers  is  exhausted,  others  in  turn  take 
up  and  continue  the  chant  till  the  wild  dance  is  concluded. 

"  The  native  bard  alluded  to  above,  from  whom  the 
illustrations  were  obtained,  is  an  intelligent  representative  of 
his  race.  His  voice  is  a  baritone  of  average  compass  and 
not  unpleasing  quality.  His  ear  is  also  fairly  quick  and 
accurate,  though  occasionally  he  would  pause  long  as  if 
trying  to  recall  the  test  sounds  before  repeating  them  ;  and 
his  patience,  good  temper,  and  evident  pleasure  at  seeing  his 
songs  committed  to  paper  were  very  remarkable. 

"  In  order  to  obtain  the  compass  of  this  aboriginal's  voice, 
and  his  power  of  retaining  and  expressing  some  distinct 
musical  idea,  a  simple  solfeggio  passage  was  sung  to  him. 
After  a  brief  silence,  and  without  attempting  to  repeat  the 
given  sounds,  he  began  slowly  and  deliberately,  and  with 
much  emphasis  on  each  note,  the  following  impromptu — 


^^=^ 


^ — = — *     jb-v 


La      La     La      La     La       La      La      La 

"  As   an   ear  test,  he   then   repeated  accurately,  pausing 
first  as  before — 

^. — » — <= — ^ 


La     La       La 

an  effort  which  the  bard  voluntarily  supplemented  by — 


420        NATIVfe  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


w 


^^ 


La      La      La 


evidently  much  pleased   with  his  performance,  and   the  ap- 
plause of  his  auditors. 

"  The  appended  native  songs,  jotted  down  as  nearly  as 
possible  in  modern  notation,  will  help  to  illustrate  the  fore- 
going observations.  The  bard  was  in  each  case  allowed  to 
choose  his  own  starting  note,  and  generally  pitched  on  or 
about  D  in  the  bass. 


KuRBURU's  Song. 


Sounded  as  if  in  the  key  of  B  minor. 
Tempo  moderato.      M  J  =  loo. 


gur 


-     na    gur   -  e   -   a         nung     ngal  -  I'lr  -  ma       hd  -  rang 
iviKpo. A  A ^  _ 

uk     Ixi       mirnfn       mirnfn      nge  burun     bdngan      biidha ' 
A  A  >  A  A 


e  -  16  -  re     mur  - 


:  e     yam-yam  mQdhan  guru  bai   wirge    ngu-rak. 


"  The  above  was  repeated  several  times,  without  break 
or  pause,  omitting  the  *  intonation  '  at  each  repetition,  and 
ending  abruptly  at  the  double  bar. 


VVenberi's  Sonc. 

No  particular  key  suggested.     Pitched  first  on  DJ  then  changed  abruptly  to 
C«,  DB,  and  B. 


Tentpo  moderato.      M  J  =  loo. 


d   u  a   g    e   a         ngi    la     nung      ba 


li^llung       ba 


1  German  d  ;  dh  =  sound  of  "  th"  in  "  this.' 


n  =  ny. 


MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC 


421 


ngaluk       ba      e  deii       nung  ngga  wurtein  ^         ^  dhullur       wlluit 

>  A  A  >    =-  A  -= 


wa-wundOn     nung  BQngil     e     ya      m  a  m  e  n  g  a  t  a       ba     yawa       bdldk 
/    >  A  A  =>        A  A 


-J— 3—^ 


i 


Ei?E=5^ 


e     yern  -  ngen      dhfil-lur     mueik'       nga  wdru-nga    luk         gueik. 

"  This  song  was  repeated   on  B,  a  third  lower,  and  sung 
through  to  the  same  sound. 

CORROBBOREE    SONG. 

Sung  on  D,  with  nasal   '  intonation  '  preceding,  and  no  change  of  note  till 
repetition. 

M  J  =  100. 
tempo     f^jijt.  >        A  .  A  fc        =*  A  A 


nga     wa  •  jfi    -    lai  -  ya      bOn     -     dea  gk  -  nun   -  wU 


A  A 


AAA 


^^m 


^ 


ng.a       burdangala 


y^lengca  gAnowar 


Repeated  a  tone  lower  without  intonation. 
=»         A  A 


ngil         w   a    g   e   1    ai    y    a         bOn     -    -dea,  etc. 

In  the  repetition  the  initial  '  e  '  is  omitted. 

"  This  drone  or  chant  is  repeated  ezd  lib.  as  long  as  the 
ceremony  lasts,  a  tone  lower  each  time,  and  accompanied 
throughout  with  clapping  of  hands  and  stamping  of  feet." 

Kurburu's  song  serves  as  an  example  of  those  which  are 
connected  with  the  supernatural,  and  it  brings  into  view  a 
curious  belief,  which  is  found  in  so  many  Australian  legends 
and  tales,  of  a  supernatural  relation  of  men  and  beasts.  It 
was   composed   and    sung   by  a  bard   called   Kurburu,  who 

'  The    "t"    in    "wurtein"   apparently   inserted    or   omitted   at    pleasure. 
(A^./i. — ei  =  "ai"in  "rain.") 

'^  dh  =  sound  of"  th  "  in  "  this."  '  Mueik  =  mweik.      .So  also  rtieik. 


422        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

lived  during  the  early  settlement  of  the  country  by  the 
whites  near  where  the  town  of  Berwick  now  stands.  He 
was  supposed  to  have  killed  a  "  native  bear,"  and  being 
possessed  by  its  Murup  or  spirit,  thenceforth  sang  its  song. 
I  was  not  able  to  obtain  a  verbatim  translation  of  it,  but 
Berak  gave  me  the  following  free  translation  :  "  You  cut 
across  my  track,  you  spilled  my  blood,  and  you  broke  your 
tomahawk  on  my  head." 

Wenberi's  song,  as  given  by  Dr.  Torrance,  differs  slightly 
from  it  as  I  wrote  it  down  from  Berak's  dictation  some  time 
before,  which  with  its  translation  runs  as  follows  : — 


Nge         tttigar         ngala 
We           go               all 

ngibenba 
the  bones  to 

ngaluga 
all  of  them 

diudirunding            nga 
shining  white  in         this 

Dullur 
Dullur 

7viluit 
country 

waweindting             Biittjil 
the  rushing  noise         Bunjil 

mamen-ngata 
father  ours 

yenniii 
singing 

thtilurm-eik              nga 
breast  mine              this 

■wur-galuk-eik. 
inside  mine. 

Berak  said  that  this  song  was  made  on  the  death  of 
Wenberi's  brother,  who  died  through  evil  magic  in  the  Dullur 
country  beyond  Geelong. 

The  corrobboree  song  given  by  Dr.  Torrance  is  one  used 
by  the  Wurunjerri,  but  of  which  I  have  no  translation. 

Other  poets  composed  under  what  may  be  called  natural, 
as  distinguished  from  supernatural,  influence.  Umbara  told 
me  that  his  words  came  to  him,  "  not  in  sleep  as  to  some 
men,  but  when  tossing  about  on  the  waves  in  his  boat  with 
the  waters  jumping  up  round  him."  This  man  was  a  fisher- 
man, and  owned  a  good  Sydney-built  boat,  which  he  managed 
with  the  aid  of  his  wife.  In  the  olden  times  these  "  sea-coast 
men  "  (Katungal)  used  to  go  out  a  mile  or  more  from  the 
coast  in  their  bark  canoes  to  spear  fish. 

As  an  example  of  his  songs,  I  give  one  he  composed 
when  going  down  the  coast  in  his  boat  to  the  Kuringal 
ceremonies,  which  are  described  in  chap.  ix. 

He  sang  this  song  in  the  evening  at  the  camp,  beating 
time  with  two  short  sticks,  while  an  appreciative  and  admir- 
ing audience  stood  round. 


MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  423 


Umbara's 

Song. 

GcUagala         binya 
Capsizing           me 

bunninga          ngali 
striking             me 

winbelmu         jena 
the  wind  blows    hard 

ngarauan                   udja 
the  sea           long  stretched 

kandubai             buninga 
between              striking 

melinthi           buninga 
hard  hitting         striking 

ngali           iHulari 
me         dashing  up 

binja           buninga. 
me             striking. 

There  is  a  curious  instance  in  Umbara's  song  of  the 
manner  in  which  EngHsh  words  may  become  engrafted  on 
the  native  language.  Winbelow  is  really  "  the  wind  blows." 
This  song  may  be  freely  but  yet  not  incorrectly  translated 
much  as  Umbara  himself  explained  it  to  me,  "  Between  the 
furious  wind  and  the  dashing  waves  of  the  long-stretched  sea 
I  was  nearly  upset." 

I  have  mentioned  songs  which  are  accompanied  by 
rhythmical  gestures  or  by  pantomime,  which  greatly  adds  to 
the  effect.  A  favourite  one  which  I  have  seen  describes  the 
hunting  of  an  opossum,  and  its  extraction  from  a  hollow 
log  by  the  hunter,  who  is  the  principal  singer,  and  his 
assistants.  Every  action  of  .finding  the  animal — the  in- 
effectual attempt  to  poke  it  out  of  its  retreat,  the  smoking  it 
out  with  fire,  and  the  killing  of  it  by  the  hunters  as  it  runs 
out — is  rendered,  not  only  by  the  words  of  the  song,  but  also 
by  the  concerted  actions  and  movements  of  the  performers 
in  their  pantomimic  dancing. 

A  very  favourite  song  of  this  description  has  travelled  in 
late  years  from  the  Murring  to  the  Kurnai.  It  was  com- 
posed by  Mragula,  who,  it  may  be  mentioned,  was  a  song- 
maker  in  his  tribe,  the  Wolgal,  describing  his  attempt  to 
cross  the  Snowy  River  in  a  leaky  canoe  during  flood.  The 
pantomimic  action  which  accompanies  this  song  is  much 
fuller  than  the  words,  and  is  a  graphic  picture  of  the  pushing 
off  in  the  canoe,  the  paddling  into  the  stream,  the  gaining  of 
the  leak,  and  after  an  ineffectual  attempt  to  bale  the  water 
out  by  hand,  a  hurried  return  to  shore.  Then  the  hole 
being  carefully  stopped  with  adhesive  mud,  the  performers 
again    put   off  and   paddle   across.      The  words   are   in   the 


424        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Wolgal  language,  and  therefore  quite  unintelligible   to   the 
Kurnai. 

Mragula's  Song. 

Burrahtirai         laiajaitii  kttmber-neino  ^vurgaiania 

Quickly  talking  to  his  mate  looking  about. 

ttgillingua         burbundu-malagtia         nintna 
now  paddling  this  side. 

Many  other  songs  could  be  given,  but  these  will  suffice 


KK;.    24. — A    KUkNAI    BAKK    CANOK. 

to  show  their  character.  Nor  is  it  necessary  for  me  to  do 
more  than  point  out  that  the  comic  songs  all  relate,  so  far  as 
I  know,  to  some  passing  event.  A  favourite  song  of  this 
kind  with  the  Murring  is  about  "  going  to  Melbourne  in  the 
steamer,"  and  I  have  heard  the  Kurnai  sing  one  inviting  a 
friend  to  come  to  a  "  cool  shady  place  with  a  bottle."  I 
regret  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  pay  more  attention  to 
this  branch  of  my  subject,  namely,  the  songs  of  the 
Australian  aborigines.  There  is  something  to  be  learned 
from  them  as  to  their  mental  condition  and  their  intellectual 


VII  MEDICINE-MEN  AND  MAGIC  .42S 

Status,  The  songs  also  in  some  cases  throw  light  on  their 
beliefs  and  their  customs.  No  doubt  there  are,  amongst 
their  songs,  some  which  are  coarse  and  indecent,  as  among 
those  of  more  civilised  peoples.  But  they  can  be  dis- 
regarded, unless  they  have  some  bearing  on  beliefs  or 
customs.  As  it  is,  white  men  know  little  of  the  black- 
fellow's  songs,  which  to  most  people  are  unmeaning  barbarous 
chants,  and  to  the  missionaries  who  have  some  knowledge 
of  them  they  savour  of  heathendom,  and  must  therefore  be 
altogether  pushed  into  oblivion  and  be  forgotten.  Thus 
before  long  all  these  songs,  old  and  new,  will  be  lost. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES 

The  universe — A  flat  earth — A  solid  sky,  resting  on  the  horizon — The  heavenly 
bodies — The  rainbow,  Aurora  and  other  phenomena — Tlie  human  spirit  ; 
ghosts — The  spirits  of  the  dead  go  to  the  land  beyond  the  sky — The  white 
man  as  a  ghost— Instances  of  this  belief — Burial  practices;  death  believed  to 
be  due  invariably  to  evil  magig — Modes  of  burial — Totemic  burials  of  the 
Wotjobaluk — The  Kurnai  Bret — Legendary  beings — The  Dieri  Afura- 
mtiras — The  Wotjobaluk  Brani-hram-gah — The  legends  of  Lohati — Kurnai 
legends — The  Muk-kurttai—T\\G  tribal  All-father. 

The  Universe 

There  seems  to  be  a  universal  belief  among  the  Australian 
aborigines  that  the  earth  is  a  flat  surface,  surmounted  by  the 
solid  vault  of  the  sky.  The  legend  of  the  Yuri-ulu  tells  how, 
after  the  holding  of  the  Wtlyaru  ceremony  they  went  on 
their  wanderings,  and  finally  beyond  the  mountains  passed 
through  what  may  be  briefly  termed  a  "  hard  darkness  "  into 
another  country,  whence  looking  back,  they  recognised  what 
they  had  passed  through  as  the  edge  of  the  sky.  The 
Kapiri  legend  shows  that  the  earth  is  supposed  to  be 
bordered  by  water  ;  the  Mura-imira  Madaputa-tupuru,  and 
the  Mankara  Waka  and  Pima  having  both  reached  it  in 
their  wanderings. 

The  Wolgal  belief  is  that  there  is  water  all  round  the 
flat  earth.  They  know  of  the  sea  round  the  coast  for  a 
great  distance,  and  heard  of  it  from  the  more  distant  blacks, 
even  before  the  white  men  came. 

The  sky  is  a  something,  on  the  other  side  of  which  is 
another  country  like  this,  with  trees  and  rivers.  It  is  there 
that  Thuramulung  lives  with  the  Bulabong,  the  ghosts. 

426 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  427 


A  Wotjobaluk  legend  runs  that  at  first  the  sky  rested 
on  the  earth  and  prevented  the  sun  from  moving,  until  the 
magpie  {goruk)  propped  it  up  with  a  long  stick,  so  that  the 
sun  could  move,  and  since  then  "  she "  moves  round  the . 
earth.  The  Wurunjerri  also  believe  that  the  earth  is  flat,  as 
do  the  Jajaurung,  and  also  that  it  was  in  darkness  until 
the  sun  was  made  by  Pupper-imbul,  who  was  one  of  the 
race  which  inhabited  the  earth  at  that  time,  and  whom  they 
called  the  Murrumbung-uttias  (old  spirits).^  They  both 
believed  too  that  the  sky  was  propped  up  by  poles  where 
it  rested  on  the  mountains  in  the  north-east.  Before  the 
"  white  men  came  to  Melbourne  "  a  message  was  passed  from 
tribe  to  tribe,  until  it  reached  the  Wurunjerri,  that  the  props 
were  becoming  rotten,  and  that  unless  tomahawks  w^ere  at 
once  sent  up  to  cut  new  ones,  the  sky  would  fall  and  burst, 
and  all  the  people  would  be  drowned."  This  same  belief 
is  mentioned  by  Buckley,  but  in  a  different  form,  namely, 
that  the  earth  was  supported  by  props,  which  were  in  charge 
of  a  man  who  lived  at  the  end  of  the  earth.^ 

A  similar  message  reached  the  Wiimbaio,  having  been 
passed  from  tribe  to  tribe  down  the  River  Murray.  It  was 
to  the  effect  that  the  props  were  becoming  rotten,  and  that 
unless  some  tomahawks  were  sent  at  once  the  sky  would 
fall  and  kill  every  one.^ 

The  sun  is  seemingly  everywhere  thought  to  be  a  woman. 
The  Dieri  have  several  legends  bearing  on  this  subject.  One 
is  that  a  Mura-mura  at  a  place  called  Palunkurana  ''  had 
sexual  intercourse  with  a  young  Dieri  woman,  who  became 
the  mother  of  Dietyi,  the  sun  ;  and  in  consequence  of  this 
shame,  sank  into  the  earth  at  a  place  called  Killa-wilpa-nina," 
about  eight  miles  from  the  place  before  mentioned.'  Another 
legend  is  that  the  sun  sets  in  a  hole  about  twenty-five  miles 
from  Killalpanina,  towards  Lake  Eyre,  called  by  the  Dieri 
Dityi-mtnka,  or  the  "  Hole  of  the  sun."  Then  it  travels 
underground  to  the  east,  where  it  rises  in  the  morning.      It 

'  Stanbridge,  op.  cit.  p.  301.  '•  S.  Gason. 

2  Berak.  "  A'illa,  "  vagina,"  Tt'/Z/a,  "hole." 

•'  Morgan,  op.  cit.  '  O.  Siebert. 

^  I.  Siiaw. 


428        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

is  said  that  the  sun  at  one  time  lived  in  the  former  hole,  but 
found  its  way  to  the  other,  and  continued  to  follow  that 
course.^  Another  legend  is  that  at  that  place  a  Mura-niura 
became  the  sun,  and  went  up  into  the  sky.- 

The  VViimbaio  said  that  at  one  time  the  sun  never  moved, 
and  that  Nurelli,  being  tired  of  an  eternal  day,  ordered  it  to 
go  down  to  the  west,  by  the  following  song  :  ^  — 

Yukaioarri        yarara-yahama         wcndilye 
Sun  wood-yours  burn 

Yunfho-yunthoiua  wendilye  tul-tiil. 

entrail  burn  away  away. 

The  Wotjobaluk  say  that  the  sun  was  a  woman  who,  when 
she  went  to  dig  for  yams,  left  her  little  son  in  the  west. 
Wandering  round  the  edge  of  the  earth,  she  came  back  over 
the  other  side.     When  she  died  she  continued  to  do  this. 

The  Wurunjerri  also  think  that  the  sun  is  a  woman,  "  the 
sister  of  every  one,"  who  goes  round  by  the  sea  every  night 
and  returns  next  morning  by  the  other  side. 

At  first  there  was  no  moon,  so  that  the  Dicri  old  men 
held  a  council,  and  a  Mura-mura  gave  them  the  moon  ;  and 
in  order  that  they  might  know  when  to  hold  their  ceremonies, 
he  gave  them  a  new  moon  at  certain  intervals."*  Another 
legend,  however,  tells  how  the  Mitra-mura  Nganto-Warrina 
climbed  up  a  tree  to  collect  grubs.  His  sons,  who  had  a  grudge 
against  him,  caused  it  to  grow  up  to  the  sky,  where  he  is 
now  the  moon.''  According  to  the  Wiimbaio,  the  moon  did 
not  die  periodically,  as  it  does  now,  until  Nurelli  ordered  it 
to  do  so  by  the  following  song : — 

Pitka-malimba         piita         paithanha         pina         bul};a-bul}<aia. 
Die  you  bone  whitened  Ixines       dust-dust-to. " 

The  Kulin  account  is  that  the  moon  was  once  a  man 
who  lived  on  the  earth.  He  wished  to  give  the  old  Kulin  a 
drink  of  water,  so  that,  when  they  died,  they  could  after  a 
time  return  to  life  again  ;  but  the  Bronze-wing  pigeon  would 
not  agree  to  this,  which  made  the  moon  very  angry.' 

In  one  of  the  Wotjo  legends  it  is  said  that  at  the  time 

»  O.  Siebert.  2  J^^^„^^  3  j.  j^ulmer.  *  S.  Gason. 

*  M.  E.  B.  Hewitt,  op.  cit.  No.  4,  ^  J.  Bulmer. 

"  M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  Lef^ends  and  Folklore.     MS. 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  429 


when  all  animals  were  men  and  women,  some  died,  and  the 
moon  used  to  say,  "  You  up-again,"  and  they  came  to  life 
again.  There  was  at  that  time  an  old  man  who  said,  "  Let 
them  remain  dead."  Then  none  ever  came  to  life  again, 
except  the  moon,  which  still  continued  to  do  so.^ 

A  Kurnai  legend  about  Brewin  is  as  follows.  "  Long 
time  ago  the  moon  {Nart-an)  was  a  young  man.  He  went 
out  hunting,  and  found  an  emu  on  the  other  side  of  a 
creek.  When  he  wanted  to  cross  over  on  a  log,  Brewin 
twisted  it  round  so  that  Narran  fell  into  the  water.  Each 
time  he  tried  to  walk  over,  Brewin  made  him  fall  in."  The 
emu  is  what  we  call  the  Southern  Cross. 

The  Wiradjuri  account  is  that  long  ago  a  piece  of 
kangaroo  was  given  to  a  boy  to  eat,  and  he  threw  a  piece 
of  the  bone  up  to  the  sky,  where  it  stuck  fast.  This  is  the 
moon,  who  is  now  a  man  who  walks  round  by  the  south 
in  the  daytime. 

The  stars  are  many  of  them  named,  or  perhaps  it  is  that 
the  more  prominent  ones  are.  Some  are  grouped  together 
in  the  constellations,  among  which  are  the  sons  of  Bunjil. 
These  have  been  already  referred  to. 

The  Turrbal  believed  that  a  falling  star  was  a  Kundri 
(medicine-man)  flying  through  the  air  and  dropping  his 
fire-stick  to  kill  some  one,  and  was  sure  if  a  sick  man  was 
in  the  camp  he  would  die.  Mr.  Petrie  relates  that  once  he 
was  in  a  camp  when  a  woman  was  sick  and  a  meteorite 
was  seen.  Her  friends  at  once  began  to  mourn  and  cut 
themselves  for  her. 

The  Wiimbaio  thought  that  the  stars  were  once  great 
men.  The  planet  Mars  is  Btlyara,  the  eagle  ;  and  another 
star  is  Kilpara,  the  crow.*^ 

The  Pleiades  are,  according  to  the  Wotjobaluk,  some 
women  named  Murkunyan-gurk,^  and  the  following  account 
explains  to  some  extent  who  they  are.  When  they  were 
on  the  earth,  Boamberik  "•  was  always  running  after  without 

'   M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  Legends  ami  Folklore.      MS.  -'  J.  Bulmer. 

•*  Miirka,  "egg"gttrk,  the  feminine  postfix.  I  do  not  know,  but  I  suspect 
that  this  name  may  refer  to  the  legend  just  mentioned,  and  that  the  eggs  referred 
to  are  ants'  eggs  which  they  dug  up. 

*  The  native  cat,  Dasyiirtis ;  boam,  "tail,"  and  berik,  "stinking." 


430        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

overtaking  them.  Now  he  is  up  in  the  sky,  still  chasing 
them,  and  still  behind.  I  have  not  been  able  to  identify 
the  star  Boamberik,  but  as  it  must  be  one  not  far  from  the 
Pleiades,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  it  may  be  Aldebaran. 
According  to  the  Wurunjerri,  the  Pleiades  are  a  group  of 
young  women,  the  Karat-goruk,^  about  whom  there  is  a 
legend  which  recounts  that  they  were  digging  up  ants'  eggs 
with  their  yam-sticks,  at  the  ends  of  which  they  had  coals 
of  fire,  which  VVaang,  the  crow,  stole  from  them  by  a 
stratagem."  They  were  ultimately  swept  up  into  the  sky, 
when  Bellin-Bellin,  the  musk-crow,  let  the  whirlwind  out  of 
his  bag,  at  the  command  of  Bunjii,  and  remained  there  as 
the  Pleiades,  still  carrying  fire  on  the  ends  of  their  yam- 
sticks.^  Thomas  speaks  of  the  Pleiades  as  Karakarook,  who 
was  the  daughter  of  Bunjii.  When  he  made  two  men,  his 
son  Binbeal  caused  two  women  to  come  out  of  the  water 
as  wives  for  them,  and  Karakarook  gave  each  of  them  a 
kunnan  (woman's  stick)."* 

The  Aurora  signified  with  the  VVotjobaluk  that,  at  some 
great  distance,  a  number  of  blacks  were  being  slaughtered, 
and  that  the  Aurora  colour  is  the  blood  rising  up  to  the 
sky.  When  the  Aurora  was  seen  by  the  Kurnai,  all  in  the 
camp  swung  the  Brett  (dead  hand)  towards  the  alarming 
portent,  shouting  such  words  as  "  Send  it  away  ;  do  not  let 
it  burn  us  up."  The  Aurora  is,  according  to  one  of  their 
legends,  Mungan's  fire. 

The  Ngarigo  had  much  the  same  idea  of  the  Aurora  as 
the  Wotjo.  They  said  that  it  was  like  blood,  and  told  that 
a  number  of  blacks  had  died  somewhere.  When  a  meteorite 
was  seen  to  fall,  they  watched  it,  and  listened  for  the  ex- 
plosion. It  was  believed  that  this  betokened  that  the 
blacks  at  the  place  towards  which  its  path  was  directed 
were  gathering  together  for  war.  Their  neighbours,  the 
Wolgal,  thought  that  the  Aurora  showed  that  the  blacks  a 
long  way  off  were  fighting,  and  that  a  number  of  them  had 
been  killed. 

*  Karat,  "group";  goruk,  feminine  postfix. 

2  M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  Legends  and  Folklore.     MS. 

2  Ibid.  *  VV.  Thomas,  Letters  of  Victorian  Pioneers. 


viii  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  431 

According  to  the  Wotjobaluk,  the  rainbow  causes  a 
person's  fingers  to  become  crooked  or  contracted  if  he 
points  to  it  with  a  straight  finger.  This  would  prevent 
him  from  using  his  hand  for  making  the  markings  with 
which  the  'possum  rugs  are  ornamented.  Therefore,  when 
pointing  to  a  rainbow,  the  fingers  must  be  turned  over  each 
other,  the  second  over  the  first,  the  third  over  the  second, 
and  the  little  finger  over  the  third,  by  which  the  evil  is 
avoided.^ 

The  Bunya-Bunya  people  in  Queensland  are  also  very 
much  afraid  of  the  rainbow,  which  they  call  Thugine  (large 
serpent).  Once,  they  say,  a  camp  of  blacks  was  close  to 
the  beach,  and  all  went  out  to  hunt  and  fish,  leaving  only 
two  boys  in  camp  with  strict  orders  not  to  go  to  the  beach, 
or  leave  the  camp  till  the  elders  returned.  The  boys  played 
about  for  a  time  in  the  camp,  and  then  getting  tired  of  it, 
went  down  to  the  beach  where  the  Thugine  came  out  of  the 
sea,  and  being  always  on  the  watch  for  unprotected  children, 
caught  the  two  boys  and  turned  them  into  two  rocks  that 
now  stand  between  Double  Island  Point  and  Inskip  Point, 
and  have  deep  water  close  up  to  them.  "  Here  you  see," 
the  old  men  used  to  say,  "  the  result  of  not  paying  attention 
to  what  you  are  told  by  your  elders." " 

The  Yuin  believe  that  the  thunder  is  the  voice  of 
Daramulun.  The  Gringai  had  a  great  dread  of  thunder, 
and  believed  it  to  be  the  demonstration  of  the  anger  of 
some  supernatural  being,  rebuking  them  for  some  impro- 
priety.     As  is  shown  later  on,  this  being  is  Coen? 

According  to  the  Tongaranka,  thunder  is  the  song  of  a 
corrobboree  held  by  the  big  old  men  in  the  sky,  who  are 
making  rain  ;  and  at  Frazer's  Island  it  was  the  thunder 
that  smashed  up  the  trees. 

The  Dieri  called  the  Milky  Way  Kadri-parhvilpa,ox  the 
River  of  the  Sky.*  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  tribes  on 
the  Herbert  River  in  North-east  Queensland.  They  call 
the  Milky  Way  Kooling,  which  is  the  road  along  which  the 
ghosts  of  dead  blackfellows  find  their  way  to  the  sky.^ 

•   M.  E.  B.  \io\i\\.\..  Legends,  etc.      MS.  -  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 

3  Robt.  Dawson,  op.  cit.  ^  O.  Siebert.  ^  J.  Gaggin. 


432        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  Wiradjuri  called  the  Milky  Way  Gnlar,  by  which 
name  they  also  call  the  Lachlan  River.  The  Corona 
Australis  is  Kukuburra,  the  Laughing  Jackass  ;  and  a  small 
star  in  Argus  is  the  Bidjerigang,  the  Shell  Parakeet. 

The  seasons  are  reckoned  by  the  BigambuP  according 
to  the  time  of  the  year  in  which  the  trees  blossom.  For 
instance,  Yerra  is  the  name  of  a  tree  which  blossoms  in 
September,  hence  that  time  is  called  Yerrabinda.  The 
Apple-tree'^  flowers  about  Christmas-time,  which  is  Nigabinda. 
The  Ironbark  tree  flowers  about  the  end  of  January,  which 
they  call  Wo-binda?  They  also  call  this  time,  which  is  in 
the  height  of  summer,  Tinna-koge-alba,  that  is  to  say,  the 
time  when  the  ground  burns  the  feet. 

Connected  with  the  Kulin  belief  in  a  flat  earth  of  limited 
extent,  there  was  another.  They  thought  that  when  the 
sun  disappeared  in  the  west  it  went  into  a  place  called 
Ngantat,  which  has  been  described  to  me  as  like  a  hole  out 
of  which  a  large  tree  has  been  burned  by  a  bush-fire. 

A  legend  in  one  of  the  tribes  near  Maryborough  (Queens- 
land) also  tells  of  a  hole  into  which  the  sun  retired  at  night. 
It  says  that  when  Birral  had  placed  the  blackfellows  on  the 
primitive  earth, "  which  was  like  a  great  sandbank,"  they  asked 
him  where  they  should  get  warmth  in  the  day  and  fire  in 
the  night.  He  said  that  if  they  went  in  a  certain  direction 
they  would  find  the  sun,  and  by  knocking  a  piece  off  it  they 
could  get  fire.  Going  far  in  that  direction,  they  found  that 
the  sun  came  out  of  a  hole  in  the  morning  and  went  into 
another  in  the  evening.  Then  rushing  after  the  sun,  they 
knocked  a  piece  off,  and  thus  obtained  fire.* 

Beyond  the  sky  there  is  another  country,  which  may  be 
called  the  sky-land.  This  belief  is  indicated  in  one  of 
the  Died  legends,  which  tells  how  Arawotya,  "  who  lives  in 
the  sky,"  let  down  a  long  hair  cord,  and  by  it  pulled  up 

1  J.  Lalor. 

2  In  Mr.  Maiden's  work,  The  Useful  Native  Trees  of  Australia,  London  and 
Sydney,  1898,  I  find  that  "  Angophoras  are  called  Apple-trees  in  the  colonies, 
from  a  fancied  resemblance  to  those  trees." 

3  The  following  trees  are  noted  as  being  called  Ironbark  in  New  South  Wales 
and  Queensland  :  Eucalyptius  leucoxylon  ;  E.  siderophloia,  Benth.  ;  E.  largiflorens ; 
E.  melanophloia. — ^J.  H.  Maiden,  op.  cit. 

*  H.  E.  Aldridge. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  433 

to  himself  the  Mura-mura  Ankuritcha  and  all  those  who 
were  with  him.^  Another  legend  of  the  Dieri  and  Tirari 
accounts  for  the  fossil  remains  found  at  Lake  Eyre,  and  called 
by  them  Kadimarkara,  as  having  been  creatures  which,  in  the 
old  times  of  the  Mura-muras,  climbed  down  from  the  sky  to 
the  earth  by  the  huge  Eucalyptus  trees  on  which  it  rested, 
and  which  grew  on  the  western  side  of  Lake  Eyre.^  The 
Wotjobaluk  had  a  legend  of  a  pine-tree,^  which  extended  up 
through  the  sky  ( Wurra-wurra)  to  the  place  beyond  which 
is  the  abode  of  Mamen-gorak*  The  people  of  that  time 
ascended  by  this  tree  to  gather  manna,  which  implies  that 
trees  grew  there  like  the  Eucalypt,  which  in  the  Wotjobaluk 
country  shed  the  so-called  manna.  The  Wurunjerri  also  had 
a  sky  country,  which  they  called  Tltarangalk-bek^  the  gum- 
tree  country.  It  was  described  to  me  as  a  land  where  there 
were  trees.  The  tribal  legends  also  tell  of  it  as  the  place  to 
which  Bunjil  ascended  with  all  his  people  in  a  whirlwind. 
By  the  Kurnai  this  place  is  called  Blinte-da-nurk,  or  (freely 
translated)  "  bright  sky  of  the  cloud,"  also  Bring  a-nurt,  or 
"  bone  of  the  cloud."  The  Ngarigo  called  the  sky  Kulumbi, 
and  said  that  on  the  other  side  of  it  there  is  another  country 
with  trees  and  rivers.  This  belief  was  also  that  of  the 
Theddora  and  Wolgal. 

When  one  comes  to  consider  it,  one  should  not  feel 
surprised  that  the  Australian  savage  thinks  that  the  earth  is 
a  flat  limited  surface,  and  the  sky  a  hard  vault  over  it.  I 
have  been  struck  by  this  appearance  myself  when  in  the 
vast  extents  of  the  open  treeless  country  in  the  interior  of 
Australia,  especially  on  clear  starlight  nights.  To  the 
savage  the  area  of  his  tribal  country  is  so  vast  as  compared 
to  the  individual,  that  the  idea  of  anything  other  than  a  flat 
earth  could  not  suggest  itself  to  him.  We  ourselves  are  so 
accustomed  to  speak  of  the  sun  "  rising  "  and  "  setting,"  that 
we  almost  mentally  disregard  the  fact  of  the  earth's  rota- 
tion, nor  does  our  position  as  to  the  earth  itself  appear  other 

•  O.  Siebert.      See  Appendix,  p.  793. 
-  Idem.     See  Appendix,  p.  800. 

3  M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  Legends,  etc.      MS. 

*  Mamen,  "father";  gorak,  "ours." 

^   Tharatigalk  is  the  Eucalyptus  viminalis,  the  Manna  gum-tree. 

2  F 


434        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

than  that  of  being  always  perpendicular  to  it,  with  a  per- 
manent sky  over  our  heads.  Thus  we,  in  so  far,  perpetuate 
a  savage  belief;  and  more  than  this,  there  are  even  now 
persons  who,  otherwise  sane,  believe  the  earth  to  be  a 
flat  plane.  It  seems  that  such  pseudo-beliefs  are  an  inherit- 
ance to  us  from  our  savage  ancestors,  and  from  which  we 
are  not  able  to  free  ourselves. 

The  beliefs  as  to  the  stars,  which  I  have  noted,  and  the 
manner  in  which  they  are  named,  seem  to  throw  some  light 
on  the  origin  of  the  names,  and  even  of  the  legends  of  the 
constellations  of  the  northern  hemisphere. 

The  Human  Spirit,  Ghosts,  Etc. 

The  Dieri  tribe  think  that  the  spirit  of  a  dead  person 
can  visit  a  sleeper.  He  reports  such  a  dream  to  the  medi- 
cine-man, who,  if  he  considers  it  to  be  indeed  a  vision,  directs 
that  food  be  left  at  the  grave  and  a  fire  lighted  at  it.^  The 
Narrang-ga  likewise  think  that  the  human  spirit  can  leave 
the  body  in  sleep,  and  communicate  with  the  spirits  of 
others,  or  of  the  dead.  These  spirits  wander  for  a  time  as 
ghosts  in  the  bush,  and  can  consume  food,  and  warm  them- 
selves at  fires  left  lighted." 

The  Dieri  also  believe  that  when  any  one  dies  his  spirit 
goes  up  to  the  Piriwilpa,  that  is  the  sky,  but  also  that  it  can 
roam  about  the  earth.^  The  Narrinyeri  thought  that  the 
spirits  of  the  dead  went  up  to  the  sky,  Wai-irre-warra  ;  *  and 
the  Buandik,  who  lived  next  to  them,  along  the  coast  east- 
ward, believed  that  there  were  two  spirits  in  mankind,  which 
they  called  Bo-ong.  At  death  one  went  west,  down  into  the 
sea,  and  would  return  a  white  man  ;^  the  other  went  into 
cloudland.  They  said  that  the  Bo-ong  would  go  up  there, 
where  everything  is  to  be  found  better  than  on  the  earth. 
A  fat  kangaroo  is  said  to  be  like  the  kangaroos  of  the  clouds.® 
All  the  tribes  which  formed  the  Wotjo  nation  believed  that 
a   man's  spirit,   Gulkan-gulkan,  can    leave  the    body  during 

»  S.  Gason.  2  T.  M.  Sutton.   .  3  O.  Siebert. 

*  Rev.  G.  Taplin,  The  Narrinyeri,  p.  1 5. 

^  This  is  evidently  an  addition  to  the  original  belief,  added  since  the  advent 
of  the  white  man.  "  Mrs.  James  Smith,  op.  cit. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  435 

life  ;  for  instance,  when  it  goes  to  see  the  body  of  some  one 
who  has  fallen  victim  to  its  evil  magic;  but  after  death  it 
could  visit  its  friends  in  sleep  to  protect  them.  An  instance 
of  this  belief  is  that  of  a  Mukjarawaint  man,  who  told  me 
that  his  father  came  to  him  in  a  dream,  and  said  that  he 
must  look  out  for  himself,  else  he  would  be  killed.  This 
saved  him,  because  he  afterwards  came  to  the  place  which 
he  had  seen  in  the  dream,  and  turned  back  to  where  his 
friends  lived,  so  that  his  enemies,  who  might  have  been 
waiting  for  him,  did  not  catch  him.  Among  the  Jupagalk 
a  person  in  great  pain  would  call  on  some  dead  friend  to 
come  and  help  him,  that  is  to  visit  him  in  a  dream  and  teach 
him  some  song  to  avert  the  evil  magic  affecting  him.  The 
Wurunjerri  had  the  same  belief,  that  each  person  has  in  him 
a  spirit,  which  they  call  Mump,  and  which,  after  death, 
becomes  a  ghost.  The  Murup  could  leave  the  body  during 
sleep,  and  the  exact  time  is  fixed  as  being  when  the  sleeper 
snored.^  But  the  Murup  might  be  sent  out  of  the  sleeper 
by  means  of  evil  magic  ;  for  instance,  when  a  man  hunting 
incautiously  went  to  sleep  in  the  open,  at  a  distance  from 
his  camp,  and  thus  fell  a  victim  to  some  medicine-man. 
This  belief  in  the  temporary  departure  of  the  Murup  during 
sleep  still  survives  in  the  last  of  the  Wurunjerri,  after  almost 
a  lifetime  with  the  white  man  and  his  ideas. 

Berak  explained  this  belief  to  me  as  follows  :  "  When  I 
sleep  and  snore,  my  Murup  goes  away,  sometimes  to  the 
Tharangalk-bek,  but  it  cannot  get  in,  and  it  comes  back.  It 
can  talk  with  some  other  Murups,  for  instance,  with  my 
father  and  others  who  are  dead." 

The  following  account  which  I  wrote  down  many  years 
ago,  when  he  told  me  of  it,  is  a  good  instance  of  the  feelings 
which  underlie  the  belief.  His  only  child,  a  young  lad, 
was  ill,  and  Berak  and  his  particular  friend  having  taken 
him  to  the  hospital,  returned  to  where  they  were  living.  He 
said,  "  We  had  been  crying  about  him  all  the  eveping  after 
we  returned,"  and  then  my  friend  went  to  sleep.  When  he 
woke  up  he  said,  "  I  saw  that  poor  fellow,  he  was  here,  and 
he  said  to  me,  '  Stand  there  ! '  Two  strings  were  hanging 
1    Yariiiiii,  "sleep";    Yamun-urra,  "snoring." 


436        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

down,  and  he  said,  '  We  will  go  up  there,  do  not  be  afraid, 
we  shall  not  fall  down.'  I  climbed  after  him,  and  we  came 
to  a  hole  where  some  people  were  looking  down  at  us.  Your 
boy  went  through  and  said  to  me,  '  I  am  only  waiting  here 
for  you  and  my  father,  tell  him  that  I  will  wait  till  he 
comes.'  One  of  the  girls  said, '  How  is  my  mother? '  I  said, 
'  Why  !  it  is  our  Meena.'  Then  I  went  through  and  saw  a 
lot  of  people  there." 

This  not  only  brings  out  the  belief  in  the  power  of  the 
individual  to  leave  his  body  during  sleep,  but  also  the  idea 
of  the  sky  country,  to  which  the  Murup  goes  after  death. 
The  ascent  by  a  cord  and  the  entrance,  through  a  hole,  into 
the  sky  country  where  the  ghosts  live,  is  in  accord  with  the 
common  belief  in  the  powers  of  the  medicine-man. 

Returning  to  Berak  and  his  belief  in  the  ability  of  his 
Murup  to  leave  his  body  in  sleep  and  wander  abroad,  I 
give  another  instance  which  connects  the  old  and  the  new 
conditions.  In  1880  Berak  told  me  that,  when  asleep,  he 
went  up  Badger  Creek,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Yarra 
River,  and  there  saw  a  quartz  reef  full  of  gold  ;  but  although 
he  had  searched  the  place  since  then  when  awake,  his  Murup 
had  never  been  able  to  take  him  to  the  spot.  So  firmly  is 
the  idea  fixed  in  his  mind,  that  in  the  latter  end  of  the  year 
1900  I  heard  of  his  still  searching  for  this  spot.^ 

The  same  belief  is  held  by  the  Kurnai.  The  human 
spirit  is  by  them  called  Yambo,  and  it  can  leave  the  body 
during  sleep.  As  one  of  the  Brabra  Kurnai  said  to  me, 
"  He  can  go  up  to  the  sky  and  see  his  father  and  mother." 
This  was  also  brought  out  clearly  by  another  man,  whom  I 
asked  whether  he  really  thought  that  his  Yambo  could  "go 
out "  when  he  was  asleep.  He  said,  "  It  must  be  so,  for 
when  I  sleep  I  go  to  distant  places,  I  see  distant  people,  I 
even  see  and  speak  with  those  who  are  dead." 

The  Ngarigo  called  dreams  gung-ung-mura-nung-ya,  and 
believed  that  in  them  they  could  see  ghosts.  The  Yuin 
Gommeras  could  get  songs  in  dreams,  or  information  about 
approaching  enemies,  and  a  relative  of  a  dead  man  could  see 
in  a  dream  who  had   killed  him.      The  Wiimbaio  had   the 

1  J.  Shaw. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  437 

same  belief,  and  said,  when  they  dreamed  such  a  thing,  they 
had  been  to  some  other  country  and  a  person  had  told  them. 
Tulaba,  whom  I  have  elsewhere  mentioned,  said  that  his 
"  other  father,"  ^  Bruthen-munji  came  to  him  during  sleep 
and  taught  him  songs  (charms)  against  sickness  and  other 
evils.  One  charm  which  he  thus  learned,  and  which  I  have 
heard  him  sing  to  cure  pains  in  the  chest,  is  as  follows  : — 

Timdunga  Brewinda  nunduiinga  ugaringa  mri-tnitrriwutida 
Tundung  by  Brewhi — I  Ijelieve — hooked  by — eye  of  spear- thrower. 

The  belief  is  that  Brewin  has  filled  the  sufferer's  chest  with 
the  frayed  fibres  of  the  stringy-bark  tree,  called  Tundung^ 
by  means  of  the  hooked  end  of  his  spear-thrower.  This 
hooked  end  is  called  the  eye,  Mri. 

The  wife  of  Tulaba  believed  before  her  death  that  she 
had  gone  up  to  the  Nurt  (sky)  in  sleep,  but  returned  because 
she  could  not  get  through.^  At  death  the  Yambo  leaves  the 
body  and  follows  the  JVauung,  that  is  the  path  to  the  sky. 
I  have  heard  this  spoken  of  as  the  Marrangrang^  along  which 
the  Mrarts  (the  ghosts)  lead  or  carry  the  medicine- men  to 
the  sky.  The  Yambo  is  believed  to  be  able  to  communicate 
with  people  when  asleep,  and,  as  a  Mrart,  to  initiate  men 
into  its  secret  rites  in  sky-land.  Mrarts  are  therefore  not 
merely  incorporeal  ghosts,  for  they  can  be  heard  jumping 
down  with  the  Birraarks  from  trees  on  to  the  ground.  They 
are  also  able  to  carry  off  people  in  bags. 

The  Thcddora  believed  in  another  land  beyond  the  sky, 
and  that  there  were  other  blackfellows  therein.  Their 
neighbours  the  Ngarigo  also  thought  that  the  spirit  of  a  dead 
person  {Bulabong)  went  up  to  the  sky,  where  it  was  met  by 
Daramulun,  who,  as  one  of  the  old  Ngarigo  men  said,  takes 
care  of  it.  The  Chepara  belief  is  that  a  male  ancestor  visits 
a  sleeper,  and  imparts  to  him  charms  to  avert  evil  magic. 
An  old  man  of  this  tribe  said  with  much  feeling,  that  he 
saw  distinctly  in  sleep  his  little  daughter,  who  had  died  a 
short  time  before,  standing  near  him,  on  the  night  after  her 
death,  and  he  said  that  once  when  sick  he  felt  that  she  was 
near  him,  and  that  then  he  slept  well  and  recovered.^ 

'  That  is,  the  brother  of  his  father. 
-'  J.  Buhner.  ^  J.  Gibson. 


438        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

These  beliefs  in  the  existence  of  the  human  spirit 
after  death  are  scattered  over  a  great  extent  of  the  eastern 
half  of  the  continent,  and  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  con- 
clude that  they  are  held  by  the  intervening  tribes.  It 
is  now  possible  to  advance  another  stage,  and  to  adduce 
other  facts  which  will  go  to  show  that  the  further  beliefs 
arising  out  of  these  are  a  logical  sequence  from  them. 
Collins  in  his  account  of  the  beliefs  of  the  Port  Jackson 
tribes,  states  that  some  thought  that,  after  death,  they  went 
either  on  or  beyond  the  great  water,  but  by  far  the  greater 
number  signified  that  they  went  to  the  clouds.^ 

The  Kulin  say  that  the  Mump  goes  either  direct  to 
Ngamat,  or  lingers  about  the  place  familiar  to  it  in  life,  and 
it  can  also  revisit  the  earth  from  the  sky.  The  account  of 
the  Murup  which  was  caught  at  the  edge  of  the  earth,  on  its 
way  to  Ngamat,  by  the  medicine-man,  who  conveyed  it  back 
to  its  deserted  body,  is  a  case  in  point  as  to  the  first  alterna- 
tive. As  to  the  second,  the  spirit  was  believed  to  wander 
about,  to  stand  at  the  grave  near  the  body,  to  warm  itself  at 
fires  left  burning  in  the  bush,  perhaps  by  men  who  had  been 
hunting,  and  often  to  eat  the  scraps  of  food  they  left.  The 
Murup  ascended  to  the  sky  by  the  Karalk,  that  is,  the  bright 
rays  of  the  setting  sun,  which  is  the  path  to  the  Tharangalk- 
bek,  and  the  Karalk  was  said  by  some  to  be  made  by  the 
Mumps  when  in  Ngamat.  The  Wotjo  also  thought  that  the 
ghost  remained  for  some  time  at  the  grave,  and  they  also 
called  the  sunset  rays  Guralk,  which  is  evidently  the  same 
as  Karalk.  This  suggests  that  the  Karalk  may  have  been 
the  way  of  the  Gulkan-gulkan  to  the  Wurra-wurra  (sky). 
With  the  Kurnai  the  Yambo  was  supposed  to  pass  away  as 
a  Yambo  or  shadow,  or  as  a  Mrart  or  ghost,  to  a  place 
beyond  the  clouds  ;  but  it  did  not  necessarily  remain  there, 
for  male  and  female  Mrarts  are  believed  to  wander  about  the 
country  which  they  inhabited  during  life.  As  I  have  elsewhere 
said,  the  term  Mrart  includes  not  only  deceased  relatives 
but  also  strangers,  of  their  own  tribe  or  of  other  tribes, 
and  then  they  were  certainly  enemies  to  be  dreaded.  I  was 
told  by  a  Tatungalung  man  of  the  Kurnai  tribe,  that  when 

*  Collins,  op.  cit.  p.  354. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  439 

a  boy  sleeping  in  the  camp  of  his  parents,  he  was  awoke  by 
the  outcries  of  his  father,  and  starting  up,  found  him  partly 
out  of  the  camp,  on  his  back  kicking,  while  his  mother  held 
him  by  the  shoulders.  His  father  said  that  while  lying  by 
the  fire  a  Mrart  came  up  with  a  bag,  and  tried  to  pull  him 
out  of  the  camp  by  the  foot.  He  then  cried  out  and  his 
wife  caught  hold  of  him,  and  the  Mrart  vanished.  In  this 
account  an  evil  Mrart  represents  the  nightmare  of  our  own 
people.  Another  instance  is  that  of  a  ghost  which,  though 
not  related  to  the  sleeper,  was  not  inimical  to  him.  Tulaba, 
when  mustering  wild  cattle  for  a  settler  near  the  Mitchell 
River  in  Gippsland,  dreamed  one  night  that  two  Mrarts 
were  standing  by  his  fire,  and  were  about  to  speak  to  him, 
or  he  to  them,  I  forget  which.  When  he  awoke  they  had 
vanished,  but  on  looking  at  the  spot  where  they  had  stood, 
he  saw  a  bulk  (magic-stone),  which  he  kept,  and  valued 
much,  for  its  magical  powers.  Tankowillin  and  Turlburn, 
were  once  walking  past  a  fenced-in  garden,  when  they 
were  much  alarmed  by  seeing  what  seemed  to  be  a  fiery  eye 
watching  them  between  two  of  the  palings.  Believing  that 
a  Mrart  was  there  in  hiding  on  the  watch  for  them,  they 
were  afraid  and  ran  off  to  their  camp. 

The  Kamilaroi  believe  that  the  spirit  of  a  man  when  he 
dies  goes  to  the  dark  patch  in  the  Magellan  clouds,  which 
they  call  Maianba,  meaning  endless  water  or  river.^ 

The  Wiradjuri  believed  that  the  ghost  (Jir)  still  haunted 
the  place  where  it  had  lived,  and  took  up  its  abode  in  some 
large  tree.  It  might  be  seen  sitting  at  the  grave,  by  those 
who  possessed  the  faculty  of  seeing  such  things,  that  is 
medicine-men,  or  by  a  boy  who,  having  the  power,  would  in 
time  grow  up  to  be  one  of  them.  A  ghost  which  took  up 
its  abode  at  a  grave  was  believed  to  be  able  to  injure 
strangers  who  incautiously  came  near  to  it.  By  the  Gringai 
also  it  was  thought  that  the  ghost  haunted  the  grave  for  a 
time.  The  Bigambul  belief  was  that  people  after  death 
went  to  and  fro,  the  shadows  of  what  they  were  in  life,  and 
these  ghosts  they  called  Matu? 

It  is  evident  from  these  facts  that  there  is  a  universal 
•  Cyrus  E.  Doyle.  2  James  Lalor. 


440        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

belief  in  the  existence  of  the  human  spirit  after  death,  as  a 
ghost,  which  is  able  to  communicate  with  the  living  when 
they  sleep.  It  finds  its  way  to  the  sky-country,  where  it 
lives  in  a  land  like  the  earth,  only  more  fertile,  better 
watered,  and  plentifully  supplied  with  game. 

The  Murup,  Yambo,  Bulabong,  or  by  whatever  name  it 
is  known,  represents  during  life  the  self-consciousness  of  the 
individual.  Its  apparent  ability  to  leave  the  body  during 
sleep  naturally  leads  to  the  further  belief  that  death  is  merely 
the  permanent  disability  to  return  to  the  body,  produced  by 
the  evil  magic  of  some  enemy.  Thus  it  seems  that  the 
belief  has  arisen  that  the  individual  continues  to  exist  after 
death,  although  usually  invisible  to  the  living. 

This  feeling  gives  rise  to  the  reluctance  to  speak  of  the 
dead,  which  seems  to  be  universal  among  the  tribes  dealt 
with  here,  and  especially  to  do  so  by  name.  This  applies 
equally  to  the  living  as  to  the  dead,  since  a  knowledge  of 
the  personal  name  would  enable  an  enemy,  as  they  put  it, 
to  "  catch  "  its  owner  by  evil  magic.  But  the  reluctance  to 
name  the  dead  arises,  it  seems,  out  of  a  fear  of  the  anger  of 
the  deceased. 

The  following  is  a  good  illustration  of  this  feeling.  One 
of  the  Kurnai  was  spoken  to  about  a  man  who  was  dead, 
and  in  doing  so  his  name  was  used.  The  man  addressed 
looking  round  uneasily,  said,  "  Do  not  do  that ;  he  might 
hear  you  and  kill  me."  ^ 

This  feeling  exists  in  the  tribes  known  to  me.  A  few 
instances  will  serve  as  examples.  The  Jajaurung,  of  the 
Upper  Loddon  River,  called  the  human  spirit  or  ghost 
Ku-it-gil.  Stanbridge  mentions  this  in  referring  to  their 
reluctance  to  name  the  dead.  It  was  supposed  that  doing 
so  excited  the  malignity  of  the  spirit  of  the  departed,  which 
hovered  upon  the  earth  for  a  time,  and  ultimately  went 
towards  the  setting  sun."  One  of  the  Jajaurung  told  me 
that  the  Kuitgil  is  the  same  name  as  the  Murup  of  the 
Wurunjerri.     Among  the  Geawe-gal  the  name  of  a  deceased 

•  A.  M'Lean. 

''■  W.    E.   Stanbridge,    7rans.   Ethnological  Society  of  London,    vol.    i.   New 
Series,  l86i,  p.  286. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  441 

person  was  never  mentioned  after  his  death,  and  when  a 
white  man  has  carelessly  or  recklessly  spoken  of  a  dead  man 
by  name,  the  blacks  there  have  been  seen  to  hang  their 
heads  sorrowfully,  while  one  of  them  would  remonstrate,  if 
he  had  any  respect  for  the  speaker,  otherwise  they  would 
endeavour  to  turn  the  conversation.  All  implements,  indeed 
every  piece  of  inanimate  property  he  had  possessed,  were 
interred  with  his  body.^  In  the  tribes  about  Maryborough 
(Queensland)  the  name  of  a  dead  man  must  not  be  mentioned, 
and  any  one  doing  so  would  be  told,  "Do  not  say  that."  My 
informant's  brother  narrowly  escaped  being  killed  by  a  friend 
of  the  dead  man  throwing  a  spear  at  him,  which  went 
through  his  clothes.^ 

These  beliefs  are  similar,  or  identical,  with  beliefs  which 
are  world  wide  ;  and,  bearing  in  mind  the  long  isolation  of 
the  Australians  in  this  continent,  two  alternative  explanations 
suggest  themselves.  The  ancestors  of  the  Australians  may 
have  brought  them  from  the  primitive  home  of  the  race,  or 
their  descendants  may  have  evolved  them  independently  of 
any  outside  source.  Yet  it  might  be  that  both  sources  have 
contributed  to  the  present  state  of  belief.  For  the  mental 
constitution  of  all  races  of  man,  is  the  same  in  kind,  though 
differing  in  degree ;  and  where  two  savage  races  are  in 
about  the  same  low  level  of  culture  and  under  the  same 
physical  conditions,  the  results  are  likely  to  be  the  same, 
although  they  may  be  separated  by  great  distances  from 
each  other. 

Thus  with  the  Australians,  their  dreams  could  only 
represent  the  universe  as  it  seemed  to  them,  and,  as  the 
Kurnai  man  said  of  himself,  they  would  see  in  sleep,  distant 
people,  even  those  who  were  dead.  If  we  admit  their 
inability  to  see  the  difference  between  real  events  of  waking 
hours  and  the  unreal  ones  of  dreams,  then  it  is  easily  seen 
how  the  beliefs,  which  I  have  noted  in  this  and  the  previous 
chapter,  may  have  been  developed.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  must  be  remembered  that  however  low  in  culture  the 
Australian  ancestors  may  have  been,  as  low  as,  or  even 
lower  than,  the  extinct  Tasmanians,  they  must   have  had 

1  G.  W.  Rusden.  2  IL  E.  Aldridge. 


442        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch, 

mental  qualities  which  would  more  than  suffice  to  provide 
the  assumed  starting-point.  How  far  back  in  man's  mental 
evolution  this  may  be  I  am  not  prepared  to  suggest. 

The  White  Man  as  a  Ghost 

The  beliefs  spoken  of  are  at  the  root  of  another,  namely, 
that  white  men  are  members  of  the  tribe,  returned  in  the 
flesh  from  death.  The  best  known  and  perhaps  the  most 
important  instance  is  that  of  William  Buckley,  a  convict 
who  escaped  in  the  year  1803  from  the  settlement  attempted 
by  Colonel  Collins,  within  Port  Phillip  Bay,  where  Sorrento 
is  now.  After  wandering  round  the  shore  of  the  Bay,  he 
was  found  by  some  of  the  Wudthaurung  tribe,  carrying  a 
piece  of  a  broken  spear,  which  had  been  placed  on  the  grave 
of  one  Murrangurk,'  by  his  kindred,  according  to  the  tribal 
custom.  Thus  he  was  identified  with  that  man  ;  and,  as 
one  returned  from  the  dead,  received  his  name  and  was 
adopted  by  his  relations. 

A  version  of  the  finding  of  Buckley,  slightly  different 
from  that  given  by  himself,  is  found  in  Dawson's  work,^ 
taken  from  statements  of  a  black  woman  who  was  alleged 
to  be  Buckley's  widow.  It  is  as  follows  : — "  When  they 
asked  him  a  number  of  questions,  all  of  which  were 
suggested  by  the  idea  that  he  was  one  of  themselves 
returned  from  the  dead,  he  gave  the  same  reply  to  all." 
That  is,  he  "  replied  by  a  prolonged  grunt  and  an  inclination 
of  the  head,  signifying  '  Yes.' "  This  I  can  very  well  under- 
stand, for  with  the  Kurnai,  the  word  Ngaar  uttered  in  a 
deep  grunting  manner  with  an  inclination  of  the  head  at 
the  same  time  would  be  "  yes." 

It  is  evident  that  Buckley  was  believed  to  be  the  Murup 
of  Murrangurk,  come  back  from  Ngamat,  or  the  Tharangalk- 
bek.  In  Morgan's  account  of  Buckley's  life  and  adventures 
there  is  mention  of  an  occurrence  at  the  burial  of  a  man 
who    had   been    speared    at   a  great    tribal    meeting :    "  All 

*  According  to  Berak,  who  knows  the  dialect  of  the  Wudthaurung, 
Murrangurk  is  probably  Murrung-ai-galko,  or  "  tomahawk-handle,"  Galk  being 
»'  wood,"  or  "handle,"  and  Murran,  "stone-axe." 

2  James  Dawson,  oJ>.  cit.  p.  no. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  443 

things  being  completed  for  the  disposal  of  the  body,"  one 
word  was  uttered,  "  animadiate"  which  means,  "He  is  gone 
to  be  made  a  white  man,"  ^  In  another  place  it  is  again 
said  that  "  amadiate "  means  a  white  man.^  It  is  evident 
that  this  must  have  occurred  after  the  blacks  had  obtained 
some  knowledge  of  white  men,  other  than  Buckley.  Yet 
they  must  have  been  prepared  for  the  pale  tint  of  the  skin 
of  the  white  men  by  what  they  must  have  seen  when  they 
burned  the  body  of  a  dead  tribesman,  or  roasted  the  flesh 
of  a  slain  enemy.  The  burning  of  the  dead  seems  to  have 
been  a  common  practice,  and  the  change  in  colour  which 
takes  place  when  the  epidermis  with  its  colouring-pigment 
is  removed  must  have  been  observed.  Indeed  one  of  the 
Jajaurung,  in  speaking  to  me  of  the  practice  of  roasting  and 
eating  the  skin  of  the  sides  and  of  the  thighs  of  people 
killed  by  the  tribes  of  the  Wotjo  nation,  said,  "  All  of  the 
people  beyond  St.  Arnaud  did  this."  His  people  called  it 
Amidiat,  that  is,  light-coloured,  or  white.  Parker  remarks* 
that  the  very  term  applied  to  white  men  indicates  the  belief 
that  they  were  their  deceased  progenitors,  returning  to  their 
former  haunts.  He  gives  Amydeet  (Jajaurung),  Amerjig 
(Witowurung),  as  specimens  of  the  designation  applied  to 
the  white  race,  and  the  same  term  designates  the  state  of 
the  spirit  when  the  body  is  dead."* 

Although  the  burning  of  the  body  was  not  much  practised 
by  the  Wurunjerri,  Berak  remembered  two  cases  of  it.  One 
was  of  a  man  who  died  where  Kew  is  now,  the  other  was  to 
the  westward  of  Geelong,  and  thus  in  the  country  where 
Buckley  lived.  This  was,  as  Berak  put  it,  "  before  white 
men  came  to  Melbourne."  Buckley  says  that  a  woman 
was  burned,  who  had  been  killed  in  a  combat  between  the 
tribe  he  lived  with  and  another  they  had  visited.  They 
made  a  large  fire,  and  having  thrown  her  body  upon  it, 
they  heaped  on  more  wood,  so  that  it  was  burned  to  ashes. 
This  done,  they  raked  the  embers  of  the  fire  together,  and 
stuck  the  stick  she  used  to  dig  roots  with  upright  at  the  head.^ 

1    op.  (it.  pp.  25,  84.  ^  Op.  cit.  pp.  25,  84. 

•'  Parker,  Lecture  delivered  in  Melbourne,  etc.,  1854,  p.  25. 
*  Ibid.  ^  Morgan,  op.  cit. 


444        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Dawson  also  speaks  of  the  burning  of  the  dead.  If 
there  is  no  time  to  dig  a  grave,  they  burn  the  body  with  all 
the  effects  except  stone  axes.  When  a  married  woman 
dies,  her  husband  burns  her  body,  and  when  old  people 
become  infirm  and  unable  to  accompany  the  tribe  in  its 
wanderings,  it  is  lawful  and  customary  to  kill  them.  The 
victim  is  strangled  with  a  grass  rope,  and  when  cold  is 
burned  in  a  large  fire  kindled  in  the  neighbourhood.^ 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  Kurnai,  when  they  saw 
white  men  first,  thought  them  to  be  Mraris,  ghosts.  Such 
was  the  idea  of  one  of  the  Brabralung  when  he  saw  a  white 
man  for  the  first  time.  He  ran  away,  believing  it  to  be  a 
ghost,  partly,  as  he  said,  from  its  strange  appearance,  and 
partly  because  it  "  was  so  very  pale."  Here  we  have  again 
the  idea  that  the  white  man  must  be  a  ghost  because  of  his 
pale  tint,  and  I  may  remark  that  the  Kurnai  probably 
derived  this  belief  from  their  practice  of  roasting  and  eating 
portions  of  the  skin  of  slain  enemies. 

Before  the  white  man  had  entered  Gippsland  vague 
rumours  telling  of  them  had  passed  from  tribe  to  tribe 
to  the  Kurnai.  Messengers  {Lewin)  had  brought  news  of 
them,  with  the  exaggeration  natural  to  rumour.  The 
strange  sight  of  ships  sailing  past  their  shores  had  been  a 
wonder  to  them,  and  the  white  man  when  he  arrived  was 
recognised  as  a  Mrart,  or  as  Loan,  and  the  white  woman  as 
Loantuka,  the  wife  of  Loan.  When  Tulaba  described  to 
me  how  the  Kurnai  first  saw  the  white  men  when  he  was 
a  boy,  and  cried  out  to  each  other,  "  Loan !  Loan ! "  I 
observed  that  he  looked  down,  and  moved  his  eyes  from 
side  to  side,  as  if  to  avoid  a  blow.  On  inquiry  I  found 
that  the  belief  was  that  the  white  man  possessed  a  super- 
natural power  of  the  eye,  to  flash  death  to  the  beholder,  or 
to  draw  together  the  banks  of  a  river,  and  to  pass  over  it. 
This  power  was  called  Ngurrung-mri^  or  "  sinew  eye,"  and 
I  think  that  I  have  also  heard  it  called  Mlang-mri,  meaning 
"  lightning  eye."  Therefore  when  white  men  were  near,  the 
Kurnai  would  make  off,  crying  to  each  other,  "  Don't  look  ! 
don't  look  !  he  will  kill  you."  In  this  we  may  see  a  dis- 
1  J.  Dawson,  op.  cit.  p.  62. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  445 

torted  account  of  taking  aim  and  discharging  a  firearm,  and 
of  making  rude  bridges,  by  the  early  explorers. 

Among  the  Wolgal  the  white  man  was  called  Maniugan; 
by  the  Ngarigo  Mugan.  The  Yuin  called  both  the  dead 
man  and  the  white  man  Muniu-gang.  The  Kamilaroi 
called  a  white  man  Wunda,  that  is,  ghost,  and  believed  him 
to  be  a  black  come  to  life  again.  The  late  Mr.  Naseby, 
who  lived  fifty  years  in  the  Kamilaroi  country,  had  the 
marks  of  cupping  on  his  back,  and  they  could  not  be 
persuaded  that  he  was  not  a  Murri^  come  back,  the  marks 
on  his  back  being  his  Mombari,  or  family  marks.  As  far 
back  as  1795,  when  a  man-of-war  on  its  voyage  to  Port 
Jackson  was  anchored  at  Port  Stephens,  four  men  were 
found  who  had  run  away  from  Parramatta,  and  reached  that 
place  in  a  boat.  The  natives  had  received  them  as  "  the 
ancestors  of  some  of  them  who  had  fallen  in  battle,  and  had 
returned  from  the  sea  to  visit  them  again  ;  and  one  native 
appeared  to  firmly  believe  that  his  father  had  come  back  as 
one  or  other  of  the  white  men,  and  he  took  them  to  the 
place  where  the  body  had  been  burned."  ^  The  Kaiabara 
also  thought  that  the  white  men  were  blacks  returned  after 
death.^  The  old  men  of  the  tribes  about  Maryborough  said 
when  they  first  saw  white  men,  "  That  is  all  right,  they  are 
the  Mutltara  (ghosts)  come  back  from  the  island  "  ;  and  they 
recognised  such  men  as  their  relatives,  gave  them  names  and 
a  family,  and  were  quite  ready  to  do  anything  for  them.* 
About  Moreton  Bay  Makoron  and  Mudltere  signify  ghost, 
and  each  of  these  words  is  applied  to  white  men.^  In  the 
tribes  about  Mackay  in  Queensland  a  man's  spirit  is  called 
Meeglo,  and  the  whites  when  first  seen  were  supposed  to  be 
the  spirits  of  their  forefathers  embodied."  So  the  Namoi 
and  Barwan  blacks  also  call  the  white  man  Wunda: 

As  a  final  instance  of  the  recognition  of  a  white  man  as 
one  of  a  tribe  returned  to  it,  I  may  give  my  own  case. 
When  on  the  Cooper's  Creek  waters  in  1862,  searching  for 

•  That  is  "  man,"  one  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribe. 
-  Collins,  op.  cit.  p.  303.  '  Jocelyn  Brooke. 

♦  H.  E.  Aldridge.  *  Tom  Petrie. 

0  G.  H.  Bridgman.  ^  R.  Crowthers. 


446        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  explorers  Burke  and  Wills,  I  was  frequently  saluted 
by  blacks  when  within  hearing  distance  with  the  words 
Pirri-ivirri-kuUhi,  which  may  be  rendered  as  "wandering 
ghost."  Even  now  the  word  Kutchi  is  used  by  the  Dieri  for 
any  of  the  strange  paraphernalia  of  the  whites,  for  instance, 
even  a  dray  and  team  of  bullocks  has  been  so  called.^ 
Afterwards,  on  my  second  expedition,  a  group  of  the 
Yantruwunta,  whom  I  met  on  their  wanderings  as  far  south 
as  the  Grey  Range,  identified  me  with  one  of  their  deceased 
tribesmen  called  MungalH,  "  lizard."  He  was  of  that  totem, 
and  I  was  necessarily  the  same.  It  was  through  their 
speaking  of  me  by  that  name  that  I  found  what  their  idea 
was,  a  circumstance  which  was  of  much  use  to  me  later  on. 

The  clouds  of  dust  raised  on  the  plains  of  Central 
Australia  are  ascribed  to  Kutchi  by  the  Dieri ;  and  if  one  of 
these  dust  whirlwinds  passes  through  the  midst  of  a  camp 
there  is  great  consternation,  as  they  fear  that  some  great 
calamity  will  follow. 

A  young  strong  man  of  the  Yendakarangu  section  of  the 
Urabunna  tribe,  who  lived  at  Strangway's  Springs,  chased  a 
whirlwind  for  many  miles,  trying  to  kill  Kutchi  with  boomer- 
angs. He  returned  after  some  hours  much  exhausted,  and 
said  he  had  had  a  fight  with  Kutchi  and  had  killed  him  ; 
but,  he  added  in  the  broken  English  spoken  by  the  blacks, 
that  "  Kutchi  growl  along  a  me  ;  by  and  by  me  tumble 
down."  He  pined  away  from  day  to  day,  and  always 
insisted  that  his  case  was  hopeless,  as  Kutchi  had  growled. 
In  this  sense  "  growling  "  means  quarrelling,  or  using  violent 
language." 

Burial  Practices 

Such  beliefs  as  those  mentioned  in  the  last  section 
explain  much  in  the  burial  customs  which  would  otherwise 
seem  to  be  without  meaning. 

When  one  of  the   Dieri  is  dying  his  relatives  separate 

into  two  groups.     These  are  first,  the  Ngaperi,  Ngata-mura, 

Noa,    with    those    Kami   and    Kadi  who    are    more   nearly 

related  to  him.      The  second  group  consists  of  the  Ngandri, 

'  O.  Siebert.  ^  Frank  James. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  447 

Ngatani,  Kaka,  Tidnara,  Buyulu,  Neyi,  Kaku,  and  Ngatata^ 
to  whom  may  be  added  the  Kami  and  Kadi,  if  not  too 
distantly  related  to  the  dying  man.  This  second  group  is 
called  Kanayawora,  or  Palkule-kamaneli. 

While  those  of  the  first  group  sit  down  close  to  the 
dying  person,  and  even  after  the  decease  throw  themselves 
on  the  body,  those  of  the  other  group  remain  at  some 
distance  from  him  or  from  the  body,  and  anxiously  guard 
themselves  from  seeing  his  face.  The  reason  for  this  custom 
is,  according  to  some,  lest  they  should  become  possessed  by 
a  great  longing  for  the  deceased,  while  others  say  that  the 
spirit  of  the  deceased  might  so  draw  them  to  itself  that  they 
also  might  die. 

It  is  the  duty  of  the  men  who  are  Kanayawora  to  the 
deceased,  that  is,  of  the  second  group,  to  dig  the  grave  ;  but 
if  there  is  none  of  that  relation  there,  then  a  Ngaperi-waka  ^ 
digs  it,  so  that  he  may  be  useful  to  the  dead.  For  this 
service  a  woman  is  given  to  him  for  a  wife,  and  if  he  have 
one  already,  he  receives  a  second.  As  a  sign  of  mourning 
the  Kanayawora,  and  also  the  Kami  and  Kadi,  if  not  of  too 
remote  "  tribal "  relation,  paint  themselves  with  Karku,^ 
mixed  with  Tuna."  The  Ngaperi,  Ngata-mura,  and  Noa, 
together  with  the  closer  related  Kami  and  Kadi,  paint 
themselves  with  Tuna  only. 

Leaving  out  the  distantly  related  Kami  and  Kadi,  the 
rule  may  be  laid  down  that  after  the  death  of  a  male  or 
female  Kararu  the  people  of  that  class  are  painted  red,  but 
the  Matteri  people  require  white.  The  reverse  is  the  case  on 
the  death  of  a  Matteri  person. 

Those  painted  with  Tuna,  especially  a  Tippa-malku  or  a 
Pirratiru,  retain  their  white  colouring  until  the  leaves  of  the 
bushes  used  in  the  burial  are  dried  up,  or,  as  the  practice  of 
the  others  is,  till  the  footprints  of  the  deceased  cannot  be 
seen  any  more  about  the  grave.  When  the  Neyi  or  Kaka  of 
the  deceased  are  satisfied  that  there  are  no  footprints,  they 
collect  a  suflficient  amount  of  red  ochre,  and,  coming  secretly 
into  the  camp  without  the  others  noticing  it,  rub  the  faces  of 

'   F"ather's  brother,  or  male  Pirrauru. 
2  Karkii  is  "red  ochre."  3   Tuna  is  "gypsum." 


448        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  Kami  with  it.  This  application  of  red  ochre  remains  for 
a  short  time  and  is  then  rubbed  off;  and  if  the  deceased 
was  a  woman,  her  husband  is  permitted  to  seek  another  wife, 
ahvays  supposing  that  he  has  a  sister,  own  or  tribal,  to 
exchange  for  her. 

If  the  deceased  was  a  person  of  influence,  food  is  placed 
for  many  days  at  the  grave,  and  in  winter  months  a  fire  is 
lighted  so  that  the  ghost  may  warm  himself  at  it.  Should 
the  food  at  the  grave  not  be  touched,  it  is  supposed  that  the 
deceased  is  not  hungry.^ 

The  corpse,  having  the  big  toes  tied  together  and 
enveloped  in  a  rug  or  net,  is  carried  to  the  grave  on  the 
heads  of  three  or  four  men,  and  there  placed  on  its  back  for 
a  few  minutes.  These  men  kneel  near  the  grave,  and  some 
others  then  place  the  corpse  on  their  heads.  One  of  the 
old  men,  usually  the  nearest  relative,  now  takes  two  light 
rods  {Kuya\  each  about  three  feet  long,  and  holds  one  in 
each  hand,  standing  about  three  yards  from  the  corpse. 
Then,  beating  the  rods  together,  he  questions  the  corpse  as 
to  who  was  the  cause  of  his  death,  that  is,  by  magic.  The 
men  sitting  round  act  as  interpreters  for  the  deceased,  and, 
according  as  opinion  prevails,  the  name  of  some  native  of 
another  tribe  is  given. 

When  the  old  man  stops  beating  the  rods,  the  men  and 
women  commence  to  cry,  and  the  body  is  removed  from  the 
heads  of  the  bearers  and  is  lowered  into  the  grave.'^  Con- 
clusions are  drawn  as  to  the  locality  in  which  the  person 
who  has  caused  the  death  lives  from  the  direction  in  which 
the  body  falls  from  the  heads  of  the  two  men  who  hold  it. 
The  body  is  laid  on  a  plant  called  Kuya-marraf  and  is 
covered  with  it.  Kuya  is  the  Yaurorka  and  Yantruwunta 
word  for  fish  (in  Dieri,  Paru),  and  means  "  new,"  so  that 
Kuya-rnarra  means  new  fish.^  An  old  man,  who  is  in  the 
relation  of  Kami  to  the  deceased,  steps  into  the  grave  and 
cuts  off  all  the  fat  adhering  to  the  face,  thighs,  arms,  and 
stomach,  and  passes  it  round  to  be  swallowed  by  the 
relations.      The  order  in  which  they  partake  of  the  fat  is  as 

*  O.  Siebert.  •*  Eremophila  hngifolia. 

«  S.  Gason.  *  O.  Siebert. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  449 

follows :  The  mother  eats  of  her  children,  and  the  children 
of  their  mother  ;  a  man  eats  of  his  sister's  husband,  and  of 
his  brother's  wife  ;  mother's  brothers,  mother's  sisters,  sister's 
children,  mother's  parents,  or  daughter's  children  are  also 
eaten  of ;  but  the  father  does  not  eat  of  his  children,  nor  the 
children  of  their  sire.^  The  relations  eat  of  the  fat  in  order 
that  they  may  be  no  longer  sad.  All  those  who  eat  of  the 
deceased  are  decked  with  the  Kuya-marra  plant.^ 

Even  in  cases  where  a  man  has  killed  one  of  another 
tribe,  he  will  carefully  preserve  the  fat  for  the  purpose  of 
protecting  himself  against  a  blood-feud.  When  the  kindred 
of  the  dead  man  call  him  to  account  for  the  death,  he  gives 
them  the  fat  to  eat,  and  it  has  the  effect  that  they  become 
pacified,  and  even  feel  grateful  to  him  for  it,  so  that  they 
need  no  longer  feel  sad  or  weep.^ 

When  the  grave  is  filled  in,  a  large  stack  of  wood  is 
placed  on  it,  and  this  practice  seems  to  be  universal  in  the 
country  of  the  Barcoo  and  Diamantina  deltas,  where  I 
observed  some  striking  instances  of  it.  The  most  striking 
case  was  to  the  south  of  Sturt's  Stony  Desert,  in  the  country 
of  the  Ngurawola  tribe  ;  and  I  was  told  that  the  group  of 
several  graves,  each  with  a  great  pile  of  wood  on  it,  con- 
tained men  who  had  been  killed  in  an  attack  by  blacks  of 
a  neighbouring  tribe. 

Invariably  after  a  death  the  Dieri  shift  their  camp,  and 
never  after  speak  of,  or  refer  to,  the  deceased  person.* 

The  Blanch-water  section  of  that  tribe  fear  the  spirits  of 
the  dead,  and  take  precautions  to  prevent  the  body  from 
rising.  They  tie  the  toes  together,  and  thumbs  behind  the 
back,  sweep  a  clear  space  round  the  grave  at  dusk  each 
evening,  and  inspect  it  to  look  for  tracks  early  each  morning 
for  a  month  after  death.  Should  tracks  be  found,  the  body 
is  removed  and  reburied,  as  they  think  that  the  deceased  is 
not  satisfied  with  his  first  grave.^ 

While  the  Dieri,  Yaurorka,  Yantruwunta,  and  Marula 
eat  only  the  fat  of  the  dead,  other  tribes  eat  the  flesh  also. 
Such    are    the    Tangara,    who    carry    the    remains    of    the 

»  S.   Gason.  «  q.   Siebert.  3  j^id. 

■•  S.  Gason.  ^  Frank  James. 

2  G 


450        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

deceased  in  a  bag  {Billi),  and  whenever  they  feel  sorrow  for 
the  dead  they  eat  of  the  flesh  until  nothing  but  the  bones 
remain.  These  are  preserved  until  a  flood  occurs,  when  they 
are  pounded  up  and  cast  into  the  waters  as  "  fish-seed " 
{Kuyt-paua)} 

The  Yerkla-mining  never  bury  their  dead  or  dispose  of 
them  in  any  way.  When  death  approaches,  the  person  is 
left  alone,  as  comfortably  as  possible  near  a  fire,  and  the 
tribe  leave  the  neighbourhood,  not  to  return  for  a  consider- 
able time.  They  seem  to  have  a  great  fear  of  a  dead  body, 
though  they  treat  the  sick  and  wounded  with  much  kindness, 
their  medicine-men  curing  ailments  by  the  usual  aboriginal 
methods  of  rubbing  and  sucking,  producing  various  foreign 
substances  that  they  say  have  caused  the  pain,  and  have 
been  put  into  the  body  by  the  Muparn  (magic)  of  some 
enemy,  who,  though  living  at  a  distance,  can  inflict  injury 
by  Gaiji-angun^  the  invisible  spear-throwing  by  which  Muparn 
is  conveyed.  The  only  two  causes  of  death  which  the 
Mining  recognise  are  by  Muparn  and  the  spear,  and  the 
great  aim  of  their  lives  would  appear  to  be  to  avoid  both. 
A  death  is  always  avenged  by  the  next  of  kin,  whose  feelings 
are  appeased  by  making  the  attack,  even  if  the  supposed 
offender  be  only  wounded.^ 

The  Kukata  bury  their  dead  immediately,  and  place  in 
the  grave  spears  and  other  weapons,  and  on  it  a  drinking 
vessel  for  the  deceased  to  drink  out  of  if  thirsty.  A  digging- 
stick  is  also  placed  on  the  grave  to  keep  evil  spirits 
away.^ 

When  one  of  the  Narrang-ga  tribe  dies,  the  corpse  is 
carried  about  on  a  kind  of  bier  for  several  weeks.  The  bier 
is  made  of  sticks  fastened  together  like  the  steering-wheel  of 
a  ship,  and  is  carried,  each  holding  one  of  the  protruding 
stick  ends.  The  body  is  buried  with  the  knees  doubled  up, 
so  as  to  be  close  to  the  face.  Two  men  get  into  the  grave, 
and  the  body  being  lowered  to  them,  they  hastily  fix  it  in 
its  place  and  then  come  out.  The  grave  being  quickly  filled 
in,  they  light  a  fire  at  it  and  leave  the  place.  If  the  deceased 
is  one  of  the  Kurnadjara  division,  his  spirit  is  supposed  to 

»  O.  Siebert.  2  w.  Williams.  3  p.  Gaskell. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  451 

go  a  long  way  to  the  north,  and  so  with  the  men  of  each  of 
the  local  divisions,  each  to  its  own  direction.^ 

The  tribes  in  the  district  about  Adelaide,  Gawler,  and 
Gumeracha  buried  the  dead  in  a  straight  position,  wrapped 
up  in  wallaby  rug,  and  packed  comfortably  with  leaves  and 
tender  boughs.  They  dug  a  hole  about  three  feet  deep, 
deposited  the  body,  and  covered  it  up,  first  with  earth  and 
sand,  then,  if  convenient,  with  stones.  At  the  head  of  the 
grave  a  crescent  of  earth  or  stone  was  erected." 

In  the  Tongaranka  tribe,  when  a  death  occurs,  the 
immediate  relations  smear  themselves  with  Kopai  (gypsum), 
hence  the  name  Kopai-nongo  is  used  for  a  widow.  The  body 
is  buried  in  a  sitting  posture,  and  all  implements  are  buried 
with  it.  Before  the  grave  is  filled  in,  the  nearest  male 
relation  present  stands  over  the  grave  and  receives  several 
blows  with  the  edge  of  a  boomerang,  the  blood  being  allowed 
to  flow  on  the  corpse.  The  grave  is  then  filled  in,  and 
logs  are  piled  on  it  to  keep  the  dogs  away.  The  loud  wail- 
ing which  is  raised  at  a  death  is  repeated  every  day  for  a 
whole  moon.  The  place  chosen  for  a  grave  is  on  a  sand- 
hill, where  it  is  easy  to  dig,^  and  on  the  top  of  the  grave  a 
hole  is  made  like  a  nest,  and  in  it  are  placed  ten  or  twelve 
white  egg-shaped  stones  made  of  ground  gypsum  moistened 
with  water,  shaped  like  eggs  and  allowed  to  dry.  A  cone- 
shaped  roof  of  branches  is  raised  above  this  nest,  big 
enough  to  hold  two  people. 

When  one  of  the  now  practically  extinct  Wiimbaio 
tribe  died,  his  face  was  covered  with  the  corner  of  his  skin 
rug,  because  no  one  would  look  at  the  face  of  a  dead  person. 
The  body  was  laid  out  at  length,  rolled  in  his  rug,  and 
corded  tightly.  The  relations  used  to  lie  with  their  heads 
on  the  body,  and  even  stretched  at  length  on  the  corpse. 
Old  Headmen,  or  men  of  note,  or  fathers  of  strong  families, 
were  buried  in  what  may  be  called  their  cemeteries.  These 
were  on  sand-hills  where  the  pines  grow,  and  thither  their  dead 
were  carried  with  great  lamentations  and  mourning.  A  six- 
foot  hole  was  dug  in  the  sand,  and  the  body,  being  wrapped 
up  in  a  rug  or  blanket  and  made  comfortable  with  twigs 
1  T.  M.  Sutton.  2  Dr.  M'Kinlay.  3  j.  VV.  Boultbee. 


452        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

and  bark,  was  deposited  and  covered  up  with  sand.  A  pile 
of  wood  about  two  feet  in  height  was  raised  over  the  grave,  and 
on  this  was  deposited  a  pile  of  rushes  or  soft  grass,  tapering 
at  the  top,  and  secured  by  old  netting  or  string.  A  space 
of  about  ten  yards  was  carefully  swept  every  morning.  The 
fires  were  kept  perpetually  burning  for  a  month,  one  to  the 
right  and  one  to  the  left  of  the  grave,  to  enable  the  deceased 
to  warm  himself.  The  spirit  was  believed  to  walk  about 
near  the  grave  at  night  if  he  were  not  comfortable,  but  if 
his  tracks  were  not  visible  in  the  morning,  his  friends 
thought  that  he  was  happy.  His  immediate  relations  cut 
off  their  hair  and  applied  to  their  heads  a  paste  of  gypsum 
about  two  inches  thick,  and  which  became  detached  in  about 
a  month  by  the  growth  of  the  hair,  and  was  then  placed  on 
the  grave.  If  a  man  died  when  his  friends  were  absent,  all 
the  men,  when  they  returned,  stood  out  and  held  their  heads 
down  to  receive,  each  of  them,  a  blow  with  a  club.  In  such 
cases  men  have  been  killed.^ 

One  of  Headmen  of  the  Wathi-wathi  was  buried  in  the 
following  manner,  wailing  being  kept  up  for  several  days  at 
the  grave,  which  was  within  a  cleared  and  fenced  space  about 
one  hundred  yards  long  by  about  fifteen  wide.  The  fence 
was  made  of  logs  filled  in  with  brush  about  three  feet  high. 
The  inside  of  the  enclosure  was  cleared  of  everything  and 
made  quite  smooth.  The  grave  itself  was  completely 
covered  over  with  sheets  of  bark,  like  a  hut  with  a  ridge 
pole  in  the  centre.^ 

When  a  man  of  the  Wotjobaluk  died,  he  was  corded  up 
with  his  knees  drawn  up  to  the  chest  and  his  arms  crossed. 
Under  these,  on  his  naked  breast,  was  placed  his  spear- 
thrower  {Garik).  He  was  then  rolled  up  in  his  opossum 
rug.  An  oblong  grave  was  dug,  about  four  feet  in  depth. 
A  sheet  of  bark  was  placed  on  the  bottom,  and  on  this  leaves, 
covered  with  strands  of  opossum  pelt  pulled  asunder,  so  as 
to  make  a  soft  bed  for  the  "  poor  fellow."  Another  lot  of 
leaves  and  pelt  was  then  laid  on  the  corpse,  over  it  bark, 
and  the  earth,  being  returned,  was  trodden  tight.  Logs  were 
placed  on  the  grave  to  prevent  dogs  interfering  with  it.      A 

1   Dr.  M'Kinlay.  -  Captain  Garside. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  453 

fire  was  then  lighted  at  the  grave  for  the  ghost  {Gulkan- 
gulkan)  to  warm  itself  at,  and  then  the  relatives  returned  to 
their  camps.  On  the  following  day  they  went  back  to  the 
grave  and  carefully  cleared  an  oval  space,  some  thirty  paces 
in  its  longer  diameter,  with  internal  parallel  ridges  of  soil, 
and  within  these  the  grave.  The  kindred  went  away  from 
the  place  for  three  or  four  months,  and  when  they  returned, 
visited  the  grave  to  see  that  all  was  right.  They  thought 
that  small  fires  could  be  seen  at  the  grave  by  night  at  times, 
and  these  "  corpse-candles  "  were  believed  to  be  fires  lighted 
by  the  ghost. 

In  the  Mukjarawaint  tribe,  when  a  man  died  he  was 
left  lying  in  his  camp  {Lur)  for  two  or  three  days.  Then  he 
was  tied  up  tightly  with  his  knees  drawn  up,  his  elbows 
fastened  to  his  sides,  and  his  hands  to  his  shoulders.  His 
relatives  cried  over  him  and  cut  themselves  with  tomahawks 
and  other  sharp  instruments  for  about  a  week.  Then  he 
was  put  into  a  hollow  tree,  or  on  a  stage,  built  on  the 
pollarded  branches  of  a  "  Bull-oak  "  ^  tree.  After  camping 
at  this  tree  for  a  time,  say  about  a  month  or  so,  they  leave 
it  for  a  time  ;  and  if  on  returning  the  body  was  found  to  be 
dry,  the  head  and  arms  were  cut  off  and  carried  by  his 
wife,  and  eventually  buried  with  her.  His  father,  own  or 
tribal,  made  magic  of  the  fibula  bones  of  the  legs. 

The  people  of  the  Wotjo  nation  buried  the  dead  with  the 
head  in  a  certain  direction,  which  is  determined  by  his  class 
and  totem.  The  several  directions  are  all  fixed  with 
reference  to  the  rising  sun.  Two  of  my  informants,  who 
were  old  men,  spent  about  two  hours  in  laying  out  the 
mortuary  directions  on  the  ground  with  sticks,  and  I  con- 
structed the  following  plan  from  compass  bearing  of  the 
directions. 

The  diagram  is  probably  not  altogether  correct,  for  the 
same  reason  given  as  to  the  list  of  totems,  that  my  in- 
formants knew  the  mortuary  totems  of  their  own  class  and 
of  some  others,  but  had  not  so  complete  a  knowledge  of 
those  with  whom  they  had  little  to  do.  The  information  is, 
however,  quite  sufficient  to  show  clearly  the  principles  on 

*  Casuarina  canibaget.  Baker. 


454        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

which  these  burial  arrangements  were  made.  It  confirms 
the  statement  made  to  me  that  Ngaui  and  Garchuka  "  went 
together,"  and  that  there  were  Batya-ngal  in  each  class.  It 
shows  that  Munya  and  Krokitch-batya-ngal  were  each  divided 
into  two  branches.  As  far  as  I  could  learn,  Gamutcli-jallan 
had  no  mortuary  totem. 

The  spaces  between  the  directions  have  names,  which  I 
have  written   down    as  far  as   I   could  obtain   them.     The 


Diagram  XXX 


word  Kolkorn  means  wholly,  or  altogether,  so  that  Kolkorn- 
batya-ngal  means  "altogether  pelican,"  as  Kolkorn-munya 
means  "  altogether  yam."  But  I  could  not  ascertain  why 
both  the  space -names  Krokitch-batya-ngal  and  Garchuka 
are  applied  to  Barewun.  I  may  add  that  the  whole  universe, 
including  mankind,  was  apparently  divided  between  the 
classes.  Therefore  the  list  of  sub-totems  might  be  extended 
indefinitely.      It   appears    that   a    man    speaks   of  some    as 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  455 

being  "  nearer  to  him "  than  others.  1  am  unable  to 
ascertain  the  precise  meaning  of  this  expression.  When 
pressed  upon  this  question,  a  black  would  say,  "  Oh,  that  is 
what  our  fathers  told  us." 

The  information  which  I  have  given  about  the  class 
organisation  of  the  Wotjobaluk  applies  also  to  the 
Mukjarawaint  and  the  Jupagalk,  but  although  1  know 
that  the  classes  Ganiutch  and  Krokitch  extend  over  a  much 
wider  range,  I  am  unable  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  the 
several  systems. 

The  Gournditch-mara  used  to  make  fires  at  the  graves, 
in  order  that  the  spirits  of  their  departed  friends  might 
warm  themselves,  and  they  also  put  food  there  so  that  they 
could  eat  if  they  were  hungry.^ 

When  a  Jupagalk  man  died,  all  the  men  went  out  of  the 
camp  at  dusk  and  watched  carefully  to  see  the  gulkan-gulkan 
of  the  man  who  killed  him,  that  is,  by  magic,  peeping  about 
in  the  bush  about  the  camp.  Then,  knowing  who  it  was, 
they  formed  a  jolung-ulung,  literally  a  "  sneaking  party," 
and  go  quietly  and  kill  him.  If  they  could,  they  hit  him  on 
the  back  of  the  neck  with  club  {dolone-gunne)  and  took 
his  fat. 

To  make  the  account  of  the  burial  customs  of  the 
Victorian  tribes  more  complete,  I  again  quote  from  Dawson's 
work. 

When  a  person  of  common  rank  dies,  the  body  is  im- 
mediately bound,  with  the  knees  upon  the  chest,  and  tied 
up  with  an  acacia  bark  cord  in  an  opossum  rug.  Next 
day  it  is  put  between  two  sheets  of  bark,  as  in  a  coffin,  and 
buried  in  a  grave  about  two  feet  deep,  with  the  head  towards 
the  rising  sun.  All  the  weapons,  ornaments,  and  property 
of  the  deceased  are  buried  with  him.  Stone  axes  are 
excepted,  as  being  too  valuable  to  be  thus  disposed  of, 
and  are  inherited  by  the  next  of  kin.  If  there  is  no  time 
to  dig  a  grave,  the  body  is  placed  on  a  bier,  and  removed 
by  two  men  to  a  distance  of  a  mile  or  two.  Then  the 
relatives  prepare  a  funeral  pyre,  on  which  the  body  is  laid, 
with  the  head  to  the  east.     All  the  effects  belonging  to  the 

»  T.  H.  Sfahle. 


456        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

deceased  are  laid  beside  the  body,  with  the  exception  of 
stone  axes.  Two  male  relatives  set  fire  to  the  pyre  and 
remain  to  attend  to  it  till  the  body  is  consumed.  Next 
morning,  if  any  bones  remain,  they  are  completely  pulverised 
and  scattered  about.  When  a  married  woman  dies  and 
her  body  is  burned,  the  husband  puts  her  pounded  calcined 
bones  into  a  little  opossum  skin  bag,  which  he  carries  in 
front  of  his  chest  until  he  marries  again,  or  until  the  bag  is 
worn  out,  when  it  is  burned. 

Immediately  after  the  death  of  a  chief,  the  bones  of  the 
lower  part  of  the  leg  and  the  forearm  are  extracted,  cleaned 
with  a  flint  knife,  and  placed  in  a  basket  ;  the  body  is  tied 
with  a  bark  cord,  with  the  knees  to  the  face,  and  wrapped  in 
an  opossum  rug.  It  is  then  laid  in  a  ivuurn  (hut)  filled 
with  smoke,  and  constantly  watched  by  friends  with  green 
boughs  to  keep  the  flies  away. 

When  all  the  mourners,  with  their  faces  and  heads 
covered  with  white  clay,  have  arrived,  the  body  is  laid  on  a 
bier  formed  of  saplings  and  branches,  and  is  placed  on  a 
stage  in  the  fork  of  a  tree,  high  enough  from  the  ground 
to  be  out  of  the  reach  of  the  wild  dogs.  Every  one  then 
departs  to  his  own  home.  The  adult  relatives  and  friends 
of  the  deceased  visit  the  spot  every  few  days  and  weep  in 
silence.  At  the  expiry  of  one  moon  the  relatives  and  the 
members  of  his  own  and  the  neighbouring  tribes  come  to 
burn  the  remains.  The  body  is  removed  from  the  tree. 
Each  chief,  assisted  by  two  of  his  men,  helps  to  carry  it 
and  to  place  it  on  the  funeral  pyre,  while  the  relatives  of 
the  deceased  sit  in  a  semicircle  to  windward  of  the  pyre,  and 
each  tribe  by  itself  behind  them.  The  fire  is  lighted  and 
kept  together  by  several  men  of  the  tribe,  who  remain  till 
the  body  is  consumed,  and  till  the  ashes  are  sufficiently  cool 
to  allow  the  fragments  of  the  small  bones  to  be  gathered. 
These  are  then  pounded  up  with  a  piece  of  wood  and  put 
into  the  small  bag  prepared  for  them.  The  widow  of  the 
deceased  chief,  by  first  marriage,  wears  the  bag  of  calcined 
bones  suspended  from  her  neck,  and  she  also  gets  the  lower 
bones  of  the  right  arm,  which  she  cleans  and  wraps  in  an 
opossum  skin.     These  relics  she  carries  for  two  years,  and 


VIII 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES 


457 


keeps   them   under   cover  with   great   care.      In    the    tribes 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Dawson,  the  custom  of  eating  the  bodies 


FIG.    25. — SPEAR-THROWERS. 


of  relatives  of  either  sex  is  practised.  This  is,  however,  only 
done  in  cases  where  the  person  has  been  killed  by  violence. 
The   body  is  divided  between   the  adult  relatives,  and  the 


458        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

flesh  of  every  part  is  roasted  and  eaten,  excepting  the  vitals 
and  the  intestines,  which  are  burned  with  the  bones.  The 
aborigines  said  that  the  body  was  eaten,  with  no  desire  to 
gratify  or  appease  the  appetite,  but  only  as  a  symbol  of 
respect  and  regret  for  the  dead.^ 

The  Wurunjerri  buried  a  man's  personal  property,  such 
as  it  was,  with  him.  His  spear-thrower  was  stuck  in  the 
ground  at  the  head  of  the  grave.  At  a  woman's  grave  her 
digging-stick  was  also  placed  at  the  head.  It  is  said  that  if 
the  deceased  was  a  violent  man,  who  did  injury  to  others, 
no  weapon  would  be  placed  with  him.  When  there  was  no 
medicine-man  there  to  tell  them  who  had  killed  him,  it  was 
the  practice  when  digging  the  grave  to  sweep  it  clean  at  the 
bottom  and  search  for  a  small  hole  going  downwards.  A 
slender  stick  put  down  it  showed  by  its  slant  the  direction 
in  which  they  had  to  search  for  the  malefactor.  The  male 
kindred  of  the  deceased  then  went  in  that  direction,  until 
they  met  some  man  whom  they  killed  to  avenge  the  dead, 
and  might  leave  the  corpse  on  a  log  for  his  friends  to  see 
and  take  warning  by. 

In  the  case  of  Murrangurk,  for  whom  Buckley  was  taken 
by  the  Wudthaurung  tribe,  his  spear  was  planted  on  his  grave, 
and  the  fact  that  Buckley  had  this  in  his  hand  when  they 
found  him  was  proof  of  his  identity. 

Richard  Hovvitt  -  in  1 840  remarked  that  the  Yarra, 
Goulburn,  Barrabool,  and  Port  Phillip  blacks  buried  their 
dead,  while  those  of  Mt.  Macedon,  the  King,  Ovens,  and 
Murray  Rivers  generally  burned  them.  After  the  flesh  was 
consumed  they  gathered  the  bones  and  put  them  in  a 
hollow  of  a  tree  some  height  from  the  ground.  The  grave 
was  a  small  mound  of  earth,  circular  and  gently  and  nicely 
rounded  at  the  top,  the  soil  bare  and  patted  smooth.  About 
five  feet  from  the  centre  of  the  grave  was  a  slight  elevation, 
and  in  it  at  short  intervals  were  driven  stakes,  five  feet  high 
and  twenty  in  number. 

Among  the  Jajaurung,  persons  of  mature  life,  specially 
old  men  and  medicine-men,  were  buried  with  much  ceremony. 

*  Dawson,  op.  cit.  pp.  63-67. 
2  Impressions  of  Australia,  1845. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  459 

With  the  body  were  interred  the  weapons  and  other  articles 
belonging  to  the  deceased,  and  for  a  time  a  small  fire  was 
made  at  the  foot  of  the  grave.^ 

Among  the  Kurnai,  when  a  man  died,  his  relatives  rolled 
him  up  in  a  'possum  rug  and  enclosed  it  in  a  sheet  of  bark, 
cording  it  tightly.  A  hut  was  built  over  it,  and  in  this 
the  mourning  relatives  collected.  The  corpse  was  placed 
in  the  centre,  and  as  many  of  the  relatives  as  could  find 
room  lay  with  their  heads  on  it.  There  they  lay  lament- 
ing their  loss,  saying,  for  instance,  "  Why  did  you  leave 
us  ? "  Now  and  then  their  grief  would  be  intensified  by 
some  one,  for  instance,  the  wife,  uttering  an  ear-piercing  wail 
"  Penning-i-torn "  (my  spouse  is  dead),  or  a  mother  would 
say  ''  Ltt-i-torn"  (my  child  is  dead).  All  the  others  would 
then  join  in  with  the  proper  term  of  relationship,  and  they 
would  cut  and  gash  themselves  with  sharp  stones  and  toma- 
hawks until  their  heads  and  bodies  streamed  with  blood. 
The  bitter  wailing  and  weeping  continued  all  night,  only  the 
more  distant  relations  rousing  themselves  to  eat  until  the 
following  day.  After  this  had  continued  for  several  days 
the  mourners  unloosed  the  body  to  look  at  it,  and  thus 
renewed  their  grief  If  by  this  time  the  hair  had  become 
loose,  it  was  plucked  off  the  whole  body,  and  preserved  by 
the  father,  mother,  or  sisters  in  small  bags  made  of  opossum 
skin.  Then  the  body  was  once  more  rolled  up,  and  was 
not  again  uncovered  till  it  had  so  far  decomposed  that  the 
survivors  could  anoint  themselves  with  oil  which  had  exuded 
from  it.  The  Kurnai  say  that  this  was  to  make  them 
remember  the  dead  person.  Sometimes  they  opened  the 
body  and  removed  the  intestines  to  make  it  dry  more 
rapidly.  The  body  in  its  bark  cerements  was  carried  with 
the  family  in  its  wanderings,  and  was  the  special  charge  of 
the  wife,  or  of  some  other  near  relative.  Finally,  the  body 
having,  perhaps  after  several  years,  become  merely  a  bag  of 
bones,  was  buried  or  put  into  a  hollow  tree.  Sometimes 
the  father  or  mother  carried  the  lower  jaw  as  a  memento. 

The  most  remarkable  custom  connected  with  the  dead 
was  that  of  the  "  Bret "  or  hand.      Sometimes  the  Kurnai  cut 

*   VV.  C.  Stanbridge,  o/>.  cit.  p.  229  ;  also  E.  S.  Parker,  op.  cit.  p.  25. 


46o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


off  one  hand  of  the  corpse,  or  both  hands,  soon  after  death, 
which  they  wrapped  in  grass  and  dried.  A  string  of  twisted 
opossum  fur  was  attached  to  it,  so  that  it  could   be  hung 

round  the  neck  and 
worn  in  contact  with 
the  bare  skin  under 
the  left  arm.  It  was 
carried  by  the  parent, 
child,  brother,  or 
sister.  The  belief  of  the  Kurnai 
was  that  at  the  approach  of  an 
enemy  the  hand  would  push 
or  pinch  the  wearer.  Such  a 
signal  being  experienced,  the 
hand  would  be  taken  from  the 
neck  and  suspended  in  front 
of  the  face,  the  string  being 
held  between  the  finger  and 
thumb.  The  person  would 
then  say,  "  Which  way  are 
they  coming  ?  "  If  the  hand 
remained  at  rest,  the  question 
would  be  again  put,  but  now 
facing  another  way,  and  so 
on.  The  response  being  that 
direction,  and  it  was  thence 
My  informants  have  told  me 
that  the  swinging  of  the  Bret  was  sometimes  so  violent  that 
the  string  broke.  In  one  case  which  I  heard  of,  the  Bret  did 
not  respond  to  its  wearer,  who  said  to  it,  "  Munju  !  Munju  ! 
IVunman  ?  Munju  !  tunainun  nganju,  brappanu  mabanju" 
that  is,  "  There  !  There  !  Where  ?  There  !  Speak  me  to  (or) 
throw  dingo-to."  That  is,  he  would  throw  it  to  the  wild  dogs. 
The  Theddora  believed  that  the  dead  do  not  always 
remain  in  the  grave,  but  come  out  at  times.  This  accounts 
for  their  graves  being  dug  like  cylindrical  pits  with  a  side 
chamber,  in  which  the  corpse  was  placed,  blocked  in  with 
pieces  of  wood.  An  account  of  a  burial  by  some  of  the 
Theddora,  which  was  reported  to  me,  and  which  I  verified  by 


FIG.    26. — THK    BRET  OK    DK.M)    HAND. 

the  hand   vibrated   in   some 
that  the  danger  was  coming. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  461 

further  inquiry  from  another  man  who  was  present,  is  very 
characteristic  of  their  beliefs. 

This  man  said  :  "  We  were  at  the  Snowy  River,  and  one 
of  the  old  men  died.  We  dug  a  hole  in  the  river  bank,  and 
as  we  were  putting  him  into  it  we  thought  that  he  moved. 
We  were  all  much  frightened  and  all  fell  back  except  old 
Nukong,  who  stood  forward  and  said,  '  What  are  you  doing 
that  for  ?  What  are  you  trying  to  frighten  us  for  ?  '  We 
rammed  up  the  hole  with  wood  and  stones  and  earth  and 
went  away." 

One  of  the  Ya-itma-thang  tribe  went  to  Gippsland  with 
one  of  my  correspondents  in  the  early  days  of  settlement. 
He  died  there,  and  was  buried  in  his  full  dress — head-band, 
nose-peg,  waist-belt,  and  apron,  or,  more  properly,  a  kind  of 
kilt  of  kangaroo  skin  strands.^ 

By  the  Ngarigo  the  body  was  tied  up  tightly,  with  the 
knees  bent  and  the  arms  crossed.  It  was  buried  either 
simply  rolled  up  naked,  or  in  other  cases  dressed  in  full 
male  ornament,  with  the  belt  and  Bridda-bridda  on,  and 
painted  with  pipeclay.  The  weapons,  implements,  and 
Bridda-bridda,  if  the  latter  was  not  put  on,  were  buried  with 
the  body,  and  as  they  said,  the  " Bulabong  (spirit  or  ghost)  went 
into  the  scrub."  They  had  the  same  belief  as  the  Kulin, 
that  the  ghost  remained  in  the  bush  for  a  time  killing  game, 
making  camps,  and  lighting  fires — in  fact,  continuing  its 
former  mode  of  existence.  But  in  this  the  Bulabong  was 
better  off  than  the  Mrarts^  or  Kurnai  ghosts,  who  were  said 
to  live  on  sow-thistles. 

The  Ngarigo  practice  was  to  cross  a  river  after  burying 
a  body,  to  prevent  the  ghost  following  them.  An  instance 
of  this  came  under  my  notice.  A  leading  man  of  that  tribe 
died  at  the  Snowy  River,  and  was  buried  there.  The 
survivors,  who  had  camped  not  far  away,  were  much  alarmed 
in  the  night  by  what  they  supposed  to  be  the  ghost  of  the 
deceased  prowling  about  the  camp — as  one  of  the  men  said, 
"  coming  after  his  wife." 

The  Wolgal  were  very  particular  in  burying  everything 
belonging  to  a  dead  man  with  him  ;   spears  and  nets  were 

'  The  kilt  worn  by  the  men. — J.   Biintine. 


462        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

included  ;  even  in  one  case  a  canoe  was  cut  into  pieces  so 
that  it  could  be  put  in  the  grave.  Everything  belonging 
to  a  dead  person  was  put  out  of  sight. 

The  Ngarigo  tied  a  dead  man  up  tightly,  the  hands 
placed  open  on  either  side  of  his  face,  and  the  knees  drawn 
up  to  the  head.  The  grave  was  sometimes  made  like  a 
well  with  a  side  chamber.  In  other  cases  it  was  made  by 
digging  out  a  cavity  in  a  bank,  as  was  done  in  the  case  just 
quoted  by  the  Theddora.  In  this  tribe  also  everything 
belonging  to  the  deceased  was  buried  with  him. 

The  practice  of  the  Yuin  tribes  is  that  when  a  man  dies 
his  body  is  wrapped  up  in  an  opossum  rug.  His  articles  of 
dress  or  ornament  are  put  with  him,  stuffed  under  his  head, 
or  wherever  there  is  room.  A  sheet  of  bark  is  rolled  round 
him  and  corded  tight.  His  weapons  are  given  to  his  friends. 
The  medicine-man  then  climbs  up  a  tree,  at  the  foot  of  which 
the  corpse  has  been  placed,  and  the  tree  must  be  a  large  and 
branching  one.  The  women  and  children  remain  at  the 
camp.  All  the  men  present,  whether  related  to  the  deceased 
or  not,  climb  up  the  tree  after  the  medicine-man.  He,  being 
up  among  the  branches,  shouts  out  "  Kai  !  "  that  is,  "  Hallo  !  " 
and  looks  up  into  the  air.  Then  all  listen  carefully  for  the 
voice  of  the  Tulugal,  that  is,  the  spirit  or  ghost.  At  length 
there  is  heard  a  far-distant  reply  of  ^'  Kai  !"  If  the  voice 
of  the  Tulugal  is  clear  and  distinct,  he  has  died  of  some 
sicknes.s,  but  if  it  is  dull  and  choking,  then  he  has  been 
"  caught,"  that  is,  killed  by  some  evil  magic.  Sometimes 
the  Tulugal  tries  to  get  back  to  the  body.  If  the  medicine- 
man is  not  strong  enough  to  send  him  away,  it  has  been 
said  to  come  rushing  into  the  tree-top  with  a  noise  like  a 
bird  flying,  and  to  push  the  medicine-man  down  the  bole  of 
the  tree  by  the  head,  and  then  to  get  into  the  covering  of 
bark  surrounding  the  corpse,  from  which  the  medicine-man 
has  much  apparent  difficulty  in  removing  him. 

The  Tulugal,  as  I  have  said,  is  the  ghost,  from  Tulu,  "  a 
hole,"  or  "grave,"  and  gal,  the  possessive  postfix,  "of,"  or  "be- 
longing to."  The  word,  however,  means  not  only  the  human 
ghost,  but  also  is  applied  to  beings  who  lived  in  trees,  rocks, 
or  caves  in  the  mountains,  and  who  were  credited  with  stealing 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  463 

and  eating  children.  It  was  said  that  long  ago  the  old 
men  used  to  go  into  the  mountains,  which  lie  at  the  back  of 
the  Yuin  country,  where  they  thought  Tulugal  might  be, 
and  after  making  a  noise  like  a  child  crying,  they  would 
watch  for  a  Tulugal  peeping  out  of  its  hole.  Having  found 
its  abode,  they  made  a  fire  and  burned  it. 

The  Yuin  were  always  afraid  that  the  dead  man  might 
come  out  of  the  grave  and  follow  them. 

The  burial  practice  of  the  Port  Jackson  tribes  is 
described  by  Collins  in  the  year  1796.  These  tribes,  it 
may  be  observed,  belonged  to  the  Katungal,  and  were  thus 
kindred  to  the  Yuin. 

The  young  people  were  buried,  but  those  who  had 
passed  the  middle  age  were  burned.  A  boy  who  died, 
apparently  of  fever,  was  buried  in  the  following  manner. 
The  body  was  placed  in  a  canoe  cut  to  the  proper  length,' 
together  with  a  spear,  fishing-spear,  and  spear-thrower,  and 
the  cord  which  the  dead  man  had  worn  round  his  waist. 
The  canoe  with  the  corpse  was  carried  on  the  heads  of  two 
natives  to  the  grave,  the  boy's  father  accompanying  it,  armed 
with  his  spear  and  throwing-stick.  At  the  grave  one  man 
stretched  himself  in  it  on  the  grass  with  which  it  was  strewn, 
first  on  his  back  and  then  on  his  right  side.  On  laying  the 
body  in  the  grave  great  care  was  taken  to  so  place  it  that  the 
sun  might  look  at  it  as  it  passed,  the  natives  cutting  down 
for  that  purpose  every  shrub  that  could  at  all  obstruct  the 
view.  He  was  placed  on  his  right  side,  with  his  head  to  the 
north-west.  When  the  grave  was  covered  in,  several  branches 
of  shrubs  were  placed  in  a  half-circle  on  the  south  side  of 
the  grave,  extending  from  the  head  to  the  foot  of  it.  Grass 
and  boughs  were  likewise  placed  on  the  top  of  it,  and 
crowned  with  a  large  log  of  wood.  After  strewing  it  with 
grass  the  placer  laid  himself  full  length  on  it  for  some  minutes. 

When  the  wife  of  Bennillong,  who  appears  from  the 
account  to  have  been  a  Headman,  died,  her  body  was 
burned.  A  pile  of  wood  having  been  prepared  of  about 
three  feet  in  height  and  strewn   with  grass,  the  corpse  was 

'   In  one  case  at  least  this  was  clone  by  the  Krauatun  Kurnai  when  they  buried 
one  of  their  tribe  who  had  been  killed  in  the  seizure  of  the  woman  Bolgan. 


464        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

borne  to  it,  and  placed  with  the  head  towards  the  north.  A 
basket,  with  the  fishing  apparatus  and  other  small  furniture 
of  the  deceased,  was  put  by  her  side,  and  her  husband 
having  placed  some  logs  over  the  body,  the  pile  was  lighted 
by  one  of  the  party.  On  the  following  day  the  husband 
raked  the  ashes  together  with  his  spear,  and  with  a  piece  of 
bark  he  raised  a  tumulus  of  earth,  on  which  he  placed  the 
piece  of  bark,  and  a  log  was  placed  on  each  side  of  the  mound. 

In  another  case  where  a  woman  had  died,  her  infant  at 
the  breast  was  placed  alive  in  the  grave  with  her,  a  large 
stone  was  thrown  on  it,  and  the  other  natives  instantly  filled 
in  the  grave  with  earth.^ 

In  the  Geawe-gal  tribe  all  the  implements,  the  property 
of  a  warrior,  were  interred  with  his  body,  and  indeed  every 
piece  of  inanimate  property  he  possessed." 

In  the  Gringai  country  there  were  places  where  numbers 
of  blacks  were  buried,  at  least  since  the  year  1830,  and  it 
was  probably  a  continuation  of  an  old  custom.  The  dead 
were  carried  many  miles  to  be  buried  in* this  place. 

When  the  grave,  which  was  very  neatly  dug,  was  con- 
sidered to  be  of  sufficient  depth,  a  man  got  in  it  and  tried 
it  by  lying  down  at  full  length.  The  body,  nicely  tied  up 
in  bark,  was  carried  to  it  by  friends  of  the  deceased.  Before 
being  lowered  into  the  grave,  the  medicine-man,  standing  at 
the  head,  spoke  to  it  to  find  out  who  caused  its  death,  and 
received  answers  from  another  medicine-man  at  the  foot  of 
the  grave.  All  the  articles  belonging  to  the  deceased  were 
buried  with  him,  and  every  black  present  contributed  some- 
thing, all  of  which  things  were  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
deceased.     Then  the  grave  was  filled  in.^ 

The  following  was  the  practice  in  another  part  of  this 
district,  namely  at  Dungog,  and  it  relates  to  a  time  some- 
where about  the  year  1830.  Venerable  men,  and  men  of 
distinction,  were  buried  with  much  ceremony,  but  ordinary 
members  and  females  were  disposed  of  in  a  perfunctory 
manner.  The  body  of  a  man  belonging  to  a  strong  family, 
and  with  a  good  following,  would  be  buried  in  the  following 
manner.     The  body  was  doubled  up,  heels  to  hips  and  face 

1  Collins,  op.  cit.  pp.  388,  393.  2  G.  W.  Rusden.  3  a.  Hook. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  465 

to  knees,  and  the  arms  folded.  It  was  then  wrapped  up  in 
sheets  of  Ti-tree  bark  secured  by  cords  of  string-bark  fibre. 
A  hole  was  dug  in  easy  soil  and  in  a  well-shaded  locality, 
about  two  feet  deep  and  circular.  The  body  was  dropped 
in  sideways,  and  after  putting  a  stone  hatchet  and  a  club 
beside  the  body,  the  grave  was  filled  in,  and  the  ceremonies 
ended.  The  grief  displayed  at  the  funeral  of  a  venerable 
and  honoured  man  was  unquestionably  great  and  genuine. 
The  lamentations  at  a  grave,  and  the  chopping  of  heads  and 
burning  of  arms,  was  something  not  to  be  easily  forgotten. 
The  grief,  though  violent,  was  not  of  long  duration,  and  by 
the  time  the  wounds  were  healed  the  sorrow  was  ended.^ 

At  Port  Stephens  the  body  was  neatly  folded  in  bark 
and  was  placed  in  the  grave  at  flood-tide  ;  never  at  ebb, 
lest  the  retiring  water  should  bear  the  spirit  of  the  deceased 
to  some  distant  country.  Before  placing  the  corpse  in  the 
grave,  two  men  held  it  on  their  shoulders,  while  a  third, 
standing  at  the  side,  struck  the  body  lightly  with  a  green 
bough,  at  the  same  time  calling  out  loudly  the  names  of  the 
acquaintances  of  the  deceased  and  of  others.  The  belief  was 
that  when  the  name  of  the  person  who  had  caused  his  death 
was  spoken,  the  deceased  would  shake,  and  cause  the  bearers 
to  do  the  same.     The  next  thing  would  be  to  seek  revenge. 

In  this  tribe  an  old  couple  had  an  only  daughter,  of 
whom  they  were  very  fond.  She  died,  and  her  parents  built 
their  hut  over  her  grave  close  to  the  shore  of  the  harbour, 
and  lived  there  many  months,  crying  for  her  every  evening 
at  sunset.  They  then  removed  their  hut  a  few  yards  away 
and  remained  in  it  till  the  grass  had  completely  covered  the 
grave,  when  they  left,  and  never  again  visited  the  place. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  Gringai  natives  belonged  to 
the  same  tribe,  at  any  rate  the  former  held  the  same  belief 
that  if  the  dead  were  not  buried  at  flood-tide,  the  ebb  might 
carry  away  the  spirit  of  the  deceased.  They  also  thought 
that  the  spirit  lingered  at  the  grave  for  a  time." 

It  is  now  necessary  to  revert  in  the  description  of  burial 
customs  to  those  of  the  inland  tribes. 

With  the   Wiradjuri,  Bulungal,  that  is,  "  death,"   is  the 
'  Dr.  M'Kinlay.  2  w.  Scott. 

2  H 


466        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

passing  away  of  the/r>,  "ghost "  or  "spirit."  After  death,  the 
body  is  rolled  tightly  in  a  skin  rug,  and  then  placed  in  a  grave 
about  four  feet  deep.  All  the  personal  property,  except 
perhaps  some  choice  articles,  are  then  laid  on  the  corpse, 
and  the  grave  filled  with  sticks  and  bark,  covered  over  with 
earth  and  with  large  logs  placed  on  it.  The  surrounding 
trees  are  marked,  the  grave  is  left,  no  one  going  near  it  and 
no  one  speaking  of  it.  The  name  of  the  deceased  is  never 
mentioned,  and  if  any  one  else  has  the  same  name  he  is 
obliged  to  drop  it  and  assume  another.^ 

There  is  a  curious  belief  among  the  Wiradjuri  that,  when 
a  man  is  near  death  he  can  see  the  shadow  of  the  person 
who  has  caused  his  death  by  evil  magic.  Under  such 
circumstances,  he  will  say  to  those  about  him,  "  Get  out  of 
my  way  so  that  I  may  see  who  it  is  who  has  caught  me." 
This  same  belief  existed  elsewhere,  for  instance  in  the 
Jupagalk  tribe  ;  and  I  remember  a  case  in  the  Kurnai,  when 
a  man  being  almost  at  the  point  of  death,  his  friend 
Tankowillin,  who  was  attending  to  him,  said  again  and  again, 
"  Can  you  see  who  it  is  ?  "  and  was  greatly  troubled  when 
his  friend  died  without  being  able  to  tell  him. 

Speaking  of  about  the  year  1830,  it  is  said  that  among 
the  southern  Kamilaroi  loud  cries  were  raised  on  the 
occasion  of  a  death  in  the  camp.  The  relatives,  and 
especially  the  women,  cut  their  heads  with  tomahawks,  and 
the  blood  was  allowed  to  remain  on  them,  while  for  mourning 
they  smeared  the  head  with  pipe-clay.  While  the  body  was 
still  warm,  they  brought  nets  and  opossum  rugs  as  wrappers 
for  the  corpse,  spread  them  on  the  ground,  and  doubled  the 
body  into  the  form  of  a  bale,  with  the  knees  and  chin  touching 
each  other.  Then  they  wrapped  the  bale  in  the  nets  and  rugs 
and  tied  it  tightly.  A  shallow  hole  was  dug  with  yam-sticks, 
in  which  the  body  was  placed,  and  being  filled  in  with  soil, 
was  covered  with  logs  and  deadwood  to  keep  the  dingoes 
out.^  In  the  northern  districts  of  the  Kamilaroi  country  the 
burial  was  sometimes  in  soft  ground.  If  there  was  not  any 
soft  ground  at  hand,  the  body  was  placed  in  a  hollow  tree. 

When  an  old  infirm  black  had  become  too  feeble  to 
»  J.  H.  Gribble.  2  c.  Naseby. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  467 

accompany  the  section  of  the  tribe  to  which  he  belonged, 
he  was  left  in  charge  of  a  man  ;  or,  if  a  woman,  in  charge 
of  a  woman,  assisted  by  a  youth  whose  duty  it  was  to  attend 
to  and  finally  to  bury  their  charge  if  death  occurred.^  A 
Headman  might  be  buried  in  a  Bora  ground,  under  one  of 
its  marked  trees,  but  to  cheat  the  Kruben  (an  evil  being), 
other  trees  were  marked,  and  other  graves  dug,  without  any 
bodies  in  them.  The  Kruben  is  supposed  to  be  a  super- 
natural creature,  living  in  hollow  trees,  or  in  water-holes.  It 
is  supposed  to  go  about  doing  harm,  especially  by  carrying 
off  children.  The  Murri  {i.e.  Man,  in  the  Kamilaroi  tongue) 
say  that  it  would  steal  up  to  the  camp  at  night,  and  catch 
children,  and  tear  them.  This  seems  to  be  an  analogous 
belief  to  that  of  the  Coast  Murring  as  to  the  Tulugal. 

The  Wollaroi  placed  the  body  of  a  man  on  a  stage,  and 
the  mourners  sat  under  it  and  rubbed  the  oil  which  exuded 
from  the  body  on  themselves,  so  that  they  might  become 
strong.  When  the  flesh  left  the  bones,  they  were  buried. 
A  female  was  buried  at  once,  and  a  child  was  placed 
in  a  tree.^ 

Among  the  Unghi  the  usual  method  of  burial  is  the  same 
as  our  own,  but  occasionally  a  blackfellow  after  death  under- 
goes a  very  primitive  system  of  embalming.  A  kind  of 
platform  is  erected  upon  which  the  corpse  is  laid,  having  first 
been  placed  in  a  rude  bark  coffin.  Beneath  the  platform  a 
fire  is  lighted  on  which  is  thrown  green  boughs  of  a  species 
of  sandal-wood,  and  a  dense  smoke  is  kept  up  for  perhaps  a 
week  or  ten  days,  after  which  the  tribe  depart,  taking  the 
body  with  them,  and  visit  the  places  the  deceased  frequented 
during  life.  Months  are  spent  in  this  way,  and  the  remains 
are  finally  deposited  in  a  hollow  tree.^ 

On  the  Maranoa  the  graves  are  nearly  always  boomerang- 
shaped,  with  the  convex  side  towards  the  west.  The  body  is 
tied  up  in  a  sheet  of  bark  immediately  after  death,  the  toes 
being  tied  together,  as  are  the  hands  also.  Occasionally  a 
vessel  containing  water  is  suspended  near  the  grave  lest  the 
deceased  should  want  a  drink.  Not  infrequently,  however, 
the  body  is  dried  and  carried  about  for  a  long  time — even, 

1  Cyrus  E.  Doyle.  ^  r,  Crowthers.  3  A.  L.  P.  Cameron. 


468        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

as  in  one  case,  for  three  years.  Such  a  body  is  dried  by 
being  placed  on  a  stage  under  which  the  women  keep  a  slow 
fire  constantly  burning.  The  fat  which  exudes  from  it  is  col- 
lected in  vessels  and  the  young  men  rub  it  over  their  bodies 
to  impart  the  good  qualities  of  the  deceased  to  themselves. 

It  is  usually  some  young  man  who  has  died  a  violent 
death  who  is  dried  and  carried  about  by  his  kindred.  The 
reason  assigned  for  the  custom  is  that  he  has  died  before  his 
time  and  would  not  rest  in  his  grave.  Such  a  body  is  tied 
up  tightly  at  full  length  in  a  sheet  of  bark,  which  is  painted 
or  ornamented  with  emu  feathers.  When  they  are  travelling 
two  young  men  carry  the  body  in  the  day  and  watch  it  at 
night,  then  two  others  the  day  following,  and  so  on.^ 

In  the  Chepara  tribe,  when  a  man  becomes  ill,  and  believes 
that  a  man  of  another  clan  of  the  tribe  has  "caught"  him — 
for  instance,  by  giving  him  a  'possum  rug  made  deadly  by 
magic — he  tells  this  to  his  friends  before  his  death,  and  they 
take  measures  afterwards  to  avenge  him.  The  medicine- 
man {Bugerum)  in  his  dreams  will  see  the  culprit,  and  also 
the  immediate  cause  of  death,  which  had  been  in  the  gift, 
flying  back  to  the  river.  When  a  man  died  he  was  tied  up 
in  the  bark  of  the  Ti-tree,  the  arms  being  crossed  over  the 
chest,  the  legs  doubled  up,  and  the  knees  close  to  the  chin. 
The  grave  was  dug  about  six  feet  deep  with  yam-sticks,  in  a 
lonely  place,  and  where  no  tree  could  fall  over  it. 

When  about  to  bury  the  body,  they  stripped  some  bark 
and  laid  it  at  the  bottom  of  the  grave  ;  they  placed  grass  on 
the  bark  and  then  the  body.  Split  sticks  were  placed  across 
the  body  and  the  earth  filled  in,  with  a  mound  on  the  top 
covered  with  grass.  A  fire  was  made  at  the  grave  by  the 
father  or  other  near  relative.  The  body  was  carried  to  the 
grave  tied  to  a  pole  on  the  shoulders  of  two  men.  If  the 
deceased  had  been  killed  by  violence  or  was  believed  to 
have  been  the  victim  of  evil  magic,  an  old  man  blew  into 
his  ears,  and  whispered  the  name  of  the  suspected  culprit. 
The  bearers  then  ran  for  a  short  distance  in  the  direction 
in  which  the  suspected  person  lived.  After  the  burial,  a 
party  was  made  up  to  go  and  kill  him. 
1  R.  C.  Lethbridge. 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  469 


When  a  man  died,  many  of  his  things — rugs,  tomahawks, 
spears,  etc. — were  buried,  but  some  were  given  to  his  kindred, 
for  instance,  to  his  son,  or  brothers,  own  or  tribal,  and  after 
a  death  the  camp  was  moved  to  another  place. 

The  mourning  in  this  tribe  was  as  follows.  The 
relations  of  a  dead  person  for  several  months  after  wore 
emu  feathers,  dyed  red  with  a  dye  called  Quitye,  and  said 
to  be  obtained  from  a  soft  stone  found  in  the  mountains 
at  the  sources  of  the  Tweed  River,  The  mother  of  the 
deceased  had  her  nose  and  all  her  body  painted  with  stripes 
of  white  pipe-clay,  and  wore  red  feathers  over  the  whole  of 
her  head.  A  sister  had  also  her  head  covered  with  red 
feathers,  but  was  not  painted  white.  After  a  few  weeks  the 
painting  was  changed  to  red,  and  then  was  worn  by  father, 
mother,  and  sisters  for  a  long  time. 

After  a  death  in  a  family,  the  name  of  that  family  was 
dropped  for  several  months.  That  is  to  say,  the  members 
of  it  were  addressed,  the  males  as  Warkunibul^  and  the 
females  as  Watmungun,  which  implies  that  one  of  their 
kindred  has  died,  and  avoids  the  mention  of  the  name  of 
the  deceased.^ 

In  the  Bigambul  tribe,  on  the  occasion  of  a  funeral,  the 
body  of  a  man  was  carried  round  the  grave  on  the  heads  of 
two  men,  and  was  asked  who  was  the  cause  of  his  death. 
On  such  occasions  my  correspondent  has  heard  them  say, 
when  they  thought  the  corpse  moved,  "  Oh !  he  has 
heard  it !  " ' 

If  a  Kaiabara  black  dies,  his  tribes-people  never  mention 
his  name,  but  call  him  Wurponum  (the  dead),  and  in  order 
to  explain  to  others  who  it  is  that  is  dead,  they  speak 
of  his  father,  mother,  brothers,  etc.  As  a  sign  of 
mourning  they  put  charcoal  and  fat  under  the  eyes,  and 
rub  red  ochre  over  the  head  and  body.  They  do  not  bury 
a  man  of  note  at  once,  but  dry  the  body  before  a  fire  and 
then  carry  it  about  for  six  months  before  burying  it.^ 

The  Turrbal  attributed  all  deaths,  other  than  by  violence 
or  in  battle,  to  magic.  When  a  man  died,  he  was  placed 
on  a  stage  and  a  space  was  cleared  under  it.     The  medicine- 

1  James  Gibson.  '^  James  Lalor.  ^  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


470        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

man  would  on  the  following  morning  make  a  track  on  the 
ground  with  the  side  of  his  hand,  and  tell  the  people  that 
tracks  were  there,  and  that  he  knew  from  them  who  had 
killed  the  man,  naming  some  one  of  another  tribe.  Then 
their  aim  was  to  kill  that  man. 

A  corpse  was  rolled  up  in  Ti-tree  bark  and  placed  in  a 
fork  of  a  tree,  the  feet  being  left  bare.  A  fire  was  made 
under  the  body.  A  spear  and  club  were  left  near  it,  that 
the  spirit  of  the  dead  might  have  weapons  wherewith  to  kill 
game  for  his  sustenance  in  the  future  state.  A  yam-stick 
was  placed  in  the  ground  at  a  woman's  grave,  so  that  she 
might  go  away  at  night  and  seek  for  roots.^ 

In  the  tribes  within  30  miles  of  Maryborough  (Queens- 
land), when  a  man  died,  the  body  was  either  buried,  burned, 
placed  on  a  stage,  or  eaten.  When  the  body  was  eaten, 
the  bones  were  collected  at  once.  When  it  was  burned, 
the  teeth  were  collected  from  the  ashes.  When  it  was 
buried,  the  bones  were  dug  up  after  a  time.  There  was  no 
rule  whether  a  deceased  person  should  be  buried,  burned, 
or  placed  on  a  stage  ;  but  it  was  considered  the  greatest 
honour  to  eat  your  friends,  if  they  had  been  killed  at  one 
of  the  ceremonial  combats. 

When  the  body  was  buried,  or  placed  on  a  stage,  one 
or  more  fires  were  lighted,  not  only  to  let  the  spirit  of  the 
deceased  warm  itself,  when  it  got  out  of  the  grave,  but  also 
to  keep  away  spirits  of  dead  blacks  of  other  tribes,  or  of 
bad  men  of  their  own  tribe.  It  showed  greater  affection  to 
light  more  fires  than  one,  so  as  to  give  more  warmth  and 
greater  security. 

The  bones,  after  being  collected  and  carried  about  for  a 
time,  were  put  up  in  trees  and  left  there. 

When  a  man  died,  his  intimate  friends  and  relations 
would  for  a  time,  out  of  respect  for  him,  taboo  certain  words 
or  invent  others,  and  a  man  might  for  instance  say,  "  I  will 
not  speak  his  language  any  more,  but  will  speak  another 
language,"  and  would  for  a  time  use  one  of  the  neighbouring 
dialects.  The  old  men  would  also  probably  taboo  certain 
animals,  saying,  "  He  ate  that  animal,  we  will  not  eat  it 

^  Tom  Petrie. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  '471 

for  a  long  time."  This  might  last  for  a  year,  or  even 
more/ 

Among  the  Kuinmurbura,  the  custom  was  to  make  a 
hole  about  a  foot  deep  for  a  grave,  place  the  body  in  it  and 
cover  with  sticks  and  logs.  When  the  flesh  had  decayed 
away,  the  bones  were  collected  in  a  bag,  called  by  the  whites 
a  "  dilly-bag,"  and  placed  in  a  hollow  tree. 

It  was  said  by  the  Kuinmurbura  that  the  natives  of  the 
Keppel  Islands  at  the  mouth  of  the  Fitzroy  River,  called 
the  Wapio-bura,  that  is,  of  or  belonging  to  Wapio,  an  island, 
simply  lay  their  dead  on  one  particular  place,  on  one  of  the 
islands,  and  never  touch  them  again.  This  I  have  not  been 
able  to  verify,  and  record  it  for  what  it  may  be  worth. 

Great  fighting-men  were  placed,  when  dead,  on  a  stage 
about  six  feet  high,  until  the  flesh  decayed,  and  the  young 
men  would  stand  underneath  and  rub  themselves  with  any 
juice  which  fell  from  it,  in  order  to  get  the  strength  and 
fighting  power  of  the  dead  man.  When  the  bones  were 
free  from  flesh,  they  were  placed  in  a  tree.^ 

The  Wakelbura  belief  was  that  no  strong  black  would 
die,  unless  some  one  had  placed  a  spell  on  him.  When  a 
man  died,  the  body  was  placed  on  a  frame,  lying  on  bark 
and  covered  with  branches,  all  of  which  must  be  of  a  tree 
of  the  same  class  and  sub-class  as  that  to  which  the  deceased 
belonged.  For  instance,  if  he  were  a  Banbe  man,  then  the 
wood,  bark,  and  branches  would  be  of  the  Broad-leaved 
Box-tree,^  that  tree  being  also  of  the  Banbe  sub-class.  Men 
of  the  Malera  class,  which  includes  both  Banbe  and  Kurgilla, 
would  build  the  stage  and  cover  the  dead  body.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  in  this  tribe  the  two  class  names  divide 
the  whole  universe  between  them.  This  being  done,  the 
women  wailed,  and  cut  themselves  with  stone  knives,  and 
at  later  times  with  broken  glass.  The  old  men,  after  the 
stage  was  made  and  the  body  placed  on  it,  carefully  loosened 
the  ground  under  it  so  that  it  was  reduced  to  dust,  on  which 
the  slightest  mark  or  print  could  be  seen.     They  then  made 

1  H.  E.  Aldridge.  2  w.  H.  Flowers. 

3  According    to    Mr.   J.    H.    Maiden,    in    his  work    The    Useful  Plants   of 
Australia,  the  Broad-leaved  Box  of  Queensland  is  the  Eucalyptus  acmenioides. 


472        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

a  large  fire  close  to  the  spot,  and  went  back  to  the  camp. 
The  next  morning  a  few  armed  blacks  went  to  the  spot,  and 
surrounded  the  stage,  while  one  going  very  gently  on  tiptoe, 
and  kneeling  down,  examined  the  smoothed  ground.  If  he 
saw  nothing,  he  rose  very  cautiously,  and  looking  round  him 
uttered  some  half-stifled  growls  about  the  ghost  of  the  dead. 
Then  biting  some  grass  and  muttering  some  words  to  the 
ghost,  he  cast  it  on  the  fire,  and  after  making  this  up,  he 
and  his  companions  returned  to  the  camp.  At  sunset  they 
would  again  visit  the  stage  and  examine  the  ground  for 
marks,  and  this  might  be  done  for  several  days,  until  they 
found  some  mark  or  track  on  it.  This  they  believed  to 
have  been  made  by  the  ghost  of  the  dead  man,  and  from 
the  appearance  of  the  mark  or  track  they  could  tell  whom 
it  represents.  For  instance  if  the  track  were  that  of  a  dingo, 
and  therefore  Malera-banbe,  they  would  soon  make  out  who 
the  Malera-banbe  man  was  who  had  killed  him.  They  say 
that  a  track  made  by  a  dingo  could  not  deceive  them,  for 
it  would  be  deeply  impressed  on  the  soil,  while  an  impression 
made  by  the  ghost  would  be  like  a  shadow. 

Having  ascertained  who  had  killed  him,  they  take  the  body 
down  from  the  stage,  and  breaking  it  up  with  a  tomahawk, 
the  pieces  are  enveloped  with  twigs,  and  enclosed  within  bark 
stripped  from  a  sapling,  and  fastened  by  sewing  opossum 
skin  round  it.  The  mother  or  sister  of  the  deceased  takes 
charge  of  it,  and  sometimes  the  remains  are  carried  about 
for  as  long  as  eighteen  months,  until  the  matter  has  been 
settled  by  the  offender  being  punished.  Then  the  remains, 
bark  covering  and  all,  are  put  into  some  hollow  tree  in  the 
country  of  the  deceased.  All  the  trees  at  the  place  are  ring- 
barked  where  the  remains  are  deposited,  and  boughs  arc 
placed  in  their  forks.  If  there  is  no  fork,  they  drive 
two  stakes  into  the  ground  and  heap  up  boughs  between 
them. 

There  are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  for  where  no  large 
hollow  tree  can  be  found,  the  remains  are  buried  in  the 
ground,  on  some  sandhill,  the  grave  being  filled  with  decayed 
wood,  so  that  at  any  time  they  can  remove  them.  Two 
stakes  are  driven  into  the  ground  at  the  head  of  the  grave, 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  473 

and  filled  in  with  boughs  of  a  tree,  or  with  bushes,  of  the 
proper  class. 

If  two  blacks  were  out  in  the  bush,  and  one  of  them  died, 
the  other  would,  if  the  ground  were  too  hard  to  dig  a  grave, 
cover  him  up  with  earth  or  mud.  Then  he  would  make  a 
big  fire,  ring-bark  the  trees  in  a  circle,  and  perhaps  place  one 
or  two  hot  coals  from  the  fire  in  the  dead  man's  ears,  before  he 
went  away.  If  the  other  blacks  were  at  a  distance,  say  a 
week's  or  a  fortnight's  journey,  nothing  further  would  be 
done,  except  that  at  a  future  time  they  would  burn  the 
remains  at  the  place  where  they  were  buried.  The  ghost  of 
the  deceased  was  supposed  to  haunt  the  place  where  he  died, 
and  to  revisit  his  old  camping-places.  They  believed  that 
if  his  relatives  were  near  him  when  he  died,  he  would  follow 
them,  if  they  did  not  make  a  fire  and  place  bushes  in  the  forks 
of  the  trees  before  leaving  the  place,  and  entering  into  their 
ears  would  kill  them.  By  placing  bushes  in  the  forks  of  the 
trees  they  think  that  the  ghost  will  be  induced  to  camp  in 
them,  and  go  to  warm  himself  at  the  fires.  The  trees  are 
blazed  in  a  circle  in  order  that  the  ghost,  if  trying  to  follow 
them,  will  go  round  in  a  circle  and  thus  return  to  the  spot 
from  which  he  started.  The  coals  are  placed  in  the  dead 
man's  ears  to  keep  the  ghost  in  the  body  till  his  relatives 
get  a  good  start  away  from  him.  They  also  believed  that 
when  a  man  died  at  a  distance  from  his  home,  his  spirit 
would  travel  towards  it,  and  his  friends,  if  they  were  going 
in  another  direction,  would  lay  him  in  the  grave  with  his  face 
towards  home.  If  he  died  in  the  night,  they  would  throw 
a  firebrand  in  that  direction  as  a  guide  for  the  spirit  to  follow. 

A  peculiar  belief  of  theirs  was  that  right-handed  men 
went  up  to  the  sky,  while  left-handed  men  went  down  under 
the  ground.  When  they  saw  white  men  for  the  first  time, 
they  thought  that  they  were  some  of  the  left-handed  men 
come  back  again. 

While  the  remains  are  being  carried  about  by  the  relatives, 
they  are,  when  a  dancing  corrobboree  is  held,  placed  up 
against  a  tree,  and  with  a  red  band  tied  round  that  part  of 
the  bark  envelope  where  the  head  is,  as  if  for  the  deceased  to 
see  the  dances. 


474        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

They  cannot  bear  to  hear  the  name  of  the  dead  men- 
tioned, and  to  do  so  would  cause  violent  quarrels  and  perhaps 
bloodshed.^ 

The  Dalebura  sometimes  bury  the  dead,  sometimes  place 
the  body  on  a  stage  of  wood,  and  covered  with  Ti-tree  bark, 
tied  on  with  cord.  Later  on,  the  friends  return,  and,  having 
danced  round  the  stage,  bury  the  bones.  The  widow  or  the 
mother  takes  some  of  the  finger  bones,  which  she  carries  in 
her  bag,  especially  if  the  deceased  was  a  great  fighting-man, 
or  had  any  special  virtues." 

No  one  is  believed  by  the  tribes  at  the  Herbert  River 
to  die  from  any  cause  but  the  magic  of  some  one  of  a  neigh- 
bouring tribe.  A  shallow  grave  is  dug  with  pointed  sticks 
close  to  water,  and  the  father  or  brother  of  the  deceased,  if 
a  man,  or  the  husband  if  a  woman,  beat  the  body  with  a 
Mera  or  club,  often  so  violently  as  to  break  the  bones.  In- 
cisions are  generally  made  in  the  stomach,  on  the  shoulders, 
and  in  the  lungs,  and  are  filled  with  stones.  After  this,  the 
body  is  placed  in  the  grave,  the  knees  drawn  up  to  the  chin, 
and  laid  on  its  side,  or  seated  head  erect.  Weapons,  orna- 
ments, in  fact  everything  which  the  deceased  had  used  in 
life,  are  put  with  the  body,  the  whole  is  covered  up,  and  a 
hut  is  built  on  the  top  of  the  grave.  A  drinking-vessel  is 
put  inside  the  hut,  and  a  path  is  made  to  the  water  for  the 
spirit  to  use.  The  legs  are  generally  broken  to  prevent  the 
ghost  from  wandering  at  night.  The  beating  is  given  in 
order  to  so  frighten  the  spirit  that  it  would  be  unlikely  to 
haunt  the  camp,  and  the  stones  are  put  in  the  body  to  pre- 
vent it  from  going  too  far  afield.  Food  and  water  are  often 
put  on  the  grave.  After  the  burial  the  camp  is  shifted  to  a 
distance.  The  grave  is  visited  and  kept  clean,  often  for 
years  after.  The  spirits  of  the  dead  roam  up  and  down  for 
a  time  in  the  places  they  had  frequented  during  life,  but 
finally  go  to  the  Milky  Way.^ 

These  burial  customs  not  only  confirm  the  conclusions 
deducible  from  the  previous  evidence,  but  show  that  the 
deceased  might  follow  his  kindred  corporeally  and  injure 
others.     Hence  it  is  that  the  body  is  tied  up  tightly  in  its 

'  J.  C.  Muirhead.  -  R.  Christison.  ^  John  Gaggin. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  475 

cerements  and  placed  in  a  grave,  blocked  in  some  cases  with 
wood  before  being  filled  with  earth.  The  common  practice 
of  placing  logs  on  the  grave  is,  I  think,  not  so  much  to 
prevent  the  ghost  from  getting  out,  as  to  prevent  the  dingoes 
from  disinterring  the  body.  The  breaking  of  the  bones  by 
the  Herbert  River  tribes  is  a  very  clear  example  of  the 
precautions  taken  to  prevent  the  ghost  from  wandering, 
although  it  is  an  exceptionally  severe  means  of  doing  so. 
The  practice  of  burying  implements,  ornaments,  or  weapons 
with  the  dead  is  clear  proof  that  they  are  supposed  to 
continue  their  lives  as  ghosts  in  the  sky-land  much  as  they 
had  done  when  in  the  body  on  earth. 

Beliefs  in  some  Legendary  Beings 

A  belief  is  common  to  all  the  tribes  referred  to,  in  the 
former  existence  of  beings  more  or  less  human  in  appearance 
and  attributes,  while  differing  from  the  native  race  in  other 
characteristics.  Their  existence,  nature,  and  attributes  are 
seen  in  the  legendary  tales  which  recount  their  actions. 

These  tales  may  be  divided  into  three  kinds,  which 
roughly  agree  with  the  areas  indicating  the  range  respectively 
of  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes,  those  to  the  north  of  them,  first 
discovered  by  Spencer  and  Gillen,  and  of  the  tribes  to  the 
south-east. 

The  legends  of  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes  are,  however,  not 
peculiar  to  them,  but  are  held  by  those  who  have  the  same 
two-class  system  of  social  organisation,  as  far  to  the  south  as 
Spencer  Gulf,  and  to  the  north  of  Lake  Eyre  approximately 
to  latitude  25°. 

These  legends  relate  to  the  Mura-muras,  who  were  the 
predecessors  and  prototypes  of  the  blacks,  who  believe  in 
their  former  and  even  their  present  existence.  Their 
wanderings  over  Central  Australia,  the  origin  of  the  present 
native  race  and  of  the  sacred  ceremonies,  are  embodied  in 
the  legends  and  preserved  by  oral  tradition. 

As  these  legends,  which  have  been  carefully  preserved  by 
my  fellow-worker,  the  Rev.  Otto  Siebert,  are  given  fully  in 
Chapter  X.  and  the  Appendix,  all  that  I  need  do  here  is  to 


476        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

State  their  purport  concisely  so  as  to  show  clearly  the  nature 
of  the  Mura-muras,  who  are  the  chief  actors  in  them.^ 

The  Mura-mura  Paralina  when  out  hunting  saw  four 
unformed  beings  crouching  together.  He  smoothed  their 
bodies  with  his  hands,  stretched  out  their  limbs,  slit  up  their 
fingers  and  toes,  formed  a  mouth,  nose,  and  eyes,  stuck  ears 
on,  and  otherwise  turned  them  into  mankind. 

Another  legend  says  that  in  the  beginning  the  earth 
opened  in  the  middle  of  Lake  Perigundi,^  and  thence  the 
totem  animals  came  forth,  one  after  the  other.  They  were 
quite  unformed,  without  sense  organs,  and  they  lay  on  the 
sandhills,  which  then  as  now  surrounded  the  lake,  until  being 
revived  and  strengthened  by  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  they 
stood  up  as  human  beings  and  separated,  some  to  the 
north-east,  some  to  the  east,  and  others  to  the  south-west 
and  south. 

Another  accounts  for  the  dispersal  of  the  totems.  The 
J/«ra-;««rrtMandra-mankana,  having  been  killed  by  the  people 
for  his  misdeeds,  was  brought  to  life  by  a  crow,  which  tapped 
with  its  bill  on  the  logs  which  lay  on  his  grave.  He, 
waking  up  and  seeing  no  one  near,  followed  the  footprints  of 
the  people  who  had  gone  fishing,  and  were  then  busy  driving 
the  fish  with  bushes  into  their  nets.  He,  keeping  himself 
concealed  in  the  water,  and  opening  his  mouth,  swallowed 
water,  fish,  and  men.  Some  who  escaped  ran  off  in  all 
directions  ;  and,  as  they  ran,  he  gave  to  each  a  Murdu,  that 
is,  a  totem  name.  In  this  way  it  came  about  that  the 
totems  are  scattered  over  the  country,  while  some  are  more 
common  in  one  part  than  in  another. 

The  next  stage  shown  by  the  legends  is  the  origin  of  the 
rites  and  ceremonies  of  circumcision  and  subincision.  They 
form  a  very  interesting  series,  the  three  first  of  which  are 
versions  of  the  same  as  recorded  by  different  tribes  and 
related  by  them  in  their  ceremonies.  The  first  belongs  to 
the  Yaurorka,  the  eastern  Dieri,  and  the  Yantruwunta.  It 
tells  how  two  Mura-mura  youths  were  hunting  for  game  at 
Perigundi,  when  one  of  them   became  accidentally  circum- 

1  Explanatory  footnotes  are  given  in  the  Appendix. 
2  A  lake  in  the  Dieri  country. 


vin  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  477 

cised,  and  saw  that  he  had  now  become  "  a  perfected  man." 
Then  his  companion  having  also  become  circumcised,  they 
performed  that  rite  on  their  father  with  a  stone  knife  ( Tula), 
and  set  out  on  their  wanderings,  carrying  it  with  them,  and 
teaching  people  to  use  it  instead  of  the  fire-stick,  which  had 
caused  the  death  of  many  youths. 

The  second  belongs  to  the  Ngameni  and  Karanguru,  and 
relates  the  wanderings  of  two  Mura-mura  youths  who, 
finding  men  about  to  use  the  fire-stick  for  circumcision, 
suddenly  used  their  stone  knife,  and  thus  saved  the  boys 
from  imminent  death.  Having  instructed  the  men,  who 
were  astounded  by  what  they  saw,  they  wandered  farther, 
when  having  become  accidentally  subincised,  they  became 
fully  completed  men. 

Having  conferred  the  use  of  the  stone  knife  on  mankind, 
they  now  introduced  the  practice  of  Dilpa,  that  is,  subincision, 
and  thus  again,  as  the  legend  says,  became  "  the  benefactors 
of  mankind." 

The  Dieri,  who  also  know  this  legend,  say  that  they  still 
live,  wandering  far  away  in  the  north,  invisible  to  men,  but 
relieving  the  distress  of  others,  carrying  lost  children  to  their 
camp,  and  caring  for  them  till  they  are  found  by  their 
friends. 

The  third  legend  belongs  to  the  Urabunna,  the  Kuyani, 
and  the  southern  tribes  as  far  as  Spencer  Gulf.  It  says 
that  two  Mura-mura  youths,  coming  from  the  north,  travelled 
through  the  land,  introducing  the  use  of  the  stone  knife  for 
circumcision.  After  thus  showing  themselves  in  many 
places  as  life -givers,  they  turned  back  northwards,  and  at 
Lake  Eyre  one  went  to  the  west,  and  the  other  to  the  east 
and  then  to  the  north,  taking  everywhere  the  Tula  and 
introducing  its  use.  Thus  they  still  wander,  showing  them- 
selves at  times  as  living  and  as  life-givers. 

Another  legend  of  two  Mura-mura  youths,  the  Yuri-ulu, 
belongs  to  the  Wonkanguru,  and  relates  partly  to  the 
circumcision  ceremony,  and  partly  to  their  wanderings  to 
the  north-westward,  where  in  the  mountains  they  passed 
through  the  edge  of  the  sky,  which  rested  on  the  earth, 
into  another  country.      There  both  of  them  died,  according 


478        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

to  this  legend  ;  but  returning  to  life,  they  called  to  their 
father,  with  the  voice  of  thunder,  that  they  had  died  in  a 
strange  land.  The  Yuri  -  ulu  are  the  stars  Castor  and 
Pollux. 

Other  legends  of  these  tribes  relate  to  the  wanderings  of 
the  Mura-muras  over  a  large  part  of  Australia  north  and 
south  of  Lake  Eyre,  either  in  connection  with  certain  of 
their  food  ceremonies,  or  for  other  purposes,  or  to  explain 
the  origin  of  things  which  to  the  aborigines  seem  to  require 
explanation. 

The  wanderings  of  the  Mura-niura  Makatakaba,^  are  told 
by  a  Wonkanguru  legend.  He  was  nearly  blind,  but  re- 
covered his  sight  by  seeing  a  distant  fire  which  his  daughters 
had  observed  when  out  with  their  mother  gathering  seeds 
for  food.  Leaving  them  behind,  he  went  forth  on  his 
wanderings,  singing  a  song  into  which  he  wove  all  that  he 
saw.  At  length  he  reached  a  great  water,  on  the  shores  of 
which  he  gathered  glowing  coals  from  a  fire  which  had 
sprung  up  by  itself.  Thence  he  wandered  back  southwards, 
still  making  his  song,  until  he  reached  the  Macumba  country, 
where,  being  ridiculed  by  the  people,  he  destroyed  them  by 
a  fire  which  he  lighted  with  the  coals  carried  in  his  bag. 
Meanwhile  his  wife  and  daughters  were  carried  away  by  a 
whirlwind,  farther  and  farther  to  the  north,  until  they  were 
finally  overwhelmed  with  sand.  The  account  of  his  wander- 
ings suggests  that  the  great  water  which  he  met  with  was 
the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  which  lies  about  700  miles  to  the 
north-east  of  the  Wonkanguru  country. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  these  legends  is  that  of 
the  Pirha-malkara.  It  is  one  of  those  about  which  songs 
are  sung  at  the  ceremonies  of  circumcision,  and  it  relates  to 
the  wanderings  of  the  Mankara-waka  and  the  Mankara-pirna, 
two  parties  of  young  women,  the  younger  and  the  elder.^ 
The  legend  is  divided  into  two  parts  :  the  first  belongs  to 
the  Urabunna,  Tirari,  Dieri,  and  other  tribes,  and  the  second 
to  the  Wonkanguru. 

1  M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  op.  cit. 

-  The  Mankara-pirna  ya  waka,  that  is,  the  girls  big  and  little,  otherwise  older 
and  younger. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  479 

The  legend  recounts  their  adventures,  and  gives  the 
reasons  for  the  names  they  gave  to  the  places  at  which  they 
halted  or  camped.  It  traces  them  to  a  place  on  the  east 
side  of  Lake  Eyre  round  its  southern  end,  and  to  some  place 
on  the  north-east  side  apparently  in  the  Wonkanguru  country. 

A  second  legend  gives  the  wanderings  of  the  young 
women  to  a  place  where  they  met  a  similar  party  of  Wonka- 
mala  girls,  who  therefore  must  have  come  southwards,  from 
about  two  hundred  miles  north  of  Lake  Eyre. 

The  two  parties  having  joined,  they  wandered  still 
farther  to  the  north,  until  they  reached  a  vast  sheet  of  water, 
with  high  waves.  Following  its  shore,  they  came  to  a  steep 
hill,  at  which  some  of  them  turned  back.  These  came  upon 
a  number  of  men  engaged  on  a  Wodampa  ceremony,  who 
being  enraged  that  the  girls  should  have  seen  what  was  not 
lawful  for  them  to  see,  strangled  them  all.  Meanwhile  the 
others,  being  stopped  by  the  steep  hill,  which  they  could  not 
pass,  the  eldest  one  struck  it  with  her  IVona,  or  staff,  and  as 
it  opened,  they  danced  through  the  opening,  and  came  to  a 
place  where  Ankuritcha,  an  ancient  man,  was  sitting  on  the 
ground,  twisting  cord,  in  front  of  his  camp.  They  seated 
themselves  near  him,  and  as  he  listened  to  them,  with  his 
ear  turned  to  the  sky,  Arawotya,  who  lives  there,  let  down  a 
long  hair  cord,  and  drew  them  up  to  himself 

The  Mankara-waka  are  the  Pleiades,  and  Orion's  Belt  is 
the  group  of  the  Mankara-pirna.  All  that  is  known  of 
Arawotya  is  that  he  once  wandered  over  the  earth,  and  that 
he  made  the  deep  springs  of  water  which  rise  here  and  there 
in  otherwise  waterless  districts  of  north-western  Queensland. 

As  in  the  legend  of  the  Mura-mura  Makatakaba,  it  is 
not  easy  to  say  what  the  great  sheet  of  water  can  be,  unless 
it  is  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  which  is  nearer  to  the  Wonka- 
mala  country  than  that  of  the  Wonkanguru.  Northern 
tribes-people  who  came  to  the  Minkani  ceremonies  would 
meet  Dieri,  and  thus  made  known  to  them  facts  as  to  the 
geography  of  parts  still  farther  to  the  north.  At  any  rate, 
there  is  no  sheet  of  water  which  would  strike  the  Lake  Eyre 
tribes  as  remarkable  between  their  country  and  the  sea. 

Besides  these  legends,  there  are  others  which  relate  to 


48o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  ceremonies  by  which  it  is  sought  to  produce  a  supply  of 
food,  animal  and  vegetable,  on  which  the  native  tribes 
depend  for  their  subsistence  ;  and  these  legends  relate  how, 
for  instance,  the  ceremonies  for  producing  a  crop  of  lizards 
and  carpet-snakes  originated. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  legends  is  that  of  the  Mura- 
mura  Minkani.  It  is  a  Yantruwunta  legend,  also  held  by 
the  Yaurorka  and  Dieri.  It  tells  how  a  Mura-mura,  called 
Anti-ctya,  went  away  to  a  place  now  known  as  Farrar's 
Creek,  where  he  lived  in  a  cave  in  a  sandhill,  and  became 
the  Mura-mura  Minkani.  It  says  that  while  he  burrowed 
deeper  and  deeper  in  the  sandhill,  presents  were  carried  from 
him  to  Andrutampana,  another  Mura-mura  in  the  north,  on 
the  understanding  that  after  his  death  the  sacred  song  of 
each  should  be  combined.  These  songs  are  sung  at  the 
cave  of  the  Mura-mura  Minkani  elsewhere  described. 

The  other  legends  given  in  the  Appendix  show  that  the 
lives  and  customs  of  those  mythical  people  were  similar  to, 
and  indeed  identical  in  most  points  with,  those  of  the  native 
tribes  who  believe  in  them. 

As  perhaps  indicating  a  stage  in  culture,  there  is  a 
Dieri  legend,  relating  how  the  existing  marriage  rules,  based 
on  the  totemic  restrictions,  were  instituted,  and  with  this  it  is 
necessary  to  consider  what  has  been  called  the  "  Murdu 
legend  "  of  Mr.  S.  Gason.^  In  the  course  of  my  inquiries  as 
to  the  Dieri  traditions,  I  became  doubtful  as  to  whether  Mr. 
Gason's  Murdu  legend  might  be  taken  to  actually  give  the 
belief  in  a  "  good  spirit "  called  Mura-mura  as  held  by  the 
Dieri.  I  therefore  requested  Mr.  Sicbert  to  investigate  this 
question,  the  result  being  the  mass  of  legends  which  are  now 
rescued  from  oblivion. 

The  following  is  Mr.  Gason's  legend,  which  was  quoted 
by  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  and  myself  in  our  work,  Katnilaroi 
and  Kurnai,  in  1 880  : — 

"  After  the  creation  brothers,  sisters,  and  others  of  the 
nearest  kin  intermarried  promiscuously,  until  the  evil  effects 
of  the  alliances  becoming  manifest,  a  council  of  the  chiefs 
was   assembled    to    consider    in    what    way   they    might   be 

1   The  Dieyeri  Tribe,  p.  13.      Cox,  Adelaide,  South  Australia,  1874. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  481 

averted,  the  result  of  their  deliberations  being  a  petition  to 
the  Mura-mura  (good  spirit),  in  answer  to  which  he  ordered 
that  the  tribe  should  be  divided  into  branches,  and  dis- 
tinguished one  from  another  by  different  names,  after  objects 
animate  and  inanimate,  such  as  dogs,  mice,  emu,  rain,  iguana, 
and  so  forth  ;  the  members  of  any  such  branch  not  to  inter- 
marry, but  with  permission  for  one  branch  to  mingle 
with  another." 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Mr.  Gason  did  not  give 
his  legend,  as  nearly  as  possible,  in  the  words  of  his  infor- 
mants, rather  than  in  the  above  anglicised  version. 

The  other  version  which  we  have  obtained  is  as  follows  : 
"  The  several  families  of  Murdus  married  in  themselves 
without  shame.  This  occasioned  great  confusion,  and  sexual 
disorder  became  predominant.  The  Pinnarus  (elders)  observ- 
ing this,  came  together  to  consider  how  these  evils  might  be 
avoided.  They  agreed  that  the  families  should  be  divided, 
and  that  no  member  of  a  segment  should  marry  within  it. 
In  accordance  with  this  it  was  ordered  that  '  Yidni  padi 
madu  (murdu)  wapanai  kaualka  kuraterila,  yidni  kaualka 
xvapanai  warugatti  kuraterila,  etc'  That  is,  '  Thou  grub 
totem,  go  to  produce  crow  ;  thou  crow  totem,  go  to  produce 
emu,  etc.,'  and  so  on  for  the  other  totems." 

These  two  legends  differ  in  a  very  material  matter. 
That  of  Mr.  Gason  says  that  the  Murdus  were  established 
for  the  purpose  of  regulating  marriage,  while  th^t  of  Mr. 
Siebert  says  that  the  Murdu  families  existed,  but  that  they 
married  within  themselves,  and  that  the  evils  which  were 
experienced  therefrom  were  avoided  by  establishing  what 
was,  in  fact,  exogamy.  By  it  marriage,  which  pre-existed, 
was  regulated,  and  this  was  done  by  the  Pinnarus,  not  by 
the  order  of  a  Mura-mura,  but  by  their  own  will.  If  we 
accept  this  as  having  been  done  in  the  Mura-mura  times, 
then  both  legends  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  reconciled,  for  the 
Pinnarus  then  were  the  Mura-muras. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  view  not  only  falls  into  line 
with  the  general  conclusions  which  may  be  drawn  from 
all  the  legends  given  here  regarding  the  beliefs  of  the  Lake 
Eyre  tribes,  and  the  sequence  of  the  several  stages  of  their 

2  I 


482        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

social  evolution,  but  also  with  conclusions  which  have  been 
drawn  by  Spencer  and  Gillen  from  the  analogous  legends 
of  the  Arunta  tribes. 

It  seems  to  me  that  these  legends  may  be  taken  to  be 
not  merely  mythical,  but  rather  dim  records  of  former  events, 
such  as  the  wanderings  of  the  early  Australians,  dressed  in 
a  mythic  garb,  and  handed  down  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion, from  father  to  son,  in  the  sacred  ceremonies.  After 
observing  the  reverence  with  which  the  blacks  hear  such 
legends,  I  can  see  plainly  how  true  their  feeling  is  when  they 
say  to  a  question,  "  Why  do  you  do  such  or  such  a  thing  ?  " 
"  Our  fathers  told  us  to  do  so." 

The  legends  show  what  the  Mura-muras  are  supposed 
to  have  been.  At  the  present  time  they  are  said  to  inhabit 
trees,  which  are,  therefore,  sacred.  It  is  the  medicine-men 
alone  who  are  able  to  see  them,  and  from  them  they  obtain 
their  magical  powers. 

Some  of  these  legends  identify  natural  features  of  the 
country  with  the  Mura-muras  ;  for  instance,  the  thermal 
springs  near  Lake  Eyre  with  the  Mura-miira  Kakakudana, 
and  certain  petrifactions  to  the  south-east  of  Lake  Eyre 
where  some  Mura-mura  women  were  turned  into  stone. 
Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  has  told  me  that  the  equivalents 
of  the  Mura-muras  occur  with  the  Urabunna,  and  the  places 
are  pointed  out  where  they  died  and  where  their  spirits  still 
are.  Oge  of  these  places  is  shown  in  the  accompanying 
illustration  of  a  mass  of  rocks  which  are  said  to  be  the  spot 
where  some  Pigeon  ancestors  went  into  the  ground. 

This  evidently  connects  the  Mura-mura  beliefs  of  the 
Dieri  with  the  Alcheringa  beliefs  of  the  Arunta.  So  far, 
however,  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  that  the  Dieri  have 
the  Arunta  belief  in  the  reincarnation  of  the  ancestor,  nor 
have  I  found  any  trace  of  it  in  the  tribes  of  South-east 
Australia. 

For  comparison  with  the  Mura-mura  beliefs,  I  quote 
from  Spencer  and  Gillen  a  few  comprehensive  passages 
descriptive  of  the  beliefs  of  the  tribes  of  which  the  Arunta 
are  the  representatives  (type).^ 

1  Spencer  and  Gillen,  op.  at.  pp.  73,  119,  120,  377,  378,  513. 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES 


483 


The  Alcheringa  is  the  name  applied  to  the  far-distant 
past,  with  which  the  earliest  traditions  of  the  Arunta  tribe 
deal,  and  in  the  Alcheringa  lived  ancestors  who,  in  the  native 
mind,  are  so  intimately  associated  with  the  animals  and 
plants  the  name  of  which  they  bear,  that  an  Alcheringa 
man  of,  say,  the  kangaroo  totem,  may  be  sometimes  spoken 
of  either  as  man-kangaroo,  or  as  a  kangaroo-man. 

Going  back  to  this  far-away  time,  we  find  ourselves  in 


FIG.    27. — PIGEON    ROCK,    UKABUNNA   TRIHK. 

The  rocks  are  supposed  to  be  full  of  pigeon  spirit  individuals  left  l)ehind  by  the  ancestor  o  the 

pigeon  totem  group.     The  spirits  are  called  Mai-aurli  (or  Mura-inura)  by  the  Urabuniia. 

the  midst  of  semi-human  creatures  endowed  with  powers  not 
possessed  by  their  living  descendants,  and  inhabiting  the 
country  which  is  now  inhabited  by  the  tribe.  The  traditions 
recognise  four  more  or  less  distant  periods  in  the  Alcheringa. 
During  the  first  of  these,  men  and  women  were  created  ;  in 
the  second,  the  rite  of  circumcision  by  means  of  the  .stone 
knife,  in  place  of  the  fire-stick,  was  introduced  ;  in  the  third, 
the  rite  of  Arilta,  or  subincision  was  brought  in  ;  and  in  the 
fourth,  the  present  organisation  and  marriage  system. 

Every  individual  is  supposed  to  be  the  reincarnation  of 


484        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

an  Alcheringa  being,  or,  in  other  words,  one  of  the  ancestors. 
Thus  one  of  the  most  remarkable  features  in  the  beHefs  of 
the  Arunta  is  that  of  the  existence  of  spirit-ancestors  who 
become  reincarnate  by  entering  some  woman,  and  are  again 
born  under  their  original  totem  names. 

The  Yerkla-mining  believe  in  the  existence  of  an  evil- 
disposed  being  called  Burga^  who  can  harm  them  unseen. 
He  is  white  in  colour,  and  is  always  lurking  about  with 
intent  to  do  harm,  and  may  be  met  anywhere  at  night  or 
after  sunset. 

One  of  my  correspondents,^  hearing  that  the  oldest 
Mobungbai  had,  as  the  blacks  express  it  in  their  "  pidgin 
English,"  "  fought  the  devil,"  went  out  to  see  the  place  in  the 
Mallee  scrub,  on  the  top  of  the  cliffs.  He  found  a  small 
open  space  where  the  ground  was  torn  up,  and  tufts  of  grass 
torn  up  by  the  roots.  The  place  looked  as  if  fifty  natives 
had  been  at  battle,  but  the  tracks  and  footprints  were  all 
evidently  made  by  the  same  person.  The  Mobungbai  who 
had  fought  was  very  ill  and  quite  exhausted  for  some  days 
afterwards.  These  men  professed  to  learn  from  dreams 
when  and  where  the  other  people  arc  to  hunt,  travel,  or  visit, 
etc.  They  surround  their  lives  with  as  much  mystery  as 
possible. 

I  take  the  beliefs  of  the  native  tribes  of  Victoria  as 
representing  those  of  the  tribes  of  South-east  Australia. 

The  Wotjobaluk  account  of  the  creation  of  man  says 
that  long  ago  Ngunung-ngunnut,  the  bat,  who  was  a  man, 
lived  on  the  earth,  and  there  were  others  like  him,  but  there 
was  no  difference  between  the  sexes.  Feeling  lonely,  he 
wished  for  a  wife,  and  he  altered  himself  and  one  other,  so 
that  he  was  the  man  and  the  other  was  the  woman.  Then 
he  made  fire  by  rubbing  a  stick  on  a  log  of  wood. 

According  to  the  Wurunjerri,  it  was  Bunjil  who  made  men 
of  clay  and  imparted  life  to  them,  while  his  brother,  Pallina, 
the  bat,  brought  women  up  out  of  the  water  to  be  their  wives.^ 

According  to  the  Yuin,  the   eastern   neighbours  of  the 

'   D.  Elphinstone  Roe. 

2  William  Thomas,  Letters  from    Victorian   Pioneers,  p.   65.     Government 
Printer,  Melbourne. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  485 

Kurnai,  before  there  were  men  there  were  creatures  some- 
what Hke  human  beings,  but  without  members.  Muraurai, 
the  Emu-wren,  turned  them  into  men  and  women  by  split- 
ting their  legs,  separating  the  arms  from  the  sides,  and 
slitting  up  their  fingers,  and  otherwise  perfecting  them. 

A  legend  of  the  Wotjobaluk  tells  of  the  wanderings  of 
the  two  Bram-bram-gal  in  search  of  Doan,  the  flying-squirrel, 
who  had  been  killed  and  eaten  by  WembuHn,  the  so-called 
Tarantula.  It  tells  of  their  adventures,  and  of  the  naming 
of  the  places  where  these  occurred,  until  the  younger  of  the 
brothers  died.  Then  the  elder  shaped  part  of  a  tree  in  the 
form  of  a  man,  and  by  his  magic  caused  it  to  become  alive, 
and  to  call  him  elder  brother.  United  once  more,  the  two 
Bram-bram-gal  travelled  far  to  the  west,  where  they  lived 
in  a  cavern  ;  but  no  one  knows  where  they  then  went  to.' 

The  Wurunjerri  legend  of  Lohan  is,  that  when  he  was 
cooking  eels  at  the  Yarra  River  he  observed  a  swan's  feather 
carried  by  the  south  wind.  Walking  in  that  direction,  he  at 
length  came  to  Westernport  Bay,  where  the  swans  lived. 
There  he  remained  till  they  migrated  to  the  east,  and  he 
followed  them.  Coming  to  Corner  Inlet,  he  made  his  home 
in  the  mountains  of  Wilson's  Promontory,  and  watched  over 
the  welfare  of  the  people  who  followed  him. 

Although  the  Kurnai  had  no  legend  of  the  migration  of 
Lohan,  they  also  believed  that  he  lived  in  the  mountains  of 
Wilson's  Promontory,  with  his  wife  Lolian-tuka.  The  Brataua 
clan,  in  whose  country  his  home  is,  said  that  their  old  men 
had  seen  him  from  time  to  time  marching  over  the  mountains 
with  his  great  jag-spear  over  his  shoulder.  They  also  believed 
that  he  watched  over  them,  and  that  he  caused  their  country 
to  be  deadly  to  strangers.  It  was  therefore  to  him  that 
they  attributed  the  taboo  which  protected  them  against  the 
visits  of  other  tribes,  from  the  eastern  extremes  of  Gippsland 
to  the  lower  Murray  River." 

There  is  a  legend  that  the  first  Kurnai  man  marched 
across  the  country  from  the  north-west,  bearing  on  his  head 
a  bark  canoe  in  which  was  his  wife  Tuk,  that  is  the  Musk- 
duck,  he  being  Borun,  the  Pelican.^ 

'   M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  Legends  and  Folklore,  MS.  ^  /^/^l  •'»  Ibid. 


486        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  sacred  legends  of  these  tribes  which  are  connected 
with  the  ceremonies  of  initiation  attribute  their  institution  to 
a  great  supernatural  being,  called  among  the  Wurunjerri, 
Bunjil,  and  not  to  origins  such  as  are  attributed  to  them  by 
the  tribes  of  Central  Australia.  This  is  a  very  marked  feature, 
which  will  be  enlarged  upon  later. 

A  Kurnai  tale  tells  how  the  supernatural  being  called 
Builum-baukan  stole  the  fire  of  the  early  Kurnai.  Narugul, 
the  Crow,  and  Ngarang,  the  Swamp-hawk,  having  recovered  it, 
Builum-baukan  ascended  to  the  sky  by  climbing  up  a  cord 
made  of  the  sinews  of  the  red  wallaby.^ 

Another  legend  shows  the  composite  nature  of  the  actors, 
other  than  Bunjil.  Karwin,  the  Blue  Heron,  who  had  been 
fishing,  met  two  young  men,  and  having  given  them  some  of 
his  fish,  which  they  ate,  they  went  to  sleep  by  the  fire.  He 
then  by  his  magic  caused  a  log  of  wood  to  rise  upon  end, 
and  fall  on  to  the  young  men,  and  kill  them.  Then  Bunjil 
for  this,  and  also  because  he  had  not  given  food  to  his  wife, 
fought  with  him  and  speared  him  through  the  thigh  so  that 
his  legs  shrivelled  up  and  became  very  thin,  and  always  hang 
down  when  he  flies.'- 

This  composite  character  of  the  actors  in  the  legendary 
tales  is  shown  by  the  Kurnai  tales,  of  which  the  following  is 
an  example. 

There  was  a  great  flood  which  covered  the  land,  and 
drowned  the  people,  excepting  a  man  and  two  women. 
Bunjil  Borun,  the  Pelican,  came  by  in  his  canoe,  and  took 
the  man  across  to  the  mainland,  then  one  woman,  leaving 
the  better-looking  one  to  the  last.  She,  being  frightened, 
swam  over  to  the  land,  having  placed  a  log  rolled  up  in  her 
rug  by  the  fire  as  if  she  were  there  asleep.  Bunjil  Borun 
discovering  this,  when  he  returned,  became  very  much  en- 
raged and  began  to  paint  himself  ready  for  fighting  with  the 
man  whose  wife  had  played  him  this  trick.  While  he  was 
doing  this  another  pelican  came  up,  and  seeing  a  queer- 
looking  creature,  half-black  and  half-white,  struck  at  it  with 
his  beak  and  killed  Bunjil  Borun.^ 

Such  tales  as  these  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely,  from 

1  M.  E.  B.  Howitt,  Legends  and  Folklore,  MS.  '^  Ibid.  ^  /^,v/. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  487 

the  tribes  of  South-east  Australia,  but  what  I  have  given 
will  show  their  character,  and  serve  for  a  comparison  with 
those  from  Central  Australia.  As  to  the  actual  character  of 
these  half-human,  half-animal  actors  of  the  tales,  something 
may  be  said,  and  perhaps  the  best  example  is  that  of  the 
Kurnai. 

With  them  certain  animals,  birds,  and  reptiles  have  each 
its  own  individual  name,  but  all  are  known  collectively  as 
Muk-jiak,  that  is,  "  excellent  flesh  "  (or  meat)  ;  while  other 
creatures  used  for  food  are  merely  Jiak.  Now  in  all  these 
tales,  in  which  a  bird-man  or  reptile-man  or  animal-man 
takes  part,  in  a  twofold  character,  it  is  a  Muk-kurnai.  This 
may  be  translated  as  "  eminent  man  or  men,"  the  Kurnai  of 
the  legend  being  thus  distinguished  from  the  Kurnai  of  the 
present  time.  The  whole  term  may  be  fairly  interpreted  as 
"  eminent  ancestors,"  for  they  were  not  only  the  predecessors 
of  the  tribe,  but  also  in  one  sense  the  Wchntwin^  that  is, 
the  Grandfathers.  It  may  be  added  that  there  are  not  only 
Muk-kurnai  but  also  Muk-rukut  {Rukut  being  woman).  The 
Kurnai  say  that  the  bird  Leatherhead  is  appropriately  place<^ 
among  the  Muk-rukut,  because  it  is  continually  chattering. 
The  Muk-kurnai  and  the  Muk-jiak  animals  are  therefore  the 
same  as  the  ancestors,  and  a  suggestion  naturally  arises  that 
these  latter  were  also  the  totems.^ 

The  Mura-muraSy  Alcheringa  ancestors,  and  Muk-kurnai     /^ 
are  all  on  somewhat  the  same  level,  while  the  tribal  All-father 
as  represented  by  Mungan-ngaua  belongs  to  a  distinctly  higher 
level  of  mental  development. 

The  three  types  of  belief  represented  by  the  AlcJieringa 
ancestors,  the  Mura-muras^  and  the  Muk-kurnai  have  certain 
features  in  common.  They  recognise  a  primitive  time  before 
man  existed,  and  when  the  earth  was  inhabited  by  beings, 
the  prototypes  of,  but  more  powerful  in  magic,  than  the 
native  tribes.  Those  beings,  if  they  did  not  create  man,  at 
least  perfected  him  from  some  unformed  and  scarcely  human 
creatures.  Although  this  appears  when  one  looks  at  the 
subject  broadly,  there  are  yet  differences  which  distinguish 
the  several  types  of  belief  from  each  other.  In  the  legendary 
'  Of  course  this  does  not  include  the  sex  totem?. 


488        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

tales  of  South-east  Australia  the  actors  are  either  of  the 
composite  human  and  animal  natures,  or  entirely  human, 
like  Bunjil  or  Baiavie.  With  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes  they  are 
almost  entirely  human  as  Mura-muras,  and  only  in  rarer 
cases  are  they  of  the  composite  character,  as  in  the  legend 
of  the  Mura-muras  who  became  emus,  or  the  tale  of  Pirinti 
and  Kapiri  where  they  are  almost  completely  animal.  But 
the  principal  difference  lies  in  this  absence  among  the 
native  tribes  of  Central  Australia  of  a  belief  in  a  tribal 
All-father,  which  I  shall  consider  in  the  following  section. 

The  Tribal  All-father 

Altogether  apart  from  the  Mura-muras,  Alcherijiga 
ancestors,  or  the  Aluk-kurnai  is  the  supernatural  anthropo- 
morphic being  in  whom  the  tribes  of  the  south-east  of 
Australia  believe,  under  different  names.  In  the  chapter  on 
the  initiation  ceremonies  I  describe  the  manner  in  which  the 
sacred  beliefs  are  imparted  to  the  novices,  and  I  shall  now 
record  what  may  be  gathered  therefrom,  and  also  from 
statements  recorded  by  various  writers  bearing  on  this 
belief. 

In  doing  this  I  commence  with  the  Narrinyeri,  as  the 
most  western  tribe  in  which  I  find  the  belief  exists. 

According  to  Taplin,'  the  Narrinyeri  "  call  the  Supreme 
Being  by  the  names  Nurrundere  and  Martummere.  He  is 
said  to  have  made  all  things  on  the  earth,  and  to  have 
given  to  men  the  weapons  of  war  and  hunting,  and  to  have 
instituted  all  the  rites  and  ceremonies  which  are  practised 
by  the  aborigines,  whether  connected  with  life  or  death. 
On  inquiring  why  they  adhere  to  any  custom,  the  reply  is 
Nurrundere  commanded  it.  Nurrundere  went  to  Wyirra- 
warre,  taking  his  children  with  him." 

Wyirra-ivarre  is  said  to  be  the  sky,  and  Taplin  says  : 
"  The  Narrinyeri  always  mention  his  name  with  reverence. 
I  never  heard  them  use  it  lightly  or  with  levity."  In 
speaking  of  a  great  kangaroo  hunt  at  which  150  natives 
were  present,  he  says :   "  On   reaching  the  hunting-ground, 

'   Op.  cit.  p.  55. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  489 

a  wallaby,  which  had  been  killed  on  the  road  thither,  was 
produced,  and  a  fire  kindled  by  the  women.  Then  the  men 
standing  round,  struck  up  a  sort  of  chant,  at  the  same  time 
stamping  with  their  feet.  The  wallaby  was  put  on  the  fire, 
and  as  the  smoke  from  it  ascended,  the  hunters,  at  a  con- 
certed signal,  rushed  towards  it,  lifting  their  weapons  towards 
heaven.  I  afterwards  learned  that  this  ceremony  was 
instituted  by  Nurrundere."  ^ 

This  description  exactly  recalls  to  me  the  action  of  the 
men  at  the  commencement  of  the  Bunan  ceremonies,  when 
they  point  to  the  sky  with  their  weapons  or  the  boughs 
they  hold,  as  indicating  the  great  Biamban,  whose  name  it 
is  not  lawful  to  mention  excepting  at  the  ceremonies,  and 
when  only  initiated  persons  are  present. 

The  Wiimbaio  spoke  of  Nurelli  with  the  greatest  rever- 
ence. He  was  said  to  have  made  the  whole  country, 
with  the  rivers,  trees,  and  animals.  He  gave  to  the  blacks 
their  laws,  and  finally  ascended  to  the  sky,  where  they 
pointed  him  out  as  one  of  the  constellations."  He  is  said 
to  have  had  two  wives,  to  have  carried  two  spears,  and  his 
place  of  ascension  is  pointed  out  as  at  Lake  Victoria.^ 

In  the  tribes  of  South-west  Victoria  Nurelli  is  replaced 
by  a  being,  who,  according  to  Dawson,"*  is  the  .good  spirit 
Ptrnmeheeal,  who  is  a  gigantic  man,  living  above  the  clouds  ; 
and,  as  he  is  of  a  kindly  disposition  and  harms  no  one,  he 
is  seldom  mentioned,  but  always  with  respect. 

The  VVotjobaluk  spoke  of  Bunjil  as  a  great  man,  who 
was  once  on  the  earth,  but  is  now  in  the  sky.  His  wives 
were  two  sisters  Ganawarra  (Black  Swan).  A  brother  of 
Bunjil  was  Dji'rt,  who  is  now  a  star  near  to  him.  I  am  in 
doubt  as  to  which  star  is  Bunjil,  for  the  one  pointed  out  to 
mc  was   Fomalhaut,  but  elsewhere   in   Victoria   among  the 

»  Op.  cit.  p.  55. 

2  The  late  Dr.  M'Kinlay,  who  knew  the  Wiimbaio  well,  soon  after  their 
country  was  settled,  informed  me  that  the  constellation  was  the  Pleiades.  'I'his 
seems  doubtful  to  me,  as  they  are  called  by  the  Victorian  tribes  by  some  name 
indicating  a  group  of  women,  for  instance,  Karat-gontk,  from  Karat  a  "group," 
and  gortik  the  feminine  postfix. 

•'  On  the  north  side  of  the  river  Murray,  with  which  it  is  connected  by  the 
Rufus,  and  about  50  miles  from  Wentworth. 

■»   Op.  cit.  p.  49. 


490        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        gh. 


Kulin  it  is  Altair.  Yet  Dawson,  in  speaking  of  the  south- 
western tribes,  gives  among  the  stars  "  Fomalhaut,  Bunjil."  ^ 
The  VVotjobaluk  also  spoke  of  Bunjil  as  Mami-ngorak, 
that  is,  "our  father,"  and  said  that  he  is  in  some  place 
beyond  the  Wiirra-wurra,  or  sky.  This  place  is  said  to  be 
also  beyond  the  Wurk-kerim,  or  dark  place,  which  the 
medicine-men  told  them  "  is  like  a  mountain."  My  in- 
formants, who  did  not  belong  to  the  medicine-man  calling, 
said  further  that  the  Bangal  (medicine-men)  told  them  that 
they  were  met  at  the  Wurk-kerim  by  another  being  called 
Gargomitch,  who  leaving  them  there  went  to  where  Mauii- 
ngorak  is  and  brought  back  to  them  his  answer  to  their 
inquiries. 

I  feel  that  it  is  well  that  I  should  guard  myself  against 
any  misconception  as  to  the  real  meaning  of  the  expression 
"  our  father."  Taking  the  Kurnai  case  as  an  example,  the 
term  used  is  iMungan,  that  being  the  relation  of  a  man 
and  of  all  his  brothers  to  his  child.  It  is  a  group  relation- 
ship, and  further  it  includes  all  those  who  were  made  Jeraeil 
at  the  same  ceremonies.  As  to  this,  I  was  Jeraeil  with  the 
before-mentioned  Tulaba,  he  being  therefore  my  Bramung, 
or  younger  brother.  Consequently  I  was  also  in  the  relation 
of  Mungan  to  his  son.  It  happened  that  I  did  not  see  the 
latter  for  some  ten  or  fifteen  years,  and  when  we  met,  he 
came  forward,  with  his  eyes  cast  down  toward  the  ground, 
and  with  his  hand  raised  to  his  mouth,  and  said  in  a  low 
tone,  with  great  reverence,  "  Mungan  !  Mungan  !  "  There 
was,  however,  more  in  this  than  a  mere  salutation  to  one  of 
his  kindred.  As  one  of  the  leaders  in  the  Jeraeil,  at  which 
he  was  present,  I  was,  so  to  say,  in  the  position  of  one  of 
the  Gweraeil- kurnai,  or  Great  Men,  whom,  independently 
of  any  group  relationship,  he  would  have  addressed  as  he 
did  me,  by  saying  with  reverence  "  Mungan  !  Mungan  !  " 
that  is,  Father  !   Father  ! 

Now  this  is  precisely  the  position  in  which  the  tribes- 
people  stand  to  Bunjil,  Daramulun,  Baiame,  and   Mungan- 

•  Op.  cit.  p.  loo.  In  Mrs.  James  Smith's  work,  The  Buandik  Tribe  (Adelaide, 
1880),  the  vocabulary,  p.  128,  gives  this,  "  Boongil — the  planets  observable."  It 
is  evident  that  she  refers  to  Bunjil  as  one  of  the  stars. 


viii  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  491 

ngaua,  who  are  all  spoken  of  as  "  father "  ;  while  the  last 
has  no  other  name  than  "  Father  of  all  of  us."  It  is 
necessary  to  guard  carefully  against  such  a  feeling  toward 
Mungan-ngaua  as  is  embodied  in  our  expression  "  Our 
Father  in  heaven."  Mungan-ngaua  is  the  Headman  in  the 
sky-country,  the  analogue  of  the  Headman  of  the  tribe  on 
the  earth.^ 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe,  which  had  not  any  initiation 
ceremonies  of  the  Bora  type,  the  medicine -men  evidently 
kept  to  themselves  certain  beliefs  as  to  Mami-ngorak,  just 
as  the  initiated  men  keep  the  beliefs  as  to  Mungan-ngaua, 
Daramulun,  or  Baiame  from  the  uninitiated. 

All  that  I  know  of  the  beliefs  of  the  Mukjarawaint  is 
that  Bunjil  was  once  a  man  who  was  the  father  of  all  the 
people,  and  that  he  was  good  and  did  no  harm  to  any  one. 
I  may  mention  here  as  in  one  sense  belonging  to  this  part 
of  my  subject,  that  one  of  the  Mukjarawaint  said  that  at 
one  time  there  was  a  figure  of  Bunjil  and  his  dog  painted 
in  a  small  cave  behind  a  large  rock  in  the  Black  Range 
near  Stawell,  but  I  have  not  seen  it,  nor  have  I  heard  of 
any  one  having  seen  it. 

The  following  are  the  beliefs  of  the  Kulin  as  they  appear 
in  their  legends,  and  from  the  statements  of  surviving 
Wurunjerri  to  me.  Bunjil,  as  represented  by  them,  seems  to 
be  an  old  man,  the  benign  Ngurungaeta  or  Headman  of  the 
tribe,  with  his  two  wives,  who  were  Ganaivarra  (Black  Swan), 
and  his  son  Binbeal,  the  rainbow,  whose  wife  was  the  second 
rainbow  which  is  sometimes  visible.  Bunjil  taught  the 
Kulin  the  arts  of  life,  and  one  legend  states  that  in  that 
time  the  Kulin  married  without  any  regard  for  kinship. 
Two  medicine-men  iWirraraf)  went  up  to  him  in  the 
Tharangalk-bek,  and  he  said  in  reply  to  their  request  that 
the  Kulin  should  divide  themselves  into  two  parts — "  Bunjil 
on  this  side  and  Waang  on  that  side,  and  Bunjil  should 
marry   Waang,  and   Waang  marry  Bunjil." 

Another  legend  relates  that  he  finally  went  up  to  the 
sky-land  with  all  his  people  (the  legend  says  his  "  sons  ")  in 

'   But  Mungan-ngaua  is  also  spoken  of  at  the  ceremonies  as  fCurttai-talung  or 
Kiiriiai-ma-ngittel,  that  is,  "my  man." 


492        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 

a  whirlwind,  which  Bellin-bellin  (the  Musk-crow)  let  out  of  his 
skin  bag  at  his  order.  There,  as  the  old  men  instructed  the 
boys,  he  still  remains,  looking  down  on  the  Kulin.  A 
significant  instance  of  this  belief  is  that  Berak,  when  a  boy, 
"  before  his  whiskers  grew,"  was  taken  by  his  Kangun 
(mother's  brother)  out  of  the  camp  at  night,  who,  pointing 
to  the  star  Altair  with  his  spear-thrower,  said  :  "  See  !  that 
one  is  Bunjil ;  you  see  him,  and  he  sees  you."  This  was 
before  Batman  settled  on  the  banks  of  the  Yarra  River,  and 
is  conclusive  as  to  the  primitive  character  of  this  belief 

One  of  the  legends  about  Bunjil  in  the  Woeworung 
tribe  is  perpetuated  in  a  corrdbboree  which  was  witnessed  in 
the  early  forties  by  Richard  Howitt.^  The  legend  is  that 
Bunjil  held  out  his  hand  to  the  sun  {Gerer)  and  warmed  it, 
and  the  sun  warmed  the  earth,  which  opened,  and  black- 
fellows  came  out  and  danced  this  corrobboree,  which  is 
called  Gayip.  At  it  images  curiously  carved  in  bark 
were  exhibited. 

Usually  Bunjil  was  spoken  of  as  Mami-ngata,  that  is, 
"  Our  Father,"  instead  of  by  the  other  name  Bunjil. 

It  is  a  striking  phase  in  the  legends  about  him  that  the 
human  element  preponderates  over  the  animal  element.  In 
fact,  I  cannot  see  any  trace  of  the  latter  in  him,  for  he  is  in 
all  cases  the  old  blackfellow,  and  not  the  eagle-hawk,  which 
his  name  denotes  ;  while  another  actor  may  be  the  kangaroo, 
the  spiny  ant-eater,  or  the  crane,  and  as  much  animal  as 
human. 

Protector  Thomas  and  Protector  Parker,  who  had  much 
knowledge  of  the  Kulin  tribes,  give  some  particulars  of  their 
beliefs  as  to  Bunjil  which  are  worth  quoting.  Bunjil  was 
the  maker  of  the  earth,  trees,  and  men,"  and  his  name  exists 
in  the  language  as  the  term  for  wisdom  or  knowledge.^ 

Among  the  Kurnai,  under  the  influence  of  the  initiation 
ceremonies,  the  knowledge  of  the  being  who  is  the  equivalent 
of  Bunjil  is  almost  entirely  restricted  to  the  initiated  men. 
The  old  women  know  that  there  is  a  supernatural  being  in 

1  Richard  Howitt,  op.  at.,  1845. 

2  Letters  from  Victorian  Pioneers,  p.  84.      Melbourne,  1 899. 

3  Parker,  op.  cit.  p.  24. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  493 

the  sky,  but  only  as  Mungan-ngaua,  "  our  father."  It  is  only 
at  the  last  and  the  most  secret  part  of  the  ceremonies  that 
the  novices  are  made  aware  of  the  teachings  as  to  Mungan- 
ngaua,  and  this  is  the  only  name  for  this  being  used  by  the 
Kurnai.  They  are  told  that  long  ago  he  lived  on  the  earth, 
and  taught  the  Kurnai  of  that  time  to  make  implements, 
nets,  canoes,  weapons — in  fact,  everything  that  they  know. 
He  also  gave  them  the  names  they  have  from  their  ancestors. 
For  instance,  Tulaba  received  his  when  he  was  made  Jeraeil, 
it  being  the  name  which  had  belonged  to  his  maternal 
grandmother's  brother.  Mungan-ngaua  had  a  son  named 
Tundun,  who  was  married,  and  who  is  the  direct  ancestor  of 
the  Kurnai,  their  Weiniwin,  or  father's  father.  Mungan- 
ngaua  instituted  the  Jeraeil,  which  was  conducted  by  Tundun, 
who  made  the  instruments  bearing  the  names  of  himself  and 
his  wife.  When  some  one  impiously  revealed  the  secrets  of 
the  Jeraeil  to  women,  and  thereby  brought  the  anger  of 
Mungan-ngaua  on  the  Kurnai,  he  sent  his  fire,  the  Aurora 
Australis,  which  filled  the  whole  space  between  the  earth  and 
the  sky.  Men  went  mad  with  fear,  and  speared  each  other, 
fathers  killing  their  children,  husbands  their  wives,  and 
brethren  each  other.  Then  the  sea  rushed  over  the  land  and 
nearly  all  mankind  was  drowned.  Those  who  survived 
became  the  Muk-kurnai.  Some  turned  into  animals,  birds, 
reptiles,  fishes,  and  Tundun  and  his  wife  became  porpoises. 
Mungan  left  the  earth,  and  ascended  to  the  sky  where  he 
still  remains.  , 

All  that  I  can  say  as  to  the  beliefs  of  the  Theddora  is 
from  what  an  old  woman,  one  of  the  sole  survivors  of  that 
tribe,  said.  When  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  who  Daramulun 
was,  she  answered  :  "All  that  I  know  of  Tliaramulun  is  that 
he  comes  down  with  a  noise  like  thunder,  to  make  the  boys 
into  men.  We  call  him  Papang."  The  word  Papang  is 
"  father." 

In  the  tribes  down  the  course  of  the  Murray  River, 
starting  from  the  Wiradjuri,  there  is,  according  to  Mr.  A.  L. 
P.  Cameron,  a  belief  "  in  a  deity,"  or,  as  he  afterwards  says, 
"  perhaps    a    supreme    supernatural    being."  ^       The    Wathi- 

1   Op.  cit.  p.  364 


494        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

wathi  called  him  Tha-tha-puli,  and  the  Ta-tathi  Tiilong. 
They  say  that  he  came  from  the  far  north,  and  now  lives  in 
the  sky.  He  told  each  tribe  which  language  they  were  to 
speak.  He  made  men,  women,  and  dogs,  and  the  latter  used 
to  talk,  but  he  took  the  power  of  speech  from  them. 
According  to  the  Wathi-wathi,  it  was  Tlia-tha-pulli  who 
changed  the  Bookoomurrt  (the  primitive  beings)  into  animals. 
Another  legend  says  that  they  transformed  themselves,  and 
that  as  animals  they  felt  an  interest  in  the  new  race  of 
human  beings  which  Tha-tha-pulli  created  after  their  change.^ 

The  conception  of  Baiame  may  be  seen  from  Ridley's 
statements,  and  so  far  as  I  now  quote  them,  may  be  accepted 
as  sufficiently  accurate.  I  have  omitted  the  colouring  which 
appears  to  be  derived  from  his  mental  bias  as  a  missionary 
to  blacks.  He  says  that  Baiame  is  the  name  in  Kamilaroi 
of  the  maker  (from  Biai,  "to  make  or  build")  who  created  and 
preserves  all  things.  Generally  invisible,  he  has,  they  believe, 
appeared  in  human  form,  and  has  bestowed  on  their  race 
various  gifts.' 

The  following  is  the  statement  of  one  of  the  early 
settlers  in  the  Kamilaroi  country,  and,  I  think,  gives  the 
aboriginal  idea  of  Baiame  free  from  any  tinge  derived  from 
our  beliefs.  If  you  ask  a  Kamilaroi  man  "  Who  made  that  ?  " 
referring  to  something,  he  replies,  "  Baiame  deah,"  that  is, 
"  Baiame,  I  suppose."  It  is  said  that  Baiame  came  from 
the  westward  long  ago  to  Golarinbri  on  the  Barwon,  and 
stayed  there  four  or  five  days,  when  he  went  away  to  the 
eastward  with  his  two  wives.  They  believe  that  some  time 
he  will  return  again.^ 

In  proceeding  with  this  branch  of  my  subject  I  must 
turn  from  the  inland  to  the  coast  tribes,  recommencing  with 
the  Coast  Murring. 

The  belief  in  Daramulun,  the  "  father,"  and  Biamban,  or 
"  master,"  is  common  to  all  of  the  tribes  who  attend  the 
Yuin  Kuringal.  I  have  described  them  at  length  in  Chapter 
IX.,  and  may  now  summarise  the  teachings  of  the  cere- 
monies.     Long  ago  Daramulun  lived  on  the  earth  with  his 

1   Op.  cit.  p.  368.  ■''  Ridley,  Kamilaroi,  etc.,  p.  135.      1875. 

3  Cyrus  E.  Doyle,  quoting  one  of  the  earlier  settlers  in  the  Kamilaroi  country. 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  495 


mother  Ngalalbal.  Originally  the  earth  was  bare  and  "  like 
the  sky,  as  hard  as  a  stone,"  and  the  land  extended  far  out 
where  the  sea  is  now.  There  were  no  men  or  women,  but 
only  animals,  birds,  and  reptiles.  He  placed  trees  on  the 
earth.  After  Kaboka,  the  thrush,  had  caused  a  great  flood 
on  the  earth,  which  covered  all  the  coast  country,  there  were 
no  people  left,  excepting  some  who  crawled  out  of  the  water 
on  to  Mount  Dromedary.  Then  Darantulun  went  up  to  the 
sky,  where  he  lives  and  watches  the  actions  of  men.  It  was 
he  who  first  made  the  Kuringal  and  the  bull -roarer,  the 
sound  of  which  represents  his  voice.  He  told  the  Yuin  what 
to  do,  and  he  gave  them  the  laws  which  the  old  people  have 
handed  down  from  father  to  son  to  this  time.  He  gives  the 
Gonivieras  their  power  to  use  the  Joins,  and  other  magic. 
When  a  man  dies  and  his  Tulugal  (spirit)  goes  away,  it  is 
Darantulun  who  meets  it  and  takes  care  of  it.  It  is  a  man's 
shadow  which  goes  up  to  Darantulun. 

Such  are  the  beliefs  which  are  taught  at  the  Yuin 
Kuringal,  and  as  the  Ngarigo  attended  these  ceremonies  it 
is  not  surprising  that  they  believed  the  same.  The  following 
is  the  statement  of  a  very  intelligent  old  man  of  that  tribe 
which  I  took  down  as  he  said  it :  "  TItarantulun  once  lived 
on  the  earth,  where  he  taught  the  Murring  what  to  do.  He 
gave  them  the  Kuringal  and  told  them  what  food  to  eat. 
When  he  died  and  was  put  in  the  ground,  his  Btda-bong 
(spirit,  ghost)  went  up  to  the  Kulumbi  (sky).  Women  know 
of  his  existence,  but  only  speak  of  him  as  Pabang  (father). 
It  is  only  when  a  young  man  has  his  tooth  knocked  out 
that  the  name  of  TItarantulun  is  told  to  him.  TItarantulun 
can  see  people,  and  is  very  angry  when  they  do  things  that 
they  ought  not  to  do,  as  when  they  eat  forbidden  food." 
This  account  speaks  of  him  as  a  man  whose  spirit  or  ghost 
went  up  to  the  sky,  while  the  usual  statement  is  that  he 
went  up  in  the  flesh  as  one  of  the  Gontnieras,  or  medicine- 
men, might  do. 

These  beliefs  extend  along  the  coast,  to  my  knowledge 
at  least  as  far  as  the  Shoalhaven  River,  and,  according  to 
the  old  men  who  were  with  me  at  their  Kuringal,  as  far  as 
Newcastle. 


496        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

My  information  as  to  the  tribes  farther  north  along  the 
coast  is  very  fragmentary.  My  valued  correspondent  the 
late  Dr.  M'Kinlay,  speaking  of  a  time  as  far  back  as  the 
year  1830,  said  that  "they  believed  in  evil  spirits  who 
disported  themselves  in  the  night,  but  also  in  a  master 
spirit,  in  some  unknown  habitat,  who  ruled  their  destinies." 
He  said  that  he  did  not  know  his  name,  but  that  they  often 
pointed  upwards  as  indicating  his  whereabouts.  He  it  was 
who  settled  them  in  their  country,  apportioned  them  their 
hunting-grounds,  gave  them  their  laws  and  instituted  the 
Boombat.  This  shows  me  clearly  that  they  told  him  as 
much  as  was  lawful  to  tell  to  an  uninitiated  man,  to  one  who 
was  not  Boombat,  for  that  is  their  name  for  an  initiated 
person  as  well  as  for  the  ceremonies.  The  blacks  of  Port 
Stephens,  who  were  of  the  same  great  tribal  community  as 
those  at  Dungog,  believed  in  an  "  evil  being,  Coen"  who 
could  take  the  form  of  birds,  and  possibly  of  animals.  Any 
mysterious  noise  at  night  was  attributed  to  Coen,  and  they 
never  travelled  at  night  without  a  fire-stick  to  keep  him 
off.^ 

In  this  connection  it  is  worth  noticing  what  Dawson 
says  about  Coen,  when  writing  about  the  time  when  he  was 
at  Port  Stephens,  before  the  year  i830.-  "They  are  afraid 
of  Coen,  an  evil  spirit  of  the  woods,  which  they  say  "  Crammer 
(steals)  blackfcllow  when  Nangry  (asleep),  in  bush."  Speak- 
ing of  a  thunder-storm,  he  says,  "  I  could,  however,  learn 
nothing  from  them,  except  that  it  was  Coen  who  was  very 
angry,  and  was  come  to  frighten  them  ;  but  of  the  origin  or 
motives  of  Coen  I  could  not  now,  more  than  upon  former 
occasions,  get  any  other  explanation  than  that  he  was  in 
form  a  blackman,  and  an  evil  being  who  delighted  in 
tormenting  and  carrying  them  away  when  he  could  get 
opportunities."  ^ 

Some  further  light  is  thrown  on  Coen  by  what  Threlkeld 
says  in  his  work  on  the  language  spoken  at  Lake  Macquarie.^ 

"  Koin  is  an  imaginary  male  being,  who  has  now,  and 
has  always  had,  the  appearance  of  a  black  ;  he  resides  in 

1  W.  Scott.  "^  R.  Dawson,  op.  cit.  p.  153. 

3  L.  Threlkeld,  An  Australian  Language,  p.  47.      Sydney.  *  Ibid. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  497 

thick  bushes  or  jungles ;  he  is  seen  occasionally  by  day,  but 
mostly  at  night.  In  general  he  precedes  the  coming  of 
natives  from  distant  parts,  when  they  assemble  to  celebrate 
certain  of  their  ceremonies,  as  the  knocking  out  of  the  teeth 
in  the  mystic  ring,  or  when  they  are  performing  some  dance. 
He  appears  painted  with  pipe-clay,  and  carries  a  fire-stick  in 
his  hand  ;  but  generally  it  is  the  doctors  (a  kind  of  magician), 
who  alone  perceive  him,  and  to  whom  he  says,  '  Fear  not, 
come  and  talk.'  At  other  times  he  comes  when  the  blacks 
are  asleep,  and  takes  them  up,  as  an  eagle  his  prey,  and 
carries  them  away  for  a  time.  The  shout  of  the  surrounding 
party  often  makes  him  drop  his  burden  ;  otherwise  he  con- 
veys them  to  his  fireplace  in  the  bush,  where  he  deposits  his 
load  close  to  the  fire.  The  person  carried  off  tries  to  cry 
out,  but  cannot,  feeling  almost  choked  ;  at  daylight  Koin 
disappears,  and  the  black  finds  himself  conveyed  safely  to 
his  own  fireside." 

This  shows  clearly  that  Koin  is  the  equivalent  of  Baiame 
or  Daramulun,  and  that  Threlkeld  repeats  what  the  initiated 
blacks  told  him,  as  one  of  the  uninitiated.  It  is  very  charac- 
teristic, and  not  less  significant  of  the  relative  positions  of 
the  blacks  and  the  missionaries,  that  even  Threlkeld,  who 
had  aquired  their  full  confidence,  knew  so  little,  while  he 
was  yet  on  such  intimate  terms  with  Biraban,^  the  account 
of  whom  shows  that  he  must  have  been  one  of  the  initiated, 
and  able,  had  it  been  lawful  for  him  to  do  so,  to  have  given 
Threlkeld  a  full  description,  not  only  of  the  real  attributes  of 
Koin,  but  also  of  the  ceremonies  to  which  he  "  precedes  the 
coming  of  natives."  I  have  no  doubt  that  Koin  is  the 
equivalent  of  Daramulun,  for  he  holds  the  place  in  the  cere- 
monies which  the  latter  has  in  the  tribes  farther  south  along 
the  coast ;  and  moreover  the  old  men  of  the  Yuin  told  me 
that  their  ceremonies  extended  up  the  coast  as  far  as  New- 
castle, which  is  the  same  as  saying  that  they  extended  to 
Lake  Macquarie. 

There  is  a  long  extent  of  coast  between  the  Port  Stephens 
blacks  and  those  who  are  known  to  me  as  the  Chepara  tribe. 
They  believed    in  a  supernatural    being  whom  they  called 

1  Op.  cit.  p.  88. 

2  K 


498        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Maamba}  who  was  supposed  to  be  "  in  the  Bugerum^'  that 
is,  in  the  medicine-man,  who  at  their  ceremonies  is  raised 
almost  to  frenzy,  much  as  are  the  Gommeras  at  the  magical 
dances  of  the  Kuringal. 

In  the  tribes  about  Maryborough  (Q.),  Birral  was  the 
name  of  the  supernatural  being  who  lived  in  an  island 
farther  north,  to  which  place  he  directs  their  ghosts  after 
death.  That  is  to  say,  the  ghosts  of  those  who  are  good,  or 
those  who  have  some  high  degree  of  excellence  in  any 
particular  line,  fishing,  hunting,  fighting,  dancing,  and  such 
like.  This  is  all  that  I  have  been  able  to  learn  about  Birral; 
but  it  suggests  that  he  may  be  the  supernatural  being  spoken 
of  in  connection  with  the  ceremonies  of  initiation.^  This 
perhaps  is  strengthened  by  what  I  have  learned  of  the  beliefs 
at  the  Herbert  River,  still  farther  to  the  north  along  the 
coast. 

In  these  tribes  there  is  a  striking  belief  in  a  supernatural 
being  called  Kohin.  He  is  said  to  have  his  dwelling  in  the 
Milky  Way  {Kultng),  but  to  roam  about  by  night  on  earth  as 
a  gigantic  warrior,  who  kills  those  whom  he  meets.  He  can 
at  will  make  himself  invisible.  He  sends  thunder  and 
lightning,  and  the  blacks  talk  to  him  during  the  storm,  and 
spit  and  put  up  their  hand  towards  the  sky,  as  if  to  ward  off 
the  lightning.  When  the  frogs  are  croaking,  it  is  said  that 
they  are  calling  on  him  to  send  the  rain.  It  is  said  that 
Kohin  is  offended  by  any  one  taking  a  wife  from  the  pro- 
hibited sub-class,  or  not  wearing  the  mourning  necklace  for 
the  prescribed  period,  or  eating  forbidden  food.  Such  offences 
bring  on  the  offender  Kohin's  anger,  and  sooner  or  later  the 
person  dies  in  consequence.  Kohin  came  long  ago  down 
from  Kuling,  and  appeared  to  their  fathers  as  a  carpet- 
snake.  He  said  that  where  he  came  from  was  a  good  land 
and  in  it  a  vast  river  full  of  splendid  fish.  He  had  two 
Tikovinas  with  him,  which  he  presented  to  the  tribe,  and 
told  them  that  if  they  were  good  men  and  wore  them,  they 
would  not  be  killed  in  fight,  and  that  they  could  fly.  Two 
men  tried  it,  and  succeeded  in  going  from  tree  to  tree  as  the 
flying-squirrels    do.       Afterwards,    becoming    more    expert, 

^  J.  Gibson.  2  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES 


499 


they  flew  from  mountain  to  mountain.  He  then  told  them 
to  get  two  large  bags  filled  with  gum-tree  leaves,  and  to  start 
for  the  Milky  Way.  This  they  did,  and  confirmed  all  that 
Kohin  had  said.  One  returned,  but  the  other  refused  to 
leave  such  good  quarters,  and  sent  his  Tikovina  by  the 
other.  Kohin,  who  had  remained  on  the  Herbert  while  the 
two  were  absent,  and  had  cured  some  old  women  of  sores 
and  had  made  them  young  again,  now  went  away,  leaving 
the  two  Tikovinas  with  the  tribe,  telling 
them  that  when  he  sent  another,  marked 
red  in  the  centre,  they  would  have  all 
to  go  to  Kuling,  and  live  there. 

The  Tikovina  is  a  flat  thin  piece  of 
soft  wood  cut  from  the  north  Queensland 
fig  -  tree.  It  is  about  a  foot  long,  by 
about  three  or  four  inches  wide,  brought 
gradually  to  a  point  at  the  bottom,  while 
the  top  is  cut  in  the  rude  representation 
of  a  man's  face  with  mouth  and  eyes. 
It  is  painted  all  over  the  front  red 
and  black  with  human  blood  and  clay. 
As  a  sort  of  war  -  charm  it  is  worn 
round  the  neck  of  a  warrior,  and  hangs 
down  between  the  shoulders  behind, 
showing  that  the  wearer  means  fight- 
ing, and  that  he  will  not  miss  with 
his  club,  spear,  and  boomerang,  while 
the  weapons  of  his  adversary  will  glance 
aside  from  him.  It  is  kept  hidden 
away  from  women  and  children,  who  seem  afraid  of  it.^ 

As  my  authority  for  these  statements  put  it  to  me, 
Kohin  seems  to  these  blacks  to  be  a  glorified  and  deified 
blackfellow,  and  they  speak  of  him  to  those  in  whom  they 
have  confidence  as  their  father. 

It  seems  quite  clear  that  Nurrundere,  Nurelli,  Bunjil, 
Mungan-ngaua,  Daramulun,  and  Baianie  all  represent  the 
same  being  under  different  names.  To  this  may  be  reason- 
ably added   Koin  of  the   Lake   Macquarie  tribes,  Maamba, 

'  J-  tiaggin. 


FIG.  28. — TIKOVINA  USED 
BY  THE  HERBERT 
RIVER    TRIBES. 


500        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Btrral,  and  Kohin  of  those  on  the  Herbert  River,  thus  extend- 
ing the  range  of  this  belief  certainly  over  the  whole  of 
Victoria  and  of  New  South  Wales,  up  to  the  eastern 
boundaries  of  the  tribes  of  the  Darling  River.  If  the 
Queensland  coast  tribes  are  included,  then  the  western 
bounds  might  be  indicated  by  a  line  drawn  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Murray  River  to  Cardwell,  including  the  Great 
Dividing  Range,  with  some  of  the  fall  inland  in  New  South 
Wales.  This  would  define  the  part  of  Australia  in  which  a 
belief  exists  in  an  anthropomorphic  supernatural  being,  who 
lives  in  the  sky,  and  who  is  supposed  to  have  some  kind  of 
influence  on  the  morals  of  the  natives.  No  such  belief 
seems  to  obtain  in  the  remainder  of  Australia,  although 
there  are  indications  of  a  belief  in  anthropomorphic  beings 
inhabiting  the  sky-land.  That  part  of  Australia  which  I 
have  indicated  as  the  habitat  of  tribes  having  that  belief  is 
also  the  area  where  there  has  been  the  advance  from  group 
marriage  to  individual  marriage,  from  descent  in  the  female 
line  to  that  in  the  male  line  ;  where  the  primitive  organisa- 
tion under  the  class  system  has  been  more  or  less  replaced 
by  an  organisation  based  on  locality  ;  in  fact,  where  those 
advances  have  been  made  to  which  I  have  more  than  once 
drawn  attention  in  this  work. 

This  supernatural  being,  by  whatever  name  he  is  known, 
is  represented  as  having  at  one  time  dwelt  on  the  earth, 
but  afterwards  to  have  ascended  to  a  land  beyond  the 
sky,  where  he  still  remains,  observing  mankind.  As  Dara- 
mulun,  he  is  said  to  be  able  to  "  go  anywhere  and  do  any- 
thing." He  can  be  invisible  ;  but  when  he  makes  himself 
visible,  it  is  in  the  form  of  an  old  man  of  the  Australian 
race.  He  is  evidently  everlasting,  for  he  existed  from 
the  beginning  of  all  things,  and  he  still  lives.  But  in  being 
so,  he  is  merely  in  that  state  in  which,  these  aborigines 
believe,  every  one  would  be  if  not  prematurely  killed  by 
evil  magic. 

Combining  the  statements  of  the  legends  and  the 
teachings  of  the  ceremonies,  I  see,  as  the  embodied  idea, 
a  venerable  kindly  Headman  of  a  tribe,  full  of  knowledge 
and  tribal  wisdom,  and  all-powerful   in   magic,  of  which  he 


VIII  BELIEFS  Ax\D  BURIAL  PRACTICES  501 

is  the  source,  with  virtues,  failings,  and  passions,  such  as  the 
aborigines  regard  them. 

Such,  I  think,  they  picture  the  All-father  to  be,  and  it 
is  most  difficult  for  one  of  us  to  divest  himself  of  the 
tendency  to  endow  such  a  supernatural  being  with  a  nature 
guasz-divine,  if  not  altogether  so — divine  nature  and  character. 

The  earliest  instance  of  this  tendency  which  I  have  met 
with  is  in  an  interesting  paper  by  Mr.  James  Manning,^  in 
which  he  reproduces  notes  written  in  the  years  1 844-1 845, 
and  mainly  taken  from  the  most  intelligent  of  those  natives 
who  frequented  his  home  in  the  bush  at  that  time.  He 
says  that  he  afterwards  met  with  fresh  confirmation  of  the 
beliefs  of  the  blacks  in  "  a  supreme  being  or  Deity,"  in  all 
parts  of  New  South  Wales,  in  Victoria  as  far  as  the 
Grampians,  and  in  Queensland  as  far  as  Rockhampton. 

To  show  what,  according  to  his  statements,  these  beliefs 
were,  I  now  quote  such  parts  of  his  account,  which,  allowing 
for  the  medium  of  transmission,  coincide  with  those  which 
I  know  to  be  held  by  the  aborigines  in  most  of  the  area 
indicated  by  him.  It  is  well  also  to  preface  this  by  what 
he  says  as  to  possible  missionary  preachings,  on  which 
Mr.  E.  M,  t^lurr  has  laid  much  stress  in  speaking  of  these 
beliefs.  Mr.  Manning  says,  "  For  the  first  four  or  five  years 
or  more,  of  that  earliest  time  "  (that  is  of  ten  years  before  he 
made  the  notes),  "  there  was  no  church  south  of  the  little 
one  at  Bong-bong  at  Mittagong.  The  cities  and  towns  of 
Goulburn,  Yass,  Albury,  and  Melbourne  did  not  exist.  It 
was  a  common  parlance  among  the  settlers,  when  travelling 
south,  before  Goulburn  and  Yass  townships  were  formed,  to 
say  that  '  there  was  no  Sunday  after  crossing  Myrtle  Creek.' 
No  missionaries  ever  came  to  the  southern  districts  at 
any  time,  and  it  was  not  until  many  years  later  that  the 
missionaries  landed  at  Sydney  on  their  way  to  Moreton 
Bay." 

His  statements,  when  condensed,  are  that  "  they  believe 
in  a  supreme  Being  called  Boyma^  who  dwells  in  the  north- 

>  James  Manning,  Royal  Society  of  New  South  Wales,  Notes  on  the  Aborigines 
of  New  Holland,  Nov.  i,  1882. 

2  Baianie,  as  I  have  heard  the  word  pronounced. 


502        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

east,  in  a  heaven  of  beautiful  appearance.  He  is  represented 
as  seated  on  a  throne  of  transparent  crystal,  with  beautiful 
pillars  of  crystal  on  each  side.  Grogorally  is  his  son,  who 
watches  over  the  actions  of  mankind.  He  leads  the  souls  of 
the  dead  to  Boyma.  The  first  man  made  by  Boytna  was 
called  Moodgegally,  who  lives  near  the  heaven  of  Boyma. 
He  lives  on  the  earth  and  has  the  power  of  visiting  Boynia^ 
whose  place  he  reaches  by  a  winding  path,  round  a  mountain, 
whence  he  ascends  by  a  ladder  or  flight  of  steps.  There 
he  received  laws  from  Boyma." 

In  these  statements  I  easily  recognise,  although  in  a 
distorted  form,  the  familiar  features  of  Baiame  and  his  son 
Daramulun,  Bunjil  and  his  son  Btnbeal,  or  Mungan-ngaua 
and  his  son  Tundun.  The  first  man  who  ascends  to  the 
sky-land  is  typical  of  the  medicine-man  who  says  that  he 
can  ascend  to  the  sky  and  commune  with  the  "great  master." 

Mr.  Manning  has  built  up  on  these  facts  a  superstructure 
which  represents  Christian  dogmas,  and  he  has  done  this 
evidently  with  full  faith  in  the  truth  of  his  deductions.  The 
following  are  his  own  words  :  "  They  not  only  acknowledge 
a  Supreme  Deity  but  also  believe  in  his  providential  super- 
vision of  all  creation,  aided  by  his  son  Grogorally,  and  by 
the  second  mediator,  in  the  supernatural  person,  of  their 
intercessor  Aloodgegally." 

I  believe  that  the  late  Archdeacon  Gunther  wrote  an 
account  of  the  belief  in  Baiame  by  the  natives  of  Wellington 
Valley  in  New  South  Wales,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to 
find  it.  However,  the  following  occurs  in  a  vocabulary 
compiled  by  him,  "  Baiamai,  a  great  God,  he  lives  in  the 
east."  ' 

The  Rev.  William  Ridley  identifies  Baiame  with  God,^ 
and  says  that  he  "  sometimes  appeared  in  human  form,  and 
will  bring  (them)  before  him  for  judgment,  and  reward  the 
good  with  endless  happiness."  ^  This  account  has,  and  not 
unnaturally,    the    mental    colour   of  the   writer,  who  in   his 

1  Dr.  John  Fraser,  op.  cit.  p.  56. 

2  Rev.  W.  Ridley,  Gurre  Kamilaroi,  p.  7. 

3  Rev.    W.    Ridley,  .Katnilaroi  and  other  Australian   Languages,   p.    135. 
Sydney,  1875. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  503 

prefatory  note  speaks  of  their  traditions  concerning  Baiame 
(the  maker  of  all),  as  "  a  ray  of  true  light  which  has  passed 
down  through  many  generations."  ^ 

Mr.  J.  Dawson,  in  speaking  of  the  beliefs  of  the  native  of 
the  south-west  of  Victoria,  says,  "  The  good  spirit  Pirnmeheeal 
is  a  gigantic  man  living  above  the  clouds"  ;  and  he  goes  on  to 
say  that,  as  he  is  of  a  kindly  disposition  and  harms  no  one, 
he  is  seldom  mentioned,  but  always  with  respect.  The 
meaning  of  the  word  Pirmneheeal  in  the  Peek  wuuruung 
language  he  gives  as  "  our  father."  '^ 

The  use,  or  misuse,  of  the  term  "  great  spirit "  or  "  good 
spirit"  is  not  confined  to  Dawson.  I  must  confess  that  I 
have  also  committed  this  misleading  error  before  I  really 
perceived  the  true  facts  of  the  case.  Gason  also  uses  the 
term  "  good  spirit "  in  reference  to  the  Mura-muraSy  which  I 
have  already  referred  to.^ 

The  views  of  the  late  Mr.  E.  M.  Curr  find  a  place  here. 
He  says  that  from  inquiries  of  blacks  on  the  subject  of 
beliefs  of  the  tribes  concerning  God  and  the  next  world,  that 
they  had,  as  it  seemed  to  him,  no  beliefs  on  the  subject.  He 
is  strongly  of  the  opinion  that  "  those  who  have  written  to 
show  that  blacks  had  some  knowledge  of  God,  practised 
prayer,  and  believed  in  places  of  reward  and  punishment 
beyond  the  grave,  have  been  imposed  upon  ;  and  that,  until 
they  had  learned  something  of  Christianity  from  missionaries 
and  others,  the  blacks  had  no  beliefs  or  practices  of  the  sort. 
He  considers  that,  having  heard  the  missionaries,  they  were 
not  slow  to  invent  what  he  might  call  kindred  statements 
with  aboriginal  accessories,  with  a  view  to  please  and 
surprise  the  whites."  ^  That  the  blacks  had  no  knowledge  of 
God,  and  that  they  did  not  practise  prayer,  is  quite  true  ; 
but  they  had,  and  have  beliefs  such  as  those  which  I  have 
recounted,  which  were  evidently  unknown  to  Mr.  Curr,  and 
which  he  was  not  likely  to  learn  from  the  manner  of  his 
inquiries  "  concerning  God  and  the  next  world."  Nor 
would  those  he  questioned  voluntarily  tell  him,  even  if  they 

^  Rev.  W.  Ridley,  op.  cit.  p.  vi. 
2  James  Dawson,  op.  cit.  p.  49.  ^  Op.  cit.  p.  13. 

*  Op.  cit.  vol.  i.  pp.  44,  45. 


504        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

understood  his  meaning,  the  sacred  and  secret  teachings  of 
the  initiation  ceremonies.  In  my  experience,  men  have  in 
such  circumstances  put  on  an  appearance  of  dense  stupidity, 
or  have  resorted  to  absolute  denial  of  any  knowledge,  and 
even  to  lies. 

In  reading  Mr.  Curr's  work,  The  Australian  Race,  I  find, 
however,  that  such  beliefs  as  those  I  have  stated  are  noticed 
by  his  correspondents.  The  Larrakia  ^  believe  in  a  being 
who  dwells  in  the  stars,  and  never  dies.  The  Cape  River 
tribes"  believe  that  when  a  blackfellow  dies  whose  actions 
have  been  in  life  what  they  hold  to  be  good,  he  ascends  to 
Boorala  («>.  the  Creator,  literally  "  good "),  where  he  lives 
much  as  he  did  on  the  earth.'  In  this  we  may  recognise  the 
Birral  of  the  tribes  inland  from  Maryborough  (Queensland) 
referred  to  a  few  pages  back. 

Some  of  the  authorities  whom  I  have  quoted  to  show 
the  wide  range  of  this  belief  in  the  tribal  All-father  have 
raised  upon  it  a  structure  which  has  caused  others  to  feel  the 
doubts  which  Mr.  E.  M.  Curr  has  expressed.  It  seems 
therefore  advisable  that  I  should  give  the  reasons  which 
appear  to  me  to  prove  conclusively  the  aboriginal  origin  of 
the  belief  in  the  tribal  All-father  as  I  have  given  it. 

It  has  been  necessary  for  me,  in  recording  and  discussing 
these  beliefs,  to  bear  in  mind  the  possibility  of  fraud  or  error 
on  the  part  of  my  native  informants.  Especially  is  this  the 
case  as  to  those  who  have  been  much  with  the  missionaries 
in  Gippsland.  .  The  two  mission-stations  were,  as  far  as  I 
remember,  established  there  about  i860,  therefore  subse- 
quently to  the  Jeraeils  at  which  my  most  trusted  native 
informants  were  initiated.  The  strongest  instance  bearing 
upon  the  possibility  of  later  external  beliefs  having  been 
engrafted  upon  the  primitive  beliefs  of  the  Kurnai  is  that  of 
the  man  who  at  first  identified  Brewin  with  Jesus  Christ, 
and  afterwards  with  the  Devil,  I  gave  that  as  an  instance 
of  what  one  might  assume  to  be  the  grasp  of  the  Christian 
religion  obtained  by  a  converted  Australian  savage  of  fairly 
good  intelligence,  I  knew  this  man,  and  I  believe  he  said 
what  he  really  thought,      I  was  the  more  struck  by  it  because 

*   Op.  cit.  vol,  i.  p.  253.         2  Qp^  f-if^  vol.  iii.  p.  146,         '  Op,  cit. 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  505 

I  remembered  the  religious  function  at  which  he  was  con- 
firmed by  the  Bishop  of  Melbourne.  But  I  have  not  made 
use  of  anything  else  which  I  may  have  heard  from  him,  other 
than  that  remarkable  opinion.  He  took  no  part  in  the 
Jeraeil  when  it  was  revived,  nor  did  he  know  of  the  intention 
to  hold  the  ceremonies  when  the  old  men  were  ready  for 
them. 

The  men  from  whom  I  obtained  the  Kurnai  views  on 
this  subject,  and  who  took  the  most  prominent  part  in  the 
Jeraeil  ceremonies,  were  boys  or  youths  when  Gippsland 
was  settled  by  the  whites  in  1844.  Two  years  earlier 
Angus  M'Millan  had  entered  it  from  New  South  Wales 
and  made  known,  on  his  return,  its  value  as  a  pastoral 
district. 

Twenty  years  later,  when  I  came  to  know  the  Kurnai 
men  just  mentioned,  the  old  men  of  1 844  had  mostly  died 
off,  or  been  killed  in  the  troublous  times  of  early  settlement. 

It  was  their  sons  who  were  now  men  of  the  tribe,  say 
between  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age,  and  they  had  been 
initiated  by  their  fathers  probably  before  1855. 

When  the  Jeraeil  was  held  at  my  instance,  these  men 
conducted  them,  and  they  assured  me  that  they  did  so 
exactly  as  "  the  old  men  "  had  done  when  they  themselves 
were  initiated.  In  answer  to  inquiries  about  the  legends 
told  at  the  ceremonies,  including  that  of  Mungan-ngaua  and 
his  son  Tundun,  they  said,  "  The  old  men  told  us  so." 

As  to  the  possibility  of  this  belief  having  been  introduced 
by  blacks  from  the  settled  districts  of  New  South  Wales  and 
Victoria,  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  the  Kurnai  were  isolated 
from  other  tribes  by  the  nature  of  the  country  surrounding 
them.  Moreover,  they  did  not  attend  the  ceremonies  of  any 
other  tribe,  nor  did  they  receive  visitors  at  theirs. 

As  to  the  tribes  which  have  ceremonies  of  the  western 
type,  I  must  now  point  out  that  missions  have  been  in 
existence  in  the  Narrang-ga,  the  Parnkalla,  the  Dieri,  and 
the  Arunta  tribes  for  long  periods.  In  all  of  them,  with 
perhaps  the  exception  of  the  Narrang-ga,  the  missionaries 
have  taught  and  preached  in  the  native  language,  and  as  to 
the   Arunta  have,  I   believe,  evolved  a  name  for  the  Deity 


■ 


5o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

from  the  term  which  Spencer  and  Gillen  have  given  as 
Alcheringa,  or  the  Alcheringa  ancestors.  Such  being  the 
case,  how  is  it,  if  we  are  to  assume  that  the  All-father  belief 
in  the  south-east  has  been  due  to  missionary  teachings, 
that  there  has  not  been  a  similar  adoption  of  it  by  the 
western  tribes  ? 

If  I  am  correct  in  saying  that  the  Kurnai  belief  in 
Mungan-ngaua  is  aboriginal,  then  the  similar  beliefs  of  the 
other  coast  tribes  may  also  be  accepted. 

It  seems  to  be  usually  assumed  from  the  evidences,  for 
instance,  of  tribes  like  those  of  Fiji  that  ancestor  worship 
has  been  at  the  root  of  primitive  religions  ;  but  Australian 
evidence  seems  to  carry  us  back  to  a  stage  before  ancestors 
came  to  be  worshipped,  although  they  were  looked  upon  as 
having  been  greater  and  wiser  than  their  descendants,  the 
present  race.  This  is  very  evident  from  the  account  given 
by  Spencer  and  Gillen  of  the  Arunta  and  other  tribes  having 
kindred  beliefs.  I  find  that  among  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes  it 
was  not  the  ancestors  but  a  supernatural  human  race, 
antecedent  to  them,  who  are  seen  in  myth  and  tradition  to 
have  been  similarly  superior  to  their  successors.  Here  there 
is  even  less  of  a  possible  approach  to  ancestor  worship  than 
with  the  Arunta. 

In  the  tribes  of  South  -  east  Australia  the  ancestors 
appear  in  the  guise  of  totems  or  theriomorphic  human  beings, 
in  some  respects  resembling  both  the  Alcheringa  ancestors 
and  the  Miira-muras.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  in 
these  tribes  there  has  been  a  clearly  marked  advance  in  the 
status  of  society,  from  group  marriage  to  a  form  of  individual 
marriage,  from  descent  in  the  female  to  the  male  line,  and 
from  a  society  organised  on  the  class  systems  to  one  based 
on  locality.  Here,  as  I  have  now  shown,  the  tribe  living  on 
the  earth  is  represented  by  the  tribe  of  the  dead,  living  in 
the  sky-country,  but  also  able  to  visit  the  earth,  and  with  a 
Headman  who  is  spoken  of  as  "  father  "  by  the  natives  from 
the  Murray  mouth  in  South  Australia  to  the  Herbert  River 
in  North-eastern  Queensland. 

In  this  being,  although  supernatural,  there  is  no  trace  of 
a  divine  nature.     All  that  can  be  said  of  him  is  that  he  is 


VIII  BELIEFS  AND  BURIAL  PRACTICES  507 

imagined  as  the  ideal  of  those  qualities  which  are,  according 
to  their  standard,  virtues  worthy  of  being  imitated.  Such 
would  be  a  man  who  is  skilful  in  the  use  of  weapons  of 
offence  and  defence,  all-powerful  in  magic,  but  generous  and 
liberal  to  his  people,  who  does  no  injury  or  violence  to 
any  one,  yet  treats  with  severity  any  breaches  of  custom  or 
morality.  Such  is,  according  to  my  knowledge  of  the 
Australian  tribes,  their  ideal  of  Headman,  and  naturally  it  is 
that  of  the  Biamban,  the  master  in  the  sky-country.  Such  a 
being,  from  Bunjil  to  Baiame,  is  Mami-ngaia,  that  is,  "  our 
father  "  ;  in  other  words,  the  All-father  of  the  tribes. 

The  mental  stages  by  which  the  conception  of  the  All- 
father  of  the  tribe  may  have  been  reached  in  these  tribes 
perhaps  commenced  with  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  the 
human  self-consciousness  as  a  spirit  or  a  ghost,  whose  home 
on  the  earth  and  in  the  sky-country  was  dreamland.  This 
would  naturally  lead  to  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  the 
ancestral  ghosts,  as  a  tribe  like  that  on  the  earth,  with  a 
Headman  and  medicine -men,  its  fighting,  feasting,  and 
dancing.  From  this  it  is  not  a  long  stretch  to  the  idea  of 
the  All-father  of  the  tribe,  since  it  is  not  uncommon,  indeed 
I  may  go  so  far  as  to  say,  that  it  is,  in  my  experience,  common 
to  address  the  elder  men  as  father.  Such  seems  to  me  the 
probable  course  of  development  of  this  belief,  which  moreover 
I  am  satisfied  has  been  locally  evolved,  and  not  introduced 
from  without.  But  in  saying  this  I  must  guard  myself  from 
being  thought  to  imply  any  primitive  revelation  of  a  mono- 
theistic character.  What  I  see  is  merely  the  action  of 
elementary  thought  reaching  conclusions  such  as  all  savages 
arc  capable  of,  and  which  may  have  been  at  the  root  of 
monotheistic  beliefs. 

But  all  this  does  not  bring  us  to  the  worship  of  the 
ancestor. 

Although  it  cannot  be  alleged  that  these  aborigines  have 
consciously  any  form  of  religion,  it  may  be  said  that  their 
beliefs  are  such  that,  under  favourable  conditions,  they  might 
have  developed  into  an  actual  religion,  based  on  the  worship 
of  Mungan-ngaua  or  Baiame. 

There  is  not  any  worship  of  Daramulun  ;  but  the  dances 


5o8      NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA  ch.  viii 

round  the  figure  of  clay  and  the  invocating  of  his  name  by 
the  medicine-men  certainly  might  have  led  up  to  it. 

If  such  a  change  as  a  recognised  religion  had  ever 
become  possible,  I  feel  that  it  would  have  been  brought 
about  by  those  men  who  are  the  depositaries  of  the  tribal 
beliefs,  and  by  whom  in  the  past,  as  I  think,  all  the  advances 
in  the  organisation  of  their  society  have  been  effected. 
If  such  a  momentous  change  to  the  practice  of  religion  had 
ever  occurred,  those  men  would  have  readily  passed  from 
being  medicine-men  to  the  office  of  priests. 


CHAPTER    IX 

INITIATION    CEREMONIES,    EASTERN    TYPE 

First  accounts  of  ceremonies — Eastern  and  Western  types — Discovery  of  use  of 
Bull-roarer  —  Headmen  summon  the  people  for  ceremonies  by  accredited 
messengers  — Kuringal  of  the  Yuin — Extent  of  the  A«r/wta/ ceremonies- 
Those  of  the  Geswe-gJCl,  Grihgain  and  Chepara  tfiBes— tThe  Wiradjuri 
BtirbtitiA — The  Wonghilx>n  ceremonies  —  The  Ta-tathi  Jiurhung —  Ihe 
Kamiiaroi  Bora — The  Turrbal  ceremonies — Dora  ceremonies  in  Queensland 
— The  Wakelbura  Umba — The  Kulin  Jibauk — The  Kurnai  Jiraeil — Influ- 
ence of  the  ceremonies. 

One  of  the  very  earliest  works  on  Australia,  that  of  Collins, 
describes  parts  of  the  ceremonies  practised  by  the  natives  of 
Port  Jackson.  Since  that  time  travellers,  missionaries,  and 
residents  in  the  Australian  bush  have  become  aware  of  and 
reported  the  existence  of  certain  ceremonies — the  "  making 
of  young  men "  as  the  practice  has  come  to  be  called. 
Fragmentary  accounts  are  to  be  found  in  works  describing 
Australia  and  its  inhabitants,  but  so  far  as  I  am  aware  no 
one  has  attempted  to  give  any  authentic,  detailed  description 
of  the  ceremonies  themselves,  from  the  observation  of  an 
eye-witness  accustomed  to  scientific  methods  of  investigation, 
until  I  published  an  account  of  the  Kuringal  and  Jeraeil 
ceremonies  in  1884.^ 

It  is  perhaps  worth  recording  here  that  I  discovered  the 
bull-roarer  in  the  Kurnai  tribe,  and  was,  I  think,  the  first 
to  draw  attention  to  the  important  part  it  plays  in  the 
ceremonies  of  Australian  tribes.  I  had  been  for  some  time 
obtaining  particulars  from  my  friends  among  the  Kurnai  as 
to  their  ceremonies  at  which  boys  were  made  into  men.      I 

'  Journal  Anthrop.  Institute,  May  1884  and  May  1885. 
509 


5IO       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

had  been  able  to  piece  together  a  good  deal,  which  I  now 
know  related  to  the  part  of  the  ceremonies  in  which  women 
take  part,  and  which  might  lawfully  be  told  to  any  one.  I 
once  happened  to  meet  Turlburn,  whom  I  have  before 
mentioned,  on  the  plains  between  Sale  and  Rosedale,  and 
stopped  to  have  a  talk.  After  a  little  I  brought  up  the 
subject  of  the  ceremonies,  and  he  finally  said,  "  There  is  one 
thing  you  do  not  know."  We  were  sitting  by  a  little 
bridge  which  crossed  a  shallow  gully,  with  open  country 
around  us  and  a  straight  road  for  a  considerable  distance. 
Looking  all  round,  he  then  said,  "  Come  down  here,"  going 
under  the  bridge  and  speaking  in  a  low  tone  of  voice.  I 
went  there  and  sat  down,  and  he  then,  with  much  mystery 
and  a  watchful  air,  lest  any  one  might  come,  told  me  of  the 
Tundun,  that  is  the  Bull-roarer,  and  of  the  part  it  plays  in 
their  ceremonies.  If  I  had  not  known  this,  I  should  never 
have  gained  the  influence  I  afterwards  had,  which  enabled 
me  to  cause  the  Jeraeil  to  be  revived,  at  which  I  took  part, 
and  which  is  described  in  this  chapter. 

There  are  two  Bull-roarers  used  by  the  Kurnai  tribe. 
The  larger  is  called  Wehntwin,  or  grandfather,  also  Muk- 
brogan,  or,  as  I  may  put  it,  the  Arch-companion,  for  Muk  is 
a  superlative,  and  Brogan  is  one  who  has  been  initiated  with 
others,  who  are  all  Brogan.  The  smaller  is  the  Rukut,  or 
woman,  that  is,  the  wife  of  Tundun. 

Since  that  time,  and  especially  since  the  year  1890, 
much  has  been  done  in  describing  the  Bora  ceremonies  of 
New  South  Wales,  and  the  similar  ceremonies  of  Queens- 
land. But  in  no  instance  has  the  work  been  so  thorough 
or  so  comprehensive  and  detailed  as  the  account  of  the 
ceremonies  of  the  Arunta  tribe  by  Professor  Spencer  and 
Mr.  Gillen.^ 

The  absence  of  authentic  information,  prior  to  my 
publication  in  1884,  did  not  arise  from  no  white  man 
having  been  present  at  the  Bora  or  other  similar  ceremonies  ; 
for  it  is  known  that  even  from  the  early  times  of  settlement 
white  men  have  been  initiated  in  these  mysteries,  having 
been  either  escaped  convicts  who  had  lived  with  the  tribes 

1   op.  cit. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  511 

in  the  interior,  or  white  settlers  who,  brought  up  from  child- 
hood in  contact  with  some  tribe,  came  to  be  regarded  as 
one  of  themselves,  and  were  therefore  permitted  to  be 
present  at  the  sacred  ceremonies,  even  if  they  were  not,  as 
happened  in  some  cases,  actually  initiated  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  aboriginal  youths.  Such  a  case  is  known 
to  me  in  New  South  Wales,  in  which  the  white  man,  having 
been  initiated  as  a  youth,  refused  persistently  to  make  the 
ceremonies  known  to  my  fellow-worker  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison. 

My  account  will  be  drawn  partly  from  what  I  have 
witnessed  and  taken  part  in,  as  an  initiated  person,  and 
partly  from  conversations  which  I  have  had  with  blacks  as 
to  the  ceremonies  of  their  own  tribes.  I  can  rely  on  these 
statements,  not  only  being  in  a  position,  from  my  own 
knowledge,  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  their  truthfulness,  but 
also  because  there  is,  as  I  have  found,  between  initiated 
persons,  not  only  no  reservation,  but  a  feeling  of  confidence, 
I  may  even  say  almost  of  brotherhood.  For  the  sake  of 
comparison,  I  draw  some  illustrations  from  the  statements 
of  competent  correspondents,  and  extracts  from  certain 
authors,  to  complete  my  work. 

It  is  very  rarely  the  case  that  the  initiation  ceremonies 
of  a  tribe  are  peculiar  to  it,  and  therefore  not  attended  by 
other  neighbouring  tribes.  Such  a  case  means  that  the 
tribe  does  not  intermarry  with  its  neighbours.  The  Kurnai 
are  such  an  example,  whose  Jeraeil  ceremonies  are  attended 
by  four  only  out  of  the  five  clans  of  the  tribe.  The  fifth 
clan  has  no  ceremonies  of  their  own,  nor  did  it  attend  those 
of  any  other  tribe.  .  But  there  were  in  it  cases  such  as  that 
of  my  messenger  to  the  Yuin  who  was  free  of  the  Ngarigo 
tribe,  because  his  mother  belonged  to  it,  and  he  himself 
had  been  initiated  at  their  Kuringal  ceremonies.  Another 
instance  of  such  cases  is  that  of  the  before-mentioned  Yibai- 
malian,  whose  father  was  a  renowned  "  blackfellow  doctor  " 
of  the  Wiradjuri  tribe,  who  joined  the  Wolgal,  with  whom 
he  was  related  by  marriage,  and  then  obtained  a  wife  from 
the  Theddora  of  Omeo.  By  this  he  became  connected  with 
the  Ngarigo  through  her  relations,  and  thus  met  the  Yuin 
and  became  a  man  of  influence  in  their  tribe. 


512        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

But  the  rule  is,  that  a  certain  ceremony  brings  together 
a  number  of  tribes.  Thus  the  Kuringal  of  the  Yuin  is 
attended  by  people  from  Manero,  Shoalhaven,  and  Braid- 
wood,  and  they  therefore  form  what  may  be  called  a 
"  community,"  which  in  this  sense  includes  a  number  of 
tribes.  In  other  words,  all  the  tribes  which  attend  the 
same  ceremonies  form  an  intermarrying  community  larger 
than  any  one  tribe,  and  approaching  what  I  have  called  a 
"  nation."  Intermarriage  usually  takes  place  in  a  friendly 
manner,  but  also  in  what  may  be  called  a  "  veiled  hostility," 
as  will  be  seen  in  speaking  of  the  tribal  meetings  within 
fifty  miles  of  Maryborough  (Queensland).  The  community 
which  thus  meets  periodically  for  the  purpose  of  initiating 
its  youths  into  the  status  of  manhood,  and  membership  in 
the  tribe,  is  in  principle  also  that  of  the  united  exogamous 
class  divisions.  Calling  the  classes  for  convenience  A  and 
B,  then  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  the  men  of  A  class  who 
initiate  the  youths  of  class  B,  and  vice  versd.  A  class 
cannot  initiate  its  own  young  men,  but  both  classes  co- 
operate in  this  ceremony.  On  the  other  hand,  in  those 
tribes  which  have  no  longer  any  class  organisation  in  a 
vigorous  state,  it  is  the  local  organisation  by  its  assembled 
initiated  men  which  conducts  the  ceremonies.  Such  a  case 
is  that  of  the  Kurnai  and  the  Chepara  tribes. 

Speaking  broadly,  it  may  be  said  in  all  but  exceptional 
cases  that  initiation  ceremonies  of  some  kind,  having  invari- 
ably certain  fundamental  principles  in  common,  are  practised 
by  the  native  tribes  all  over  Australia. 

These  ceremonies  may  be  conveniently  separated  into 
two  types,  namely  one  which  extends  over  most  of  the 
eastern  part  of  Australia,  and  another  which  occurs  in  the 
western  half.  The  line  which  separates  these  types  may  be 
roughly  indicated  as  extending  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Murray  River  to  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.  But 
this  line  only  approximately  shows  the  range  of  those  who 
practise  circumcision,  or  circumcision  together  with  sub- 
incision,  from  those  who  have  ceremonies  of  thte  character 
of  the  Bora  or  Kuringal.  ' 

The  ceremonies  which  I  shall  take  as  an  illustration  of 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  513 

the  eastern  type  are  those  of  the  tribes  which  inhabit  the 
south  coast  of  New  South  Wales,  and  who  may  be  con- 
veniently spoken  of  generally  as  the  Coast  Murring.  The 
ceremonies  are  called  Kuringal,  or  Bunan  when  a  mound  is 
made  in  connection  with  them,  and  Kadja-wallung^  when 
there  is  no  mound. 

These  ceremonies  are,  according  to  my  aboriginal 
informants,  an  example  of  those  of  the  tribes  extending  from 
Twofold  Bay  along  the  coast  to  Port  Macquarie,  at  least, 
and  inland  to  the  Turon  River,  thus  including  the  tribes  of 
Port  Jackson,  whose  ceremonies  were  described  by  Collins  a 
century  ago.  To  my  own  knowledge,  the  last  Kuringal  was 
attended  by  the  Katungal  from  Twofold  Bay  to  Shoalhaven, 
and  by  others  from  as  far  inland  as  the  upper  waters  of  the 
Snowy  River,  and  Braid  wood.  It  was,  in  fact,  the  great 
intermarrying  group  which  met  at  this  ceremony,  and  the 
component  parts  of  it  differed  so  much  in  language,  that  the 
most  distant  could  not  understand  each  other  without  making 
use  of  the  broken  English  which  passes  current  over  all 
Australia  in  those  native  tribes  which  have  been  brought 
under  the  white  man's  influence. 

But  this  assemblage  did  not  include  any  of  the  Biduelli, 
a  few  of  whom  still  lived,  and  had  temporarily  joined  the 
Yuin.  They  were  excluded  from  the  ceremonies,  because 
they  had  none  of  their  own,  and  had  never  been  initiated  by 
any  of  their  tribal  neighbours. 

In  these  tribes  it  is  the  Headman  of  some  locality,  in 
one  geographical  moiety  of  the  tribe,  who  summons  the 
assembly  for  initiation,  by  a  message  to  a  Headman  in  the 
other  moiety.  Assuming  that  it  was  the  principal  Headman 
of  the  Katungal  or  coast  people  who  initiated  the  Bunan  or 
Kuringal  ceremonies,  he  would  send  his  messenger,  called  by 
them  Jerri-irr  or  Gudjin,  to  the  Headman  of  the  Baiangal, 
or  forest  people,  who  would  then  take  action  on  his  part. 
The  messenger  need  not  be  of  the  same  totem  as  the  sender, 
nor  of  the  same  local  group,  but  it  is  usually  the  case  that 
he  is.     This  message  is  sent  after  consultation  with  the  other 

'   "  Raw  ceremony,"  alluding  to  thi  novices  not  being  "  roasted  "  before  a 
fire. 

2  L 


514        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

old  men.  For  distant  places  two  messengers  go  in  company, 
as  far  as  their  roads  are  the  same,  and  then  separate.  A 
messenger  is,  of  course,  an  initiated  man,  and  is  chosen 
especially  as  being  a  good  speaker.  He  carries  with  him  a 
bull-roarer,  which  the  head  Govimera  gives  him.  The  points 
of  his  message  are  impressed  on  his  memory,  or  it  is  aided 
by  so  many  strands  of  a  man's  kilt,^  which  he  carries  with 
him.  In  addition  to  the  bull-roarer,  he  also  carries,  wrapped 
up  in  the  skin  of  one  of  the  animals  of  whose  pelts  the 
men's  kilts  are  made,  a  belt  of  opossum-fur  string,  arm 
bands  of  ringtail  opossum  skin,-  and  a  forehead  band.^ 
When  he  arrives  at  the  place  where  the  Gommera  is  to  whom 
he  is  sent,  he  opens  his  bundle  in  the  council -place,  the 
IVirri-iutrn-than*  and  there  delivers  his  message,  exhibit- 
ing to  the  Gommera  the  bull -roarer  and  the  other  things. 
Holding  the  kilt  in  one  hand,  he  then  takes  the  strings 
seriatim,  and  says,  "  This  tail  is  for  so-and-so,"  naming  a 
Gommera^  until  he  has  named  all  of  those  whom  he  has 
to  call  together.  The  Gommera  then  announces  the  message 
to  the  men  at  the  council-place,  and  after  consulting  with 
them,  fixes  the  time  when  he  and  his  men  will  start  for 
the  appointed  place. 

The  Burbung  of  the  VViradjuri  is  analogous  to  the 
Bunan  of  the  Yuin,  and  is  called  together  by  the  Headman 
of  one  of  the  totems,  the  message  being  sent  through  the 
totem  to  the  several  Headmen  of  it,  in  the  local  divisions, 
who  communicate  it  to  the  other  men  of  their  localities.  It 
may  be  noted  that  in  these  tribes  the  class  system  is  in  full 
vigour. 

Assuming  that  the  sender  of  the  message  is  the  head  of 
the  Yibai-gurimul,  that  is,  of  the  Yibai  sub -class  and  the 

*  The  biorain  or  kilt  is  made  of  the  skin  of  a  rabbit  rat  (nga-bmt),  or 
kangaroo  rat  [i^uragttr),  wallaby  or  native  cat,  cut  into  strands  about  half  an  inch 
in  width,  the  full  length  of  the  skin  being  still  left  attached  by  about  an  inch 
at  the  upper  end.  One  btirrain  is  fastened  in  front  and  one  behind  the  wearer, 
being  pendent  from  the  belt  of  opossum- fur  string  by  the  outermost  strand, 
tucked  under  the  belt  on  each  side. 

'^   Vnda  or  iigulia.  ■'  Kikitl-bttga. 

*  The  word  wirri-wiri-i  means  "hasten"  ;  than  means  "speech,"  as  in  the 
name  of  the  langunge  of  the  Krauatungalung,  which  is  Than-quai,  or  "rough 
speech." 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  515 

opossum  totem,  the  messenger  would  also  be  Yibai-gurimul, 
and  he  would  carry  the  message  to  the  head  of  the  same 
sub-class  and  totem  in  the  local  group,  to  which  he  is  sent, 
who  would  similarly  send  it  on  till,  in  the  course  of  time,  it 
would  have  gone  through  the  whole  tribe.  Thus  the  message 
travels  through  the  whole  community,  being  carried  by 
members  of  the  opossum  totem,  whose  Headmen  communicate 
it  to  the  other  men  of  their  groups.  The  messenger  carries 
with  him  a  whole  set  of  male  attire,  together  with  a  bull- 
roarer  {inudjt)  carefully  wrapped  in  a  skin  and  concealed 
from  women  and  children.  Hence  in  such  tribes  the 
community  is  assembled  by  a  totem. 

In  the  Kurnai  tribe  the  Jeraeil  was  called  by  the  Head- 
man of  either  the  southern  or  the  northern  moiety  of  the 
tribe.  So  far  as  I  know,  there  was  no  rule  as  to  which  it 
should  be.  The  initiative  was  taken  by  the  local  organisa- 
tion. It  could  not  be  by  the  social  organisation,  for  in  this 
tribe  that  organisation  had  become  totally  extinct. 

This  action  was  preceded  by  long  consultations  between 
the  elders  of  the  clan  in  which  it  originated.  When  it  was 
found  that  there  was  a  sufficient  number  of  boys  to  be  made 
men,  the  Gweraeil-kurnai  in  that  clan  sent  out  his  Baiaur,  or 
messenger,  to  summon  the  principal  Headman  of  the  next 
clan.  He  carried  with  him  some  token  from  the  sender, 
such  as  his  club,^  or  boomerang,'  or  shield,^  and  he  had  given 
to  him  to  convey  with  great  secrecy  one  of  the  larger  of  the 
two  bull-roarers  used  in  this  tribe.  He  delivered  his  message 
to  the  old  man  to  whom  he  was  sent,  together  with  the 
bull-roarer  and  the  tokens.  The  Gweraeil-kurnai  then  called 
together  the  elders  at  some  suitable  place  apart  from  the 
camp,  and,  showing  them  the  tokens  and  bull-roarer,  told 
them  the  message.  After  due  consideration,  the  message 
was  announced  in  a  general  assemblage  of  all  the  initiated 
men,  and  the  Gweraeil-kurnai  sent  forward  the  message  by 
one  of  his  own  men.  These  proceedings  are  carefully 
concealed  from  the  women,  excepting  the  old  women  of 
consideration,  to  whom  a  hint  is  given  by  some  such  expres- 
sion as  "  the  Mrarts  (ghosts)  are  going  to  kill  a  kangaroo."' 
'  Kujerung,  -   fVunh'm.  3  Bamertik. 


5i6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

This  hint  is  given  because  the  old  women  take  a  part  in  the 
earlier  stages  of  the  ceremonies. 

In  this  manner  the  message  travelled  from  clan  to  clan 
and  from  group  to  group,  till  the  whole  Kurnai  community, 
that  is  to  say  the  initiated  men,  became  aware  of  the  intention 
to  hold  a  Jeraeil.  These  preliminary  proceedings  take  up  a 
long  time,  extending  over  several  months.  More  than  one 
set  of  messengers  would  travel  to  and  fro  before  the  final 
arrangements  would  be  completed,  and  the  time  and  locality 
were  settled.  The  latter  would  in  all  probability  be  in  the 
country  of  the  Headman  by  whom  the  Jeraeil  was  called 
together,  for  it  would  be  to  him,  and  at  his  call,  that  the 
others  came. 

The  manner  of  explaining  the  time  at  which  the  meeting 
would  take  place,  and  even  the  different  stages  of  the  route 
to  it,  would  be  described  as  explained  in  the  chapter  on 
"  Messengers." 

In  the  great  group  of  tribes,  of  which  the  Wakelbura  is 
my  example,  it  was  also  the  practice  to  send  a  message  for 
the  initiation  ceremonies  through  a  totem  ;  but  in  this  case 
a  message-stick  accompanied  it,  and  this  was  made  of  the 
wood  of  some  tree  which  was  of  the  same  class  division  as 
the  sender,  and  also  of  the  bearer  of  the  message. 

These    instances   will    show    the    manner   in    which    the 
meetings  for  initiating  the  youth  of  the  several  tribes  into 
the  privileges  and   the   obligations   of  manhood   are  called, 
together.      I  will  now  show  what  these  ceremonies  are. 

The  Ceremonies 

The  Kuringal  Ceremonies. — In  addition  to  the  particulars 
which  I  have  given  as  to  the  manner  of  assembling  the  tribes 
which  attended  the  ceremonies  of  the  Yuin  tribe,  I  may  now 
add  some  further  particulars  as  to  those  who  were  present  at 
that  which  I  attended. 

For  many  years  I  had  known  a  medicine-man  of  the 
Wolgal  tribe,  the  before-mentioned  Yibai-malian,  and  through 
him  became  acquainted  with  one  of  the  principal  Gommeras 
of  the  Yuin.      On  several  occasions  I  had  spoken  with  Yibai 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE 


517 


about  the  initiations,  and  to  his  surprise  he  found  that  I 
knew  much  about  them  ;  and  I  also  produced  to  him  several 
of  the  bull-roarers  from  different  parts  of  Australia.  Thus 
at  last  he  came  to  look  on  me  as  one  of  the  initiated,  and  in 
consequence  spoke  to  me  unreservedly  on  the  otherwise 
forbidden  subjects.  I  then  arranged  with  him  that  one  of  the 
most  influential  of  the  Yuin 
Gommeras,  who  lived  at  Two- 
fold Bay,  should  come  up  to 
Manero  with  some  of  his  men 
and  meet  me  on  the  occasion 
of  my  next  visit  to  that  part 
of  New  South  Wales.  At  this 
meeting,  amongst  other  things, 
we  discussed  the  advisability 
of  holding  a  Kuringal,  and  it 
was  at  last  decided  that  one 
should  be  held.  I  was  greatly 
struck  by  the  maimer  in  which 
the  old  man  received  a  bull- 
roarer  which  I  had  made  for 
the  occasion,  it  being  the 
facsimile  of  those  with  which 
I  had  played  as  a  boy.  I 
drew  it  from  a  small  bag  and 
secretly  presented  it  to  him, 
saying :  "  This  I  used  when 
I  was  a  lad,  and  you  know 
that  these  mudthi  were  first 
made  by  that  great  one 
(pointing  upwards),  and  that 
he  ordered  your  fathers  to  hold  the  Kuringal^  and  to 
make  your  boys  into  men."  He  and  Yibai,  who  was 
standing  by  him,  each  placed  his  hand  over  his  mouth,  and 
looked  at  the  bull-roarer  for  some  moments.  Then  the  Yuin 
Gonimera  Brupin  said :  "  Yes,  that  is  it,"  and  he  called  the 
three  men  whom  he  had  brought  with  him,  and  holding  the 
bull-roarer  before  him  said  :  "  This  is  a  viudthi  which  he 
(pointing  to  me)  has  brought  from  a  long  way  off.      It  is 


FIG.  29. — I.  YUIN  BULL-RUAKER, 
MUDTHI  ;  2.  DIERI  BULL- 
ROARER,    YUNTHA. 


5i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  same  as  that  which  we  know  of,  and  which  was  given  to 
our  fathers  by  that  great  Biaviban  you  know  about."  The 
men  looked  at  it  with  every  appearance  of  awe,  but  said 
nothing,  and  then  returned  to  their  fire. 

When  we  parted  it  was  understood  that  I  should  send 
up  my  messenger  to  Brupin,  who  would  consult  with  the 
other  Gommeras,  and  I  shortly  after  sent  a  man  of  the 
Krauatun  Kurnai  as  my  messenger  to  the  Yuin  to  ask  them 
to  call  together  a  Kuringal,  and  to  let  me  know  when  they 
were  ready,  and  I  would  go  up  to  help  them.  This  man 
was,  in  fact,  the  proper  intermediary  between  the  Kurnai 
and  the  Yuin.  His  mother  was  a  Ngarigo,  and  his  wife 
was  Yuin,  so  that  he  was  as  one  of  themselves  ;  and  he  had 
been,  moreover,  initiated  at  the  Ngarigo  Butian. 

He  carried  from  me  the  bull-roarer  which  I  had  shown 
to  Yibai  -  malian  and  Brupin,  and  delivered  it  with  my 
message  to  the  latter  at  Bega.  In  going  to  and  from  that 
place  he  journeyed  on  foot  a  distance  of  about  four  hundred 
miles  over  some  of  the  most  mountainous  country  in  South- 
east Australia.  He  made  the  journey  a  second  time 
before  the  arrangements  were  completed,  and  he  brought 
back  a  message  to  me  that  Brupin  would  send  his  messenger 
carrying  my  viudthi  to  the  principal  Gonimera  of  the  Kurial, 
who  lived  at  the  Shoalhaven  River,  asking  him  to  bring  his 
people  to  a  meeting  on  the  east  side  of  the  Bega  River,  not 
far  from  the  coast. 

Word  was  sent  to  me  when  the  Murring  were  assembling. 
Being,  so  to  say,  in  the  position  of  a  Gonimera  of  the  Kurnai, 
I  was  told  that  I  was  to  bring  a  contingent  of  my  men  to 
the  meeting ;  and  I  accordingly  arranged  with  my  messenger 
that  he  was  to  take  certain  of  the  Kurnai,  starting  from  the 
Snowy  River  mouth,  and  meet  me  on  the  upper  waters  of 
the  Delegate  River. 

The  term  Kuringal,  which  means  "  of  the  bush,"  or 
"  belonging  to  the  bush,"  includes  two  slightly  different  forms 
of  the  initiation  ceremonies,  which  are  called  respectively 
Bunan  and  Kadja-wallung.  The  difference  and  resemblances 
of  each  will  be  seen  from  the  following  statements.  But  for 
the  moment  it  will  suffice  to  say  that,  broadly  speaking,  the 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  519 


Bunan  is  distinguished  from  the  Kadja-ivallung  by  having  a 
circular  ring  of  earth,  within  which  the  preliminary  ceremonies 
take  place,  and  a  small  sacred  enclosure,  at  a  distance, 
connected  with  the  Bunan  by  a  path.  This  form  connects 
the  Bunan  with  the  Burbung  of  the  Wiradjuri,  the  Bora  of 
the  Kamilaroi,  and  the  Dora  of  some  Queensland  tribes. 

The  Kadja-wallung  ceremonies  dispense  with  the  circular 
mound,  and  the  small  circular  enclosure  is  represented  by 
the  small  clear  space  which  will  be  described  farther  on  in 
this  chapter.  With  these  differences,  the  ceremonies  are 
substantially,  and  in  some  particulars  identically,  the  same. 
I  shall,  however,  describe  the  whole  of  the  ceremonies, 
beginning  with  the  Bunan. 

The  ceremonial  meeting  having  been  called,  that  part  of 
the  community  which  took  the  initiative  prepares  the  ground, 
and  gets  everything  ready  for  the  arrival  of  the  various 
contingents  ;  some  spot  being  selected  where  a  good  supply 
of  food  is  obtainable. 

In  forming  the  Bunan  ground  a  larger  space  is  cleared, 
and  on  it  a  low  circular  embankment  is  made,  having  a 
diameter  of  from  thirty  to  fifty  yards,  according  to  the 
number  of  people  who  will  attend  it.  At  a  distance  of 
400  to  500  yards  from  the  circular  mound  a  lesser  space  is 
also  cleared,  and  is  so  selected  that  saplings  can  be  arched 
over,  and  thus  make  an  enclosure,  with  only  one  opening 
facing  the  larger  Bunan.  If  there  arc  not  sufficient  saplings, 
or  if  there  are  not  any,  some  are  cut  elsewhere,  and,  being 
stuck  in  the  ground,  are  bent  over  as  before  mentioned.  A 
path  is  cleared  from  the  great  to  the  small  Bunan ;  and 
where  young  trees  or  bushes  border  it,  they  are  also  arched 
across  the  path,  but  this  is  not  essential. 

The  Bunan  is  got  ready,  and  the  proceedings  commence 
about  the  time  when  the  contingents  are  expected  to  arrive. 

Assuming  that  the  Bunan  was  to  be  attended  by  the 
clans  from  Moruya,  Bega,  and  Twofold  Bay,  that  is,  by  both 
the  Kurial  and  Guyangal,  and  that  the  meeting  was  to  be 
near  Bega,  the  following  would  be  the  procedure  as  the 
contingents  arrived. 

The  people  from  Braidwood,  Ulladulla,  and   Shoalhaven 


520        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA         ch. 

would  accompany  those  from  Moruya.  With  them,  people 
from  Broulee  would  occasionally  come.  Next  would  arrive 
those  from  Queanbeyan,  then  the  Gurungatta  from  beyond 
Shoalhaven,  with  whom  there  might  be  even  some  from 
Jervis  Bay  ;  and  all  these  people  are  true  Kurial. 

The  WoUongong  people  did  not  attend  this  ceremony, 
because  they  go  to  one  farther  up  the  coast.  The  people 
from  Twofold  Bay  would  arrive  about  the  same  time,  and 
bring  with  them  some  of  the  Bemeringal  from  the  country 
along  the  coast  range,  being  some  of  those  living  to  the 
east  of  the  Ngarigo. 

The  limits  within  which  people  would  come  may  be 
roughly  stated  as  Jimberoo,  Kangaroo  Valley,  Nowra  ;  but 
at  this  latter  place  were  Bemeringal,  that  is,  those  who  lived 
upon  the  high  tableland,  who  went  to  the  ceremonies  at 
Goulburn.  Nor  did  the  Bemeringal  come  to  these  cere- 
monies from  as  great  a  distance  as  the  country  of  the 
Ngarigo. 

The  Bunan  ground  being  prepared  by  the  initiated  men, 
the  ceremonies  are  commenced  by  a  young  man,  who  was 
initiated  at  the  last  Kuringal,  and  who  is  therefore  selected 
to  commence  this.  Walking  past  a  log  near  the  camp,  he 
starts  back  as  if  in  surprise,  and  shouts  out  "  Gari  !  gari  !  " 
that  is,  "  A  snake,  a  snake  !  "  ^  The  men  also,  pretending 
surprise,  run  up  to  him,  saying:  "  Where  is  it?"  He  replies, 
*'  In  this  log,"  and  pretends  to  be  afraid,  calling  out,  "  Kat  ! 
kail"  as  we  might  say,  "Oh  !  Oh!"  and  as  a  child  might 
do  if  frightened.  He  then  runs  off,  and  all  the  men  run 
after  him  in  a  long  line.  Each  man  has  a  bough  in  either 
hand,  or,  as  I  have  seen,  some  of  the  leading  men  have  a 
boomerang  in  one  hand  instead.  The  young  man,  with  a 
bough  in  each  hand,  runs  a  sinuous  course,  and  strikes  the 
ground  alternately  on  the  right  and  the  left,  with  a  swaying 
motion  of  the  body.  The  men  following  him  as  a  tail 
exactly  imitate  his  movements,  shaking  their  boughs  with  a 
rustling  sound  alternately  on  either  side,  and  shouting  at 
each  blow,  "  Hai  I  Hai  !  "  The  leader  and  all  his  following 
halt  at  each  camp,  making  a  sound  which  can  only  be 
1  Gari  means  a  snake  of  any'kind. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  521 

represented  by  ''■  prr  I  prr  I "  at  the  same  time  raising  the 
bough  or  boomerang  with  one  hand  to  the  sky,  while  point- 
ing to  the  ground  with  the  other.  After  each  camp  has 
been  visited,  they  separate.  In  this  manner  women  are 
informed  that  an  initiation  ceremony  is  to  be  held. 

This,  of  course,  takes  place  when  it  is  expected  that  the 
first  contingent  is  about  to  arrive.  When  it  reaches  a  place 
about  a  day's  journey  from  the  Bunan  ground,  it  halts  for  a 
time  to  allow  the  messenger  to  go  on  and  announce  their 
arrival,  and  also  to  give  themselves  time  to  paint  and  adorn 
themselves  properly. 

When  such  a  contingent  arrives  within  hearing  distance 
of  the  camp,  the  women  and  children  are  sent  on  a  little 
way,  while  the  men  remain  behind.  Those  two  of  the  men 
who  have  the  most  muscular  arms  take  the  bull-roarers, 
which  are  carried  with  the  party,  and  make  as  loud  a  noise 
with  them  as  they  are  able.  The  other  men,  at  the  same 
time,  raise  a  great  shouting,  so  that  the  noise  made  by  the 
mudthis  may  be  notified  to  the  initiated  at  the  Bunan  camp, 
and  yet  may  be  masked  from  the  women  and  children. 
From  this  the  men  at  the  camp  know  when  to  expect  them. 

The  messenger  having  now  rejoined  the  contingent,  they 
all  run  forwards  towards  the  camp,  leaving  their  weapons 
with  their  bundles.  Each  man  carries  a  bough,  or  the  old 
men  carry  boomerangs,  and  the  procedure  is  like  that  before 
described,  all  the  people  being  assembled  at  the  circular 
mound.  Each  hut  having  been  visited,  and,  as  in  the  Gari 
ceremony,  the  men  having  halted  at  each,  and  pointed  to  the 
sky  and  the  ground,  they  finally  reach  the  Bunan,  where  the 
people  are  waiting  for  them. 

The  women  and  the  children  arc  collected  in  the  centre 
of  the  circle,  the  men  standing  outside  and  on  the  side  facing 
the  path  to  the  lesser  Bunan.  Meanwhile  the  women  and 
children  of  the  contingent  have  joined  the  other  women  and 
children  in  the  circle. 

When  the  messenger  reaches  it,  followed  by  the  men  of 
this  contingent,  he  runs  round  to  a  point  not  far  from  the 
entrance  and  jumps  over  the  mound,  followed  by  his  men. 
Then  he  moves  rhythmically  round  the  women  and  children 


522        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

until  all  his  men  are  within  the  circle.  One  of  them  then 
shouts  out  the  name  of  one  of  the  local  divisions  of  the 
makers  of  the  Bunan,  to  which  all  his  followers  shout  "  Van!" 
that  is  "  Come  here  ! "  Then  other  names  of  the  local  divi- 
sions of  the  Bioian-makers  are  shouted,  while  the  men  of  the 
contingent  are  dancing.  The  women  and  children  dance  in 
imitation  of  the  men  of  the*  contingent,  but  in  silence. 

The  visitors  now  run  out  of  the  circle,  and  the  Bunan- 
makers  run  into  it,  the  former  taking  their  places  outside 
the  circle.  The  latter  now  dance  in  their  turn,  and  shout 
out  the  names  of  the  local  divisions  of  the  visitors.  These 
names  are  received  with  shouts  of  "  Yau  !  " 

This  being  finished,  the  women  and  children  go  outside, 
and  the  5«//rt«-makers  join  the  contingent  in  the  ring,  where 
all  dance  a  ceremonial  dance.  The  women  and  children 
during  this  sit  down  outside  the  entrance,  but  with  their 
backs  to  it,  and  are  under  the  surveillance  of  one  of  the 
older  Gommcras,  to  prevent  their  looking  at  what  the  men 
are  doing. 

The  women  and  children,  the  novices  being  among  them, 
sing  the  "  tooth  "-song  during  this  dance,  the  intention  being 
to  cause  the  novice's  tooth  to  come  out  easily.  The  follow- 
ing are  the  words  of  this  song  : — 

Bunbe         \,be)  lanya  iniri  yeringya. 

Eel  the  bush  dingo         mother's  brother. 

While  they  are  occupied  in  singing  the  "  tooth  "-song,  the 
men  quietly  steal  away,  led  by  one  of  the  Goniineras,  along 
the  path  to  the  lesser  Bunan.  A  few  men  are  left  for  a 
time  singing  in  the  circle,  so  that  the  women  shall  not  know 
that  the  men  have  left. 

The  men  of  the  contingent  are  taken  by  the  path  and 
shown  the  various  representations,  or  emblems,  or  figures  as 
they  may  be  called,  with  each  of  which  a  magical  substance, 
that  is,  a  Joi'a,  which  is  used  by  the  medicine-men,  is  specially 
connected.  Indeed  some  of  them  have  certain  /oi'as  peculiar 
to  themselves.  The  following  is  a  description  of  the  figures 
and  proceedings  at  this  part  of  the  Bunan  ground.  The 
series  commences  with  that  figure  nearest  to  the  greater 
Bunan. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  523 

1 .  Giiraua,  that  is,  "  a  hole,"  otherwise  "  a  grave."  At  it 
one  of  the  medicine-men  dances  the  magical  dance  peculiar 
to  these  ceremonies,  in  which  he  squats  down  near  to  the 
ground  while  dancing,  moving  his  legs  alternately  from  one 
side  to  the  other,  at  the  same  time  swinging  his  arms  perpen- 
dicularly in  front  of  his  body.  He  seems  possessed  by  a 
sort  of  frenzy  while  doing  this,  and  apparently  brings  up 
from  within  himself  and  exhibits  between  his  teeth  the  Jo'ia 
peculiar  either  to  himself  or  to  the  object  exhibited  or  sung. 
In  the  case  of  the  Guraua,  the  Join  is  a  quartz  crystal, 
which  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  most  deadly  of  the 
magical  substances  which  the  Gomvieras  receive  from 
Daramulun. 

2.  Junnung-ga- batch.  This  is  the  figure  of  the  spiny 
ant-eater  made  of  earth,  with  sticks  for  quills.  Here  all  the 
men  stand  round,  and  make  a  noise  as  if  blowing  something 
out  of  their  mouths,  and  then  shout  "  whish  "  to  rouse  the 
creature  up,  this  being  the  sound  made  by  them  when 
digging  it  out  of  the  ground.  It  is  supposed  to  distract  its 
attention  from  its  burrowing  out  of  sight  in  the  ground. 
One  of  the  medicine-men,  while  this  is  going  on,  dances 
round  the  figure,  producing  a  white  frothy  substance  out  of 
his  mouth  having  the  appearance  of  soap.  This  is  said  to 
be  a  deadly  Jo'ia  if  blown  over  a  person  or  put  into  his  food. 

3.  Mtirumbul.  The  figure  of  a  brown  snake  ^  made  of 
clay.  At  this  stage  one  of  the  medicine-men,  at  the  Bunan 
which  I  am  now  describing,  dropped  a  small  live  brown 
snake  from  his  mouth  on  to  the  ground  while  dancing,  which 
he  then  picked  up  and  held  up  before  putting  into  his  bag. 
This  Jo'ia  is  said  to  be  "  very  strong,"  and  that  the  medicine- 
man having  it  can  send  it  at  night  into  people's  camps  to 
kill  them  while  they  sleep. 

4.  Daraiujilun.  A  figure  the  size,  or  more  than  the  size, 
of  life  is  made  of  earth  in  relief  representing  a  man  in  the 
act  of  dancing  the  magic  dance,  and  surrounded  by  the 
implenients  and  weapons  of  the  Yuin.  These  were,  it  is 
said,  invented  by  Darajnulun,  and  given  by  him  to  their 
fathers.      Round  this  all   the  medicine-men   dance,  shouting 

'  Hoplocephalus  sp. 


524        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  name  of  Daramulun,  and  each  producing  his  special  Join; 
amongst  others,  one  looked  like  a  black  membrane,  and 
another  was,  to  all  appearances,  a  piece  of  one  of  the  lesser 
intestines  of  some  small  animal,  which  the  Gomviera  let  hang 
from,  and  then  withdrew  into,  his  mouth. 

5.  Finally  the  lesser  Bunan  is  reached,  in  which  one 
medicine-man  dances  wfeile  the  others  dance  round  it.  He 
who  was  inside  it  exhibited  a  black  substance  about  five 
inches  in  length  which  hung  from  his  mouth,  and  was  then 
withdrawn.  It  is  a  Join  called  Brauutiy  the  meaning  of 
which  word  I  did  not  learn,  but  the  Jo'ia  itself  is  said  to 
enable  its  possessor  to  cause  an  enemy's  eyesight  to  become 
dim,  so  that  he  would  be  unable  to  ^efend  himself 

After  all  these  magical  substances  have  been  exhibited 
to  the  contingent,  they  return  quietly  to  the  Bunan  circle, 
the  first  entering  m^ing  a  sound  like  " prr !  prr!"  and 
each  joining  in  this  as  Tie  enters,  so  that,  as  the  women  have 
all  the  time  continued  singing  the  "  tooth  "-song  under  sur- 
veillance, they  could  not  be  aware  of  what  has  been  going  on. 

The  men  being  now  all  within  the  circle,  one  of  them 
calls  out  the  name  of  some  place  a  number  of  times,  and 
they  all  go  off  to  their  respective  camps.  In  the  evening 
there  is  a  dancing  corrobboree,  the  Bunan-mak&vs  being  the 
H  performers,  and  the  contingent  the  spectators,  in  whose 
honour  it  is  held. 

This  ceremonial  is  repeated  on  the  arrival  of  each 
contingent,  and  may  extend  over  several  weeks. 

During  this  time  the  "tooth  "-song  is  sung  by  the 
women  each  night  v^^en  they  hear  the  mudthi  sounded  at 
the  camp  of  the  young  men,  that  is,  of  those  who  have  been 
at  one  initiation  only.  This  camp  is  at  about  200  to  300 
yards  from  those  of  the  married  Tnen. 

When  all  the  contingents  have  arrived,  the  men  about 
daybreak  rush  V)ff,  each  carrying  a  fire-stick  or  a  burn- 
ing log.  They  run  into  the  great  Bunan  and  throw  the 
burning  wood  into  a  heap  in  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and 
pile  up  bark  and  dead  wood  on  it  to  make  a  great  fire. 
Meanwhile  the  guardians  of  the  boys  who  are  to  be  initiated 
have  taken  them  to  another  small  fire  made  about  a  hundred 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  525 

yards  from  the  Bu?ian,  where  they  paint  them  with  dabs  of 
white  clay  over  the  shoulders,  arms,  and  chest,  and  with  bars 
of  the  same  across  the  legs.  Each  boy  has  also  a  -fillet  of 
white  grass  twine  bound  round  his  forehead. 

It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  these  guardians,  two  of 
whom  are  selected  for  each  novice,  are  men  who  stand  in  the 
relation  of  Kabo  to  him  ;  that  is,  who  are  own  or  tribal 
brothers  of  those  girls  or  women  who  form  the  group  from 
which  his  future  wife  must  be  taken,  or,  which  is  the  same 
thing,  are  own  or  tribal  husbands  (actual  or  potential)  of  the 
own  or  tribal  sisters  of  the  novice.  During  the  Kuringal  the 
Kahos  look  after  their  boy  and  do  everything  for  him,  cook 
for  him,  bring  him  water,  and  so  on.  They  explain  every- 
thing to  him,  tell  him  what  his  duties  as  one  of  the  tribe  are, 
repeat  to  him  the  tribal  legends  which  he  now  hears  for  the 
first  time,  impress  on  him  the  tribal  laws  and  the  tribal 
morality,  describe  the  powers  of  the  Gommeras  and  their 
ability  to  see  in  dreams  what  others  do,  and  finally  their 
power  to  kill  by  magic  at  a  distance. 

The  large  fire  being  ready,  the  men  assemble  at  the 
boys'  fire.  Each  boy  is  lifted  by  one  of  his  guardians  on  to 
his  shoulders,  and  carried  in  this  manner  to  the  mound. 
The  Kabos  walk  first,  and  after  them  come  the  women. 

The  boys  are  placed  sitting  on  the  mound  with  their  feet 
in  the  Bunan.  Each  holds  a  woman's  digging-stick  upright 
between  his  feet,  and  on  it  hangs  a  woman's  netted  bag,^ 
containing  the  cord  of  twisted  opossum-fur  many  yards  in 
length,  which  when  wrapped  round  his  waist  forms  his  belt, 
also  a  man's  kilt,  a  forehead  band,  and  the  pointed  bone 
which  is  worn  through  the  perforated  septum  of  the  nose. 
These  comprise  a  man's  full  ceremonial  dress,  and-this  set  is 
given  to  him  by  some  relative  or  friend,  or  by  several  of 
them  conjointly.^ 

The  boy  is  told  by  his  Kabos  to  look  at  the  fire,  and 
not  to  move  away  on  any  account.  While  this  is  being 
arranged  the  Gommeras  are   building  up  a  fire  fit  to  roast 

1  Mudbi. 

-  The  wearing  of  this  set  is  not  confined  to  manhood,  for  small  sets  are  some- 
limes  made  to  please  little  boys. 


526        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  boys.  The  head  Gommera,  however,  only  looks  on, 
having  given  his  instructions  to  the  others  early  in  the 
morning,  at  the  council-place,  so  that  each  one  knows  what 
he  has  to  do. 

The  fire  is  built  up  only  twelve  or  fourteen  paces  from 
the  boys,  and  they  are  kept  before  it  for  ten  or  twelve 
minutes,  or  even  longer,  if  they  can  bear  the  heat.  Even  if 
the  wind  blows  it  towards  them,  they  must  not  move  of 
themselves,  for  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Kabos  to  look  out  for 
such  an  event,  and  to  move  them  farther  off,  before  any 
harm  can  happen  to  them. 

Behind  each  boy,  that  is  to  say,  outside  the  mound, 
crouches  his  mother,  or  failing  her,  his  mother's  sister,  or  the 
sister  of  his  father  {Mimung),  closely  covered  with  boughs. 
When  the  head  Gommera  thinks  tliat  the  boys  have  been 
roasted  enough,  the  bull-roarer  is  sounded  at  a  little  distance 
away  and  behind  the  women,  and  at  this  signal  the  Kabos 
make  the  boys  run  across  the  Bunan  and  along  the  path, 
where  they  He  down,  and  are  closely  covered  with  opossum 
rugs  or  blankets. 

After  a  little  time  the  boys  are  allowed  to  sit  up,  but 
still  covered  so  that  they  cannot  see  what  is  going  on. 
Meanwhile  the  men  have  brought  their  bundles,  and  then 
remove  the  boughs  from  the  women,  who  are  sent  away  to 
some  place  several  miles'  distant,  where  they  make  a  new 
camp  and  await  the  return  of  the  men  the  next  day.  In 
order  to  ensure  discretion  on  their  part,  and  that  none  of 
them  shall  spy  out  the  proceedings  at  the  secret  ceremonies, 
an  old  man  is  left  behind  in  charge  of  them,  who  sees  that 
they  do  their  part  in  readiness  for  the  return  of  the  men. 

The  men  having  joined  the  boys  with  their  bundles,  they 
all  move  along  the  path,  and  at  each  stage  the  medicine-men 
go  through  their  magical  performances.  The  Kabos  explain 
everything  to  their  boys,  and  also  tell  them  about  Daramulun, 
warning  them  never  to  mention  these  things  to  women  or 
children. 

These  matters  are  more  fully  described  in  speaking  of 
the  other  variety  of  the  Kwingal,  the  Kadja-wallung  cere- 
monies. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  527 


The  Kabos  during  the  day  take  their  boys  out  to  hunt 
for  food,  and  remain  away  until  evening,  when  the  men, 
having  cleared  a  space  near  the  lesser  Bunan,  capable  of 
accommodating  twenty  or  thirty  people,  take  the  boys  there 
for  the  ceremony  of  knocking  out  the  tooth. 

From  this  point  the  Bunan  and  Kadja-wallung  cere- 
monies are  the  same,  and  it  will  be  convenient,  before  pro- 
ceeding farther,  to  describe  the  other  ceremonies  up  to  this 
point.  For  this  purpose  I  will  now  describe  the  visit  which 
I  made  to  the  Murring,  when  they  were  ready  for  the 
Kuringal  which  had  been  held  at  my  suggestion. 

Having  received  notice  from  Yibai-malian  and  Brupin 
that  the  people  were  assembling  for  the  Kuringal,  and  having 
sent  off  my  contingent  of  the  Kurnai  under  the  guidance  of 
my  messenger  from  the  Snowy  River,  I  went  to  the  south  coast 
and  there  found  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  blacks, — men, 
women,  and  children, — waiting  for  me.  They  represented 
mainly  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  Murring  of  the  sQuth 
coast,  but  there  were  also  people  from  as  far  as  Bateman's 
Bay  and  Braidwood,  who  accompanied  the  Shoalhaven  con- 
tingent. Besides  these,  there  were  also  a  few  of  the  Biduclli. 
After  waiting  a  few  days  for  the  Kurnai,  I  learned  that 
owing  to  their  guide  having  been  attacked  by  ophthalmia, 
they  had  returned  from  the  Coast  Range  before  descending 
to  the  sea-coast  where  we  were  waiting  for  them. 

Thus  some  time  was  lost,  which  I  could  not  make  up, 
and  in  order  that  the  whole  of  the  ceremonies  should  be 
completed  while  I  could  remain,  it  was  decided  that,  as  the 
men  had  not  yet  prepared  the  circular  mound,  the  Kadja- 
wallung  should  be  at  once  proceeded  with.  This  was  settled 
at  a  meeting  of  the  old  men  at  their  council-place,  about  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  general  camp.  The  preliminary 
ceremonial  receptions  of  the  several  contingents  had  been 
held  as  they  came  in,  although  they  could  not  have  been 
done  fully  according  to  the  usual  rule,  in  the  absence  of  a 
proper  ring.  In  my  case,  although  my  party  had  not  met* 
me  as  arranged,  there  was  the  ceremonial  visit  to  the  several 
huts,  starting  from  council-place,  the  Wirri-wirri-than.  The 
messenger   who    had    been    entrusted   with    my    bull-roarer 


528        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

swung  it  a  little  distance  from  the  council-place,  and  at  its 
roaring  sound  the  men  sprang  up  and  ran  in  a  long  line, 
following  Umbara,  the  tribal  bard,  who  held  a  boomerang  in 
his  hand,  the  others  holding  boughs. 

They  ran  towards  the  camp,  in  a  long  sinuous  line, 
following  the  actions  of  their  leader,  rhythmically  striking 
the  ground  on  alternate  sides,  and  shouting  "  IVa/i  I  "  Once 
or  twice  in  their  course  the  leader  and  his  men  stopped  and 
raised  their  boughs  and  boomerangs  silently  to  the  sky. 
When  they  reached  the  camp  the  long  line  wound  through 
it,  stamping  in  time,  waving  boughs  and  shouting  "J JW^ .'" 
They  visited  each  hut,  from  which  the  women  and  children 
hastened  to  join  the  others  who  had  assembled  just  outside 
the  camp,  encircled  by  the  men,  while  the  women  sang  the 
"  tooth  "-song  to  the  time  beaten  on  rolled-up  rugs.  The 
men  now  ranged  themselves  at  the  east  side  of  the  women, 
and  shouted  alternately  the  name  of  one  of  the  local  groups, 
the  most  distant  one  being  first  used. 

This  having  been  done,  the  men  closed  rapidly  and 
closely  round  the  women  and  children  so  as  to  crowd  them 
together  ;  and,  having  done  so,  shouted  "  IVa/i  !  "  and  raised 
their  boomerangs  and  boughs  to  the  sky.  This  is  the  gesture 
signifying  "  the  great  master "  i^Biaviban),  whose  true  but 
secret  name  o{  Daramtilun  it  is  not  lawful  to  utter,  excepting 
at  the  ceremonies,  on  the  initiation  ground. 

In  the  evening  the  friendly  welcome  of  the  dancing 
corrobboree  was  held.  The  only  notable  variation  in  this 
from  the  corrobborees  which  I  had  seen  elsewhere  was  that 
of  a  dance  by  the  women  of  the  Braidwood  contingent,  the 
wives  of  Katungal  (sea -coasters).  These  women  danced 
together  in  the  usual  corrobboree  style,  but  wearing  short 
fringe-like  skirts,  which  represented  the  "  women's  aprons " 
of  the  olden  time.  Their  faces  were  whitened  with  pipe-clay, 
and  thQy  wore  large  head-dresses  made  of  swans'  feathers. 

On  the  following  morning  a  general  council  of  the  men 
was  held  at  the  Wirri-wirri-than  to  decide  the  procedure. 
Some  of  the  Goinmeras  were  desirous  of  forming  the  Bunan, 
which  had  been  left  pending  my  arrival,  but  to  this  I  objected 
that,  as  my  time  was  now  so  short,  I  could  not  wait  to  the 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EAStERN  TYPE  529 

end  of  the  ceremonies  if  that  were  done.  Some  of  the  old 
men  agreed  with  me,  and  after  Umbara,  who  had  much 
influence,  had  spoken,  it  was  decided  that  the  Kadja-wallung 
should  be  begun  on  the  following  morning. 

Therefore  on  the  next  morning  about  ten  o'clock  the 
men  all  assembled  at  the  Wirri-ivirri-than,  and  Gunjerung,^ 
the  principal  Headman,  finding  that  all  were  ready,  gave  the 
order  that  each  one  should  make  up  his  bundle  and  place  it 
behind  a  clump  of  Ti-tree  close  at  hand.  This  having  been 
done,  two  men  were  left  to  sound  the  bull-roarer,  as  soon  as 
the  others  should  have  reached  the  camp.  Two  bull-roarers 
were  used  for  this,  one  which  Yibai-malian  had  made  when 
the  one  which  I  had  sent  in  the  first  instance  by  my  messenger, 
and  which  had  been  hidden,  was  accidentally  burned  by  a 
bush  fire,  and  the  other  which  I  had  brought  up  with  me  to 
show  the  old  men.  It  was  one  from  the  Dieri  tribe,  and 
had  been  used  at  one  of  their  ceremonies.  The  Yuin  looked 
at  it  with  great  interest.  I  was  surprised  that  they  should 
wish  to  use  it,  but  such  being  the  case,  I  had  no  objection. 
According  to  rule,  the  two  men  who  were  to  sound  the  mudtJiis 
should  have  been  those  who  had  been  sent  with  the  message 
by  Brupin  and  Yibai-malian,  but  one  of  them  was  temporarily 
away,  getting  some  supplies  to  take  with  the  men  to  the 
place  of  the  ceremonies,  and  another  was  told  off  to  take  his 
place.  As  soon  as  we  had  reached  the  camp,  and  the  men 
were  distributed  through  it,  the  distant  roaring  sound  of  the 
Mudthis  was  heard  and  the  whole  camp  was  instantly  in 
commotion.  The  women  started  up,  and,  seizing  their  rugs 
and  blankets,  hastily  went  with  their  children  to  a  vacant 
space  on  the  north  side  of  the  encampment,  where  they 
re-commenced  the  "  tooth  "-song.  Meanwhile  the  men  were 
stalking  about  among  the  camps  shouting  "  Ha  !  Wah  !  "  * 
commanding  silence  among  the  women.  In  a  very  short 
time  these  with  their  children  were  huddled  together  in  a 
close  group,  surrounded  by  the  men,  who  were  stamping  a 
dance  to  the  word  "  Wah  ! "  finally  closing  in  round  them, 
and    silently  raising    their   hands    to   the   sky.      This    silent 

'  Gunjerung  is  the  "  Morning  Star."  , 

^  This  word  is  properly  "  Wangh,"  but  is  pronounced  Wah  or  Woh. 

2  M 


530        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

gesture  again  means  Daratimlun,  whose  name  cannot  be 
lawfully  spoken  there. 

A  singular  feature  now  showed  itself  There  were  at 
this  time  two  or  three  Biduelli  men  with  their  wives  and 
children  in  the  encampment,  and  also  one  of  the  Krauatun- 
galung  Kurnai,  with  his  wife  and  child.^  When  these 
ceremonies  commenced  they,  with  one  exception,  went 
away,  because  neither  the  Biduelli  or  the  Krauatun  Kurnai 
had,  as  I  have  said  before,  any  initiation  ceremonies,  and 
these  men  had  therefore  never  been  "  made  men."  The 
one  man  who  remained  was  the  old  patriarch  of  the  Biduelli, 
and  he  was  now  driven  crouching  among  the  women  and 
children.  The  reason  was  self-evident ;  he  had  never  been 
made  a  man,  and  therefore  was  no  more  than  a  mere  boy. 

The  women  and  children  being  thus  driven  together, 
the  old  men  proceeded  to  draw  from  them  those  boys  who 
were  considered  to  be  ripe  for  initiation.-'  The  old  men 
pointed  out  those  who  were  to  be  taken,  and  their  Kabos 
seized  them  and  placed  them  in  the  front  rank  of  the 
women.  There  was  one  boy,  a  half-caste,  indeed  he  was 
nearer  white  than  black,  as  to  whom  the  old  men  were 
divided  in  opinion.  He  was  in  an  agony  of  terror,  clinging 
to  his  mother,  but  by  the  order  of  the  head  Gommera  he 
was  dragged  out  and  discussed.  After  a  few  minutes  the 
decision  was  given,  "  He  is  too  young,  put  him  back  again." 
The  women  and  children  were  now  pushed  together  into  as 
small  a  compass  as  possible,  with  the  old  Biduelli  patriarch 
among  them.  Skin  rugs  and  blankets  were  then  placed 
over  them,  so  that  they  were  completely  hidden,  and  were 
themselves  unable  to  see  anything.  At  a  signal  from 
Gunjerung,  a  Kabo  seized  his  boy  from  under  the  covering, 
and  holding  him  by  one  arm,  ran  him  off  to  the  place  where 
the  bundles  were  left.  All  of  us  followed  as  fast  as  possible, 
and  as  I  left  I  could  hear  the  muffled  sound  of  the  "  tooth  "- 
song  being  sung  by  the  women  under  their  coverings. 

^  This  man  had  married  the  daughter  of  Vibai-malian. 

2  The  proper  time  is  when  the  whiskers  are  beginning  to  show  themselves, 
and  when  the  old  men  ol>serve  that  the  boys  are  paying  more  attention  to  women 
of  the  tribe  than  is  considered  decent  or  proper. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  531 

It  was  expected  that  there  would  be  eight  boys  ready 
to  be  made  men,  but  owing  to  the  delays  and  to  the  non- 
arrival  of  the  Kurnai  contingent,  there  were  only  three  who 
were  passed  by  the  old  men.  Two  were  about  fourteen  or 
fifteen,  the  other  was  older  and  had  an  incipient  moustache. 

The  first  proceeding  at  the  trysting-place  was  that  the 
Kabos  placed  on  each  boy,  who  had  been  stripped  naked,  a 
new  blanket  folded  twice,  so  that  when  fastened  down  the 
front  it  formed  a  cone,  the  apex  of  which  was  over  the 
boy's  head  and  the  base  barely  touched  the  ground.  The 
wooden  skewers  with  which  the  sides  of  the  blanket  were 
fastened  were  so  placed  that  the  boy's  face  appeared  just 
over  the  uppermost  one.  The  upper  fold  fell  over  the  head 
so  as  to  shade  the  eyes  and  in  fact  most  of  the  face. 

This  being  all  arranged,  Gunjerung  gave  the  signal  to 
start,  and  our  procession  began  to  ascend  the  steep  side  of 
a  grassy  hill  leading  to  the  mountain.  Some  of  the  old 
men  led  the  way,  then  came  the  three  sets  of  Kabos,  one  on 
each  side  of  a  boy,  holding  the  upper  part  of  his  arm,  and 
in  deep  converse  with  him  as  they  went.  All  the  other 
men  followed  as  they  liked,  each  one  carrying  his  bundle, 
and  the  Kabos  carried,  not  only  their  own,  but  also  their 
boys'  things. 

The  duty  of  the  Kabos  is  to  take  charge  of  the  boys  1 
during  the  ceremonies.  They  never  leave  them  alone,  and  ' 
if  one  of  them  has  to  absent  himself  for  a  time,  he  calls 
some  other  man,  of  the  same  relation  to  the  boy  as  himself, 
to  take  his  place.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Kabo  to  prepare 
his  boy  for  the  coming  ceremony  by  instruction,  admonition, 
and  advice,  and  this  commences  the  moment  the  procession 
moves  forward.  One  of  the  earliest,  if  not  the  first,  in- 
struction is  that  the  boy  must  not  under  any  possible  cir- 
cumstances show  any  surprise  or  fear,  and  no  matter  what 
is  said  or  done  to  him,  he  is  not  by  word  or  deed  to  show 
that  he  is  conscious  of  what  is  going  on,  yet  that  he  must 
narrowly  observe  everything,  and  remember  all  he  sees  and 
hears.  It  is  explained  that  everything  he  hears  said,  to 
which  the  word  "  Yah  "  is  appended,  means  the  exact  opposite 
to  the  apparent  meaning.     This  word  was  explained  when 


532        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

we  started  by  Umbara.  He  said  that  it  was  like  a  white 
man  saying  "  I  sell  you  "  ;  my  messenger  Jenbin  said  it  was 
like  a  white  man  saying  "  gammon."  The  use  of  the  word 
will  be  seen  by  illustration  farther  on. 

The  intention  of  all  that  is  done  at  this  ceremony  is  to 
make  a  momentous  change  in  the  boy's  life  ;  the  past  is  to 
be  cut  off  from  him  by  a  gulf  which  he  can  never  re-pass. 
His  connection  with  his  mother  as  her  child  is  broken  off, 
and  he  becomes  henceforth  attached  to  the  men.  All  the 
sports  and  games  of  his  boyhood  are  to  be  abandoned  with 
the  severance  of  the  old  domestic  ties  between  himself  and 
his  mother  and  sisters.  He  is  now  to  be  a  man,  instructed 
in  and  sensible  of  the  duties  which  devolve  upon  him  as  a 
member  of  the  Murring  community.  To  do  all  this  is 
partly  the  object  of  the  ceremonies,  and  the  process  by  which 
this  is  reached  is  a  singular  one.  The  ceremonies  are 
intended  to  impress  and  terrify  the  boy  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  lesson  may  be  indelible,  and  may  govern  the  whole 
of  his  future  life.  But  the  intention  is  also  to  amuse  in  the 
intervals  of  the  serious  rites. 

The  ceremonies,  therefore,  are  marked  by  what  may  be 
called  major  and  minor  stages,  and  the  intervals  are  filled  in 
by  magic  dances,  by  amusing  interludes  and  buffoonery,  in 
which  all  the  men  take  part,  excepting  the  Kabos,  whose 
duty  is  to  unceasingly  explain  and  admonish  during  the 
whole  ceremony  ;  to  point  the  moral  and  adorn  the  tale. 
The  pieces  of  buffoonery  are  perhaps  some  of  the  most 
remarkable  features  of  the  proceeding.  If  one  were  to 
imagine  all  sorts  of  childish  mischief  mixed  up  with  the 
cardinal  sins  represented  in  burlesque,  and  ironically 
recommended  to  the  boys  on  their  return  to  the  camp  and 
afterwards,  it  would  give  a  not  unapt  representation  of  what 
takes  place.  But  there  is  the  remarkable  feature  that  at  the 
end  of  almost  every  sentence,  indeed  of  every  indecent, 
immoral,  or  lewd  suggestion,  the  speaker  adds  "  Yah ! " 
which  negatives  all  that  has  been  said  and  done.  Indeed 
the  use  of  the  word  "  Yak "  runs  through  the  whole  con- 
versation carried  on  during  the  ceremonies,  as  when  a  man 
in  the  rear  of  the  procession  calls  to  some  one  in  the  front, 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  533 

"  Hallo  there,  you  (mentioning  his  name),  stop  and  come 
back  to  me — yah  !  "  This  gave  to  the  whole  of  the  proceed- 
ings, up  to  the  time  when  we  reached  the  Talmaru  camp,  in 
the  recesses  of  the  mountain,  a  sort  of  Carnival  and  April 
fool  aspect. 

The  old  men  told  me  that  the  rrieaning  of  this  inverted 
manner  of  speaking,  of  saying  one  thing  when  the  speaker 
intended  another,  was  to  break  the  boys  of  a  habit  of  telling 
lies,  and  to  make  them  for  the  future  truth-speaking. 

The  ceremonies  are  also  intended  to  rivet  the  influence 
and  power  of  the  old  men  on  the  novices,  who  have  heard 
from  their  earliest  childhood  tales  of  the  fearful  powers  of 
the  Gojtivieras,  and  of  the  Jo'ias  by  which  they  can  cause 
sickness  and  death.  At  these  ceremonies  the  Joias  are 
exhibited.  A  young  man  said  to  me  after  his  initiation, 
"  When  I  was  a  little  boy  I  did  not  believe  all  I  heard  about 
the  Joias,  but  when  I  saw  the  Gommeras  at  the  Kuringal 
bringing  them  up  from  their  insides,  I  believed  it  all." 

These  remarks  will  be  illustrated  by  the  incidents  which 
I  am  about  to  describe. 

At  the  halt  made  the  Kabos  placed  their  boys  in  a  row, 
and  two  old  men  sat  down  before  them  on  the  ground,  facing 
each  other  with  their  feet  touching.  In  the  oval  space  thus 
enclosed  by  their  legs  they  proceeded  to  make  a  "  mud  pie  " 
of  the  wet  soil,  which  they  smoothed  and  patted  into  the 
semblance  of  a  cake,  with  childish  manner  and  gestures. 
All  the  men  danced  round  them  uttering  some  word  which 
I  omitted  to  note.  Several  men  then  came  to  the  boys  and 
spoke  to  them,  in  their  buffoon  manner,  pointing  at  the  same 
time  to  the  dirt  cake.  It  fortunately  happened  that  one  of 
the  boys  was  a  Bemeringal,  whose  language  differed  from 
that  of  the  Katungal  so  much  that  throughout  the  ceremonies, 
while  the  men  spoke  to  the  Katungal  boys  in  their  own 
language,  they  spoke  to  the  Bemering  boy  in  the  broken 
English  which  is  used  by  the  blacks  and  whites  in  speaking 
to  each  other.  Thus  I  was  able  to  follow  the  whole  course 
of  instruction  and  admonition  very  satisfactorily,  and  also  to 
check  the  explanations  given  me  by  my  friends  Yibai-malian 
and  Umbara  and  others.      The   men   said,  "  Look    at   that ! 


534        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

look  at  those  old  men  !  when  you  get  back  to  the  camp  go 
and  do  like  that,  and  play  with  the  little  children — Yah  !  " 

After  a  march  of  another  quarter  of  a  mile  there  was 
another  halt.  Some  of  the  old  men  came  out  of  the  scrub 
with  boughs  held  round  their  heads  representing  a  mob  of 
bullocks,  and  went  through  some  absurd  antics  to  make  the 
boys  laugh  at  their  child's  play.  But  the  boys,  having 
been  warned  by  their  Kabos,  looked  on  with  the  utmost 
stolidity. 

From  here  we  marched  slowly  up  the  mountain  side, 
until  at  another  little  level  a  third  halt  was  made.  Here 
the  second  stage  was  marked  by  all  the  men  rubbing  them- 
selves with  powdered  charcoal,  making  themselves  almost 
unrecognisable.  The  use  of  powdered  charcoal  in  this 
manner  seems  to  have  a  very  general  application  in  these 
ceremonies  and  in  other  tribes  to  magic,  as  for  instance  the 
Bunjil-barn  among  the  Kurnai. 

This  interlude  was  an  amusing  one.  The  men,  led  by 
Umbara,  pretended  to  be  a  team  of  working  bullocks.  Each 
man  held  a  stick  by  both  hands  over  his  neck  to  represent 
a  yoke,  and  the  team  danced  slowly  among  the  trees,  past 
the  boys  with  ludicrous  gestures.  Thence  a  further  march 
was  made,  the  men  making  laughable  remarks  to  the  boys, 
such  as  "  You  can  go  home  now — Yah !  We  are  going  to 
the  sea-shore  to  get  oysters — Yah  !  " 

On  the  summit  of  the  hill  there  was  another  halt,  and 
here  was  the  first  magic  dance.  The  boys  and  their  Kabos 
stood  in  a  row  and  the  men  danced  in  a  circle  before  them, 
shouting  the  name  for  "  legs."  This  kind  of  dance  is  merely 
jumping  round  in  a  circle,  with  the  legs  wide  apart  and  the 
arms  stretched  straight  downwards  swinging  across  each  other 
in  front,  the  word  being  loudly  uttered,  rhythmically  with  the 
body  movement.  After  doing  this  for  a  minute  or  two,  the 
circle  of  dancers  opened,  and  joined  on  to  the  end  of  the  line 
of  Kabos  and  novices,  the  whole  then  forming  a  new  circle. 
One  of  the  Gommeras  darted  into  this  enclosed  space,  and 
danced  the  magic  dance.  This  is  done  as  if  sitting  almost 
on  the  heels,  but  the  knees  are  widely  apart,  and  the  two 
hands  are  extended  downwards  until  the  fingers  almost  touch 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  535 

the  ground.  The  medicine-man  then  hops  backwards  and 
forwards  with  a  staring  expression  of  face,  his  head  vibrates 
from  side  to  side,  and  he  suddenly  shows,  sometimes  after 
apparently  internal  struggles,  one  of  his  Joias  between  his 
teeth.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been  brought  from  within 
himself.  The  other  men  are  meantime  dancing  round  him, 
and  I  have  occasionally  seen  him  work  himself  into  a  kind 
of  ecstatic  frenzy,  and  fall  down,  once  almost  into  the  fire, 
utterly  exhausted.  While  this  was  going  on,  the  Kabos 
spoke  in  earnest  tones  to  their  boys,  explaining  to  them  the 
great  and  deadly  powers  of  the  Goinmeras,  and  the  necessity 
of  their  obeying  every  instruction  given  to  them. 

After  a  further  ascent  of  a  steep  mountain  ridge,  there 
was  another  halt  before  crossing  the  summit  of  the  range, 
which  was  marked  by  the  men  representing  to  the  boys  a 
procession  of  old  men,  slowly  and  with  rhythmical  movements 
marching  out  of  the  forest  into  the  little  open  space  in  which 
the  boys  had  been  halted.  Great  age  was  shown,  as  in  all 
these  representations,  by  each  man  walking  in  a  stooping 
position,  supported  by  a  staff  in  each  hand.  After  circling 
round  the  boys  twice,  the  procession  resolved  itself  into  a 
ring  in  front  of  the  boys,  and  the  men  danced  the  usual 
magic  dance  round  one  who  exhibited  his  Joias  in  the  usual 
manner.  The  men  then,  ceasing  to  dance,  rushed  to  the 
boys  in  an  excited  manner,  old  Yibai-malian  leading  the 
way,  and  for  the  first  time  went  through  one  of  their  most 
characteristic  performances.  They  all  shouted  "  Ngai ! " 
meaning  "  Good,"  and  at  the  same  time  moved  their  arms  and 
hands  as  if  passing  something  from  themselves  to  the  boys, 
who,  being  instructed  by  the  Kabos,  moved  their  hands  and 
arms  as  if  pulling  a  rope  towards  themselves,  the  palms  of 
the  hands  being  held  upwards.  The  intention  of  this  is  that 
the  boys  shall  be  completely  filled — saturated,  I  might  say — 
with  the  magic  proceeding  from  the  initiated  and  the  medicine- 
men, so  that  "  Daramulun  will  like  them." 

Perhaps  the  best  expression  that  could  be  used  in 
English  would  be  that  by  their  thus  passing  their  magical 
influence  to  the  boys,  the  medicine-men  and  the  initiated 
made  the  novices  acceptable  to  Daramulun. 


536        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ck. 

The  bull-roarer  was  now  sounded  in  the  distance  and  the 
procession,  obeying  its  call,  moved  again  up  the  mountain. 

The  fifth  halt  was  merely  a  burlesque  of  a  number  of 
women  sitting  on  the  ground  and  beating  on  their  rolled -up 
rugs  as  they  sang  a  song.  The  sixth  halt  was  near  the 
summit  of  the  mountain,  and  a  number  of  the  men  crouched 
on  the  ground  covered  with  grass  representing  kangaroo 
rats.  As  the  boys  came  up,  these  men  started  to  their  feet 
and  danced,  forming  a  circle,  in  which  Yibai-malian  exhibited 
his  magical  powers.  The  name  of  the  animal  was  the  word 
sung  here. 

From  this  place  the  ground  fell  a  little,  so  as  to  lead  by 
a  gentle  slope  of  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  into  a  small 
grassy  depression  lying  back  from  the  range,  and  falling 
slightly  to  the  south.  Here  we  halted,  the  bundles  were 
laid  down  or  hung  on  the  trees,  and  the  first  of  the  minor 
stages  was  completed.  The  procession  from  the  camp  to 
this  place  in  the  mountain  represents  the  cleared  path  from 
the  circle  to  the  little  Bunan.  The  various  stages  to  be 
now  described  represent  some  of  the  stages  on  the  path,  and 
the  little  Bunan  is  represented,  partly  by  this  grassy  depres- 
sion and  partly  by  a  small  gra.ssy  glen  below  it.  This  latter 
was  connected  with  the  grassy  depression  above  it  by  a  little 
water  channel  which  had  cut  its  way  down  a  steep  rocky 
slope  and  joined  a  small  creek  leading  down  to  a  valley 
where  there  was  a  fine  pool  of  water.  It  then  formed  a 
stream,  bordered  by  shrubs  and  tall  sedges,  and  flowing 
through  a  scries  of  small  basin-like  hollows,  ultimately  ran 
into  a  lake  on  the  sea-shore. 

On  the  way  down  from  the  summit  to  the  place  where 
we  had  halted  the  old  men  had  bent  down  small  saplings 
to  form  arches,  under  which  the  novices  had  to  pass.  Some 
of  them  were  so  low  that  the  boys  had  to  crawl  under  them. 
The^e  arches  are  made  to  impress  obedience  on  the  boys. 

The  forest  was  not  very  dense,  but  the  trees  were  high, 
and  the  whole  was  secluded  by  a  dense  growth  of  wattles, 
which  covered  the  upper  slopes  of  the  mountain-top  over 
which  we  had  come. 

Here  we  made  our  camp,  each  contingent  being  on  that 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  537 

side  of  it  nearest  to  its  own  country.  The  Kabos  and  their 
boys  had  a  camp  by  themselves,  in  the  rear  of  the  huts  of 
the  men  from  Manero  and  Braidwood,  in  order  to  separate 
them  from  any  of  their  relations  and  friends.  The  Kabos 
cut  boughs  and  made  a  couch  on  which  the  novices  lay 
down  covered  with  their  blankets.  Their  guardians  sat  by 
them,  occasionally  talking  to  and  instructing  them. 

The  younger  men  stripped  sheets  of  bark  from  the 
trees  ^  and  made  the  huts  which  composed  the  camp,  went 
down  to  the  creek  for  water,  and  built  up  the  fires,  one  for 
each  hut,  while  in  the  middle  of  the  open  space  round  which 
the  huts  had  been  pitched  the  old  men  built  up  the  magic 
fire  called  Talmaru,  which  was  soon  burning  brightly. 
This  fire  is  built  by  driving  a  stake  into  the  ground  and 
then  leaning  pieces  of  wood  up  against  it  all  round  to  form 
a  cone  about  three  feet  in  height. 

All  the  fires  at  the  camp  are  spoken  of  in  the  language  of 
the  ceremonies  as  Talmaru,  and  not  by  the  word  which 
means  "  fire  "  in  their  tongue.  It  may  be  said  with  truth  that 
there  is  a  special  language  appropriate  to  the  Kuringal 
ceremonies,  which  is  not  used  elsewhere,  and  which  is  only 
known  to  the  initiated. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Talmaru  was  the  Moruya 
camp,  on  the  south  side  that  of  the  men  from  the  coast, 
south  of  Bega,  while  on  the  western  side  were  the  Bcmeringal  ; 
and,  as  I  came  from  that  direction,  my  camp  was  with 
them.  With  me  was  my  messenger,  having  in  his  charge 
my  bull-roarer,  and  it  was  his  duty  *'  officially,"  if  I  may  so 
use  that  word,  to  look  after  me  and  obey  my  orders,  as 
being  one  of  the  Gommeras  or  Headmen  who  had  started 
the  Kuringal,  My  old  friend  Umbara,  who  was  alone, 
having  come  in  a  boat  from  his  home  at  the  Waloga  lake, 
joined  me,  and  had  his  hut  on  one  side,  while  Yibai-malian, 
being  a  Bemeringal,  was  on  the  other. 

The  encampment  having  been  thus  satisfactorily  arranged, 
and  the  men  having  rested  after  their  exertions,  it  became 
necessary,  as  Umbara  put  it,  to  rouse  them  up  by  swinging 
the  Mudthi ;  but  as  Mragula,  the  old  Wolgal  singer,  was 

*  Eucalyptus  obliqua. 


538        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

not  satisfied  with  the  sound  of  mine,  he  set  to  and  made 
another  from  a  piece  of  the  wood  of  a  native  cherry-tree  ^ 
which  grew  near  by.  While  he  was  doing  this,  I  went  with 
my  messenger  to  a  pile  of  rocks  near  at  hand,  where  he  had 
secreted  the  Dieri  bull-roarer,  and  set  him  to  swing  it 
vigorously.  Instantly,  when  the  sound  was  heard,  all  the 
men  started  to  their  feet,  the  Kabos  roused  their  boys  up 
with  a  shout  of  "  Huh  !  Yakai  ! "  which  may  be  rendered 
"  Hallo  !  Oh,  dear  !  "  The  roaring  of  the  Mudthi  represents 
the  muttering  of  thunder,  and  the  thunder  is  the  voice  of 
Daramulun,  and  therefore  its  sound  is  of  the  most  sacred 
character.  Umbara  once  said  to  me,  "  Thunder  is  the  voice 
of  him  (pointing  upwards  to  the  sky)  calling  on  the  rain  to 
fall  and  make  everything  grow  up  new." 

All  the  men  now  went  to  their  camps  and  had  their 
dinners,  but  the  boys  had  only  a  small  quantity  of  tea  and 
a  piece  of  bread  each,  this  being  the  commencement  of  short 
commons  for  them  during  their  novitiate. 

"^  The  old  men  being  ready,  we  went  down  a  cattle-track 
to  the  lower  glen,  where  a  place  was  chosen  and  a  space 
cleared  for  the  tooth  ceremony.  All  the  bushes  were 
chopped  up,  the  stones  gathered,  and  even  the  grass  plucked 
up  by  the  roots — in  fact,  everything  cleared  from  it  for  a 
space  of  about  twenty-five  feet  square.  In  a  line  along  one 
side  three  pairs  of  holes  were  dug,  about  a  foot  in  depth,  in 
which  the  novices  were  to  stand.  A  great  stringy-bark  tree 
was  close  to  the  northern  side,  and  on  this  the  Bega 
Gommera  cut  in  relief  the  figure  of  a  man  of  life-size  in  the 
attitude  of  dancing.  This  represented  Dararnulun,  whose 
ceremonies  they  are,  and  who,  as  is  taught  to  the  novices,  is 
cognisant  of  all  the  Kuringal  proceedings. 

While  some  of  the  old  men  were  making  these  prepara- 
tions, other  men  prepared  sheets  of  stringy  bark  for  the 
dresses  of  the  performers  in  the  next  ceremony.  These 
dresses  were  prepared  by  cutting  the  bark  of  the  tree  through 
all  round  the  bole  in  two  places  about  three  feet  apart. 
The  outer  bark  is  then  chipped  off  and  the  inner  bark 
beaten  with  the  back  of  the  tomahawk  before  being  separated 

'  Exocarptis  cupressifonnis. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE 


539 


from  the  tree.      It  is  then  taken  off  as  a  sheet  of  fibres,  and 

being  extended  on  the  ground,  is  at   least  three  times  its 

former  circumference.     The 

sheets  of   fibre   are    about 

three  inches  thick,  and  look 

like   coarse    bright    yellow 

tow.     Ten  men  were  now 

decorated    with    this    fibre 

round     their     bodies,     tied 

round  their  legs  and  arms, 

and    placed    as    monstrous 

wigs  on  their  heads.     Their 

faces  were  further  disguised 

by  reverting  the  upper  and 

lower  lips    by  cords  made 

of   the    fibre    tied     behind 

the  head,  thereby  showing 

the   teeth  and    gums,   and 

the     effect     was     hideous. 

Two    pieces  of  bark   were 

now   stripped,  each    about 

four    feet     in     length,    by 

fifteen    inches   at  one   end 

and     nine     at     the    other. 

The    ten    men    now    knelt 

down    in    a    row    on    the 

southern    edge    of     the 

cleared    space,    and    about 

six    or   seven    feet    distant 

from,  and  parallel  with,  the 

row  of  holes,  which   faced 

them.      The  kneeling  men 

were  shoulder  to  shoulder  ; 

the  man  at  either  end  had 

one  of  the  pieces  of  bark 

in   his  hands,  and   in  front  of  him  a  small   mound   of  earth 

raised  up  in  such  a  position  that  he  could  strike  it  with  the 

concave  side  of  his  piece  of  bark. 

All  being  now  ready,  including  the  new  bull-roarer,  my 


KIG.    30. — MAN    DECOKATED    FOR 
THE    Kt'RINGAI.    CEREMONV. 


540        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        en. 


messenger  was  sent  to  sound  it  on  the  mound  of  rocks 
overlooking  our  camp.  The  Kabos  soon  appeared,  care- 
fully leading  their  charges  over  the  rocks  and  among  the 
fallen  trees,  and  down  the  cattle-track.  The  boys  were 
ordered  to  keep  their  eyes  fixed  on  their  feet,  and  could 
therefore  only  proceed  slowly,  each  one  being  guided  by  a 
Kabo.  The  remainder  of  the  men  who  had  remained  at  the 
camp  followed  them. 

When  the  novices  reached  the  cleared  ground,  still  with 
bent  heads  and  downcast  eyes,  each  was  placed  with  his 
feet  in  one  pair  of  holes.  Then  they  were  told  to  raise 
their  eyes  and  look,  and  the  sight  of  the  ten  disguised 
figures  must  have  been  startling  to  them,  but  I  could  not 
see  the  slightest  trace  of  emotion  on  the  face  of  cither  of 
them. 

At  this  time  the  scene  was  striking.  Some  of  the  men 
were  standing  at  the  east  side  of  the  cleare(j  space,  some  on 
the  west  side,  the  boys  and  their  Kabos 
being  on  the  north,  almost  at  the  foot 
of  the  tree  on  which  the  figure,  about 
three  feet  in  length,  of  Daraviulun 
was  cut.  In  front  of  them  were  these 
motionless  disguised  figures.  The  Gom- 
mera  Brupin  was  at  a  little  distance 
almost  hidden  in  some  scrub,  and  old 
Gunjerung,  the  head  Gommera,  stood 
apart  from  all  as  was  his  custom, 
leaning  on  his  staff,  waiting  for  the 
moment  when  all  being  ready,  he 
would  give  the  signal  for  the  ceremony 
to  commence.^ 

At  length  Gunjerung  raised  his  staff, 
and  the  kneeling  man  nearest  to  the  sea,  that  is  at  the  east 
end  of  the  row,  raised  his  strip  of  bark  and  brought  it  down 
on  the  earthen  mound  before  him  with  a  sound  like  the 
muffled  report  of  a  gun.      Then   he  and  all   the  other  men 


FIG.    31. — THE    FIGURE 
OF    DARAMUI.UN. 

Cut  on  a  tree. 


'  The  principal  men  in  these  ceremonies,  such  for  instance  as  this  Gunjerung, 
always  stand  apart  from  the  others.  See  the  plate  in  Collins'  work,  where  the 
Koradjis  (^Gommeras)  are  standing  apart  just  as  Gunjerung  did. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  541 

surged  over  to  the  west,  uttering  a  sound  like  "  sh "  or 
"  ush,"  long  drawn  out.  The  western  man  now,  in  his 
turn,  struck  his  mound  with  a  resounding  blow,  and  all 
surged  back  making  a  rumbling  sound  ;  so  they  went  on 
for  some  little  time  with  the  regularity  of  clockwork. 
This  represents  the  waves  breaking  on  the  land,  and 
rushing  up  on  the  shore,  and  the  thunder  answering  it 
from  the  mountains. 

Gunjerung  now  signed  with  his  staff,  and  the  masked 
figures,  springing  up,  rushed  to  the  novices,  and  commenced 
to  dance  to  the  words  "  Wirrt-wirri-wirri"  that  is,  "  Quick, 
quick,  quick."  As  they  did  this,  one  of  the  Kabos  knelt 
behind  his  boy,  with  his  right  knee  on  the  ground,  and  the 
boy  sat  on  his  left  as  a  seat.  The  other  Kabo  came  behind 
and  drew  the  boy's  head  on  to  his  breast,  having  his  left 
arm  round  his  chest,  and  his  right  hand  over  the  boy's  eyes. 
The  Kabo  kneeling  on  the  ground  held  the  boy's  legs,  his 
feet  being  in  the  holes. 

From  behind  the  bushes  where  he  had  been  concealed, 
the  Gommera  Brupin  now  suddenly  emerged  dancing,  bearing 
in  one  hand  a  short  wooden  club  ^  and  in  the  other  a  piece 
of  wood  about  eight  inches  long  and  chisel-shaped  at  the 
end."  Being  the  representative  of  Daramulun,  he  was 
clothed  only  in  a  complete  suit  of  charcoal  dust. 

The  boy's  eyes  being  covered,  he  danced  into  the  space 
between  them  and  the  masked  men  to  excited  shouts  of 
"  Wt'rrt"  to  which  the  other  men  were  also  dancing,  and 
thus  approached  the  first  boy.  He  now  handed  his 
implements  to  the  man  nearest  to  him,  and  seizing  the 
boy's  head  with  his  hands,  applied  his  lower  incisor  to 
the  left  upper  incisor  of  the  boy,  and  forcibly  pressed  it 
upwards.  He  then,  dancing  all  the  time,  placed  the 
chisel  on  the  tooth  and  struck  a  blow  with  the  mallet. 
This  time  the  tooth  was  loosened,  and  I  could  see  blood. 
Some  of  the  dancing-men  now  came  between  the  boy  and 
me,  so  that  I  lost  count  of  the  blows  for  a  few  seconds. 
However,  I  counted  seven,  and  I  think  that  there  was  at 
least  one  more.     The  tooth  then  fell  out  of  its  socket,  and 

1  Bul-bul.  2  Kuk-kum-bur. 


542        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        en. 

Brupin  gave  it  to  one  of  the  old  men.  The  boy  was  then 
led  aside  by  the  Kabo,  who  told  him  that  he  must  on  no 
account  spit  out  the  blood,  but  swallow  it,  otherwise  the 
wound  would  not  heal.  The  stoical  indifference  shown  by 
this  boy,  to  what  must  have  been  an  exquisitely  painful 
operation,  was  most  surprising.  I  watched  him  carefully, 
and  he  could  not  have  shown  less  feeling  had  he  been  a 
block  of  wood.  But  as  he  was  led  away  I  noticed  that  the 
muscles  of  his  legs  quivered  in  an  extraordinary  manner. 

The  Gommera  now  danced  up  to  the  second  boy,  and 
amidst  the  same  shouts  of  "  Wirri"  gave  a  hoist  to  the  boy's 
tooth  with  his  own,  and  then  struck  his  first  blow.  This, 
however,  produced  a  different  effect  on  this  boy,  for  he  set 
up  a  tremendous  yell  and  struggled  violently.  His  outcry 
was,  however,  drowned  by  the  cries  of  "  Wirri"  and  the  boy's 
eyes  being  still  covered,  the  Gommera  again  danced  in  from 
the  masked  figures,  behind  whom  he  had  been  crouching, 
and  again  struck  his  blow.  This  produced  the  same  effect 
as  before.  The  old  men  now  said  that  the  boy  had  been 
too  much  with  the  women,  and  had  played  too  much  with 
the  little  girls,  thereby  causing  his  tooth  to  be  so  firmly 
fixed.  Yibai-malian  now  came  forward,  in  his  character  of 
a  great  medicine-man,  and  first  of  all  gave  the  tooth  a 
tremendous  hoist  up  with  his  lower  jaw,  then  he  put  his 
mouth  to  that  of  the  boy,  who  made  a  tremendous  struggle, 
and  got  his  arms  free.  Yibai  told  me  afterwards  that  he 
then  forced  one  of  his  Jo'ias,  a  quartz  crystal,  up  against  the 
tooth  to  loosen  it.  The  boy,  feeling  this  hard  substance 
coming  out  of  the  medicine-man's  mouth,  thought,  as  he 
afterwards  told  his  Kabo,  that  the  man  was  going  to  kill 
him  by  something  out  of  his  inside.  While  this  was  going 
on,  the  men  near  to  the  boy  said  to  him,  '*  Now  you  be 
quiet,  only  a  little  more  and  it  will  be  out." 

As  soon  as  the  boy  was  soothed  down,  the  Gommera 
danced  in  again  and  succeeded  in  getting  a  good  blow 
which  knocked  the  tooth  out.  He  struck  thirteen  blows 
in  all. 

The  third  boy  now  only  remained,  the  smallest  of  the 
three,  and  in  his  case  one  of  his  Kabos,  a  man  of  the  Ngarigo 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  543 

tribe,  having  first  of  all  pushed  the  gum  back  from  the 
tooth  with  his  finger-nail,  Yibai-malian  gave  the  tooth  the 
regulation  hoist,  and  the  Gommera,  dancing  in,  knocked 
the  tooth  out  with  a  few  blows. 

The  three  boys,  having  somewhat  recovered  from  the 
severe  ordeal  through  which  they  had  gone,  were  led  by 
their  Kabos  to  the  tree  on  which  the  figure  of  Daraviulun 
was  cut,  and  were  told  of  him  and  his  powers,  and  that  he 
lived  beyond  the  sky  and  watched  what  the  Murring  did. 
When  a  man  died  he  met  him  and  took  care  of  him.  It 
was  he  who  first  made  the  Kuringal,  and  taught  it  to  their 
fathers,  and  he  taught  them  also  to  make  weapons,  and  all 
that  they  know.  The  Gommeras  receive  their  powers  from 
him,  and  he  gives  them  the  Kriigullung.  He  is  the  great 
Bianiban  who  can  do  anything  and  go  anywhere,  and  he 
gave  the  tribal  laws  to  their  fathers,  who  have  handed  them 
down  from  father  to  son  until  now. 

As  the  boys  were  then  being  led  away  to  their  camp, 
Gunjerung  stopped  them,  and  spoke  to  them  in  a  most 
impressive  manner.  Alluding  to  the  figure  of  Daraviulun, 
he  said,  "  If  you  make  anything  like  that  when  you  go  back 
to  the  camp,  I  will  kill  you." 

When  the  boys  were  taken  away,  the  men  stripped  off 
their  bark-fibre  disguises  and  piled  them  over  the  foot-holes. 
Then  they  all  formed  a  ring  round  the  cleared  space,  standing 
with  their  faces  outwards.  At  a  signal  from  Brupin  they 
all  bent  forwards,  and  with  their  hands  scratched  leaves, 
sticks,  rubbish,  anything  they  could  reach,  towards  themselves, 
throwing  it  backwards  on  to  the  heap.  Then  they  simul- 
taneously jumped  backwards,  uttering  the  sounds  ''pn-l  prrl 
prrl  %vahl  ivah!  wah!"  three  times.  A  large  quantity  of 
rubbish  being  thus  gathered  over  the  sacred  ground,  they  all 
turned  round,  and  each  one  motioning  with  his  outstretched 
hands  towards  the  heap  with  the  palms  downwards  repeated 
the  words  "  Yah  !  wah  !"  as  a  final  conclusion. 

We  all  now  went  up  to  the  camp,  and  standing  by  the 
Tahnaru  fire,  the  boys  were  invested  with  the  man's  belt. 
A  long  cord  of  opossum-fur  string,  folded  a  number  of 
times,  was  wound  round  the  waist,  and  fastened  by  the  end 


544        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

being  tucked  under  the  folds.  This  belt  is  coloured  with 
red  ochre.  In  front  hangs  the  narrow  kilt  {Burrain\  thrust 
up  under  it  so  as  to  hang  down  and  preserve  decency, 
being  fastened  to  the  belt  by  the  two  outside  thongs,  which 
are  tucked  once  or  twice  under  and  round  the  belt.  A 
Burrain  also  hangs  down  behind. 

The  novices  were  now  covered  as  before  with  their 
blankets  ;  and,  being  seated  beside  their  Kabos,  were  told 
that,  their  teeth  being  out,  nothing  more  would  be  done  to 
them,  that  they  were  no  longer  boys,  but  were  to  look  on 
and  attend  to  all  the  Kabos  told  them. 

The  proceedings  which  I  shall  now  describe  continued 
all  night,  and  are  intended  to  enforce  the  teachings  of  the 
Kabos,  to  amuse  the  boys,  and  at  the  same  time  to  securely 
establish  the  authority  of  the  old  men  over  them. 

The  magic  fire  was  freshly  built  up,  and  the  novices 
were  told  to  stand  up  and  observe.  I  may  now  mention 
once  for  all  that  the  evening's  ceremonial  entertainments 
and  proceedings  were  carried  on  alternately  by  the  two 
sections  of  the  community — the  mountain  Bemeringal  and 
the  sea-coast  Katungal. 

Dances  and  performances  alternated,  some  merely  to 
amuse,  others  to  illustrate  the  magical  powers  of  the 
GommeraSy  and  others  to  enforce  tribal  morality,  or  to 
perpetuate  tribal  legends.  These  were  all  strung  together 
by  a  series  of  buffooneries,  some  of  them  of  the  broadest 
kind,  and  pervaded  by  the  inverted  manner  of  speaking 
before  mentioned.  Jokes,  which  were  too  broad  for  transla- 
tion, were  bandied  about  from  side  to  side  with  the  inevitable 
"  Yah  I "  attached,  which  implied  that  they  were  not  to  be 
taken  as  serious. 

In  all  these  performances  the  men  are  naked,  and  even 
towards  morning,  when  it  clouded  over  and  a  smart  shower 
fell,  only  a  few  put  on  a  little  covering.  The  old  men 
especially  adhered  to  the  rules  of  their  fathers,  so  far  as  they 
could  do  so,  in  the  conduct  of  the  ceremonies  and  their 
own  procedure.  One  old  man  put  on  nothing  when  it 
rained  but  a  pair  of  boots. 

The  first  performance  was  by  the  Bega   Gommera,  and 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  545 

it  was  a  ludicrous  one.  It  represents  an  old  man  tormented 
by  opossums.  It  must  be  mentioned  that,  whenever  possible, 
the  men  who  represented  animals  were  of  those  totems,  and 
indeed  all  the  animals  which  were  represented  in  these 
performances  were  the  totem  animals  of  the  tribe.  Thus, 
when  it  is  a  kangaroo  hunt,  it  is  a  kangaroo  man  who 
performs,  and  the  wild -dog  men  hunt  him.  But  if  there 
are  not  sufficient  of  the  necessary  totems,  then  other  men 
help  them. 

In  this  instance  the  great  age  of  the  performer  was  indi- 
cated, as  in  all  other  cases,  by  his  leaning  on  a  staff.  He 
was  occupied  in  chopping  some  animal  out  of  a  hollow  log, 
and  behind  him  were  a  number  of  opossums,  crouching  in  the 
bushes.  As  he  chopped,  an  opossum  came  behind  him  and 
scratched  his  bare  leg,  frightening  him,  to  judge  by  the 
caper  he  cut  and  the  yell  he  uttered,  as  he  turned  round  and 
hit  at  it  with  his  staff.  His  tormentor  dodged  him,  and, 
running  past  on  all  fours,  lay  down  at  the  edge  of  the 
cleared  space.  The  old  man  now  resumed  his  chopping, 
when  another  opossum  ran  out  and  bit  his  leg,  and  the  old 
man,  jumping  and  yelling,  hit  at  and  missed  him.  So  it 
went  on  till  all  the  opossum  men  had  passed  from  one  side 
of  the  fire  to  the  other,  and  were  lying  side  by  side.  The 
performer  now  dropped  his  staff  and  tomahawk  and  rushed 
to  the  fire,  where  he  clapped  his  hands,  shouting  the  word 
for  opossum,  whereupon  all  the  opossum  men  sprang  up  and 
danced  round  him  and  the  fire. 

The  next  was  a  magic  dance  to  the  word  meaning 
"  legs."  In  this  the  dancing  of  the  Gommeras  and  the 
exhibition  of  their  Jo'ias  was  a  marked  feature  of  the  dance. 
At  one  time  there  would  be  only  one,  then  others  would 
rush  into  the  ring,  until  there  were  four  or  five,  once  there 
were  six,  all  dancing  in  an  excited  state,  staring  with  goggle 
eyes,  with  their  lips  drawn  back,  showing  their  Jo'ias  held 
between  their  teeth,  in  the  firelight,  for  it  had  become  dark. 
One  man  in  his  frenzy  threw  himself  down  on  his  knees, 
and  danced  on  them.  Others  danced  until,  apparently 
overcome  by  their  own  magic,  they  fell  down  seemingly 
senseless. 

2  N 


546        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  purely  magical  dances  were  performed  when  the 
word  rhythmically  shouted  was  Daramulun^  or  Murunga, 
that  is,  the  bull-roarer,  this  synonym  being  lawfully  used 
only  at  the  Kuringal,  Ngnlalbal,  the  mother  of  Daramulun, 
or  the  names  of  different  parts  of  the  body  which  might  be 
affected  by  the  Joins,  and  lastly  the  Joins  themselves. 

The  different  Joins  which  were  "  danced "  during  the 
night  were  as  follows  :  Kruginlln,  the  quartz  crystal  ;  Kun- 
ambrun^  a  black  stone,  apparently  lydianite  ;  Bundnin, 
resembling  the  flesh  or  the  intestine  of  an  animal,  and  also 
a  substance  looking  like  chalk,  of  which  I  did  not  obtain 
a  sample. 

^  The  dance  of  Dnrnmulun,  which  was  indeed  the  invoca- 
tion of  him  by  name,  accompanied  by  dancing,  was  repeated 
several  times.  The  dance  of  Ngnlnlbal  took  place  only 
once,  and  it  was  partly  a  performance.  The  old  Wolgal 
singer  struck  up  a  plaintive  air,  beginning  in  a  high  note, 
and  gradually  falling,  all  joining  in  it,  excepting  those  who 
represented  Ngnlnlbnl}     The  words  of  the  song  are  : — 

Ngalalbal  Ngalalbal  walulbal    gilH-gulli  beta, 

or,  freely  translated,  "  Oh !  Ngalalbal,  where  do  you  go, 
coming  from  afar  ? "  As  the  song  rose  louder  from  the 
number  of  voices  that  joined  in,  two  figures  glided  in  from 
the  black  shadows  of  the  forest  to  the  light  of  the  fire. 
The  word  "  glided  "  best  expresses  the  slow  movement  with 
which  the  two  figures  came  forward  side  by  side,  as  one 
person,  and  again  vanished  out  of  the  circle  of  firelight  into 
the  forest  beyond.  They  glided  past  silently,  almost  motion- 
less, each  one  shrouded  from  head  to  foot  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  novices,  and  each  one  protruding  from  the 
space  in  which  the  face  was  visible  a  crooked  stick  to  repre- 
sent a  boomerang,  held  concave  edge  outwards,  with  which, 
tradition  says,  the  two  Ngnlnlbnl,  the  mothers  of  Dnrnmulun, 
were  armed.  After  they  passed,  there  was  a  magic  dance 
to  the  word  Ngnlnlbnl. 
^      Of  the  totem  dances  some  were  merely  the  magic  dance 

1  Ngalal is  "sinew,"  e.g.  those  at  the  back  of  the  knee.  Bal is  a  dual  postfix, 
the  name  being  rendered  as  "the  two  Ngalalbal."  The  name  probably  also 
refers  to  the  sinewy  legs  of  the  emu,  for  Ngalalbal  is  the  emu. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  547 

to  the  name  of  the  totem.  Others  were  prefaced  by  panto- 
mimic representations  of  the  totem  animal,  bird,  or  reptile. 
Thus  there  was  a  dance  to  the  word  Ytrai-kapin,  the  dog's 
tooth,  referring  to  the  "  ravenous  tooth  which  devours  every- 
thing." It  commenced  with  the  life-like  howling  of  a  dingo 
in  the  forest,  answered  by  other  dogs  on  the  other  side. 
Then  nearer,  till  a  man  ran  into  the  firelight  on  all  fours, 
with  a  bush  stuck  in  his  belt  behind,  to  represent  a  dingo's 
tail.  Others  followed,  till  half  a  score  were  running  round 
the  fire,  smelling  each  other,  snarling  and  snapping,  scratching 
the  ground,  in  fact  representing  the  actions  of  wild  dogs, 
until  the  medicine-man  leading  them  sprang  to  his  feet, 
clapped  his  hands,  vociferating  in,  measured  tones,  "  Ytrai- 
kapin"  While  he  danced,  the  others  followed  him,  dancing 
round  him,  and  the  usual  totem  dance  was  made. 

Another  was  the  crow  dance,  in  which  men,  with  leaves 
round  their  heads,  croaked  like  those  birds,  and  then  danced  ; 
the  owl  dance,  in  which  they  imitated  the  hooting  of  the 
Takula,  owl  ;  the  lyre-bird  dance,  and  that  of  the  stone- 
plover.  Finally,  there  was  the  dance  of  the  rock-wallaby, 
which  was  pantomimic. 

In  this  the  rock- wallaby  were  at  first  concealed  in  the 
shadows  to  the  right  front  of  the  fire,  that  is,  looking  north 
from  where  I  sat.  Brupin  and  Yibai-malian  were  the 
principal  performers,  the  animals  being  represented  by  two 
or  three  of  that  totem,  with  other  men  helping  them.  Yibai 
had  charge  of  the  rock -wallaby,  and  Brupin  tried,  in  a 
grotesque  manner,  to  entice  them  from  him,  while  talking  to 
the  former.  When  they  ran  to  Brupin's  side,  Yibai  threatened 
him,  and  they  had  a  comic  combat,  as  if  with  club  and  shield. 
So  it  went  on  till  all  the  wallaby  had  been  enticed  from 
Yibai,  who  evinced  his  grief  at  the  loss  in  the  most  comical 
manner.  It  ended  with  the  usual  dance  to  the  word 
Yalonga,  that  is,  rock-wallaby. 

\  Some  of  the  pantomimes  were  curious,  particularly  one 
which  represented  a  Gommera  curing  a  sick  child,  which  was 
a  small  log  which  one  of  the  old  men  had  taken  from  the 
fire  and  carried  in  his  arms  to  and  fro,  imitating  the  crying 
of  a  sick  child.     Several  of  the  men  came  up  and  imitated 


548        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  actions  of  a  "doctor,"  in  stroking  the  child  with  their 
hands,  and  extracting  from  it  stones,  pieces  of  wood,  bark, 
and  other  things,  as  the  cause  of  the  disease.  This  was 
received  with  shouts  of  laughter  from  all,  from  the  medicine- 
men as  well  as  the  others.  The  only  ones  who  did  not  even 
smile  were  the  utterly  unmoved  novices. 

Another  pantomime  represented  a  number  of  very  old 
men  who  came  up,  following  each  other,  out  of  the  forest, 
and  circled  round  the  fire  in  the  usual  rhythmical  manner, 
swaying  from  side  to  side  at  each  step,  and  each  holding  his 
head  with  both  hands,  one  at  each  temple.  After  going 
round  the  fire  several  times,  the  chain  broke  up  into  indi- 
viduals, who  began  tickling  each  other,  finally  falling  down 
into  a  heap,  screeching  with  laughter.  Such  an  exhibition 
of  childishness  in  venerable  old  greybeards  was  ridiculous, 
and  this  was  impressed  on  the  novices  by  going  up  to  them 
and  saying, "  When  you  go  back  to  the  camp  do  like  that — 
yah  !  "  by  this  warning  them  not  to  be  guilty  of  such  childish 
acts  in  their  new  characters  of  men. 

Other  pantomimic  representations  were  to  impress  rules 
of  tribal  morality  by  visible  instances. 

A  man  lay  down  on  the  ground  near  the  fire,  as  if  a 
woman  asleep.  The  other  performers  were  hidden  by  the 
shadows  thrown  by  the  trees  beyond  the  fire.  One  man 
then  stole  out,  and  seeing  the  woman  sleeping,  cautiously 
approached,  after  peering  all  round  to  see  if  any  one  were 
near.  He  tried  in  vain  to  wake  her,  and  made  comic 
gestures  which  left  no  doubt  of  his  intentions.  Being 
unable  to  succeed,  he  went  across  and  lay  down  at  the  edge 
of  the  clear  space.  One  by  one  the  other  men  came  by, 
each  fruitlessly  endeavouring  to  waken  the  sleeping  woman, 
and  also  making  gestures  showing  what  he  intended.  When 
all  had  passed  tl><r  pseudo-woman,  one  of  the  Gonimeras 
jumped  up  and  commenced  his  dance,  the  disappointed  suitors 
joining  in .  it.  This  play,  taken  by  itself,  was  comic,  but 
when  looked  at  in  reference  to  the  gestures  made  by  the 
men,  suggested  what  might  happen  if  a  savage  found  a  solitary 
woman  sleeping  in  the  bush.  But  a  remarkable  commentary 
was  applied,  not  only  by  the  broad  allusions  made  by  the 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  549 

men  looking  on,  addressed  to  the  novices,  and  always  followed 
by  the  emphatic  "  Yah  ! "  but  by  the  direct  statements  of 
Gunjerung  to  the  boys  in  the  coast  language,  and  to  the 
Wolgal  boy  in  English,  which  was,  "  Look  at  me !  if  you  do 
anything  like  that  when  you  go  back  to  the  camp,  I  will 
kill  you  ;  by  and  by,  when  you  are  older,  you  will  get  a 
wife  of  your  own." 

Another  pantomime  was  still  more  striking.  By  itself 
it  seemed  to  be  merely  beastliness  of  behaviour.  The 
pantomimic  actions  and  words  left  no  doubt  that  this  repre- 
sented the  offences  for  which,  it  is  said,  the  cities  of  the  plain 
were  destroyed  by  celestial  fire. 

When  the  dance  was  over,  and  Gunjerung  went  to 
speak  to  the  boys,  I  had  moved  up  close  to  them  to  hear 
with  certainty  what  he  might  say  to  the  Wolgal  boy,  and 
thus  have  at  first  hand  what  otherwise  I  should  have  to  take 
from  a  translation.  Looking  at  him  with  the  expression  of 
a  malignant  wizard,  he  said,  "  Look  at  me  ! "  The  boy  took 
no  more  notice  than  if  he  had  been  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb. 
He  said  again,  "  Look  at  me  ! "  The  Kabo  said,  "  Look  at 
him  "  ;  the  boy  then  looked  Gunjerung  full  in  the  face,  who 
said,  "  Look  at  that  man  ! "  pointing  to  one  of  the  most 
prominent  Gommeras  who  had  been  dancing  ;  "  if  you  do 
anything  like  that  when  you  go  back  to  the  camp,  he  will 
see  you  and  will  kill  you  dead." 

These  representations  went  on  from  about  six  in  the 
evening  to  near  three  o'clock  in  the  morning.  When  one 
section  had  wearied  themselves  a  short  halt  was  called,  and 
the  boys  were  told,  as  in  one  instance,  "  You  can  go  and  lie 
down,  we  are  going  to  sleep — yah  ! "  The  Kabos  led  them  to 
the  couch  of  leaves,  and  caused  them  to  lie  down  covered 
by  blankets.  The  men  sat  by  their  fires,  or  rolled  them- 
selves in  their  rugs  ;  some  smoked,  some  chatted,  but  before 
long,  sometimes  after  no  more  than  five  minutes  had  passed, 
one  of  the  leading  Govivieras  would  start  up,  clap  his  hands, 
and  rush  to  the  Talmaru  fire,  shouting  some  word,  in 
most  cases  either  ^'•MirambuV'  (legs)  or  "Katir"  (dance).  The 
section  to  which  he  belonged  then  joined  in,  the  proceedings 
recommenced,  and  the  other  section  remained  spectators. 


550        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Twice  when  the  proceedings  flagged  a  little,  Yibai-maHan 
made  me  the  sign  for  Mudthi,  namely,  moving  the  forefinger 
of  the  right  hand  in  a  small  circle,  and  I  sent  my  messenger 
to  the  mound  of  rocks  to  sound  the  bull-roarer  out  of  sight. 
Directly  the  sound  was  heard  the  whole  camp,  excepting  the 
Kabos  and  novices,  was  in  a  state  of  excitement,  the  men 
shouting  "  Huh !  huh  ! "  and  the  dancing  went  on  with 
renewed  vigour. 

The  novices  were  thus  kept  in  a  constant  state  of 
excitement  and  suspense  until,  as  I  have  said,  at  about 
three  in  the  morning,  when  the  old  men  danced  to  the  word 
Kat'r,  that  is,  the  end,  the  finish.  The  magic  fire  was  let 
burn  low,  the  boys  were  laid  on  their  couch  of  leaves,  and  all 
hands  rolled  themselves  in  their  rugs  or  blankets  and  slept 

Towards  five  o'clock  I  was  roused,  partly  by  the  cold 
mountain  air,  my  fire  having  burned  out,  and  partly  by  old 
Umbara's  nasal  song  not  far  away.  When  I  told  him  of 
this  afterwards,  he  said,  "  When  I  snore,  that  is  the  time  I 
dream  and  am  walking  about."  Making  up  my  fire,  I  sat  by 
it  thinking  of  the  strange  scenes  of  the  past  twenty-four 
hours,  till,  as  the  first  signs  of  the  dawn  were  showing  in  the 
east,  Yibai-malian  woke  and  instantly  rushed  to  the  Talmaru, 
shouting  "  Bau  !  bau  ! "  that  is,  "  Hallo  !  hallo  !  " 

The  whole  camp  woke  up  at  once,  and  by  the  time  he 
had  lit  up  the  fire  the  other  fires  were  burning  at  the  several 
camps,  and  the  men  were  either  having  an  early  smoke,  or 
were  warming  up  tea  left  from  the  night  before.  As  the 
light  came  stronger  a  song  was  raised  in  the  Bega  camp 
about  the  dawning,  which  was  sung  for  some  time.  As  it 
died  away  the  Wolgal  singer  commenced  a  song  about  the 
bat,  and  as  we  sat  by  the  fire  Umbara  explained  it  to  me  as 
being  about  "  that  miserable  little  fellow  flying  about." 

He  then  sang  a  song  about  "  the  clear  space  in  the  tree 
tops  through  which  the  dawn  shines."  Then  the  laughing- 
jackasses  commenced  their  cackling  laughs,  and  one  and  all 
joined  in  singing  a  song  about  the  Kakobert,  that  is,  the 
laughing-jackass.  By  this  time  it  was  daylight,  and  the  pots 
and  "  billies "  were  boiling  for  breakfast,  the  younger  men 
having  fetched  water  up  from  the  creek   for  the  others.      I 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  551 

had  gone  there  also  for  mine,  and  I  broke  the  rule  which 
forbids  washing  the  person  during  the  Kuringal  ceremonies. 

After  breakfast  the  dances  recommenced  vigorously. 
The  sequence  was  Katir  (dance),  Yiratnil  (teeth),  and  a 
pantomimic  dance  for  which  the  men  covered  themselves 
with  boughs.  It  was  called  Ngadjigar  (bushes),  and  was 
followed  by  a  magic  ring,  in  which  the  Gommeras  danced 
and  exhibited  their  Joi'as.  Then  occurred  one  of  the 
periodic  rushes  of  these  men  to  the  novices,  and  the  trans- 
ference of  the  magical  influence  to  them,  followed  by  the 
three  emphatic  words,  "  Wah !  Huh  !  IVa/t  ! "  with  the 
downward  motion  of  the  outstretched  hands. 

The  novices  were  told  to  go  and  sit  down  by  their  fire. 
The  day's  ceremonies  had  been  commenced  and  the  old  men 
had  a  consultation  as  to  the  further  course  to  be  pursued. 
One  of  the  principal  old  men  had  had  a  dream  in  the  night. 
It  was  that  the  Kurnai  had  arrived  since  our  departure,  and 
that  as  we  had  left  and  commenced  the  Kuringal  without 
them,  they  would  follow  the  old  law  and  "  kill  our  women." 
This  seemed  to  impress  some  of  the  others,  and  a  discussion 
arose.  One  man  said  that  he  was  sure  that  the  dream  was 
true,  because  his  nose  had  been  itching  all  night,  which  was 
a  sign  that  strangers  were  coming  to  the  camp.  Another 
man  said  that  during  the  night  a  log  on  his  fire  had  "sung 
out,"  which  is  one  of  the  omens  with  these  people  foretelling 
the  arrival  of  strangers. 

The  arranged  programme  was  that  we  should  remain  in 
camp  another  day,  go  out  hunting  for  food,  and  in  the 
evening  repeat  the  programme  of  the  night  before.  Then 
on  the  next  morning  we  should  finish  and  return  to  the 
camp,  or  rather  go  to  the  new  camp,  which  the  women  were 
to  make.  Such  being  the  case,  I  said  that,  as  my  time  was 
short,  we  would  finish  the  ceremonies  that  day,  and  return 
in  the  afternoon  to  the  new  camp.  ^ 

This  being  settled,  we  recommenced  with  the  Crow 
dance,  after  which  all  the  men  formed  a  ring  round  the 
Talmaru  fire,  and  shouting  "  YaJi !  Yah  !  Yah  !  Prr ! 
Prr  I  Prr  !  Wah  !  Wah  !  Wah  ! "  scratched  leaves,  sticks, 
rubbish,  earth   over   it   till    it  was   completely   covered   up. 


552        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Then  they  stamped  on  it,  danced  on  it,  and  finally  sat  down 
on  it,  till  they  were  fully  satisfied  that  it  was  quite  ex- 
tinguished. Then  they  stood  over  it  and  uttered  the  usual 
formula,"  Yah!  Huh!  ]Vah!"  concluding  with  downward 
motion  of  the  extended  hands. 

Before  the  fire  was  extinguished,  one  of  the  Kabos  had 
cut  six  pieces  of  dry  bark  from  a  dead  tree,  each  piece  being 
about  eighteen  inches  long  and  four  wide.  These  were  tied 
two  and  two,  and  small  leafy  twigs  were  tied  round  one  end. 
The  other  end  was  then  lighted  at  the  Talmaru,  and  one  of 
these  fire-sticks  was  given  to  each  boy  to  carry  with  him, 
and  he  was  to  light  his  fire  with  it  when,  at  the  final  close 
of  the  ceremonies,  he  commenced  his  life  of  probation  in  the 
bush.  If  this  is  omitted,  the  belief  is  that  it  will  cause  a 
terrible  storm  of  wind  and  rain. 

All  being  ready  to  start,  Gunjerung  standing  apart, 
leaning  on  his  staff,  said,  "  Go  !  "  and  moved  off  followed  by 
all,  the  Kabos  and  the  novices  being  last.  Yibai-malian 
and  my  messenger  remained  with  me,  and  when  the  pro- 
cession had  disappeared  down  the  steep  eastern  side  of  the 
mountain  we  sounded  the  two  bull-roarers,  and  then  having 
carefully  wrapped  them  up  so  that  they  could  not  be  seen, 
followed  the  party. 

The  Yuin  believe  that  the  Gommeras  leave  things  lying 
on  the  Kuringal  ground  filled  with  evil  magic  ;  but  if  this  is 
done,  these  arc  probably  poisoned  pieces  of  sharp  bone, 
which,  penetrating  the  bare  foot  of  a  blackfellow  or  a 
woman,  might  produce  blood-poisoning.  Such  at  any  rate 
seems  to  be  a  fair  explanation  of  a  case  which  happened. 
Two  men  were  crossing  a  Bunan  ground  which  had  been 
used  some  little  time  before,  when  one  of  them  trod  on 
something  sharp.  His  friend  picked  it  out  of  his  foot  for 
him,  and  found  it  to  be  a  piece  of  fish  bone.  That  night  the 
man  was  in  great  pain,  and  in  a  few  days  he  died.  The 
Yuin  attributed  his  death  to  some  Gonunera  having  left 
something  behind  in  the  form  of  a  Jo'ia,  by  which  the  man 
was  "  caught "  by  evil  magic. 

When  we  overtook  the  Kabos  and  the  novices  we  found 
them  seated  on  the  hill-side,  a  little  way  from  the  other  men. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  553 


who  were  on  a  small  level  clear  space.      Brupin  and  another 
man   were  carefully  clearing  a  small   piece  of  ground,  and 
with  pointed  sticks  dug  out  a  figure  of  Daramulun,  leaving 
it  about  twelve  inches  in   relief.      It  was  in   the  attitude  of 
the  magic  dance,  and  was  provided  with  pieces  of  wood   for 
teeth,  and  a  mouthful  of  quartz  fragments  as  Joias,  the  male 
member  being  much  exaggerated.       According   to  ancient 
usage,  a  collection  of  the  implements  and  weapons  used  by 
the  Yuin  should  have  been 
placed  round  the  figure,  but, 
as  most   of   these  are  not 
now  used   by  the   Murring, 
they  were  omitted.      When 
completed    the   figure   was 
nearly  life-size.      The  men 
then    disguised    themselves 
with     boughs     over     their 
heads,  and   formed  a  close 
row  across  and   in   front  of 
the  feet  of  the  figure.     The 
novices  were  now  brought 
down  by  their  Kabos  to  the 
rear  of  the  men  who  were 
dancing,  and  who    then 
formed  a  ring,  danced  five 
times   round    the  figure 
shouting   the    name   Dara- 
mulun in  time  to  the  dance. 
Another  dance  to  the  name 
Ngalalbal  followed,  and  the  novices  were  then  led  to  the  figure. 
Gunjerung  discoursed  to  them  about  it.      What  he  said   I 
gathered   first  from  a  rapid    explanation    by   Umbara,    and 
then  from  what  Gunjerung  said  to  the  Wolgal  boy  in  English: 
"  That  is  the  Biaviban  you  have  been   told  about,  who  can 
go  anywhere  and  do  anything.      If  you  make  a  thing  like 
that  when   you  go  back   to  the  camp,  or  speak  of  it  to  the 
women  and  children,  you  will   be  killed."      The  boughs  were 
now  thrown  on  to  the  figure,  and  the  whole  covered  up  as 
had  been  done  with  the  foot-holes  and  the  Talmaru. 


32. — KAKTH    FKJIKI 

DAKAMULUN. 


554        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  joking  was  now  recommenced,  the  novices  being 
told,  "  Now  we  are  going  to  catch  some  fish — yah  ! "  and 
other  such  sayings  as  we  moved  down  to  the  creek,  crossed 
its  course  amongst  dense  masses  of  tall  sharp-edged  sedges, 
from  the  flower  stems  of  which  spear-points  were  formerly 
made,  and  followed  down  the  valley  till  the  old  men  found 
a  pool  which  would  suit  their  purpose  for  the  last  ceremony 
before  returning  to  the  new  camp. 

Although  it  was  now  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  the 
sun  had  only  just  peeped  over  the  high  mountain-side  of  the 
valley  into  which  we  had  descended,  and  shone  through  the 
tall  mountain  ash  and  stringy-bark  trees  which  clothed  it. 
Although  the  hill-sides  were  sunny  and  warm  where  we  sat 
down  to  rest,  the  bottom  of  the  valley  was  still  in  deep 
shadow,  and  dank  with  the  moisture  of  the  night's  rain. 

Another  important  ceremony  had  now  to  be  performed 
before  the  final  one  of  which  the  men  had  jokingly  said  that 
they  were  going  to  "catch  fish."  While  Gunjerung  and  his 
section  of  the  party  rested  by  a  fire,  which  they  had  lit,  and 
the  Kabos  and  the  novices  rested  by  another,  which  they 
lighted  with  the  fire  brought  from  the  Talmaru,  Yibai-malian 
and  Brupin  prepared  for  the  next  ceremony.  Some  of  the 
men  under  their  direction  prepared  a  new  stock  of  bark- 
fibre  decorations,  while  others  dug  a  grave.  There  was 
now  a  discussion  as  to  the  way  in  which  it  was  to  be  done. 
Brupin  said  that  it  must  be  dug  in  the  manner  in  which  the 
body  is  buried  in  a  sitting  position,  with  the  knees  drawn 
up  and  the  arms  across  the  chest,  but  Yibai  said  that  as  he 
was  to  be  buried,  he  would  have  the  grave  made  as  in  the 
case  where  the  body  was  to  be  laid  out  at  length  on  its  back. 
Two  men  therefore  set  to  work  to  excavate  it  with  digging- 
sticks  in  the  friable  granitic  soil,  while  he  went  off  to  super- 
intend the  costuming  of  the  other  actors. 

Sheets  of  bark  were  again  beaten  into  fleeces  of  fibre, 
and  we  dressed  up  six  performers,  this  time  completely 
covering  them  from  head  to  foot,  so  that  not  even  a  glimpse 
of  their  faces  could  be  seen.  Four  of  them  were  attached 
to  each  other  by  a  cord  of  stringy-bark  fibre  fastened  to  a 
tuft  left  on  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  first,  the  cord  then 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  555 

tied  to  the  tuft  on  the  head  of  the  second,  and  so  on  to  the 
last.  Each  man  had  a  piece  of  bark  twelve  inches  long  and 
four  wide  in  each  hand.  The  two  remaining  actors  were 
not  tied  to  any  one,  and  each  walked  nearly  bent  double  by 
the  weight  of  supposititious  years,  resting  on  a  staff — this 
indicating  a  great  age  and,  as  they  represented  two  medicine- 
men, also  great  magical  powers. 

By  this  time  the  grave  was  completed,  and  leaves  having 
been  laid  on  the  bottom  as  a  couch,  Yibai  stretched  himself 
out  on  them  with  a  rolled-up  blanket  under  his  head,  as  if 
he  were  a  dead  man.  In  his  two  hands,  which  were  crossed 
on  his  chest,  he  held  the  stem  of  a  young  Geebung  tree,^ 
which  had  been  pulled  up  by  the  roots,  and  now  stood 
planted  on  his  chest  several  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ground. 
A  light  covering  of  dead  sticks  filled  the  grave,  and  on  them 
were  scattered  dead  leaves  and  grass,  artistically  levelled  off 
with  the  ground,  by  sticking  little  tufts  of  grass,  small  plants 
and  such  like,  to  make  the  illusion  complete. 

All  being  now  ready,  the  novices  were  led  by  their  Kabos 
and  placed  alongside  the  grave,  and  the  Wolgal  singer  perched 
himself  on  the  bole  of  a  fallen  tree  close  by  the  head  of  the 
grave,  and  commenced  a  melancholy  but  well-marked  song, 
called  the  "  Song  of  Yibair  2 

The  words  of  this  song  are,  as  is  often  the  case,  merely 
suggestive  of  its  meaning  rather  than  descriptive  of  it,  being 
the  repetition  of  the  words  Burrin-burrin  Yibai,  that  is, 
Stringy-bark  Yibai.  This  song  is  said  to  have  been  handed 
down  by  their  fathers  at  these  ceremonies,  and  further,  that 
it  refers  to  the  incantation  by  the  medicine-men.  It  refers 
to  Malian,  that  is  eagle-hawk,  in  connection  with  Yibai,  and 
Daramulun  is  also  Malian.  In  this  aspect  the  burial  of  the 
man  Yibai  has  a  new  significance,  he  being  of  the  sub-class 
Yibai  and  of  the  totem  Malian. 

To  the  slow,  plaintive,  but  well-marked  air  of  this  song 
the  actors  began  to  move  forward,  winding  among  the  trees, 
logs,  and  rocks.      In  accord  with  the  time  of  the  song  the 

•  Persoonia  linearis. 

2  That  is,  either  the  song  of  the  sub-class  Yibai,  or  of  the  individual  Yibai 
who  was  thus  fictitiously  dead  and  buried. 


556        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

four  men  kept  step,  at  each  step  striking  their  two  bark 
clappers  together,  and  simultaneously  swaying  first  to  the 
one  side  and  then  to  the  other.  The  two  old  men  kept 
pace  with  them,  but  a  little  to  one  side  as  became  their 
dignity.  This  represented  a  party  of  medicine-men,  guided 
by  two  Gonufieras,  proceeding  to  the  grave  of  the  medicine- 
man Yibai-malian  and  chanting  an  invocation  to  Daraviiiluii 
under  his  synonyms.  As  they  came  near  to  the  grave  they 
wound  round  its  foot  and  ranged  themselves  at  the  side 
facing  the  novices  and  the  Kabos.  The  two  old  men  stood 
behind  them  as  the  chant  and  dance  still  went  on.  Then 
there  was  seen  a  slight  quivering  of  the  Geebung  tree,  and 
the  Kabos  directed  the  attention  of  the  novices  to  it,  saying, 
"  Look  there."  It  quivered  more,  was  then  violently  agitated, 
then  the  whole  structure  fell  to  pieces,  and  to  the  excited 
dancing  of  the  actors,  to  the  song  of  Yibai,  the  supposed 
dead  man  rose  up  and  danced  his  magic  dance  in  the  grave, 
showing  the  Joias  in  his  mouth,  which  he  is  supposed  to 
have  received  from  Daramulun  himself. 

I  found  afterwards  that  this  song  of  Yibai  is  known  to 
the  Wiradjuri  in  their  Burbung  ceremonies. 

This  being  ended,  the  trappings  of  the  actors  and  the 
Geebung  sapling  were  thrown  into  the  grave,  and  the  whole 
covered  up  by  scratching  rubbish  over  it  as  in  the  cases  of 
the  other  sacred  representations. 

It  was  now  noon,  and  we  all  rested  and  cooked  and  ate 
our  mid-day  meal.  After  that  the  bundles  were  again  tied 
up  and  the  "  fish-catching  ceremony  "  commenced. 

Properly  speaking,  every  one  ought  to  have  gone  into 
the  water  and  have  washed  off  all  traces  of  the  charcoal 
dust,  which  is  the  covering  appropriate  to  the  Kuringal 
ceremonies.  But  it  had  become  so  cold  that  a  considerable 
number  of  the  men  compounded  by  only  washing  their  faces, 
heads,  and  arms.  The  other  more  punctilious  men  went 
into  the  water  up  to  their  middles  and  washed  themselves 
thoroughly,  shouting  while  they  did  so, "  We  are  going  fishing 
— yah  !  "  The  novices  were  led  to  the  edge  of  the  pool  and 
plentifully  sprinkled  with  water  by  the  men,  who  then  danced, 
and,  as  in  former  cases,  passed  the  magical  influence  to  the 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  557 

novices.  Then  they  came  out  of  the  water  and  put  on 
clothes,  and  with  them  they  put  on  also  their  usual 
demeanour. 

The  novices  were  led  away  ahead  of  the  party,  being 
now    "  completed "    and    made    "  ngai "    so    as    to    "  please 
Daramulun." 
j  The  intention  of  this  washing  is  that  everything  belonging 

\\to  the  ceremonies  shall    be   left    behind  with  the  charcoal, 
'which  is  the  indication  of  them.      To  use  their  own  expres- 
sion, "  Everything    belonging   to  the  bush  work   is  washed 
away,  so  that  the  women  may  not  know  anything  about  it."  ^ 

The  novices  are  forbidden,  during  their  period  of  proba- 
tion, to  wash  themselves,  or  to  go  into  the  water,  especially 
if  running,  lest  the  influence  with  which  the  ceremonies  have 
filled  them  should  be  washed  off.  The  men  had  "  gone  to 
catch  fish "  full  of  buffoonery,  with  the  word  Yah  !  on  the 
tip  of  their  tongues  ;  when  they  came  out  of  the  pool,  having 
left  behind  them  all  I  have  described  as  peculiar  to  these 
ceremonies,  they  resumed  their  usual  quiet  and  impassible 
demeanour.  The  bundles  were  picked  up  and  we  started  on^/ 
our  way  to  the  new  camp.  When  we  had  almost  reached 
the  crest  of  the  range  we  overtook  the  Kabos  and  the  novices. 
Gunjerung  called  a  halt,  and  the  bull-roarers  were  produced 
from  the  bundles  and  swung  loudly.  The  novices  were 
brought  back  to  us,  and  Gunjerung  spoke  to  them  about 
these  things,  showing  them  the  tooth-stick,  the  mallet,  and 
the  Mudtliis.  Finally,  turning  to  the  Wolgal  boy,  he  said, 
pointing  to  the  bull-roarers,  and  especially  to  the  one  which 
had  been  sent  to  him  :  "  These  are  what  made  the  noise  you 
heard,  and  this  one  was  very  strong,  it  brought  me  all  the 
way  from  Moruya."  I  may  mention  here  that  the  head 
Gommera  takes  care  of  the  Mudthis  from  one  Kuringal  to 
the  other. 

We  now  started  again,  the  "  young  men "  no  longer 
being  led  by  their  Kabos,  but  walking  by  themselves  along- 
side the  other  men. 

The  whole  of  the  secret  ceremonies  were  now  completed, 

I  Dr.  Lorimer  Fison  tells  me  that  this  cleansing  exactly  corresponds  with  the 
Nanga  ceremony  in  Fiji. 


558        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

having  been,  by  stress  of  circumstances,  condensed  into  about 
one-third  of  the  time  usually  taken  for  them.  The  three 
boys  had  been  made  men,  probationers  certainly,  but  ranking 
with  the  men,  and  for  ever  separated  from  the  control  of 
their  mothers  and  the  companionship  of  their  sisters. 

All  the  boys  who  are  made  men  at  the  same  time  are  in 
the  relation  of  Mudthi.  All  who  have  had  a  tooth  knocked 
out  are  Gumbang-ira^  that  is,  "  Raw-tooth." 

When  we  reached  the  summit  of  a  rocky  spur  which 
jutted  out  from  the  mountain,  we  overlooked  the  distant 
river  valley.  Then,  about  half  a  mile  farther  on,  we  halted 
on  a  small  peak  above  a  steep  descent,  and  here  the  young 
^en  were  divested  of  their  blankets  and  carefully  painted 
with  yellow  ochre  by  their  Kabos  in  lines  and  dots.  Three 
bands  were  drawn  across  the  face,  and  the  legs  from  the 
knee  down  were  wholly  covered  with  ochre.  The  belt  of 
^jmanhood'was  carefully  wound  round  the  waist,  and  the  two 
Burrain  were  hung  thereto,  before  and  behind.  The  head- 
bands and  the  arm-bands  completed  their  costume. 

The  two  elder  boys  took  it  all  with  the  greatest  equanimity, 
but  the  younger  one,  who  had  shown  an  utterly  unmoved 
demeanour,  except  when  his  tooth  was  being  knocked  out, 
through  all  the  ceremonies  of  nearly  thirty  hours,  was  now 
scarcely  able  to  contain  himself,  as  he  stood  and  admired 
his  costume.  His  face  was  radiant  as  he  looked  down  first 
on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other. 

This  having  been  done,  we  were  ready  to  start,  but  first 
of  all  a  signal  was  made  to  learn  whether  the  women  were 
ready  to  receive  us.  This  was  done  by  one  of  the  men 
uttering  a  shrill  cry  three  times  like  "  Trr,  trr,  trr"  and  then 
all  joining  in  a  great  shout  of  "  Yau  !  yau  !  yau  !  "  This  was 
repeated  three  times  with  intervals  of  listening,  until  at 
length  a  shrill  answering  signal  of  the  same  kind  came  up 
from  the  distant  forest  below. 

We  now  descended  the  remaining  part  of  the  mountain  ; 
and  at  its  foot,  when  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the 
new  camp,  we  halted,  and,  the  bundles  being  put  down,  the 
men  broke  off  boughs  or  young  trees,  and  formed  a  close 
group  bearing  them,  within  which  were  the  Kabos,  one  of 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  559 

each  pair  carrying  his  boy  on  his  shoulders.  Old  Gunjerung 
alone  did  not  carry  anything  ;  but,  as  the  Biamban,  walked 
apart  a  little  at  one  side  and  in  the  rear.  Holding  boughs 
high  up  so  as  to  conceal  the  newly-made  young  men  in  a 
moving  forest,  we  all  walked  slowly  to  the  camp,  in  front  of 
which  was  constructed  the  semblance,  made  of  boughs,  of  a 
double  hut  such  as  is  used  here.  It  had  been  made  large 
enough  to  hold  ten  or  a  dozen  people,  and  at  the  farther 
opening  and  inside  stood  four  women,  the  three  mothers  of 
the  boys  and  the  sister  of  one  of  the  former,  that  is,  a  tribal 
mother  of  the  boy.  These  women  had  each  a  band  of  white 
clay  across  her  face  as  a  sign  of  mourning. 

As  we  came  to  this  simulated  camp,  the  leading  men 
entered  and  the  Kabos  placed  their  boys  on  the  ground  before 
the  women.  The  oldest  woman  then  carefully  scrutinised 
them,  as  if  to  find  out  who  they  were,  and  then  turning  one 
of  them  with  his  face  in  the  direction  in  which  he  had  come, 
struck  him  lightly  on  the  back  with  two  boomerangs  which 
she  held  in  her  hand.  The  men  then  shouted  to  the  boys 
to  run,  and  opening  a  lane,  they  having  been  instructed  by 
their  Kabos  what  to  do,  raced  off  at  the  top  of  their  speed 
to  the  place  where  the  bundles  and  their  Talmaru  fire-sticks 
had  been  left.  All  the  men  followed  fast  after  them,  and 
when  I  came  up  with  them  more  leisurely,  found  them 
recovering  their  breath  after  their  race, 

_  The  three  novices  had  now  to  go  and  live  by  themselves 
in  the  bush,  on  such  food  as  they  could  catch,  and  which  it 
might  be  lawful  for  them  to  eat.  They  were  still  under  the 
charge  of  the  Kabos,  who  would  visit  them  from  time  to 
time,  continue  to  instruct  them,  and  see  that  they  followed 
the  rules  laid  down  for  them.  In  the  case  of  the  elder  of 
the  three,  the  period  of  probation  would  be  shortened, 
because  he  was  employed  as  a  stock-rider  on  a  cattle  station. 
But  in  all  the  cases  the  Gommeras  would  not  consent  to 
either  of  them  taking  his  place  in  the  tribal  community 
until  they  were  satisfied  as  to  his  conduct.  For  instance,  he 
would  not  be  allowed  to  take  a  wife  for  possibly  several 
years. 

Among  the  things  which  are  told  to  the  novice  by  his 


56o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Kabos,  is  his  Budjan,  that  is  his  totem  name.  These  names 
are  not  much  used,  and  a  person  does  not  know  much  of  the 
Budjans  of  others.  It  is  the  personal  name  which  is  used, 
not  the  Budjan.  The  personal  name  is  a  tribal  one  given  to 
an  individual  in  childhood,  and  the  use  of  the  totem  name  is 
avoided,  lest  an  enemy  might  get  hold  of  it  and  do  him  an 
injury  by  evil  magic.  In  this  there  is  a  difference  between 
the  Yuin  and  other  tribes,  in  which  the  totem  name  is  used, 
and  the  personal  name  strictly  kept  secret.  The  rule  is  that 
during  the  period  of  probation  the  novice  is  absolutely 
prohibited  from  holding  any  communication  with  a  woman, 
even  his  own  mother.  He  must  not  even  look  at  one,  and 
this  prohibition  extends  to  the  emu,  for  the  emu  is  Ngalalbal, 
the  mother  of  Daramulun. 

The  food  restrictions  in  connection  with  these  ceremonies 
are  that  the  Giimbang-ira  (raw-tooth  novice)  may  not  eat 
any  of  the  following :  emu,  because  it  is  Ngalalbal ;  any 
animal,  e^.  the  wombat,  which  burrows  in  the  ground,  and 
therefore  reminds  of  the  foot-holes  ;  such  creatures  as  have 
very  prominent  teeth,  such  as  the  kangaroo,  because  they 
remind  of  the  tooth  itself;  any  animal  that  climbs  to  the 
tree-tops,  like  the  koala,  because  it  is  then  near  to  Dara- 
mulun ;  any  bird  that  swims,  because  it  reminds  of  the  final 
washing  ceremony.  Other  food  forbidden  is  spiny  ant-eater, 
common  opossum,  lace-lizard,  snakes,  eels,  perch,  and  others. 

Thus  the  young  man  during  his  probation  is  placed  in 
an  artificial  state  of  scarcity  as  to  food,  although  perhaps 
surrounded  by  plenty.  Included  in  the  forbidden  is  the 
Budjan  of  the  novice,  although  this  rule  is  becoming  more 
and  more  disregarded  in  the  younger  generations. 

The  novices  were  told  that  if  they  eat  any  of  the 
forbidden  animals,  the  Jo'ia  belonging  to  it  would  get  into 
them  and  kill  them.  But  not  only  is  there  an  immaterial 
Joia  which  acts  magically,  but  also  a  special  magical 
substance  which  belongs  to  each  such  animal.  In  fact,  these 
magical  substances  are  some  of  the  Joias  which  the  medicine- 
men exhibit  at  the  Kuringal.  As  each  Goniniera  has  a 
totem  name,  his  Budjan  and  the  magical  substance  belonging 
to  it  are  his  special  Joias. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  561 

It  is  the  evil  magic  of  the  Budjan  that  in  great  measure 
commands  obedience,  but  there  is  also  the  belief  that  the 
Gonimera  can  see  in  dreams  the  actions  of  the  novices,  and 
punish  them  by  Joia.  In  the  old  times  a  novice,  known  to 
have  broken  the  food  rules  after  initiation,  would  have  been 
killed  by  violence. 

The  strictness  with  which  these  food  rules  are  observed 
by  the  old  men  affords  a  measure  of  their  force  in  the 
olden  times.  The  old  man  whom  I  have  mentioned  as  the 
Wolgal  singer,  and  who  seemed  to  be  about  seventy  years 
of  age,  told  me,  when  we  were  speaking  of  these  rules,  that 
he  had  never  eaten  of  the  flesh  of  the  emu.  He  said  that 
he  had  never  been  made  free  of  its  flesh,  by  some  one 
stealthily  rubbing  a  piece  of  it,  or  the  fat,  on  his  mouth. 

When  the  Gommeras  are  satisfied  that  the  youth  is  fit 
to  take  his  place  in  the  tribe,  he  is  allowed  to  return.  In 
6ne  case  known  to  me,  it  was  between  five  and  six  months^ 
before  the  old  men  were  satisfied  as  to  this.  For  some 
reason  they  were  dissatisfied  with  the  novices,  and  after  a 
meeting  was  held  of  the  old  men,  some  of  them  went  out 
to  and  told  the  novices  that  they  must  not  let  the  women 
see  them  stripped  of  their  rugs  for  some  months  after 
coming  in. 

After  the  novice  is  allowed  to  come  into  the  camp,  and 
till  he  is  permitted  to  marry,  the  Gommeras  can  order  him 
to  do  things  for  them,  and  he  obeys  them. 

The  ceremonies  being  now  completed,  there  remained 
nothing  for  the  people  to  do  but  gradually  to  return  to  their 
own  districts.  The  tooth  would  be  carried  by  the  Gommera 
of  the  place  most  distant  from  that  of  the  youth  it  belonged 
to.  He  would  then  send  or  hand  it  to  the  Headman  of  the 
locality  next  to  him,  and  thus  it  would  pass  from  group  to 
group  of  the  inter-marrying  community  which  had  attended 
the  Kuringal.  It  conveys  its  message,  which  is  that  so- 
and-so  has  been  made  a  man.  Finally  it  returns  to  its 
owner. 

I  took  on  myself,  as  being  in  their  eyes  a  "  Gommera  of 
the  Kurnai,"  and  as  having  joined  in  causing  the  Kuringal  to 
be  held,  to  carry  off  two  of  the  teeth,  which  were  fastened 

2  0 


S62        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


with  grass-tree  gum  one  to  each  end  of  a  piece  of  twisted 
fibre.  An  old  man,  the  father  of  one  of  the  boys,  begged 
me  not  to  put  the  teeth  into  my  '^  Joia  bag,"  and  Yibai,  who 
was  present,  said  that  he  would  by  and  by  fetch  them  back. 
Some  twelve  months  after,  I  was  surprised  by  the 
arrival  at  Sale,  in  Gippsland,  where  I  was  then  living,  of  the 

7 


FIG.  33.  —  I  AM)  3,  W(K)1)KN  IMPLKMKNT  USKD  TO  KXTRACT  TKKTH  AT  YUIN 
KURINGAL  ;  2.  TKETH  WHEN  EXTKACTEIJ  ATrACIIED  TO  TWISTED  I'lHKK 
BY   GUM.        X^. 

man  who  had  acted  as  my  messenger  during  the  ceremonies. 
In  the  usual  secret  manner  in  which  anything  relating  to 
the  Kuringal  is  spoken  of,  he  whispered  to  me  that  one 
of  the  boys  had  been  taken  ill,  and  that  the  old  men  feared 
that  I  had  placed  the  teeth  in  my  bag  with  Jo'ias,  and  had 
thereby  caused  his  sickness.  The  old  men  had  therefore 
sent  him  to  ask  me  for  them.  I  relieved  his  mind  by 
showing  him  the  teeth  carefully  packed  in  a  small  tin  box 
by  themselves,  and  sent  him  off  with  them  on  his  return 
journey  of  some  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  563 


The  Ngarigo  Ceremonies 

In  one  of  the  talks  which  I  had  with  the  old  men  at 
their  Wirri-wirri-than,  I  asked  them  what  would  be  done  if  a 
woman  saw  a  Mudthi.  The  consensus  of  opinion  was  that 
if  a  woman  found  a  Mudthi  and  showed  it  to  a  man,  he 
would  kill  her.  If  a  man  showed  a  Mudthi  to  a  woman  or 
a  child,  he  would  be  killed,  and  not  unlikely  those  belonging 
to  him  also.  If  a  woman  were  seen  in  the  little  Bunan 
ground,  she  would  be  killed. 

I  have  mentioned  that  some  of  the  Bemeringal  attended 
the  Yuin  ceremonies,  but  the  "  true  Bemeringal,"  according 
to  the  Yuin,  are  the  Ngarigo  of  the  Manero  tableland. 
Their  ceremonies  are  almost  precisely  the  same  as  the 
Kuringal^  but  the  following  details  may  be  added. 

During  the  time  that  the  novice  {Kuringun)  is  away  in  the 
mountains  after  the  ceremonies,  he  is  in  the  charge  of  some 
old  man,  or  more  than  one.  He  may  be  absent  more  than 
six  months,  and  during  this  time  he  is  not  allowed  to  touch 
cooked  food  with  his  hands.  The  food  is  put  into  his 
mouth  by  the  man  who  has  charge  of  him.  Tharamulun  is 
believed  to  be  watching  him,  and  his  dread  is  very  great. 
During  the  time  when  the  novices  are  at  the  Kuringal 
before  they  are  shown  to  their  mothers,  their  food  is  brought 
by  women  who  have  not  any  boys  to  be  made  men.  When 
the  tooth  is  taken  out,  it  is  fastened  to  a  piece  of  Kaiutig, 
the  woman's  apron,  and  is  sent  round  to  Tumut  in  a  bag 
with  some  kangaroo  teeth  and  red  ochre.  The  bag  is  made 
of  the  skin  of  small  wallaby  called  Kulbut. 


The  Wolgal  Kuringal 

The  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Wolgal  were  described 
to  me  by  Yibai-malian  and  the  old  Wolgal  singer,  with 
diagrams  drawn  in  the  sand  to  explain  matters.  They  said 
that  the  ceremony  is  also  called  Kuringal,  and  the  boys 
who  are  made  men  at  it  are  called  by  that  name.  There  is 
the  earthen  mound  with  a  path  leading  to  a  small  enclosure 


564        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

at  some  distance.  Huts  are  made  at  a  little  distance  from 
the  mound,  in  which  the  boys  and  their  mothers  sit.  When 
the  ceremonies  commence,  in  the  same  manner  as  with  the 
Coast  Murring,  the  boys  are  placed  on  the  mound  before  a 
great  fire,  and  behind  each  boy  stands  his  mother.  All  the 
other  women  are  at  the  camp  covered  with  boughs  and 
skin  rugs,  or  blankets,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  principal 
medicine-man,  or,  in  the  instance  which  Yibai  described  to 
me,  the  two  medicine-men,  stood  just  inside  the  ring,  a  little 
way  from  the  fire,  but  so  as  to  be  able  to  prevent  the  boys 
from  shifting  before  the  medicine-men  think  they  have  been 
sufficiently  put  to  the  test. 

The  dances  described  wh^en  speaking  of  the  Kuringal 
of  the  Yuin  were  used  here,  and  the  novices  were  attended 
by  their  Jambis^  who  are  in  the  same  relation  to  the  boys 
as  the  Kabos  are  in  the  Yuin. 

The  boys  are  covered  with  rugs  in  the  same  manner  as 
at  the  Kuringal,  and  are  led  along  the  path  to  the  small 
enclosure,  where  there  are  the  same  figures  and  emblems  as 
described  for  the  Bunan,  and  the  saplings  along  the  path 
are  bent  down  to  form  arches,  under  which  the  boys  have 
to  stoop  or  even  crawl,  to  make  them  obedient.  The  magic 
dances  are  those  described,  and  in  the  small  enclosure  two 
holes  are  dug  in  which  the  novice  stands  when  his  tooth  is 
knocked  out  by  one  of  the  medicine-men.  During  this 
operation  the  men  sing  in  a  loud  voice  to  make  the  tooth 
come  out  easily.  If  the  tooth  holds  fast,  the  old  men  say 
it  is  because  the  boys  have  had  improper  relations  with  the 
women. 

The  ceremonies  last  for  three  or  four  days,  during  which 
the  songs  and  dances  are  the  same  as  at  the  Kuringal.  The 
novices  are  instructed  by  their  Jambis,  and  admonished  to 
obey  the  rules  laid  down  for  their  conduct.  They  are  also 
told  about  TJiaramulun,  and  that  he  watches  what  men  do. 

The  novices  are  forbidden  to  eat  opossum,  bandicoot, 
and,  above  all,  emu  eggs.  They  are  told  that  if  they  eat 
forbidden  food  they  will  become  ill  by  the  magic  of  the 
creature  eaten.  But  they  are  allowed  to  eat  kangaroo,  ring- 
tail opossum,  fish,  and  other  things. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  565 

The  boys,  having  been  properly  instructed,  are  taken  to 
where  the  women  are,  where  a  hut  has  been  built,  in  which 
the  boys'  mothers  are  with  a  smoky  fire  in  front.  The  boys, 
seeing  their  mothers  in  the  smoke,  run  ojff  into  the  bush  with 
some  of  the  men. 

The  bull-roarer  is  called  Marangrang. 

While  the  people  are  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the 
contingents  there  is  singing  and  dancing  each  evening.  The 
contingents  when  they  arrive  perform  their  songs  and  dances 
for  the  amusement  of  the  others.  New  dances  are  brought 
by  them  and  taught  to  the  makers  of  the  Kuringal.  In 
these  dances  the  novices  take  part  with  the  men. 

The  teeth  knocked  out  are  put  in  a  bag  with  kangaroo 
teeth  and  red  ochre,  and  sent  away  by  the  medicine-man 
who  extracted  them  round  to  the  places  from  which  the 
contingents  came — for  instance,  as  far  off  as  Lambing  Flat. 
With  the  teeth  are  sent  a  boomerang,  a  club  {nulla-nulla\ 
and  a  shield  for  club-fighting. 

Before  his  tooth  is  out  a  boy  is  called  Bruebul ;  after- 
wards he  is  Nurmung  or  Kuringun. 

The  Ya-itma-thang  Ceremonies 

The  Ya-itma-thang  tribe  of  the  Omeo  tableland  attended 
the  initiation  ceremonies  on  the  one  side  of  the  tribes  on  the 
Upper  Ovens  River,  and  those  of  the  Wolgal  and  Ngarigo 
on  the  other.  I  was  not  able  to  learn  anything  at  first-hand 
as  to  these  ceremonies,  excepting  that  Mallur  came  down 
from  the  sky  to  knock  out  the  tooth  of  the  boy  when  he 
was  made  a  man.  As  this  was  the  statement  of  an  old 
woman  who  had  survived  all  her  tribes-people,  it  merely 
tells  us  what  was  told  to  the  uninitiated  by  the  medicine-men 
of  that  tribe.  However,  as  the  Theddora  branch  of  the  tribe 
went  to  the  Kuringal  of  the  Ngarigo,  we  may  fairly  infer 
what  the  ceremonies  of  the  Theddora  were. 

The  bull-roarer  of  this  tribe  was  about  four  inches  in 
length,  and  with  notched  edges,  being  fastened  by  a  string 
to  a  short  stick.  Such  a  one  was  shown  to  one  of  my 
correspondents,  secretly,  by  a  Theddora  medicine-man  in  the 


566        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

very  early  days  before  Gippsland  was  settled.  He  was  told 
that  the  women  and  children  might  not  see  it.^ 

The  best,  indeed  the  only  account  which  I  have  seen  of 
this  tribe  is  that  of  Mr.  Richard  Helms,"-  which  I  quote  from 
to  make  my  remarks  more  complete.     He  says  as  follows  : — 

"  At  about  fourteen  to  sixteen  years  the  young  man  was 
made  Kurrong  by  knocking  out  one  of  his  front  teeth.  This 
removed  him  from  the  care  of  his  mother  and  the  influence 
of  the  women,  and,  so  to  say,  raised  him  from  boyhood  to 
youth.  At  eighteen  to  twenty,  when  his  beard  had  started 
to  develop  properly,  he  was  made  Wahu.  All  the  hair  of 
his  head  was  singed  off  gradually,  the  women  being  excluded. 
When  the  hair  was  removed,  the  men  ran  up  and  waved 
green  boughs  over  his  head.  After  this  the  men  would  run 
some  way,  returning  swinging  the  boughs,  with  a  swishing 
sound,  in  a  certain  direction,  mentioning  at  the  same  time 
the  name  of  the  district  towards  which  they  were  pointing. 
This  was  repeated  three  times  for  each  of  the  various 
directions  they  might  point  to.  Each  name  mentioned  was 
preceded  by  the  emphasised  exclamation  of  '  Wau  !  wau  ! ' 
— for  instance,  '  JVau  !  wau  !  Tuviut  ! '  If  the  IVau  was 
followed  by  an  exclamation  or  malediction,  it  meant  that  the 
Wahu  might  go  to  the  one  as  a  friend  ;  or  that  in  the  other 
direction  lived  tribes  with  whom  he  would  have  to  carry  on 
the  hereditary  feud.  He  was  now  considered  to  have  been 
raised  to  the  position  of  a  warrior." 

As  soon  as  the  initiation  was  completed  the  women  were 
again  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the  men,  and  dancing  and 
corrobborees  were  held  for  the  benefit  of  the  visitors  present 
on  these  occasions. 

A  newly-made  Wahu  might  choose  any  woman  of  the 
tribe  he  liked,  his  blood  relations  excepted,  for  the  night. 
But  such  a  privilege  was  for  the  night  only. 

The  Yoohlang  Ceremonies  of  Port  Jackson 

According  to  the  Yuin,  the  Kuringal  extended  up  the 
coast  northwards  as  far  as  the   Hunter  River,  and  therefore 

1  J.  Buntine.  2  gp.  cit.  p.  387.      1895. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  567 

included  the  now  extinct  Port  Jackson  tribe.  Collins,  in  his 
work,  An  Account  of  the  English  Colony  of  New  South  Wales} 
gives  particulars  of  the  ceremony  of  initiation,  which  he  saw, 
at  least  in  great  part,  in  the  year  1796,  and  which  was  called, 
by  the  native  tribes  which  inhabited  Port  Jackson,  Yoolahng, 
from  the  cleared  space  in  which  the  ceremonies  were  held. 
The  people  who  assembled  at  the  Yoolahng  were  apparently 
not  only  the  Geawe-gal  of  the  southern  shores  of  Botany  Bay, 
and  the  Cam-mer-ray-gal,  who  lived  on  the  north  shore  of 
Port  Jackson,  but  also  "wood-natives  and  many  strangers." 
The  place  selected  for  the  Yoolahng  was  Farm  Cove,  where 
the  ceremonial  ground  had  been  prepared.  It  was  of  an 
oval  figure,  twenty-seven  feet  by  eighteen. 

The  Cam-mer-ray-gal  stood  at  one  end  ;  the  boys  to  be 
initiated,  with  their  friends,  at  the  other.  The  Cam-mer-ray- 
gal  advanced  from  their  end  of  the  Yoolahng  with  a  shout 
peculiar  to  the  occasion,  and  the  clattering  of  shields  and 
spears,  and  raised  a  dust  with  their  feet  that  nearly  obscured 
the  objects  around  them.  One  of  them  stepped  forward, 
and,  seizing  one  of  the  boys,  placed  him  in  the  middle  of  his 
party.  Fifteen  boys  were  thus  taken  and  placed  at  the 
upper  end  of  the  Yoolahng,  where  they  sat,  each  holding 
down  his  head,  his  hands  clasped  and  his  legs  crossed  under 
him.  In  this  manner  they  were  to  remain  all  night,  and 
until  the  ceremonies  were  ended  they  were  not  to  look  up 
or  take  any  refreshment  whatever. 

One  of  the  Carralidis  then  suddenly  fell  on  the  ground, 
a  crowd  of  natives  dancing  round  him  and  singing  vocifer- 
ously, until  he  produced  a  bone  which  was  to  be  used  in 
the  ensuing  ceremony.  Another  then  went  through  the 
same  ceremony,  producing  another  bone,  the  boys  being 
assured  that  the  ensuing  operation  would  be  attended  with 
little  pain,  and  that  the  more  the  Carrahdis  suffered,  the 
less  would  be  felt  by  them. 

It  being  now  perfectly  dark.  Colonel  Collins  left,  with 
an  invitation  to  return  early  in  the  morning. 

On  the  next  morning  he  found  the  Cam-mer-ray-gal 
camped   by  themselves,  and   the  boys  lying  also  by  them- 

'  Pp.  353-372. 


568        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

selves.  Soon  after  sunrise  the  Carrahdis  and  their  party 
advanced  in  quick  movements  towards  the  Yoolahng,  one 
after  the  other,  shouting  as  they  entered  it  and  running 
twice  or  thrice  round  it. 

The  boys  were  then  brought  to  the  Yoolahng^  hanging 
their  heads  and  clasping  their  hands.  On  being  seated  in 
this  manner  the  ceremonies  began,  the  principal  performers 
being  about  twenty  in  number,  and  all  of  the  Cam-mer-ray 
tribe. 

The  exhibitions  were  numerous  and  various,  and  all  in 
their  tendency  pointed  towards  the  boys  and  had  some 
allusions  to  the  principal  act  of  the  day  which  was  to  be 
the  concluding  scene  of  it. 

Shortly,  the  different  parts  of  the  ceremony  are  as 
follows.  There  was  a  dance  in  which  the  performers 
represented  dingoes,  and  during  it  the  boys  continued 
perfectly  still  and  quiet,  never  moving  from  the  position 
in  which  they  were  placed,  nor  seeming  in  the  least  to 
notice  the  ridiculous  appearance  of  the  Carrahdis  and  their 
associates. 

The  next  was  the  carrying  by  two  men  of  a  kangaroo 
made  of  grass,  and  also  of  a  load  of  brushwood,  which 
were  laid  respectively  at  the  feet  of  the  boys,  other  men 
singing  and  beating  time  to  which  the  two  men  walked. 

In  the  third  some  men  dressed  to  represent  a  flock  of 
kangaroos,  other  men  pretending  to  steal  on  them  and 
spear  them. 

The  next  appeared  to  be  a  pendant  to  the  preceding 
one.  The  men  disguised  as  kangaroos,  divesting  themselves 
of  the  disguises,  each  caught  up  a  boy  and  placing  him  on 
his  shoulders  carried  him  to  the  last  scene  of  the  ceremony. 
The  account  is  here  imperfect,  Collins  not  having  been,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  permitted  to  see  all.  From  the  description 
of  what  he  saw,  it  may  be  conjectured  that  it  was  one  of 
those  representations  which  at  the  Kuringal  are  intended 
to  impart  qualities  to  the  boy  such  as  will  make  him  a 
more  worthy  member  of  the  community  to  which  he  is  to 
be  admitted.  The  men  who  lifted  the  boys  on  their 
shoulders  were  most  likely  the  analogues  of  the  Kabos. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  569 

The  ceremony  of  knocking  out  the  tooth  is  fully 
described.  The  gums  were  lanced  with  the  bone  which 
the  night  before  had  been  apparently  produced  from  his 
inward  parts  by  the  Carrahdis.  The  tooth  was  extracted 
by  means  of  a  wooden  chisel  made  from  a  piece  of  a  spear- 
thrower,  a  large  stone  being  used  to  strike  with.  The  gum 
was  closed  by  the  boy's  friends,  who  equipped  him  in  the 
style  in  which  he  was  to  appear  for  some  days.  A  girdle 
was  tied  round  his  waist,  in  which  was  stuck  a  boomerang. 
A  head-band  was  tied  on,  in  which  were  stuck  slips  of  the 
grass-tree.  The  mouth  was  to  be  kept  shut  and  the  left 
hand  was  placed  over  it,  and  for  that  day  he  was  not  to  eat. 

During  the  whole  operation  the  assistants  made  the 
most  hideous  noise  in  the  ears  of  the  patients,  who  made 
it  a  point  of  honour  to  bear  the  pain  without  a  murmur. 
The  blood  that  issued  from  the  lacerated  gum  was  not 
wiped  away,  but  suffered  to  run  down  the  breast,  and  fall 
upon  the  head  of  the  man  on  whose  shoulders  the  patient 
sat,  and  whose  name  was  added  to  his. 

Collins  says  that  the  boys  were  also  called  Ke-ba-ra, 
which  has  reference  in  the  construction  of  the  "  singular 
instrument "  used  on  this  occasion,  Kebar  signifying  a  rock 
or  stone.  He  does  not  explain  what  the  singular  instrument 
was,  but  I  assume  it  was  the  stone  used  for  striking  the 
chisel. 

The  extracted  tooth  would  be,  it  may  be  inferred  from  the 
context,  sent  to  the  Cam-mer-ray  tribe,  who  it  is  said  in  one 
place  had  the  privilege  of  calling  the  people  together  for 
these  ceremonies,  and  also  "  to  extract  a  tooth  from  the 
natives  of  the  other  tribes  inhabiting  the  sea-coast." 

The  Ceremonies  of  the  Geawe-gal  Tribe 

In  connection  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  Geawe-gal 
tribe  of  the  Hunter  River,  a  wooden  booming  instrument 
was  whirled  round  at  the  end  of  a  cord.  It  was  used  then, 
and  then  only.  A  particular  coo-ee  and  a  particular  reply 
to  it,  were  made  known  to  the  young  men  when  they  were 
initiated.      Among  the  symbols  used  were  the  form  of  the 


570        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

cross  moulded  on  the  earth,  also  a  circle  similarly  formed, 
and  sinuous  parallel  lines  with  other  marks  on  the  trees 
surrounding  the  site  of  the  ceremony ;  which  sites  the 
women  and  children  were  never  allowed  to  approach.  The 
Murramai,  or  rock  crystal,  was  first  seen  by  the  young  men 
at  their  initiation.  It  was  held  in  reverence.  "Think  of  the 
defeat  of  tribal  reverence  which  was  brought  about,  when  a 
white  man  put  a  station  close  to  one  of  these  secret  places 
and  it  became  a  thoroughfare  ! " 

A  European  who  had  gained  the  confidence  of  the  tribe 
might  be  permitted  to  be  present  at  the  ceremonies  of 
initiation  ;  and  a  knowledge  of  them  might  be  a  safe  pass- 
port for  a  traveller  in  a  strange  tribe,  if  by  any  means  he 
could  communicate  the  fact  of  this  initiation.  The  wonder 
and  the  readiness  to  fraternise  shown  by  strange  blacks  to 
an  initiated  white  man  seen  for  the  first  time  by  them  are 
very  great,  accompanied  by  the  earnest  entreaties  not  to 
reveal  anything  unlawful." 

The  Ceremonies  of  the  Gringai  Tribe 

The  following  particulars  relate  to  the  Gringai  tribe, 
which  also  inhabited  country  on  the  Hunter  River.  A 
large  assembly  is  called  together  to  celebrate  the  ceremonies 
of  initiation.  The  boy  to  be  made  a  man  is  painted  red  all 
over,  and  is  then  taken  to  the  centre  of  an  earthen  ring, 
where  he  sits  facing  the  track  which  leads  to  another  ring 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant.  The  women  with  their 
faces  covered  lie  round  the  large  ring.  An  old  man  steps 
up  to  where  the  boy  is  sitting,  and  blowing  in  his  face  bends 
his  head  down.  Two  other  old  men  then  take  him  by  the 
arm  and  lead  him  to  the  other  ring,  where  he  sits  down,  all 
the  time  keeping  his  head  bent  and  looking  on  the  ground. 
The  women  now  rise  up,  and  having  sung  and  danced,  go 
away  to  another  camp  and  take  no  part  in  the  ceremonies 
till  their  termination. 

Trees  which  grow  near  to  both  of  the  circles  have  been 
carved,  and  the  boy  is  taken  to  each  of  them.      He  looks  at 

1  G.  W.  Rusden. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  571 

them  for  a  moment,  when  the  old  men  give  a  great  shout. 
He  is  then  taken  away  to  a  place  some  miles  distant,  still 
keeping  his  face  to  the  ground,  even  when  he  is  eating. 
Here  a  large  camp  is  made,  and  the  boy  learns  dances  and 
songs,  and  is  for  the  first  time  allowed  to  look  up  and  see 
what  is  going  on.  He  is  kept  here  in  this  manner  for  about 
ten  days,  being  placed  by  himself  in  lonely  and  secluded 
places,  while  at  night  the  men  make  hideous  noises  at  which 
he  must  not  show  the  least  sign  of  fear,  on  pain  of  death. 
After  this  time  they  take  the  boy  to  a  large  water-hole,  where 
they  all  wash  off  the  red  paint,  and  on  coming  out  are 
painted  white. 

When  the  men  return  to  the  new  camp,  the  women  are 
lying  down  by  a  large  fire  with  their  faces  covered.  The 
old  men  who  took  the  boy  away  bring  him  back  at  a  run 
towards  the  fire,  the  other  men  following  clattering  their 
boomerangs,  but  not  speaking  or  shouting.  The  men  form 
a  ring  round  the  fire,  and  one  old  man  runs  round  inside  the 
ring  beating  a  shield  {liiela-vian).  At  this  signal  the  boy's 
mother,  or  failing  her,  some  other  woman,  comes  out  of  the 
company  of  women,  and  taking  the  boy  under  the  arm  lifts 
him  up,  rubs  her  hands  over  him,  and  then  goes  away. 

The  fire  has  by  this  time  burned  down  to  red  coals,  and 
the  men,  including  the  novice,  extinguish  them  by  jumping 
on  them  with  their  feet.  The  boy  now  camps  in  sight  of 
where  the  women  are  and  is  allowed  to  eat  food  which  was 
before  forbidden  to  him,  such  as  kangaroo,  snake,  etc. 

The  bull-roarer  is  called  by  the  Gringai  Torikotti^  and  is 
used  in  these  ceremonies. 

The  young  man  is  not  allowed  to  marry  till  three  years 
after  the  ceremony.' 

Another  statement  has  been  made  to  me  which  has  a 
bearing  on  this  ceremony,  and  may  be  added  to  it.  At  Port 
Stephens  the  blacks  when  making  a  Bumbat,  that  is,  when 
initiating  a  boy,  remove  a  tooth,  by  one  of  the  old  men 
placing  his  bottom  tooth  against  the  Bumbafs  upper  tooth, 
and  by  giving  a  sudden  jerk  snaps  the  boy's  tooth  off." 

An  extraordinary  mystery  attaches  to  the  large  quartz 

>  K.  W.  Boydell,  per  Dr.  J.  Fraser.  2  A.  Hook. 


572        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

crystal  in  these  tribes.  They  are  possessed  by  the  Koradjis 
or  medicine-men.  The  Bumbat  is  presented  on  his  initiation 
with  one,  which  is  wrapped  up  with  the  greatest  solemnity, 
caution,  and  secrecy,  and  concealed  in  his  belt.  If  a  woman 
by  chance  saw  one  of  these,  her  brains  were  knocked  out,  and 
women  were  therefore  in  great  dread  of  seeing  one  of  them 
by  any  chance.^ 

The  Ceremonies  at  Port  Stephens 

A  description  of  what  was  certainly  part  of  the  initiation 
ceremonies  at  Port  Stephens  has  been  given  me  by  an  eye- 
witness, who  accidentally  came  across  it  and  was  permitted 
to  see  the  final  part.'^     I  quote  his  own  words  : — 

"  A  number  of  blacks  were  camped  at  the  foot  of  a  hill, 
the  camp  being  in  the  form  of  a  half-circle,  round  an  oval 
cleared  space,  about  thirty  or  forty  feet  in  area.  The  edges 
of  the  space  were  raised  about  nine  inches.  This  cleared 
space  was  connected  with  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  another 
cleared  space  by  a  narrow  path.  The  women  were  not 
allowed  to  go  up  this  path  or  to  approach  the  top  of  the 
hill  at  all.  When  going  to  the  creek  for  water  they  were 
careful  to  look  another  way.  On  more  than  one  occasion 
when  riding  past  the  camp  I  heard  most  extraordinary 
noises  proceeding  from  the  top  of  the  hill,  a  kind  of  bellow- 
ing or  booming  sound,  continuing  for  a  long  time,  then 
sinking  away  at  times,  and  then  swelling  out  as  loud  as 
ever.  The  blacks  would  not  tell  me  what  it  meant,  so  I 
determined  to  see  for  myself.  I  therefore  rode  carefully 
round  the  hill,  and  up  the  other  side  from  the  camp.  I 
found  that  a  conical  fire  was  burning  in  the  centre  of  a 
cleared  space,  similar  to  the  one  at  the  foot  of  the  hill. 
Round  this  fire,  radiating  from  it  like  the  spokes  of  a 
wheel,  and  painted  like  skeletons,  were  a  number  of  naked 
blacks  on  their  faces.  Within  the  cleared  space,  and  on 
one  side  of  it,  was  a  rough  figure  painted  red,  made  of  wood, 
formed  by  a  stake  driven  in  the  ground  with  a  cross  piece 
for  arms  and  the  top  dressed  up  with  grass  and  bark,  in  the 
»  Dr.  M'Kinlay.  2  W.  Scott. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE 


573 


style  used  by  the  blacks  when  prepared  for  hunting.  The 
blacks  were  so  absorbed  in  what  they  were  doing  that  I 
sat  some  time  unobserved.  When  they  did  see  me,  they 
seemed  much  annoyed.  One  of  our  own  blacks  came  to 
me  and  said  that  he  did  not  mind,  because  I  was  '  Gimbail  ^ 
but  the  up-country  blacks  would  not  go  on  with  the 
ceremony  while  I  remained.  I  then  rode  away,  but  in  a 
few  days  after  he  told  me  that 
I  could  see  the  great  finishing 
ceremony.  I  rode  to  the  camp 
at  the  foot  of  the  hill  and 
saw  a  large  fire  burning  in 
the  centre  of  the  large  cleared 
space.  The  booming  noise 
from  the  top  of  the  hill  was  also 
going  on,  and  grew  louder 
and  louder,  and  at  last  was 
succeeded  by  great  shouts 
and  yells.  Then  about  two 
hundred  painted  blackfellows 
appeared  over  the  brow  of  the 
hill.  They  were  all  armed 
with  boomerangs,  shields,  and 
spears,  which  they  clashed  to- 
gether in  time  as  they  ran. 
They  were  in  two  divisions,  and 
kept  crossing  and  recrossing 
the  path,  interlacing  as  they 
met  at  a  run,  while  descending 

the  hill,  and  yelling  at  the  top  of  their  voices.  The  effect 
was  very  startling,  especially  to  my  horse,  who  took  fright. 
Arriving  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  they  threw  their  weapons  on 
the  ground,  and  springing  on  to  the  clear  space,  danced  on 
the  fire  with  their  bare  feet  till  it  was  extinguished,  all  the 
time  bearing  up  amongst  them  the  youths  who  were  being 
made  Bumbat. 


FIG.    34. — ROUGH  FIGURE  USED  AT  THE 
PORT   STKI'HENS   CEREMONIES. 


'  Gimbai  is  used  here  as  "friend,"  but  it  evidently  m^ans  more  than  that, 
because  the  tree-creeper  is  at  Port  Stephens  one  of  the  sex  totems,  and  is  called 
\}max gimbai,  that  is,  "friend." 


574        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

"  This  part  of  the  ceremony  being  over,  the  Port  Stephens 
blacks,  accompanied  by  the  Bumbats^  ran  up  the  trees  Hke 
monkeys,  and  breaking  off  small  branches,  threw  them 
down  on  the  ground,  where  they  were  eagerly  scrambled  for 
by  the  women,  who  put  them  in  their  nets.  The  up-country 
blacks  took  no  part  in  the  branch-breaking,  and  one  of  them 
told  me  that  they  never  did  that  sort  of  thing  in  his  part  of 
the  country.  This  concluded  the  first  part  of  the  ceremony, 
and  the  women  were  not  allowed  to  see  the  next  part. 
They  were  made  to  lie  down  and  were  covered  with 
blankets  and  bark,  and  a  blackfellow  was  placed  over  them 
as  a  guard,  waddy  in  hand.  At  this  stage  of  the  proceedings 
some  of  the  up-country  blacks  objected  to  my  being  present 
with  a  gun,  for  I  had  a  small  one  with  me.  One  of  our 
blacks  asked  me  to  give  it  up,  and  it  would  be  all  right,  but 
I  did  not  do  so  and  went  away." 

The  Ceremonies  in  the  Dungog  District 

The  following  account  relates  to  the  ceremonies  of  the 
tribe  which  occupied  the  country  about  Dungog,  and  which 
appears  to  be  part  of  the  great  group  to  which  the  Gringai 
belong.  I  follow  my  informant's  words  in  describing  what 
he  saw,  and  also  ascertained,  about  the  ceremonies.'  The 
juvenile  males  of  this  tribe  were,  from  the  age  of  about 
twelve  to  eighteen,  allowed  to  accompany  their  parents  and 
friends  in  hunting  excursions,  and  assisted  in  the  incidental 
fagging  necessary  about  the  camps,  and  then  in  the  course 
of  time  were  thoroughly  disciplined  and  properly  trained. 
When  they  are  considered  ready  to  be  made  full  members 
of  the  tribe,  the  elders  hold  a  convention,  and  decide  on  a 
Bumbat  being  held,  generally  when  there  are  three  or  four 
youths  to  be  initiated. 

Messengers  are  despatched  to  summon  the  tribes  far  and 
near  ;  and  on  their  return,  full  preparations  are  made  for  the 
celebration,  a  place  being  selected  and  a  day  appointed. 
As  part  of  the  ceremonies,  the  aspirants  undergo  the  ordeal 
of  having  an  upper  front  tooth  either  bitten  or  knocked  out 
»  Dr.  E.  M.  M'Kinlay. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  575 

with  a  stick  prepared  for  the  occasion.  It  is  said  that  the 
youth's  mother  is  the  custodian  of  the  tooth,  and  takes  much 
care  of  it.  As  everything  relating  to  these  ceremonies  is 
kept  very  secret,  this  is  only  hearsay.  White  men  are  not 
allowed  to  be  present  at  this  great  ceremony,  but  by  bribing 
one  of  the  leading  men  my  correspondent  was  permitted  to 
be  present  at  part  of  the  performance,  on  the  condition  that 
he  did  not  come  so  near  to  the  ceremony  as  to  annoy  the 
assembled  tribes.  On  the  eventful  morning  (about  the  year 
I  844)  he  went  to  the  place  indicated,  where  he  found  about 
two  hundred  of  the  tribesmen  differently  but  tastefully 
painted  in  red,  white,  and  yellow,  and  armed  to  the  teeth. 
They  were  in  groups  here  and  there  in  a  little  valley.  On 
riding  about  he  noticed  a  large  gum-tree  deeply  carved  with 
hieroglyphics,  which  he  was  informed  was  a  record  to  future 
generations  that  a  Bumbat  had  been  celebrated  in  that 
locality.  A  circle  of  eighty  to  ninety  feet  in  diameter  was 
dug,  or  scratched,  on  a  level  piece  of  ground,  leaving  a  space 
of  four  or  five  feet  undisturbed  to  enter  the  circle  by.  In 
the  centre  of  this  circle  there  was  a  fire  of  moderate  dimen- 
sions, and  attended  to  by  one  of  the  men.  Shortly  there 
was  a  stir  when  a  detachment  entered  the  circle,  and  with 
dancing,  yelling,  and  gesticulations,  and  brandishing  of  arms 
at  intervals,  all  made  a  rush  to  the  fire,  yelling  and  jumping 
on  it,  until  it  was  quite  extinguished,  when  they  retired. 
The  spot  where  the  fire  had  been  being  now  cool,  the 
embers  and  ashes  were  levelled,  and  boughs  were  brought 
and  disposed  of  in  the  middle  of  the  circle.  Then  two  men 
proceeded  to  the  camp  of  the  females,  two  or  three  hundred 
yards'  distant,  and  marched  them  and  the  children  with  their 
heads  prone  to  the  circle,  where  they  were  made  to  lie  down 
and  be  covered  up  with  boughs,  rugs,  bark,  and  whatever 
was  at  hand.  This  being  done,  the  whole  force  of  the 
assembled  tribes  came  up,  running,  shouting,  and  striking 
their  shields  with  their  clubs,  and  using  a  roarer  which 
produced  the  most  fearful  and  unnatural  sounds.  A  sort  of 
warlike  pantomime  was  then  enacted,  and  the  women  and 
children,  closely  covered  up,  were  frightened  out  of  their  wits, 
and  cried  out  lustily.     Suddenly  the  fearful  noises  ceased. 


576        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch 

and  all  the  men  rushed  out  of  the  ring  and  seemed  to  be 
engaged  in  a  fearful  fight,  spears  and  boomerangs  flying 
about  in  hundreds.  This,  he  was  told,  was  the  end,  but  to 
me  it  seems  clear  that  was  but  the  beginning  of  the 
ceremonies,  being  the  time  when  the  contingents  have 
arrived,  and  before  the  final  part  when  the  boys  who  are  to 
be  initiated  are  taken  from  their  mothers. 


The  Kabbarah  Ceremonies 

I  have  met  with  a  notice  of  these  ceremonies  in  Breton's 
work,^  dating  back  to  1830,  and  I  extract  it  to  make  more 
complete  the  fragmentary  account  which  I  have  been  able 
to  piece  together  of  the  ceremonies  of  initiation  of  the  tribes 
of  the  Hunter  River  country,  which  include  the  blacks  of 
Port  Stephens  ;  and  to  the  same  great  group  those  of  Port 
Macquarie  may  be  added. 

Breton  says:  "There  is  a  remarkable  ceremony  performed 
at  Port  Macquarie.  It  is  called  Kabbarah.  The  summit  of 
a  low  hill  is  chosen  for  the  scene  of  this  singular  rite.  The 
surface  is  carefully  cleaned  from  grass,  and  the  bark  of  any 
trees  that  may  be  near  is  carved  into  rude  representations  of 
different  animals.  After  this,  a  fire  is  lighted  in  the  centre, 
and  the  youth  who  is  to  be  initiated  is  held  by  the  heels, 
while  the  natives  dance  round  him  uttering  loud  shouts.  .  A 
man  called  the  Cradji,  or  *  doctor,'  then  bites  out  the  upper 
front  tooth  on  the  left  side  ;  or,  if  he  fails,  it  is  knocked  out. 
After  the  extraction  of  the  tooth  the  youth  is  supposed  to 
have  arrived  at  the  age  of  manhood,  and  is  then  at  liberty 
to  steal  a  woman  from  another  tribe.  No  female  is  permitted 
to  be  present  at  the  celebration  of  the  rites,  nor  may  she 
approach  within  several  hundred  yards  of  the  spot,  and  any 
attempt  on  the  part  of  a  woman  to  witness  the  ceremony 
would  be  punished  by  instant  death.  The  Kabbarah  always 
includes  several  tribes,  some  of  whom  come  from  a  distance 
of  some  hundreds  of  miles,  and  probably  much  farther.  As 
a  preliminary  to  the  meeting,  two  messengers  are  despatched 

'  Excursions   in   New  South    Wales   during  the  years    1830-31-32-33,  by 
Lieut.  Breton,  R.N. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  577 

from  each  tribe  intending  to  be  present ;  and  these  men, 
together  with  the  leading  men  of  the  Port  Macquarie  natives, 
form  a  council  by  whose  authority  wars  are  proclaimed, 
boundaries  are  settled,  and  the  tribes  prevented  from  inter- 
fering with  or  encroaching  on  each  other." 

The  author  says  that  Corborn  Comleroi  are  present  at 
the  meeting.  This  means  that  the  Port  Macquarie  tribe 
and  the  Kamilaroi  intermarried,  and  that  therefore  they  met 
at  the  initiation  ceremonies,  just  as  the  tribes  enumerated  by 
me  met  at  the  Kuringal.  He  further  says  that  while  the 
meeting  lasted  the  tribes  attending  it  were  on  the  most 
friendly  terms. 

I  have  unfortunately  no  information  farther  north  than 
Port  Stephens.  But  that  which  I  have  been  able  to  record  of 
the  tribal  ceremonies  so  far  north  of  the  Yuin  country  con- 
firms the  statements  of  the  old  men  of  that  tribe,  that  the 
Kuringal  ceremonies  extend  "  at  least  as  far  as  Newcastle," 
that  is,  as  far  as  the  Hunter  River,  and  the  tribes  of  which 
the  Geawe-gal  is  one.  The  evidence  of  Mr.  W.  Scott  as  to 
the  tribe  at  Port  Stephens  makes  it  clear,  to  my  mind,  that 
what  he  saw  was  part  of  the  initiation  ceremonies  exactly  of 
the  Bunan  type.  The  figure  described  by  Mr.  Scott  is  the 
analogue  of  Daramulun ;  the  division  of  the  men  present 
shows  the  two  moieties  of  the  intermarrying  community, 
whether  of  the  social  or  the  local  organisation  I  have  no 
means  of  knowing.  But  since  the  Kamilaroi  attended  the 
Kabbarah  at  Port  Macquarie,  it  may  be  that  the  "  up-country 
blacks"  mentioned  by  Mr.  Scott  were  of  that  nation.  If  so, 
there  must  have  been  some  common  organisation  which 
admitted  of  intermarriage. 

The  account  which  1  have  quoted  from  Lieutenant 
Breton  is  valuable,  because  it  was  written  when  the  olden - 
time  customs  were  still  in  full  strength. 

The  statements  as  to  the  Gringai  and  other  tribes  of  the 
Hunter  River  are  evidently  from  native  informants,  who  told 
all  that  it  was  lawful  to  tell  to  an  uninitiated  person.  What 
Mr.  Scott  says  is  from  observation  of  occurrences,  parts  of 
ceremonies  which  were  of  such  a  character  that  a  blackfellow 
would  not  reveal  them  to  an  outsider.      It  is  perhaps  hardly 

2  P 


578        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

necessary  to  say  that  the  roaring  and  booming  noise  which 
Mr.  Scott  heard  was  the  sound  of  the  bull-roarers  at  the 
lesser  enclosure,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  the  lesser  Bunan 
of  the  Kuringal.  No  better  description  could  be  given  of 
the  uproar  made  by  near  a  score  of  bull-roarers,  as  I  heard 
it  at  the  Kurnai  JeraeiL 

I  feel  no  doubt  that  the  equivalent  of  the  Yuin  Kuringal 
extends  up  the  coast,  northwards,  as  far  as  Port  Macquarie. 

Before  proceeding  to  describe  the  Burbling  of  the 
Wiradjuri,  which  is  the  analogue  of  the  Kuringal,  I  shall 
complete  what  I  have  to  record  as  to  the  ceremonies  of 
tribes  on  the  east  coast,  leaving  to  a  later  part  an  account 
of  those  of  the  tribes  on  the  coast  of  southern  Queensland. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  any  information  as  to 
the  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  tribes  along  the  great  extent 
of  coast  from  Port  Macquarie  to  the  boundary  of  Queensland, 
where  we  find  the  Chepara  tribe. 

Ceremonies  of  the  Chepara  Tribe 

Its  initiation  ceremonies  were  held  when  the  principal 
Headman,  after  consultation  with  the  other  men  of  import- 
ance, sent  his  messenger  {Buira)  (usually  his  Kanil,  that  is, 
sister's  son),  who  carried  with  him  two  objects  which  certified 
his  message.  One  was  the  message-stick  called  Kabugabul- 
bajeru,  the  markings  on  which  are  always  the  same,  and 
are  well  known  to  the  Headmen  as  calling  the  people 
together.  The  other  is  the  Bribbun,  or  bull-roarer.  This 
latter  is  kept  very  secret  and  hidden  by  the  Headman  until 
wanted  for  the  ceremonies.  It  is  held  to  possess  a  mysterious 
and  secret  power.  Women  and  children  are  not  permitted 
to  see  it,  and  if  seen  by  a  woman,  or  if  shown  to  one  by  a 
man,  the  penalty  is  death,  in  the  latter  case  to  both. 

The  messenger  goes  the  whole  round  of  the  tribe,  carry- 
ing with  him  not  only  the  message-stick  and  bull-roarer,  but 
also  a  spear,  to  the  point  of  which  is  attached  a  bag  contain- 
ing small  quartz  crystals.  These  emblems  he  shows  to  the 
Headmen  of  the  several  clans,  who  in  due  course  bring  their 
people  to  the  ceremonies. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE 


579 


These  ceremonies  are 
the  occasion  of  a  gather- 
ing, not  only  of  the  Chepara 
clans,  but  of  outlying  tribes, 
as,  for  instance,  those  of 
the  Richmond  River,  across 
the  border  of  New  South 
Wales. 

As  the  messenger  has 
to  go  the  round  of  all  the 
Chepara  clans,  it  takes  a 
long  time  before  the  whole 
of  the  community  is 
gathered  together.  On 
arriving  at  a  camp  he 
approaches  it  at  sundown, 
and  concealing  himself  at 
a  little  distance,  he  sounds 
the  bull-roarer.  The  men 
hearing  this,  jump  up,  hold- 
ing their  spears  and  shields 
aloft,  and  raise  a  great 
shout.  The  women  gather 
in  a  circle  and  sing  a  song 
which  is  always  used  at  this 
time,  drumming  on  their 
rolled  -  up  skin  rugs  held 
between  their  thighs. 

The  men  go  out,  in 
reply  to  the  Bribbun,  to 
where  the  messenger  is 
concealed,  simulating  sleep 
or  a  sort  of  trance.  The 
bull-roarer  is  exhibited  by 
him  to  the  Headman,  and 
they  return  to  the  camp,  fig  35. 
taking  the  messenger  with 
them. 

The    following    morning   the    men     being    painted    and 


1)  MKIBHUN  (JK  IHK  CUKHAKA 
TRIBK.  (2)  WABULKAN  OK  THE  CHE- 
PARA TRIBE.         X  \. 


58o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

decorated  with  feathers  and  dingo  tails,  the  women  being 
also  painted,  start  with  the  messenger  for  the  trysting- 
place. 

While  the  contingents  are  being  collected,  those  who  are 
calling  them  to  the  Bora  prepare  the  ground.  A  space  of 
ground  of  nearly  a  mile  in  circumference  is  prepared  by 
stripping  the  bark  from  the  trees,  and  marking  them,  as 
well  as  clearing  away  the  bushes.  Within  this  the  women 
and  children  are  not  permitted  to  enter,  and  therefore  the 
camps  are  situated  at  a  distance  from  it.  When  a  contingent 
arrives  near  the  Bora  ground,  it  being  arranged  that  it  shall 
be  about  sundown,  the  messenger  goes  on  ahead,  so  as  to 
arrive  about  half-an-hour  before  the  party.  He  sounds  the 
bull-roarer,  on  hearing  which  the  men  at  the  Bora  camp  raise 
a  great  shout,  and  the  women  drum  on  the  skin  rugs  and 
sing.  Here  again  the  messenger  sits  down  as  if  in  a  trance, 
while  the  arriving  party  is  received  by  the  men  who  have 
gone  out  from  their  camp,  and  kneel  in  a  row  at  one  side  of 
the  Bora  ground.  The  new  arrivals  approach  in  a  crouching 
attitude,  their  women  making  as  much  smoke  as  possible 
with  fire-sticks.  On  reaching  the  outside  of  the  Bora  circle, 
they  are  received  with  a  great  shout,  and  a  ceremonial  dance 
performed  by  those  who  have  arranged  the  ground. 

The  initiation  ceremonies  take  place  in  the  cleared 
ground,  and  extend  over  many  days,  during  which  panto- 
mimic performances  take  place.  The  first  commencement 
of  the  Bora  itself  is  marked  by  the  boys  to  be  initiated 
being  taken  from  the  women  and  painted  red  in  a  line 
straight  down  the  back,  front,  and  sides.  Each  one  sits 
down  with  his  head  covered  with  his  rug,  and  he  is  told  that 
he  must  look  down  on  the  ground.  During  this  time  the 
women  and  children  silently  leave  the  camp,  and  the  boys 
then  being  told  to  look  round  are  surprised  to  find  them 
gone. 

The  boys  are  now  called  Kippers,  and  are  under  the 
control  of  certain  men,  who  see  that  they  keep  their  heads 
covered  and  obey  orders.  They  are  only  permitted  to 
speak  to  these  men  when  they  require  something,  and  then 
only  in  a  subdued  voice.      All  the  time  during  the  ceremonies. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  581 

they  are  kept  in  a  crouching  position,  and  with  their  heads 
covered  and  their  eyes  cast  down. 

The  various  ceremonial  performances,  which  are  held 
both  in  the  daytime  and  at  night,  are  arranged  while  the 
Kippers  have  their  heads  covered  ;  and  when  told  to  look 
round  they  are  expected  to  show  surprise,  which  no  doubt 
they  feel. 

In  the  middle  of  the  clear  space  in  which  the  ceremonies 
take  place,  a  small  tree  is  taken  up  and  placed  with  its 
roots  in  the  air,  and  around  it  saplings,  peeled  of  their  bark, 
are  placed,  the  whole  being  tied  together  with  strips  of 
bark,  thus  making  a  sort  of  small  enclosure.  The  saplings 
are  painted  with  ochre.  On  this  structure  one  of  the 
medicine-men  stands  with  a  cord  hanging  out  of  his  mouth. 
He  is  said  to  represent  a  supernatural  being  called  Maaviba. 
The  medicine-men  are  called  Bujerum,  and  the  one  just 
spoken  of  is  the  principal  one  of  the  tribe,  and  is  believed 
to  ascend  at  night  to  the  sky  to  see  Maamba  about  the 
welfare  of  the  tribes -people.  During  this  part  of  the 
ceremonies  the  initiated  men  sit  round  the  upturned  tree 
and  chant  a  song  in  low  tones,  which  is  only  used  at  this 
time,  and  which  it  is  forbidden  for  the  women  to  hear.  A 
woman  who  was  found  to  have  listened  to  this  song  would 
be  killed.^ 

My  valued  correspondent,  Mr.  Tom  Petrie,  tells  me  that 
he  knows  of  this  ceremony  as  being  used  by  tribes  beyond 
the  Turrbal,  and  he  confirms  the  statement  that  women  who 
heard  this  low  chant  were  killed. 

At  one  part  of  the  ceremonies  the  men,  while  the  Kippers 
are  lying  down,  make  a  long  and  narrow  fire,  on  one  side  of 
which  they  sit,  while  the  boys,  who  have  been  roused  up, 
sit  on  the  other  in  a  sleepy  state.  The  men  pretend  that 
it  is  stormy,  and  that  it  rains,  making  noises  to  represent 
the  wind.  Then  a  number  of  the  men  hop  about  and  croak 
like  frogs.  Finally  the  men  all  dance  and  then  extinguish 
the  fire  by  jumping  on  it  with  their  feet.  In  the  darkness 
the  Kippers  are  led  back  to  their  camp. 

Among  the  pantomimic  representations  by  the  men  are 

*  J.  Gibson. 


582        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

those  of  flying-foxes  on  the  branches  of  the  trees,  of  bees  flying 
about,  of  curlews,  and  of  many  other  creatures.  It  seems 
to  me  that  in  these  we  may  see  the  survivals  of  the  totems 
which  have  otherwise  disappeared  in  this  tribe ;  and  this 
doubtless  represents  a  still  more  advanced  stage  towards  the 
obliteration  of  the  social  organisation  than  is  shown  by  the 
totems  of  the  Kurnai  and  Yuin. 

Besides  these  representations  of  animated  creatures 
there  are  others.  For  instance,  the  men  twist  ropes  of 
grass  and  make  disguises  of  them.  Mounds  of  grass  are 
also  built  up  in  the  centre  of  the  cleared  space,  round  which 
the  men  dance.  Another  is  that  the  men  stand  in  a  row 
with  fire-sticks  in  their  hands,  and  wave  them  about.  The 
Kippers  are  told  that  the  whole  country  is  on  fire. 

At  the  later  part  of  the  ceremonies,  the  Kippers  are  no 
longer  covered  up  but  walk  about,  being  now  initiated,  and 
accompany  the  men  to  the  new  camp  where  the  women  and 
children  are,  and  which  has  been  made  at  some  place  fixed 
upon  beforehand.  Here  there  is  a  ceremonial  fight  between 
the  several  clans  of  the  tribe,  which  the  Kippers  see,  but  do 
not  take  a  part  in. 

The  last  ceremony  of  all  is  that  a  large  circle  is  made 
on  the  fighting  ground,  with  a  fire  in  the  middle  of  it,  to 
which  the  Kippers  are  brought.  There  they  find  all  their 
mothers  (own  and  tribal),  each  with  a  branch  in  her  hand, 
dancing  together.  On  seeing  them,  the  women  throw  the 
branches  down,  and  each  rubs  down  the  back  of  her  son 
with  a  bunch  of  grass,  and  goes  away.  The  man  who,  as 
the  Bujerum,  has  charge  of  the  Bribbun,  comes  and  shows 
it  to  the  boys  for  the  first  time,  also  giving  to  each  one  a 
small  one  called  Wabulkan,  whicb  is  a  sort  of  warrant  to 
them  and  others  that  they  have  been  initiated.  It  is  sup- 
posed to  possess,  but  in  a  smaller  degree,  the  magical  power 
and  virtue  of  the  larger  one,  the  Bribbun,  and  is  carefully 
concealed  by  the  owner. 

At  one  part  of  the  ceremonies  the  Bujerum  holds  up  a 
large  quartz  crystal  and  makes  it  flash  in  the  sunlight. 
The  Kippers  are  told  that  it  came  from  Maamba,  and  that 
those  who  swallow  a  piece  of  it  will  be  able  to  fly  a  long 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  58; 

way  out  of  sight,  that  is,  to  become  medicine-men,  and  go 
up  to  the  sky  like  the  Bujeruin. 

This  it  seems  was  the  only  part  of  the  ceremonies  which 
approached  to  the  magical  practices  of  the  more  southern 
tribes,  nor  was  there  a  tooth  knocked  out  by  the  Chepara. 
The  Kipper,  after  the  ceremonies,  was  prohibited  from 
eating  female  opossums,  and  indeed  the  only  food  that  he 
might  eat  during  the  period  of  his  probation  was  kangaroo, 
male  opossum,  native  bear,  and  honey.  If  he  disregards 
any  of  these  restrictions,  and  -is  found  to  have  eaten  for- 
bidden food,  he  is  first  warned  by  his  kindred,  and  if  he 
still  continues  to  do  it,  is  killed  by  others  not  related 
to  him. 

After  a  young  man  has  been  to  three  of  these  ceremonies, 
he  may  eat  of  the  forbidden  food,  and  then  takes  part  in  the 
tribal  combats  which  follow  the  ceremonies  ;  is  in  fact  a  full 
man  and  may  take  his  promised  wife. 

The  Wiradjuri  Burbung 

Before  speaking  of  some  other  Queensland  tribes,  which 
have  four  sub-classes  and  descent  in  the  male  line,  it  will  be 
convenient  to  consider  the  Burbung  of  the  Wiradjuri  and 
others,  who  have  ceremonies  which  are  intimately  related  to 
the  Kuringal. 

My  account  of  the  Wiradjuri  ceremonies  is  derived 
mainly  from  the  statements  of  the  man  J/«m- kangaroo 
before  mentioned. 

When  a  Headman  of  one  of  the  great  local  divisions  of 
the  tribe  finds  that  there  are  a  number  of  boys  ready  for  the 
Burbung,  he  consults  with  the  other  old  men,  and  if  they  are 
all  agreed,  he  sends  out  a  messenger  {Duran-duran)  to  gather 
tlie  people  together.  The  messenger  is  of  the  same  sub-class 
and  totem  as  the  sender,  as  must  be  also  the  person  to 
whom  he  is  sent.  Thus,  supposing  that  the  Headman  were 
a  Kubbi-butharung  (flying-squirrel),  the  messenger  and  the 
old  man  to  whom  he  was  sent  would  both  be  the  same. 
The  messenger  carries  a  buU-roarcr  {Mudjigang  or  Bobu),  a 
man's  belt  {Gulir\  a    kilt   {Buran    or    Tala-bulg)   made   of 


584        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

kangaroo-rat  skin,  a  head  string  {Ulungau-ir),  and  a  white 
head-band  {Kambrun). 

On  arriving  at  the  place  he  is  sent  to,  he  gives  the 
message  to  the  Headman,  who  then  assembles  the  initiated 
men  at  the  council-place  {Ngulubul).  The  messenger  shows 
the  bull-roarer  to  the  old  men,  and  delivers  his  message, 
which  is  impressed  on  his  memory  by  markings  cut  on  a 
message-stick  given  him  by  his  sender,  or  by  the  strands  of 
the  man's  kilt,  which  are  used  for  the  same  purpose. 

The  recipient  of  the  message  then  sends  the  message 
on  by  a  Duran-duran  of  his  own,  to  the  Headman  of  the 
next  great  local  group,  together  with  the  articles  above 
enumerated.  So  the  message  travels  through  the  whole 
tribe,  and  also  the  adjoining  tribes,  who  attend  the  Burbung. 
In  the  instance  given,  it  would  pass  through  the  whole 
community  by  means  of  the  Kubbi  sub-class  and  the 
Bnthartmg  totem  ;  and  its  members  make  it  known  to  their 
fellow-tribesmen.  It  must  be  remembered  that  a  class,  or 
sub-class,  or  a  totem,  cannot  initiate  its  own  boys,  but  calls 
in  those  of  the  intermarrying  class,  sub- class,  and  totem 
to  assist  in  doing  it.  Having  reached  the  further  limit, 
the  messenger  returns,  bringing  with  him  the  emblematic 
articles,  and  accompanied  by  the  tribes-people,  who  join 
the  party  on  its  way  back  to  the  chosen  Burbung  ground, 
where  each  contingent  camps  on  the  side  nearest  to  its  own 
country. 

Meanwhile  the  originators  of  the  Burbung  have  prepared 
the  ground,  the  circular  mound,  and  the  path  to  the  Gumbu^ 
which  is  the  same  as  the  lesser  Bunan  of  the  Yuin.  It  is 
also  called  by  the  Wiradjuri,  Pataguna,  and  it  is  lawful  to 
speak  of  it  at  the  Burbung,  also  of  the  Tarumbul,  or  track, 
which  leads  from  the  Burbung  to  the  Pataguna,  by  those 
names.  But  it  is  not  lawful  to  speak  of  the  latter  place  by 
its  secret  name  Gumbu,  in  the  public  camp  or  near  women 
and  the  uninitiated.  The  ceremonies,  as  a  whole,  are  spoken 
of  as  the  Guringal,  that  is  "  belonging  to  the  bush,"  or,  in 
other  words,  the  forest,  or  open  country. 

When  the  whole  community  has  arrived  at  the  Burbung 
ground,  the  ceremonies  are  commenced  by  the  men  carrying 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  585 

boughs,  headed  by  their  principal  man,  running  from  the 
council-place  to  each  of  the  separate  camps  and  gathering 
the  women  and  children  together.  The  men  then  shout  out 
the  name  of  each  place  from  which  a  contingent  has  come, 
and  the  women,  as  they  are  collected,  sing  one  of  the  songs 
belonging  to  the  Burbung.  At  the  main  ceremonies  the 
boys  are  seated  on  the  mound,  each  with  his  guardians 
(yMuriwung)  behind  him.  They  are  in  front  of  a  structure 
made  of  green  boughs,  and  behind  this  the  women  crouch 
together,  closely  covered  with  boughs  and  blankets. 

Meanwhile  the  younger  initiated  men  who  have  been 
hidden  in  the  scrub  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off  run  up 
shouting,  headed  by  the  medicine-man  {Ngoura-turai  or 
Wulla-mulla),  who  sounds  the  bull-roarer,  to  which  he  is 
believed  to  have  imparted  great  power  by  means  of  magical 
quartz  crystals  {Ngalun)  brought  up  from  his  inside.  In 
order  to  increase  the  din,  and  thus  to  frighten  the  women 
the  more,  each  man  carries  a  long  strip  of  bark  in  his  hand, 
with  which  he  strikes  resounding  blows  on  the  ground  as 
he  runs. 

The  boys  are  now  seized  by  their  guardians  and  hurried 
off  to  the  forest,  followed  by  the  men,  one  man  remaining  to 
see  that  the  women  do  not  look  after,  or  follow  them.  Each 
boy  is  now  rubbed  over  with  red  ochre,  and  clothed  with  a 
rug  or  blanket,  which  conceals  the  whole  of  him  except  his 
face,  over  which  the  upper  part  hangs  like  a  hood. 

The  ceremonies  arc  marked  off  into  various  stages  by 
particular  representations.  For  instance,  the  men  strip  off 
from  a  tree  near  the  Gumbu  a  spiral  piece  of  bark  round  the 
bole,  from  the  limbs  to  the  ground,  which  represents  the 
path  from  the  sky  to  the  earth,  and  they  cut  on  the  ground 
the  figure  of  Daramulun,  who  is  not  the  Supernatural  Being 
of  the  Yuin  beliefs,  but  the  "  boy,"  or  son,  of  Baiame.  He 
is  always  represented  as  having  only  one  leg,  the  other 
terminating  in  a  sharp  point  of  bone.  There  is  also  figured 
on  the  ground  the  tomahawk  which  Daramulun  let  fall  as 
he  slipped  down  from  the  tree  before  mentioned  to  the 
ground  ;  then  two  footprints  of  an  emu  a  little  distance  from 
each  other,  made  when  trying  to  escape  from  Daramulun. 


586        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Finally  there  is  the  figure  of  the  emu  where  it  fell  when  he 
killed  it. 

At  each  of  these  stages  there  is  a  magic  dance  in  which 
the  medicine-men,  who  are  rubbed  over  with  powdered  char- 
coal, exhibit  their  powers  and  show  things  which  they 
appear  to  bring  up  from  their  insides.  At  the  figure  of 
Darauiulun  a  special  song  is  called   Wondung. 

At  the  most  sacred  of  all  these  places,  namely  the  Gumbu^ 
there  is  the  magic  fire  called  Gudji-ivirri,  which  is  one  of 
the  words  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  speak  out  of  the  Burbung 
ground,  the  common  term  for  fire  being  ive.  The  medicine- 
men and  the  other  men  dance  at  the  Gudji-ivirri,  and  these 
dances  are  also  called   Wondung. 

During  this  time  the  two  guardians  have  been  instructing 
the  boy  in  his  duties :  not  to  take  notice  of  anything  that  is 
done  to  him  or  to  show  surprise  or  fear  at  anything,  not  to 
tell  lies  or  to  play  with  children,  but  to  behave  himself  as 
becomes  a  man.  Above  all,  not  to  go  near  women,  and 
especially  not  to  reveal  anything  that  he  has  seen  or  heard 
at  the  Burbung,  under  pain  of  being  killed. 

At  the  place  where  the  tooth  is  knocked  out  the  boy  is 
placed  with  his  feet  in  two  holes.  One  of  his  guardians 
stands  behind  him  and  holds  him  fast  by  the  arms,  which 
are  placed  down  his  sides,  while  the  other  stands  at  his 
right  side  and  holds  his  head  back,  so  that  his  eyes  look 
upwards  and  he  cannot  see  what  goes  on.  In  front  and  all 
round  are  the  medicine -men  dancing  quite  naked.  Some 
old  medicine-man  pushes  the  gums  back  from  the  upper 
incisor  of  the  central  pair,  and  placing  his  lower  incisors 
against  it,  he  jerks  it  violently  upwards.  If  it  will  not 
come  out  without  being  punched  out,  it  is  said  that  the 
boy  has  been  too  much  with  the  women  and  played  too 
much  with  the  little  girls. 

J/«rr/-kangaroo  said  that  his  tooth  came  out  at  the  first 
jerk,  but  that  of  the  boy  next  to  him  had  to  be  knocked  out 
by  the  medicine-man,  who  some  time  before  at  the  camp  had 
looked  earnestly  at  him  and  said,  "  You  have  been  too  much 
with  the  women,  and  some  of  their  Gumilga  (waist  fringe) 
has  got   into   you."      He   then    rubbed   the   boy's  legs  and 


i 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  587 

produced  some  pieces  of  a  woman's  skirt  from  them.  When 
he  found  at  the  Gumbu  that  the  tooth  would  not  come  out 
by  jerking  it  with  his  own,  he  proceeded  to  rub  the  boy's 
neck,  and  again  produced  a  lot  of  Gumilga,  which  he  said 
"  held  the  tooth  fast."  The  tooth,  when  knocked  out,  was 
taken  care  of  by  one  of  the  medicine-men. 

Among  the  spectacular  representations  at  the  Burbung 
there  is  one  in  which  the  head  medicine-man  goes  away  for 
a  time,  and  then  returns  dressed  up  in  bunches  and  tufts  of 
grass,  saying  that  he  had  been  for  them  to  Baiame's  camp. 

After  a  great  number  of  pantomimic  representations,  the 
secret  ceremonies  being  then  completed,  the  men  return  to 
the  main  camp  with  the  boys.  On  the  way  back  the  latter 
are  severely  cautioned  against  telling  anything  about  the 
ceremonies  to  women  or  persons  not  initiated,  and  to  enforce 
this  the  medicine-men  strike  the  ground  with  pieces  of  bark 
to  imitate  the  bursting  of  stones  heated  in  the  fire,  with  which 
the  boys  are  told  Daramulun  will  injure  or  kill  them  if  they 
tell  any  of  the  secrets. 

The  two  last  stations  on  the  way  back  to  the  camp  are, 
first,  a  halt  to  paint  and  dress  the  boys  as  men  ;  and  second, 
for  the  men  to  wash  off  all  the  charcoal  powder  used  in  the 
ceremonies. 

When  they  are  nearing  the  camp  their  approach  is 
heralded  by  shouts  of  "  Yau  !  " 

Meanwhile  the  women  have  formed  a  new  camp  at  a 
place  fixed  on  before  the  ceremonies,  and  at  several  miles' 
distance  from  the  former  camp.  They  prepare  there  a  place 
called  gud7,  that  is,  a  camp  or  hut  of  boughs  with  a  fire 
in  front  of  it.  In  it  the  boy's  mother  and  sisters  stand,  and 
when  his  guardians  take  the  novice  into  this  place,  these 
women  look  at  him  as  if  looking  at  a  stranger  ;  then  they 
strike  him  with  boughs,  and  on  this  he  runs  off  into  the  bush, 
accompanied  by  his  guardians. 

After  three  or  four  days,  these  guardians  return,  bringing 
the  novices  with  them,  who  are  placed  on  a  long  embankment, 
called  Mim-bam-miimbia,  made  of  logs  and  bark,  beyond 
which  are  all  the  women  watching  them.  After  sitting  on 
the  embankment   for   about   five    minutes,  the    novices   are 


588        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

surrounded  by  the  men  shouting  "/rr  /  xvau  ! "  and  are  taken 
away  again,  having  been  finally  shown  to  their  mothers. 

They  remain  away  in  the  bush  for  as  long  as  twelve 
months,  not  being  allowed  to  approach  the  camp  or  to  come 
near  a  woman.  They  are  forbidden  during  their  probation, 
indeed  even  after  it,  until  permitted  by  the  old  men,  to  eat, 
among  other  things,  the  emu,  spiny  ant-eater,  female 
opossum,  kangaroo-rat,  bandicoot,  etc.  The  emu  is  Baiame's 
food.  Among  many  restrictive  observances,  they  are  not 
permitted  to  go  to  sleep  at  night  until  the  Milky  Way  is 
straight  across  the  sky. 

When  the  old  men  are  satisfied  that  the  probation  has 
been  sufficient,  and  that  the  boys  have  duly  observed  the 
restrictions,  one  of  them  goes  out  and  tells  them  that  if  they 
act  properly  and  do  not  speak  to  women  for  a  little  longer, 
they  will  be  permitted  to  come  to  the  camp.  It  is  at  such 
visits  that  the  old  men  gradually  relax  the  food  rules,  for 
instance  by  rubbing  the  boy  with  the  fat  of  the  female 
opossum,  which  makes  him  able  to  eat  that  animal. 

The  Burbung  of  the  Wonghibon 

To  the  north  of  the  Riverina  branch  of  the  Wiradjuri, 
whose  ceremonies  I  have  now  briefly  described,  there  is  the 
Wonghi  or  Wonghibon  tribe,  described  to  me  long  ago  by 
Mr.  A.  L.  P.  Cameron,  and  since  reported  on  in  his  valuable 
paper  "  On  Some  Tribes  of  New  South  Wales."  ^  I  now 
quote  his  more  complete  description  of  the  Burbung  of  that 
tribe. 

The  ceremonies  of  initiation  are  secret,  and  at  them  none 
but  the  men  of  the  tribe  who  have  been  initiated  attend  with 
the  novices.  At  the  spot  where  the  ceremonies  are  to  be 
performed  a  large  oval  space  is  cleared.  The  old  men  of 
the  tribe  conduct  the  ceremonies,  and  the  medicine-man  of 
the  tribe  is  the  master  of  them.  Part  of  the  proceedings 
consist  in  the  knocking  out  of  a  tooth,  and  giving  a  new 
designation  to  the  novice,  indicating  the  change  from  youth 
to    manhood.       When    the    tooth    is    knocked    out,    a    loud 

'  Joiirn.  Anthrop.  Inst.  vol.  xiv.  p.  344. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  589 

humming  noise  is  heard,  which  is  made  by  a  bull-roarer. 
Women  are  forbidden  to  be  present  at  these  ceremonies,  and 
should  one  by  accident  or  otherwise  witness  them,  the  penalty 
is  death.  The  penalty  for  revealing  the  secrets  is  probably 
the  same. 

When  everything  is  prepared,  the  women  and  children 
are  covered  with  boughs,  and  the  men  retire  with  the  young 
fellows  who  are  to  be  initiated  to  a  little  distance.  It  is 
said  that  the  youths  are  sent  away  a  short  distance  one  by 
one,  and  that  they  are  each  met  in  turn  by  a  being  called 
Thurmulun,  who  takes  the  youth  to  a  distance,  kills  him, 
and  in  some  instances  cuts  him  up,  after  which  he  restores 
him  to  life,  and  knocks  out  a  tooth. 

This  account  may  be  divided  into  two  parts  :  the  first, 
which  contains  matters  which  it  is  not  unlawful  for  an 
mitiated  man  to  reveal  to  a  stranger  ;  the  second,  giving  an 
account  of  matters  the  true  nature  of  which  it  is  unlawful  to 
reveal  to  an  uninitiated  person.  The  account  of  Thurmulun 
and  his  dealings  with  the  novice  is  just  what  is  told  to  the 
women  and  the  children. 

It  shows  very  well  how  impossible  it  is  for  an  outsider 
to  obtain  full  information  as  to  these  ceremonies.  Mr. 
Cameron  has  been  acquainted  for  many  years  with  the 
Wonghibon  tribe,  and  yet  the  men  have  carefully  kept  from 
him  the  real  secrets  of  the  Burbung. 

I  have  spoken  before  of  the  sequence  of  the  groups  of 
tribes  along  the  course  of  the  Murray  River  from  Wentworth 
upwards.  I  need  not  again  enumerate  them,  but  merely 
point  out  that  the  Ta-tathi  are  situated  farthest  down-stream, 
being  on  their  western  boundary  in  touch  with  the  tribes  of 
the  River  Darling,  of  which  the  Wiimbaio  are  my  example. 
The  Baraba-baraba  are  the  farthest  up-stream,  with  the 
Bureppa-bureppa  akin  to  them,  as  speaking  a  dialect  of  the 
same  language,  on  the  Lower  Loddon  River  in  Victoria. 
On  the  Victorian  side  of  the  Murray  the  sequence  of  tribes, 
having  the  two-class  system  with  the  names  Mukwara  and 
Kilpara,  commences  with  the  Burra-burra  about  Reedy  Lake, 
who  adjoin  the  Bureppa-bureppa,  whose  class  names  are 
those  of  the  Kulin  tribes,  namely  Bunjil  and  Waang.     The 


590        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

tribe    lowest    down -stream    on    the   Victorian    side    is    the 
Grangema,  who  adjoin  the  Wiimbaio. 

Through  all  this  great  stretch  of  country  the  tribes  with 
the  class-names  Mukwara  and  Kilpara  have  the  same  social 
organisation  and  ceremonies  of  the  Burbung  type. 

The  Ta-tathi  Purbung 

As  an  illustration  of  this  statement  I  take  the  Ta-tathi, 
whose  ceremonies  were  attended  by  some  of  the  Wotjobaluk 
people  on  one  side,  and  the  VVathi-wathi  tribe  near  Balranald 
on  the  other. 

About  1870  the  Ta-tathi  sent  a  messenger  to  the 
Wotjobaluk  to  call  some  of  them  to  attend  their  Purbung, 
near  Euston.  Among  those  of  the  Wotjobaluk  who  went 
were  my  informant  and  his  brother,  and  the  son  of  the  latter, 
who  was  taken  there  by  them  to  be  initiated  by  the  Ta- 
tathi.  On  reaching  Euston  under  the  guidance  of  the 
messenger,  the  old  men  of  the  Ta-tathi  decided  that  the 
Purbung  should  be  commenced  the  next  day.  Before  day-, 
break  the  people  were  all  ready,  and  there  were  present 
Ta-tathi,  Wathi-wathi,  Leitchi-Ieitchi  people,  v/ith  others,  and 
they  waited  for  the  sun  to  rise.  Three  boys  were  to  be 
initiated,  each  of  whom  sat  in  his  camp  with  his  mother 
and  father.  The  old  men  and  the  other  initiated  men  were 
at  their  "  talking-place."  When  the  sun  rose  they  all  ran 
to  the  camp  shouting,  and  each  boy  was  seized  by  his 
Ngierup}  who  dragged  him  by  the  arm  into  the  crowd  of 
men.  The  boy's  father  remained  in  the  camp,'^  where  the 
mother  was  covered  by  a  rug.  The  other  women  were 
collected  together  in  one  place. 

The  Wathi-wathi  Burbung 

I  add  to  the  account  of  the  Ta-tathi  Purbung  a  con- 
densed   description    of  the   ceremonies   of  the   Wathi-wathi 

1  Sister's  husband  or  wife's  brother. 

2  I  omitted  to  inquire  why  this  was  done.      Possibly  the  boy's  father  had 
not  been  initiated. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  591 

as  described  by  Mr.  Cameron.^  It  will  be  remembered  that 
my  Wotjobaluk  informant  said  that  among  those  who  were 
at  the  Ta-tathi  Purbung  were  the  Wathi-wathi. 

When  there  is  a  sufficient  number  of  youths  old  enough 
for  initiation,  the  Headman  sends  messengers  to  the  different 
sections  of  the  tribe  to  inform  them  that  a  Burbung  is  to  be 
held  at  a  certain  time  and  place.  To  each  messenger  there 
is  given  an  instrument  called  Pupanderi,  which  is  made  of 
the  fur  of  opossums  twisted  into  yarn,  plaited  in  a  circular 
form  and  fixed  on  a  piece  of  thin  flat  wood.  W^hen  the 
messenger  arrives,  he  shows  the  Pupanderi  to  the  men,  and 
announces  his  mission.  But  he  is  careful  not  to  allow  it  to 
be  seen  by  women  and  children  or  uninitiated  youths.  The 
following  day  they  depart,  and  on  arriving  near  the  place  of 
meeting,  advance  towards  the  camp  in  a  sinuous  manner, 
and  with  many  pantomimic  gestures.  When  the  whole  of 
the  tribe  is  assembled  at  the  Burbung  ground  each  messenger 
produces  his  Pupanderi  and  places  it  in  his  forchcad-band. 
On  seeing  this,  many  of  the  youths  who  know  what  it  is  the 
signal  of,  attempt  to  escape,  but  are  immediately  seized  by 
their  Waingapuis,  that  is  to  say,  the  men  who  have  the 
charge  of  them  during  the  initiation.  Each  youth  is  in- 
vested with  a  belt  made  from  the  twisted  fur  of  the  opossum, 
and  a  fringe  made  of  strips  of  skin  of  the  same  animal  is 
hung  in  front  of  it.  After  the  adjustment  of  this  belt  no 
further  attempt  to  escape  is  made. 

On  the  day  following,  the  women  and  children  are  made 
to  lie  down,  and  are  covered  with  boughs,  while  at  the  same 
time  each  of  the  youths  is  seized  by  his  Waingapui  and 
hurried  off  to  the  scene  of  initiation,  which  is  generally  in  a 
scrubby  place  two  or  three  hundred  yards  from  the  camp. 
Here  they  are  all  laid  on  the  ground  in  a  row,  covered  with 
opossum  skins,  and  left  in  that  position  for  an  hour  or  so, 
while  the  men  discuss  matters  connected  with  the  coming 
ordeal. 

They  are  then  raised  up,  but  the  rugs  are  kept  over 
their  heads,  and  they  are  kept  for  an  hour  or  more  in  this 
position.      Should  a  youth  require  anything,  the  Waingapui 

»  Op.  cit.  358. 


592        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

attends  to  his  wants.  Two  holes  are  made,  each  about  a 
foot  or  fifteen  inches  deep,  and  into  these  holes  the  feet  of 
the  youth  are  inserted  and  the  holes  filled  up.  This  is 
done  to  keep  him  steady  and  prevent  him  struggling.  The 
Waingapui  stands  behind  the  youth,  and  a  man  who  is 
accustomed  to  the  office  advances  with  a  mallet  and  a  small 
wooden  wedge,  which  is  driven  between  the  teeth  for  the 
purpose  of  loosening  them.  The  tooth  is  then  knocked  out 
and  kept  by  the  Waingapui. 

During  this  operation  one  of  the  tribe,  who  is  concealed 
in  the  scrub  at  some  distance,  whirls  the  humming  instrument 
round  his  head.  This  instrument  is  supposed  to  have  a 
wonderful  magic  influence,  and  is  called  Kalar.  After  the 
Burbung  it  is  usually  given  to  some  unmarried  man,  who 
either  carries  it  about  with  him,  or  conceals  it  in  some  safe 
place. 

After  the  knocking  out  of  the  tooth  is  complete,  the 
boys  are  brought  to  the  camp,  and  are  shown  to  the  women. 
They  are  then  taken  by  the  Waingapuis  into  the  bush, 
where  they  remain  secluded  fr6m  women  for  two  or  three 
months.  During  this  time  the  Waingapuis  live  with  them  ; 
and  their  return  to  the  camp  is  gradual.  Thus  the  young 
men  will  return  to  the  camp  first  at  night,  and  each  time  of 
returning  will  prolong  their  stay.  At  the  initiation  the 
names  by  which  they  are  known  are  changed. 

Everything  connected  with  the  Burbung  is  considered  as 
sacred,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  any  woman  found  prying 
into  its  mysteries  would  be  severely  punished,  probably 
killed.  It  is  said  that  should  a  Waingapui  ever  touch  a 
woman  in  any  way  while  the  Burbung  is  going  on  she  would 
become  seriously  ill. 

Initiation  confers  many  privileges  on  the  youths,  for 
they  are  allowed  in  due  course  to  eat  articles  of  food  which 
were  previously  forbidden  to  them.  They  also  leave  the 
camp  of  their  parents,  and  join  that  of  the  young  men,  and 
after  a  time  are  permitted  to  take  a  wife. 

I  have  now  spoken  of  the  tribes  which  have  ceremonies 
either  quite  the  same  as  those  of  the  Yuin  Kuringal,  or  in 
principle  the  same,  extending  over  a  large  part  of  South- 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  593 


east  Australia.  The  Burbung  extends  from  Wentworth 
eastward  to  the  boundary  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes,  and 
from  the  southern  boundaries  of  the  Baraba-baraba  tribe  to 
the  extreme  waters  of  the  Macquarie  River.  The  Kuringal, 
which  is  practically  the  same  as  the  Burbung,  extends 
certainly,  although  under  a  different  name,  from  Twofold  Bay 
along  the  coast  to  Port  Stephens.  Thence  it  appears  to 
range  to  the  Hastings  River,  and  the  ceremonies  of  the 
Chepara  tribe  show  some  marked  resemblances  to  it.  These 
ceremonies  extend  inland  to  varying  distances.  Roughly 
speaking,  it  may  be  said  that  in  the  south  they  join  the 
Burbung  of  the  Wiradjuri,  then  farther  northward  the 
ceremonies  of  the  Kamilaroi,  which  are  known  as  the  Bora. 
As,  however,  the  Bora  is  based  upon  similar  principles  with 
the  Burbung,  in  which  Baiaine  is  the  central  figure  of  magical 
tradition  and  power,  it  will  be  found  when  the  two  types  of 
ceremony,  the  Burbung  and  the  Bora,  are  critically  compared 
that  they  are  substantially  the  same,  differing  merely  in 
what  1  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  speak  of  as  ritual. 

One  thing  is  quite  clear  to  me,  namely,  that  a  man  who 
has  been  initiated  in  the  ceremonies  either  of  the  Kuringal, 
the  Burbung,  or  the  Bora,  would  be  accepted  as  one  of  the 
initiated  by  any  one  of  them  if  he  could  make  himself 
known  to  the  tribes-people  in  question.  My  own  experience 
is  in  point.  Thrice  I  have  met  blacks  who  were  strangers 
to  me,  but  who,  after  I  had  satisfied  them  that  I  was  one  of 
the  initiated,  have  at  once  accepted  me  in  that  character  as 
to  their  own  ceremonies. 

I  have  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  Bora  ceremonies  of 
the  Kamilaroi  tribes,  but  from  what  I  have  learned  they 
resemble  those  of  the  Wiradjuri. 

The  Bora  Ceremonies 

The  following  particulars  relate  to  the  Bora  as  it  was 
about  the  year  1830.  Any  section  of  a  tribe  might  hold  a 
Bora.  The  fathers  of  families,  say  at  Murrurundi,  might  tell 
their  Headman  that  they  had  sons  ready  to  be  initiated, 
and  he  would  order  the  Bora  to  be  held.      It  took  place  at 

2Q 


594        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  time  of  full  moon,  and  usually  at  the  same  spot,  in  the 
several  districts,  near  water  and,  if  possible,  on  level  ground, 
for  convenience  in  sitting  or  lying  down.  At  these  spots 
the  trees  were  marked  with  curious  devices  right  up  to  the 
limbs.      These  markings  are  traditional. 

When  the  Headman  had  determined  that  the  Bora 
should  be  held  at  some  one  of  the  usual  places,  notice  was 
given  to  that  effect  some  weeks  before,  so  that  all  young 
men  might  be  assembled. 

The  greatest  Bora  of  all  the  Kamilaroi  tribes  was 
always  held  at  Terryhaihai.  All  the  Headmen  were  there, 
and  the  oldest  was  the  principal,  or  president  of  them,  and 
he  could  carry  some  decisions  by  his  own  voice. 

At  the  time  and  place,  only  the  Headmen  come  together  ; 
the  youths  to  be  initiated  are  brought  to  them  later  on. 
They  are  then  instructed  in  the  rules  relating  to  food,  the 
support  of  the  aged  and  infirm,  and  their  duties  to  those 
who  have  large  families.  Old  and  infirm  people  stand  first 
for  their  share,  then  those  who  have  large  families. 

Hitherto  the  youth  has  been  Wonal,  that  is,  only 
allowed  to  eat  certain  animals,  and  only  the  females  of 
these  ;  but  he  is  now  allowed  to  eat  the  males  of  some  one 
animal,  say  opossum,  but  not  the  males  of  any  other.  The 
males  of  these  others  which  he  may  find  and  kill  he  must 
bring  home  to  the  camp  and  lay  at  the  huts  of  those  who 
from  sickness  or  infirmity  cannot  hunt,  or  who  have  large 
families.  He  is  also  told  that  he  may  eat  the  "  sugar-bag," 
that  is,  the  honey  from  one  particular  kind  of  tree. 

The  penalty  for  disregarding  these  food  rules  is  death. 
At  his  first  Bora  he  is  shown  the  bull -roarer,  and  is 
cautioned  on  pain  of  death  not  to  divulge  this  instrument 
to  women  or  children.  The  Kamilaroi  belt  was  worn  after 
the  last  Bora} 

At  the  Boras  following  the  first,  the  youth  is  advanced 
step  by  step  until  he  can  eat  of  all  animals  and  all  "  sugar- 
bags  "  ;  and  after  his  last  Bora  he  can  take  a  wife.  All  the 
lads  go  through  the  same  grades  and  the  same  experience. 

No  woman  or  child   is  allowed  to  come  near  the  Bora 

'  C.  Naseby. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  595 

ground.  No  tooth  was  knocked  out  by  the  Northern 
Kamilaroi,  but  was  by  the  blacks  of  Maitland  and  Newcastle.^ 

The  Kamilaroi  tribe  at  the  Gvvydir  River  used  a  bull- 
roarer  made  of  Brigalow  wood,"  or  the  Brimble,  and  it  is 
said  to  be  about  eight  inches  long  by  four  wide.  A  sinew 
is  tied  to  it,  or  sometimes  put  through  a  hole  in  the  small 
end.  The  young  of  both  sexes  are  forbidden  to  eat  of  the 
following  foods  :  snakes,  emu  eggs,  body  of  lace-lizard  (they 
might  eat  the  tail),  honey  from  a  gum-tree,  and  some  other 
things.^ 

I  am  unable  to  say  where  it  is  that  the  ceremonies  of 
the  Bora  type  are  replaced,  by  others,  but  it  probably  is 
where  the  Kamilaroi  class  system  ends  with  the  Bigambul, 
and  is  replaced  by  those  of  the  Ungorri  and  Emon  tribes. 
This  is  somewhere  about  the  Condamine  River. 

The  ceremonies  of  the  tribes  of  Southern  Queensland, 
which  are  held  at  the  great  tribal  meetings,  for  instance  at 
the  triennial  harvest  of  the  fruit  of  the  Bunya  trees,  may  be 
illustrated  by  those  of  the  Turrbal  tribe,  and  of  the  tribes 
within  a  radius  of  fifty  miles  of  Maryborough.  I  take 
the  former  in  the  first  place. 

The  Kurbin-aii  Ceremonies 

The  Turrbal  represented  a  large  group  of  allied  tribes, 
and  occupied  country  on  the  Brisbane  River.  It  is  now 
extinct;  but  in  1&52  it  numbered  about  four  hundred  men 
and  women. 

The  initiation  ceremonies  are  called  Kurbin-aii^  and  the 
youths  admitted  thereby  to  the  status  of  manhood  are 
called  Kippur.  Several  tribes  assembled  at  these  ceremonies. 
The  old  men  fixed  the  time  for  holding  them  when  there 
was  plenty  of  food,  as  when  the  sea-mullet  came  in,  or  when 
the  fruit  of  the  Bunya- bunya  was  ripe.  Messengers  were 
sent  to  the  various  tribes  which  attended  the  Kurbin-aii ;  for 
instance,  tribes  came  from  Maryborough  and  from  Ipswich, 
and  brought  with  them  new  songs  to  teach  to  the  others  at 
the  festivities  attending  the  ceremonies. 

'   Cyrus  E.  Doyle.  ^  Acacia  glaiuescens,  *  Cyrus  E,  Doyle. 


596        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Several  tribes  assembled  at  these  ceremonies,  and  the 
men  of  one  tribe  initiated  the  boys  of  the  other.  They 
are  ordered  not  to  speak  on  pain  of  death,  and  in  the  old 
times  this  penalty  was  certainly  inflicted.  During  the  night 
the  boys  were  made  to  lie  down  in  a  circle,  surrounded  by 
boughs,  and  each  boy  slept  with  his  head  on  the  hip  of  the 
next  one.  During  the  day  they  sat  with  opossum  rugs  over 
their  heads.  To  ask  for  anything  was  strictly  forbidden. 
If  they  desired  to  scratch  themselves,  they  had  to  do  it  with 
a  stick. 

Armed  sentries  were  placed  over  them  prepared  to  spear 
any  boy  who  might  be  tempted  to  look  up  or  laugh.  The 
old  men  tried  the  self-control  of  the  boys  by  telling  them 
that  their  mothers  were  calling  them,  or  by  working  upon 
superstitious  beliefs  or  fears. 

The  camp  where  the  boys  were  kept  by  day  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  circle  of  boughs.  At  night  they  were  taken 
to  another  camp  about  two  hundred  yards  away.  All  the 
ceremonies  were  conducted  during  the  night.  Trees  about 
the  place  had  rude  figures  cut  into  the  bark. 

Two  bull-roarers  were  used  in  the  ceremonies  ;  one,  the 
larger  of  the  two,  was  called  Bugerutn,  the  other  was  called 
Wobblekum,  and  was  about  four  inches  long  by  an  inch 
wide,  and  perforated.  The  Bugeruvi  made  a  louder  and 
deeper-sounding  roar. 

The  unearthly  sounds  made  by  the  bull-roarers  were 
believed  by  the  women  and  children  to  be  made  by  the 
medicine -men  when  swallowing  the  novices  during  the 
ceremonies,  and  a  woman  who  attempted  to  spy  out 
the  ceremonies  would  have  been  certainly  killed. 

The  boys  were  taught  to  respect  the  old  men,  and  to 
obey  all  the  teachings  imparted  to  them  at  the  ceremonies, 
and  these  were  enforced  by  the  magical  arts  which  the 
medicine-men  exhibited  thereat.  The  Kurbin-aii  lasted  for 
a  long  time  ;  never  less  than  three  weeks,  and  often  much 
longer. 

The  boys  after  initiation  were  called  Kippur,  which  has 
now  passed  among  white  people  as  a  name  for  any  young 
blackfellow. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  597 


The  Kippurs  were  not  allowed  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the 
female  of  any  kind  of  animal  nor  the  roes  of  fish,  nor  any 
kind  of  eggs.  All  the  best  of  the  food  was  prohibited  to 
them,  the  old  men  receiving  it  and  all  the  dainty  pieces. 

The  ceremonies  being  concluded,  the  boys  were  taken 
into  the  bush  about  four  or  five  hundred  yards  away  by  one 
of  the  men  of  the  other  tribe,  and  dressed  in  tribal  fashion. 
Dogs'  tails  and  snakes'  skins  were  tied  round  the  head  ;  ropes 
of  opossum  fur  crossed  over  the  shoulders  like  a  soldier's 
cross-belt ;  long  tails  of  opossum  fur  hung  down  from  the 
head  to  the  waist  ;  and  strips  of  kangaroo  skin  round  the 
arms  completed,  with  a  white  fillet  of  braided  bark  and  fibre 
round  the  head,  the  costurne  of  a  man.  Faces  and  bodies 
were  painted  black,  except  the  nose,  which  was  coloured 
bright  red  with  grease  and  ochre.  The  hair  was  well  greased, 
and  decked  with  bright  parrot  feathers. 

Each  Kippur  was  armed  with  two  small  spears,  two 
boomerangs  were  stuck  in  his  belt,  and  he  held  a  small  shield 
and  a  club  called  Tabri. 

They  were  then  arranged  in  a  row,  each  with  a  fringe  of 
green  boughs  round  the  waist.  The  women  and  girls  waited 
their  coming  in  some  small  open  space  near  the  camp. 
Stuck  in  the  ground  in  front  of  each  woman  was  a  digging- 
stick  {Kulgore),  with  a  bunch  of  leaves  tied  on  the  end 
something  like  a  broom. 

When  the  Kippurs  were  painted,  leaves  were  stuck  under 
their  belts,  and  they  held  boughs  under  their  arms.  All  the 
people  were  painted  according  to  the  customs  of  their 
respective  tribes.  The  Ipswich  tribes  painted  white  all 
down  the  one  side,  and  red  on  the  other  ;  the  coast  tribe, 
black  on  one  side  and  yellow  on  the  other  ;  the  face  was 
also  painted  yellow,  with  whiskers  made  of  the  feathers  of 
the  blue  mountain  parrot.  Some  of  the  men  had  feathers 
stuck  on  them  down  their  sides.  The  medicine-men  wore 
the  yellow  crests  of  the  white  cockatoo  on  the  top  of  their 
heads,  and  were  naked  all  but  a  fringe  round  their  middles. 
Widows,  and  the  women  who  had  recently  lost  relatives,  were 
painted  red  with  white  faces,  being  in  full  mourning.  They 
held  digging-sticks,  with  boughs  tied  to  the  end. 


598        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

As  the  Kippurs  came  dancing  round,  each  one  took 
branches  from  his  mother's  stick,  or  from  that  of  some 
female  relative,  and  put  them  under  his  arms.  After  dancing 
three  times  round  the  women,  they  separated,  each  one 
going  to  his  own  tribe,  who  stood  facing  one  of  the  others 
in  lines  about  one  hundred  yards  apart,  armed  with  spears, 
clubs,  and  boomerangs.  The  old  men  retired  a  little  back, 
and  the  men  commenced  to  throw  spears  and  boomerangs 
at  each  other,  the  old  men  and  the  women  looking  on.  As 
soon  as  some  one  was  speared,  the  blacks  rushed  towards  each 
other  and  fought  furiously,  men  with  men,  and  women  with 
women. 

They  then  separated,  and  each  party  rested  at  the  side 
nearest  to  its  country,  as  in  the  following  diagram  : — 


2-<- 


4 

Each  figure  represents  a  company  of  blacks.  Say  that 
a  man  of  No.  i  runs  out  and  shakes  a  spear  at  the  men  of 
No.  4,  then  a  man  of  No.  4  rushes  out  and  shakes  his  spear 
at  No.  I  ;  then  No.  2  does  the  same  to  No.  3,  and  No.  3  as 
to  No.  2,  and  each  one  says  something  offensive  to  the 
company  opposing  his,  on  which  some  of  each  party  throw 
spears  at  each  other,  and  this  mcl^e  lasts  for  some  time. 
After  a  lull,  a  man  comes  out  of  one  of  the  parties  with 
spears,  a  club,  and  boomerangs,  and  is  faced  by  one  of  the 
other  party.  The  spears  being  stuck  in  the  ground  about 
forty  yards  apart,  the  clubs  are  thrown  at  each  other,  then 
the  boomerangs,  the  women  sheltering  behind  trees  while 
these  are  thrown,  the  boomerangs  not  being  of  the  returning 
kind.  These  ceremonial  combats  may  last  three  or  four 
days. 

The  Kippurs  commenced  the  fight  by  attacking  each 
other  with  spears  and  clubs,  the  older  men  looking  on. 
This  fight  might  last  for  two  minutes,  after  which  the  serious 
business  of  the  day  began. 

The  Kippurs  drew  off,  and  the  seasoned   fighting-men 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  599 

commenced.  The  former  had  been  fighting  in  solemn 
earnest,  burning  to  distinguish  themselves  ;  but  the  older 
men  too  had  many  an  ancient  feud  to  satisfy,  or  they 
remembered  many  an  ancient  tale  of  murder,  or  abduction 
of  women,  to  be  revenged,  and  the  fight  was  sure  to  be  a 
severe  one.  Spears  flew  fast,  and  sounding  blows  fell  on 
shields,  or  even  on  thick  skulls,  and  the  women,  behind  the 
fighting  -  men,  hurled  sticks  and  abuse  at  the  opposite 
fighting-line. 

Little  harm  was,  however,  done,  although  the  fighting 
might  last  for  some  hours.  In  parts  of  the  battle-field 
picked  champions  began  the  fray,  and  were  followed  by 
others  from  each  side. 

Due  time  was  allowed  for  hunting,  or  for  seeking  other 
food,  so  that  this  fighting  might  last  for  perhaps  a 
week. 

Single  combats  also  occurred  on  such  occasions,  when, 
if  one  gave  the  other  several  severe  cuts,  and  thus  became  the 
victor,  he  had  to  allow  the  friends  of  the  vanquished  opponent 
to  give  him  several  cuts  to  equalise  matters. 

A  man  who  was  killed  in  this  fighting  was  eaten,  and 
such  a  catastrophe  was  the  signal  for  the  cessation  of 
hostilities. 

After  the  fighting  was  all  over,  the  Kippitrs  were  con- 
sidered to  be  able  to  fight  for  their  own  hands. 

But  they  were  not  allowed  to  go  near  the  women  for 
about  three  months,  each  night  going  into  the  bush  to  camp 
by  themselves,  and  taking  with  them  their  respective  Wohble- 
kutns,  which  they  sounded,  making  with  them  sounds  like 
the  barking  of  dogs. 

The  Dora  Ceremonies 

The  tribes  within  fifty  miles  of  Maryborough  attended 
the  same  ceremonies,  which  are  called  Dora.  These 
would  be  decided  on  by  some  old  man  announcing  that  he 
had  had  a  vision  of  the  Miirang,  that  is,  the  eagle-hawk, 
which  is  the  fighting-bird,  and  therefore  the  Dora  must  be 
held.      He    proclaims    things    to    the    whole    camp  —  men, 


6oo        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

women,  and  children.  The  vision  seen  gives  him  the 
position  of  the  leader  of  the  ceremonies,  but  the  general 
conduct  of  the  Dora  is  governed  by  the  council  of  the  old 
men.  For  instance,  the  old  men,  having  heard  the  account 
of  the  vision,  will  send  messengers  to  the  neighbouring 
tribelets,  telling  them  that  they  are  going  to  start  a  Dora, 
and  asking  them  to  join  with  them,  so  that  they  may  be 
strong  enough  to  have  a  good  fight  with  their  enemies. 

I  may  mention  here  that  there  are  no  ceremonies  at 
night  at  the  Dora,  as  at  the  Kuringal,  Burbung,  or  Bora. 
The  medicine -men  do  not  take  any  special  part  in  these 
ceremonies  ;  but,  being  all  old  men,  and  especially  because 
of  their  calling,  their  opinions  carry  weight.  My  informant 
spent  several  nights  in  the  camp  at  the  different  Doras  he 
attended.^ 

All  the  men  set  to  work  to  make  the  Dora,  which  is  a 
circle  of  logs  and  earth  about  four  feet  high  and  fifteen 
inches  wide  at  the  top.  It  may  be  six  or  seven,  or  up  to 
twenty-five  yards  in  diameter.  It  is  made  not  far  from  some 
thick  scrub.  On  the  side  which  faces  the  scrub  there  is  an 
opening,  and  a  track  is  cleared  from  the  enclosure  to  the 
scrub,  which  is  not  more  than  two  or  three  hundred  yards 
from  it.  A  space  is  cleared  in  the  scrub,  the  trees  only 
being  left,  among  which  there  is  a  platform  made  of  tough 
vines  and  runners  of  scrub  plants,  strong  enough  to  bear  the 
weight  of  several  men  standing  on  it.  The  old  man  who 
had  the  vision  is  the  leading  spirit  in  the  affair,  or,  for 
shortness,  the  Headman.  He  asks  for  volunteers  to  carry 
messages  to  the  other  branches  of  the  tribe,  and  from  six  to 
ten  are  chosen  from  those  who  stand  out  as  volunteers. 
They  may  be  of  any  sub-class  or  totem.  These  form  a 
party  under  the  direction  of  one,  or  perhaps  two,  of  the  old 
men  who  know  the  country  they  have  to  go  to.  These 
messengers  are  called  '' s,y^&&z\\-z2iXx'\QLX^" {Thungkiva-komwathi). 
They  travel  light,  without  rugs  or  blankets  or  fire-stick,  only 
carrying  tomahawk,  spear,  boomerang,  and  club.  If  a  fire 
is  wanted,  one  is  made,  but  is  carefully  extinguished  when 
done  with,  in  order  that  no  indication  shall  be  given  of  their 

'   Harry  E.  Aid  ridge. 


ix^  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  6oi 

approach.  When  the  camp  of  the  people  they  are  sent  to 
is  found,  they  sneak  round  near  to  it  and  paint  themselves  ; 
then  when  night  comes  they  approach  within  hearing  of  the 
camp,  and  one  of  them  strikes  two  boomerangs  together. 
The  people  in  the  camp  know  at  once  what  it  means,  and 
answer  the  signal  by  a  shout  something  like  our  Hurrah. 
The  old  men  go  out  and  make  a  fire  at  a  convenient  place, 
generally  close  to  a  scrub,  for  these  blacks  usually  camp 
close  to  a  scrub,  if  one  is  near. 

The  messengers,  seeing  this,  come  up  to  them  and  stand 
in  a  row  in  perfect  silence  before  the  old  men,  who  are  at 
the  opposite  side  of  the  fire.  After  about  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  one  of  the  old  men  puts  the  established  question,  "  You 
have  brought  the  Murang?"  The  answer  is  "Yes";  then, 
"  Who  has  seen  it  ? "  The  principal  messenger  then  gives 
the  name  of  the  man  who  has  seen  the  vision,  for  instance 
"  Bunda," '  also  giving  the  name  which  he  had  received  at 
the  Dora.  Then  he  is  questioned  as  to  where  the  Dora  is 
to  be  held,  who  are  coming  to  it,  and  so  on.  After  this  the 
conversation  becomes  easier  and  less  ceremonious. 

The  messengers  do  not  camp  with  the  people  to  whom 
they  are  sent,  but  at  some  place  near  by,  which  has  been 
pointed  out  to  them,  and  always  at  that  side  of  the  encamp- 
ment which  is  towards  their  own  country. 

Meanwhile  other  parties  of  messengers  are  carrying  the 
Dora  to  the  other  divisions  of  the  tribe,  and  when  they  have 
delivered  their  messages  they  return  home.  During  this 
time  the  people  at  headquarters  have  been  commencing  the 
Dora  by  holding  the  preliminary  ceremonies. 

At  daylight  they  are  all  roused  up,  and  the  men  turn 
out  duly  painted  and  armed,  grouping  themselves  at  the 
entrance  to  the  ring,  which  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet 
wide.  They  all  stand  there,  facing  towards  the  interior  of 
the  ring.  One  man  then  commences  to  run  round  it,  and 
the  others  follow  him,  till  they  return  to  the  part  from  which 
they  started,  where  they  now  stand  facing  the  path,  in  the 
attitude  of  attack,  and  three  times  shout  a  defiance. 

Then  another  man  runs  into  the  ring  and  the  performance 

'   Bunda,  one  of  ihe  sub-class  names  of  these  tribes. 


6o2        NATIV'E  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

is  repeated,  and  this  continues  for  about  an  hour,  till  the 
Headman  says,  "  Enough."  On  this  all  the  men  rush  into 
the  ring  and  run  round  it,  then  through  the  entrance  along 
the  path  to  the  clearing  in  the  scrub,  where  they  dance,  one 
of  them  singing  and  the  others  joining  in.  The  words  are 
nonsensical  ;  for  instance,  "  I  have  seen  a  fish,  a  nice  little 
fish."  Then  one  of  the  men  mounts  the  platform  and  says, 
"  What  was  it  like  ?  "  The  singer  gives  some  fantastic  name, 
and  they  all  shout.  This  goes  on  for  half  an  hour,  when 
the  ceremony  is  ended  for  the  time,  and  the  men  go  out 
hunting.  At  sundown  the  ceremony  is  repeated,  but  it  is 
not  compulsory  for  all  the  men  to  be  at  it,  as  is  the  case  in 
the  morning.  These  ceremonies  continue  till  all  the  outside 
portions  of  the  tribe  are  collected  at  the  Dora  camp.  Then, 
all  the  tribe  being  present,  it  is  decided  to  conclude  the 
preliminary  ceremonies.  It  is  at  this  time  that  messengers 
are  sent  off  to  tribes  with  which  they  are  at  feud  outside  the 
boundaries  of  this  community,  that  is  to  say,  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  Dora.  By  these  messengers  they  are  informed 
that  a  Dora  is  being  held,  and  they  are  summoned  to  bring 
their  young  men  down  to  fight.  Such  a  tribe  is  one  with 
which  they  do  not  marry  except  by  capture. 

The  initiation  ceremonies  now  described  were  the  occa- 
sion of  a  gathering  of  distant  tribes,  among  which  were  the 
Chepara  before  spoken  of 

When  all  those  who  are  to  take  part  in  the  Dora  have 
arrived,  the  camp  is  broken  up  on  the  day  following.  This 
is  decided  on  at  a  general  council,  at  which  the  Headman 
who  saw  the  vision  is  the  principal.  The  old  men  form  the 
council,  but  the  young  men  are  present,  listen  to  what  is 
said,  but  do  not  speak.  The  women  are  also  present.  The 
boys  who  are  to  be  initiated  are  gathered  together,  and  they 
are  discussed — who  they  are,  where  they  come  from,  and  so 
forth.  Each  boy  has  a  Quonmie,  or  guardian,  who  is  a  relative 
or  great  friend  of  his.  It  does  not  matter  of  what  sub-class 
the  Quonmie  is,  and  a  boy  may  have  several  Quomnies,  both 
male  and  female.  The  boys  are  now  taken  by  the  Quonmies 
to  a  place  apart  from  the  camp  and  receive  a  vast  amount  of 
instruction  as  to  their  behaviour  and  duties.     They  are  told 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  603 

not  to  be  frightened,  and  that  the  Quonmies  will  take  care 
that  no  one  hurts  them. 

When  the  morning  star  rises,  the  whole  tribe  is  on  the 
move,  and  all  the  women  have  their  things  packed  up  for 
removal.  The  Quonmie  women  go  with  them,  but  the 
Quonmie  men  go  in  charge  of  the  boys.  All  the  others  go 
to  the  Dora  ring,  each  woman  carrying  a  fire-brand,  and 
this  is  the  first  time  that  they  have  been  permitted  to  be 
there.  The  boys  now  leave  their  camp  to  go  to  the  ring, 
several  of  the  old  men  asking,  in  a  rough  tone  of  voice, 
"  Where  are  the  boys  who  wish  to  be  made  men  ?  "  The 
boys  are  told  to  close  their  hands  and  not  to  open  them  till 
they  get  their  new  names,  under  all  kinds  of  fearful  penalties. 
They  are  now  ordered  by  the  old  men  in  fierce  tones  to 
move  off,  and  the  men,  duly  painted  and  armed,  surround 
and  take  them  to  the  ring.  All  this  very  much  alarms  the 
boys,  but  they  are  reassured  by  the  QuontnieSy  who  say, 
"  We  will  see  that  no  harm  comes  to  you." 

When  the  women  arrive  at  the  ring,  they  drop  their 
burdens  and  all  covering,  and  stand  naked,  and  packed 
together  as  close  as  possible  on  the  top  of  the  mound,  each 
holding  a  fire-brand  in  her  hand.  This  is  the  first  time  that 
they  have  been  permitted  to  approach  the  ring,  and  step  on 
to  the  mound  from  the  outside,  for  no  woman  is  allowed  to 
go  into  the  enclosure.  The  men  stand  at  the  entrance  where 
the  path  is.  The  men  of  that  part  of  the  tribe  which  called 
the  Dora  together  now  run  into  and  round  the  enclosure  ; 
but  instead  of  running  out  and  along  the  path,  they  face 
round  towards  the  interior  of  the  circle  and  give  a  great 
shout.  The  Headman  now  says  "  Finished,"  and  the  women 
throw  their  fire-sticks  into  the  middle  of  the  circle  and  go 
away,  taking  a  road  to  the  new  camp  which  is  to  be  formed, 
other  than  that  taken  by  the  men.  These  have  gone  off  in 
batches  of  fifty  or  more,  who  form  ambuscades  along  the 
direction  the  boys  are  to  be  taken  by  their  Quonmies,  accom- 
panied by  a  small  band  of  fighting-men. 

As  the  boys  come  up  to  each  ambuscade  the  concealed 
men  rush  out  and  pretend  to  attack  them,  taking  good  care, 
however,  that  the  weapons  which  they  throw  do  not  hit  any 


6o4        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

one.  The  Quonmies  tell  the  boys  to  stand  still  and  not  to 
be  frightened,  for  they  will  not  be  hurt,  while  their  escorts 
often  run  off  for  a  short  distance  as  if  in  fear. 

This  sort  of  thing  continues  for  some  miles,  for  the 
purpose  of  trying  the  fortitude  of  the  boys,  whom  they 
attempt  to  intimidate  in  every  possible  manner.  For 
instance,  some  of  the  old  men  who  accompany  them,  and 
who  take  the  lead,  will  suddenly  jump  aside  crying  "  Murang" 
which  also  includes  the  meaning  of  snake,  and  at  the  same 
time  shout  out  the  name  of  some  snake,  as  if  there  were 
really  one  there.  The  Quonmies  on  all  such  occasions 
reassure  the  boys.  After  travelling  a  few  miles,  some  ten  to 
twenty  men  are  left  in  charge  of  the  boys,  who  are  told  to 
rest  while  the  men  spread  themselves  over  the  country,  to 
hunt  and  catch  game.  At  this  halt  the  boys  have  to  crouch 
down  and  are  fed  by  the  Quonmies  with  bits  of  cooked  meat 
and  drinks  of  water,  for  the  boys  have  their  hands  closed 
and  may  not  help  themselves  in  any  way.  All  they  can  do 
is  to  sit  down,  get  up,  go  on,  or  stop,  as  they  are  told.  Nor 
may  they  speak,  being  only  permitted  to  nod  or  shake  their 
heads,  in  reply  to  questions  put  to  them  by  the  Quonmies. 

In  this  manner  they  make  several  days'  journeys,  which 
are  so  arranged  that  on  the  afternoon  of  a  certain  day  they 
may  be  within  reach  of  the  tribe  which  is  being  called  upon 
to  meet  them.  At  night  the  boys  are  laid  on  the  ground 
close  together,  like  sardines  in  a  tin,  their  Quonmies  lying  at 
their  heads  or  their  feet,  but  so  as  not  to  keep  the  warmth 
of  the  fire  from  them.  The  old  men  keep  the  fire  up  ;  and 
when  the  morning  star  rises,  the  fire  having  been  allowed  to 
go  down,  they  rouse  the  boys  by  climbing  up  the  trees  and 
making  all  kinds  of  hideous  noises  and  by  beating  the 
ground  with  bark  near  the  boys'  heads.  This  is  done  to 
frighten  the  boys,  who  however  are  expected  to  take  no 
notice  of  it,  and  to  appear  as  if  still  sleeping.  After  this,  a 
great  fire  is  lit  and  the  men  dance. 

The  other  tribe,  having  received  due  notice,  is  camped  in 
the  neighbourhood,  but  at  such  a  distance  that  it  can  meet 
the  other  party  a  little  before  sundown,  for  the  favourite  time 
for  fighting  is  at  sunrise  or  sunset.      The  rest  of  the  tribe  to 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  605 


which  the  boys  belong  having  also  arrived,  the  boys  are  led 
by  their  Quonmies  to  where  new  names  are  given  to  them  by 
the  old  men.  These  names  are  supposed  to  enable  them  to 
catch  fish  or  animals,  or  to  do  something  relating  to  hunting, 
better  than  other  people.  For  instance,  the  name  Buna- 
ivunanii  mean^"  a  long  while  come  out,"  and  refers  to  diving 
for  turtle  or  fish.  Paraing-thuma  is  "high  catch  "  (or  hold), 
referring  to  catching  flying -foxes,  or  climbing  trees  after 
birds,  and  so  on  with  other  names. 

The  Headman  calls  the  Quonmie  to  bring  his  boy  to 
him  ;  and,  this  being  done,  steps  out  and  recites  in  a  sing- 
song tone  the  words,  ''  Burrum-burruvi  burro,  nolla-wurro" 
which  have  no  meaning  in  their  language,  and  which  no  one 
could  explain  to  my  informant,  who  was  present,  and  who 
spoke  their  language.  The  Headman  says  several  times, 
"  What  will  your  name  be  ? "  then  he  speaks  the  name  and 
says  "  Shout ! "  and  all  the  assembled  people  set  up  a  great 
shout,  and  repeat  the  name.  Hereupon  the  Quonmies,  who 
have  been  getting  ready  while  the  naming  has  been  going 
on,  slip  a  spear,  shield,  and  boomerang  into  the  hands  of  the 
boy,  and  he  now,  for  the  first  time  since  the  ceremonies 
commenced,  opens  his  hands  and  looks  up  from  the  ground 
and  lifts  his  head  up,  having  previously  kept  it  bent.  In  the 
afternoon  the  boys  are  painted  and  instructed  how  to  fight 
and  defend  themselves. 

The  boys  of  the  other  tribe  have  also  on  their  side 
passed  through  the  Dora  and  have  been  named.  The  old 
(child's  name)  is  dropped  from  this  time  forth. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  two  tribes  approach  each  other, 
and  the  respective  lots  of  boys  are  placed  facing  each  other 
and  are  told  to  fight,  under  the  tuition  of  the  old  men  behind 
them,  and  this  they  do  for  some  three-quarters  of  an  hour. 
Then  the  old  men  join  in,  and  the  fighting  is  very  severe. 
Five  men  were  killed  in  one  such  fight,  and  the  wounded 
and  maimed  were  very  numerous. 

The  two  tribes  then  camp  within  hearing  of  each  other, 
but  not  within  sight.  As  a  rule,  they  hunt  in  different  tracts 
of  country,  so  as  not  to  meet ;  but  if  the  nature  of  the 
country  is  such  that  they  must  hunt  near  each  other,  there 


6o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

will  be  left  a  narrow  strip  of  neutral  ground  over  which 
neither  party  will  cross. 

The  party  who  sent  the  challenge  travels  into  the 
country  of  the  other  tribe.  In  one  case  the  challenging 
party  travelled  some  seventy  miles,  that  is  to  say,  some  thirty 
miles  into  the  enemy's  country.  The  radius  from  which 
people  came  to  that  Dora  was  fifty  miles,  and  about  three 
thousand  attended,  it  being  on  the  mainland  opposite  Frazer's 
Island. 

When  the  two  tribes  are  travelling  to  meet  each  other 
they  have  a  practice  for  several  days  before  they  meet  of 
burning  the  grass  and  everything  they  can  set  fire  to,  as  a 
defiance  to  each  other.  The  bull-roarer  called  Pmidunda 
was  used  after  the  fight,  the  boys  and  the  Quonmies  going 
into  the  thick  scrub,  within  hearing  of  the  camp,  and  sound- 
ing it.  The  women,  when  they  hear  this,  run  away  out  of 
the  camp,  being  told  that  if  they  remain  and  listen  to  it 
they  will  lose  their  hearing,  and  if  they  look  back  they  will 
become  blind.  The  noise  is  not  continued  long.  The 
women  are  not  allowed  to  see  the  Pundunda.  After  the 
fight  and  the  corrobborees  which  follow  it  there  is  the 
capturing  of  women,  which  has  been  already  described. 

When  the  meeting  is  over  and  the  people  return  to  their 
homes,  the  boys  are  not  placed  under  any  restriction  as  to  the 
food  which  they  may  or  may  not  eat,  that  is  to  say  by 
reason  of  the  Dora,  but  there  are  general  rules  which  prevent 
the  younger  men  from  eating  certain  articles  of  food,  which 
are  reserved  for  the  old  men.  For  instance,  boys  are  not 
allowed  to  eat  emu  eggs,  nor  even  to  touch  them,  but  they 
must  give  them  to  the  old  men. 

Although  the  youths  on  returning  from  the  Dora  are 
accounted  as  men,  they  are  not  permitted  to  take  wives 
until  their  beards  are  grown.  Should  a  youth  attempt  to 
take  his  promised  wife  before  that  time,  he  would  be  told, 
"  Go  away  !  What  do  you  want  with  a  wife,  you  beardless 
boy?" 

To  the  southward  of  the  tribes  whose  Dora  I  have 
described,  there  are  those  tribes  of  which  I  have  taken  the 
Kaiabara   as    the    example.       Their   ceremonies   were   held 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  607 

whenever  there  were  a  sufficient  number  of  boys  approaching 
puberty  to  be  made  men.^ 

The  Kaiabara  Ceremonies 

The  ceremonies  were  held  at  a  place  where  a  circular 
mound  had  been  made,  in  the  centre  of  which  a  hole  had 
been  dug  in  the  ground,  in  which  one  of  the  old  men  was 
concealed,  under  a  sheet  of  bark.  The  boys  were  brought 
into  the  ring,  and  lay  on  their  faces  on  the  ground,  covered 
by  their  opossum  rugs.  They  were  then  taken  to  the  place 
where  the  old  man  was  concealed,  and  he  gave  a  name  to 
each.  The  name  was  repeated  aloud  by  another  old  man, 
and  the  men  standing  round  shouted  the  name  and  danced. 

For  a  time  the  boys  were  kept  on  short  commons,  and 
were  not  allowed  to  eat  female  opossums,  which  were  given 
to  the  old  men,  nor  iguana,  kangaroo,  mullet,  turtle,  grubs, 
scrub-turkey,  emu,  and  other  things. 

But  they  might  eat  male  opossum,  wallaby,  bandicoot, 
yams,  and  honey. 

These  particulars,  though  scanty,  suffice  to  show  a 
general  similarity  to  the  Dora  ceremonies. 

I  have  greatly  regretted  that  my  correspondent  in  the 
country  of  the  Wakelbura  tribe  did  not  avail  himself  of  the 
opportunities  which  offered  themselves  for  seeing  the  initia- 
tion ceremonies  of  that  and  other  kindred  tribes.  He  was 
invited  to  go  to  them,  but  did  not  do  so,  and  when  I  drew 
his  attention  to  the  great  interest  attaching  to  those  cere- 
monies, he  had  to  rely  for  information  on  the  blacks  with 
whom  he  was  on  friendly  terms.  This,  however,  did  not 
suffice  to  justify  them  in  revealing  secrets,  which  can  only 
be  made  known  to  those  who  are  within  the  arcana  of  these 
mysteries. 

The  Umba  Ceremonies 

The  ceremonies  are  called  Umba,  and  can  only  be  held 
by  Malera  or  Wuthera  men,  not  by  both  combined.  Thus 
jf  there  are   Kurgilla  and  Banbe  boys  to  be  made  men,  it 

'  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


6o8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


would  be  the  Wuthera  men  who  would  hold  the  Umba, 
that  is  to  say,  the  men  of  the  one  sub-class  Kurgilla  initiate 
the  boys  of  the  other  sub-class  Banbe,  or  vice  versa.  This 
is  a  remarkable  innovation  on  the  rule  which,  so  far  as  I 
know,  is  universal  in  the  tribes  of  South-eastern  as  well  as  of 
Central  Australia,  that  the  men  of  one  moiety  of  the  tribe 
initiate  the  youths  of  the  other  moiety.  As  I  have  before 
pointed  out,  the  reason  of  this  seems  to  be  that  it  is  only 
when  the  youth  has  been  admitted  to  the  rights  and  privi- 
leges of  manhood  in  the  tribe  that  he  can  obtain  a  wife. 
As  his  wife  comes  to  him  from  the  other  moiety,  it  is  the 
men  of  that  moiety  who  must  be  satisfied  that  he  is,  in  fact, 
able  to  take  his  place  as  the  provider  for,  and  the  protector 
of,  the  woman,  their  sister,  who  is  to  be  his  wife.  In  this 
connection  one  can  therefore  see  why  it  is  that  the  future 
wife's  brother,  who  is  also  his  sister's  husband,  is  the  guardian 
of  the  youth  in  the  ceremonies. 

But  in  the  Wakelbura  case  it  is  not  the  men  of  the  other 
intermarrying  moiety  who  initiate  the  youth  ;  for  if  so,  it 
would  have  been  Malera  and  Wuthera  men  who  would 
have  respectively  initiated  each  other's  sons.  So  far,  this 
has  not  received  any  explanation,  further  than  it  is  probably 
connected  with  food  rules,  and  the  food  animals  which 
belong  to  the  respective  classes  ;  and  as  the  Wakelbura  tribe 
is  now  practically  extinct,  it  cannot  be  elucidated. 

The  Uniha  ceremonies  relieve  the  individual  from  certain 
food  restrictions.  According  to  what  I  have  been  able  to 
ascertain,  the  individual  receives  a  new  name  at  each  Umba. 
These  names  denote  accomplishments  or  qualities,  as  quick 
sight,  courage,  being  a  good  fighter,  or  a  skilful  medicine- 
man. Some  of  the  men  received  as  many  as  four  different 
names.  The  tendency  of  the  restrictions  is  to  reserve  the 
best  of  the  food  for  the  older  men,  and  only  to  admit  the 
younger  to  the  same  privileges  as  they  acquire  age. 

The  Umba  ground  is  always  made  at  a  sandy  place, 
where  there  is  loose  soil,  which  is  banked  up,  by  means  of 
boomerangs  and  feet,  into  a  ridge,  which  encloses  a  square 
with  several  interior  divisions.  At  one  end  there  is  an 
opening  for  the   men   to  go    in  and  out,  and    it  faces  the 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  609 

direction  from  which  the  visitors  have  come.  It  is  the  men 
called  Tarrima  who  make  the  mound,  and  indeed  they  do 
most  of  the  work  in  making  the  Uniba  ground. 

During  the  ceremonies  the  novice  has  to  climb  a  straight 
young  tree  free  from  branches,  without  a  tomahawk  or  any 
aid  whatever.  The  bystanders  utter  simultaneously  "  Yeh!" 
or  "  Wah!"  at  each  step  he  takes  in  climbing.  On  his 
reaching  the  top  they  give  one  united  shout.  The  same 
exclamations  are  made  at  each  step  of  his  descent,  and 
when  he  reaches  the  ground  the  same  shout  is  raised. 

The  youth  is  called  Walba  until  initiated  ;  after  that  he 
is  called  Kaula,  and  he  also  at  the  same  time  receives  a 
new  personal  name,  and  his  former  personal  name  is  never 
afterwards  mentioned.  To  mention  his  Waiba,  or  boy 
name,  would  be  a  serious  cause  of  offence.  To  avoid  this, 
and  indeed  to  avoid  the  mention  of  the  personal  name  of 
any  one,  a  young  man  would  be  spoken  of  as  Kaula,  a  man 
of  mature  years  as  Minda  (old  man),  and  an  uninitiated 
youth  as  Walba.  Relatives  use  the  term  of  relationship 
proper  to  each.  The  children  of  the  same  mother  are 
spoken  of  according  to  age,  after  the  fingers  of  the  hand. 
Thus  the  oldest  is  addressed  as  Teling,  that  is  thumb,  the 
next  in  age  is  Burbi,  the  forefinger,  etc' 

The  Initiation  Ceremonies  of  Victorian  Tribes 

The  Victorian  tribes  were  so  broken  down  during  the 
early  gold  discoveries  that  when  I  commenced  a  critical 
investigation  of  their  social  and  local  organisation  and 
customs,  I  found  that  the  tribal  customs  had  almost  died 
out,  together  with  many  of  the  tribes  themselves.  But  I 
was  able  here  and  there  to  rescue  some  facts  from  surviving 
old  men,  which  may  enable  me  to  indicate  the  sort  of 
ceremonies  by  which  the  youths  were  admitted  to  the 
privileges  and  subjected  to  the  obligations  of  manhood. 

As  to  the  Kulin  nation,  the  practice  may  be  illustrated 
by  that  of  the  Wurunjerri,  for  according  to  Berak  the 
initiation  ceremonies  were  substantially  the  same  in  each  of 

'  J.  C.  Muirhead. 

2  R 


6io        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  tribes,  from  the  Wudthaurung  at  Corio  Bay  to  the 
Mogullum-bltch  at  the  Buffalo  River.  From  other  native 
informants  I  have  learned  also  that  the  range  of  these 
ceremonies  was  also  from  Port  Phillip  Heads  to  Echuca. 

When  a  boy  was  about  ten  or  eleven  years  old,  that  is 
to  say,  when  his  whiskers  were  beginning  to  appear,  his 
parents  or  relations,  or  even  other  people,  would  remark 
that  it  was  only  decent  and  proper  that  he  should  no  longer 
run  about  naked.  Then  his  Guritch,  sister's  husband,  would 
tell  him  that  he  must  be  made  Jibank}  But  some  time 
before  this,  his  parents  sent  him  to  live  with  the  young  men 
in  their  camp,  which  was  always  at  a  distance  from  the 
camps  of  the  married  men. 


The  Jibauk  Ceremonies 

The  Jibauk  ceremonies  were  held  periodically  where 
Melbourne,  Geelong,  Bacchus  Marsh,  Seymour,  Bendigo,  the 
Delatite  River,  Benalla,  the  Buffalo  River,  Echuca,  and 
other  places  now  are. 

When  the  ceremonies  were  held  by  the  Wurunjerri,a  screen 
of  boughs  was  made  some  two  or  three  hundred  yards  from 
the  main  encampment,  with  a  large  fire  in  front,  of  it.  The 
boy's  Guritch  or  his  Kangun,  that  is,  his  mother's  brother,  took 
him  there,  having  first  covered  him  with  a  rug,  the  corner 
of  which  hung  over  his  face.  Having  joined  the  others 
who  were  to  be  "  made  men,"  a  number  of  men's  kilts 
{Branjep),  which  had  been  collected  from  the  men  at  the 
camp,  were  tied  round  his  waist.  His  hair  was  cut  quite 
short,  excepting  a  ridge,  like  a  cock's  comb,  along  his  head 
from  front  to  back.  Mud  was  thickly  plastered  over  his 
head  and  shoulders,  and  a  wide  band  of  pipe-clay  was  painted 
from  ear  to  ear,  across  his  face.  Another  band  was  from 
the  Branjep  in  front  over  his  head  to  that  hanging 
behind. 

He  carried  a  bag  slung  roung  his  neck,  in  which  was  a 
live  opossum  which  he  had  caught,  and  from  which  he  had 

•  This  word   is  pronounced  usually  as  I   have   written  it,  but  it  really  is 
Jtba-gop. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  6ii 

plucked  the  fur  as  if  for  cooking.  He  never  moved  away 
from  the  Jibauk  place  without  a  fire-stick  and  this  bag 
containing  the  opossum.  When  one  died  he  had  to  go 
away  and  catch  another  to  replace  it.  The  Jibauks  were 
not  allowed  any  clothing  other  than  the  kilts,  and  they  slept 
round  the  fire  by  the  bough  enclosure.  All  the  young  men 
of  the  encampment,  together  with  the  guardians  of  the 
Jibauk,  kept  them  company.  The  lads  obtained  their  food 
by  going  the  rounds  of  the  camp  with  their  Guritches  ;  and 
opening  their  bags,  they  said  to  the  people  they  called  upon, 
"  Have  you  anything  to  put  in  here  ? "  The  food  thus 
obtained  was  all  they  got,  and  it  was  not  much.  It  was 
considered  a  joke  to  ask  a  Jibauk  what  he  had  caught  when 
out  hunting. 

When  the  boy's  hair  had  grown  about  two  inches  in 
length,  his  probation  was  over.  The  Jibauk  camp  was 
shifted  on  successive  days  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  encamp- 
ment, until  it  was  quite  close.  During  this  time  the  Guritch 
had  been  preparing  an  opossum  Vug,  which  he  now  gave  to 
the  boy  under  his  charge,  who,  being  dressed  in  the  full 
male  costume,  was  led  by  his  guardian  from  camp  to  camp 
of  the  married  men,  where  he  was  received  with  expressions 
of  rejoicing.  The  Jibauk  was  thus  introduced  to  the  com- 
munity in  the  character  of  a  man.  Several  evenings  of 
singing  and  dancing  concluded  the  ceremonies. 

The  jibauk  was  not  specially  instructed  during  this  time 
in  the  tribal  laws  and  beliefs,  because  this  was  done 
previously  by  his  father,  father's  brother,  or  his  father's 
father,  but  he  was  told  what  animals  he  might  or  might  not 
eat.  The  forbidden  food  included  emu,  black  duck,  musk 
duck,  flying  tuan,  iguana,  spiny  ant-eater.  He  might  eat 
the  common  opossum,  ringtail  opossum,  bandicoot,  wallaby, 
kangaroo,  wombat,  native  bear,  swan,  teal,  and  all  fish. 
From  time  to  time  the  young  man  was  made  free  of  the 
forbidden  food  by  having  a  piece  of  the  cooked  meat  given 
him  to  eat  by  one  of  the  old  men.  Sometimes  it  was 
handed  to  the  Jibauk  on  the  point  of  a  stick.  As  he  grew 
older,  he,  so  to  say,  acquired  the  freedom  of  eating  other 
animals.      When    about    thirty    to    thirty-five,    he    became 


6i2        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

entitled  to  eat  emu,  by  some  of  the  fat  being  rubbed  un- 
expectedly by  some  old  man  on  his  naked  back. 

The  IVtrrarap  (medicine-man)  also  in  this  tribe  exercised 
supervision  over  the  youth  who  had  been  made  Jibauk.  He 
could  dream  of  his  actions.  But  the  novice  was  also  under 
supernatural  penalties  if  he  broke  the  food  laws  or  rules  of 
conduct  laid  upon  him.  Thus  the  Kulin  of  the  Goulburn 
River,  who  were  the  neighbours  of  the  Wurunjerri,  and  nearly 
allied  to  them,  believed  that  if  the  novice  ate  the  spiny  ant- 
eater  or  the  black  duck,  he  would  be  killed  by  the  thunder. 
If  he  ate  of  the  female  of  the  opossum  or  native  bear,  he 
was  liable  to  fall  when  climbing  trees. 

Protector  Thomas  speaks  of  this  ceremony  in  a  report 
to  Governor  La  Trobe  ^  on  the  "  Ceremony  of  Tobbut,"  and 
his  remarks  probably  apply  not  only  to  the  Wurunjerri,  but 
also  to  other  tribes  within  his  immediate  knowledge.  He 
says  "  that  there  are  strips  of  old  rags,  string,  strips  of 
opossum  skin  and  old  rope,  and  all  the  variety  of  stripes 
with  which  a  fringed  apron  girdles  him  round  "  {sic).  He  is 
not  allowed  to  have  a  blanket  to  cover  him,  or  anything 
else,  night  or  day,  and  it  is  generally  the  winter  season  which 
is  selected  for  this  purpose.  He  goes  through  the  encamp- 
ment calling  out  ''Ttb-bo-bo-but"  He  has  a  basket  under  his 
arm,  which  contains  all  the  filth  he  can  pick  up,  not  even 
omitting  soil.  He  frightens  and  bedaubs  all  he  meets  with 
some  of  the  beastly  commodities  contained  in  his  basket, 
but  must  not  touch  any  who  are  in  their  niia-vtias,  or  lubras 
on  their  way  getting  water,  but  in  any  other  case  he  is  at 
liberty  to  annoy  and  frighten  all  he  meets. 

The  Talangun  Ceremonies 

In  the  Bunurong  tribe  the  equivalent  of  the  Jibauk 
was  called  Talangun.  All  that  was  done  was  that  the  boy 
was  taken  by  some  of  the  men,  who  dressed  him  in  full  male 
attire,  and  he  was  made  free  of  the  forbidden  food  animals 
as  soon  as  the  men  could  catch  them.  According  to  Berak, 
who  knew  that  tribe  well,  there  were  no  other  ceremonies  of 

^  Letters  from  Vicloriatt  Pioneers,  p.  99. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  613 

initiation  of  any  kind.  Similar  statements  were  made  to  me 
by  the  survivors  of  the  Thagunworung  and  Jajaurung  tribes, 
who  all  knew  the  Bunurong  people.  The  fact  that  in 
this  tribe  the  bull-roarer,  which  is  elsewhere  regarded  with 
reverential  awe,  was  a  child's  plaything,  seems  to  be  strong 
corroboration  that  they  had  no  secret  rites  of  initiation. 
What  they  had  was  clearly  only  a  survival  of  ceremonies 
such  as  the  Jibauk,  and  it  seems  to  be  a  case  in  which  they 
were  approaching  the  condition  of  the  Krauatun  Kurnai, 
who  had  not  even  the  traces  of  former  ceremonies. 


The  Jajaurung  Ceremonies 

In  the  Jajaurung  tribe  the  ceremonies  were  somewhat 
fuller  than  those  of  the  Wurunjcrri,  and  also  illustrate  them. 

Before  a  boy  was  grown  up  and  had  whiskers,  he  was 
taken  by  his  GuritcJi  to  his  camp,  where  he  rubbed  him  over 
with  red  ochre.  When  the  Guritch  went  out  hunting,  or  was 
travelling,  he  took  the  boy  with  him,  and  carried  him  when 
he  was  tired.  He  sounded  the  bull-roarer  continually,  to 
make  the  boy  strong,  and  he  sang  this  song : — 

Pata  mamunya  jita-runffa. 

Wait  a  while         don't  touch  it         growing  up. 

This  song  also  makes  the  two  front  teeth  easily  removable 
when  the  boy  is  being  initiated.  When  the  boy  has  grown 
somewhat  older,  so  that  his  beard  has  come,  his  Guritch  and 
the  old  men  take  him  away  to  be  made  a  man.  He  is  laid 
down  on  the  ground  and  all  the  hair  on  his  face  and  his 
pubes  is  plucked  out.  If  it  comes  out  easily  and  without 
blood  showing,  they  say,  "  He  is  a  good  young  man,"  and 
rub  him  over  with  red  ochre.  The  song  above  mentioned 
is  then  sung,  and  the  medicine-man  (Barn-bungal)  forces  a 
pointed  stick  between  the  teeth  to  loosen  them.  If  any 
blood  comes  from  the  gums  either  now  or  when  the  teeth 
are  knocked  out,  it  must  not  be  spat  out  or  let  fall  on  his 
breast ;  but  he  must  swallow  it,  otherwise  his  legs  would 
become  crooked,  and  he  would  be  lame.  He  then  goes 
away  with  his   Guritch  and  the  old  men.      For  a  time  he 


6i4        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

remains  quite  naked,  and  is  rubbed  with  red  ochre,  until  his 
oldest  Guritch  brings  him  an  opossum  rug. 

If,  however,  blood  comes  when  the  hair  is  plucked  out, 
the  youth  is  said  to  have  "  been  too  much  with  the  women," 
and  is  painted  white  from  the  waist  over  the  head,  down  the 
back  to  the  belt  on  which  he  wears  a  Branjep,  before  and 
behind,  and  he  is  called  Jibauk. 


The  Jupagalk  Cp:remonies 

The  Jupagalk  adjoined  the  Jajaurung  on  the  north-west 
side.  In  that  tribe,  when  a  boy  was  old  enough  to  be  made 
a  man,  two  of  his  Ngierep  (sister's  husband)  took  him  away 
for  a  time  and  kept  him  with  them  until  he  had  been  initiated. 
The  boy  was  dressed  in  the  full  dress  of  a  man,  with  a  belt 
of  opossum  cord  round  his  waist,  a  row  of  kangaroo  teeth 
round  his  forehead,  and  a  reed  necklace.  In  front  and 
behind  a  Branjep  hung  from  his  belt.  Red  ochre  and  grease 
was  rubbed  over  him,  and  a  ligature  of  kangaroo  sinew  tied 
round  his  upper  fore-arm,  from  which  the  boys  are  called 
Ganitch,  that  is,  "  tied."  The  Ngierep  kept  the  boy  in  their 
camp  for  two  or  three  months,  and  did  everything  for  him. 
When  they  went  out  hunting,  one  of  them  carried  him  on 
his  shoulders.  The  boy  was  not  allowed  to  do  anything  for 
himself.  In  one  case  of  which  I  had  some  knowledge,  the 
boy  was  Garchuka  (white  cockatoo),  and  his  Ngierep  was 
Wurant  (black  cockatoo).  The  boy  was  not  allowed  to  eat 
the  male  of  any  animal. 

The  subjoined  diagram  shows  the  manner  in  which  the 


inmates  of  the  camp  of  such  a  Ngierep  slept  round  the  fire 
at  night. 

I  is  the  Ngierep,  2  is  the  boy,  3  wife  of  the  Ngierep,  and 
5  and  6  their  children. 


ix         initiation  ceremonies,  eastern  type     .  615 

The  Wotjobaluk  Ceremonies 

The  ceremonies  are  called  Ganitch  by  the  Wotjobaluk, 
also  by  the  Mukjarawaint,  and  in  both  tribes  the  procedure 
was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Jupagalk,  with  the  exception 
that  with  the  Wotjobaluk  the  boy,  when  he  was  taken  away 
by  his  Guritch,  was  placed  before  a  great  fire,  and,  as  they 
put  it,  was  "  roasted." 

Ceremonies  of  the  Tribes  of  South-Western 
Victoria 

In  the  tribes  of  South-Western  Victoria'  a  youth  is  not 
considered  to  be  a  man  until  he  has  undergone  a  probation, 
during  which  he  is  called  Kutneet,  which  is  really  best  trans- 
lated as  "  hobbledehoy."  Should  he  have  "  brothers-in-law  " 
they  conie  and  take  him  into  a  hut  ( IVuurn),  and  dress  him 
and  ornament  him,  and  remove  him  into  their  own  country, 
where  he  is  received  with  welcome  by  his  new  friends. 
During  his  term  of  probation  his  wants  arc  liberally  supplied. 
He  is  not  allowed  to  do  anything  for  himself,  and  when  he 
wants  to  go  anywhere  he  must  be  carried  by  the  men  who 
brought  him  from  his  own  country.  The  women  of  the  tribe 
must  also  wait  upon  him  with  every  mark  of  respect,  and 
should  any  disobey  the  order,  he  has  the  right  to  spear  them. 
At  the  end  of  twelve  moons,  his  relations  call  and  take  him 
to  the  first  great  meeting  of  the  tribes.  Before  leaving,  they 
pull  out  all  the  hairs  of  his  beard,  and  make  him  drink  water 
mixed  with  mud,  which  completes  his  initiation  into  manhood. 
The  knocking  out  of  a  front  tooth  is  unknown  in  these 
tribes. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Mr.  Dawson  made  use  of  the 
term  "  brother-in-law,"  which  includes  several  relations,  which 
are  individualised  by  the  native  tribes.  But  I  conjecture 
that  he  may  be  the  "  sister's  husband "  (Kuunuee),  which 
would  be  in  accord  with  the  universal  practice. 

In  the  Jajaurung  practice  a  distinction  appears  between 
the  novice  who  has  kept  to  himself  and  him  who,  to  use  the 

*  J.  Dawson,  o/>.  cit.  p.  30. 


6i6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

usual  phrase,  has  been  "  too  much  with  the  women."  This 
distinction  occurs  in  all  cases  where  the  tooth  is  extracted, 
but  the  Jibaiik  practice  of  the  Jajaurung  is  the  only  one  I 
know  in  which  a  special  treatment  follows  this  social  offence. 
Usually  in  such  cases  the  tooth  ostensibly  cannot  be  removed, 
and  this  causes  great  pain  and  suffering  to  the  offender. 
Thus  at  the  Yuin  Knringal  the  Gommera  took  good  care 
that  the  tooth  of  the  novice,  who  was  known  for  his  practices 
with  the  women,  should  only  be  extracted  after  a  dozen 
blows.  But  the  Jajaurung  went  still  further :  not  only  did 
the  tooth  stick  fast,  but  the  novice  became  a  Jibauk,  and 
underwent  a  series  of  more  than  personal  inconveniences  as 
a  warning  to  others. 

One  of  the  results  of  the  ceremonies  of  initiation  is,  in 
most  cases,  to  place  the  novice  inter  alia  under  inter- 
sexual  restraints.  This  is  shown  by  his  removal  from  the 
"  fire  circle  "  of  his  parents  to  the  camp  of  the  young  men, 
and  also  the  breaking  off  of  the  intimate  association  with  his 
sisters  which  existed  while  he  was  a  boy.  This  is  shown 
very  clearly  by  the  Kurnai  Jeraeil.  The  Jibauk  practice,  as 
seen  among  the  Jajaurung,  appears  to  have  been  in  the 
nature  of  a  punishment  ;  with  the  Wurunjerri  it  is  not  so 
clear,  as  it  applied  apparently  to  all,  while  with  the 
Bunurong  the  practice  seems  not  to  have  existed. 

The  ceremonies  of  all  these  tribes  of  Victoria  seem  to 
me  to  have  been  in  a  state  of  decadence,  and  it  is  difficult 
to  decide  from  the  survivals  what  their  original  form  may 
have  been. 

The  Kurnai  Jeraeil 

The  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  Kurnai  were  in 
principle  the  same  as  those  which  I  have  described  as  the 
Bunan,  Burbung,  and  Bora.  But  in  details  they  differed 
much  from  them,  either  retaining  practices  which  had  become 
obsolete  elsewhere,  or  having  developed  new  details  inde- 
pendently. Both,  however,  may  have  co-operated  in  pro- 
ducing the  Jeraeil,  for  the  Kurnai,  in  consequence  of  their 
country  being  shut  in   by  dense  scrubs  and  forests  in   the 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  617 

west,  and  by  the  Australian  Alps  and  their  spurs  in  the 
north  and  east,  were  very  much  isolated  from  the  tribes 
beyond  those  boundaries. 

The  word  Jeraeil  means  leafy,  or  having  leaves  or  twigs, 
being  connected  with  Jerung,  a  "  branch  "  or  "  twig."  It  is 
therefore  analogous  to  the  Murring  word  Kuringal,  which 
may  be  translated  as  "  of  the  forest." 

At  the  Jeraeil  which  I  attended,  and  which  I  am  about 
to  describe,  the  old  men  had  decided  that,  being  short-handed, 
the  Krauatun  Headman  and  one  other  should  be  permitted 
to  help.  This  distinction  between  the  words  "  help "  and 
^'  participate  "  marks  the  fact  that  neither  of  these  men  had 
been  formally  initiated,  that  is  to  say,  they  had  not  passed 
through  the  stages  of  Tutnurring  and  Brewit  to  Jeraeil. 
Moreover,  although  the  Kurnai  were  short-handed  on  this 
occasion,  and  had  only  six  boys  to  be  initiated,  they 
absolutely  refused  to  allow  any  half-castes  even  to  be  present, 
giving  as  their  reason,  "  these  half-castes  have  nothing  to  do 
with  us."  This  is  a  well-marked  illustration  of  the  view  by 
this  tribe  as  to  the  derivation  of  the  child. 

All  the  Kurnai  being  assembled,  the  Headmen  decide 
when  the  ceremonies  shall  commence.  In  the  Jeraeil  which 
I  attended  the  ceremonies  were,  according  to  the  statements 
of  the  old  men  who  conducted  them,  the  exact  reproduction 
of  the  Jeraeil  of  their  fathers,  at  which  they  themselves  had 
been  initiated,  and  made  the  depositaries  of  the  ancestral 
knowledge.  After  the  occupation  of  Gippsland  by  the  white 
people  in  1842,  these  ceremonies  were  held  at  intervals  for 
some  twenty  years.  They  then  fell  into  disu.se,  and  were 
only  now  revived  in  response  to  the  message  which  I  had 
sent  round.'  The  old  men  said  they  were  glad  to  receive 
my  message,  and  to  hold  the  Jeraeil,  for  the  reason  that  the 
Kurnai  youth  "  were  now  growing  wild.  They  had  been 
too  much  with  the  whites,  so  that  now  they  paid  no  attention 

•  Those  to  whom  the  message  goes  accompanied  by  the  Ttiudun  must  oliey 
the  call.  Two  of  the  Hrayaka  clan  failed  to  attend  after  being  summoned,  having 
remained  at  one  of  the  missions  for  a  wedding.  The  old  men  were  very  indignant, 
and  said,  "  When  that  kalk  (wood)  goes  to  a  man  he  must  come,  he  cannot  stop 
away."  In  olden  times  this  non-attendance  would  have  had  serious  results  for 
the  two  Brayakas. 


6i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

either  to  the  words  of  the  old  men  or  to  those  of  the 
missionaries." 

The  Preliminary  Ceremony. — In  the  afternoon  of  the 
day  on  which  the  first  ceremony  of  the  Jeraeil,  called  Telbing, 
or  "  wattle-bark,"  was  held,  the  oldest  woman,^  the  wife  of 
the  second  Headman,  called  the  other  women  together  near 
the  camp  ;  and,  having  then  summoned  to  her  the  Tutnur- 
ring  (novices),'"^  proceeded  to  drill  them,  as  also  their 
Krauunf  in  the  performances.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  rehearsal. 
The  boys  were  seated  cross-legged  in  a  row  with  their  arms 
folded,  and  were  told  by  the  old  women  to  keep  their  eyes 
cast  down,  and  not  to  stare  about  ;  also  to  mind  and  keep 
good  time  to  the  drumming  by  the  women.  The  Krauun 
were  placed  in  a  row  just  behind  the  Tutnurring,  and  were 
instructed  to  copy  their  movements  exactly.  The  women 
now  commenced  to  drum  slowly  on  their  folded  rugs,  and  in 
accord  with  the  time  the  two  rows  of  seated  figures  moved 
their  bodies  sharply  first  to  one  side  and  then  to  the  other, 
at  the  same  time  reclining  the  head  almost  on  the  alternate 
shoulders.  One  boy,  who  was  not  quite  quick  enough  in  his 
movements,  was  told  by  the  old  woman  to  "  move  more 
sharply,  as  if  some  one  were  tickling  him."  After  some 
practice  the  old  woman  thought  the  performance  satisfactory, 
and  told  the  boys  to  go  away  and  rest  themselves. 

During  the  day  the  Jeraeil  ground  had  been  selected  by 
the  Headman  in  an  open  space  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
from  the  camp.  All  the  little  bushes  were  chopped  up,  and 
the  ground  cleared  of  sticks  and  rubbish. 

About  sundown,  the  Headman  gave  the  word  to 
commence,  and  walked  off  into  the  forest,  followed  by  the 
men.  The  old  woman  walked  to  the  Jeraeil  ground,  followed 
by  the  women  and  by  the  novices,  who  were  attended  by 
one  of   the   Bullawangs*     This    man    being  a  cripple  was 

'   Gweraeil-Rukiit ;  /f!ukuf  =  womzn. 

2  The  novices  are  called  Tutnurring  during  the  ceremonies  ;  afterwards  they 
are  Brexvit  (young  men)  ox  Jeraeil. 

3  The  Krauun  is  one  of  those  women  who  stand  in  the  relation  of  "sister" 
to  the  Tutnurring.  For  instance,  she  is  his  "tribal,"  if  not  "own,"  mother's 
brother's  daughter.  In  other  words,  she  is  the  "tribal,"  if  not  "own,"  sister  to 
the  Bullawang.     See  following  note  on  "  Bullatvang." 

^  The  Kurnai  name  for  the  Australian  robin  (Petroica  multicolor).      Pointing 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE 


619 


unable  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  ceremonies,  and  had 
therefore  been  assigned  specially  to  watch  and  instruct  the 
Tutnurring. 

On  reaching  the  ground,  the  Tutnurring  and  the  Krauun 
were  seated  in  two  rows,  as  at  the  rehearsal,  the  pairs  being 
allotted  to  each  other  in  accordance  with  their  group-relation- 
ship. The  mothers  of  the  boys  stood  in  a  row  behind  them, 
each  bearing  a  staff  sur- 
mounted by  a  tuft  of 
eucalyptus  twigs.^  The 
Gweraeil  -  Rukut  acted 
as  mistress  of  the  cere- 
monies. When  the 
arrangements  had  been 
completed,  and  the  boys 
were  sitting  silently  with 
their  eyes  cast  down  on 
the  ground,  a  distant 
noise  was  heard  of  rhyth- 
mical  shouts,  accom- 
panied by  dull,  muffled- 
sounding  blows.  These 
coming  nearer,  a  proces- 
sion of  men  came  in  sight 
led  by  the  Headman. 
The    performers   were 

smeared  over  with  charcoal  powder,^  and  bound  round  with 
stripsof  white  bark  across  their  bodies  likeshoulder-belts, round 
their  waists,  legs,  and  arms,  and  in  coronets  round  their  heads, 
from  which  rose  tall  waving  tufts  of  grass.  Similar  bunches 
of  grass  were  thrust  from  each  side  through  the  nose-perfora- 
tions.     Each  man   held  a  strip  of  bark,  about  three  feet   in 


36. — HK.\n   OF    BLI.I.AWANG    SHOWING 
THK   CHARACTERISTIC    MARKINGS. 


to  one  of  these  birds,  an  old  man  said  to  me,  "  That  is  the  policeman  who  looks 
after  the  boys."  The  birds  Bullawaug,  Yiiritni:;,  and  Djiitgtin  are  said  to  be 
three  of  the  ^*  ken  muk-Kurttai'"  ("real  Kurnai  ancestors  "). 

'  These  staves  should  properly  have  l)een  "yam-sticks,"  but  these  implements 
are  no  longer  used  by  the  Kurnai,  flour  having  replaced  the  former  food  of  roots 
or  tubers.  The  bunches  -of  leaves  which  play  a  part  in  these  ceremonies  are 
called  "Jerung" — branches,  boughs,  or  twigs. 

2  Both  in  the  Kurnai  and  in  the  Mtirrin)>  tril)es  the  use  of  charcoal  powder 
belongs  to  these  ceremonies  and  to  magic. 


620        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

length  and  four  inches  wide,  in  each  hand.  In  the  olden  times 
— forty  odd  years  back — the  men  were  entirely  naked  during 
these  ceremonies,  but  now  civilisation  has  so  far  modified  their 
customs,  even  in  the  Jeraeil,  that  they  wore  their  trousers, 
and  some  of  them  their  shirts  also.  The  line  of  men  came 
rapidly  forward  from  the  bush  in  a  series  of  short  runs, 
following  and  imitating  the  actions  of  their  leader,  who  came 
on  in  a  serpentine  course,  shouting  "  Huh  !  Huh  !  "  beating 
the  ground  in  time  with  his  strips  of  bark,  first  on  the  one 
side  and  then  on  the  other.  After  every  fifteen  or  twenty 
paces  the  men  stopped,  and  raising  their  strips  of  bark,  set 
up  a  loud  shout  of  "  }V/r  /"  (Hurrah  !). 

As  soon  as  the  men  appeared,  the  women  began  to  beat 
their  rugs,  the  mothers  kept  time  by  stamping  their  yam- 
sticks  on  the  ground,  and  the  seated  rows  of  Tutnurring  and 
Krauun  swayed  in  perfect  unison  alternately  to  right  and 
left.  The  men,  having  run  in  a  winding  course  once  or 
twice  past  the  boys,  formed  a  semicircle  in  front  and  near 
them  ;  and,  kneeling  down,  struck  the  ground  violently  with 
their  bark  strips,  shouting  "  Huh  !  Huh  !  Yeh  !  "  This 
continued  some  little  time,  and  then  the  men  walked  off  to 
the  camp,  after  having  stripped  off  their  disguising  costumes. 

This  preliminary  ceremony  ended  the  proceedings  for 
the  day.  The  Jeraeil  has  now  commenced,  and  by  it  the 
initiated  men  have  claimed  the  boys  from  their  mothers,  and 
have  shown  their  intention  of  making  men  of  them. 

"  Laying  the  Boys  down  to  sleep." — This  second  stage 
in  the  ceremonies  commenced  at  a  little  before  sundown  on 
the  following  day.  In  the  afternoon  the  men  had  prepared 
the  place  in  which,  as  they  said,  the  Tutnurring  were  to  be 
"  laid  down  to  sleep,"  A  curved  screen  of  boughs  had  been 
made,  about  three  feet  in  height,  twenty-five  feet  wide  across 
the  opening,  and  ten  feet  deep.  The  space  thus  partly 
enclosed  was  filled  about  six  inches  deep  with  freshly  plucked 
eucalyptus  twigs,  so  as  to  form  a  couch. 

The  same  ceremonies  were  now  repeated  that  had  been 
gone  through  on  the  previous  evening.  At  their  termination 
the  men  retired  into  the  bush  to  prepare  for  the  next 
ceremony.     The  boys  were  placed  standing  in  a  row  with 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  621 

their  faces  toward  the  camp,  the  Krauun  being  in  another 
row  behind  them,  and  behind  them  again  were  the  mothers. 
It  was  now  strongly  impressed  upon  the  boys  by  the 
Bullawang  in  charge  of  them  that,  when  the  men  returned, 
and  offered  rods  to  them,  or  threw  rods  on  them,  they  were 
on  no  account  to  touch  them,  but  must  let  them  fall  unheeded 
to  the  ground,  otherwise  the  Jeraeil  would  have  to  be  re- 
commenced from  the  beginning.  The  reason  of  this  caution 
is  that  the  rods  which  are  offered  to  the  boys  are  afterwards 
gathered  up  by  the  women,  and  this  would  be  unlawful  for 
them  to  do  if  any  of  the  Tutniirring  had  touched  them  with 
their  hands.  From  the  commencement  of  the  Jeraeil,  there 
is  an  increasing  .separation  of  the  Tutnurring  from  the 
women,  until  they  are  mutually  tabooed  after  the  "  sleeping  " 
ceremony.  For  either  then  to  touch  the  other  would  be 
something  very  like  pollution,  and  would,  as  the  Kurnai 
believe,  be  followed  by  serious  bodily  illness  to  one  or  both. 

After  a  short  time  of  waiting,  we  heard  in  the  distance  a 
curious  rattling  .sound  accompanying  the  words  "}  rt  I  IVa  ! 
Ya  !  Wa  !  "  ^  At  intervals  there  was  a  pau.se,  followed  by 
.shouts  of  "  Ye/t ! "  The  men  came  in  view,  led  by  the  old 
Headman,  slowly  marching  in  line.  Each  man  held  a  bundle 
of  thin  rods,  called  Teddeleng,  in  each  hand,  which  he  struck 
together  to  the  words  "  Ya  !  Wa  ! "  Several  men  carried 
other  bundles  slung  round  their  necks  to  supply  the  women 
and  the  Krauun  who  join  in  this  ceremony.  Having  marched 
round  the  two  rows  of  Tutnurring  and  Krauun,  they  then 
pas.sed  between  the  two  rows  and  encircled  the  boys,  thus 
severing  them  finally  from  the  Krauun,  And  from  their  mothers. 
As  they  halted,  each  presented  his  bundle  to  one  of  the  boys, 
and  then  proceeded  to  launch  the  rods  one  by  one  into  the 
air  over  them,  so  that  a  continual  shower  fell  on  the 
Tutnurring,  and  thence  to  the  ground,  where  they  were 
carefully  collected  by  the  Krauun. 

This  part  of  the  ceremony  marks,  as  I  have  said,  the 
separation  of  the  boys  from  the  women  from  this  time 
forward,  until  the  novice  has  been  readmitted  by  the  old 

1  No  meaning  can  be  given  for  these  words.      I  was  told  in  reference  to  them, 
"  Our  fathers  always  said  and  did  thus  to  make  the  boys  into  men." 


622        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

men  into  the  community  ;  but,  even  then,  the  young  man 
does  not  stand  on  his  former  footing.  He  no  longer  lives 
in  the  same  camp  with  his  parents  and  sisters,  but  in  the 
camp  of  the  Breivit,  or  young  unmarried  men.  So  strict  is 
the  rule  as  to  the  rods  that,  had  a  Tutnurring  touched  one 
of  them,  the  Kranun  would  have  dropped  all  those  they  had 
collected,  and  would  have  returned  to  the  camp  with  all  the 
women  present.  The  Jeraeil  would  have  had  to  be  recom- 
menced from  the  beginning,  and  the  boy  who  had  caused 
this  serious  break  in  the  ceremonies  would  have  been  severely 
punished.  Probably  in  the  olden- times  he  would  have  been 
speared. 

The  Krauun,  having  collected  the  rods,  reformed  their 
line  behind  the  motionless  Tutnurring,  and  the  Bullawangs 
formed  a  third  line  facing  them.  There  were  three  of 
these  to  each  boy.  The  Bullawang  is  the  Tuinurring^s 
"  own,"  or  "  tribal,"  mother's  brother's  son,  and  belongs  to 
that  local  group  of  the  tribe  with  which  the  Tutnurring' s 
father's  group  intermarried.  These  Bullaivangs  had  been 
selected  after  careful  consideration,  the  old  women  taking 
a  prominent  part  in  the  genealogical  discussion  which 
occurred  ;  for,  owing  to  the  diminution  of  the  tribe,  it  was 
necessary  to  trace  out  "  tribal  relations,"  as  there  were  not 
enough  "  own  relations  "  to  supply  the  required  number  of 
Bullawangs  to  each  boy.  I  heard  the  old  Gweraeil-Rukut 
ask  two  of  the  boys  which  part  their  "  mother's  father " 
belonged  to  ;  and  it  was  by  this  knowledge  of  the  locality 
and  of  the  individual  that  the  particular  Bullawang  was 
allotted. 

With  loud  shouts  of  ''Huh!"  and  the  rustling  of 
bunches  of  leaves,  each  group  of  three  Bullawangs  raised 
their  boy  several  times  high  in  the  air,  he  extending  his 
arms  towards  the  sky  as  far  as  possible.^  The  women 
now  raised  and  shook  their  leaf- topped  sticks,  and  the 
men  their  handfuls  of  leaves,  over  the  boys.  Immediately 
following    this,    the    Bullawangs   were   raised    into    the    air, 

1  I  was  much  struck  by  the  similarity  of  this  raising  the  hands  towards  the 
sky,  to  the  pointing  upwards  of  the  Murring  at  their  Ktiringal ;  but  I  could 
not  learn  that  it  had  any  reference  to  Aftoii^an-ngatia,  who  is  the  equivalent  of 
the  Murring  Daraimiltiti. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  623 

each  one  by  his  fellows,  and  with  his  face  turned  towards 
his  own  country.  As  each  one  was  raised  aloft,  the  men 
crowded  round  rustling  boughs  and  with  loud  shouts 
of  "  Huh  !  " 

The  last  scene  of  this  part  now  took  place.  It  is 
considered  most  important  that  it  be  carefully  carried  out 
according  to  the  ancestral  rules.  The  Tutuurring  are  to 
be  laid  to  sleep  as  boys,  in  order  to  be  awakened  as  men. 

Each  one  was  led  by  three  old  men  to  the  enclosure 
wherein  the  couch  of  leaves  had  been  prepared,  and  was 
there  carefully  laid  down  with  exclamations  of  "  Hel  Nga!"^ 
The  novices  were  laid  on  their  backs  side  by  side,  with 
their  arms  crossed  on  their  breasts.  Each  had  a  bundle 
of  twigs  under  his  head  for  a  pillow.  The  old  men  now 
carefully  and  completely  covered  them  with  rugs,  a  few 
leaves  having  been  first  sprinkled  over  their  naked  bodies. 
They  were  so  completely  covered  up  from  head  to  foot 
that  not  a  glimpse  of  any  one  of  them  was  visible,  nor 
could  they  see  anything. 

A  large  fire  was  then  lighted  at  their  feet,  and  the 
women  made  another  at  the  back  of  the  highest  part  of 
the  bough  screen.  While  this  was  being  done  the  old  men 
were  admonishing  the  boys  as  to  their  conduct  while  lying 
down.  They  were  neither  to  move  nor  to  speak.  If  one 
of  them  wanted  anything,  he  was  to  signify  this  to  his 
Bullaivang  by  chirping  like  an  Emu-wren  ( Yitrung)!'  They 
were  finally  reminded  that  from  this  time  forth  they  were 
no  longer  to  consort  with  children,  but  to  behave  themselves 
as  men.  Moreover,  they  were  carefully  to  listen  to  and 
remember  the  instructions  of  their  Biillaxvangs. 

These  boys  were  now  said  to  be  put  to  sleep.  In  the 
olden  days,  and,  indeed,  at  all  times  when  time  was  of  no 
object,  this  part  of  ihQ  Jeraeil  would  have  continued  without 
intermission  till  morning.  But  on  this  occasion,  as  time 
was  short,  the  proceedings  only  continued  till  about  mid- 
night, in  view  of  the  ceremonies  which   had  to  take   place 

'  "He!"  may  l)e  translated  here  "  Well,"' or  "Good."  The  aspirate  has 
a  nasal  sound  which  cannot  be  represented  in  writing.  "He!"  is  also  used 
affirmatively  as  we  use  the  sound  ^^  H»i  !'^     A^a  =  yes. 

-'    Yiirung,  the  totem  of  the  h'untai  males,  as  Djiitgun  is  that  of  the  females. 


624        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

next  day.  This  was  because  I  could  not  remain  beyond 
a  certain  date,  and  also  because  the  beginning  of  the  Jeraeil 
had  been  delayed  by  the  late  arrival  of  some  of  the  Kurnai. 
As  it  was,  the  Jeraeil  extended  over  five  days.  In  olden 
times  it  would  have  taken  two  or  three  weeks. 

The  two  fires  having  been  lighted,  and  the  Tutnurring 
formally  instructed,  the  important  proceedings  commenced. 
Two  Bullmvangs  crouched  down  at  the  boys'  heads,  in 
order  to  be  ready  if  their  aid  were  required.  I  was  amused 
at  this  time,  and  during  the  night,  in  watching  the  men 
and  listening  to  what  they  said  to  any  of  the  boys  who, 
wanting  something,  uttered  the  chirp  of  the  Emu -wren. 
The  Bullawang  had  first  to  stoop  down  and  ask  the  boys 
in  the  neighbourhood  whence  the  chirp  came,  "Is  it  you? 
Is  it  you  ? "  until  he  questioned  the  right  one,  when  an 
affirmative  chirp  replied.  Then  he  had  to  find  out  what 
the  boy  wanted,  which  he  could  only  do  by  a  series  of 
questions,  the  boys  not  being  allowed  to  speak.  Several 
times  he  was  completely  posed  ;  and,  after  a  number  of 
ineffectual  queries,  such  as  "  Are  you  too  hot  ? "  "  Is 
there  a  stick  sticking  into  you  ? "  "  Do  you  want  to  be 
moved  ?  "  "  Do  you  want  to  drink  ?  "  he  had  to  wait,  and 
scratch  his  head,  in  the  hope  of  thinking  of  the  right 
question. 

The  ceremony  commenced  by  the  Gweraeil-Rukut  stand- 
ing up  at  her  fire  with  a  bundle  of  rods  in  each  hand,  and 
slowly  beating  them  together  to  the  words  "  Ya  !  Wa  !  "  and 
"  Ve/t  ! "  at  intervals.  All  the  women  joined  in,  and  the 
Headman,  with  all  the  men,  followed  suit  at  their  fire. 
After  this  had  gone  on  for  perhaps  a  quarter  of  an  hour, 
the  old  woman  moved  off,  and  marched  round  the  enclosure 
to  the  tune  of  "  Va  !  Wa!"  followed  by  the  women,  and 
these  were  followed  by  the  men.  This  went  on  for  hours, 
the  only  sounds  being  the  soft  tramp  of  the  people  walk- 
ing round  the  enclosure,  the  regular  rattling  of  the  rods, 
and  the  monotonous  utterance — I  cannot  call  it  chant — of 
the  words  "  Ya  !  Wa  !  Yeh  !  "  This  was  sometimes  varied 
by  the  words  "  Yiirung  !  "  and  "Kat'ung  !  "  ^  instead  of  "  Yaf  " 

^   Kaiung  is  the  women's  apron,  which  in  the  old  times  was  worn  by  the 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  625 

and  "  IVa  I "  but  the  expression  of  exultation  "  Ve/i  !  "  was 
in  all  cases  used  at  intervals.  Anything  more  monotonous 
than  this  part  of  the  ceremony  I  cannot  conceive ;  but  the 
Kurnai  seemed  to  derive  great  satisfaction  from  it,  and  to 
think  it  very  powerful  in  infusing  manly  virtues  into  the 
boys.  It  is  supposed  to  have  the  effect  of  putting  them  to 
some  kind  of  magic  sleep,  not  like  the  ordinary  sleep  of 
mankind,  from  which  they  may  waken  into  manhood. 

About  midnight  the  old  woman  gave  the  signal  for  rest 
by  ceasing  her  march,  and  subsiding  into  her  opossum  rug 
by  her  fire.  The  women  all  followed  her  example,  the  men 
lay  down  round  their  fire,  and  all  were  soon  asleep.  Just 
before  dawn  the  old  Headman  woke,  and  called  out  to  the 
Giveraeil-Rukut  to  rouse  the  women.  Very  soon  the  pro- 
ceedings recommenced  just  where  they  left  off  the  night 
before.  The  slow  marching  round  to  the  monotonous  beat- 
ing of  the  rods,  and  the  cries  of  "  Viirung  !  Vn'runj^  !  Yeh  !  " 
went  on  for  about  half-an-hour,  when  the  women  ceased, 
leaving  the  men  standing  in  a  crowd  at  the  feet  of  the 
prostrate,  motionless  Tiitnurring,  still  beating  their  rods  to 
the  same  old  song,  and  invoking  Viirung,  the  "  men's 
brother,"  for  the  last  time. 

The  Tutnurring  had  been  put  to  sleep  the  night  before 
as  boys  ;  they  were  now  to  be  awakened  from  their  sleep  as 
men.  In  order  that  this  should  be  done  in  a  proper  manner, 
the  old  Headman  and  the  "  doctor  "  '  took  it  in  hand. 

The  women  left  the  Jeraeil  ground,  and  went  to  the 
camp  ;  for  the  ceremonies  which  are  now  held  are  those  at 
which  it  is  unlawful  for  the  women  or  the  uninitiated  to  be 
present.  At  these,  the  women  are  told,  Tundun  himself 
comes  down  to  make  the  boys  into  men  ;  and  they  are 
assured,  and  so  far  as  I  know  they  believe,  that  were  they 
to  be  present,  or  even  to  see  or  hear  what  goes  on,  he  would 
kill  them.  So  strong  is  this  feeling  against  the  women 
knowing  anything  of  the  secret  rites  that,  even   now,  after 

Kratiun  after  this  ceremony  until  she  married,  when  it  was  discarded.      I  believe 
that  DJiit,^uti,  the  female  totem,  the  "  women's  sister,"  ought  also  to  have  been 
invoked  during  the  marching  round.      I  noticed  its  omission,  but  neglected  at  the 
time  to  inquire  the  reason,  and  I  have  not  since  had  a  chance  of  so  doing. 
>  Mulla-tnullung  is  the  blackfellow  doctor,  the  medicine-man. 

2  S 


626        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

nearly  half  a  century  of  occupation  of  Gippsland  by  the 
white  men,  one  of  the  Headmen  said  to  me,  "  If  a  woman 
were  to  see  these  things  or  hear  what  we  tell  the  boys,  I 
would  kill  her."  Whether  this  would  now  be  really  done 
I  cannot  say — perhaps  not — but  it  might  be,  and  I  am 
certain  that,  at  the  time,  the  old  man  meant  what  he 
said. 

The  two  Headmen,  and  the  Mulla-mullung,  who  by 
virtue  of  his  office  had,  in  addition  to  the  charcoal  powder, 
a  band  of  white  drawn  across  his  face  from  ear  to  ear,  now 
began  to  uncover  the  Tutnurring  at  one  end  of  the  row. 
He  seemed  to  be  in  a  deep  sleep  ;  and  the  old  men,  raising 
him  up  into  a  sitting  posture,  made  curious  grunting  noises, 
for  the  purpose,  as  one  of  them  told  me  afterwards,  of 
wakening  him.  He,  being  placed  sitting  on  the  couch  of 
leaves  in  front  of  the  fire,  had  his  blanket  drawn  over  his 
shoulders  and  head  like  a  hood.  In  this  manner  all  the 
boys  were  roused  up,  and  seated  in  a  row,  having  then 
additional  rugs  drawn  over  them  all,  so  as  to  screen  them 
from  the  cold.  These  boys,  having  lived  so  much  among 
the  whites,  were  thought  by  the  old  men  to  have  departed 
too  much  from  the  good  old  ancestral  virtues,  and  it  was 
therefore  necessary  that  the  white  man's  influence  should,  if 
possible,  be  counteracted.  It  was  thought  that  the  lads  had 
become  selfish,  and  no  longer  willing  to  share  that  which 
they  obtained  by  their  own  exertions,  or  had  given  to  them, 
with  their  friends.  The  boys  being  all  seated  in  a  row,  at 
each  end  of  which  was  one  of  the  Headmen,  the  doctor 
proceeded  to  exercise  his  magical  functions.  He  stooped 
over  the  first  boy,  and  muttering  some  words  which  I  could 
not  catch,  he  kneaded  the  lad's  stomach  with  his  hands. 
This  he  did  to  each  one  successively,  and  by  it  the  Kurnai 
supposed  the  "  greediness  "  of  the  youth  would  be  expelled. 

It  is  at  this  time  that  the  Tutnurring  are  invested  with 
the  belt  of  manhood,^  the  kilt,'  the  armlets,^  forehead-band,'' 
nose-peg,'^  necklace,"  in  fact  with  the  full  male  dress. 

From  this  time  the  youths  are  constantly  supervised  and 

1  Barun.  •*  Piboro.  '•  Gumbart. 

^  Bridda-bridda.  *  Jimbrin.  ®   Takwai. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  627 

instructed  by  two  of  the  Bullawangs,  all  of  whom  take  this 
duty  in  turn.  A  camp  is  formed  in  which  the  Tut7iurring 
sit,  or  sleep,  and  which  they  are  not  allowed  to  leave  unless 
accompanied  by  a  Bullaivang.  So  strictly  are  the  novices 
looked  after  and  drilled,  even  as  to  the  manner  in  which 
they  are  to  sit  in  their  camp,  "  covered  with  their  blankets 
like  men,  and  not  behaving  like  boys,"  that  an  old  man  of 
the  now  almost  extinct  Wurunjerri  tribe,  who  attended  this 
Jeraeil  with  me,  after  seeing  this  going  on  all  day,  said 
confidentially  to  me,  "  This  one  all  the  same  like  it  Lockup." 
This  part  of  the  ceremonies  being  satisfactorily  concluded, 
the  men  went  away  to  their  camps  to  get  their  breakfasts, 
to  rest  and  to  sleep,  or  to  go  out  hunting  till  the  afternoon. 

During  the  morning  an  incident  occurred  which  was 
very  significant  of  the  profound  feeling  of  secrecy  in  regard 
to  the  central  mysteries  which  is  felt  by  the  Kurnai.  One 
of  the  Headmen  came  to  me,  and  intimated  that  the  old 
men,  before  proceeding  further,  desired  to  be  satisfied  that 
I  had  in  very  deed  been  fully  initiated  by  the  Brajerak 
blackfellows  in  their  Kiiringal.  I  caused  them  all  to  come 
to  me  in  the  recesses  of  a  thick  scrub,  far  from  the  possibility 
of  a  woman's  presence,  and  I  there  exhibited  to  them  the 
bull-roarer,  which  had  been  used  at  the  "  Brajerak  "  initia- 
tions previously  attended  by  me,  and  which  I  had  brought 
back  with  me.  After  I  had  shown  them  the  Murring  bull- 
roarer,  I  also  produced  the  smaller  one  of  two  which  are 
used  by  the  Chepara  tribe.  They  at  once  pointed  out  to 
me,  after  inspecting  it,  that  there  ought  to  be  another,  and  a 
larger  one  ;  and  they  seemed  much  pleased  when  I  informed 
them  that  they  were  correct  in  their  surmise,  and  that  I  had 
both.  I  also  fully  satisfied  them  that  I  had  witnessed  all 
the  ceremonies  of  the  Kuringal.  It  was  remarkable  that, 
long  as  the  Kurnai  had  known  me,  and  intimately  as  I  had 
known  some  of  them,  especially  the  Headman  Tulaba,  these 
special  secrets  of  the  tribe  had  been  kept  carefully  concealed 
from  me  by  all  but  two,  one  of  whom  was  now  dead,  and 
the  other  absent  from  the /^ra^//,  ostensibly  through  sickness, 
but  really  from  consciousness  of  tribal  treachery,  and  fear 
of  the  consequences  if  it  were  brought  home  to  him.     The 

2  s  2 


628        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


old  men  were  very  urgent  to  know  what  "  wicked  man  "  ^  had 
betrayed  to  me  the  secrets  of  the  Jeraeil,  and  especially  of 
the  Tundun  ;  but  they  were  silenced,  if  not  satisfied,  when 
I  said  that  the  man  who  first  told  me  was  dead. 

"  S halving    the    Grand- 
7  -         father"  - — This  is  the  cryptic 

phrase  used  to  describe  the 
central  mystery,  which  in 
reality  means  the  exhibition 
to  the  novices  of  the  Tutidun, 
and  the  revelation  to  them  of 
the  ancestral  beliefs.  It  is 
used,  for  instance,  by  the 
Bullazvangs  to  their  charges, 
as  in  telling  them  "  This  after- 
noon we  will  take  you,  and 
show  your  grandfather  to 
you." 

The  Kurnai  have  two  bull- 
roarers,    a    larger    one   called 
3  "  Tundun"  or  "  the  man,"  and 
a  smaller  one  called  "  Rukut- 
Tundun"  the  woman,  or  wife 
of  Tundun.      The  larger  one 
is  also  called    "  Grandfather," 
Wehntwin,  or    Muk  -  brogan} 
In  this  the  Kurnai  differ  from 
the    Murring,  who  have  only 
one  bull-roarer,  but  they  agree 
with  several  other  Australian 
tribes.      I  think,  but  I  cannot 
be  sure,  that  where  two  bull- 
roarers  are  used,  it  indicates  ceremonies  in  which  the  women 
take  a  certain   part,  whereas  in  tribes  where  there  is  only 
one,  as  the  Murring,  the  women  are  totally  excluded. 

While  the  novices  were  thus  under  tutelage  during  the 

*  Z>/«rf/«  =  bad,  wicked. 

2  Wehntwin  =  father's  father,  or  father's  father's  brother. 

3  All  those  who  are  initiated  at  the  s&me /eraei/  are  Brogan,  or  Comrade, 
to  each  other.     Mtik-Brogan  is  the  Arch-Brogan,  if  I  may  so  put  it. 


FIG.  37. — THK  TWO  BUU.-KOARKRS  Ol" 
THK  KURNAI  TRIBK  —  (3)  IS  THE 
CROSS-SECTION    OK   ( I ).        X  J. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  629 

day  following  the  sleeping  ceremony,  and  while  most  of  the 
men  were  out  hunting,  the  Headmen  and  several  others 
went  away  to  prepare  for  the  great  ceremony  of  the  grand- 
father. The  spot  chosen  was,  as  I  afterwards  ascertained, 
over  2000  paces  distant  from  the  camp  of  the  Tutnurring. 
While  sitting  there,  talking  to  the  Bullawangs,  I  several 
times  heard  the  peculiar  screech  of  the  "  woman  Tundun" 
when  the  men  who  were  making  them  tried  one  to  see  if  it 
was  satisfactory.  When  they  were  ready,  about  an  hour 
before  sunset,  word  was  brought  to  the  Bullawangs,  who 
took  their  charges  to  the  appointed  place  under  the  pretext 
"  Let  us  go  for  a  walk.  You  must  be  tired  with  sitting  there 
all  day." 

On  reaching  the  place,  which  was  at  the  edge -of  an  ex- 
tensive and  dense  scrub  of  Ti-tree  {Melaleuca),  with  a  little 
open  plain  of  some  fifty  acres  in  front,  the  novices  were 
halted,  and  made  to  kneel  down  in  a  row,  with  their  blankets 
drawn  closely  over  their  heads,  so  as  to  prevent  their  seeing 
anything.  One  of  the  Bullaiuangs  knelt  before  each,  and 
another  stood  behind.  The  principal  Headman  stood  near, 
holding  his  throwing-stick  in  his  hand.  This  being  arranged 
satisfactorily,  the  ceremony  commenced.  The  second  Head- 
man emerged  from  the  scrub  at  about  a  hundred  and  fifty 
yards'  distance,  holding  his  bull-roarer,  a  "  man  Tundun"  in 
his  hand,  which  he  commenced  to  whirl  round,  making  a 
dull -sounding  roar.  The  man  immediately  following  him 
had  a  "  woman  Tundun  "  ;  and  in  this  way  sixteen  men  came 
slowly  forward,  each  one,  as  he  came  into  the  open,  whirling 
his  instrument  and  adding  to  the  roaring  and  screeching  din. 
By  the  time  the  last  man  had  marched  out  into  the  clear 
ground,  the  leader  had  gained  a  point  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  kneeling  Tutnurrings,  and  the  performers  then  halted 
in  a  semicircle,  and  produced  a  finale  of  discordant  sounds. 
When  this  ceased,  the  Headman  ordered  the  novices  to  stand 
up,  and  raise  their  faces  towards  the  sky.  Then,  pointing 
upwards  with  his  spear-thrower,  the  blanket  was  pulled  off 
the  head  of  each  boy  by  his  Bullaivang,  and  the  eyes  of  all 
the  novices  being  directed  to  the  uplifted  throwing-stick,  the 
Headman  said,  "  Look  there  !      Look  there  !      Look  there  !  " 


630        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

successively  pointing  first  to  the  sky,  then  lower,  and  finally 
to  the  Tundim  men.  Two  old  men  now  immediately  ran 
from  one  novice  to  the  other,  saying  in  an  earnest  manner, 
"  You  must  never  tell  this.  You  must  not  tell  your  mother, 
nor  your  sister,  nor  any  one  who  is  not  Jeraeil."  In  the 
olden  times  spears  were  held  pointed  at  the  novices  at  this 
juncture,  to  emphasise  the  threats  that  were  made,  should 
they  reveal  the  mysteries  unlawfully.  The  old  Headman 
then,  in  an  impressive  manner,  revealed  to  the  novices  the 
ancestral  beliefs,  which  I  condense  as  follows  : — 

Long  ago  there  was  a  great  Being,  called  Mungan-ngaua, 
who  lived  on  the  earth,  and  who  taught  the  Kurnai  of  that 
time  to  make  implements,  nets,  canoes,  weapons — in  fact,  all 
the  arts  they  know.  He  also  gave  them  the  personal  names 
they  bear,  such  as  Tulaba.  Mungan-ngaua  had  a  son  named 
Tiindun^  who  was  married,  and  who  is  the  direct  ancestor — 
(the  Wehnttvin,  or  father's  father) — of  the  Kurnai.  Mungan- 
ngaua  instituted  the  Jeraeil,  which  was  conducted  by  Tiaidun, 
who  made  the  instruments  which  bear  the  names  of  himself 
and  of  his  wife. 

Some  tribal  traitor  once  impiously  revealed  the  secrets 
of  the  Jeraeil  to  women,  and  thereby  brought  down  the  anger 
of  Mufigan  upon  the  Kurnai.  He  sent  fire  (the  Aurora 
Australis),  which  filled  the  whole  space  between  earth  and 
sky.  Men  went  mad  with  fear,  and  speared  one  another, 
fathers  killing  their  children,  husbands  their  wives,  and 
brethren  each  other.  Then  the  sea  rushed  over  the  land, 
and  nearly  all  mankind  were  drowned.  Those  who  survived 
became  the  ancestors  of  the  Kurnai.  Some  of  them  turned 
into  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  fishes  ;  and  Tundun  and  his  wife 
became  porpoises.  Mungan  left  the  earth,  and  ascended  to 
the  sky,  where  he  still  remains. 

From  that  time,  say  the  Kurnai,  the  knowledge  of  the 
Jeraeil  and  its  mysteries  has  been  handed  down  from  father 
to  son,  together  with  the  penalty  for  unlawfully  revealing 
them,  and  for  breaking  the  ordinance  of  Mungan — namely, 
destruction  by  his  fire,  or  death  at  the  hands  of  the  men  to 
whom  his  laws  have  been  transmitted. 

The    novices,    having    been    thus     properly    instructed. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  631 

were  told  to  take  the  Tundun  in  hand,  and  to  sound 
it,  which  they  did  with  evident  reluctance  and  appre- 
hension. 

Before  the  return  to  the  camp,  what  is  called  the  "opossum 
game"  was  played.  A  young  tree  was  cut  down  and  trimmed 
of  its  branches  so  as  to  form  a  pole  about  twenty  feet  long, 
and  perhaps  six  inches  thick  at  the  lower  end.  This  was 
placed  in  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground,  a  large  bunch  of  leaves 
being  tied  to  the  upper  end.  It  represented  a  tree,  and  was 
held  in  position  by  as  many  men  as  could  get  at  it,  grasping 
it  with  one  hand,  and  holding  in  the  other  a  bundle  of  leafy 
twigs.  Up  this  pole  one  after  the  other  the  Bullaivangs 
climbed,  touching  it  only  with  their  hands  and  feet,  imitating 
the  actions  of  opossums,  while  the  men  below  rustled  their 
bunches  of  leaves  and  shouted  "  Huh  !  "  This  was  supposed 
to  represent  an  opossum  hunt.  It  is  interesting  as  being  the 
only  "  animal  game  "  in  the  Jeraeil,  and  it  seems  to  be  intro- 
duced without  any  reason  or  connection  with  the  other 
ceremonies.  It  is,  however,  noteworthy  that  the  Kurnai  say 
it  is  done  "  to  amuse  the  boys,"  and  this  is  the  reason  given 
by  the  Murring  for  the  performance  of  their  numerous 
animal  games  and  dances,  which,  like  this  one,  take  place 
immediately  following  the  "  central  mystery."  I  regard 
this  "  opossum  game "  as  most  probably  a  survival  from  a 
time  when  the  Kurnai  had  a  class-system  with  numerous 
totems. 

The  men  all  now  returned  to  their  camps,  and  the 
Tutniirring  to  theirs  under  the  charge  of  the  Bullaivangs. 
It  was  evident,  however,  that  the  novices  were  no  longer 
under  such  strict  supervision  as  before,  they  being  now  in 
the  ranks  of  men  though  only  so  recently  admitted. 

At  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  Bulla- 
ivangs took  their  charges,  each  carrying  a  Tundun,  for 
the  purpose,  as  they  put  it,  of  "  frightening  the  women." 
The  women  and  children  are  always  told  that  at  the 
secret  parts  of  the  Jeraeil,  Tundun  himself  comes  down  to 
"  make  the  boys  into  men."  The  hideous  sounds  which  the 
uninitiated  may  chance  to  hear  from  a  distance  they  are 
told   is  Tundun's  voice,  and  they  are  warned   not  to   leave 


632        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

their  camp  while  he  is  about,  lest  he  should  kill  them  with 
his  spears. 

This  "  frightening  the  women "  by  the  Bullawangs  and 
the  newly-initiated  youths  is  done  by  walking  slowly  round 
the  encampment  at  such  a  distance  that  there  is  no  chance  of 
their  being  seen,  or  their  movements  through  bushes  and  over 
logs  being  heard  by  the  women  and  children.  They  swing 
their  bull-roarers  as  they  go.  Tundun  is  thus  supposed  by 
the  women  and  children  to  be  walking  round  the  camp 
before  returning  to  the  place  whence  he  came.  At  the 
Jeraeil  I  am  describing  the  novices  thoroughly  entered  into 
the  fun  of  frightening  the  women  ;  and,  having  got  over 
their  awe  of  the  bull-roarers,  they  made  an  outrageous  noise 
with  them.  The  moment  the  roaring  and  screeching  sounds 
were  heard  there  was  a  terrible  clamour  of  cries  and  screams 
from  the  women  and  children,  to  the  delight  of  the  novices, 
who  now  in  their  turn  aided  in  mystifying  the  uninitiated. 
It  sometimes  happens  that  during  this  nocturnal  perambula- 
tion one  of  the  bull-roarers  becomes  detached  from  its  string 
and  is  thus  lost.  If,  perchance,  it  is  afterwards  picked  up 
by  a  woman  or  child,  their  curiosity  is  satisfied  by  the  state- 
ment that  it  is  a  "  paddle  belonging  to  Tundun"  which  he  is 
supposed  to  have  dropped  in  returning  home.  The  shape  of 
the  bull-roarer  is  much  that  of  the  little  bark  paddle  which 
the  Kurnai  use  when  sitting  down  in  their  canoes. 

"  Giving  the  Boys  some  Frogs."  —  After  the  revelation 
of  the  central  mysteries  of  the  Jeraeil,  the  novices  being 
now  enrolled  among  the  men,  are  not  kept  with  such 
strictness  as  before.  They  are  allowed  to  go  out  in  com- 
pany with  their  Bullawangs  to  seek  for  such  animals  as 
are  permitted  them  for  food  ;  and  this  occasion  is  improved 
by  their  mentors,  who  deliver  a  peripatetic  lecture  on  their 
lawful  and  their  forbidden  foods.  When  in  camp  the 
instruction  continues  generally  as  to  the  duties  now  devolving 
upon  them  by  reason  of  their  having  reached  manhood.  I 
may  now,  as  at  a  convenient  time,  notice  what  these  rules 
of  conduct  are — the  principal  ones  at  least,  for  to  enumerate 
them  all  would  require  an  essay  on  the  tribal  and  social  life 
of  the  Kurnai.      The  youths  are  instructed  : 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  633 

1.  To  listen  to  and  obey  the  old  men. 

2.  To  share  everything  they  have  with  their  friends. 

3.  To  live  peaceably  with  their  friends. 

4.  Not  to  interfere  with  girls  or  married  women. 

5.  To  obey  the  food  restrictions,  until  they  are  released 

from  them  by  the  old  men. 

Some  of  the  rules  which  I  heard  impressed  upon  the 
Tutnurring  are  curious.  They  were  not  to  use  the  right 
hand  for  anything,  unless  told  to  do  so  by  the  Bullawang. 
A  breach  of  this  rule,  they  were  informed,  would  certainly 
cause  Gumily  that  is  to  say,  some  magical  substance,  such  as 
Bulk,  to  get  into  the  offending  member,  which  would  require 
the  "  doctor  "  to  extract  it.  They  were  cautioned  not  to  go 
near  an  enceinte  woman,  nor  to  let  a  woman's  shadow  fall 
across  them,  nor  to  permit  a  woman  to  make  bread  ^ 
for  them,  under  the  certainty  that  such  acts  would  cause 
them  to  become  "  thin,  lazy,  and  stupid."  But  a  woman 
might  cook  an  opossum  for  the  novice,  provided  it  were 
a  male  and  the  entrails  had  been  extracted  before  she 
touched  it. 

The  rules  as  to  food  animals  are  as  follows  :  The  novice 
may  not  eat  the  female  of  any  animal,  nor  the  emu,  the 
porcupine,  the  conger-eel,^  nor  the  spiny  ant-eater  ;  ^  but  he 
may  eat  the  males  of  the  common  opossum,  the  ringtail 
opossum,  the  rock  wallaby,  the  small  .scrub  wallaby,  the 
bush-rat,  the  bandicoot,  the  rabbit-rat,*  the  brushtail,^  and 
the  flying -mouse.  He  becomes  free  of  the  flesh  of  the 
forbidden  animals  by  degrees.  This  freedom  is  given  him 
by  one  of  the  old  men  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  smearing 
some  of  the  cooked  fat  over  his  face.*^  The  novice  must 
not  eat  wattle-gum  until  some  of  the  old  men  cook  and 
give  it  to  him.      This   is  done  soon   after  the  ceremonies, 

'  This  prohibition  as  to  bread  had  been  transferred  from  the  prohibition  as  to 
the  Dura,  which  was  formerly  much  used,  and  which  was  cooked  by  baking  in  the 
ashes.  ^  Noyang.  ^  Kauem.  *  Peraineles  lagotis. 

'•  Phascologale  penicillata. 

"  One  of  the  men  attending  this /eraril  had  never  yet  been  made  free  of  some 
food  animal,  I  forget  which,  but  it  was  the  eating  of  which,  for  some  reason  or 
other,  he  believed  would  be  injurious  to  him.  Being  very  strong  and  active  and 
always  on  his  guard,  he  had  managed  to  esca]w  whenever  the  old  men  had  tried 
to  smear  his  face  with  its  fat. 


634        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

and  indeed  when  in  poor  country  the  food  rules  are  soon 
relaxed,  as,  for  instance,  at  Lake  Tyers,  where  flesh  food  is 
somewhat  scarce.  In  what  manner  the  Tutnurring  become 
free  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  "  old  man  kangaroo "  I  shall 
presently  show. 

The  next  stage  after  "  Showing  the  Grandfather "  is 
called  "  Giving  the  Tutnurring  some  Frogs,"  This  is  a 
cryptic  way  of  referring,  under  the  name  of  "  Frogs,"  which 
are  swamp-dwellers,  to  the  Dura}  a  food  plant  which  grows 
abundantly  in  the  lagoons  and  swamps  of  Gippsland.  In 
this  ceremony  the  women  again  take  a  prominent  part. 
But  the  novices  are  now  with  the  men,  and  not,  as  at  first, 
together  with  the  Krauun,  under  the  direction  of  their 
mothers. 

In  preparation  of  this  ceremony  the  women  have 
gathered  some  of  the  rhizomes  of  the  Dura,  and  baked  them 
in  the  ashes  as  usual  when  preparing  them  for  food.  The 
Tutnurring  having  been  painted  by  their  guardians,  each 
one  with  a  band  of  red  ochre  down  each  side  of  the  nose, 
were  told  to  "  come  and  eat  some  frogs."  They  were  taken 
to  the  open  space  in  the  Jeraeil  ground,  and  there  placed 
in  a  row,  the  Buliaivangs  and  other  men  being  grouped 
behind  them,  holding  branches  in  their  hands.  The  women 
then  came  from  the  main  camp,  bringing  with  them  the 
Krauun,  whom  they  placed  in  a  row  facing  the  novices,  but 
about  a  hundred  and  fifty  yards  distant  from  them.  The 
mothers  and  the  other  women  stood  behind.  Each  Krauun 
held  in  her  hands  a  pole  about  ten  feet  long,  at  the  end  of 
which  was  tied  a  bunch  of  the  cooked  rhizomes  of  the  Dura. 
They  shouted,  "  Come  here,  and  we  will  give  you  your  food." 
Each  novice  had  been  placed  fronting  his  Krauun,  and  being 
instructed  what  to  do,  ran  forward,  seized  the  Dura,  and 
throwing  it  down  on  the  ground,  ran  back  to  the  Jeraeil 
camp  at  the  top  of  his  speed.  The  men,  who  had  raised 
shouts  of  "  Huh  ! "  and  rustled  their  boughs,  opened  their 
ranks  to  let  the  Tutnurring  through,  and  then  followed  them, 
shouting,  to  the  camp.  One  of  the  Buliaivangs,  who  had 
been  told  off  for  the  purpose,  gathered  up  the  Dura,  and 

1   Typha  angttstifoUa. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  635 

brought  it  to  tKe  Jeraeil  ground,  where  it  was  divided, 
and  eaten  by  all  present.  The  women  returned  to  their 
camp. 

"  Seeing  the  Ghosts." — At  this  stage  the  Tutnurring  are 
told  to  come  and  see  the  Mrart  (ghosts).  For  this 
ceremony  it  is  necessary  to  procure  a  large  "old -man 
kangaroo."  At  the  Jeraeil  which  I  am  describing,  two  days 
were  fruitlessly  spent  by  almost  all  the  men  ranging  over 
miles  of  country  in  search  of  the  wanted  Brangula  jira? 
I  found  out  afterwards  that  all  the  "  old  men "  had  been 
shot  for  their  skins  by  a  party  of  kangaroo  hunters  (white 
men)  who  had  been  encamped  for  some  time  at  a  place 
near  by.  The  Jeraeil  therefore  came  to  a  standstill,  until 
one  genius  suggested  that  a  male  wallaby  should  be  substi- 
tuted. The  old  men  having  approved,  the  difficulty  was 
got  over.  This  Brangula,  having  been  shot  and  roasted, 
was  cut  up,  and  the  pieces  were  laid  on  the  top  of  a  large 
fallen  tree  at  a  little  distance  from,  but  within  hearing  of, 
the  camp,  where  the  novices  were  still  under  the  careful 
tuition  of  their  guardians.  When  all  was  prepared,  the 
men  began  to  shout,  as  if  driving  game,  to  beat  the  logs 
and  tree-stems  with  clubs  and  tomahawk-heads,  and  in  fact 
to  represent  a  "  kangaroo  drive."  The  Tutnurring  being 
carefully  shrouded  in  their  blankets,  were  told  to  come  and 
see  where  "  the  ghosts  had  caught  a  kangaroo."  On  reaching 
the  spot  where  the  men  were  still  imitating  the  driving  of 
game,  the  novices  were  placed  in  a  row  clo.se  to  the  log  on 
which  the  game  was  displayed.  The  noise  now  ceased,  and 
the  Headman,  holding  his  throwing-stick  pointing  to  the  sky, 
told  them  to  look  up  ;  and  their  blankets  being  thrown  off, 
he  pointed  successively  three  times  to  the  sky,  to  the 
horizon,  and  to  the  meat  on  the  log,  saying,  "  Look  there  ! 
Look  there  !      Look  there  !  " 

The  novices  were  now  seated  on  the  log,  each  one 
having  a  pile  of  meat  beside  him.  The  Headman  gave 
some  of  this  to  them,  and  the  rest  was  eaten  up  by  the 
other  men.'"^ 

'   Brani^ula,  "  male  "  ;  y/Va,  "  kangaroo." 

-'  This  may  perhaps  be  a  survival  of  former  ceremonies  of  toteniism. 


636        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


In  this  way  the  youths  were  made  for  ever  free  of  the 
flesh  of  the  kangaroo.  It  was  explained  to  me  that  this 
ceremony  is  a  most  important  one  ;  for,  were  it  not  carried 
out,  the  youth  would  never  be  able  lawfully  to  eat  the  flesh 
of  the  male  kangaroo,  as  the  necessary  qualification  can  be 
acquired  in  no  other  way  than  by  eating  the  flesh  in  common 
with  all  the  men  who  are  present  at  the  Jeraeil. 

After  this  the  boys  were  dressed  as  men,  with  a  red 
forehead-band,  a  nose-peg,  reed  necklace,  armlets,  and  with 
their  faces  marked  with  naial — that  is,  red  ochre. 

Tlu  Water  Ceremony. — After  the  "  ghosts  "  had  killed 
and  eaten  their  kangaroo,  the  novices  retired  in  company 
with  their  Bullaivangs  and  some  other  men.      All  the  rest 

of  the  people  also  left  the 
camp,  and  went  by  another 
route  to  the  place  where  the 
final  ceremony  was  to  take 
place.  This  ceremony  is 
public  ;  and  not  only  are 
the  women  present,  but  the 
novices  also,  who,  after  it, 
become  Jeraeil,  and  no 
longer  Tutnurring,  stop  in 
the  young  men's  camp  ^ 
for  the  day,  or  until  their 
guardians  are  ready  to  take 
them  away. 

This  final  rite,  which 
is  the  termination  of  the 
Jeraeil,  was  on  the  banks  of 
a  rather  deep  dry  creek, 
running  through  the  level 
country  near  the  Thompson  River.  The  mothers  of  the 
novices  stood  in  the  bed  of  the  dry  creek,  each  having  a 
vessel  full  of  water  before  her  on  the  ground.  The 
novices   had  encamped  the  night   before   some  miles  away 

'  The  young  men  [Brexvit)  and  the  married  men  who  have  not  their  wives 
with  them  always  encamp  together  at  some  distance  from  the  camps  of  the 
married  men. 


FIG.  38. — TUTNURRING,  SHOWING  CHARAC- 
TERISTIC   MARKING. 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  637 

down  the  river,  and  now,  being  led  by  their  Bullawangs , 
followed  up  the  winding  bed  of  the  creek  in  single  file,  and 
out  of  sight,  until  within  a  hundred  yards  of  where  the 
mothers  stood.  As  they  came  up,  each  woman  stooped  to 
drink,  and  her  son  splashed  the  water  over  her  with  a  stick 
which  he  held  in  his  hand.  She,  appearing  enraged,  filled 
her  mouth  with  water  several  times,  and  squirted  it  over  his 
face  and  head.  The  novices  then  walked  off  to  the  young 
men's  camp,  and  the  women  went  to  their  own.  One  of 
them  was  crying  at  the  loss  of  her  son. 

Though  the  "  Water  Ceremony  "  ends  the  Jeraeil,  it  does 
not  terminate  the  probation  which  the  youths  have  to  under- 
go. They  must  spend  a  time,  which  may  be  of  months' 
duration,  away  from  their  friends  under  the  charge  of  their 
Bullawangs  in  the  bush.  In  short,  they  must  remain  away 
gaining  their  own  living,  learning  lessons  of  self-control,  and 
being  instructed  in  the  manly  duties  of  the  Kurnai,  until 
the  old  men  are  satisfied  that  they  are  sufficiently  broken 
in  to  obedience,  and  may  be  trusted  to  return  to  the  com- 
munity. In  the  present  instance,  the  old  men  had  deter- 
mined at  the  Jeraeil  that  the  novices  should  remain  at 
least  a  month  away,  for  the  reason  that,  as  they  expressed 
it,  having  been  so  much  with  the  whites  the  lads  had  "  gone 
wild."  However,  I  have  heard  since  that  they  relented, 
and  permitted  the  youths  to  return  at  an  earlier  date. 
Under  the  strict  rules  of  the  olden  time  this  would  not 
have  been  the  case.  An  old  man  said  to  me,  "  It  is  not 
much  use  forbidding  them  to  eat  things.  They  can  get 
plenty  of  food — the  Jeraeil  has  nothing  to  do  with  beef  and 
damper." 

The  particulars  given  in  this  chapter  as  to  the  initiation 
ceremonies  of  the  tribes  of  the  south-eastern  quarter  of 
Australia,  although  scanty  and  incomplete  in  many  cases, 
will  suffice  to  show  with  sufficient  clearness  the  principles 
on  which  they  rest,  and  the  procedure  by  which  they  are 
carried  out. 

Four  principal  forms  of  the  ceremonies  may  be  dis- 
tinguished :  the  Kuringal  of  the  tribes  of  the  south  coast 
of  New    South   Wales  ;  the    Burbung  of  the   Wiradjuri   of 


638        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

western  New  South  Wales  ;  the  Bora  of  the  Kamilaroi 
tribes  ;  and  the  Dora  ceremonies  of  the  tribes  of  the  south- 
eastern part  of  Queensland.  In  addition  to  them,  there  are 
to  be  appended  the  initiation  ceremonies  of  the  tribes  who 
occupied  the  western  parts  of  Victoria,  and  the  Jeraeil 
ceremonies  of  the  Kurnai  of  Gippsland.  These  ceremonies 
all  exhibit  principles  common  to  all,  but  vary  in  the 
manner  in  which  those  principles  are  carried  out.  Those 
which  are  referable  to  the  Jibauk  of  the  Wurunjerri  are 
probably  survivals  of  ceremonies  derived  from  tribes  such 
as  the  Wiradjuri.  The  Jeraeil  was  probably  brought  by 
the  primitive  ancestors  of  the  Kurnai,  when  they  occupied 
Gippsland,  from  the  west,  that  is,  by  the  early  Kulin 
ancestors. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Kuritigal,  in  its  form  as  the 
Bunatiy  is  almost  identical  with  the  Burbung^  and  apparently 
more  or  less  so  with  the  ceremonies  of  tribes  situated 
between  the  coast  and  the  Great  Dividing  Range  as  far 
north  as  Port  Macquarie.  This  gives  an  extent  of  some 
four  hundred  and  fifty  miles  along  the  coast-line  of  New 
South  Wales.  The  Burbnng,  in  its  slightly  varied  forms, 
extends  from  near  the  junction  of  the  Murray  and  the 
Darling  Rivers  northwards  to  the  farthest  waters  of  the 
Macquarie  River,  some  three  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  and 
eastward  to  the  western  bounds  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes, 
some  three  hundred  miles.  These  latter,  with  kindred  tribes 
such  as  the  Wollaroi,  Unghi,  and  Bigambul,  extend  from 
the  sources  of  the  Hunter  River  northwards,  between  the 
Wiradjuri  and  the  coast  tribes,  into  Queensland,  at  least  as 
far  as  the  Condamine  River,  a  distance  approaching  three 
hundred  miles.  These  collectively  form  what  may  be  termed 
the  south-eastern  type  of  the  Australian  ceremonies  of 
initiation. 

The  intention  of  the  ceremonies  is  evidently  to  make 
the  youths  of  the  tribe  worthy  members  of  the  community, 
according  to  their  lights.  Certain  principles  are  impressed 
upon  them  for  their  guidance  during  life — for  instance,  to 
listen  to  and  obey  the  old  men  ;  to  generously  share  the 
fruits  of  the  chase  with  others,  especially  with  their  kindred  ; 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  639 

not  to  interfere  with  the  women  of  the  tribe,  particularly 
those  who  are  related  to  them,  nor  to  injure  their  kindred, 
in  its  widest  sense,  by  means  of  evil  magic.  Before  the 
novice  is  permitted  to  take  his  place  in  the  community, 
marry,  and  join  in  its  councils,  he  must  possess  those 
qualifications  which  will  enable  him  to  act  for  the  common 
welfare. 

As  a  hunter  he  is  sent  into  the  bush  to  find  his 
own  living,  often  for  several  months,  and,  under  the  pro- 
hibitions as  to  certain  food  animals  which  arc  imposed 
upon  him,  he  is  practically  placed  in  a  state  of  privation, 
while  being  possibly  surrounded  by  plentiful  but  forbidden 
food. 

The  qualifications  of  the  young  men  are  tested  in  some 
tribes,  especially  those  of  Southern  Queensland,  by  a  cere- 
monial combat  in  which  they  take  part. 

The  extraordinary  restrictive  powers  of  the  food  rules, 
and  the  powerful  effect  of  the  teaching  at  the  ceremonies, 
has  been  shown  in  cases  known  to  me  by  the  serious  and 
even  fatal  effects,  produced  by  what  one  must  call  conscience, 
in  novices  who  had  broken  the  rules  and  eaten  of  forbidden 
food. 

All  those  who  have  had  to  do  with  the  native  race  in 
its  primitive  state  will  agree  with  me  that  there  arc  men  in 
the  tribes  who  have  tried  to  live  up  to  the  standard  of 
tribal  morality,  and  who  were  faithful  friends  and  true  to 
their  word  ;  in  fact  men  for  whom,  although  savages,  one 
must  feel  a  kindly  respect.  Such  men  are  not  to  be  found 
in  the  later  generation,  which  has  grown  up  under  our 
civilisation,  and  is  rapidly  being  exterminated  by  it. 

In  the  ceremonies  mentioned,  with  few  exceptions,  there 
is  a  similar  mode  of  assembling  the  meeting  for  initiation, 
the  making  of  a  circular  earthen  mound,  the  removal  of  the 
boys  from  their  mothers'  control,  the  knocking  out  of  the 
tooth,  the  investment  in  some  tribes  of  the  novice  with  a 
man's  attire,  the  formation  of  a  new  camp  by  the  women, 
and  the  showing  of  the  boy  to  his  mother,  with  the  severance 
of  her  control  over  him  by  a  formal  act,  and  finally  the 
period  of  probation  under  severe  conditions.      I   have  else- 


640        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

where  referred  to  the  belief  inculcated  as  to  the  exist- 
ence of  a  great  supernatural  anthropomorphic  Being,  by 
whom  the  ceremonies  were  first  instituted,  and  who  still 
communicates  with  mankind  through  the  medicine- men,  his 
servants. 

All  this  is  more  or  less  clearly  shown  in  the  ceremonies 
in  Victoria  and  New  South  Wales,  but  less  so  in  those  of 
Queensland,  where  the  food  rules,  for  instance,  seem  to  be 
made  with  the  object  of  providing  a  plentiful  and  superior 
supply  of  food  for  the  old  men,  and  not,  as  in  the  before- 
mentioned  tribes,  to  inculcate  discipline,  under  which  the 
novices  are  placed.  Yet  they  also  act  in  the  same  direction 
in  making  the  participation  in  the  better  class  of  food 
dependent  on  age.  Whether  the  rule  of  the  Queensland 
tribes,  or  of  those  of  New  South  Wales  and  Victoria,  is  the 
older  one,  is  a  difficult  question  to  answer.  In  my  opinion 
the  former  is  probably  the  older,  for  it  seems  to  be  most 
likely  that  where  the  old  men  have  the  power  to  do  so,  they 
will  impose  rules  which  favour  themselves,  leaving  the 
disciplinary  rule  to  be  the  secondary  object. 

The  universality  of  the  practice  that  the  guardians  of 
the  novice  are  of  the  relation  to  him  of  sister's  husband,  or 
wife's  brother,  is  clearly  connected  with  the  almost  universal 
practice  of  betrothal,  and  exchange  of  sister  for  sister,  in 
marriage.  As,  moreover,  the  boy  is  initiated  by  the  men  of 
the  intermarrying  moiety  of  the  tribe  other  than  his  own, 
those  men  of  the  group  from  which  his  future  wife  must 
come  are  naturally  suggested  as  his  guardians  and  preceptors 
in  the  ceremonies.  Their  selection  would  be  acceptable  to 
both  moieties,  that  to  which  the  novice  belongs,  and  that 
from  which  his  wife  must  come.  As,  moreover,  the  relation 
of  Kabo^  to  use  the  Yuin  term  of  relationship,  is  not  merely 
an  individual,  but  a  group  of  men,  the  arrangement  would 
have  the  strength  of  numbers,  and  a  strong  kindred  behind 
it.  Thus  the  novice,  who  is  taken  from  the  protection  of 
his  own  kindred  during  the  ceremonies,  is  placed  in  that  of 
the  kindred  of  his  future  wife,  whose  interest  it  is  that  no 
harm  shall  come  to  him. 

One    of   the    causes    which   act   strongly   in    producing 


IX  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  EASTERN  TYPE  641 

uniformity  of  belief  and  of  practice,  is  the  fact  that  men 
come  from  a  wide  radius  of  country  to  the  ceremonies,  under 
what  may  be  called  a  ceremonial  armistice.  The  component 
parts  of  the  several  tribes  which  thus  meet  together  are 
each,  in  their  furthest  limits,  in  contact  with  still  more 
distant  tribes,  with  whom  they  intermarry.  I  have  referred 
to  instances  of  a  contingent  from  a  distant  locality  being 
accompanied  by  people  of  another  tribe,  friendly  to  them,  but 
strangers  to  the  tribe  which  has  convened  the  ceremonies. 
It  is  certain  that  in  each  contingent  there  will  be  leading  men, 
probably  medicine-men,  who  will  take  part  with  their  fellows 
in  the  ceremonies  they  have  come  to  see.  When  they  return, 
they  carry  with  them  the  sacred  mysteries  of  this  tribe,  and 
will  be  able  to  introduce  such  new  beliefs  or  procedure  as  may 
have  recommended  itself  to  them,  and  they  may  on  their 
part  have  contributed  something  to  those  they  visited.  The 
effect  of  this  intercourse,  even  if  slight,  must  be  to  produce 
uniformity  in  the  procedure  of  the  ceremonies ;  and  the 
period  during  which  this  may  have  been  going  on  is  not 
to  be  measured  in  years,  that  is,  in  view  of  the  long-con- 
tinuing isolation  of  the  Australian  aborigines,  from  any 
material  outside  influence.  The  fact  that  the  ceremonies 
are  the  same  in  principle,  even  where  they  vary  in  practice, 
seems  to  me  to  strongly  confirm  the  theory  which  I  have 
suggested. 

Such  are  the  views  which  I  have  formed  as  to  the 
initiation  ceremonies  of  the  eastern  type.  In  the  next 
chapter  I  shall  consider  those  which  form  the  western  type. 
For  the  present  I  may  point  out  the  apparent  range  of 
the  several  classes  of  ceremonies,  which  constitute  the  two 
types,  namely,  those  which  have  the  rites  of  circumcision, 
with  or  without  subincision,  and  those  which  are  without 
them. 

(i)  Ceremonies  like  the  Kuringaly  Burbling,  and  Bora, 
which  are  characterised  by  the  removal  of  a  tooth,  obtain  in 
the  extreme  south-eastern  part  of  the  continent. 

(2)  The  Dora  ceremonies  of  the  Maryborough  (Queens- 
land) tribes  apparently  indicate  the  character  of  those  of  the 
north-east  part  of  Australia. 


642        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA    ch.  ix 

(3)  To  the  westward  of  these  are  ceremonies  which,  like 
those  of  the  Dieri,  are  marked  by  circumcision  and  sub- 
incision. 

These  latter  may  possibly  extend  over  the  greater  part, 
if  not  the  whole,  of  the  western  half  of  the  continent. 


CHAPTER    X 


INITIATION   CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE 

Location  of  the  two  types — The  Kadri-pariwilpa-ulu,  a  Dieri  legend — The  Malku- 
malku-ulu,  a  Ngameni  legend — The  Yuri-ulu,  a  Urabunna  legend — The 
Dieri  ceremonies — The  Karaweli-wonkana — Giving  the  "Man's  name" — 
The  Wilyaru  ceremony— The  Kulpi  ceremony— The  Wilpadrina  ceremony — 
The  rites  of  the  coast  tribes — The  Verkla-mining — The  Parnkalla — The 
Warrara  ceremony — The  Pardnappa  ceremony — The  Wilyalkinyi  ceremony 
—The  Narrang-ga  ceremonies — The  ceremonies  at  Encounter  Bay — The 
Narrinyeri  ceremonies — Ceremonies  of  the  Itchumundi — Comparison  of  the 
eastern  and  western  ceremonies. 


Location  of  the  Two  Types 

For  convenience  I  have  taken  a  line,  drawn  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Murray  River  to  the  most  southern  part  of  the  Gulf 
of  Carpentaria,  as  defining  the  common  boundary  of  the 
eastern  and  western  types  of  initiation  ceremonies.  There 
are,  however,  between  those  of  the  Bora  and  those  of  the 
Dieri  ceremonies  which  have  a  resemblance  to  both,  but  are 
more  like  those  of  the  western  type,  and  are  therefore  taken 
with  them. 

The  Banapa  and  Bida  Tribes 

A  line  drawn  about  east  and  west,  some  three  hundred 
miles  from  Adelaide  to  the  north,  will  separate  the  tribes 
who  are  circumcised  from  those  who  are  both  circumcised 
and  subincised.  The  former  are  called  Banapa,  that  is, 
circumcised,  and  the  latter  Bida,  being  both  circumcised  and 
subincised.  The  Bida  are  to  the  north  of  the  said  line. 
There  also  a  marked  change  takes  place  in   the   language. 

643 


644       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 

South  of  it  the  words  Kadla,  "  fire  "  ;  Kaui,  "  water"  ;  Kadna, 
"stone "  ;  and  Kukanaui,  "  watercourse,"  are  pronounced  as 
written,  but  from  the  above  line  northwards,  the  initial  K 
before  the  vowel  is  dropped,  and  the  words  change  to  Acila, 
Aui,  Adna,  and  Ukana. 

The  tribes  on  each  side  of  this  line  are  friendly,  and 
when  any  mischief  is  in  contemplation,  they  join  in  carrying 
it  out. 

The  Banapa  blacks  are  usually  circumcised  when  about 
twelve  years  old.  The  operator  seizes  the  prepuce  with  a 
kind  of  forceps,  and  then  cuts  off  a  part  with  a  very  sharp 
piece  of  flint.  He  puts  the  detached  piece  in  his  mouth, 
and  then  throws  it  to  some  of  the  other  men.  My  informant 
did  not  know  what  was  ultimately  done  with  it.  When 
approaching  manhood,  they  are  seized,  and  the  urethra  is 
slit  down  for  about  an  inch.  This  is  done  by  inserting  a 
rounded  piece  of  bone,  and  cutting  down  to  it,  with  a  sharp 
piece  of  flint,  called  Yudla.  The  Bidas  look  on  themselves 
as  being  superior  in  race  to  the  Banapas.' 

The  blacks  here  spoken-  of  as  Bidas  evidently  are  part 
of  that  great  section  of  the  tribes  which  have  the  class  names 
Mattcri  and  Kararu,  and  which  as  the  Parnkalla  extend  from 
Port  Lincoln  to  beyond  Port  Augusta. 

They  are  therefore  connected  with  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes, 
and  I  commence  my  description  of  the  ceremonies  of  the 
western  type  with  those  of  the  Dieri  tribe.  These  ceremonies 
are  illustrated  by  legends,  which  are  repeated  at  the  cere- 
monies, and  form  the  precedents  for  ceremonial  procedure 
and  practice.  They  purport  to  give  an  account  of  the 
origin  of  the  ceremonies,  and  of  the  Mura-muras  who 
established  them.  If  you  ask  a  Dieri,  "  Why  do  you  do 
this?"  he  will  reply,  "Our  Mura-muras  did  so,"  which  is  a 
final  and  conclusive  answer. 

The  following  legends  have  been  obtained  for  me  by  the 
Rev.  Otto  Siebert,  not  only  from  the  Dieri,  but  also  from 
other  tribes  both  to  the  north  and  south  of  them. 

'   Dr.  M'Kinlay. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  645 

The    Kadri-pariwilpa-ulu.^      A   Legend   of   the. 
Yaukorka,  Yantruwunta,  and  Eastern  Dieri 

Two  Mura-mura  youths  called  Kadri-pariwilpa-ulu 
were  out  hunting  pelicans  at  Peri-gundi.^  They  crept  along- 
side the  creek  and  threw  their  boomerangs  at  one  which  was 
swimming  about.  The  right-hand  one  struck  his  mark,  but 
the  boomerang  of  the  other  flew  wide,  and  as  they  were 
wading  into  the  water  to  secure  their  prey,  the  boomerang 
swept  past  them,  almost  striking  one  of  them  on  its  return. 
The  young  men  were  determined  to  catch  it  on  its  next 
swoop,  but  its  strength  was  such  that  they  feared  that  no 
mere  arm  would  be  able  to  stop  it.  Then  they  procured  a 
tree-stem,  by  which  to  arrest  it  in  its  next  flight.  It  cut  the 
tree-stem  in  two  and,  losing  its  power,  fell  into  the  water. 
One  oT  the  two  young  men  dived  for  it,  but  struck  against 
the  boomerang,  which  was  stuck  in  the  bottom,  and  which 
had  become  sharpened  and  pointed  by  its  flight  through  the 
air.  Thus  it  circumcised  him,  and  on  rising  out  of  the  water 
he  saw  to  his  great  joy  that  he  had  now  become  a  perfected 
man.  He  secretly  informed  his  companion  of  what  had 
happened  to  him  ;  and  he  also,  diving  for  the  boomerang, 
was  likewise  circumcised.  Both  boys  said  to  each  other, 
"  What  has  happened  to  us,  for  we  are  now  no  longer  boys, 
but  men  ? "  Being  rejoiced  at  what  had  befallen  them,  they 
thought  of  their  father,  who,  while  they  had  become  men,  still 
remained  a  mere  boy.  They  determined  to  make  a  man  of 
him,  and  having  provided  themselves  with  a  Tula^  they  crept 
up  to  him  while  he  slept  in  his  camp,  and  circumcised  him. 
The  great  loss  of  blood  weakened  him,  and  as  he,  notwith- 
standing the  unhealed  wound,  continued  to  have  access  to 
his  wife.  Mini  ^  came  on  and  he  died. 

'  Kadri  in  Yaurorka,  or  Kaiari'xn  Dieri,  is  ••river-course," or  "creek";  IVilpa 
is  the  sky ;  Ulti  is  the  dual  form,  •'both."  Kadri -pariToilpa-tilu  is  also  the  name  of 
the  Milky  Way. 

^  Peri-giindi  is  a  crooked,  twisted  place.  Peri  is  a  spot  or  place  ;  gnitdi, 
or  more  pro|x:rly  Kutiti,  is  "crooked"  or  "twistetl."     Lake  Buchanan. 

'  Tula  is  tlie  word  for  a  flint  knife  used  for  circumcision,  but  is  used  also  for 
any  sharp  flint  used  for  cutting. 

^  Mira  is  "inflammation."  This  shows  that  while  the  Dieri  attribute  most 
deaths  to  evil  magic,   by   ♦•  some  one  giving  the  bone,"   they  also  admit  other 

2  T 


646        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

As  soon  as  they  had  circumcised  their  father,  they  set 
out  on  their  journey,  everywhere  circumcising  youths 
and  men.  Coming  to  Kunauana  ^  they  found  a  number  of 
people  who  had  collected  to  circumcise  some  young  men  by 
means  of  fire.  They  approached  quietly,  and  then,  suddenly 
springing  forward,  they  circumcised  the  youths  with  their 
Tula  before  the  men  knew  what  was  being  done.  Seeking 
for  those  who  had  performed  the  operation  so  skilfully,  and 
seeing  the  two  Mura-muras  enveloped  in  a  mist,  they  shouted 
out,  "  Kadri-pariwilpa-ulu"  These  now  came  forward,  and 
showing  the  Tula  to  them,  said,  "In  future  make  your  boys 
into  men  with  this,  instead  of  using  fire,  which  has  caused 
the  death  of  many  ;  thus  they  will  all  remain  living,  for 
'  Turu  nari  ya  tula  tepV.  "  '^  Turning  to  the  youths  whom 
they  had  circumcised,  they  admonished  them  not  to  have 
access  to  women,  or  even  to  be  seen  by  them,  whil?  their 
wounds  were  unhealed,  nor  to  show  their  wounds  to  any  one, 
otherwise  they  would  certainly  die. 

The  two  Mura-muras  wandered  through  all  the  land, 
carrying  the  Tula  everywhere  for  circumcision,  and  were 
everywhere  honoured  as  the  benefactors  of  mankind. 

The  Malku-malku-ulu.^   A  Legend  of  the 

KARANGURU    AND    NgAMENI 

A  large  number  of  people  had  assembled  at  Tuntchara,^ 
for  the  circumcision  ceremony,  at  which  there  was  an  old 
Mura-mura  who  had  provided  Palyara  ^  for  food,  and  who 
rejoiced  over  the  sweet  smell  thereof  as  it  was  being  cooked. 
In    the  evening,   as    they   sat    round   the   fire,  singing   the 

causes.      They  say  that  long  ago  a  great  sickness  came  from  the  north  and  killed 
so  many  that  when  they  woke  in  the  morning  one  was  alive  and  the  other  dead. 

^  Properly,  Kndna-ngauana,  from  Kudna,  "filth,"  "excrement,"  zxiAngaua, 
♦'  light." 

'^  That  is,  "  Fire  is  death,  and  the  stone  is  life." 

3  This  is  a  Ngameni  word,  the  Dieri  equivalent  being  Tippa-tippa-ulu,  meaning 
"the  two  with  the  Ttppa"  that  is,  a  pubic  tassel,  made  from  the  tails  of  the 
/Capita,  the  native  rabbit  (Peragale  /as^o/is),  and  worn  by  the  men  for  decency. 

*  This  Ngameni  and  Karangurii  word  means  "powdered  human  bones,"  and 
refers  to  a  number  of  bones  which  are  said  to  have  accumulated  there,  by  reason 
of  deaths  through  the  use  of  fire  in  circumcision. 
This  is  the  long-snouted  marsupial  rat. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  647 

Malkara  ^  song,  the  old  Mura-mura  scattered  the  fire  about, 
so  that  all  those  who  were  sitting  round  it  were  burned  by 
the  hot  coals.  After  a  painful  night,  the  men  at  early  dawn 
were  painting  themselves  for  the  ceremony,  and  the  six 
young  men  who  were  to  be  initiated  were  brought  forward.'- 
For  each  youth  four  men  placed  themselves  so  that  their 
bodies  were  bent  outwards.  On  these  men  the  youth  was 
laid,  and  in  this  manner  two  of  them  were  circumcised  by 
means  of  the  fire-stick.  Then  the  Malku-nialku-ulu  came 
up,  and  instantly  rushing  forwards  circumcised  the  four 
other  boys  with  their  stone  knife  before  the  people  knew  what 
they  were  doing,  thus  saving  the  former  from  imminent  death. 
Then  going  to  the  astonished  men  they  presented  their  stone 
knife  to  the  Woningaperif  and  told  them  to  use  it  in  future, 
and  thus  preserve  their  boys  from  death. 

Having  done  this,  the  Malku-malku-ulu  went  onwards, 
and  at  Kutchi-wirina  "*  they  saw,  at  a  little  distance  from 
them,  a  KutcJii  in  human  form  suddenly  disappear  into  the 
ground.  In  alarm  they  altered  their  former  course  and 
went  in  another  direction. 

Decked  with  the  Tippa-tippa,  the  young  Mura-muras ''' 
wandered  onwards,  hunting  and  seeking  food  as  they 
travelled,  killing  a  Kapita  in  one  place,  and  in  another 
finding  a  tract  covered  with  Manyura^  on  which  they 
feasted.  After  resting  here  for  some  time,  they  travelled 
farther  and  found  a  kangaroo  lair  at  Chukuro  -  wola.^ 
Thinking  that  there  might  be  a  kangaroo  in  it,  the  one 
who  had  sharpest  sight  threw  his  spear  into  it,  then  also 
the  spear  of  his  comrade,  who  was  one-eyed,  but  failed  to 

'   Malkara  is  the  word  for  the  songs  sung  at  these  ceremonies. 

•^  This  description  of  the  procedure  at  the  ceremony  of  circumcision  is  part  of 
the  legend.  For  every  custom  and  rile  there  is  an  equivalent  in  a  Mura-mura 
legend.  If,  for  instance,  one  asks  a  Dieri,  "  Why  do  you  have  this  custom  ?  " 
the  reply  is,  "  Our  Mura-muras  had  that  custom  too,  so  we  must  follow  them." 

^  Woniugaperi  is  the  efjuivalent  of  the  Arunta  Atwia-atwia,  mentioned  by 
Spencer  and  (jillen,  p.  647.      He  is  the  man  who  performs  the  rite  of  circumcision. 

*  Ktitchi  is  a  spirit  of  the  dead,  a  ghost ;  wiriua  is  "  to  go  in." 

^  Only  the  circumcised'  men  can  wear  the  Tippa.  It  is  not  only  worn  for 
decency,  but  is  also  by  the  men  of  the  Pinya  fastened  to  their  beards.  These,  to 
show  their  anger,  put  the  end  of  the  Tippa  in  their  mouths  and  bite  it. 

"  Manyura  is  the  Claytonia  Ballonensis.     {Narrative  of  the  Horn  Exped.) 

^  CAukuro  is  in  Ngameni  "kangaroo,"  and  wola  is  "nest"  or  "  lair." 


648        xNATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

find  anything  in  the  place.  Immediately  afterwards  they 
found  a  lace -lizard,  which  they  carried  with  them  until  it 
became  stinking,  and  black  on  the  under  side.  As  they 
still  wandered  on  they  came  to  a  large  tract  of  country  well 
covered  with  rushes,  from  which  they  made  bags  in  which  to 
carry  their  things.  Then  marching  on  they  saw  a  kangaroo, 
at  which  the  sharp -sighted  one  threw  a  spear,  and  then 
another,  without  hitting  it.  Then  he  threw  all  his  companion's 
spears  but  one,  which  the  latter  had  kept  in  his  hand,  who, 
then  throwing  it,  killed  the  kangaroo,  which  they  carried  till 
they  came  to  a  place  where  they  found  water.  Here  they 
rested  for  a  time ;  then  lifting  the  kangaroo  from  the 
ground,  and  each  holding  it  by  one  leg,  they  swung  it  round 
their  heads,  singing  : — 

Mina        yunJrti         tayila         n^t^attai 
What  thou  eat  wilt? 

Titiba-tiuba-tiuba         yundru         tayila         ni^nai 
Tiuba '  thou  eat  wilt 

Manakata-kaia        yundru         tayila         nganai 
Manakata-kata  thou  eat  wilt 

Then  they  laid  it  on  the  ground  ;  but  no  sooner  had  they 
done  so  than  it  jumped  up  and  hopped  away  so  swiftly  that 
they  could  not  overtake  it.  Before  long,  however,  they 
killed  another  kangaroo.  The  one  who  had  good  sight  sent 
the  one-eyed  one  to  fetch  a  Tula  (stone -knife)  so  that  he 
could  flay  off  the  skin.  While  he  was  seeking  for  a  Tula 
the  other  began  to  remove  the  pelt.  When  the  one-eyed 
man  returned  with  the  Tula  the  other  replaced  the  skin  over 
the  carcase  and  pretended  to  try  the  Tula  on  it ;  then, 
saying  that  it  was  too  blunt,  he  sent  him  to  Antiritcha  ^  to 
bring  back  a  new  one.  During  his  absence  he  hastily 
skinned  the  kangaroo  down  to  the  hind  legs,  and  when  the 
other  returned  from  Antiritcha  and  offered  him  the  new 
Tula,  he  said,  "  Skin  the  kangaroo  with  it  yourself."  Begin- 
ning to  do  this,  the  one-eyed  man  found  that  the  skin  was 

'   Tiuba- tiuba  and  manakata-kata  are  both  lizards. 

2  After  careful  inquiries,  it  seems  that  Antiritcha  must  be  supposed  to  be  a 
hill  or  mountain,  on  the  upper  waters  of  the  Finke  River,  probably  in  the  M'Donnell 
Ranges. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  649 

quite  loose,  and  said,  "  Why  have  you  cheated  me  in  this 
way  by  almost  removing  the  skin  ? "  "  Do  not  be  angr>' 
with  me,"  said  the  other,  "  I  only  wished  to  have  a  joke  with 
you,  and  surprise  you  with  an  almost  skinned  pelt." 

Having  completed  the  skinning,  they  fastened  the  edges 
of  the  skin  to  the  ground,  and  raised  up  the  middle,  thus 
forming  the  sky.  Having  done  this,  they  said  with  satis- 
faction, "  Now  from  this  time  people  can  walk  upright,  and 
need  not  hide  themselves  for  fear  of  the  sky  falling."  ^ 

Pleased  with  their  work,  they  turned  homewards,  and 
coming  to  a  good  pool  of  water,  one  jumped  in,  saying,  "  Let 
us  bathe  ourselves  here,"  but  in  striking  the  water  it  made  a 
cut,  which  caused  subincision.  When  he  showed  this  to  his 
companion,  the  latter  at  once  jumped  into  the  water,  and  he 
also  became  subincised.  Looking  at  himself,  he  said,  "  Now 
I  indeed  am  a  complete  man,  but  it  hurts  me." 

Having  conferred  on  mankind  the  use  of  the  Tula,  they 
now  introduced  the  Dirpaf  so  that  by  it  a  young  man 
becomes  a  completed  man. 

The  Malku-malku-ulu  are  the  benefactors  of  mankind, 
and  it  is  said  that  they  still  live,  and  are  even  sometimes  seen. 
They  wander  about  invisibly,  to  relieve  the  distress  of  others. 
They  carry  lost  children  to  their  camp,  and  care  for  them 
till  they  are  found  by  their  friends.  Such  is  the  legend  as 
told  at  the  ceremonies. 

The  southern  Dieri  say  that  the  Malku-malku-ulu 
wander  far  to  the  north  of  their  country,  and  that  their  camps 
can  be  recognised  by  the  luxuriant  growth  of  the  Mokuf  a 
plant  the  fruit  of  which  no  one  may  eat,  because  it  is  the 
especial  food  of  the  Malku-malku-ulu. 

One  of  these  camps  is  said  to  be  at  Narrani,"*  not  far 
from  Cattle  Lagoon  on  the  Birdsville  road.  This  place  is 
celebrated,  among  the  tribes,  because  it  was  where  the  Malku- 
malku-ulu    left   their   shields  when    they   commenced    their 

•  The  belief  is  that  the  sky  was  fastened  down  to  the  earth,  and  that  mankind 
could  not  walk  about  freely. 

-  Dirpa  is  subincision,  in  Dieri  called  kulpi. 
•''  Probably  the  Cttctimis  trigonus,  Linn. 

*  Narra  is  an  abbreviation  of  the  Vaurorka  word  Narrangama,  which  is  a 
shield,  in  the  Dieri  called  Pirha  mara. 


6so        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

wanderings  ;  for,  being  the  benefactors  of  mankind,  they  did 
not  need  any  weapons.  But  the  original  site  of  their  home 
is  said  to  be  Antiritcha,  where  lives  Atarurpa.  Who  this 
was  I  have  been  so  far  unable  to  ascertain. 


The  Yuri-ulu.     A  Legend  of  the  Urabunna, 
KuYANi,  AND  Southern  Tribes 

The  Yuri-ulu  travelled,  coming  from,  the  north,  through 
all  the  land,  bringing  in  the  use  of  the  Tula  in  circumcision. 
Thus  they  came  to  the  Beltana  country,  at  a  time  when  a 
youth  was  about  to  be  made  into  a  man.  When  the  men 
were  going  to  burn  him  with  fire,  the  Yuri-ulu  went  into  the 
earth,  the  one  on  his  right  and  the  other  on  his  left,  waiting 
for  the  moment  when  they  could  help  him.  When  a  man 
approached  with  a  red-hot  fire-stick  to  perform  the  operation, 
the  two  Yuri-ulu  rose  out  of  the  earth,  and  instantly  cutting 
off  the  foreskin  with  their  Tula,  sank  back  into  the  ground 
invisibly.  The  men  who  were  present  were  astonished  at 
the  fresh  wound,  and  saw  that  the  boy  had  been  circumcised. 
They  questioned  each  other  as  to  who  had  done  it,  but  no 
one  could  say.  The  feeling  was  such,  that  they  began  to 
say  to  each  other,  "  Didst  thou  do  this  ?  or  thou  ?  or  who  ?  " 
and  to  grasp  their  weapons,  when  he  who  was  about  to  have 
done  the  operation  said  that  he  would  find  out  the  cause. 
Seating  himself  on  the  ground,  and  striking  it  with  a  club, 
he  sang  continuously  that  he  who  had  circumcised  the  boy 
should  come  forth.  Then  the  Yuri-ulu  rose  out  of  the  earth 
biting  their  long  beards,  and  each  holding  a  Tula  in  his  hand 
before  him. 

Then,  properly  painted  and  adorned,  they  danced,  and 
having  given  the  Tula  to  the  men,  whom  they  adhionished 
as  if  they  had  been  youths,  they  disappeared,  followed  by  the 
praises  of  the  assembled  men. 

After  showing  themselves  in  many  places  as  life-givers, 
they  turned  back,  and  at  Katitandra,^  one  went  west,  and 
the  other  went  east  and  northwards,  bringing  the  Tula  to 
every  tribe. 

*  Katitandia  is  Lake  Eyre. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  651 

Thus  they  still  wander,  showing  themselves  at  times  as 
living,  and  as  life-givers. 

The  following  legend  does  not  seem  to  have  any  direct 
connection  with  the  last,  but  speaks  of  the  Yuri-ulu  as  being 
boys  who  had  not  yet  been  circumcised,  while  in  the  other 
legend  it  speaks  of  them  as  being  the  originators  of  the 
practice.  This  is  remarkable,  because  while  the  last  legend 
belongs  to  the  Urabunna,  this  one  belongs  to  their  neighbours, 
the  Wonkanguru. 

An  old  blind  widower  lived  at  Mararu  ^  with  his  two 
sons  the  Yuri-ulu,  who  from  their  early  youth  had  to  provide 
him  with  food.  As  they  grew  older  they  went  farther  afield 
hunting,  and  delighted  to  kill  young  birds  with  the  boomerang, 
and  to  cook  them  for  their  father  when  they  returned  in  the 
evening  to  their  camp.  One  evening  on  returning  they 
observed  that  an  old  man  had  come  to  the  camp,  and  had 
seated  himself  close  to  them.  They  informed  their  father, 
and  he  told  them  to  call  the  stranger.  They  did  so,  but 
received  no  answer,  and  even  when  they  went  to  him  and 
invited  him  to  come  to  their  father,  he  .still  remained  silent. 
Not  troubling  themselves  more  about  him,  they  ate  their 
food,  and  darkness  having  come  on,  they  lay  down  and  slept. 
In  the  early  morning  the  boys  went  out  hunting,  and  then 
the  stranger,  after  having  warmed  his  hands  at  the  fire  to 
.strengthen  him.self,  .seized  the  blind  man,  wrestled  with  him, 
struggled  with  him,  struck  him  on  the  face  and  breast,  and 
scratched  his  face  with  his  nails  till  the  blood  came.  Then 
taking  a  piece  of  wood  he  scraped  the  blood  ofif.  By  the 
struggling  and  the  scratching  the  dimness  of  the  old  man's 
eyes  had  been  removed,  so  that  he  could  .see  better  than  before. 
As  the  stranger  had  done  to  him,  so  he  now  did  to  the 
stranger — struck  him  and  scratched  him,  until  the  blood  came, 
which  he  wiped  off,  and  then  recogni.sed  the  stranger  as  his 
Kami.      After  they  had  recognised  each  other  as  Kami-mara, 

*  Mararu  is  to  complete  with  the  hand,  to  strike  the  pirha,  that  is,  to  strike 
the  upturned  wooden  bowl,  in  a  dance.  Mara  is  the  hand,  and  ni  is  the  Won- 
kanguru causative  termination,  which  in  the  Dieri  is  /«',  as  tnararu,  ntarali. 
The  place  Mararu  is  said  by  our  Wonkanguru  informant  to  l)e  not  far  from 
Birdsville,  in  a  south-westerly  direction. 

■*  Kaiiii-mara  is   the  relation  which  a  man  bears  to  all  those  who  are  the 


652        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

they  sat  down  together,  and  the  stranger  told  him  that  he  had 
come  to  consult  with  him  as  to  the  circumcision  of  his  sons. 
The  two  having  decided  that  the  boys  should  be  circum- 
cised, they  commenced  their  preparations.  Stone  axes  were 
sharpened,  Kandri^  melted,  Ngtilyi'^  collected,  and  the  axes 
fastened  afresh  to  their  hafts  with  them.  The  boys  were  sent 
out  early  next  morning  to  hunt,  and  to  be  out  of  the  way 
while  the  old  men  were  at  work,  so  as  riot  to  see  what  they 
were  doing.  The  old  men  went  to  a  place  where  there  was 
a  Pirha,^  that  is,  a  great  tree,  which  they  cut  down,  separated 
a  piece  of  the  stem,  and  having  taken  off  the  bark,  hollowed 
out  the  inside  to  make  a  great  Pirha.  Then  they  placed  it 
in  moist  earth  to  soften,  and  kept  its  sides  apart  till  it  became 
cool. 

The  following  morning  they  ornamented  its  sides  with 
longitudinal  markings,  and,  laying  it  on  its  back,  the  stranger 
struck  it  with  his  open  hand.  Listening,  but  hearing  no 
reply,  he  struck  it  again  harder,  and  there  was  an  echo, 
which  they  thought  was  a  reply  by  the  women  at  a  distance. 

Early  on  the  following  morning,  while  the  boys  still 
slept,  the  stranger  started  homewards  to  Minka-kadi,''  to 
call  together  the  people  for  the  ceremony  at  which  the  boys 
were  to  be  circumcised.  After  a  time  he  returned  with 
them,  bringing  with  him  his  two  daughters,  who,  as  he  and 
his  Kavii-viara  had  agreed,  should  be  the  wives  of  the  two  boys. 

Then  while  the  two  boys  were  out  hunting,  there  was 
held  a  meeting  of  the  old  men,  at  which  they  consulted  as 
to  the  manner  of  the  ceremony.  Towards  evening,  when 
the  boys  returned,  a  number  of  men  were  lying  in  wait  for 

children  of  his  mother's  ])rother,  or  of  his  father's  sister.  It  is  remarkable  that  in 
this  legend  the  "fathers-in-law"  are  kami-mara,  while  with  the  Wonkanguru,  as 
among  the  Dieri,  it  is  the  mothers-in-law  who  must  be  in  that  relation.  Possibly 
the  explanation  may  be  that  this  legend  had  its  origin  in  a  tribe  farther  to  the 
north,  which  like  the  Arunta  has  descent  counted  in  the  male  line. 

1  Kandri  is  a  cementing  gum  prepared  from  the  mindri  plant. 

2  Ngiilyi  is  the  kino  of  a  Eucalypt. 

^  Pirha  is  a  bowl,  cut  out  of  a  block  of  wood.  These  natives  speak  of  a 
thing  as  being  already  completed  when  they  have  the  material  ready.  Thus  a 
Dieri  will  say,  when  he  has  found  a  tree  suitable  for  a  pirha,  "  Nauda  ngakani 
pirha,"  that  is  my  pirha,  and  similarly  as  to  things  such  as  weapons.  In  the 
Waramunga  tribe  this  bowl  is  called  Pitchi. 

*  Minka-kadi  is  a  hole  or  cave,  of  which  there  are  said  to  be  many,  in  the 
district  to  the  east  of  Mararu. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  653 

them,  and  two  who  were  Kami  and  Kadi  ^  to  them,  respec- 
tively, sprang  forwards  and  laid  their  hand  on  their  mouths, 
as  a  sign  that  they  should  not  thenceforward  speak  to  any 
but  themselves  during  the  ceremonies.  Then  they  took 
them  apart  to  a  place,  where  they  built  a  break-wind  {Katu), 
and  taught  them  the  Kirha  song.  Early  the  next  day  the 
women  and  children  and  the  two  boys  were  sent  to  a 
distance  to  hunt,  so  that  the  men  might  hold  a  council 
undisturbed.  They  collected  the  Tula,  and  selected  the 
good  from  the  bad.  Then  they  decided  what  presents  the 
boys  should  give  to  the  Woningaperi. 

In  the  evening,  when  every  one  had  assembled  on  the 
ceremonial  ground,  the  Yuri-ulu  returned,  and,  as  they 
approached,  a  few  of  the  men  joined  them,  then  more, 
until  by  the  time  they  had  reached  the  ground  they  were 
surrounded  by  a  great  crowd,  not  counting  the  women  and 
children.  The  Yuri-ulu  were  then  taken  behind  their 
Katu  (break-wind)  to  be  decorated  with  emu  and  cockatoo 
feathers.  This  having  been  done,  the  boys  were  openly 
led  to  the  ground,  across  which  they  marched.  Each  one, 
standing  on  a  Kirha  which  rested  on  two  spears,  and 
supported  by  his  Kami,  grasped  the  Kalti "  as  high  up  as 
possible.  Thus  they  remained  for  some  time.  Their 
Ngandri  (mothers)  were  sitting  in  a  row  which  extended 
from  their  Katu  to  the  Kalti,  having  on  each  side  the  Katu 
of  one  half  of  the  Ngaperi  (fathers).  The  seated  mothers, 
one  after  the  other,  rose  and  went  to  each  of  the  boys,  and 
with  her  open  hands  stroked  him  about  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  navel.  When  the  last  one  had  returned  to  her  place, 
each  boy  was  carried  to  his  Katu  on  the  back  of  one  of  his 
Kami,  where    his  ornaments ''   were   taken    from    him,   and 

'  The  Kami  and  Kadi  have  charge  of  the  Ixiy  during  the  ceremonies,  and 
lead  him  away  after  the  operation  has  been  performed.  The  Neyi  and  the 
Kaka  provide  food  for  him  and  accompany  him.  Men  of  these  relationships 
arc  always  chosen  who  arp  much  older  than  he,  in  order  that  they  may  instil 
respect  for  the  laws  which  they  have  to  impress  upon  him.  KaJi  is  the  wife's 
brother,  or  the  sister's  husband,  which  is  the  same  person.  Neyi  is  the  elder 
brother,  Kaka  is  the  mother's  brother.  It  nmst  be  l)orne  in  mind  that  these  are 
group  relations,  own  and  tribal. 

^  Kalti  is  a  spear.  It  appears  to  be  the  Nurtuiija  of  Spencer  and  Gillen, 
op.  cit.   p.    122. 

•'  Such  ornaments  are  given  to  the  boy  by  his  Ngandri. 


654        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

carried  to  his  father  to  be  given  to  those  who  were  to 
perform  the  rite  of  circumcision  on  him.  Then  was 
heard  the  muffled  sound  of  the  Kirha  being  struck,  and, 
shortly  after,  the  sisters  of  the  Yuri-ulu  came  forward,  and 
commenced  their  dance  in  parties  of  four  each,  one  of  the 
elder  girls  and  one  of  the  younger.  At  the  end  of  this 
the  men  carried  each  other  about  on  their  backs. 

About  midnight  the  women  were  driven  away  from  the 
ground  to  their  main  camp,  the  Ngandri  only  remaining 
behind,  at  a  little  distance,  forming  a  connection  between  the 
men  at  the  ground  and  the  women  at  the  camp,  but  also 
keeping  the  latter  quiet  and  seeing  that  none  of  them 
watched  the  ceremonies,  the  great  Pirha  was  struck  several 
times,  and  replied  to  by  the  Ngandri  striking  their  stomachs 
with  the  open  hand. 

The  boys  were  now  taken  to  the  camp  of  the  Ngapert, 
and  there  carefully  watched  by  their  Kami  and  Kadi,  so 
that  they  should  not  sleep,  being  shaken  up  into  wakefulness 
when  they  dozed  off.  Then  the  Woningaperi  and  the  Taru 
(father-in-law)  came  up  to  them,  decked  with  feathers, 
and  three  Neyi  of  each  boy  placed  themselves  together  so 
that  the  boy  could  be  laid  on  their  backs,  and  there  circum- 
cised by  their  Taru.  This  being  done,  their  Woningaperi y 
Kadi,  Kamiy  and  especially  the    TarUy  were  placed   before 

DIAGRA.U   XXXI.  ^^"'"'       ^"^       '^^      1^^^ 

named   gave  to  each  a 

;;;.;:VA:y.-..y...  bundle   of  the    hair    of 

•■;.-.V:'-"-V-V-':""-  '■  one  of  his  daughters  as 

2  . 

a  sign  that  she  should 

04  Q4  be    his    promised    wife. 

05  The     boys    were     then 

[  taken     back     to     their 

1  Katu. 

•.■.•?•..•....         I       •••.■•.:•.>•■■.■•.■••.  The  subjoined   dia- 

'^^^'^'^'^        1 8  gram,  which  was  drawn 

I  on  the  ground  by  the  in- 

formant to  explain   his 
narrative  of  the  legend, 
shows  the  positions  of  the  places  referred  to. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  655 

I  is  the  Katu  of  the  Yuri-ulu  ;  2,  spectators,  women 
and  children  ;  3,  the  Kaiti  ;  4,  the  two  Pirha,  each  lying 
on  two  spears  in  front  of  a  Kalti  ;  5,  the  great  Pirha  ;  6 
and  7,  the  Katus  of  the  Ngaperi ;  8,  the  Ngandri  sitting 
in  a  row  ;  9,  the  Katu  of  the  Ngaperi} 

The  Dieri  Ceremonies 

It  is  the  Pinna-pinnarUy  that  is,  the  principal  Headman  of 
the  Dieri  tribe,  who  decides  when  the  youths  shall  be  passed 
through  the  several  stages  of  the  initiation  ceremonies. 
When  he  finds  that  there  are  a  sufficient  number  ready,  he 
decides  on  the  time.  The  matter  is  brought  by  him  before 
the  council  of  elders,  but  so  far  as  relates  to  the  time  and 
place  he  decides,  and  also  which  youths  are  to  be  initiated." 

Knocking  out  the  Teeth 

The  knocking  out  of  the  two  lower  middle  front  teeth  is 
practised  sometimes  earlier  than  in  tribes  which  have  cere- 
monies of  the  eastern  type,  and  is  not  confined  to  boys 
only.  When  a  child  is  from  eight  to  twelve  years  of  age, 
the  teeth  are  taken  out  in  the  following  manner.  Two 
pieces  of  the  Kuya-mara  tree,  each  about  a  foot  in  length, 
and  chisel-shaped,  arc  placed  one  on  either  side  of  the  tooth 
to  be  extracted,  and  driven  tightly.  Some  wallaby  skin  is 
then  folded  two  or  three  times  and  placed  on  the  tooth,  and 
a  piece  of  wood  aboiit  two  feet  long  being  placed  against 
the  wallaby  skin,  is  struck  with  a  heavy  stone.  Two  blows 
suffice  to  loosen  the  tooth,  which  is  then  pulled  out  by  the 
hand.  This  is  repeated  with  the  second  tooth.  As  soon  as 
the  tooth  is  extracted,  a  piece  of  damp  clay  is  placed  on  the 
gums  to  stop  the  bleeding.  The  boy,  or  girl,  as  the  case 
may  be,  is  forbidden  during  the  ceremony,  and  for  three  days 
after,  to  look  at  the  men  who  were  present,  but  who  turned 
their  faces  away.  It  is  thought  that  a  breach  of  this  rule 
would  cause  the  child's  mouth  to  close  up,  and  that  con- 
sequently it  would  not  be  able  to  eat  afterwards.  The 
teeth  are  placed  inside  a  bunch  of  emu  feathers  smeared 
>  O.  Sieben.  2  S.  Gason. 


656        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

with  fat,  and  are  kept  for  about  twelve  months,  under  the 
belief  that  if  they  were  thrown  away  the  eagle-hawk  would 
cause  larger  ones  to  grow  up  in  their  places,  which  would 
turn  up  over  the  upper  lip  and  thus  cause  death.  The  boy's 
teeth  are  carefully  kept  by  the  boy's  father,  and  long  after 
the  mouth  is  completely  healed  he  disposes  of  them,  in  the 
company  of  some  old  men,  in  the  following  manner.  He 
makes  a  low  rumbling  noise,  not  using  any  words,  blows 
two  or  three  times  with  his  mouth,  and  then  jerks  the  teeth 
through  his  hand  to  a  distance.  He  then  buries  them  about 
eighteen  inches  in  the  ground.  The  jerking  motion  is  to 
show  that  he  has  already  taken  all  the  life  out  of  them  ;  as, 
should  he  fail  to  do  so,  the  boy  would  be  liable  to  have  an 
ulcerated  mouth,  an  impediment  in  his  speech,  a  wry  mouth, 
and  ultimately  a  distorted  face.^ 

This  is  another  instance  of  the  belief  that  there  is  an 
intimate  connection  between  the  teeth  and  the  person  from 
whom  they  were  extracted,  even  at  a  distance,  and  after  a 
considerable  time.      I  have  before  referred  to  this  belief. 

The  Karaweli-wonkana 

The  Karaweli-ivonkana^'  or  ceremony  of  circumcision,  is 
performed  when  a  boy  is  about  nine  or  ten  years  of  age. 
The  proceedings  are  commenced  by  a  woman  walking  up 
to  the  boy  in  the  early  part  of  the  evening  and  quietly 
slipping  a  string  over  his  head,  to  which  is  attached  a 
mussel  shell  {Kurt).  This  is  done  by  a  married  woman, 
who  is  not  of  his  class  or  totem,  or  in  any  way  related  to 
him.  This  action  usually  brings  about  a  disturbance,  for 
neither  the  boy  nor  his  father  have  been  made  aware  of 
what  was  intended.  Directly  the  boy  finds  the  shell 
suspended  round  his  neck  he  jumps  up,  and  runs  out  of  the 
camp.  His  father  becomes  enraged,  for  it  is  generally  the 
case  that  fathers  think  their  sons  are  too  young  to  undergo 
the  painful  operation.  He  therefore  attacks  the  elders,  and 
a  general  fight  ensues. 

From  the  moment  the  boy  runs  out  of  the  camp  until 

'   S.  Gason.  '^  Karaweli'\%  "boy,"  and  -vonkatia  is  "to  sing." 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  657 

several  months  after  the  operation,  no  woman,  excepting 
immediately  after  the  ceremony,  is  supposed  to  have  a  sight 
of  him.  On  the  night  preceding  the  circumcision  the 
women  see  him,  or  he  is  shown  to  them,  for  a  few  minutes. 
At  this  time  all  the  available  tribes-people  are  collected,  and 
for  the  time  there  is  unrestricted  intercourse  between  those 
who  are  in  the  relation  of  Pirrauru  to  each  other.  Nothing 
is  said  of  this  at  the  time,  but  it  may  cause  sanguinary 
quarrels  afterwards.  It  is  not  spoken  of  at  the  ceremony, 
because  those  who  may  be  jealous  dare  not  show  their 
feeling  at  the  Karaweli-iuonkana,  lest  it  should  be  said  that 
they  are  attempting  to  undermine  and  tamper  with  the  old- 
established  customs. 

Immediately  before  a  boy  is  circumcised,  a  young  man 
picks  up  a  handful  of  sand  and  sprinkles  it  as  he  runs  round 
the  outside  of  the  camp.  This  is  to  keep  out  Kutchi  and 
to  keep  in  the  Mura-mura  of  the  ceremonies.' 

It  is  the  Kami  and  the  Kadi  who  lead  away  the  boy 
after  he  is  circumcised.  The  Neyi  and  the  Kaka  provide 
him  with  food,  and  later  on  accompany  him.  Above  all, 
however,  they  must  be  elder  people,  so  that  their  teaching 
shall  be  respected.  For  this  reason,  elder  rather  than 
younger  members  of  the  relationship  group  are  preferred." 

As  soon  as  the  rite  has  been  performed  the  boy's  father 
stoops  over  him,  and  gives  him  a  new  name.^  This  name 
has  been  invented  by  him  long  before,  when  the  boy  was 
much  younger.  It  might  be  that  when  he  was  lying  ill  and 
in  pain,  he  said  something  to  his  wife,  using  the  child-name 
of  his  son.  She  repeating  what  he  has  said,  he  adds  to 
it  something  more,  now  using  the  Matteri-tali,  or  man's 
name,  of  his  son,  which  his  wife  now  hears  for  the  first  time. 
If  he  feared  that  he  was  going  to  die,  he  would  hand  over 
the  name  to  his  brother,  the  Ngaperi-waka,  or  little  father, 
own  or  tribal,  of  his  son.  This  is  in  order  that  he  may  be 
able  to  announce  the  boy's  new  name  when  he  is  circumcised. 
Such  a  name,  so  given  to  a  man  in  charge,  would  be  kept  as 
a  sacred  trust. 

Such  a  name  is  taken  from  the  legend  of  the  boy's 
'  S.  Gason.  2  O.  Siebert.  3  g^  Gason. 


658        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Mura-mura.  This  is  not  inherited  from  his  mother,  as  is 
his  Murdu,  but  from  his  father. 

The  boy's  name  is  not  exactly  a  secret  name,  but  a 
youth  when  he  has  been  once  honoured  with  his  Matteri-tali^ 
and  has  been  announced  by  it  as  a  man,  is  too  proud  to  let 
himself  be  called  a  boy. 

There  are  eight  tribes  which  have  separate  Karaiveli- 
ivonkana  ceremonies,  and  each  has  its  particular  Karaiveli- 
tnalkara,  that  is,  the  song  belonging  to  the  ceremonies.^  Of 
these,  that  of  the  Pirha  and  the  Wapiya  are  mentioned  in 
the  legend  of  the  Mankara-pirna-ya-waka  (Appendix). 

This  inheritance  of  the  legend  of  the  individual's  Mura- 
mura  shows  that  the  Mura-mura  is  in  some  manner  the 
ancestor,  and  connects  the  Dieri  beliefs  with  the  legends  of 
the  Arunta,  and  the  Alcheringa  ancestors.  So  far,  however, 
I  have  not  any  evidence  that  the  Dieri  hold  the  Arunta 
belief  in  the  re-incarnation  of  the  supernatural  ancestor. 

The  Wilyaru 

The  next  ceremony  after  that  of  the  Karaweli-zvonkana 
is  called  Wilyaru.  A  young  man  without  previous  warning 
is  led  out  of  the  camp  by  some  old  men  who  are  of  the 
relation  of  Neyi  to  him,  and  not  of  near,  but  distant 
relationship.  On  the  following  morning  the  men,  old  and 
young,  except  his  father  and  elder  brothers,  surround  Jiim, 
and  direct  him  to  close  his  eyes.  One  of  the  old  men  then 
binds  the  arm  of  another  old  man  tightly  with  string,  and 
with  a  sharp  piece  of  flint  lances  the  vein  about  an  inch 
from  the  elbow,  causing  a  stream  of  blood  to  fall  over  the 
young  man,  until  he  is  covered  with  it,  and  the  old  man  is 
becoming  exhausted.  Another  man  takes  his  place,  and 
so  on  until  the  young  man  becomes  quite  stiff  from  the 
quantity  of  blood  adhering  to  him.  The  reason  given  for 
this  practice  is  that  it  infuses  courage  into  the  young  man, 
and  also  shows  him  that  the  sight  of  blood  is  nothing,  so 
that  should  he  receive  a  wound  in  warfare,  he  may  account 
it  as  a  matter  of  no  moment.'"^ 

1  O.  Siebert.  2  s.  Gason. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE 


639 


The  next  stage  in  the  ceremony  is  that  the  young  man 
lies  down  on  his  face,  when  one  or  two  of  the  other  young 
men  cut  from  three  to  twelve  gashes  on  the  nape  of  his 
neck,  with  a  sharp  piece  of  flint.     These,  when  healed  into 


ric;.    39.  —  I  KAHINNA    MAN,    SHOWINC    WII.VARf    (ITS    ON    TIIK    HA(  K. 

raised  scars,  denote  that  the  person  wearing,  them  has 
passed  through  the  Wilyaru  ceremony.  A  Dieri  points 
with  pride  to  these  scars  as  showing  that  he  is  Wilyaru. 
Until  the  scars  are  healed,  he  must  not  turn  his  face  to  a 
female,  nor  eat  in  the  sight  of  one. 

Immediately  after  the    W^i/yaru,  a  bull-roarer,  called  by^ 


66o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  Dieri  Yuntha,  is  given  to  the  youth.  It  is  from  six  to 
nine  inches  long,  by  two  to  two  and  a  half  wide,  and  one- 
eighth  thick,  and  a  string  is  attached  to  it,  made  of  human 
hair,  or  of  native  flax,  from  ten  to  twelve  feet  in  length/ 

It  was  some  time  after  the  Wilyarn  ceremonies  were 
made  known  to  Mr.  Gason  that  a  Yuntha  was  shown  to 
him,  and  he  was  required  to  promise  never  to  show  it  to 
women,  or  to  let  them  know  that  he  had  seen  it.  When 
he  was  initiated  in  an  actual  knowledge  of  the  ceremonies, 
and  had  been  present  at  them,  he  was  required  to  promise 
that  he  would  keep  all  their  secrets,  and  never,  even  by  a 
tracing  on  the  ground,  show  them  to  women. 

A  Yuntha  which  has  been  made  use  of  at  a  Wilyaru 
is  marked  with  a  number  of  small  notches  on  the  side  and 
at  one  end. 

If  by  chance  a  Yuntha  is  lost,  the  finder  examines  it  to 
see  whether  it  bears  any  notches  ;  and,  if  it  does,  he  care- 
fully secretes  it,  and  acquaints  the  elders  of  his  find.  If 
there  are  no  notches,  he  treats  it  merely  as  a  plain  piece  of 
wood,  and  he  may  even  carry  it  to  the  camp  and  make  a 
joke  of  it.  The  Yuntha  is  one  of  the  most  important 
secrets  of  the  tribe,  and  the  knowledge  of  it  is  kept  inviolate 
from  the  women.  The  belief  is  that  if  a  woman  were  to 
see  a  Yuntha  which  had  been  used  at  the  ceremonies,  and 
knew  the  secret  of  it,  the  Dieri  tribe  would  ever  afterwards 
be  without  snakes,  lizards,  and  such  other  food. 

When  a  Yuntha  is  given  to  the  youth  after  the  Wilyaru 
ceremony,  he  is  instructed  that  he  must  twirl  it  round  his 
head  when  he  is  out  hunting.  The  Dieri  think  that  when 
the  Yuntha  is  handed  to  the  young  Wilyaru,  he  becomes 
inspired  by  the  Mura-mura  of  this  ceremony,  and  that  he 
has  the  power  to  cause  a  good  harvest  of  snakes  and  other 
reptiles  by  whirling  it  round  his  head  when  out  in  search 
of  game.  About  a  week  after  the  ceremony,  and  on  some 
dark  night,  he  approaches  the  camp  and  commences  to 
whirl  the  Yuntha,  so  as  to  make  a  loud  noise.  When  this 
is  heard,  the  men,  excepting  the  elders,  go  out  to  see  him, 
carrying  with  them  food,  which  the   women  have  prepared. 

'  S.  Gason. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  66i 

They  cheer  up  and  encourage  the  young  Wilyaru  who, 
when  he  departs  again,  is  accompanied  by  some  of  the 
young  men,  who  keep  him  company  till  his  wounds  are 
healed.  The  young  man  is  never  seen  by  the  women,  from 
the  time  he  is  made  Wilyaru  till  the  time  when  he  returns 
to  the  camp,  after  perhaps  many  months.  Before  he  shows 
himself  at  the  camp,  all  the  blood  which  was  caused  to 
stream  over  him  must  be  worn  off,  and  the  gashes  must  be 
thoroughly  healed.  During  the  time  of  his  absence  his  near 
female  relatives,  Ngandri,  Kaku,  Ngatata,  and  Buyulu,  be- 
come very  anxious  about  him,  often  asking  as  to  his 
whereabouts.  There  is  great  rejoicing  in  the  camp  when 
the  Wilyaru  returns  finally  to  it,  and  his  mothers  and  sisters 
make  much  of  him.  He  is  prohibited  from  speaking  to 
any  of  the  actual  operators  at  the  Wilyaru  ceremony  until 
he  has  given  some  kind  of  present  to  each.  As  he  hands 
his  present  to  one  of  the  operators,  he  is  told  that  he  may 
speak.  This  custom  is  carried  out  strictly,  and  Mr.  Gason 
said  that  he  never  witnessed  the  ceremony  without  after- 
wards receiving  a  present  from  the  youth,  and  he  was  never 
able  to  induce  one  to  speak  till  a  present  had  been  given 
by  him. 

The  Mindari  * 

After  the  Wilyaru  the  next  ceremony  is  that  of  the 
Mindari,  which  is  held  about  once  in  two  years,  either  by 
the  Dieri  or  some  one  of  the  neighbouring  tribes.  When 
there  is  a  sufficient  number  of  young  men  in  the  tribe  who 
have  not  passed  this  ceremony,  and  when  the  tribes  are 
friendly  with  each  other,  a  council  is  held,  for  instance  by 
the  Dieri,  to  fix  on  the  time  and  place.  This  being  settled, 
women  are  sent  to  neighbouring  tribes,  to  invite  them  to  be 
present,  the  preparations  for  which — building  the  huts  and 
collecting  food — is  carried  on,  and  generally  occupies  six.to 
eight  weeks.  As  soon  as  the  first  members  of  an  arriving 
party  come  in  sight,  the  Mindari  song  is  sung,  to  show  the 
strangers  that  they  are  received  as  friends.  At  length,  when 
all  have  arrived,  they  wait  for  the  full  of  the  moon,  so  as  to 

'  S.  Gason. 

2  U 


662        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

have  plenty  of  light  during  the  ceremonies,  which  commence 
at  sunset.  Meanwhile  at  every  sunrise,  and  at  intervals,  all 
the  men  at  the  camp  join  in  the  Mindari  song. 

On  the  evening  of  the  ceremony  the  young  men  are 
carefully  dressed.  The  hair  of  the  head  is  tied  with  cord 
so  as  to  stand  straight  up,  and  tails  of  rats  {Thilpa)  are 
fastened  to  the  top.  Feathers  of  the  owl  and  the  emu  are 
affixed  to  the  forehead  and  the  ears,  and  a  large  girdle 
( Yinka),  made  of  human  hair,  is  wound  round  the  waist. 
The  face  is  painted  red  and  black. 

The  ceremonies  commence  by  the  men,  women,  and 
children  shouting  at  the  full  force  of  their  lungs  for  about 
ten  minutes.  Then  the  women  go  a  little  way  from  the 
camp,  to  dance  by  themselves,  while  the  men  proceed  to  a 
distance  of  about  three  hundred  yards,  to  a  piece  of  hard 
ground  which  has  been  neatly  swept,  and  on  which  a  ring 
has  been  marked.  The  ceremonies  are  opened  by  a  little 
boy  about  four  years  of  age,  who  is  decked  out  with  the 
down  of  the  swan  and  the  wild  duck  attached  to  his  head, 
and  with  his  face  painted  red  and  black.  He  dances  into 
the  ring,  followed  by  the  old  men,  and  this  dance  continues 
for  about  ten  minutes,  when  the  boy  ends  it  by  running  out 
of  the  ring. 

All  the  young  men  then  go  through  a  number  of 
evolutions,  and  this  is  continued  till  the  sun  rises,  when  the 
ceremony  terminates  and  all  retire  to  sleep  during  the 
day. 

The  reason  for  holding  this  ceremony  is  to  enable  all 
the  tribes  to  meet  and  to  amicably  settle  any  disputes  that 
may  have  occurred  since  the  last  Mindari. 

The  Kulpi' 

.  Connected  with  initiation,  there  is  the  Kulpi  rite,  now 
known  to  anthropologists  as  subincision.  At  the  secret 
council  at  which  the  circumcision  ceremony  is  determined 
upon,  the  Headman  and  the  heads  of  totems  fix  upon  the 
youths  who   are  to   become  Kulpi.     Certain   men  are  fixed 

'  S.  Gason. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  663 

upon  to  see  this  carried  out,  and  they  are  responsible  to  the 
Headmen  for  the  proper  incision  being  made — clean,  straight, 
and  without  any  unnecessary  violence. 

No  warning  or  notice  is  given  to  the  young  man.  He 
goes  out  hunting  with  others  as  usual,  when,  on  a  signal 
being  given  by  one  of  the  party,  he  is  suddenly  pinioned 
from  behind,  and  thrown  down.  He  naturally  struggles 
desperately,  thinking  that  they  are  going  to  kill  him,  and 
calls  out  to  his  father  and  mother  in  most  piteous  terms, 
until  his  mouth  is  covered  by  some  one's  hand.  Other  men, 
who  have  been  lying  concealed,  now  rush  up  and  tell  him 
not  to  be  frightened,  for  they  are  only  going  to.  make  a 
Kulpi  of  him.  If,  however,  he  still  continues  to  struggle,  he 
is  quietened  by  a  blow  on  the  head,  but  as  a  rule  he  submits 
quietly,  finding  himself  in  their  power,  and  that  moreover 
his  life  is  not  in  danger.  The  old  men  and  the  bystanders 
encourage  him  by  saying  that  he  must  not  mind  the  pain, 
for  it  is  nothing  to  what  he  has  suffered  during  circumcision. 
The  operation  may  last  for  twenty  minutes,  and  many 
youths  faint  after  it  is  over.  In  one  such  instance,  which 
Mr.  Gason  gave  me,  the  young  man  struggled  violently, 
large  drops  of  sweat  broke  out  on  his  forehead,  and  tears 
flowed  from  his  eyes ;  yet  he  did  not  make  a  sound  or 
murmur,  till  the  operation  was  over,  when  he  uttered  a  deep 
groan,  several  sighs,  and  then  gradually  fell  back  into  the 
arms  of  the  men  who  were,  holding  him.  The  wound  was 
staunched  with  sand.  Mr.  Gason  lost  sight  of  him  for 
several  months,  and  when  he  saw  him  again  he  looked 
quite  healthy,  active,  and  smart,  and  the  wound  had  com- 
pletely healed.  He  presented  Mr.  Gason  with  a  carved 
boomerang,  making  signs  to  him  to  accept  it.  He, 
knowing  the  custom"  in  such  cases,  did  so,  and  it  was  only 
then  that  the  youth  ceased  to  be  Apu-apu,  that  is  dumb,  and 
spoke  to  him.  A  Kulpi,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Karaiveii 
and  the  Wilyaru,  may  not  speak  till  he  has  given  presents 
to  those  who  were  at  the  ceremony,  either  as  operators  or 
as  witnesses. 

It  is  thought  that  the  presence  at  the  operation  of  some 
distinguished    man,  such    as    a    great   fighting- man,  or   the 


664        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


head  of  a  totem,  tends  to  give  strength  to  the  young  man 
while  he  is  undergoing  it. 

It  is  only  when  a  young  man  has  been  made  Kulpi  that 
he  is  considered  to  be  a  thorough  man,  and  in  this  sense 
Kulpi  is  the  highest  stage  in  the  initiation  ceremonies. 

Professor  Baldwin  Spencer  tells  me  that  in  all  the  tribes 
with  which  he  is  acquainted  who  practise  subincision,  all 
the  men  are  subject  to  it.  According  to  the  information 
given  me  by  Mr.  S.  Gason,  twenty  years  ago,  only  a  certain 
number  of  the  men  of  the  Died  tribe  were  Kulpi. 

From  further  inquiries  which  I  have  made  I  am  now 
satisfied  that  the  practice  of  Kulpi  in  the  Dieri  tribe  was,  and 
is,  universal,  and  that  Mr.  Gason  must  have  been  in  error  in 
the  above  statement.^ 

The  Wilpadrina- 

On  the  young  women  coming  to  maturity,  there  is  a 
ceremony  called  Wilpadrina,  in  which  the  elder  men  claim, 
and  exercise,  a  right  to  the  young  women.  The  other 
women  are  cognisant  of  it,  and  are  present. 


The  Rites  in  the  Coast  Tribes 

In  the  Yerkla-mining  tribe  the  rite  of  circumcision  is 
very  strictly  observed.  For  some  time  before  a  youth  is 
circumcised  no  woman,  married  or  single,  is  allowed  to  take 
food  from  him,  nor  are  they  permitted  to  see  him  take  food 
from  any  one  else,  if  they  can  avoid  doing  so. 

When  it  is  decided  that  a  certain  boy  shall  be  circum- 
cised, the  medicine-men,  having  held  a  council,  call  upon 
some  of  the  old  men  to  assist  in  capturing  him.  He,  being 
aware  of  their  intention,  has  previously  taken  to  the  bush, 
living  a  watchful  and  lonely  life.  The  natives  call  him 
Kokitta-mining,  that  is,  wild  man.  If  they  can  get  on  his 
track,  he  is  easily  surrounded,  but  he  sometimes  evades  them 
for  months.  The  time  for  circumcision  is  when  the  youth 
is  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  that  is,  after  he  has  got 
whiskers. 

'  J.  G.  Reuther.  2  S.  Gason. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  665 

A  place  is  chosen  for  the  ceremony  which  is  not  likely 
to  be  visited  by  any  one,  and  three  days  are  devoted  to 
hunting  and  providing  food. 

The  operation  is  performed  by  men  of  one  of  the 
neighbouring  tribes,  and  the  boy  is  taken  away  to  a  part 
of  the  tribal  country  fixed  on  by  his  male  relations.  There 
is  little  or  no  ceremonial  observance,  but  some  of  the  old 
men  take  the  boy  by  the  wrists,  and  pull  him  violently  from 
one  side  to  the  other,  uttering  at  the  same  time  a  kind  of 
chant  consisting  of  a  series  of  "  Eyah  !  "  Whether  through 
excitement,  or  anticipation  of  the  ceremony,  or  by  being 
swung  about  from  one  side  to  the  other  by  the  old  men, 
the  boy  becomes  somewhat  dazed.  Then  the  operator 
approaches,  and  suddenly  seizes  the  prepuce,  and  cuts  it  off 
with  a  piece  of  flint.     The  wound  is  seared  with  a  fire-stick. 

String  is  made  from  opossum  and  wombat  hair,  with 
which  the  youth  is  decorated,  particularly  about  the  head  ; 
and  a  sort  of  apron  is  made  with  which  he  is  covered  till 
the  wound  is  healed. 

After  a  week  or  a  fortnight,  if  he  is  sufficiently  recovered, 
he  rejoins  the  tribe,  and  there  is  a  great  feast  and  corrob- 
boree,  at  which  both  sexes  join  in  the  dancing. 

The  boy  never  sees  who  circumcises  him  ;  neither  does 
he  know  the  name  of  the  man  till  the  operation  is  over. 
Then  he  is  taken  away  by  his  nearest  male  relation,  who 
provides  food  for  and  looks  after  him. 

No  women  are  permitted  to  h>e  on  the  ground  where 
the  circumcision  is  done,  and  must  camp  some  distance 
away  from  the  place,  nor  is  it  allowed  for  them  to  hear  the 
matter  spoken  of  If  any  reference  is  made  to  the  ceremony 
in  their  presence,  they  at  once  stop  their  ears  with  their 
hands. 

If  the  boy  is  of  the  Wenung  division,  he  is  circumcised 
in  the  morning.  Boys  of  the  other  classes  arc  not,  and 
they  are  left  tied  on  the  ground  till  the  Milky  Way  is  seen 
in  the  sky.  Then  the  lad  is  asked,  "  Can  you  see  the  two 
black  spots  ? "  When  he  has  seen  them,  he  is  allowed  to 
go  to  his  camp  ;  and  then  the  medicine-men  tell  him  the 
following  legend.     A  very  long  time  ago  a  great  bird  came 


666        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

and  devoured  all  the  people,  excepting  three  men  and  one 
woman.  These  were  one  Budera,  one  Kura,  one  Wenung, 
and  a  Kura  woman.  The  men  fought  the  bird  and  killed 
it  ;  but,  after  it  was  dead,  only  two  spears  were  found  in 
the  body,  one  belonging  to  the  Kura,  and  one  belonging  to 
the  Wenung  man.  Then  they  went  up  to  the  Milky  Way  ; 
and  the  name  given  to  two  black  spots,  to  which  they  went, 
is  Nug-jil-bidai-ttikaba,  or  the  "  far-away  men."  After  the 
Budera  man,  who  remained  behind,  had  grown  old,  and  had 
many  children  and  grandchildren,  he  also  went  up  to  the 
stars  ;  but  he  is  only  seen  when  he  walks  across  the  moon, 
and  then  he  is  angry.  Budera's  children  were  boys,  and 
they  went  inland  a  great  distance,  and  were  absent  a  long 
time.  On  their  return  each  boy  brought  back  with  him  a 
captured  wife.  The  Budera,  before  he  died,  marked  them 
with  their  class  marks. 

When  the  rite  of  subincision  is  to  be  carried  out,  it 
causes  great  excitement  in  the  tribe.  It  takes  place  some 
time  after  circumcision,  and  is  called  Wandai-ngrungur. 
When  a  young  man  has  passed  through  this  ceremony,  he 
may  claim  his  promised  wife. 

In  making  the  subincision,  the  youth  is  laid  on  the 
ground  flat  on  his  back,  his  wrists  and  ankles  being 
fastened  to  the  earth  by  means  of  kangaroo  sinews  and 
pegs.  A  second  or  assistant  mcdicinc-man  sits  across  his 
chest,  with  his  face  towards  his  feet,  performing  two 
functions  at  once,  namely  holding  him  down,  and  assist- 
ing the  principal  operator.  The  instrument  used  is  called 
Meru^  and  is  a  wooden  haft  with  a  piece  of  very  sharp 
flint  bound  on  one  end  with  sinew  and  mallee-scrub  gum. 

The  wound  is  treated  by  bandaging  it  with  a  piece  of 
flat  smooth  wood  and  the  inner  bark  of  an  acacia.  One  of 
the  medicine-men  spins  a  tassel  of  wombat  or  opossum  fur, 
which  is  suspended  from  the  waist  of  the  patient  by  the 
operator,  so  as  to  hang  down  and  keep  the  flies  and  dust 
from  the  wound.  Until  it  is  healed,  the  youth  has  allotted 
to  him  three  IViia/i,  or  mothers,  to  look  after  him  and  pro- 
vide for  him,  until  he  is  able  to  do  so  for  himself,  and 
through  their  lives  they  look  after  his  welfare. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  667 

It  is  thought  that  if  any  one  but  a  medicine-man  touches 
a  Meru,  it  will  cause  great  sickness  to  the  young  man  on 
whom  the  flint  was  used.  In  such  a  case,  if  the  young 
man  became  ill,  the  offender  would  have  to  go  away  and 
live  by  himself  for  a  time.  But  if  the  young  man  died,  the 
offender  would  be  killed. 

There  is  in  this  tribe  a  rite  similar  to  the  Wilpadrina  of 
the  Dieri,  accompanied  by  an  operation  by  a  medicine-man. 
Three  men  of  the  relation  of  father  to  the  girl  are  allotted 
to  her,  who  provide  her  with  food  till  her  wound  is  healed.^ 

The  tribe  at  Fowler's  Bay  adjoins  the  Mining,  and  at 
certain  times  of  the  year  the  two  tribes  have  a  ceremonial 
meeting.  Boys  are  circumcised  at  the  age  of  about  fourteen, 
and  subsequently  subincised.  The  medicine -man  who 
operates  swallows  the  prepuce,  with  some  water.  He  never 
speaks  to  the  boy  or  his  parents,  does  not  go  to  their  camp 
fire,  excepting  in  very  cold  weather,  nor  accept  any  food 
from  them  unless  it  were  sent  by  some  other  person.- 

These  tribes  east  of  the  Mining  adjoin  the  Parnkalla, 
who  lived  at  Port  Lincoln,  whose  northern  extent  includes 
the  Beltana  country,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  legend  of  the 
Yuri-ulu  already  given.  The  Parnkalla  therefore  bring  us 
into  the  region  of  the  Lake  Eyre  ceremonies.  I  find  an 
account  of  the  initiation  ceremonies  of  this  tribe  in  a  work 
by  C.  W.  Schiirmann,"  from  which  I  shall  quote,  for  com- 
parison with  the  accounts  already  given. 

The  names  of  the  ceremonies  which  form  the  several 
parts  of  initiation  in  this  tribe  supersede  the  ordinary  names 
of  the  youths  during  the  time  which  intervenes  between  the 
ceremonies,  or  immediately  follows  them. 

The  three  ceremonies  are  the  Warrara,  when  a  boy  is 
about  the  age  of  fifteen  ;  the  Pardnappa,  at  the  age  of  sixteen 
or  seventeen  ;  and  the  Wilyalkinyi^  when  about  eighteen. 

The  Warrara  Ceremony 

Mr.  Schiirmann  gives  a  description  of  these  ceremonies 
at  length,  which  is  briefly  as  follows. 

1   11.  Williams.  ^  p.  Gaskell.  ^  Qp.  cit.  pp.  226,  234. 


668        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  Warrara  is  conducted  from  the  camp  blindfolded 
by  a  man  called  Yumbo,  who  attends  the  novice  during  the 
whole  of  the  ceremony.  This  is  held  at  some  remote  place 
whereat  women  and  children  are  not  permitted  to  be. 

The  novice  is  laid  on  the  ground,  covered  with  skins, 
the  Yumbo  sitting  by  him.  The  rest  of  the  men  prepare  a 
number  of  bull-roarers,  called  Pullakalli,  which,  when  tied  to 
a  handle,  produce  a  piercing  sound. 

One  of  the  men  then  opens  a  vein,  causing  the  blood  to 
run  on  the  Warrarcis  head,  face,  and  shoulders,  also  in  a 
few  drops  into  his  mouth.  A  number  of  precepts  are  now 
impressed  on  him  for  his  future  conduct.  These  are,  not  to 
associate  any  longer  with  his  mother,  or  the  other  women, 
nor  with  children,  but  to  keep  company  with  men.  Not  to 
quarrel  with,  or  ill-treat,  women.  To  abstain  from  eating 
forbidden  food,  such  as  lizards.  He  is  warned  not  to  betray 
what  he  has  seen  and  heard,  under  pain  of  being  speared, 
thrown  into  the  fire,  or  otherwise  dealt  with. 

On  the  following  morning  the  novice  is  taken  to  the 
women,  who  have  camped  separately.  A  smoky  fire  has 
been  made  with  damp  grass,  and  the  Warrara  is  conducted 
backwards  to  it,  where  one  of  the  women  is  placed  to 
receive  him.  He  is  caused  to  sit  on  the  grass,  and  she 
dries  and  rubs  his  back,  which  has  been  previously  covered 
with  blood,  with  her  skin  rug.  Then  one  of  the  little  boys 
chases  him  through  a  lane  formed  by  the  body  of  men. 

For  three  or  four  months  the  Warrara  must  keep  his 
face  blackened  with  charcoal,  speak  in  low  whispers,  and 
avoid  women. 

The  children  are  never  allowed  to  approach  a  place 
where  a  Warrara  has  been  made. 


The  Pardnappa  Ceremony 

The  Pardnappa  ceremony  commences  with  the  novice's 
attendant  shouting  "  Pu  !  Pu ! "  All  the  women  of  the 
class  to  which  the  Pardnappa  belongs,  whether  Matteri  or 
Kararu,  touch  the  shoulders  and  necks  of  the  men   of  the 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  669 

same  class,  to  express  their  approval  of  the  intention  to 
make  the  boy  a  Pardnappa. 

The  ceremony  takes  place  at  some  neighbouring  water, 
where  game  has  been  roasted  and  is  now  eaten.  After  this, 
the  Pardnappa  goes  apart  with  those  lads  who  last  under- 
went the  same  ceremony. 

One  of  the  men  takes  his  place  in  the  fork  of  a  tree  of 
moderate  height,  and  others  crowd  round  and  place  their 
hands  and  heads  against  the  stem  of  the  tree,  so  that  their 
backs  form  a  sort  of  platform,  on  which  the  Pardnappa  is 
placed  backwards.  His  arms  and  legs  are  stretched  out 
and  held  fast,  and  the  man  sitting  in  the  fork  of  the  tree 
descends  and  sits  on  his  chest,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  move 
any  limb  of  his  body. 

The  circumciser,  who  is  usually  a  man  from  some  distant 
place,  performs  the  operation  with  a  piece  of  quartz,  while 
the  lookers  on  recite  a  charm,  which  is  supposed  to  have  the 
power  of  allaying  pain. 

The  Pardnappa,  whose  hair,  prior  to  the  operation,  has 
been  allowed  to  grow  to  a  great  length,  has  it  now  secured 
on  the  crown  of  his  head  in  a  net  made  of  opossum-fur 
string.  He  wears  a  tassel  of  the  same  over  the  pubes, 
which  is  worn  for  many  months  afterwards. 

At  this  period,  although  without  any  particular  ceremony, 
subincision  is  performed.  In  support  of  this  practice,  they 
say  it  was  observed  by  their  fathers,  and  must  therefore  be 
upheld  by  themselves. 

The  Wilyalkinyi  Ceremony 

The  ceremony  of  Wilyalkinyi  is  the  third  through  which 
a  young  man  has  to  pass,  and  at  it  "  a  sort  of  sponsors  are 
appointed  "  called  Indanyanya. 

The  Wilyalkinyi  are  taken  blindfolded  from  their  camp 
to  a  short  distance,  where  the  Indanyanya  keep  them  for  a 
time,  shutting  their  eyes  with  their  hands.  The  lads  are 
then  taken  farther,  and  laid  flat  on  the  ground,  and  covered 
with  skin  rugs.  At  this  time  chips  of  quartz  are  prepared, 
and   new  names  are  invented   for  the    Wilyalkinyi.      Every- 


670        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

thing  being  ready,  several  men  open  veins  in  their  lower 
arms,  while  the  young  men  are  raised  to  swallow  the  first 
drops  of  the  blood.  They  are  then  told  to  kneel  on  their 
hands  and  knees,  so  as  to  give  a  horizontal  position  to  their 
backs,  which  are  covered  with  blood.  As  soon  as  this  is 
sufficiently  coagulated,  one  of  the  men  marks,  with  his  thumb, 
the  places  where  the  incisions  are  to  be  made,  namely,  one  in 
the  middle  of  the  neck,  and  two  rows  from  the  shoulders 
down  to  the  hips  at  intervals  of  about  a  third  of  an  inch  at 
each  cut.  These  are  named  Manka,  and  are  ever  after  held 
in  such  veneration  that  it  would  be  deemed  to  be  great  pro- 
fanation to  allude  to  them  in  the  presence  of  women.  During 
the  cutting,  which  is  done  rapidly,  as  many  of  the  men  as 
can  find  room  crowd  round  the  youths,  repeating  in  a  subdued 
tone,  but  very  rapidly,  the  following  formula  :  "  Kauwaka 
kanya  tnarra  marra^  karndokanya  marra  vtarra  pilbirri  kanya 
tnarra  marra."  This  incantation,  which  is  derived  from 
their  ancestors,  is  apparently  devoid  of  any  meaning  to  them, 
but  the  object  in  saying  it  is  to  alleviate  the  pain  of  the 
young  man,  and  to  obviate  any  dangerous  consequences  from 
the  lacerations.  After  the  incisions  are  completed,  all  the 
youths  are  allowed  to  stand  up  and  open  their  eyes.  The 
first  thing  they  behold  is  two  men  coming  towards  them, 
stamping,  biting  their  beards,  and  swinging  the  Witarna  ^ 
with  such  fury  as  if  he  intended  to  dash  it  against  their 
heads  ;  but  when  approaching,  they  place  the  string  of  the 
instrument  round  the  necks  of  the  youths  in  succession. 
Several  fires  are  made  to  windward,  so  that  the  smoke  will 
be  blown  over  the  young  men.  The  Wilyalkinyi  are  given 
a  new  girdle  for  the  waist,  spun  of  human  hair,  a  bandage 
tightly  tied  round  the  upper  arm,  a  string  of  opossum  hair 
round  the  neck,  the  end  of  which  falls  down  the  back,  where 
it  is  tied  to  the  girdle,  a  bunch  of  green  leaves  over  the 
pubes,  and,  lastly,  their  faces,  arms,  and  breasts  are  painted 
black.  Then  the  men  crowd  round  them  and  give  advice 
for  their  future  conduct.  This  is  to  abstain  from  quarrelling 
and  fighting,  to  avoid  women,  and  to  refrain  from  talking 
loudly.     The  last  two  injunctions  are  observed  scrupulously 

'  There  are  two  buil-roarers,  of  which  the  Witarna  is  the  larger  one. 


INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  671 


till  the  men  release  them  four  or  five  months  later.  Till 
then  they  live  and  sleep  separately  from  the  camp,  and  speak 
in  whispers.  The  releasing  of  the  Wilyalkinyis  consists 
merely  in  tearing  the  string  from  their  necks,  and  covering 
them  with  blood,  in  the  same  manner  as  at  the  earlier  cere- 
mony. After  that  they  are  admissible  to  all  the  privileges 
of  grown  men.  The  women  and  children,  as  has  been 
already  said,  are  not  permitted  to  see  any  of  the  above 
ceremonies,  and  are  camped  on  these  occasions  out  of  sight 
of  the  men.  If  their  business  requires  them,  in  fetching 
water,  wood,  or  anything  else,  to  be  in  sight  of  where  the 
men  are,  they  must  cover  their  heads  with  a  skin  rug  and 
walk  in  a  stooping  posture.  Any  impertinent  curiosity  on 
their  part  is  punishable  with  death,  and  it  is  said  that 
instances  have  occurred  in  which  this  punishment  has  been 
inflicted. 

I  hayc  quoted  this  account  of  the  ceremonies  of  the 
Parnkalla  for  the  reason  that  it  gives  a  fairly  full  account  of 
them,  and  also  because  it  completes  the  view  of  these  of  the 
Lake  Eyre  tribes,  to  which  the  Parnkalla  belong  by  their 
organisation  and  customs.  The  Wilyalkinyi  ceremony  is 
evidently  the  equivalent  of  the  Wilyarn  of  the  Dicri. 

The  Narrang-ga  Ceremonies 

On  the  opposite  side  of  Spencer  Gulf  to  Port  Lincoln 
there  is  the  Narrang-ga  tribe.  It  also  practised  circum- 
cision, but  not  subincision,  and  therefore  it  belongs  probably 
to  the  Banapa  already  mentioned. 

When  the  boys  became  aware  that  they  were  likely  to  be 
wanted  for  that  rite,  they  sometimes  concealed  themselves  in 
the  bush,  but  were  hunted  down.  At  the  ceremony  the  boy 
is  caused  to  drink  blood  from  his  own  arm.  In  the  actual 
rite  one  of  the  old  men  places  his  hands  over  the  boy's  eyes, 
and  after  the  prepuce  is  cut  off,  it  is  buried  at  the  place  of 
initiation.  For  about  twelve  months  the  young  man  is 
obliged  to  carry  with  him  a  fire-stick,  wherever  he  goes,  and 
it  is  only  after  his  return  to  the  camp  that  he  is  allowed  to 
marry.      At  the  ceremonies  no  one  speaks  above  a  whisper. 


672        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


The  bull-roarer  is  used,  but  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  woman, 
or   uninitiated  person,  to  see  it.      Formerly  such   an  offence 


FIG.    40. — THE    NAKRANG-GA    BULL-KOAKKK. 
I    AND    2    ARK    OPPOSITE    SIDES. 


was  punished  with  death,  both  of  the  person  who  showed  it 
and  the  person  to  whom  it  was  shown. ^ 

Ceremonies  at  Encounter  Bay 

The  initiation  ceremonies  at  Encounter  Bay  are  briefly 
described  by  H.  E.  A.  Meyer.'  They  appear  to  be  nearly  the 
same  as  those  of  the  Narrinyeri,  whose  country,  according  to 

1  T.  M.  Sutton. 
2   The  Naiive  Tribes  of  South  Australia.     Adelaide,  1879. 


i 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN   TYPE  673 

the  Rev.  George  Taplin,  includes  that  of  the  Encounter  Bay 
tribe. 

Mr.  Meyer  says  that  in  the  summer  time,  when  the  nights 
are  warm,  several  tribes  meet  together  for  the  purpose  of 
fighting,  and  afterwards  dancing  and  singing.  At  such  a 
meeting  it  is  understood  that  some  of  the  boys  are  made 
into  men.  In  the  midst  of  the  amusements  the  men 
suddenly  give  a  shout,  and  all  turn  towards  two  boys,  who 
have  been  chosen,  and  who  are  suddenly  seized  and  carried 
away  by  the  men.  The  females  cease  their  singing.  From 
this  time  they  are  not  allowed  to  accept  any  food  from  these 
young  men.  As  soon  as  these  latter  are  brought  to  the 
place  appointed  for  the  ceremony,  two  fires  are  lighted,  and 
the  young  men  are  placed  between  them.  Several  of  the 
men  now  pluck  all  the  hair  from  the  body,  except  the  hair 
of  the  head  and  the  beard.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  the 
whole  body,  except  the  face,  is  rubbed  with  grease  and  red 
ochre.  The  young  men  are  not  allowed  to  sleep  during  the 
whole  night,  but  must  either  sit  or  stand  until  the  morning, 
when  the  men  return  to  them.  They  then  go  into  the  bush 
until  sundown,  when  they  return  to  their  male  relations,  and 
obtain  some  food,  but  must  avoid  the  females.  They  are 
now  considered  to  be  "  Ravibe "  or  sacred,  and  no  female 
must  accept  any  food  from  them,  not  even  their  own  mothers, 
until  such  time  as  they  are  allowed  to  ask  for  a  wife.  For 
about  a  year  the  two  young  men  who  have  been  made  men 
at  the  same  time  assist  each  other  in  singeing  and  plucking 
out  each  other's  beards,  and  apply  the  grease  to  the  face  as 
well  as  to  the  other  parts  of  the  body.  When  the  beard 
has  grown  again  to  a  considerable  length,  it  is  a  second  time 
plucked  out,  after  which  they  may  ask  for  wives. 

Narrinyeri  Ceremonies 

The  Rev.  George  Taplin  says'  that,  among  the  Narrinyeri, 
the  boys  are  not  allowed  to  cut  or  comb  their  hair,  from  the 
time  when  they  are  about  ten  years  of  age  till  they  undergo 
the  rites  by  which  they  are  admitted  to  the  rank  of  men. 

'    The  Narrinyeri.     Adelaide,  1847. 


674        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

When  the  beard  of  a  youth  has  grown  to  a  sufficient  length, 
he  is  made  Naruinbe  or  Kaingaui,  a  young  man.  In  order 
that  this  ceremony  may  be  properly  performed,  and  the 
youth  admitted  as  an  equal  with  the  men  of  the  Narrinyeri, 
it  is  necessary  that  men  of  several  different  clans  should  be 
present  on  the  occasion.  A  single  clan  cannot  make  its 
own  youths  Naruinbe,  without  the  assistance  of  others. 

Generally  two  youths  are  made  Nariimbe  at  the  same 
time,  so  that  they  may  afterwards,  during  the  time  that  they 
are  Narumbe^  assist  each  other.  They  are  seized  at  night, 
suddenly,  by  the  men,  and  carried  off  to  a  spot  some  little 
distance  from  the  Wurley}  the  women  resisting,  or  pretending 
to  resist,  the  seizure,  by  pulling  at  the  captives,  and  throwing 
firebrands  at  their  captors.  They  are  soon  driven  off  to 
their  Wurleys,  and  are  compelled  to  stop  there,  while  the 
men  proceed  to  strip  the  two  youths.  Their  matted  hair  is 
combed,  or  rather  torn  out  with  the  point  of  a  spear,  and 
their  moustaches  and  a  great  part  of  their  beards  are  plucked 
out  by  the  roots.  They  are  then  besmeared  with  oil  and 
red  ochre  from  head  to  foot.  For  three  days  and  nights 
the  newly  made  Kainganis  must  neither  eat  nor  sleep,  a 
strict  watch  being  kept  over  them  to  prevent  either.  They 
are  allowed  to  drink  water,  by  sucking  it  up  through  a  reed. 
The  luxury  of  a  drinking  vessel  is  denied  to  them  for  several 
months  after  initiation.  When,  after  three  days,  they  are 
allowed  to  sleep,  they  rest  their  heads  on  two  crossed  sticks. 
For  six  months  they  walk  about  naked,  or  with  merely  the 
slightest  covering  round  their  loins.  The  condition  oi Naruinbe 
lasts  until  their  beards  have  been  pulled  out  three  times,  and 
each  time  has  grown  again  to  about  the  length  of  about  two 
inches.  During  all  that  period  they  are  forbidden  to  eat 
any  food  which  belongs  to  women,  and  the  prohibition 
extends  to  twenty  different  kinds  of  game.  If  they  eat  of 
any  of  these  forbidden  things,  it  is  thought  that  they  will 
grow  ugly.  Only  those  animals  which  are  the  most  difficult 
to  obtain  are  allowed  for  their  subsistence.  Everything  which 
they  possess,  or  obtain,  becomes  Naruinbe,  or  sacred  from  the 

'    Wtirley  is  a  hut  or  camp.     This  word  has  been  carried  by  settlers  all  over 
South  Australia. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  675 

touch  of  women.  Even  the  bird  hit  by  the  club,  or  the 
kangaroo  speared  by  their  spear,  or  the  fish  taken  by  their 
hook,  is  Narunibe.  Even  if  their  implements  are  used  by 
other  men,  the  proceeds  are  forbidden  to  all  females. 

They  are  not  allowed  to  take  wives  until  the  time  during 
which  they  are  Narumbe.  But  they  are  allowed  the  privilege 
of  promiscuous  intercourse  with  the  younger  portion  of  the 
sex. 

Any  violation  of  these  customs  is  punished  by  the  old 
men  by  death,  sometimes  by  Millin,  that  is,  magic,  but  often 
by  more  violent  methods. 

The  tribes  which  lived  on  the  Lower  Murray  and 
Darling  Rivers  and  extending  back  to  the  Barrier  and  Grey 
Ranges  did  not  practise  circumcision  or  subincision,  but  had 
initiation  ceremonies  which,  in  some  respects,  resembled 
those  of  the  western  type. 

Dr.  M'Kinlay,  who  lived  among  the  Maraura-spcaking 
tribes  of  the  Lower  Darling  River  in  the  early  days  of 
settlement,  told  me  that  before  the  young  men  were  admitted 
to  rank  as  men  they  were  subject  for  some  years  to  very 
strict  discipline.  Every  six  or  seven  years  there  was  a  great 
meeting  from  long  distances  for  the  purpose  of  passing 
eligible  candidates.  In  one  case  which  came  under  his 
notice,  a  young  man  was  seized  by  two  or  three  men, 
stretched  out  on  the  ground,  and  all  the  hair  plucked  from 
his  cheeks  and  chin,  and  given  to  his  mother,  who  was 
present,  crying  and  lamenting.  He  was  then  taken  away 
for  a  week  into  the  scrub,  where  he  underwent  some 
discipline  ;  and  when  he  returned  he  looked  miserable  and 
half-starved.  There  was  no  circumcision  in  the  Maraura 
tribes. 

The  Itchumundi  Ceremonies 

In  the  tribes  of  the  Itchumundi  nation,  circumcision  is 
practised  by  the  Wilga,  Kongait,  and  Bulalli  tribes.  The 
Tongaranka  knock  out  only  one  incisor  and  depilate  the 
private  parts.  The  tooth  is  either  the  right  or  the  left  upper 
incisor,  according  as  the  boy  uses  his  right  or  left  hand  in 
using  a  digging-stick.      He  carries    the  tooth  and   hair  with 


676        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


him  for  about  three  weeks  ;  and  then,  selecting  a  tree  which 
stands  with  its  roots  in  a  water-hole,  he  cuts  a  hole  in  the 
bark  and  conceals  them  therein. 

I  am  informed  that,  during  the  ceremonies,  he  drinks  the 
blood  from  the  arm  of  one  of  the  old  men,  and  is  supposed 
thereby  to  be  infused  with  a  manly  spirit,  and  to  lay  aside 
boyish  things. 

After  the  ceremonies,  he  is  prohibited  from  eating 
animal  food,  until  the  sore  caused  by  knocking  out  the  tooth 
is  healed. 

Two  bull-roarers  are  used  in  these  ceremonies.  The 
larger  of  the  two  is  called  Bungumbelli,  and  is  the  charge  of 
the  medicine-man  of  the  tribe.  A  notch  is  made  on  it  for 
each  ceremony  at  which  it  is  used.  The  smaller  one  is 
called  Purtalty  and  is  used  not  only  at  the  ceremonies,  but 
also  in  cases  of  sickness  by  the  medicine-men  as  a  sort  of 
exorcism.  The  youth  after  the  initiation  receives  presents 
from  the  men  to  give  him  a  start  in  life,  such  as  rugs, 
weapons,  and  such  like.  He  is  then  permitted  to  be  present 
at  the  consultations  of  the  men.* 

The  principles  which  underlie  the  ceremonies  of  the 
western  type  are  in  some  points  the  same  as  those  of  the 
eastern  type.  The  youths  are  separated  from  the  control 
of  their  mothers  and  from  the  companionship  of  their  sisters, 
are  usually  taboo  as  to  women  during  their  novitiate,  and 
are  generally  initiated  by  the  men  of  the  other  moiety  of 
the  tribe. 

The  inculcation  of  obedience  to  the  elders  and  obser- 
vation of  the  tribal  morality  is  common  to  both,  but  they 
are  sharply  distinguished  by  the  rites  of  circumcision  and 
subincision,  and  the  practice  of  bleeding  at  the  Wilyaru 
and  similar  ceremonies. 

There  is  no  direct  evidence  to  show  from  whence  these 
ceremonies  have  been  derived,  but  the  legends  suggest  a  line 
of  inter-tribal  communication  from  the  north  to  the  south, 
and  I  incline  to  the  belief  that  a  northern  origin  will 
ultimately  be  assigned  to  these  ceremonies.  Whether  they 
overlie  older  ceremonies  of  the  eastern  type  or  the  reverse, 

1  J.  W.  Boultbee. 


X  INITIATION  CEREMONIES,  WESTERN  TYPE  677 

I  am  unable  to  say.  Perhaps  when  the  initiation  ceremonies 
of  Western  and  Northern  Austrah'a  have  been  carefully- 
studied  and  described,  it  may  be  possible  to  form  some 
opinion  as  to  this  question. 

There  is  an  absence  in  the  western  tribes  of  a  belief  in 
an  anthropomorphic  Being  by  whom  the  ceremonies  were 
first  instituted.^ 

'  I  observe  that  Spencer  and  Gillen,  in  their  new  work  7'he  Northern  Tribes 
of  Central  Australia,  p.  20,  are  also  of  the  opinion  that  "  changes  in  custom 
have  been  slowly  passing  down  from  north  to  south." 


2  X 


L 


CHAPTER    XI 

MESSENGERS   AND    MESSAGE-STICKS— BARTER   AND 
TRADE    CENTRES— GESTURE    LANGUAGE 

Qualifications  of  messengers — Ceremonial  garb  of  messengers — Speed  with  which 
news  travels — The  heralds  of  the  Kamilaroi  and  other  tribes — Mode  of 
procedure,  and  emblems  carried  by  messengers — Message-sticks — Methods 
of  enumeration  in  different  tribes — Kulin  message-stick — Kurnai  messengers 
—  Chepara  message  -  stick  —  Tribal  expeditions  —  Dieri  Pitcheri  party  — 
Expedition  for  red  ochre  —  The  Yantruwunta  go  300  miles  for  sandstone 
slabs — The  Vutchin  custom  among  the  Dieri — Trade  centres  for  barter — 
Bartering  at  the  VVilyaru  ceremonies — The  Kani-nura  ceremonies — Bartering 
at  tribal  meetings  of  the  Wotjobaluk,  Kulin,  and  other  tribes — Smoke  signals 
and  others — Gesture  language — Very  complete  system  of  the  Dieri — Gestures 
used  by  various  tribes. 

In  all  tribes  there  are  certain  men  who  are,  so  to  say,  free 
of  one  or  more  of  the  adjacent  tribes.  This  arises  out  of 
tribal  intermarriage  ;  and,  indeed,  marriages  are  sometimes 
arranged  for  what  may  be  termed  "  state  reasons,"  that  is,  in 
order  that  there  may  be  means  of  sending  ceremonial  com- 
munications by  some  one  who  can  enter  and  traverse  a 
perhaps  unfriendly  country,  with  safety  to  himself  and  with 
security  for  the  delivery  of  his  message.  In  some  cases 
these  ceremonial  messengers,  as  will  be  seen  later  on,  are 
women.  But  the  bearing  of  merely  friendly  messages  within 
the  tribe  is  usually  by  a  relative  of  the  sender.  The  message 
itself  is,  in  other  tribes,  conveyed  by  what  the  whites  in 
certain  districts  call  a  "  blackfellow's  letter  " — a  message-stick. 
There  has  been  much  misunderstanding,  not  to  say  mis- 
statement, as  to  the  real  character  of  these  message -sticks, 
and  the  conventional  value  of  the  markings  on  them.  It 
has  been  said  that  they  can  be  read  and  understood  by  the 
person  to  whom  they  are  sent  without  the  marks  on  them 

678 


MESSENGERS  679 


being  explained  by  the  bearer.  I  have  even  heard  it  said 
that  persons,  other  than  the  one  to  whom  a  stick  is  sent,  can 
read  the  marks  with  as  much  ease  as  educated  people  can 
read  the  words  inscribed  on  one  of  our  letters. 

The  subject  is  important  in  so  far  that  a  right  under- 
standing of  the  method  by,  and  the  manner  in,  which  the 
markings  on  the  sticks  are  made  to  convey  information, 
is  well  calculated  to  afford  some  measure  of  the  mental 
status  of  the  persons  using  them. 

In  order  to  test  the  questions  thus  raised,  whether  these 
message-sticks  do  or  do  not  convey  information  to  those 
receiving  them,  apart  from  any  explanatory  message  given 
by  the  bearer,  I  made  such  personal  investigations  as  were 
possible,  and  addressed  myself  to  correspondents  in  various 
parts  of  Australia,  to  a  number  of  whom  my  best  thanks  are 
due  for  the  trouble  they  took  to  inform  me. 

Following  the  same  plan  as  in  the  other  chapters,  I 
commence  with  the  Dieri  tribe.  The  particulars  relate  to 
their  customs,  while  they  were  in  their  primitive  condition, 
nearly  forty  years  ago.  They  did  not  use  the  message- 
stick,  but  sent  only  messages  by  word  of  mouth.  It  was 
not  necessary,  as  with  some  tribes,  that  certain  messages,  for 
instance,  those  relating  to  the  initiation  ceremonies,  should 
be  carried  by  a  man  of  the  same  totem  as  the  sender. 
Messages  are  sent  to  gather  people  together  for  dancing 
corrobborees,  from  distances  of  over  one  hundred  miles,  and 
a  messenger  for  such  a  purpose  is  painted  with  red  ochre, 
and  wears  a  head-dress  of  feathers. 

In  calling  people  together  for  the  Wilyaru  or  Mindari 
ceremonies,  the  messengers  are  painted  with  diagonal  stripes 
of  yellow  ochre,  and  have  their  beards  tied  to  a  point. 
They  carry  a  token  made  of  emu  feathers,  tied  tightly  with 
string  and  shaped  like  a  Prince  of  Wales  feather.  The 
sending  of  a  handful  of  red  ochre  tied  up  in  a  small  bundle 
signifies  the  great  Mindari  or  peace  ceremony.  In  giving 
notice  of  the  ceremony  of  circumcision,  the  messenger  takes 
a  handful  of  charcoal,  and  places  a  piece  of  it  in  the  mouth 
of  each  person,  without  saying  a  word.  This  is  fully  under- 
stood to  mean  the  "  making  of  young  men." 


68o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Any  tokens  used  for  giving  notice  of  the  initiation 
ceremonies  are  not  allowed  to  be  shown  to  women,  girls,  or 
boys. 

A  messenger  sent  to  form  a  Pinya  wears  a  kind  of  net 


FIG.   41. — TOKKN   WORN  BY  MESSENGKR,   WILYAKU  CEREMONY.      DIERI   TRIBE.        X  §. 


on  the  head  and  a  white  band  round  it,  in  which  is  stuck  a 
feather.  He  is  painted  with  yellow  ochre  and  pipe-clay,  and 
bears  a  bunch  of  emu  feathers  stuck  in  the  string  girdle  at 
his  spine.  He  carries  part  of  the  beard  of  the  deceased  or 
some  balls  of  pipe -clay  taken  from  the  heads  of  those 
mourning  for  him.       These   are    shown   to    the   persons   to 


MESSENGERS  68i 


whom   he  is  sent,  and  are  at  once  understood  as  a  call  to 
form  a  Pinya,  to  avenge  a  death  by  evil  magic. 

A  messenger  who  is  sent  to  announce  a  death  is  smeared 
all  over  with  pipe -clay.  On  his  approach  to  the  camp 
the  women  commence  screaming  and  crying  passionately. 
After  a  time  the  particulars  of  the  death  are  made  public 
to  the  camp,  and  it  is  only  those  nearly  related  to  the 
deceased  who  weep.  Even  old  men  cry  bitterly,  and  their 
friends  console  them  as  if  they  were  children.  On  the 
following  morning  the  relatives  paint  themselves  over  with 


FIG.  42. — HEAD-NET  WORN  BY  MESSENGER   TO  CALL  A  IMNYA.      DIERI  TRIBE.       X  J. 

white  pipe-clay.  Widows  and  widowers  are  prohibited  from 
speaking  until  all  this  clay  has  worn  off,  however  long  it 
may  remain  on  them.  They  do  not  rub  it  off,  as  doing  so 
would,  they  believe,  be  followed  by  evil  consequences  to 
themselves.  It  must  absolutely  wear  off  by  itself,  and  during 
this  period  they  communicate  with  others  by  gesture  language. 
If  the  message  is  to  call  together  a  meeting  of  the  elder 
men  of  the  tribe,  the  messenger  is  some  noted  old  man, 
nominated  by  the  Pinnaru  (Headman)  who  sent  the  message. 
The  same  would  be  the  case  when  neighbouring  tribes  are 
invited  to  attend  the  ceremonies  of  initiation.  But  in  any 
other  matter  which  might  be  attended  by  danger,  or  where 
treachery  is  feared,  it  is  not  men  but  women  who  are  sent. 


682        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  most  important  messages  sent  by  the  Dieri  to 
neighbouring  tribes  are  those  relating  to  disputes  between 
them.  For  such  purposes  women  are  chosen,  and  if  possible 
such  women  as  belong  to  the  tribe  to  which  the  embassy,  if 
it  may  be  so  called,  is  sent.  Women  are  chosen  in  such  a 
case  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  they  are  going  to  a  tribe 
in  which  they  have  near  relations  ;  and  second,  because  it 
would  be  less  likely  that  they  would  be  treacherously  made 
away  with  than  men. 

Forty  years  ago  these  women  were  usually  the  wives  of 
Headmen  of  the  Murdus  (totems),  and  occasionally  one  of 
the  wives  of  the  principal  Headman,  Jalina-piramurana^  was 
among  them. 

The  women  are  accompanied  by  their  Pirraurus,  for  the 
Dieri  consider  that  on  such  a  mission  a  man  would  be  more 
complaisant  as  regards  the  acts  of  his  Pirrauru  wife  than 
as  regards  those  of  his  Tippa-malku  wife.  For  on  such 
occasions  it  is  thoroughly  understood  that  the  women  are 
to  use  every  influence  in  their  power  to  obtain  a  successful 
issue  for  their  mission,  and  are  therefore  free  of  their  favours. 
After  what  I  have  said  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  work  as  to 
the  class  rules,  it  is  perhaps  hardly  necessary  to  say  here 
that  in  these  cases  the  class  rules  are  obeyed. 

If  the  mission  is  successful,  there  is  a  time  of  licence 
between  its  members  and  the  tribe,  or  part  of  a  tribe,  to 
which  it  has  been  sent.  This  is  always  the  case,  and  if  the 
Dieri  women  failed  in  it,  it  would  be  at  peril  of  death  on 
their  return.  This  licence  is  not  regarded  with  any  jealousy 
by  the  women  of  the  tribe  to  which  the  mission  is  sent.  It 
is  taken  as  a  matter  of  course.  They  know  of  it,  but  do 
not  see  it,  as  it  occurs  at  a  place  apart  from  the  camp. 

The  members  of  such  a  mission  are  treated  as  dis- 
tinguished guests.  Food  is  provided  for  them,  and  on  their 
return  home,  after  about  a  week's  stay,  they  are  loaded  with 
presents.  If  the  mission  is  unsuccessful,  messages  of  dreadful 
threatening  are  sent  back  by  them. 

The  mode  of  announcing  a  mission,  whether  by  male  or 
female  messengers,  is  by  telling  it  to  the  Pinnaru  of  the 
camp,  when  alone,  as  soon  as  the  former  arrive.      Nothing  is 


MESSENGERS  683 


then  said  to  any  one,  but  when  all  the  people  are  in  the 
camp  about  the  time  of  going  to  rest,  the  Pinnaru  announces 
the  visit.  There  is  then  an  excited  discussion  on  it,  if  it  be 
a  matter  of  moment  or  general  interest,  for  an  hour  or  two  ; 
to  be  again  resumed  at  daybreak,  and  so  on,  night  and 
morning,  for  a  day  or  two,  until  some  definite  determination 
is  arrived  at. 

The  arguments  of  the  old  men  who  speak  are  noted  by 
the  messengers,  and  on  their  return  they  repeat  as  nearly  as 
they  are  able  the  popular  sentiments  of  the  tribe.^ 

Mr.  Gason  has  described  to  me  how  he  was  present  on 
several  occasions  on  the  return  of  a  mission  which  had  been 
entrusted  to  women.  The  Headman  and  the  principal  old 
men  received  them  kindly,  and  congratulated  them  on  their 
safe  return,  but  appeared  anxious,  and  clutched  their  spears 
in  an  excited  manner.  No  one  but  the  Headman  spoke  to 
the  women  immediately  on  their  return  ;  but  when  all  the 
men  were  seated,  they  were  questioned  as  to  the  result  of 
their  mission.  The  result  was  at  once  told  to  all  the  people 
in  the  camp,  who  rejoiced  if  it  were  favourable,  but  who 
became  fearfully  excited  and  seemed  to  lose  all  control  over 
themselves  if  it  had  failed,  rushing  to  and  fro,  yelling, 
throwing  sand  into  the  air,  biting  themselves,  and  brandish- 
ing their  weapons  in  the  wildest  manner  imaginable. 

In  cases  where  such  a  mission  had  been  successful, 
women  of  the  other  tribe  usually  accompanied  it  back,  to 
testify  its  approval  by  their  tribe.  Agreements  so  made  are 
probably  observed  as  faithfully  as  are  many  treaties  more 
formally  made  by  civilised  people. 

During  my  expedition  to  the  north  of  Cooper's  Creek  an 
attempt  was  made  by  some  of  the  Yaurorka  tribe  to  surprise 
my  camp  at  night.  As  it '  was  most  important  for  the 
success  of  my  expedition  that  I  should  be  on  friendly  terms 
with  the  people  of  the  Barcoo  delta,  I  went  on  the  following 
morning  to  their  camp,  which  was  near  at  hand  on  the  same 
water,  taking  with  me  my  black  boy,  who  spoke  their 
language,  and  at  an  interview  with  the  old  men,  apart  from 
the  others,  I  cautioned  them  against  in  any  way  molesting 

'  S.  Gason,  also  O.  Siebert. 


684        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

US,  who  were  travelling  peaceably  in  their  country.  I  told 
them  that  if  I  found  blackfellows  prowling  about  my  camp 
at  night,  I  should  certainly  shoot  them  after  this  notice. 

After  some  discussion  the  old  men  promised  that  none  of 
their  people  should  go  near  our  camp  at  night,  and  that 
when  doing  so  in  the  daytime  they  would  lay  down  their 
arms  at  a  little  distance,  and  on  my  part  I  promised  not  to 
do  them  any  hurt.  I  must  say  that  this  agreement  was 
kept  by  them  ;  and  I  observed  that  not  only  they  but  their 
fellow -tribesmen  also  in  future  laid  down  their  weapons 
when  visiting  us.  This  corroborates  Mr.  Gason's  statement 
that  the  Dieri  keep  to  the  agreements  which  they  make. 

As  the  Dieri  send  missions  to  the  surrounding  tribes,  so 
do  these  also  send  them  to  the  Dieri  when  occasion  requires, 
and  the  proceedings  are  such  as  I  have  described. 

It  may  be  noted  here  that  a  Dieri  man  of  no  note  or 
influence,  arriving  at  a  camp  as  a  messenger,  sits  down  near 
to  it  without  saying  anything.  After  remaining  a  few 
minutes  in  silence,  the  old  men  gather  round  him,  and  ask 
whence  he  comes  and  what  has  befallen  him.  He  then 
delivers  his  message  and  details  his  news.  Two  of  the  old 
men  then  stand  up,  one  retailing  the  message  and  the  other 
repeating  it  in  an  excited  manner.  The  newcomer,  if  he  is 
a  friendly  stranger,  is  hospitably  entertained,  living  in  the 
hut  of  some  man  of  the  same  totem  as  himself. 

I  remember  an  instance  of  such  a  visit  when  I  was 
camped  close  to  a  small  number  of  Yaurorka,  some  distance 
to  the  north  of  Cooper's  Creek,  with  whom  I  was  on  friendly 
terms  under  the  agreement  spoken  of.  A  stranger  had 
arrived  from  the  south,  and  so  far  as  I  remember,  was  a 
Dieri.  I  could  watch  all  their  movements  by  the  light  of 
their  fire,  and  hear  what  was  spoken  in  a  loud  tone,  for  we 
were  separated  only  by  a  deep  though  narrow  water 
channel.  They  spent  the  evening  in  great  feasting,  and  the 
women  were  busy  till  late  at  night  in  pounding  and  grinding 
seeds  for  food.  The  stranger  related  his  news,  and  it  was 
repeated  in  a  loud  tone  to  the  listening  tribesmen  sitting  or 
standing  at  their  fires.  I  was  unable  to  understand  more 
than  the  general   meaning  of  the  announcements,  but    my 


MESSENGERS  685 


black  boy,  who  was  acquainted  with  the  Dieri  speech, 
explained  that  this  man  was  a  "  walkabout  blackfellow,"  in 
other  words,  a  messenger  who  was  telling  them  his  news. 

Messengers  from  time  to  time  arrived  at  that  branch  of 
the  Yantruwunta  tribe  which  lived  where  I  had  established 
my  depot,  and  with  whom  I  was  on  the  best  of  terms. 
The  old  men,  the  Pinnarus,  told  me  on  several  occasions 
that  a  messenger  had  arrived  from  beyond  the  "  great 
stones,"  or  stony  country,  that  is,  Sturt's  Stony  Desert, 
bringing  news  of  the  Whil  - pra- pinnaru,  meaning  the 
explorer  M'Kinlay.^  They  first  reported  that  he  was 
surrounded  •  by  flood  waters,  and,  after  some  time,  that  the 
waters  had  fallen  and  that  he  had  "  thrown  away  "  his  cart, 
and  was  gone  northwards  they  knew  not  where.  These 
messengers  came  from  the  tribe  living  about  where  Birdsville 
is  situated.  The  account  given  of  M'Kinlay's  movements 
was  correct,  and  I  afterwards  saw  the  country  which  had 
been  flooded.  This  shows  how  news  is  carried  from  one 
tribe  to  another,  in  this  case  for  a  distance  of  about  a 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  at  least. 

A  man  of  influence,  arriving  at  a  camp  of  a  friendly 
tribe,  is  received  with  raised  weapons  by  the  inmates,  as  if 
in  defiance.  Upon  this  the  visitor  rushes  towards  them, 
making  a  pretence  of  striking  them,  they  warding  off  his 
feints  with  their  shields.  Immediately  after  this  they 
embrace  him  and  lead  him  to  his  camp,  where  the  women 
shortly  after  bring  him  food.'^ 

During  my  exploration  on  the  southern  side  of  Sturt's 
Desert,  in  the  country  of  the  Ngurawola  tribe,  I  had  a  good 
opportunity  of  observing  the  manner  in  which  a  party  of 
strangers  is  received.  On  arriving  at  a  shouting  distance 
of  a  camp  of  that  tribe  my  guide,  a  Yantruwunta  man, 
halted  us  and,  breaking  off  a  branch  of  a  tree,  which  he 
held  up  in  hfs  right  hand,  went  nearer  to  a  group  of  old 
men  who  had  come  forward  and  stood  at  a  little  distance 

'  M 'Kinlay  received  this  name  from  the  blacks  at  the  outlying  cattle  stations 
of  South  Australia.  Any  wheeled  vehicle  is  there  called  in  the  blacks'  "  pidgin 
English"  a  whil-pra^  that  is,  a  wheel  -  barrow,  Pinnarti  being  Headman,  or 
leader.     The  name  followed  him  on  from  tribe  to  tribe. 

2  O.  Siebert. 


686        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

in  advance  of  their  camp.  The  guide,  waving  his  branch 
at  arm's-length,  said,  in  a  loud  tone  of  voice,  that  we  were 
travelling  peaceably  {Barkii-balkala).  Then  followed  a  loud- 
toned  conversation  between  him  and  the  Pinnarus  of  the 
camp.  Being  at  length  satisfied,  they  came  towards  us, 
and  led  us  to  a  place  adjoining  a  water-channel,  on  the 
farther  side  of  which  they  were  encamped  in  a  cluster  of 
bee-hived-shaped  grass  huts.  Here  we  were  told  to  camp, 
and  some  of  their  young  men  were  sent  to  gather  wood 
for  our  fire. 

In  this  manner  I  was  taken  during  several  days  from 
camp  to  camp  in  the  country  bordering  Sturt's  Desert  and 
Lake  Lipson. 

In  the  Wiimbaio  tribe  a  messenger  of  death  walks  in  a 
dejected  manner  on  nearing  a  camp,  holding  his  spear  in 
one  hand  and  letting  it  rest  in  the  hollow  of  the  other  arm. 
When  close  to  the  camp  he  says  "  Dau "  (death)  twice, 
which  is  the  formula  suited  to  the  occasion.  His  face  is 
painted  with  a  little  pipe- clay.  He  walks  through  the 
encampment,  repeating  the  word  "  Dau "  at  each  hut, 
before  he  sits  down,  apart  from  the  others,  waiting  till 
some  friend  brings  him  some  food.  After  a  time  he  again 
goes  into  the  camp  and  delivers  his  news. 

It  is  always  possible  to  tell  by  the  appearance  of  the 
messenger  what  the  kind  of  news  it  is,  whether  of  death,  of 
fighting,  or  of  elopements.^ 

In  the  Ngarigo  tribe  a  message  was  called  Mabtm^  and 
a  messenger  Gunumilli.  He  might  be  any  one  chosen  by 
the  old  men  or  the  Headman. 

A  messenger  who  merely  carried  a  verbal  message  from 
some  person  to  another  would  probably  carry  with  it  a  ball, 
made  of  strips  of  opossum  pelt  rolled  tightly  together,  as  a 
friendly  token  from  the  sender. 

A  man  was  chosen  as  messenger  for  tribal  matters  who 
had  relatives  at  the  place  to  which  he  was  to  go. 

The  man  who  acted  as  messenger  between  myself  and 
the  Murring  Headmen  about  the  holding  of  the  initiation 
ceremonies  was  the  Headman  of  the  Snowy  River  clan  of 

1  Dr.  M'Kinlay, 


MESSENGERS  687 


the  Kurnai,  but  his  mother  was  a  Ngarigo  woman.  He 
was  therefore  free  of  her  tribe,  and  was  the  recognised 
means  of  communication  between  the  Krauatungalung  and 
the  Ngarigo.  He  spent  his  time  mostly  between  the  two 
places,  and  had  thus  become  known  to  the  Yuin  and  attended 
their  ceremonies. 

If  the  message  related  to  a  corrobboree,  the  Ngarigo 
messenger  carried  a  man's  kilt  {Buran),  a  head  -  band 
{Ngunuinila),  and  nose-peg  {Elangantu).  If  it  related  to  an 
expiatory  fight,  he  carried  a  shield  for  spear  -  fighting 
{Birkumba)  ;  but  if  it  was  to  call  a  war-party  together,  he 
carried  a  jag-spear  (Jerumbuddi).  In  relation  to  the 
initiation  ceremonies  the  token  was  a  bull-roarer  {Mudj't) 
and  also  a  spear,  boomerang,  and  shield.  A  messenger 
carrying  the  tidings  of  the  death  of  some  person  had  his 
face  painted  with  a  white  streak  from  each  eye  down  to  the 
lower  jaw. 

In  the  Wiradjuri  tribe  there  is  a  Headman  for  each 
totem,  who  is  the  oldest  man  of  the  name.  Important 
messages,  such  as  those  relating  to  the  Burbung  ceremonies, 
are  sent  by  a  Headman.  The  messenger  must  be  of  the 
same  totem  as  the  sender,  and  the  message  is  sent  to  the 
oldest  man  in  the  same  totem  in  the  locality  to  which  the 
messenger  goes.  This  oldest  man  is  the  head  of  his  totem 
at  that  place.  In  one  case  within  my  knowledge,  such  a 
message  was  sent  by  a  Headman  of  the  Kubbi  sub-class  and 
the  red  kangaroo  totem,  and  his  messenger  was  of  the  same 
sub-class  and  totem.  The  message  is  thus  sent  on  by  men 
of  the  same  totem  from  place  to  place. 

All  kinds  of  niessages  are*  sent  on  in  this  manner,  and 
the  messengers  are  regarded  as  sacred,  and  may  safely 
travel  anywhere,  so  long  as  they  possess  the  proper  sign  or 
emblem  of  their  office. 

The  practice  of  the  Kamilaroi  tribes  may  be  taken  as 
that  of  the  tribe  which  lived  nearest  to  Maitland  in  New 
South  Wales,  about  fifty  years  back.  In  each  clan  there 
was  one  man  who  was  the  herald,  and  had  an  official 
designation.  He  was  well  known  in  all  the  adjoining 
tribes,  and   could    go   in    safety  between   them,  even  when 


688        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

they  were  at  war.  When  sent  as  an  envoy  to  the  enemies* 
camp,  he  might  have  to  wait  for  a  night  to  bring  back  a 
message  from  them.  While  there,  he  made  a  camp  by 
himself,  a  Httle  distance  from  their  encampment.  These 
heralds,  being  well  known,  did  not  need  to  carry  any  badge 
or  emblem  of  office  ;  but  if  a  black  was  employed  as  a 
white  man's  messenger,  the  message  was  written  on  a  piece 
of  paper  which  was  fastened  in  the  end  of  a  split  stick. 
Carrying  this  before  him,  he  might  pass  safely  through  an 
enemy's  country,  because  he  was  seen  to  be  the  white  man's 
messenger,  and  if  any  harm  were  done  to  him,  the  tribe  of 
the  white  man  would  be  very  angry.^ 

As  a  curious  parallel  to  this,  I  may  mention  that  when 
returning  from  Cooper's  Creek  into  the  settlements  of  South 
Australia,  a  young  man  of  the  Yaurorka  tribe,  who  had 
attached  himself  to  me,  accompanied  my  party  to  a  stage 
beyond  Blanch-water.  To  ensure  him  good  treatment  by 
any  white  man  he  might  meet  on  his  way  through  the 
settlements,  I  wrote  a  sort  of  passport  which  I  folded  up 
and  put  into  the  end  of  a  stick.  I  explained  to  him  what 
it  was,  and  when  he  sorrowfully  started  on  his  long 
journey  he  carried  the  stick  perpendicularly  in  his  hand  in 
front  of  himself,  as  a  sort  of  talisman  which  would  ensure 
safety. 

In  1862  a  messenger  arrived  at  the  blacks'  camp  at 
Ningy  Gnlly  station,  on  the  Moonie  River  in  Southern 
Queensland,  bringing  a  message  about  the  Boorool  Bora^  or 
Big  Bora.  This  is  in  the  Wollaroi  or  Yualaroi  country,  the 
language  being  akin  to  the  Kamilaroi.  The  messenger, 
one  of  the  lesser  Koradjis,  approached  the  camp  as  the  sun 
was  sinking.  The  two  oldest  men  in  the  camp  met  him, 
and  made  his  fire.  The  message-stick  which  he  carried 
was  ornamented  with  paint  and  cockatoo  down,  and  he 
himself  was  in  war-paint,  with  feather  head-dress.  He 
came  from  the  Bora  ground,  near  the  New  South  Wales 
border,  where  the  Headmen  were.  He  had  also  a  bull- 
roarer,  and  that  night,  when  there  was  a  corrobboree,  it 
was  sounded.      The  same  occurred   at  each  station  up  the 

1  C.  Naseby. 


MESSExNGERS  689 


river,  as  he  proceeded,  for  each  station  fed  regularly  six  to 
twelve  blacks,  the  men  riding  after  cattle,  the  women 
herding  milkers,  washing,  etc.  Other  messengers  were 
sent  on  the  same  business  in  other  directions.^ 

The  means  of  communication  by  the  Geawe-gal  and 
neighbouring,  and  even  more  distant,  tribes  was  by  persons 
having  the  character  of  heralds.  Their  persons  were  sacred 
even  among  hostile  tribes.  From  occasional  residences  in 
distant  places  many  of  them  acquired  different  dialects 
fluently.  Other  men,  engaged  in  affairs  of  less  moment, 
may  be  termed  "  special  messengers."  They  also  were 
respected  scrupulously,  but  perhaps  their  persons  were  not 
so  sacred  as  those  of  the  heralds,  under  certain  conditions, 
and  their  journeys  were  made  in  safer  territories.  A  herald 
would  be  selected  for  dangerous  latitudes.^ 

With  the  Gringai  a  messenger  can  pass  in  safety  from 
one  tribe  to  another.  The  red-coloured  net  which  is  worn 
round  the  forehead  is  usually  an  emblem  for  calling  the 
tribe  together.  When  a  messenger  is  within  sound  of  the 
camp  to  which  he  is  sent,  he  gives  a  particular  "  coo-ee," 
when  all  hearing  it  assemble  to  hear  what  he  has  to  say, 
but  not  a  word  is  spoken  to  him  till  he  thinks  it  proper  to 
unburden  his  message,  and  sometimes  he  sits  quite  silent 
for  a  long  time.  When,  however,  he  unburdens  his  mind, 
his  eloquence  is  wonderful,  and  he  is  listened  to  with  the 
greatest  attention.  No  message -sticks  were  used  in  this 
tribe.^ 

My  Jajaurung  informant,  whose  father  married  a 
woman  of  the  Jupagalk  tribe,  and  whose  maternal  grand- 
mother was  of  the  Leitchi-leitchi  tribe,  was  one  of  those 
men  who  were  sent  on  important  messages.  He  was  free 
of  three  tribes,  first  on  account  of  his  father,  who  lived  with 
the  Jupagalk,  also  on  account  of  his  mother  and  grand- 
mother, as  well  as  of  his  own  tribe  the  Jajaurung.  Thus 
he  became  a  messenger  and  intermediary  between  these 
tribes.  His  mother's  sister  was  married  to  a  Jajaurung 
man  who  lived  at  Charlotte  Plains,  and  her  son  took  care  of 
a  stone  quarry  at  that  place,  from  which  the  tribes  to  the 

1  E.  R.  Vernon.  2  q.  W.  Rusden.  '  J.  W.  Boydell. 


690        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

north-west  were  supplied  with  axe-heads.  My  informant 
on  one  occasion  brought  down  word  that  the  Wotjobaluk,  at 
Lake  Hindmarsh,  were  in  want  of  stone  for  axes,  and  this 
material  was  obtained  from  the  quarry,  and  carried  up  to 
the  next  great  meeting  of  the  tribes  on  the  Wimmera  for 
barter  by  my  informant's  father.  This  man  was  not  only  an 
intermediary,  like  his  son,  but  also  a  great  medicine-man,  for 
it  was  he  whom  I  mentioned  elsewhere  as  having  taken  up 
the  challenge  of  the  settler  at  Morton's  Plains  to  make  rain 
and  fill  his  new  dam. 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribes  messages  are  sent  from  the 
old  men  by  chosen  messengers.  This  is  also  the  case  in 
other  tribes  of  the  same  nation. 

In  the  tribes  of  South-west  Victoria  there  were  messengers 
attached  to  each  tribe  who  were  selected  for  their  intelli- 
gence and  their  ability  as  linguists.  They  were  employed 
to  carry  information  from  one  tribe  to  another,  regarding 
the  time  and  place  of  great  meetings,  corrobborees,  marriages, 
burials,  and  proposed  battles. 

Persons  carrying  these  messages  are  considered  sacred 
when  on  duty,  and  to  distinguish  them  from  others,  they 
generally  travel  two  together,  and  are  painted  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  message,  so  that  their  appearance  denotes 
the  nature  of  their  news  before  they  come  to  the  camp. 
On  arriving  at  the  camp,  they  sit  down  without  speaking, 
apparently  unobserved,  and  after  a  time  one  of  them  delivers 
a  short  speech,  with  intoned  voice.^ 

It  was  not  -necessary  in  the  Kurnai  tribe  that  the 
message  should  be  carried  by  any  particular  person,  but 
generally  the  messenger  was  one  of  the  younger  men  related 
to  the  sender.  In  important  matters  affecting  the  tribe, 
messengers  were  sent  by  the  Gweraeil-kurnai^  or  Headman, 
on  his  own  authority,  or  more  frequently  after  consulting 
with  the  old  men. 

In    the    Chepara    tribe    messages    were    sent    on    tribal 

matters  by  a   Headman,  or,  if  of  great  importance,  by  the 

principal    Headman.       When   such  a  message  was    sent,  it 

was   by  a    messenger    called    Buira,  who  was    usually   the 

^  J.  Dawson,  op.  cit.  p.  72. 


MESSAGE-STICKS  691 


sister's  son,  or  sister's  daughter's  son  {Kanif),  or  a  similar 
near  relative  of  the  sender.^ 

In  the  tribes  about  Maryborough  (Queensland),  when  it 
has  been  decided  to  hold  a  Dora  (initiation  ceremonies),  the 
old  man  at  whose  instance  they  are  to  be  held  calls  for  a  party 
to  carry  the  message.  This  consists  of  from  six  to  ten  men, 
under  the  guidance  of  one  or  two  old  men,  who  know  the 
country  to  which  they  are  to  go.  They  travel  secretly,  not 
being  protected  by  their  office,  and  only  announce  their 
arrival  at  a  camp  when  so  near  that  a  signal  made  by  strik- 
ing two  boomerangs  together  can  be  heard.  This  signal  is 
immediately  understood,  and  the  old  men  go  out  and 
receive  them.  For  the  time  they  are  exempted  from  any 
party  feuds.  They  carry  with  them  on  their  return  journey 
only  fire-stick,  tomahawk,  boomerang,  spear,  and  shield,  but 
no  rugs  or  coverings.^ 

A  messenger  is  chosen  by  the  Wakelbura  who  has  a 
number  of  friends  in  the  tribe  to  which  he  is  sent,  or  which 
he  is  instructed  to  bring  back  with  him.  Should  such  a 
messenger  be  injured  or  killed  in  a  quarrel,  in  which  he  was 
not  the  aggressor,  his  tribe  would  in  turn  injure  or  kill  the 
man  who  did  it.  This  vengeance  would  be  carried  out 
by  the  messenger's  father's  and  mother's  brothers.  If  the 
injury  was  such  as  to  form  the  subject  of  a  set  fight,  the 
weapons  would  be  knives,  which  were  in  the  olden  time  of 
stone,  but  latterly  of  part  of  a  shear  blade  or  butcher's  knife 
fixed  with  a  handle.' 

Messengers  are  sent  by  the  Buntamurra  to  call  other 
tribes  to  fight  or  for  other  purposes,  and  message-sticks  are 
used  for  the  purpose.* 

Message-Sticks 

The  use  of  message  -  sticks  appears  to  have  been 
common  in  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  country  through  which 
the  Darling  River  flows.  The  following  particulars  relate 
to  the  tribes  of  the  Itchumundi  nation. 

'  J.  Gibson.  3  J.  C.  Muirhead. 

^  Hairy  E.  Aldridge.  ♦  J.  H.  Kirkham. 


692        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Message-sticks  can  be  sent  by  any  one.  The  marks 
placed  on  the  sticks  are  an  aid  to  memory.  The  numbers 
I  and  2  in  Fig.  44  represent  a  message-stick  sent  to  inform 
the  Kongait  tribe  that  the  Tongaranka  intended  holding  an 
initiation  ceremony,  and  inviting  their  attendance.  The 
notches  on  No.  i  have  the  following  explanation,  counting 
from  the  top  : — 

1.  Jumba  =  make  young  men. 

2.  Yantoru  =  sticks  for  knocking  out  teeth. 

3.  Purtali  =  small  bull-roarer. 

4.  Bungumbelli  =  large  bull-roarer. 

5.  Not  explained. 

6.  (Large  notch)  Tallyera  =  marking  with  red  ochre. 
On  No.  2  the  notches  refer  to  different  localities  from 

which  the  blacks  are  to  come  to  Yancannia,  which  is  the 
larger  notch. 

Nos.  3  and  4  represent  another  Tongaranka  stick,  from 
the  son  of  the  Headman  to  a  man  at  Tarella.  The  message 
was  to  tell  him  that  the  sender,  his  brothers,  and  two  old 
men  were  at  a  certain  water-hole,  and  wished  him  to  bring 
his  son  to  be  initiated,  as  there  were  two  other  boys  ready 
for  the  ceremony.  In  3  the  large  notch  is  the  recipient  of 
the  message,  and  the  three  smaller  ones  his  son  and  the 
other  boys.  The  group  of  three  notches  in  No.  4  represent 
the  sender  of  the  stick  and  his  two  brothers,  while  the  two 
small  cuts  are  the  old  men. 

No.  5  represents  a  message-stick  sent  by  a  man  of  the 
Tongaranka  tribe,  inviting  two  of  his  friends  at  a  distance 
to  come  and  see  him,  as  his  wife  was  ill  and  could  not 
travel.  The  lower  notch  represents  the  sender,  and  the  two 
others  the  men  invited. 

This  message-stick  is  made  of  part  of  a  small  branch  ot 
a  tree,  and  is  wrapped  round  with  a  few  strands  of  a  man's 
kilt,  with  which  article  of  man's  attire  the  boy  is  invested 
after  initiation.  The  whole  is  tied  up  in  about  two  feet  of 
the  cord  made  of  twisted  opossum  fur,  which  the  novice 
wears  for  a  time,  after  his  initiation,  as  evidence  of  his 
having  been  made  a  "  young  man."  ^ 
1  J.  W.  Boultbee. 


MESSAGE-STICKS     ,  693 


The  message-stick  was  known  and  made  use  of  by  the 
Ngarigo,  but  not  to  such  an  extent  as  by  other  tribes.  It 
was  a  piece  of  wood  a  few  inches  long,  with  notches  at  the 
edges  which  referred  to  the  message  with  which  the  bearer 
was  entrusted. 

About  the  year  1 840  my  friend,  the  late  Mr.  A.  M. 
M'Keachie,  met  two  young  men  of  the  Ngarigo  tribe  at 
the  Snowy  River,  near  to  Barnes's  Crossing  ;  one  of  them 
carried  two  peeled  sticks  each  about  two  feet  long,  and  with 
notches  cut  in  them,  which  they  told  him  reminded  them  of 
their  message.  The  sticks  were  about  one  half- inch  in 
diameter.  Their  message  was  that  they  were  to  collect 
their  tribe  to  meet  those  of  the  Tumut  River  and  Quean- 
beyan,  at  a  place  in  the  Bogong  Mountains,  to  eat  the 
Bogong  moths.^ 

A  messenger  in  the  Wiradjuri  tribe  is  provided  with  a 
message-stick,  the  notches  on  which  remind  him  of  his 
message,  and  if  it  is  to  call  the  people  together  for  initiation 
ceremonies,  he  carries  a  bull-roarer  {Bobu  or  Mudjigang),  a 
belt  [Gulir),  a  man's  kilt  {Buran  or  Tala-bulg)  made  of 
kangaroo-rat  skin,  a  head-string  {Ulungau-ir),  and  a  white 
head-band  {Kainbrun).  The  messenger  having  made  known 
his  message  to  the  man  to  whom  he  is  sent,  and  delivered 
his  message  with  the  other  emblems  above  mentioned,  the 
recipient  assembles  the  men  at  the  council-place  {Ngulubuf). 
He  then  shows  them  the  message-stick  and  other  articles, 
and  delivers  to  them  the  message  which  he  has  received. 
Sometimes,  when  the  kilt  is  sent,  the  strands  of  skin  forming 
it  are  used  instead  of  a  notched  stick,  to  remind  the  bearer 
of  his  message. 

The  recipient  of  the  message-stick  sends  it  on,  with  all 
the  articles  which  he  has  received,  by  one  of  his  own  people, 
and  it  thus  travels  until  the  farthest  point  is  reached. 

'  A  great  gathering  usually  took  place  about  midsummer  on  the  highest 
ranges  of  the  Australian  Alps,  where  sometimes  from  500  to  700  aborigines, 
belonging  to  different  friendly  tribes,  would  assemble  almost  solely  to  feast  on 
roasted  moths  (Bogong).  The  moths  were  thickly  congregated  in  the  crevices 
of  the  rocks,  and  were  stifled  with  smouldering  brush.  Being  roasted  on  the  hot 
ashes,  they  were  shrivelled  to  about  the  size  of  a  grain  of  wheat.  The  taste  of 
the  roasted  Bogongs  is  said  to  be  sweetish  and  rather  pleasant  eating.  ("The  Omeo 
Blacks,"  by  Richard  Helms,  op.  cit.  p.  387). 

2  Y 


694        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

In  the  Yualaroi  tribe  men  not  specially  appointed 
carry  pieces  of  wood  with  marks  on  them  from  one 
person  to  another,  but  they  have  to  explain  what  these 
marks  mean.' 

The  messengers  of  the  Wakelbura  tribe  carry  message- 
sticks,  the  marks  on  which  do  not  convey  their  meaning 
without  verbal  explanation.  The  man  who  presents  the 
stick  explains  what  the  various  markings  mean.  If  the 
stick  were  sent  by  a  man  of  the  Malera  class,  it  and  every- 
thing marked  on  it  would  also  be  Malera.  The  stick 
shown  on  Fig.  45,  Nos.  i  and  2,  was  sent  from  sub-class 
Obu  to  Obu,  the  stick  b)eing  itself  of  Gidya  wood,  which  is 
Wutheru-Obu,  and  the  game  is  Wutheru,  but,  being  wallaby, 
might  be  of  either  the  Obu  or  Wungo  sub-class.  The 
message-stick  was  sent  by  a  Tarrima  of  the  Wakelbura  tribe 
to  one  of  the  Yangebura  tribe  at  Blackall.  The  message 
referred  to  game  which  was  to  be  found  in  abundance  within 
a  wire  fence  erected  near  Clermont,  and  was  to  invite  the 
Yangebura  to  come  and  kill  game  there.  Such  message- 
sticks  are  always  painted  ;  this  one  was  coloured  red  and 
blue.2 

In  the  case  of  a  message  sent  by  the  Turrbal  tribe  to 
call  another  tribe  to  come  to  an  expiatory  combat,  a 
message-stick  sent  would  be  marked  with  certain  notches, 
which  the  messenger  in  delivering  it  would  explain  in  the 
following  manner.  Pointing  to  a  certain  set  of  notches,  he 
would  say,  for  instance,  "  There  are  the  men  of  a  big 
division  of  the  Wide  Bay  Tribe,  who  are  coming  to  see  us, 
to  have  this  fight  about  one  of  their  peopip  whose  death 
they  blame  you  for."  Pointing  to  another  set  of  notches,  he 
would  say,  "  These  other  people  are  coming  to  help  them. 
This  stick  is  sent  you  by  the  great  man  who  sent  me,  and 
who  says  that  you  are  to  meet  him,  at  such  and  such  a 
place.  You  are  to  send  word  on,  and  tell  your  friends  or 
the  other  tribes  to  come  and  help  you." 

The  messenger  who  is  sent  to  call  people  for  a  Dora 
ceremony  not  only  carries  a  message-stick,  but  also  a  bull- 
roarer,  to  show  to  the  old  men.^ 

1  R.  M.  Crowthers.  ^  J.  C.  Muirhead.  '  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


MESSAGE-STICKS  695 


In  the  tribes  within  fifty  miles  of  Maryborough  (Queens- 
land), the  sender  of  a  message-stick  makes  it  in  the  presence 
of  his  messenger  and  explains  it  to  him.  If  the  messenger 
cannot  deliver  it,  he  in  his  turn  explains  it  to  some  other 
man  who  undertakes  to  deliver  it.  If  shown  to  a  man  to 
whom  it  has  not  been  explained,  he  may  say,  "  I  know  this 
means  something,  but  I  do  not  know  what  it  means." 

The  following  will  give  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  which 
a  message-stick  is  prepared  and  used  in  these  tribes.  It  is 
figured  in  Fig.  44,  No.  10. 

It  is  assumed  to  be  from  a  blackfellow  living  at  some 
place  distant  twenty  to  thirty  miles  from  where  some  friend 
is  camped,  to  whom  the  sender  desires  to  inform  of  the 
following  message :  "  I  am  here,  five  camps  distant  from 
you.  In  such  and  such  a  time  I  will  go  and  see  you. 
There  are  so  and  so  with  me  here.  Send  me  some  flour, 
tea,  sugar,  and  tobacco.  How  are  Bulkoin  and  his  wife  and 
Bunda  ?  " 

Having  his  messenger  beside  him  he  would  make  the 
marks  shown. 

Five  notches  represent  the  five  camps  (stages),  distance 
to  the  recipient ;  a  flat  place  cut  on  the  stick  shows  a 
break  in  the  message  ;  ten  notches  the  time  after  which  the 
sender  will  visit  his  friend  ;  eight  notches  the  eight  people 
camped  with  the  sender  ;  four  notches  the  articles  asked  for  ; 
another  flat  place  on  the  stick  shows  another  break  in  the 
message  ;  and  three  notches  the  three  persons  asked  after. 
Having  made  these  marks,  and  having  explained  them  to 
the  messenger,  he  carves  the  ends  of  the  stick  to  make  it 
look  ornamental,  and  gives  it  to  him  for  delivery.^ 

The  Headmen  of  a  branch  of  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe 
having  consulted  and  decided  that,  for  instance,  some  other 
part  of  the  tribe  should  be  summoned  to  meet  them  on 
some  special  occasion,  the  principal  man  among  them 
prepares  a  message-stick  by  making  notches  on  it  with  a 
knife.  In  the  old  times  this  was  done  with  a  sharp  flint  or 
a  mussel  shell.  The  man  who  is  to  be  charged  with  the 
message   looks  on   while   this  'is   being  done,  and   he   thus 

»   Harry  E.  Aid  ridge. 


696        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

receives  his  message,  and  learns  the  reference  which  the 
marks  on  the  stick  have  to  it.  A  notch  is  made  at  one 
end  to   indicate   the   sender,  and   probably  also   notches  for 


m 


FIG.    43. — MESSAGE-STICKS    OK    WURUNJEKKl,    NARKINVERI,    GOURNDITCH-MARA, 
AND    WOTJOBALUk    TRIBES.        X  §. 

those  who  join  him  in  sending  the  message.  A  large  notch 
is  made  on  one  side  for  each  tribal  group  which  is  invited 
to  attend.  If  all  the  people  are  invited  to  attend,  then  the 
stick  is  notched  from  end  to  end.  If  very  few  are  invited, 
a  notch  is  made  for  each  individual,  as  he  is  named  to  the 


MESSAGE-STICKS  697 


messenger.  The  illustration,  Fig.  43,  No.  5,  represents  one  of 
these  sticks,  which  was  made  to  convey  an  invitation  from  the 
Headman  of  the  Gromilluk  horde  to  the  Yarik-kulluk  horde 
at  Lake  Coorong,  both  being  local  divisions  of  the  Wot- 
jobaluk  tribe.  All  the  people  were  invited  to  attend.  The 
three  notches  at  the  upper  end  on  the  right-hand  side  show 
the  sender  and  his  friends,  who  were  the  principal  Gromilluk 
men.  The  large  notch  represents  the  Yarik-killuk  horde 
and  its  Headman,  to  whom  the  message  was  sent.  The 
notches  continuing  along  the  edge  to  the  end  and  along  the 
other  edge  indicate  all  the  people  of  the  horde  being  invited. 
The  oldest  man  having  made  such  a  message -stick, 
hands  it  to  the  next  oldest  man,  who  inspects  it,  and,  if 
necessary,  adds  some  further  marks  and  gives  corresponding 
instructions.  Finally  the  stick,  having  passed  from  one  to 
the  other  of  the  old  men,  is  handed  to  the  messenger,  who 
has  been  duly  told  off  for  this  duty,  and  he  is  informed  at 
the  same  time  when  the  visitors  will  be  expected  to  arrive. 
The  enumeration  of  the  days,  or  the  stages  of  the  journey 
of  the  visitors,  is  made  in  the  following  manner.  Commenc- 
ing at  one  little  finger,  the  enumeration  is  as  follows  : — 

1.  Giti-munya,  or  little  hand,  that  is,  the  little  finger. 

2.  Gaiup-munya,  from  gaiup,  one,  and  viunya,  a  hand  ; 
the  third  finger. 

3.  Marung-munya,  from  Marung,  the  desert  pine 
{Callitris  verucosa).  The  middle  finger,  being  longer  than 
the  others,  is  like  that  tree,  which  is  taller  than  the  other 
trees  growing  in  the  Wotjo  country. 

4.  Yollop-yollop-munya,  from  yollop^  to  point  or  aim  at  ; 
thus  yolhp-bit,  the  act  of  aiming  a  spear,  as  by  the  fore- 
finger being  used  as  a  throwing-stick  ;  the  fore-finger. 

5 .  Bap-munya,  from  bap,  mother,  therefore  mother  of  the 
hand  ;  the  thumb. 

6.  Dart-gur,  from  dart,  a  hollow,  and  gur,  the  fore-arm  ; 
the  hollow  formed  by  the  end  of  the  radius  and  the  wrist. 

7.  Boi-bun,  a  small  swelling,  i.e.  the  swelling  of  the 
flexor  muscle  of  the  fore-arm. 

8.  Bun-dari,  a  hollow,  i.e.  the  inside  of  the  elbow-joint. 

9.  Gengen-dartchuk,  from  gengen,  to   tie,  and  dartchuk. 


698        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

the  upper  arm.  This  is  the  name  of  the  place  where  the 
armlet  of  opossum  pelt  is  tied  round  the  biceps  for 
ornament. 

I  o.  Borporung,  the  point  of  the  shoulder. 

1 1 .  Jarak-gourn,  from  jarak,  a  reed,  and  goum,  the 
neck.  This  refers  to  the  place  where  the  reed  necklace 
is  worn. 

1 2.  Nerup-wrembul,  from  nerup,  the  butt,  as  nerup-galk, 
the  butt  or  base  of  a  tree,  and  wrembul,  the  ear. 

1 3.  Wurt-wrembuly  from  wurt,  above,  and  also  behind, 
and  wrembul,  the  ear ;  that  is,  the  head  above  and  just 
behind  the  ear. 

1 4.  Doke-doke,  from  doka,  to  move,  i.e.  "  that  which 
moves,"  being  the  muscle  which  can  be  seen  when  in  the 
act  of  eating. 

1 5.  Det-det^  hard.  This  is  the  crown  of  the  head. 
From  this  place  the  count  goes  down  the  other  side  by 
corresponding  places. 

This  method  of  counting  seems  to  do  away  with  the 
often-repeated  statement  that  the  Australian  aborigines  are 
unable  to  count  beyond  four  or  at  the  most  five.  By  the 
above  manner  of  counting  they  are  able  to  reckon  up  to 
thirty,  with  names  for  each  place. 

The  messenger  carries  the  message-stick  in  a  net  bag, 
and  on  arriving  at  the  camp  to  which  he  is  sent,  he  hands 
it  to  the  Headman,  at  some  place  apart  from  the  others, 
saying,  "  So  and  so  sends  you  this,"  and  he  then  gives  his 
message,  referring  as  he  does  so  to  the  marks  on  the 
stick  ;  and,  if  his  message  requires  it,  also  to  the  time  in 
days,  or  the  stages  to  be  made,  in  the  manner  already 
pointed  out. 

The  Headman,  having  examined  the  message -stick, 
hands  it  to  the  other  old  men,  and  having  satisfied  himself 
how  many  people  are  wanted,  and  how  many  hordes  are  to 
be  present,  and  having  made  such  further  inquiries  as  seem 
necessary,  calls  all  the  people  together  and  announces  the 
message  to  them. 

This  kind  of  message-stick,  called  galk,  that  is,  wood  or 
stick,    may    be   seen    by  any  one.      It    is    retained    by   the 


MESSAGE-STICKS  699 


recipient,  who  carries  it  back  to  the  meeting  to  which  he 
has  been  called.  The  messenger  lives  in  the  camp  with 
some  of  his  friends,  until  they  all  depart  to  the  meeting, 
when  he  accompanies  them. 

Such  a  messenger  would  never  be  interfered  with.  No 
one  would  think  of  injuring  a  man  who  brings  news  of 
important  matters.  But  if  any  one  were  to  molest  him,  the 
whole  of  the  people  would  take  the  matter  up,  and  especially 
his  own  friends.  The  messenger  does  not  carry  anything 
emblematical  of  his  mission  beyond  the  stick,  even  when 
carrying  a  message  calling  a  meeting  for  an  expiatory 
combat,  or  for  a  Ganitch,  the  initiation  ceremony.  But 
when  conveying  news  of  death,  he  smears  his  face  with 
pipe-clay  in  token  of  his  message. 

In  the  Gournditch-mara  tribe  message-sticks  were  used. 
Nos.  3  and  4  of  Fig.  43  are  two  which  were  used  probably 
thirty  or  forty  years  ago.  The  ends  of  such  sticks  were  tied 
round  with  fine  twine  or  sinews.  If  sent  to  a  friendly  tribe, 
it  would  be  an  invitation  to  a  feast  and  dancing  corrobboree, 
and  would  be  wrapped  up  in  a  piece  of  kangaroo  skin.  If, 
however,  it  were  sent  as  a  call  to  attend  a  fight  or  a  raid  on 
another  tribe,  the  messenger  carried  a  barbed  spear,  in  the 
point  of  which  two  emu  feathers  were  fixed.^ 

In  the  tribes  of  south-western  Victoria  a  meeting  of  the 
adjacent  friendly  tribes  was  called  by  the  Headman  sending 
two  messengers  to  the  Headman  of  the  nearest  tribe, 
bearing  a  message-stick,  about  six  inches  long  and  one  inch 
in  diameter,  with  five  or  six  sides,  one  of  these  indicating 
by  notches  the  number  of  tribes  to  be  summoned,  and  the 
others  the  number  of  men  required  from  each.  The  mes- 
sengers do  not  explain  the  business  of  the  proposed  meeting. 
Immediately  a  Headman  receives  the  message  he  sends  for 
his  principal  men,  who  pass  their  hands  down  the  stick  and 
ascertain  the  number  of  men  required  from  the  tribe.  They 
then  decide  who  are  to  be  sent.  The  stick  is  next  forwarded 
by  messengers  from  their  tribe  to  the  nearest  Headman, 
who  sends  it  on  to  the  next,  and  so  on  till  all  are  summoned. 
The  most  distant  tribe  starts  first,  and  joining  the  others  in 

1  J.  H.  Stable. 


700        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

succession,  all  arrive  in  a  body  in  the  camp  of  the  Headman 
who  sent  for  them. 

The  spear-thrower  is  also  used  as  a  message-stick,  but 
when  so  employed  it  is  specially  marked  to  indicate  its 
purpose. 

As  an  instance  of  the  procedure  of  the  tribes  of  the 
Kulin  nation,  I  take  that  of  the  Wurunjerri. 

It  was  the  Headman  who  sent  out  messengers  ( Wirrigirt) 
to  collect  people  for  festive  occasions,  for  ceremonial  or 
expiatory  fights,  or  for  other  matters  concerning  the  tribe, 
and  he  did  this  after  consulting  with  the  other  old  men. 
The  messenger  was  usually  one  of  the  younger  men,  and  if 
possible  one  whose  sister  was  married  to  some  one  in  that 
place  to  which  he  was  to  go,  for  under  such  circumstances 
a  man  could  go  and  return  in  safety,  being  protected  by  his 
friends  and  connections.  Messengers  were  chosen  who 
were  not  implicated  in  any  blood -feud.  People  were 
always  pleased  to  receive  news,  and  no  messenger  known  as 
such  was  ever  injured. 

The  message-stick,  called  Mungu  or  Kalk  (wood)  or 
Barndana  (that  is,  "  mark  it "),  was  made  by  the  sender,  and 
was  retained  by  the  recipient  of  the  message  as  a  reminder 
of  what  he  had  to  do,  perhaps  to  meet  the  sender  at  a 
certain  time  and  place,  or  to  meet  and  feast  on  fish  or  game. 
For  friendly  meetings,  when  there  was  no  quarrel  or  danger, 
the  messenger  carried  a  man's  belt  {Branjep),  and  a  woman's 
apron  {Kaiung)  hung  upon  a  reed.  For  meetings  to  settle 
quarrels  or  grievances,  such  as  a  bodily  injury  inflicted,  or 
the  death  of  some  one  by  evil  magic,  by  a  set  combat,  or  to 
concert  an  attack  on  another  tribe,  the  Branjep  was  hung 
upon  a  jag-spear  made  of  ironbark  wood,^  and  when  calling 
a  meeting  for  the  initiation  of  boys  {Talangun),  the  messenger 
carried  also  a  bull-roarer  and  a  man's  kilt  hung  upon  a  reed. 
The  bull-roarer  was  kept  secret  from  the  sight  of  women 
or  children. 

If  the  message  was  to  call   the  people  together  for  a 
corrobboree  or  for  ball-playing,  a  ball  made  of  opossum  pelt, 
cut    in    strips    and  rolled  up  tightly,  was  sent.      This    was 
^  Eucalyptus  sideroxylon. 


MESSAGE-STICKS  701 


called  Mangurty  and  was  sent  also  from  one  person  to 
another  as  a  friendly  mark  of  regard.  For  ball-playing,  the 
ball,  made  from  the  scrotum  of  an  old-man  kangaroo,  stuffed 
with  dry  grass,  was  also  sent. 

The  place  of  meeting  being  named  in  the  message, 
which  the  messenger  "  carried  in  his  mouth,"  it  might  be 
further  necessary  to  indicate  the  day  on  which  the  people 
should  assemble,  and  this  was  done,  as  with  the  Wotjobaluk, 
by  enumerating  parts  of  the  human  body,  commencing  with 
the  little  finger  of  one  hand.  The  names  of  these  enumera- 
tions are  as  follows  : — 

1.  Bubupi-muningya^  the  child  of  the  hand,  the  little 
finger. 

2.  Bulato-ravel,  a  little  larger,  the  third  finger. 

3.  Bulato,  larger,  the  middle  finger. 

4.  Urnung-meluk^  from  Urnung^  a  direction,  and  Meluk, 
a  large  grub  found  in  some  eucalypti  ;  the  forefinger. 

5.  Babungyi-muningya,  the  mother  of  the  hand,  the 
thumb. 

6.  Krauel,  the  wrist-joint. 

7.  Ngurumbul,  a  fork,  the  divergence  of  the  radial 
tendons. 

8.  Jeraubil,  the  swelling  of  the  radial  muscles. 

9.  Thambur,  a  round  place,  the  inside  of  the  elbow- 
joint. 

10.  Berbert,  the  ringtail  opossum.  Also  the  name  of 
the  armlet  made  from  the  pelt  of  that  animal,  hence  the 
name  of  the  biceps  round  which  the  armlet  is  worn  on 
festive  occasions. 

1 1 .  Wulung,  the  shoulder-joint. 

12.  Krakerap,  the  bag  place,  the  place  where  the  bag 
hangs  by  its  band,  i.e.  the  collar-bone. 

1 3.  Gurnbert,  the  reed  necklace,  the  neck,  or  place 
where  the  reed  necklace  is  worn. 

14.  Kurnagory  the  point  or  end  of  a  hill,  or  of  a  spur  or 
ridge,  hence  the  lobe  of  the  ear. 

I  5.  Ngarabuly  a  range  or  the  ridge  of  a  hill,  hence  the 
side  suture  of  the  skull. 

16.  Bundial,  the  cutting-place,  i.e.  the  place  where  the 


702        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

mourner  cuts  himself  with  some  sharp  instrument,  from 
Budagra,  "  to  cut,"  e.g.  Budagit-kalk,  "  cut  the  log."  This  is 
the  top  of  the  head.  From  this  place  the  count  follows  the 
equivalents  on  the  other  side. 

The  message-stick,  Fig.  43,  No.  i,  is  one  which  Berak 
made  to  show  what  they  were  like  as  used  by  his  tribe 
formerly.  The  explanation  is  as  follows.  The  notches  on 
the  upper  end  at  the  left  hand  of  the  stick  represent  the 
sender  and  other  old  men  with  him.  The  remainder  of  the 
stick  being  notched  along  the  whole  of  the  two  sides, 
means  that  all  the  men  of  both  localities  are  to  be  present. 
The  markings  on  the  flat  side,  at  the  lower  end,  are  only 
for  ornament,  as  are  also  the  crescent-shaped  ends  of  the 
stick.  This  message  is  an  invitation  to  some  people  at  a 
distance  to  come  to  a  corrobboree. 

The  Jajaurung  counted  the  number  of  days  or  camps  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  Wotjobaluk  and  Wurunjerri,  thus 
showing  that  this  system  was  probably  universal  among  the 
tribes  of,  at  any  rate,  the  Wotjo  and  Kulin  nations.  But 
the  Wudthaurung  tribe,  about  Geelong,  with  which  Buckley 
lived  for  over  thirty  years,  had,  according  to  him,  a  different 
method.  He  says  that  a  messenger  came  from  another 
tribe  saying  they  were  to  meet  them  some  miles  off.  Their 
method  of  describing  time  is  by  signs  on  the  fingers,  one 
man  of  each  party  marking  his  days  by  chalking  on  the  arm 
and  then  rubbing  one  off  as  each  day  passes.  Elsewhere  he 
says  that  before  he  left  a  certain  place,  a  Bihar  or  messenger 
came  to  them.  He  had  his  arms  striped  with  red  clay  to 
denote  the  number  of  days  it  would  take  them  to  reach  the 
tribe  he  came  from.  On  another  occasion,  when  a  large- 
party  left  on  a  distant  hunting  excursion,  they  marked  their 
arms  in  the  usual  manner  with  stripes  to  denote  how  many 
days  they  would  be  absent ;  and  one  of  the  men  who 
remained  did  the  same,  rubbing  off  one  mark  each  day,  to 
denote  the  lapse  of  time.^ 

I  have  seen  counting  done  by  the  Kulin    by  the   hand 
combined  with  the  other  method.       The  little  finger  being 
Kanbo  or  one,  the  third  finger  Benjero  or  two,  the   middle 
1  Morgan,  op.  at.  pp.  35,  49,  61. 


MESSAGE-STICKS  703 


finger  Kanbo-ba-benjero,  three,  the  forefinger  Benjero-ba- 
benjero,  four,  and  the  thumb  Benjero-ba-benjero-ba-kanbo,  five. 
The  enumeration  was  then  carried  on  in  the  manner 
described,  commencing  with  Krauel,  the  wrist-joint. 

In  the  Narrang-ga  tribe  meetings  of  the  elders  are  called 
together  by  messengers  who  carry  message  -  sticks.  The 
messengers  are  chosen  by  the  principal  Headman,  or  in 
matters  of  local  importance  by  the  Headman  of  the  locality, 
or  the  Headman  who  had  initiated  the  proceedings  in 
question.  If  a  reply  is  required,  the  same  or  some  other 
m.essenger  will  carry  it  back,*  sometimes  with  a  message- 
stick,  but  very  often  by  word  of  mouth  only.  There  is 
apparently  no  rule  as  to  the  return  message. 

When  a  part  of  the  tribe  is  at  a  distance,  and  the 
Headman  wishes  some  of  them  to  return  to  him,  he  sends  a 
message-stick,  on  which  he  cuts  a  notch  representing  himself 
and  others  for  the  old  men  next  to  him  in  authority.  These 
are  cut  on  the  upper  edge  of  the  stick,  while  the  notches  cut 
on  the  other  edge  represent  the  number  of  people  he  wants 
to  come  to  him. 

The  message-stick  is  called  Mank,  and  is  rolled  up  in 
the  skin  of  any  kind  of  animal.  At  the  present  time  a 
handkerchief  is  commonly  used.  If  the  message  is  a 
challenge  to  fight,  the  messenger  in  handing  the  message- 
stick  says,  ^^  Dudla"  which  means  fight.  If  the  message  is 
one  calling  people  together  for  a  dancing  corrobboree,  a  piece 
of  wood  is  used,  marked  in  a  special  manner,  which  is  under- 
stood without  further  explanation.  In  Fig.  44,  Nos.  6  and  7 
represent  the  two  sides  of  such  a  stick.  In  6,  which  is  a 
message  about  a  dancing  corrobboree,  the  four  notches  on 
the  upper  part  of  the  right-hand  edge  represent  four  old 
men  who  are  invited  to  attend,  those  lower  down  are  the 
women,  and  those  on  the  left-hand  edge  represent  the  men 
who  accompany  the  old  men.  In  7  the  notch  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  right-hand  edge  is  the  sender  of  the  message, 
the  three  at  the  bottom  are  singers,  and  the  intermediate 
notches  represent  the  women.  The  notches  along  the  edge 
at  the  opposite  side  are  the  men  of  the  tribe.  Nos.  8  and 
9  are  the  two  sides  of  a  stick  sent  to  summon  to  an   initia- 


/ 


704        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

tion  ceremony.  The  longer  notches  at  the  top  of  the  right- 
hand  edge  of  8  represent  the  old  men  to  whom  the  stick  is 
sent,  those  lower  down  are  the  women,  and  the  edge  on  the 


12 


\^S 


+ 


FK;,  44. — MESSAGE-STICKS   OF    THFl   TONGARANKA,    NARRANG-GA,    MUNDAIN- 
BURA,    AND   YAKUNBURA   TRIBES.        X  §. 


other  side  being  notched  indicates  that  the  men  are  to  come. 
On  No.  9  the  three  upper  notches  represent  the  sender  of 
the  message  and  two  other  old  men.  The  notches  all 
down  the  edge  represent  all  the  men  of  that  moiety  of  the 
tribe.      The  five  notches  at  the  bottom  of  the  right-hand 


MESSAGE-STICKS  705 


edge  are  the  boys  to  be  initiated,  and  the  five  pairs  of 
notches  above  represent  couples  of  men  to  look  after  the 
boys  during  the  ceremony. 

It  is  not  lawful  for  women  to  see  this  stick,  which  would 
be  sent  rolled  up  with  a  corrobboree  stick  in  some  covering. 

Two  of  the  three  old  men  referred  to  on  No.  9  are  two 
principal  men  who  have  already  been  instructed  by  the 
sender  of  the  message,  and  whose  duty  it  is  to  see  that 
everything  in  their  department  is  done  correctly.  These 
two  old  men  are  next  in  authority  to  the  Headman  and  sit 
with  him  in  consultation.  It  seems  from  my  information 
that  these  two  old  men  are  analogous  to  the  man  in  the 
Wurunjerri  tribe  who  stood  by  Billi-billeri  and  "  gave  his 
words  to  other  people,"  as  before  mentioned. 

The  five  boys  may  be  of  any  division  of  the  tribe. 
One  of  the  men  in  each  couple  is  the  father's  brother  of  the 
boy,  and  the  other  man's  duty  is  to  hold  his  hands  over  the 
boy's  eyes  during  a  certain  part  of  the  initiation  ceremonies. 

The  plan  on  which  these  sticks  are  marked  seems  to  be 
this.  Assuming  that  the  Headman  of  one  part  of  the  tribe 
wishes  to  send  a  message  to  the  Headman  of  the  other  part, 
he  cuts  a  notch  on  one  end  of  the  upper  side  for  himself, 
with  one  or  more  notches  close  to  it,  according  to  the 
number  of  old  men  with  him.  At  the  other  end  he  cuts  a 
notch  for  the  recipient  of  the  message,  and  a  number  of 
notches  for  the  people  he  wishes  to  be  sent  to  him.  If  there 
is  not  enough  room  he  cuts  their  notches  on  the  under 
side.^  It  seems  from  this  that  the  marks  themselves,  for 
instance,  on  the  corrobboree  and  initiation  sticks,  might  from 
constant  use  by  the  same  person,  or  a  succession  of  persons 
using  the  same  method,  and  for  substantially  the  same 
objects,  come  to  have  a  certain  meaning.  This  might  then 
become  a  first  step  to  a  rude  style  of  communicating  thought 
by  marks,  unaccompanied  by  verbal  explanation.  I  was 
told  of  a  case  in  which  a  message-stick  was  carried  by  my 
correspondent,  Mr.  Sutton,  for  one  of  the  Narrang-ga, 
which  was  merely  a  flat  piece  of  wood  with  one  notch  at 
one  end  and  two  notches  close  together  at  the  other.      He 

'  T.  M.  .Sutton. 


7o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

delivered  it  without  saying  more  than,  "  This  is  from  so-and- 
so,"  not  having  received  any  message  with  it.  The  recipient, 
however,  knew  that  the  sender  had  been  separated  from  his 
wife,  and  he  understood  the  stick  to  mean  that  the  two  had 
been  reconciled,  and  were  together  again,  and  this  was  the 
correct  reading  of  the  marks  on  the  stick.  This  supports 
the  view  which  I  have  suggested. 

In  the  Narrinyeri  tribe  a  messenger  is  called  Brigge, 
When  on  a  mission,  he  carries  .some  part  of  his  totem  as  an 
emblem.  For  instance,  a  messenger  of  the  Tanganarin  carried 
a  pelican's  feather,  one  of  the  Rangulinyeri  a  dingo's  tail,  one 
of  the  Karowalli  a  snake's  skin.  The  messenger  was  safe 
from  harm  by  reason  of  his  office,  and  he  was  chosen  to 
carry  the  message  by  the  council  of  old  men.  The 
messenger  delivered  his  message  to  the  Headman  of  the  clan 
to  which  he  was  sent,  who  sometimes  escorted  him  part  of 
the  way  back.'  He  also  carried  a  message-stick,  of  which 
No.  2,  Fig.  43,  is  an  example. 

The  message-stick  was  in  the  most  rudimentary  state  in 
the  Kurnai  tribe.  If,  for  instance,  a  man  desired  to  send  a 
message  to  men  of  another  division  of  his  clan,  or  of  another 
clan,  asking  them  to  meet  him  at  a  certain  time  and  place, 
he  would  probably  do  so  in  the  following  manner.  I  assume, 
as  an  illu.stration,  that  the  meeting  is  to  be  at  a  locality 
indicated  by  name,  that  it  will  take  place  after  "  two  moons," 
and  that  such  and  such  persons  are  to  be  there.  The 
sender  in  giving  his  message  to  his  Baiara,  or  messenger, 
would,  if  he  used  anything  to  aid  his  memory,  break  off  a 
number  of  short  pieces  of  stick,  equal  in  number  to  the 
people  he  asks  to*  meet  him,  one  for  each  person,  or  the 
people  of  a  certain  place.  By  delivering  them  one  by  one, 
his  messenger  checks  the  accuracy  of  his  memory  as  to  the 
verbal  message  given  him.  The  number  of  stages  to  be 
travelled  are  fixed  by  telling  them  off  on  the  fingers  of  one 
or  of  both  hands.  If  they  were  insufficient,  the  count  would 
be  again  over  the  same  fingers,  or  recourse  would  be  had  to 
the  toes. 

If  the  message  was  sent  by  the  Headman  of  the  locality, 

»  F.  W.  Taplin. 


MESSAGE-STICKSl  707 


or  of  the  clan,  relating,  for  instance,  to  th^Jeraeil  ceremonies, 
the  messenger  would  also  carry  with  him  as  his  credentials 
a  bull-roarer,  which  he^vould  deliver  with  his  message  in 
secret. 

It  was  not  infrequently  the  case  that  a  Headman,  to 
authenticate  his  messenger,  gave  him  some  weapon,  for 
instance  a  club,  known  to  the  recipient  of  the  message. 

When  the  last  great  tribal  ceremonial  combat  took  place^ 
the  parties  to  it  had  been  summoned  to  meet  at  a  certain 
place,  by  a  messenger  who  carried  a  jag-spear,  on  which  was 
hung  a  man's  kilt  {Bridda-bridda)  as  the  emblem  of  his 
mission. 

A  friendly  messenger  sent  from  one  clan  to  another  was 
also  called  Bidda.  In  1850,  that  is,  about  eight  years  after 
the  first  settlement  of  Gippsland,  such  a  messenger  came 
from  the  Dairgo  clan  to  those  nearer  the  sea,  and  in  deliver- 
ing his  message  he  spoke  for  a  considerable  time  as  to  the 
relations  between  his  people  and  the  Ovens  River  tribe. 

I  am  not  aware  what  emblem  he  carried,  but  as  in  the' 
case  of  the  message  calling  together  the  tribes  which  I  have 
mentioned,  it  might  probably  be  a  man's  Bridda-bridda  hung 
from  the  point  of  a  spear. 

No  one  would  harm  such  messengers  on  such  an  occasion. 

In  the  Chepara  tribe  the  messenger,  if  sent  by  the 
principal  Headman,  carried  with  him  a  message  stick  called 
Kabugabul-bajeru,  the  markings  on  which  are  always  the 
same,  having  been  handed  down  from  past  times,  and  are 
known  to  the  Headmen.  It  signifies  that  the  recipient  must 
start  at  once  for  the  appointed  place.  The  stick  tells  this  o( 
itself,  but  the  actual  message  is  by  word  of  mouth. 

Women  and  children  are  not  permitted  to  see  this  stick. 

The  messenger  delivers  the  message  and  the  message- 
stick  to  the  Headman  of  the  clan  to  which  he  is  sent,  and 
which  is  nearest  to  his  own.  This  Headman  then  sends  it 
on  by  his  own  messenger  to  the  next,  and  so  on  till  it  has 
been  taken  to  all  the  clans.  The  message-stick  is  returned 
to  the  original  sender.  In  cases  of  unusual  importance,  the 
original  messenger  has  been  known  to  carry  the  message- 
stick  and  message  to  all  the  clans  of  the  tribe. 


7o8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

This  message-stick  was  sent  when  all  the  tribe  was  to 
be  collected  for  great  meetings,  ceremonial  fights,  or  the  Bora 
ceremonies.  • 


/ 


>- 


xi 


xi- 


FIG.   45. — MESSAGE-STICK    OF   THE    WAKELBUKA    TRIBE,    AND    KABUGABUL-BAJERU 
OF    CHEPARA    TRIBE. 


The  messenger  was  painted  in  a  particular  manner,  was 
decked  with  feathers,  and  carried,  when  calling  a  Bora,  in 
addition  to  the  Kabugabul-bajeru,  a  bull-roarer  [Bribbun),  and 
a  spear,  to  the  point  of  which  is  attached  a  bag  containing 


MESSAGE-STICKS  709 


quartz  crystals,  which  could  be  only  shown  to  the  several 
Headmen. 

This  bull-roarer  is  kept  by  the  principal  Headman,  and 
is  believed  to  have  special  power.  If  seen  by  a  woman,  she 
is  killed  ;  if  a  man  were  to  show  it  to  her,  both  would  be 
killed.  The  same  penalty  attaches  to  the  revealing  of  the 
Kabugabul-bajeru} 

The  message -stick  No.  12  in  Fig.  44  is  from  the 
Yakunbura  tribs  of  the  Dawson  River,  Queensland.  One 
end  is  coloured  blue,  the  other  red  ;  the  notches  are  to  remind 
the  messenger  of  the  various  parts  of  his  message,  and  the 
lines  marked  across  the  longitudinal  one  are  the  days  on 
which  he  has  travelled.  The  persons  to  whom  the  stick  is 
sent  know  from  them  the  number  of  days  it  will  take 
them  to  travel  to  the  place  from  which  the  messenger  has 
come. 

A  message-stick  from  the  Mundainbura  tribe  of  the 
Durham  Downs  in  Queensland  is  shown  on  Fig.  44,  No.  i  i. 
The  notches  shown  on  the  right-hand  edge  represent  a 
number  of  men  of  the  Kurgilla  sub-class.  The  two  rows  of 
dots  represent  men  respectively  of  the  Kunbe  and  Wungu 
sub-classes.  The  notches  on  the  left-hand  edge  represent 
men  of  the  Kuburu  sub-class.  The  message  with  it  was  to 
invite  these  people  to  a  corrobboree.^ 

I  sent  a  sketch  of  the  stick  to  a  valued  correspondent, 
Mr.  R.  Christison  of  Lammermoor  Station,  with  a  request 
that  he  would  ascertain  what  the  men  of  the  Dalebura  tribe, 
living  with  him,  could  make  of  it.  The  Dalebura  tribe  has 
the  same  sub-classes  as  the  Mundainbura  tribe.  In  reply  he 
informed  me  that  his  blacks  made  out  the  stick  to  mean, 
that  the  right-hand  notches  represent  the  Karagilla  sub- 
class ;  the  left-hand  the  Kuburu  sub -class,  and  the  dots 
represent  a  wish  to  meet, 

This  statement  shows  that  the  notches  in  the  right  and 
left-hand  edges  have  a  definite  meaning  as  the  Kurgilla  and 
Kuburu  sub-classes  respectively.  In  the  Kuinmurbura  tribe, 
meetings  for  initiation  ceremonies  are  called  by  means  of 
message-sticks. 

*  J.  Gibson.  2  \v.  Logan. 

2  Z 


7IO       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 

One  sent  by  the  blacks  to  the  westward  was  from  the 
Bau  totem  (black  eagle -hawk)  to  the  Merkein  totem 
(laughing  jackass)  of  the  Kuinmurbura  tribe.  It  was  a 
piece  of  rosewood  about  five  inches  by  one  and  a  half  inch, 
and  one  inch  thick.^ 

The  evidence  shows  that  the  message-sticks  are  merely 
a  kind  of  tally,  to  keep  record  of  the  various  heads  of  the 
message,  and  that  the  markings  have  no  special  meaning  as 
conventional  signs  conveying  some  meaning.  The  instances 
which  I  have  noted  in  the  Narrang-ga  and  Mundainbura 
tribes  merely  show  how  such  markings  might,  under  favourable 
conditions,  become  the  first  steps  to  a  system  of  conveying 
a  message  otherwise  than  verbally.  What  we  find  here  may 
perhaps  be  considered  as  early  stages,  the  ultimate  result 
of  which  might  be  a  system  of  writing,  in  which  symbols 
would  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  original  notches  on  these 
message-sticks. 

Tribal  Expeditions 

All  the  tribes  about  Lake  Eyre,  and  indeed  far  beyond 
it,  use  as  a  narcotic  the  dried  leaves  and  twigs  of  the  Pitcheri 
bush.2 

The  Dieri,  at  the  time  when  I  was  in  their  country,  sent 
a  party  of  able-bodied  men  annually  to  the  Pitcheri  country, 
on  the  Herbert  River  in  Northern  Queensland,  a  distance  of 
some  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  their  boundaries. 
This  party  had  to  pass  through  the  country  of  several  hostile 
tribes,  and  if  necessary  to  fight  their  way.  On  arriving  at 
the  Pitcheri  country,  the  leaves  and  small  twigs  of  this  bush 
were  picked  off.  Small  holes,  two  feet  deep,  were  dug  in  the 
sand  and  heated  with  live  coals.  When  the  holes  were 
sufficiently,  heated  they  were  cleaned  out,  the  Pitcheri  placed 
in  them,  covered  up  with  hot  sand,  and  then  baked.  When 
the  sap  had  been  evaporated,  the  Pitcheri  was  taken  out  and 
packed  in  netted  bags  or  small  wallaby  skins,  each  man  on 
the  return  of  the  party  carrying  a  load  of  about  seventy 
pounds. 

Great  preparations  are  made  by  the  Dieri  for  the  return 

1  W.  H.  Flowers.  ^  Duboisia  Hopwoodii. 


TRIBAL  EXPEDITIONS  711 


of  the  party.      New  huts  are  made,  seeds  of  the  season  are 
stored  up  for  fathers,  brothers,  husbands,  and  friends. 

When  such  a  party  returned,  its  members  were  full  of 
strange  stories  of  battles  they  had  fought,  of  tribes  they  had 
seen,  men  having  toes  behind  their  feet  as  well  as  in  front, 
and  all  kinds  of  wild  and  extravagant  reports. 

The  Pitcheri,  though  brought  from  so  great  a  distance 
and  obtained  under  such  difficulties,  is  all  gone  after  a  few 
months,  being  bartered  away  to  more  southern  tribes.^ 

Mr.  Gason  informed  me  that  when  the  Dieri  expedition 
returned,  he  used  to  obtain  as  much  as  six  bags,  weighing 
each  three  pounds,  for  one  shirt.  As  soon  as  the  Pitcheri 
became  scarce,  the  leading  men  would  come  to  him, 
bringing  all  kinds  of  weapons  as  presents  for  a  small 
quantity,  begging  him  to  give  them  '' pitcheri  waka yittkeami" 
that  is,  "  give  one  little  (chew  of)  Pitcheri." 

I  found  the  use  of  Pitcheri  very  common  among  the 
Yantruwunta.  Frequently  a  quid  of  it  was  offered  to  me 
fresh  from  the  mouth  of  a  friendly  blackfellow,  and  in  an 
unchewed  state  I  obtained  it  in  small  bags  made  of  grass 
twine  and  human  hair.  The  Yantruwunta  also  sent  out 
a  similar  party  for  Pitcheri,  and  they  told  me  that  they 
travelled  about  ten  days'  journey  for  it,  pointing  to  the  north- 
west as  the  direction.  This  would  give  a  distance  of  from 
one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  miles,  and  roughly 
agrees  with  the  position  of  what  is  called  the  Pitcheri 
country.  The  Yantruwunta  mixed  the  Pitcheri,  before 
use,  with  the  dried  leaves  of  a  bush  called  by  them 
IVir/ia,  which  grows  plentifully  on  the  sandhills  in  their 
country,  and  which. they  dry  in  hot  ashes  for  use.  I  found 
the  use  of  Pitcheri  to  extend  to  the  tribes  of  the  Barrier 
Ranges,  thus  indicating  an  extended  system  of  barter. 

In  July  or  August  in  each  year  the  Dieri  sent  out  an 
expedition  southwards  to  procure  red  ochre.  This  was 
always  regarded  as  being  a  perilous  journey,  with  many 
dangers  and  privations.  It  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the 
most  important  duties  of  the  Blanch-water  division  of  the 
tribe    to  see    to  this  matter.       Some  seventy  to   eighty  of 

'  S.  Gason. 


712        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


the  picked  fighting-men  of  the  tribe  went  on  this  mission, 
under  some  great  leader.  Each  man  was  painted  with  three 
stripes  of  red  ochre,  with  three  stripes  of  micaceous  iron-ore, 
immediately  below  them,  across  the  abdomen.  Two  similar 
lines  were  drawn  across  the  arms.  Each  man  had  all  the 
hair  of  his  beard  and  moustache  plucked  out,  and  the  hair 
of  his  head  cut  short  before  he  started. 

They  were  well  armed,  and,  if  necessary,  fought  their 


FIG.  46. — WIRHA.       ACACIA   SALICINA. 

way  against  all  opposition.  The  distance  to  be  travelled 
depended  upon  where  the  party  started  from,  and  might 
be  as  much  as  three  hundred  miles.  When  in  hostile 
country  a  watch  was  kept  each  night,  and  they  had  to 
procure  food  while  travelling.  The  red  ochre,  when  dug 
from  some  aboriginal  mine,  for  instance  near  Beltana,  was 
kneaded  into  large  cakes,  weighing  when  dry  from  seventy 
to  eighty  pounds.  The  red  ochre  is  used  for  paint,  for 
magical  charms  and  such  purposes,  and  also  for  barter  with 
other  tribes  for  spears,  shields,  and  other  weapons. 


XI  TRIBAL  EXPEDITIONS  713 

The  Yantruwunta  gave  me  a  similar  account  of  their 
annual  expedition  to  fetch  Pocato  (red  ochre),  and  also  slabs 
of  sandstone,  on  which  they  grind  seeds  of  various  plants 
and  grasses  for  food.  The  locality  to  which  they  went  for 
these  things  must,  from  the  description  given  me,  have  been 
far  down  on  the  western  side  of  the  Flinders  Range,  and 
the  distance  over  three  hundred  miles.  They  told  me  that 
such  a  party  might  not  stop  two  nights  at  any  one  place  in 
the  journey  ;  but  had  to  fight  its  way  there  and  back,  and 
hunt  for  food  as  they  went  along.  The  flagstones  used  for 
grinding  seeds  were  obtained  not  far  from  the  red  ochre 
mine.  Each  man  carried  back  either  a  slab  of  stone  or 
lump  of  red  ochre  on  his  head. 

That  these  parties  had  to  often  fight  their  way  to  the 
mines  of  red  ochre  and  freestone  slabs  is  not  surprising, 
when  one  remembers  that  these  places  were  the  property  of 
the  tribes  in  whose  country  they  were  situated.  These 
expeditions  were  a  trespass  on  them,  and  interfered  with 
the  barter  which  the  owners  of  the  mines  no  doubt  carried 
on  with  other  tribes.  The  case  of  the  stone  quarry  before 
mentioned,  in  the  Wurunjerri  country,  throws  a  sidelight  on 
these  matters. 

There  is  a  curious  custom  among  the  Dieri  which  may 
find  its  place  here.  It  is  called  Yutchin.  When  a  black- 
fellow  is  going  a  distance  from  home,  either  to  another  of 
the  Dieri  hordes,  or  its  lesser  divisions,  or  to  a  neighbouring 
tribe,  some  one  at  his  camp  becomes  his  Yutchin.  This  is 
done  by  tieing  a  string  made  of  human  hair  or  native  flax 
round  his  neck,  to  remind  him  of  his  promise  to  bring  back 
presents. 

It  is  then  his  duty  to  bring  back  with  him  articles  for 
his  Yutchin,  who  while  he  is  away  also  collects  presents  for 
him.  Under  no  circumstances  is  such  a  pledge  broken, 
for  if  a  person  failed  in  it  he  would  have  all  the  men  in 
the  camp  at  him,  and  he  would  be  reproached  for  being  an 
untrustworthy  man.  Mr.  Gason  was  frequently  the  Yutchin 
of  some  Dieri  man,  giving  him  old  wearing  apparel,  and 
receiving  from  him  in  return  carved  weapons  and  ornamental 
articles.      This  practice  is  used  for  bartering.      For  instance. 


714        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        en. 


if  a  man  saw  a  carved  boomerang  which  he  desired  to  have, 
he  would  say  to  the  owner,  "  I  will  give  you  such  and  such 
things  for  it,  if  you  will  be  my  Yutchin."  If  this  is  agreed 
to,  and  the  proposer  after  having  been  away  at  some  outside 
place  brings  back  the  things  agreed  upon,  the  exchange 
is  made. 

When  the  Dieri  see  a  man  or  a  woman  with  a  string 
round  his  or  her  neck,  they  say,  "  Who  are  you  Yutchin  for  ?  " 

A  son  may  be  a  Yutchin  for  his  father ;  for  instance, 
the  latter  may  promise  to  make  some  boomerangs  for  his 
sons  while  they  are  out  hunting  for  him.  Whatever  they 
catch,  no  matter  how  much  it  is,  they  hand  it  to  him  on 
their  return  ;  and  the  women  flock  to  see  what  kind  of 
Yutchin  the  boys  have  been.  The  boomerangs  are  of 
course  made  and  handed  over  at  once.  Little  boys  will 
coax  their  father  to  make  boomerangs  for  them  by  promising 
to  be  his  Yutchin} 

When  at  Cooper's  Creek  I  observed  that  the  blacks  used 
shields  made  of  some  wood  not  known  to  me  in  that  part  of 
Australia.  Subsequently,  when  I  was  able  to  obtain  informa- 
tion from  them,  I  learned  the  following  particulars.  The 
Yantruwunta  obtained  these  shields  from  their  neighbours 
higher  up  Cooper's  Creek,  who  got  them  from  tribes  farther 
to  the  north-east.  The  Yantruwunta  on  their  part  exchanged 
weapons  made  by  them,  and  stone  slabs  for  grinding  seeds 
which  they  brought  from  the  south.  I  also  saw  among  these 
tribes,  though  rarely,  a  portion  of  a  large  univalve  shell,  worn 
suspended  by  a  string  from  the  neck,  which  I  was  told  came 
from  the  north.  Inquiries  made  later  from  the  Dieri  show 
that  they  bartered  with  the  Mardala,  or  hill  tribes,  to  the 
.south  of  them,  for  skins. 

This  information  indicates  an  extensive  system  of  inter- 
tribal communication  and  barter,  which  was  apparently 
carried  on  by  men  who  were  the  recognised  means  of  com- 
munication. But  there  are  also  established  trade  centres  at 
which  the  tribes  meet  on  certain  occasions  for  a  regulated 
barter.  One  of  these  old  trade  centres  is  Kopperamana  on 
the  Cooper,  where   the  surrounding  tribes  met  periodically 

'   .S.  Gason. 


TRIBAL  EXPEDITIONS  715 


to  confer  and  barter  their  respective  manufactures.  It  may- 
be noted  here,  that  the  name  Kopperamana  is  a  mutilation 
of  the  true  name  Kappara-7nara,  from  Kappara  meaning 
"  hand,"  and  Mara  meaning  "  root."  But  Mara  also  means 
"  hair  "  of  the  head,  which  is  connected  with  the  head  as  the 
fingers  are  with  the  hand.  The  meaning  of  the  name  really 
is,  that  as  the  fingers  all  come  together  in  the  "  root "  of  the 
hand,  so  do  the  native  tribes  come  together  at  Kopperamana 
to  confer  together,  and  especially  to  exchange  their  respective 
articles  of  barter.  Kopperamana  is,  therefore,  one  of  the  trade 
centres  for  the  tribes  allied  to  the  Dieri. 

There  are  four  different  occasions  on  which  the  barter  is 
carried  on.  One,  which  I  have  already  described,  is  when 
a  blood-feud  is  settled  by  barter  of  goods,  so  that  the  feud 
may  be  healed,  bloodshed  be  avoided,  and  people  live  in 
peace.' 

Here  we  see  a  procedure  which,  under  favourable  con- 
ditions, might  have  developed  into  such  a  custom  as  that  of 
the  Wergeld  of  the  Teutonic  tribes.  Another  occasion  of 
barter  is  when  there  is  an  as.sembly  for  the  great  Wilyaru 
ceremony. 

At  the  termination  of  this  ceremony,  the  young  man 
who  has  been  made  Wilyaru-mara'-  is  sent  out  to  call  the 
people  together,  from  far  and  near,  to  the  market,  as  it  may 
be  called,  which  is  held  in  his  honour.  After  .some  months 
he  returns  to  the  place  where  he  was  made  Wilyaru^  accom- 
panied by  a  number  of  men  from  other  places  laden  with 
articles  for  barter.  Another  lot  of  men  from  other  places, 
who  are  all  Wilyaru,  have  joined  the  men  belonging  to  the 
locality,  and  await  at  the  bartering  place  the  arrival  of  the 
Wilyaru  and  his  companions.  On  .some  evening  after  his 
arrival,  soon  after  nightfall,  the  sound  of  the  Yuntha  (bull- 
roarer)  is  heard,  and  fire  signals,  at  first  .several  miles  di.stant, 
are  seen  approaching.  To  this  they  reply  by  throwing 
burning  pieces  of  wood  up  in  the  air,  and  sounding  the 
Yuntha.  Then,  as  the  approaching  party  comes  nearer,  the 
shouts  at  each  renewal  of  the  fire  signal  can  be  heard,  until 
at  length  visitors  enter  upon  the  prepared  ground,  their  leader 

'  O.  Siebert.  ^  Mara  is  "new." 


7i6       NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        CH. 

being  preceded  by  the  Wilyaru-mara,  and  both  parties  join 
in  a  ceremonial  dance,  to  the  sound  of  the' bull-roarer. 

Suddenly  the  leader  jumps  on  the  back  of  the  Wtiyaru- 
mara,  who  then  dances  in  the  midst  of  the  circle  of  men, 
with  quivering  limbs.  Then  they  change  places,  and  the 
leader  dances,  carrying  the  Wilyaru. 

This  being  over,  the  two  parties  separate,  and  sitting 
down  opposite  each  other,  the  bartering  commences  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  the  Yutyuto  ceremonies. 

The  Dieri  exchange  string-tassels,  which  are  worn  by 
the  men  for  decency,  netted  bags,  red  ochre,  etc.  Tribes 
from  the  east  bring  boomerangs  {Kir/ia),  shields  i^Pirha-mara)} 
and  other  articles  made  of  wood.  Those  who  come  from  the 
north  bring  Pitcheri  and  feathers.  Those  who  come  from 
the  south  and  west  bring  stone  slabs.  These  particulars 
indicate  the  nature  of  the  inter-tribal  trade,  and  the  radius 
within  which  it  is  carried  on,  taking  Kopperamana  as  the 
centre.  It  may  certainly  be  held  that  reciprocal  trade  centres 
exist  in  the  tribal  countries,  from  which  those  who  attend 
the  meetings  at  Kopperamana  come." 

There  is  another  ceremony  connected  with  bartering 
called  Kani-nura.  It  arises  when  a  mother,  being  out 
seeking  for  food,  has  with  her  her  son,  of  about  five  years 
of  age,  and  sees  a  Kani} 

She  kills  the  Kani  and  roasts  it  on  the  fire,  but  care- 
fully keeps  the  tail,  and,  on  returning  to  the  camp,  gives  it 
to  her  husband.  He  gives  it  to  a  Neyi  of  his  son,  who  is 
an  aged  man,^  and  says  to  him,  "  Your  Ngatata  has  seen  a 
Kani ;  here  is  the  tail.  I  think  it  best  to  burn  it  at  once." 
He  replies,  "  Do  not  do  that,  he  must  go  to  my  country." 
That  place  may  be  at  a  great  distance,  even  as  far  as  Salt 
Creek,  Oudnadatta,  or  Kunangara.  The  Neyi  takes  the 
boy — who  is  now  called  Kani-nura,  from  the  cord  which  the 
A^eyi  ties  round  him — and  sends  him  by  another  Neyi  to  his 
country,  where  his  kindred  look  after  the  boy.  After  a 
time  these   return,   bringing   with   them   articles  for   barter, 

*  Pirha  is  a  wooden  bowl,  and  titara  is  the  hand.  -  O.  Siebert. 
3  Kani  is  a  lizard. 

*  Neyi  is  elder  brother,  Ngatala,  younger  brother.     The  context  shows  tliat 
these  are  "  tribal  "  and  not  "  own  "  relationships. 


XI  TRIBAL  EXPEDITIONS  717 

carrying  them  secretly,  so  that  no  one  may  see  what  they 
are.  The  people  who  have  come  with  the  boy,  and  the 
people  of  his  own  place,  seat  themselves  opposite  to  each 
other  ;  the  old  Neyi  of  the  boy  who  had  called  the  people 
together,  by  means  of  the  Kani-nura,  being  so  placed  that 
he  just  faces  the  boy,  who  is  seated  on  his  father's  lap. 
The  Neyi  holds  the  Kani-nura  cord  against  the  breast  of 
the  boy,  and  says,  "Why  did  you  find  the  Kani?  You 
must  not  think  that  you  have  any  longer  any  Neyi  or  Kaka 
(elder  sister)  in  my  country,  any  more  than  there  will  be  a 
Kani-nura  when  the  fire  has  burned  it."  Then  he  breaks 
the  cord  and  throws  the  pieces  into  the  fire.  The  people 
who  have  come  together  for  the  ceremony  then  exchange 
their  things,  and  lastly  the  Neyi  of  the  boy,  who  sent  him 
to  his  country,  and  the  Neyi  who  took  care  of  him, 
exchange  theirs. 

These  ceremonies  take  place  whenever  a  little  boy  finds 
a  Kani,  or  one  of  the  small  lizards  called  Tiubba-tiubba  and 
Kadiwaru} 

Bartering  was  also  practised  by  the  Wiimbaio,  with  the 
blacks  from  higher  up  the  Darling  River,  who  occasionally 
brought  down  wood  of  the  mulga  tree  for  spear  points, 
slabs  of  stone,  and  hard  and  heavy  pestles  of  granite  for 
pounding  and  grinding  seeds  and  tough  tubers.  These 
they  exchanged  for  nets,  twine,  or  fish-hooks." 

When  the  people  who  attended  the  great  tribal  meetings 
of  the  Wotjobaluk  were  about  to  depart  to  their  homes 
there  was  an  assembly  at  the  Jun,  or  men's  council-place, 
where  they  exchanged  the  articles  which  they  had  brought 
for  the  purpose.  These  articles  were  such  as  the  following : 
Sets  of  spears,  respectively  called  Guiyum-ba-jarram,  or  jag 
spear,  and  reed  spears  ;  opossum  skin  rugs,  called  Jirak- 
ivilli  (opossum  skin)  ;  men's  kilts,  called  Burring-jun,  made 
of  the  skin  of  the  kangaroo-rat  {Goiyt),  or  padi-melon  (Jalla- 
gur)  ;  armlets  worn  round  the  upper  arm,  called  Murrumdat- 
yuk ;  wooden  bowls  called  Mitchigan  ;  in  fact,  all  the 
implements,  utensils,  arms,  and  ornaments  used  by  these 
people.  It  was  to  such  a  meeting  that  the  Jajaurung  man, 
1  O.  Siebert.  =«  J.  Bulmer. 


7i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


Tenamet-javoHch,  before  mentioned,  carried  stone  from  the 
quarry  at  Charlotte  Plains  to  be  made  into  axe -heads. 
The  same  was  the  case  with  the  meetings  of  the  Jupagalk 
tribe. 

The  same  practice  of  barter  occurred  when  there  were 
great  tribal  meetings  in  the  Kulin  nation.  Such  a  meeting 
was  held  about  the  year  1840  at  the  Merri  Creek  near 
Melbourne;  at  which  people  came  from  the  Lower  Goulburn 
River,  from  its  upper  waters,  and  even  from  as  far  as  the 
Buffalo  River.  Not  only  was  barter  carried  on,  but,  as 
Berak  said,  people  made  presents  to  others  from  distant 
parts  "  to  make  friends."  ^ 

Buckley  mentions  that  a  messenger  {bihar)  came  from 
the  Wudthaurung  to  propose  that  the  latter  should  exchange 
eels  for  roots.  The  place  of  meeting  was  about  fourteen 
days'  distance  to  travel.  The  exchange  was  made  by  two 
men  of  each  party  delivering  the  eels  and  roots  on  long 
sheets  of  bark,  carrying  them  on  their  heads  from  one  party 
to  the  other  until  the  bargain  was  concluded.  When  the 
tribes  separated  an  agreement  was  made  to  meet  again  for 
barter. 

The  Yuin  ceremonies  of  initiation  were  attended  by 
people  from  a  district  included  by  Shoalhaven  River, 
Braidwood,  the  southern  part  of  Manero,  and  Twofold 
Bay.  At  the  termination  of  these  ceremonies,  when  the 
novices  had  gone  away  into  the  bush  for  their  time  of 
probation,  and  when  the  people  were  about  to  separate, 
there  was  held  a  kind  of  market,  at  which  those  articles 
which  they  had  brought  with  them  for  exchange  were 
bartered.  It  was  held  at  some  clear  place  near  the  camp, 
and  a  man  would  say,  "  I  have  brought  such  and  such 
things,"  and  some  other  man  would  bargain  for  them.  A 
complete  set  of  articles  is  one  Ngulia  or  belt  of  opossum- 
fur  string,  four  Burrain  or  men's  kilts,  one  Gumbrum  or 
bone  nose-peg,  and  a  complete  set  of  corrobboree  ornaments. 
It  was  the  rule  that  a  complete  set  went  together.  Weapons 
might  be  given  in  exchange,  and  a  complete  set  of  these  is 
"  two  hands,"  that  is   ten,  fighting  boomerangs  ( Warangun)^ 

*   Morgan,  op.  cit.  p.  49. 


TRIBAL  EXPEDITIONS 


719 


being  the  straight-going  ones  ;  the  same  number  of  grass- 
tree  spears  {Jjumma)  ;  one  of  each  kind  of  shield,  namely 
the  Bejnata,  used  for  stopping  spears,  and  the  Millidu,  used 
for  club  fighting  ;  one  club  {Gujerung  or  Bundi),  and  one 
spear-thrower  {Meara). 

■    The    women    also    engaged    in    this    trade,   exchanging 
opossum  rugs,  baskets,  bags,  digging-sticks  {Tualt),  etc. 

Not  only  were  these  things  bartered,  but  presents  were 


IK;.   47. — Kl'KNAI    WOMAN    WITH    HASKKTS. 

made  to  friends  and  to  the  Headmen  by  the  other  men. 
The  women  also  gave  things  to  the  wives  of  the  Headmen. 
A  Headman  who  was  held  in  great  esteem  might  have  as 
many  things  given  to  him  as  he  could  well  carry  away. 

Not  only  were  articles  which  the  people  made  them- 
selves bartered,  but  also  things  which  had  some  special 
value,  and  had  perhaps  been  brought  from  some  distant 
place.  Such  an  instance  I  heard  of  at  one  of  these  meetings 
many  years  ago.  An  ancient  shield  had  been  brought 
originally  from  the  upper  waters  of  the  Murrumbidgee 
River,  and  was   greatly  valued    because,  as    my    informant 


720        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

said,  it   had  "  won    many  fights."     Yet  it  was  exchanged, 
and  carried  away  on  its  farther  travels. 

There  is  a  natural  tendency  for  certain  occupations  to 
become  hereditary.  The  office  of  medicine-man,  for  instance, 
and  that  of  song-maker  have  been  already  mentioned,  as 
well  as  that  of  Headman,  as  being  in  some  cases  hereditary. 
One  instance  remains,  which  is,  so  far,  the  only  one  which 
has  come  to  my  knowledge.  In  the  Herbert  River  tribes 
the  various  trades,  if  one  may  use  that  term,  are  hereditary, 
so  that  there  are  hereditary  tree-climbers,  canoe,  shield, 
spear,  and  boomerang  makers.  Fishermen,  rain-makers  or 
medicine-men,  hunters,  messengers  or  heralds.  Among  the 
women  are  yam -hunters,  hut -makers,  basket -makers,  etc. 
The  tribal  rain-maker  is  also  an  hereditary  shield-maker.^ 

Smoke  Signals  and  Others 

When  the  Dieri  expected  visitors  who  might  not  know 
the  position  of  their  camp,  they  informed  them  of  it  by 
smoke  signals.  These  were  also  made  use  of  to  attract  the 
attention  of  distant  parties  with  whom  the  smoke-makers 
desired  to  communicate.  When  out  in  the  Yandairunga 
country  in  the  year  1859,  to  the  south-west  of  Lake  Eyre, 
I  saw  almost  daily  as  I  travelled  columns  of  smoke  rising 
from  the  flat-topped  hills  of  the  Desert  sandstone.  These 
signals  were  evidently  to  call  the  attention  of  other  parties 
of  Yandairunga  to  the  strangers  travelling  in  their  country, 
but  I  never  succeeded  in  getting  into  touch  with  the 
signalling  parties. 

The  Willuri  and  Hilleri  tribes  between  Eucla  and  Port 
Lincoln  make  signals  by  smoke  and  marks  in  the  sand  to 
show  friends  the  direction  taken  by  the  tribe,  such  as  very 
short  overlapping  steps.'^ 

If  one  party  of  the  Ngarigo  were  in  search  of  another, 
and  knew  that  they  were  in  some  particular  locality,  they 
would  go  up  on  to  a  hill  and  fill  a  sheet  of  bark,  rolled  up 
into  a  pipe,  with  dry  grass.  By  setting  fire  to  this  a 
column  of  smoke  would  be  caused  to  ascend  into  the  air, 
1  J.  Gaggin.  2  F.  Gaskell. 


XI  SMOKE  SIGNALS  AND  OTHERS  721 

and  if  the  other  blacks  saw  it  they  would  respond  in  the 
same  way. 

In  the  old  times,  when  two  parties  of  Kamilaroi  were, 
say,  twenty  miles  apart,  and  one  of  them  was  anxious  to 
know  if  the  other  was  on  friendly  terms  with  the  white  men, 
they  would  select  a  hollow  tree,  with  two  or  three  pipes  to 
it,  at  some  height  from  the  ground.  They  then  kindled  a 
fire  within  it  so  that  the  smoke  issued  from  the  pipey  arms. 
The  number  of  pipes  would  be  arranged  beforehand  :  for 
instance,  smoke  issuing  from  two  pipes  might  mean  peace, 
and  three  war.  If  the  tree  had  too  many  holes,  two  or 
more  would  be  plugged  up.^ 

The  Yuin  also  used  the  same  kind  of  smoke  signals. 
To  communicate  with  friends  at  a  distance  a  sheet  of  bark 
would  be  rolled  up  and  stuffed  full  of  bark  and  leaves. 
Being  then  set  fire  to  at  the  bottom  and  held  straight  up,  a 
column  of  smoke  ascended  into  the  air.  They  preferred 
this  to  a  hollow  tree,  but  in  either  case  the  signal  would 
have  to  be  arranged  for  beforehand,  so  as  to  be  understood. 
In  order  to  inform  friends  who  may  be  following  which  way 
one  has  gone,  a  stick  or  spear  in  the  old  times  would  be 
stuck  in  the  ground  near  to  the  camp  fire,  pointing  in  the 
direction  ;  or  if  the  man  was  not  returning  a  stick  would  be 
stuck  in  the  ashes  of  the  fire,  and  those  following  would 
know  by  their  amount  of  heat  how  long  the  party  had  been 
gone. 

The  manner  in  which  the  Gringai  communicated  their 
movements  to  following  friends  will  be  seen  from  the  follow- 
ing anecdote.  My  correspondent,  the  late  Dr.  M'Kinlay, 
wished  to  see  certain  blacks,  but  found  their  camp  deserted. 
His  black  boy  said  he  would  see  where  they  had  gone,  and 
going  to  the  camp  showed  him  a  spear  stuck  in  the  ashes  of 
the  fire,  with  a  corn  cob  tied  to  the  point.  The  spear  was 
leaning  in  a  certain  direction.  He  explained  this  by  saying 
that  they  were  gone  to  a  place  in  the  direction  in  which 
the  spear  pointed  to  pick  corn,  but  would  be  back  shortly. 
This  proved  to  be  the  case. 

When  one  branch  of  the  Bigambul  tribe  is  approaching 

^  C.  Naseby. 


722        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


the  country  of  another  branch,  a  hollow  tree  is  set  on  fire,  so 
that  the  smoke  is  seen  at  a  distance.^ 

The  Kaiabara  used  smoke  signals  to  call  the  tribe  to- 
gether. When  leaving  camp,  they  indicated  to  others  where 
they  were  gone  to  by  placing  a  stick  in  the  ground  pointing 
in  the  direction." 

When   one  or  more  of  the   Narrang-ga  messengers  are 


FIG.   48. — .\N    OBAL    HI.ACEI)    AS    A   GUIDE    TO    A    FOLLOWING    I'AKTV. 
KURNA!    TKIBK. 


approaching  a  place  where  they  know  others  are  encamped, 
they  make  a  smoke,  but  there  is  nothing  more  in  this  than 
to  announce  their  approach.' 

The  Kurnai  indicate  the  direction  in  which  they  have 
gone  by  either  planting  a  stick  in  the  ground  leaning  in 
a  certain  direction  and  with  some  bark  tied  on  the  end,  or  by 
bending  a  small  sapling  in  it,  and  tieing  the  leafy  branches 
of  its  head  up  in  a  ball,  either  by  themselves  or  with  some- 


'  J.  Laloi. 


3  T.  M.  Sutton. 


'^  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


GESTURE  LANGUAOE 


thing  tied   to  them   to    attract   attention.       This   signal    is 
called  Obal. 

Gesture  Language 

The  use  of  gestures  accompanying,  supplementing,  or 
replacing  speech  is  apparently  to  some  extent  inherent  in 
the  human  race.  Children  make  use  naturally,  or  as  some 
might  prefer  to  say,  instinctively,  of  certain  signs.  Deaf 
mutes  necessarily  use  them  to  communicate  their  needs  and 
wishes,  and  some  simple  signs  are  so  universally  used  that 
the  term  "  natural  gestures "  seems  not  inapplicable  to 
them. 

It  has  long  been  known  that  gesture  language  is  much 
used  among  the  North  American  Indians,  and  some  remark- 
able statements  have  been  made  as  to  the  reasons  for  its 
use.  Burton  attributed  it  to  the  paucity  of  language,  which 
compelled  the  use  of  supplementary  signs.  It  was  even 
said  that  certain  tribes  could  not  communicate  freely  unless 
when  daylight  permitted  the  use  of  gestures.  This  state- 
ment has  been  completely  disposed  of  by  researches  of 
American  anthropologists,  especially  those  of  Col.  Garrick 
Mallery,  to  whose  exhaustive  treati.se  upon  this  subject 
the  reader  is  referred. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  use  of  signs  by  the  Au.stralian 
aborigines  is  in  any  waj'  due  to  paucity  of  language,  theirs 
being  fully  competent  to  provide  for  every  mental  or 
material  necessity  of  their  life.  Tho.se  who  have  had  the 
opportunity  of  becoming  intimately  acquainted  with  these 
savages  in  their  social  life  will  agree  with  me  in  this  .state- 
ment, and  no  one  can  feel  the  slightest  doubt  who  has 
heard  one  of  their  orators  addressing  an  assembly  of  the 
men,  and  with  a  flow  of  persuasive  eloquence  moulding 
opinion  to  his  will. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable,  and  at  the  same  time 
difficult  to  explain,  that  the  u.se  of  gesture  language 
varies  so  much  in  different  tribes.  Some  have  a  very 
extensive  code  of  signs,  which  admit  of  being  so  used 
as  to  almost  amount  to  a  medium  of  general  communi- 
cation.      Other   tribes   have    no    more    than   those  gestures 


724        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

which  may  be  considered  as  the  general  property  of  man- 
kind. 

The  occurrence  or  absence  of  gestures  as  an  aid  or 
substitute  for  speech  does  not,  as  far  as  I  can  ascertain, 
depend  on  social  status,  or  the  locality  in  which  a  tribe 
lives.  Yet,  so  far  as  I  can  venture  to  form  an  opinion  from 
my  own  observations,  and  from  the  statements  made  to  me 
by  correspondents,  the  use  of  sign  language  is  more 
common  in  Central  and  North-eastern  Australia  than  in 
the  South-eastern  quarter  of  the  Continent. 

The  reason  for  this  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  vast 
extents  of  open  country,  plains,  sandhills,  and  stony  tracts 
which  occur  in  the  interior  of  Australia,  as,  for  instance,  in 
the  Lake  Eyre  basin. 

A  stranger  is  seen  there  from  afar  off,  and  can  be 
interrogated  at  a  safe  distance  by  gesture  language  as  to 
who  he  is,  where  he  comes  from,  and  his  intentions. 
When  I  first  saw  some  of  the  Cooper's  Creek  blacks,  I  was 
struck  by  their  use  of  gestures,  at  a  safe  distance,  and 
which  I  took  to  be  either  a  defiance  or  a  command  to 
depart.  In  reality  they  were  the  sign  for  peace  and  the  sign 
for  interrogation  as  to  our  destination,  or  as  to  our  reason 
for  being  there.  Afterwards,  when  I  became  better 
acquainted  with  them,  I  came  to  see  that  these  gestures  were 
part  of  a  complete  system  of  hand  signs,  by  which  a  person 
might  be  interrogated,  informed,  welcomed,  or  warned. 
In  the  coastal  regions  or  in  the  forest-clad  mountain  ranges 
which  lie  alongside  the  Great  Dividing  Range,  separating 
the  coast  lands  from  the  interior,  such  would  not  be  the 
case,  and  gesture  language  could  not  be  made  use  of  at  a 
distance  excepting  in  rare  cases. 

I  venture  this  supposition,  but  without  laying  much  stress 
upon  it. 

The  different  degree  in  which  gesture  language  is  made 
use  of  may  be  best  seen  by  taking  a  few  illustrations  from 
tribes  within  my  knowledge. 

The  Dieri  have  a  very  full  code  of  signs  which  suffice 
for  ordinary  needs  of  communication.  A  widow  is  not 
permitted  to  speak  until  the  whole  of  the  white  clay  which 


XI  GESTURE  LANGUAGE  725 

forms  her  "  mourning "  has  come  off  without  assistance. 
During  this  time  (perhaps  for  months)  she  communicates 
by  gestures  alone,^ 

As  an  instance  of  the  value  of  such  a  means  of  com- 
munication between  tribes  speaking  different  languages,  I 
give  the  following. 

In  1853  seventeen  of  the  Wirangu  tribe  were  driven  in 
from  their  country  to  the  west  of  Lake  Torrens  by  a  water 
famine.  They  came  across,  and  made  for  Elder's  Range  in 
hope  of  getting  water.  Here  they  fell  in  with  the  Arkaba 
blacks,  who  received  them  very  kindly  and  hospitably  for 
about  a  fortnight,  when  the  appearance  of  rain  induced  the 
visitors  to  take  their  departure  homewards.  They  did  not 
understand  a  word  of  each  other's  language,  and  it  was 
merely  by  gestures  that  they  managed  to  communicate  with 
each  other.  They  were  in  every  respect  very  different  to 
the  Parnkalla,  in  language,  colour,  and  general  appearance. 
They  were  not  of  a  very  dark  shade,  more  of  a  dark  dirty 
red,  and  had  rather  broad  features  but  a  pleasant  expression 
of  countenance,^ 

In  contrast  to  the  Dieri,  the  Kurnai  may  be  instanced 
as  a  tribe  without  any  "  gesture  language,"  although  I  have 
seen  them  use  certain  signs  in  lieu  of  words,  when  they 
were,  from  one  reason  or  another,  prevented  from  using,  or 
were  reluctant  to  use  the  words  themselves.  Thus  the 
messenger  who  conveyed  the  news  of  the  death  of  some 
individual  to  his  kindred  or  friends,  either  spoke  of  the 
deceased  in  a  roundabout  manner,  as  the  "  father,"  "  brother," 
"  son,"  as  the  case  might  be,  of  "  that  person  "  (pointing  to 
him),  or  what  was  perhaps  more  common,  owing  to  the 
objection  to  refer  to  the  dead,  the  messenger  would  say, 
naming  the  relationship,  for  instance,  "  the   father  of  that 

one  is ",  then  concluding  the  sentence  by  pointing  with 

the  forefinger  to  the  ground  or  to  the  sky.  Thus  intimating 
that  he  was  buried,  or  that  he  had  gone  up  to  the  Leen 
ivruk  or  "  good  land." 

Intermediately  between   these   two   extremes  are  other 
tribes,    with    a    more    or    less  extensive  or  limited  gesture 
1  O.  Siebert.  2  £>,  M'Kinlay. 

3  A 


726        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        cic. 

language,  such  as  I  have  quoted  in  the  following 
lists. 

The  systematic  use  of  gestures  by  the  Australian 
aborigines,  in  lieu  of  words,  or  in  connection  with  speech, 
seems  to  have  been  almost  overlooked  until  lately  by  writers 
on  the  native  tribes  of  Australia.  It  was  observed  that  they 
used  certain  signs,  such  as  shaking  or  nodding  the  head 
to  signify  dissent  or  assent.  Explorers  have  occasionally 
mentioned  that  the  blackfellows  they  met  with  used 
gestures  to  them,  as,  for  instance.  Sir  Thomas  Mitchell, 
when  travelling  on  the  Thompson  River.  But  the  idea  did 
not  arise  that  in  such  cases  these  signs  and  gestures  were 
not  merely  the  natural  aids  to  speech,  but,  in  fact,  formed 
part  of  a  recognised  and  well-understood  system  of  artificial 
language,  by  which  these  savages  endeavoured  to  com- 
municate with  the  white  strangers  passing  through  their 
country,  just  as  they  would  have  endeavoured  to  com- 
municate with  strangers  of  their  own  colour. 

Speaking  of  the  Port  Stephens  aborigines,  Mr.  R. Dawson^ 
describes  a  meeting  with  some  strange  blacks.  He  told  those 
who  were  with  him  "  to  make  the  sign  of  peace  to  them, 
which  they  did  by  waving  the  right  hand  over  the  head  and 
then  pointing  to  the  ground.  No  return  was  made  to  this, 
and  on  repeating  the  sign  an  answer  was  returned  in  a  loud 
and  as  it  seemed  menacing  tone.  The  natives  of  each  party 
harangued  each  other  in  turns,  and  then  the  strange  blacks 
placed  their  spears  against  a  tree  and  gave  an  invitation  to 
join  them."  This  account  is  very  characteristic  of  similar 
meetings  which  I  observed  when  in  the  Cooper's  Creek 
country. 

The  difficulties  which  arise  in  investigating  the  use  of 
gesture  language  are  very  great.  The  ordinary  inquirer 
needs  to  be  almost  specially  trained  to  the  work  in  order 
to  prevent  his  falling  into  errors  in  interpreting  or  describing 
the  signs  made.  There  is,  moreover,  always  the  danger 
that  a  blackfellow  may  misunderstand  the  meaning  of  the 
inquiry,  and  instead  of  giving  such  signs  as  are  recognised 
in  his  tribe,  or  of  saying  that  there  were  none  at  all,  will 

1  op.  at.  p.  128. 


XI  GESTURE  LANGUAGE  -         727 

endeavour  to  give  such  a  translation  in  signs  as  seems  to 
him  best  to  express  the  reply  to  the  question  put  to  him. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  do  more  than  superficially  touch 
upon  this  subject.  I  have  recorded  the  few  data  which  I 
have  been  able  to  obtain,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  those 
who  are  in  a  position  to  do  so  will  more  fully  investigate 
and  record  at  least  one  complete  system.  Central  Australia 
seems  to  be  best  suited  for  this,  where  the  aborigines  have 
apparently  more  fully  developed  the  use  of  gestures  than 
in  other  parts  of  Australia.  Here  follow  some  of  the 
signs  : — 

All. — Hold  out  the  clenched  hands  and  open  and  shut 
them  several  times  (Wurunjerri). 

All  gone. — Extend  both  hand  and  arms,  as  if  in  the  act 
of  swimming,  then  point  in  the  direction  in  which  they  have 
gone  (Died).  Hold  out  both  hands  with  widely  extended 
fingers,  and  the  palms  downward,  in  the  direction  in  which 
they  have  gone  (Aldolinga).^ 

All  right. —  Hold  the  hand  out,  palm  upwards,  and 
describe  several  horizontal  circles  with  it  (Aldolingay  Nod 
the  head  twice  (Kuriwalu).^ 

Anger. — Pout  the  lips  out  (Dieri).^ 

Above. — The  head  is  bent  back  and  the  eyes  look  up- 
wards, the  right  hand  being  held  higher  than  the  head  and 
above  it  (Dieri).* 

Attention. — Hold  up  the  open  hand,  palm  outwards,  and 
move  it  once  or  twice  up  and  down  (Wurunjerri).  Wave 
the  open  hand,  palm  upwards,  several  times  towards  the 
body  (Kuriwalu).""' 

Bad  (meaning  "decayed  "). — Avert  the  face  and  screw 
up  the  mouth  and  nose  as  if  in  disgust  (Died).'*  Shake  the 
head  and  blow  through  the  nostrils  (Eucla).^ 

Before. — Point  forwards  and  a  little  downwards  with  the 
right  hand  and  forefinger  (Aldolinga).^  Point  with  the 
hand  in  front  downwards  (Dieri)  * ;  also,  the  hand  being 
held    level    with    the   waist,    move   it   to   the   front   (Dieri).* 

Note. — When  no  correspondent  is  given,  the  inforination  is  my  own. 

1  Rev.  II.  Kempe.  2  j.  h.  Kirkhani. 

3  S.  Gason.  *  Vogelsang.  ^  H.  Williams. 


728        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Right  hand  is  brought  from  the  left  shoulder  across  the 
body  in  front  (Kuriwalu)." 

Behind. — Place  the  left  hand,  fingers  slightly  closed,  and 
palm  outwards,  behind  the  hip  (Wurunjerri).  Point  with  the 
hand  backwards  (Dieri)/  Point  with  the  hand  extended 
behind  the  body  (Aldolinga).^  Waft  the  hand  with  the 
fingers  open  downwards  and  to  the  rear  (Kuriwalu)." 

Be  quiet. — Close  the  hand  loosely,  the  fingers  being 
towards  yourself,  then  make  several  motions  with  it  down- 
wards in  front  of  the  body  (Dicri).'*  Make  several  short 
movements  with  the  right  hand  in  front  towards  the  ground 
(Wurunjerri).  Make  several  short  movements  with  the  right 
hand  in  front  towards  the  ground  (Yantruwunta).  Make 
a  motion  with  the  closed  fist  from  the  mouth  downwards 
(Aldolinga).' 

Be  quick. — Hold  out  the  hand  and  arm  stiffly,  and  rather 
high.  Shake  the  hand  several  times  as  if  flirting  some- 
thing off  (Dieri)."*  Make  a  number  of  circular  movements 
from  right  to  left  in  front  of  the  body,  with  the  open  hand, 
palm  downwards  (Aldolinga).^  Wave  the  hand  several  times 
towards  the  body  (Kuriwalu).'^  Arms  brought  to  the  front 
horizontally,  and  then  extended  right  back  (Mundainbura).*' 

Big. — Extend  both  arms  semicircularly  from  the 
shoulders  outwards,  the  fingers  slightly  crooked  and  sepa- 
rated, and  at  the  same  height  as  the  shoulders  (Wurunjerri). 
The  hand  held  horizontally  to  the  ground  the  approximate 
size  intended  (Dieri)."'  Strike  with  the  clenched  fist  towards 
the  ground  ;  if  for  "  very  big  "  make  a  long  stroke  (Dieri).* 
Shut  both  hands,  excepting  the  forefingers,  with  which 
indicate  size  by  holding  them  apart  (Kuriwalu).^  Spread 
out  the  arms  as  if  describing  something  large  (Eucla).'' 

Bring  here. — Extend  the  hand  palm  upwards,  fingers  a 
little  closed,  as  if  to  receive  something.  Then  draw  the 
hand  towards  yourself  (Dieri).^ 

Bring  together;  Collect;  Heap  up. — Extend  the  arms  with 
the  palms  of  the  hands  towards  each  other,  then  draw 
them   towards  the  body  several  times  round   (Wurunjerri). 

1  Rev.  H.  Kempe.  ^  j-  H.  Kirkham.  »  S.  Gason. 

*  Vogelsang.  '"  H.  Williams.  "  W.  Logan. 


XI  GESTURE  LANGUAGE  729 

Extend  the  arm  towards  the  ground,  and  make  two  or  three 
quick  movements  with  the  open  hand  towards  the  ground 
(Yantruwunta). 

Camp. — Chop  twice  with  the  right  hand,  at  an  angle  of 
45°  from  right  to  left  in  front  of  yourself  Then  place  fore- 
finger of  the  right  hand  between  the  tips  of  the  first  and 
second  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  simulating  a  ridge  pole 
(Wurunjerri). 

Camp,  or  sleep. — Recline  the  head  upon  the  hand,  as  if 
sleeping  (Dieri).*  Lay  the  head  on  the  right  hand  and  close 
the  eyes  (Mundainbura).^ 

Child. — Place  both  hands  behind  the  back,  as  if  carrying 
one  (Dieri).* 

Come  here. — Beckon  with  the  open  hand  towards  your- 
self (Wurunjerri).  Point  to  the  person  with  the  right  hand, 
then  point  to  the  left  (Aldolinga).^  Motion  as  if  throwing  a 
stone,  but  bringing  the  hand  afterwards  towards  the  body 
(Eucla).^ 

Come  on. — Extend  the  hand  and  arm  straight  out,  then 
bend  the  arm  towards  yourself  The  action  repeated  several 
times  means  "  come  quickly  "  (Dieri).^ 

Come  here ;  Sit  down. — Beckon  towards  yourself  with 
right  hand,  palm  upwards,  fingers  slightly  bent,  then  make  a 
motion  or  two  with  them  towards  the  ground  at  the  right 
(Wolgal). 

Companions. — Hold  up  the  fore  and  middle  fingers  of 
one  hand,  then  lightly  snap  the  fingers  and  thumb  (Dieri).'* 

Cut — Draw  the  forefinger  of  the  one  hand  across  the 
other  hand  (Dieri).^  There  was  a  man  in  the  Yantruwunta 
tribe  whom  I  often  saw,  but  never  knew  his  name,  excepting 
by  a  gesture  which  distinguished  him,  and  which  meant 
'■'■  broken  arm."  It  was  made  by  striking  the  radius  of  the 
left  arm  with  the  right  hand  open  and  held  vertically. 

Danger. — Make  a  movement  as  of  catching  a  fly  close 
to  the  mouth,  and  then  squeezing  it  (Dieri).^  Place  the  right 
hand  in  front  of  the  body  and  then  step  back  a  pace  or  two 
(Kuriwalu),^ 

1  Rev.  H.  Kempe.  ^  J.  H.  Kirkham.  ^  g.  Gason. 

*  Vogelsang.  '  H.  Williams.  *  W.   Logan. 


730        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        cn. 

Dead ;  Death. — Make  a  mark  along  the  ground  by 
drawing  the  finger  along  (Dieri).*  Bring  the  hands  together, 
then  make  a  movement  with  them  as  if  concealing  something 
(Dieri).^  Stoop  a  little,  and  then  pat  the  ground  with  the 
back  of  the  hand  (Yantruwunta). 

Doctor ;  Medicine-man. — Draw  the  head  in  between  the 
shoulders,  then  draw  the  forefinger  down  the  nose  ;  cross  the 
arms  over  the  breast,  and  stroke  down  each  arm  with  the 
other,  finally  passing  each  arm  over  the  stomach  (Dieri).^ 

Distance ;  Far  off. — If  near,  point  a  little  way  off;  if  far 
off,  point  to  the  horizon  (Wurunjerri).  Incline  head  back- 
wards and  stick  out  upper  lip  (Eucla).^  Close  at  hand,  in  the 
camp,  point  to  ground.  Near,  point  to  horizon.  Far  off, 
point  to  direction  at  a  high  altitude  (Wolgal). 

Drink ;  Drinking. — Imitate  lifting  water  to  the  mouth 
with  the  hand  (Wurunjerri).  Place  the  thumb  and  forefinger 
of  the  right  hand  together  like  a  scoop,  and  carry  the  hand 
up  to  the  mouth  (Dieri).''  Throw  the  head  back,  and  carry 
the  hand  up  to  the  mouth  (Kuriwalu).'^ 

Eat. — Lift  the  hand  to  the  mouth,  as  if  conveying  food 
(Dieri).' 

Enemy  {wild  blackfelloiv). — First  make  the  sign  for 
man,  then  make  that  for  distance  (Wurunjerri).  Right 
hand  open,  and  palm  downwards.  Move  it  two  or  three 
times  vertically  in  front  of  the  body,  then  repeat  the  same 
at  the  right  side  (Kuriwalu).^  Place  the  hand,  palm  out- 
wards, in  front  of  the  face,  then  turn  it  several  times  from 
inwards  to  outwards  (Aldolinga).^ 

Emu. — Hold  the  hand  out  with  the  forefinger  and  little 
finger  extended,  the  thumb  and  the  other  fingers  closed 
(Dieri).'' 

Enough. — Hold  out  the  hands  as  in  the  sign  for  "  big," 
then  point  to  yourself  and  make  the  sign  for  "  none " 
(Wurunjerri).  Tap  the  stomach  several  times  with  the  flat 
hand,  then  wave  the  hand  with  the  finger  spread  outwards 
(Dieri).'  Tap  the  mouth  with  the  open  hand,  then  wave  the 
hand  (Kuriwalu).^ 

1  Rev.  H.  Kempe.  -'  J.  H.  Kirkham.  ^  s.  Gason. 

*  Vc^elsang.  6  pj_  Williams. 


XI  GESTURE  LANGUAGE  731 

Far  away. — Snap  the  fingers  in  the  direction  indicated 
(Dieri).*  Stretch  the  hand  out  full  length,  and  snap  the 
fingers  (Aldolinga).^ 

Fight. — Hold  the  two  hands  as  high  as  the  head,  as  if 
grasping  a  weapon,  then  strike  with  them  in  all  directions 
(Dieri)." 

Feather  head-dress. — Hold  the  hair  of  the  head  with  one 
hand,  and  with  the  other  imitate  the  action  of  sticking 
something  into  it  (Dieri).'* 

Give  me. — Hold  out  the  hand  at  full  length,  palm  up 
(Wurunjerri).  Extend  the  hand,  palm  up,  and  then  draw  it 
back  (Dieriy  Right  hand  held  out  at  full  length,  the  fingers 
a  little  bent  (Kuriwalu).'  Hold  out  the  hands,  palm  upwards 
(Eucla).^ 

Glad. — Pat  the  breasts  with  both  hands  several  times 
(Wurunjerri). 

Good. — Make  a  trembling  or  vibrating  motion  with  both 
hands,  palms  inwards,  in  front  of  the  face,  which  must  have 
a  pleased  expression  (Dieri).^  Move  the  right  hand,  palm 
upwards,  up  and  down  in  front  of  the  body,  then  point 
downwards  (Aldolinga)/ 

Go  away ;  Go  on. — Hand  with  back  to  face,  moved 
sharply  outwards,  in  a  semicircle  to  full  length  of  arm 
(Yantruwunta).  The  hand  is  thrown  sharply  from  the 
breast,  palm  inwards  (Kuriwalu)."^  Hold  up  the  hand  in 
front  of  the  face,  palm  outwards,  and  make  several  quick 
movements  outwards  from  yourself  (Dieri)."  Point  in  the 
direction  to  go  with  the  second  finger  of  the  right  hand 
(Aldolinga).^  Hold  the  hand  near  the  face,  palm  outwards, 
as  if  holding  something.  Then  act  as  if  throwing  it  away 
(Dieri).'*  Bring  arm  round  to  the  front  of  the  body,  the 
palm  of  hand  being  to  self.  Then  throw  it  out  to  person 
addressed  (Mundainbura).** 

Halt ;  Stop. — Make  a  sign  with  the  outstretched  right 
hand,  palm  downwards,  towards  the  ground,  repeat  this 
several  times  rapidly  (Dieri).'*  Rapidly  move  the  right  hand 
from  the  breast,  palm  outwards,  to  the  full  length   upwards, 

'  Rev.  H.  Kempe.  ^  j    h    Kirkham.  ^  S.  Gason. 

■•  Vogelsang.  *  H.  Williams.  •  W.  Logan. 


732        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

then  point  to  the  ground  (Aldolinga).^  Make  three  waves 
towards  the  ground  with  the  hand  (Kuriwalu).'"  Throw 
hand  towards  the  ground  (Eucla).^  Stretch  hand  out  in 
front,  with  pahn  outwards.  Then  suddenly  jerk  hand 
downwards  (Mundainbura).** 

Hear. — Point  to  the  ear  with  the  forefinger  of  the  right 
hand  (Wurunjerri).  Make  a  number  of  small  circles  with  the 
finger  in  front  of  the  ear  (Aldolinga).^  Fanning  with  the 
hand  about  two  inches  from  the  ear  means,  "  I  cannot  hear 
you.  Say  it  again "  (Dieri).^  Extend  the  hand  over  the 
head  as  high  as  possible  ;  stoop  and  reach  out  as  far  as 
possible  till  the  hand  nearly  reaches  the  ground  ;  do  this 
quickly,  this  means,  "  I  hear  you,  I  know  what  you  mean." 
These  signs  are  used  when  communicating  from  a  distance 
(Dieri).^  Point  to  the  ear  (Eucla).^  Touch  the  ear  (Ngarigo). 
Tap  the  ear,  then  raise  the  hand  above  the  head  (Mundain- 
bura).* 

Hungry. — Extend  the  arms  both  upwards,  so  as  to  show 
the  stomach  drawn  in  (Wurunjerri).  Rub  the  open  hand 
over  the  stomach  (Yantruwunta).  Tap  the  stomach  with 
the  finger  and  then  extend  the  open  hand  (Dieri).^  Point  to 
the  stomach  with  bent  fingers  (Aldolinga).^  Pat  the  stomach 
(Kuriwalu).^  Draw  up  the  abdomen,  and  look  miserable 
(Eucla).^  Rub  the  pit  of  the  stomach  with  the  right  hand 
(Wolgal).      Pat  the  stomach  with  the  hand  (Mundainbura).^ 

/. — Point  to  the  breast  (Wurunjerri).  Pass  the  forefinger 
down  at  a  little  distance  from  the  forehead  along  the  nose, 
or  tap  the  breast  lightly  with  the  forefinger  (Dieri).*  Point 
to  yourself  (Aldolinga).^  Point  to  the  breast  (Kuriwalu).^ 
Place  hand  upon  the  chest  (Eucla).^  Tap  the  breast  with 
the  forefinger  (Mundainbura).® 

Kill. — Make  several  movements  downwards  with  the 
fist,  as  of  striking  violently  (Dieri).''  Strike  short  blows  with 
one  hand  on  the  other  (Dieri).^  Hold  the  right  hand  high 
over  the  head,  with  the  palm  downwards  (Kuriwalu).^ 

Large. — Clench  the  fist  and  strike  downwards.  P'or 
very  large^  strike  a  longer  blow  with  more  force  (Dieri).^ 

1  Rev.  H.  Kempe.  ^  j    j^_  Kirkham.  ^  S.  Gason. 

*  Vogelsang.  *  H.  Williams.  *  W.  Logan. 


XI  GESTURE  LANGUAGE  733 

Man. — Indicate  with  both  hands  the  outline  of  a  beard. 
The  size  of  the  beard  denotes  the  age — a  great  beard  is  a 
great  age,  i.e.,  an  old  man  (Wurunjerri).  Indicate  the  beard 
with  the  right  hand,  as  of  passing  the  hand  down  it.  For 
an  old  man,  tap  lightly  several  times  on  the  top  of  the 
head  (Dieri).*  Clutch  the  beard  and  shake  it  (Dieri)."* 
Close  the  right  hand  except  the  middle  finger,  then  describe 
a  small  circle  with  it  (Aldolingay  Touch  the  beard 
(Eucla).5 

Mother. — Take  hold  of  the  breast  with  one  hand  and 
shake  it  (Dieri).* 

No;  Not;  None. — Shake  the  head  (Wurunjerri).  Shake 
the  head  several  times,  the  hand  being  raised  as  high  as  the 
face,  and  held  loosely  pendent  from  the  wrist,  as  if  shaking 
something  from  the  fingers  (Dieri),*  also  (Yantruwunta). 
Shake  the  head  (Dieri).*  Hold  the  right  hand  palm  out- 
wards, then  point  upwards  (Aldolingay  Shake  the  head 
several  times,  then  wave  the  hand  from  the  breast,  palm 
downwards  (Kuriwalu).^  Shake  the  head  and  raise  the  hand 
to  the  front  (Mundainbura)." 

Peace. — Hold  up  both  hands  at  full  length,  open  palms 
outwards  above  the  head  (Yantruwunta).  The  same,  or 
hold  one  hand  up,  and  shake  the  fingers  as  if  making  the 
sign  for  nothing  (Dieri).'*  Hand  thrown  forward,  full  length 
from  the  body,  palm  downwards,  and  head  bent  back 
(Kuriwalu).^ 

Salt  water. — Point  to  the  mouth,  and  touch  the  point 
of  the  tongue  with  the  finger  (Dieri).*  The  same  for  the 
Yantruwunta.  Rub  the  windpipe  with  thumb  and  forefinger 
(Wolgal). 

Silence ;  Say  no  more. — Thumb  of  each  hand  turned 
inwards,  then  stoop  and  extend  the  hands  full  length.  This 
also  implies  a  threat  of  strangling,  and  is  used,  for  instance, 
by  the  old  men  to  the  young  men  when  they  are  misbehav- 
ing themselves  (Dieri).* 

Sit  down. — Make  the  sign  for  halt.  Stop  and  point  to 
the    ground    (Wurunjerri).       Extend    the    arm    towards   the 

1  Rev.'H.  Kempe.  ^  J.  H.  Kirkham.  *  Vogelsang. 

s  H.  Williams.  «  W.  Logan. 


734        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

ground,  and   make  two  or  three  quick   movements  with  the 
open  hand  towards  the  ground  (Yantruwunta). 

Sleep. — Incline  the  head  on  the  open  hand  towards  the 
shoulder  (Wurunjerri).  Incline  the  head  upon  the  palm  of 
the  hand  near  the  shoulder  (Dieri)/  Place  left  hand  over 
the  eyes,  and  incline  the  head  on  the  left  hand  (Kuriwalu).* 
Drop  the  head  to  one  side,  or  recline  and  close  the  eyes 
(Eucla).^  Recline  the  head  on  one  hand  (Wolgal).  Lay 
the  head  on  the  right  hand  and  close  the  eyes  (Mundainbura).* 

Supernatural  Being  {Bunjit). — Make  exaggerated  sign 
for  old  man,  then  make  exaggerated  sign  for  "  big,"  then 
point  to  the  sky  (Wurunjerri).  Similar  gestures  are  made 
by  the  Murring. 

Thirsty. — Make  the  sign  for  "  to  drink,"  then  hold  out 
the  open  hand  (Dieri)."*  Point  to  the  stomach  and  then 
snap  the  fingers  (Aldolinga).^      Scratch  the  throat  (Kuriwalu).^ 

To  run. — Hold  the  arms  bent  at  the  elbows,  with  the 
hands  clenched  in  front ;  then  describe  circles  outwards, 
indicating  the  movements  of  legs  running  (Wurunjerri). 

To  see. — Touch  the  eye  with  the  forefinger,  and  then 
point  in  the  direction  indicated  (Wurunjerri).  Describe  a 
number  of  small  circles  with  the  finger  from  the  eye  in  the 
direction  indicated  (Aldolinga).'  Touch  the  eyes  (Eucla).* 
Touch  the  eye  (Wolgal). 

Wfiere  ?  Wliat  ?  What  is  it  ?  etc. — Place  right  hand  at 
left  breast  palm  outwards,  then  move  it  up  at  an  angle  of 
45°  with  the  horizon,  hold  up  for  a  moment,  and  let  drop; 
when  moving  the  hand,  jerk  up  the  chin  (Wurunjerri). 
Hold  the  right  hand  opposite  to  and  higher  than  the 
shoulder,  gradually  turning  the  hand  so  that  at  last  the 
palm  is  upwards  ;  or  do  this  so  that  the  movement  of  the 
hand  upwards  and  forwards  only  brings  it  level  with  the 
face  (Yantruwunta).  Throw  up  the  hand  higher  than  the 
head,  then  let  it  fall  palm  upwards  (Dieri).* 

Where  are  you  going  ?  Who  are  you  ? — Hold  the  right 
hand  about  twelve  or  fifteen  inches  in  front  of  the  shoulder, 
palm     to    front     and    fingers    expanded,    wave    it    quickly 

•  Rev.  H.  Kempe.  ^  j    j|.  Kirkham.  ■•  Vogelsang. 

*  H.  Williams.  ^  W.  Logan. 


XI  GESTURE  LANGUAGE  735 

horizontally  twelve  to  eighteen  inches  from  left  to  right 
(Wolgal). 

Water. — Same  as  to  drink  (Dieri).* 

Water  bowl. — Hold  the  left  hand  upwards,  partly  closed. 
Then  make  a  motion  with  it,  as  if  scooping  something  out 
of  the  other  hand  (Dieri)/ 

Woman. — Point  with  the  fingers  to  the  breast  (Wurun- 
jerri).  Indicate  the  breasts  with  both  hands  (Dieri)."*  Make 
a  circle  with  the  forefinger  of  each  hand  round  the  breast 
(Dieri).^     Point  to  the  breasts  (Eucla),^ 

Yes. —  Nod  the  head  (Wurunjerri).  Nod  the  head,  or 
make  a  movement  with  the  head  as  if  catching  a  tly  about 
a  foot  distant  from  the  mouth  (Dieri).*  Make  a  movement 
towards  the  ground  with  the  open  hand  (Aldolingay  Nod 
the  head  (Eucla).^ 

1  Rev.  H.  Kemj>e.  *  Vogelsang.  *  H.  Williams. 


CHAPTER  XII 

VARIOUS  CUSTOMS 

Naming  of  children — Family  duties  in  bringing  up  children  shared  by  both 
parents — Names  of  respect  given  to  the  aged — Opossum  skin  nigs — Perfora- 
tion of  the  septum  of  the  nose — Raised  scars  —  Mutilations — Infanticide 
— Cannibalism  —  Food  rules,  hunting,  and  distribution  of  game  —  Ball- 
playing — Camping  rules — Fire-making. 

In  the  Kurnai  tribe  the  infant  child  is  at  first  recognised 
merely  as  Lit,  that  is,  "  child,"  although  it  receives  some 
name  when  it  begins  to  walk,  frequently  from  some  trivial 
occurrence  which  happened  about  its  birth.  When  a  boy  is 
eight  or  nine  years  of  age  he  is  called  Wotti,  and  the  girl 
Kuere-jung.  The  child  is  named  by  the  paternal  grandfather 
or  grandmother,  or  in  default  by  the  mother's  parents,  and 
its  name  may  be  that  borne  by  some  former  member  of  the 
family.  For  instance,  the  before-mentioned  Tulaba  was, 
when  a  child,  named  Barrumbulk  (teal  duck)  by  his  maternal 
grandfather.  This  was  the  naine  of  his  mother's  deceased 
brother.  When  as  a  youth  he  was  initiated  at  the  Jeraeil 
ceremonies,  a  maternal  uncle  called  him  Tulaba,  which  was 
the  name  of  a  grand  ancestor. 

When  the  new  name  is  given  at  initiation,  the  child's 
name  becomes  secret,  not  to  be  revealed  to  strangers,  or  to 
be  mentioned  by  friends.  The  reason  appears  to  be  that  a 
name  is  part  of  a  person,  and  therefore  can  be  made  use  of 
to  that  person's  detriment  by  any  who  wish  to  "  catch  "  him 
by  evil  magic.  Thus  one  of  the  Kurnai,  of  whom  I  inquired 
as  to  his  child's  name,  told  me  in  a  whisper,  when  no  one 
else  was  present.  When  I  asked  him  the  name  of  one  of 
the   Kurnai,  he  said,  "  I   cannot  tell  you,  he  might  be  very 

736 


VARIOUS  CUSTO>rS 


lyj 


angry  with  me  ;  our  fathers  have  told  us  that  we  must 
never  speak  of  our  secret  names." 

The  boy  as  a  youth  is  called  Wot-wotti  while  he  still 
lives  with  his  parents,  and  his  sister,  when  approaching  a 
marriageable  age,  is  called  Tutbukan. 

After  being  initiated,  the  youth  is  called  Tutnurrtngy 
and  also  is  called  Jeraeil,  from  the  name  of  the  ceremonies. 
When  he  returns  to  the  camp,  having  satisfied  the  old  men 


KLKNAI    WOMAN    CARRYING    A    CHIM). 


that  he  is  to  be  depended  upon,  he  no  longer  lives  with  his 
parents.  As  I  have  shown  in  the  description  of  the  Jeraeil, 
the  ceremonies  clearly  show  that  his  mother's  control  over 
him  has  been  annulled,  and  being  a  man  he  is  not  allowed 
to  live  in  the  married  people's  part  of  the  camp,  but  joins 
the  young  men,  who  put  up  their  Bun  or  camp  apart  from 
the  others.  He  as  a  Brewit^  or  "  young  man,"  lives  with 
the  other  Brewit.  All  the  Brewit  who  have  been  made 
young  men  at  the  same  time  are  brogan^  or,  as  I  may  put 
it,  comrades. 


738        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

The  girl,  who  has  participated  in  the  ceremonies  so  far 
as  the  women  are  allowed  to  do,  still  lives  with  her  parents 
until  she  is  married. 

The  young  man,  having  obtained  a  wife,  is  free  of  two 
divisions  of  the  tribe,  at  least — that  to  which  he  belongs  by 
birth,  and  that  of  his  wife.  He  begins  a  partly  independent 
life  of  his  own,  wandering  over  the  hunting-grounds,  which 
his  fathers  before  him  hunted  over,  and  also  over  those  of 
his  wife's  forefathers  ;  indeed,  there  were  cases  in  which  the 
man  joined  the  clan  of  his  wife  and  abandoned  his  own. 

The  family  duties  are  shared  by  the  husband  and  the  wife, 
both  assisting  to  support  their  family,  his  share  being  to 
hunt  for  their  support,  and  to  fight  for  their  protection.  As 
one  of  them  said  to  me,  "  A  man  hunts,  spears  fish,  fights, 
and  sits  about"  The  woman  formerly  built  the  home  of 
bent  sticks  thatched  with  grass  tussocks,  but  since  the  blacks 
obtained  iron  tomahawks,  the  home  is  made  of  sheets  of 
bark  stripped  by  the  men.  It  was  the  woman's  duty  to 
catch  fish  and  to  cook  it,  to  gather  the  vegetables,  fruit,  or 
seeds  which  formed  part  of  the  food  supply,  and  to  make 
rush  bags,  baskets,  and  nets. 

When  a  Kurnai  has  arrived  at  mature  age,  and  when  he 
may  be  supposed  to  have  taken  his  place  among  the  elders 
of  the  clan,  and  was  designated  Boldain  or  old  man,  he 
usually  acquired  a  new  name.  As  the  child's  name  gave 
place  to  a  new  one  at  initiation,  so  did  that  name  give  place 
to  a  new  one  when  he  became  Boldain,  but  the  former  did 
not  become  secret.  This  last  name  was  often  derived  from 
some  personal  peculiarity  or  quality.  It  was  usually  composed 
of  two  names,  of  which  one  is  constant,  being  Bunjil.  It 
has  no  meaning  as  a  word,  and  is  only  used  as  a  prefix  to 
another  word  indicating  some  quality  or  peculiarity.  This 
name  would  probably  be  his  last,  and  remained  with  him  till 
his  death. 

Among  the  names  of  such  men  known  to  me  are  Bunjil- 
barlajan  (platypus),  from  his  skill  in  spearing  that  animal  ; 
Bunjil-tambun  (Gippsland  perch,  Lates  Colonorum),  from  his 
skill  in  catching  that  fish.  A  leading  man  in  the  Brayakau- 
lung  clan  was  Btinjil-kraura  (west  wind).     Another  of  the 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTONfS  739 

Brayakaulung  was  Bunjil-daua-ngufi,  from  Daua-ngun,  to  turn 
up.  H.e  was  noted  for  making  bark  canoes  much  turned  up 
in  front.  His  brother,  Bunjil-barn,  was  so  named  from  his 
supposed  extraordinary  powers  in  that  form  of  evil  magic. 

As  an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  such  names  may 
be  acquired,  I  may  mention  the  following.  The  Mitchell 
River  flows  for  some  thirty  miles  through  a  gorge-like  and 
somewhat  inaccessible  valley.  In  order  to  examine  it  I 
caused  some  Kurnai  to  make  canoes  at  the  upper  end,  and 
therein  we  floated  down  together.  The  gorge  was  unknown 
to  them,  being  out  of  their  country,  and  the  navigation  was 
regarded  as  a  great  feat,  in  consequence  of  the  great  number 
of  rapids,  in  one  of  which  our  canoes  were  wrecked.  It  was 
talked  of  for  some  time  among  the  Brabralung,  and  the  name 
of  Bunjil-guyergun,  or  Bunjil  rapids,  was  given  to  me. 

In  the  Yuin  tribe  some  of  the  personal  names  of  men 
known  to  me  are  :  Burru-walway  (one  who  knows  every- 
thing), Kuvibo  (marrow),  Naieni-wang  (thunder),  Bullur 
(dust),  Kayan  (the  summit  of  Mount  Dromedary),  Mundu-pira 
(stone  tomahawk),  and  Jubbuk  (throw  the  fishing-line). 

There  are  also  what  may  be  termed  family  names,  such 
as  that  of  Uuibara,  before  mentioned,  namely,  Wattin  (Point 
of  land).  Such  names  are  inherited  by  children  of  both 
sexes  from  their  fathers.  For  instance,  Vmbara  was  Wattin 
from  his  father,  and  individually ////^/w/',  which  was  given  to 
him  at  the  Kuringal  ceremony,  thus  replacing  his  child's  name. 

In  the  Wiimbaio  tribe  a  child  was  spoken  of  as  Katulya  ; 
a  boy  of  nine  or  ten  years  as  Wilyango  ;  one  of  ten  to  fifteen 
as  Wilyango-kurnundo  ;  and  when  fifteen,  and  before  being 
made  a  young  man,  as  Kurno,  that  is  excrement.  When  he 
became  a  man  he  would  be  spoken  of  as  Thalara) 

The  personal  names  among  the  Bigambul  are  such  as 
have  been  given  to  persons  when  children  ;  for  instance, 
Waronga  (left-handed),  or  Yurngal  (right-handed),  but  they 
are  not  usually  applied  to  them  personally.  The  usual  terms 
of  address  are  those  of  relationship  ;  for  instance,  Mugen 
(elder  brother),  or  Kogebel  (younger  brother),  or  such  as  may 
be  applicable." 

>  J.  Bulmer.  2  j,  L^lor. 


740        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe  a  name  was  usually  given  to  a  child 
when  about  a  week  old.  It  was  either  the  name  of  a  place, 
or  a  bird,  or  an  animal,  or  fish.  Another  name  was  given 
to  a  boy  when  he  was  made  a  young  man.  But  a  girl 
retained  her  child's  name  through  life.  When  a  man  was 
thirty  or  forty  he  received  another  name.  They  were  never 
named  after  their  father  or  mother.^ 

In  the  Maryborough  tribes  a  child  receives  a  name  as 
an  infant.  If  a  girl,  the  name  remains  always  the  same,  but 
if  a  boy,  the  name  is  changed  at  the  Dora  ceremonies. 

The  friends  of  a  man  or  a  woman  use  the  personal  name 
in  speaking  to  him  or  her.  That  is  to  say,  the  name  given 
to  him  at  the  Dora,  and  to  her  in  childhood.  Old  men 
address  a  girl  as  Wurgu  (girl),  and  a  boy  as  Ogbin  (boy). 
A  man  and  his  wife  address  each  other  with  the  word  Ura 
(Heigh  !).  They  do  not  speak  to  each  other  as  "  husband  " 
or  "  wife,"  that  is,  by  the  words  in  their  language  with  those 
meanings.  People  do  not  generally  use  a  person's  name  to 
commence  a  conversation  with  them,  but  seek  a  favourable 
moment  to  catch  their  eye,  or  attract  their  attention  by  some 
remark,  and  then  continue  speaking." 


Perforation  of  the  Septum 

In  the  Kurnai  tribe  the  perforation  of  the  septum  of  the 
nose  was  usually  made  when  the  boy  was  growing  up,  but 
some  time  before  he  was  initiated.  Some  of  the  men  might 
notice  him  as  growing  up,  or  his  young  men  friends  might 
say  to  him,  "  You  ought  to  have  Ngrung ;  it  won't  hurt  you." 
Ngrung  is  short  for  Ngrung-kong,  or  nose -hole.  If  he 
consents,  he  lies  down  on  his  back,  and  his  friend  takes  hold  of 
the  septum  of  his  nose,  extends  it,  moistens  it  with  saliva, 
and  then  rapidly  pierces  it  with  a  sharp  bone  instrument. 
The  patient  must  not  show  any  sign  of  feeling  pain.  This 
being  done,  he  jumps  up  and  extends  his  arms  out  quickly 
from  the  shoulder,  and  jerks  each  leg  in  succession.  This 
proceeding  is  supposed  to  aid  the  Ngrung-kong  in  causing 

1  Tom  Petrie.  2  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  741 

him    to   grow  big   and    strong.      A  peg   called    Guinbat-t   is 
left  in  until  the  wound  is  healed. 

The  perforation  in  the  septum  of  the  nose  in  the 
Wurunjerri  tribe  was  made  when  the  child  was  about  twelve 
years  of  age.  It  is  called  Ilbi-jerri.  The  old  men  performed 
the  operation  for  the  boys,  and  the  old  women  for  the  girls, 
and  it  was  in  the  winter -time  that  this  was  done.  The 
parents  would  say  to  the  child,  "  You  must  get  ready  your 
bone  ;  make  it  nice  and  sharp,  so  that  a  hole  can  be  made  in 
your  nose,"  After  the  bone  had  been  pushed  through  the 
nose  and  left  there,  the  child  scraped  a  small  hole  in  the 
ground,  placed  in  it  some  stones  heated  in  the  fire,  covered 
it  with  some  earth,  and  poured  water  on  it.  It  then  held  its 
head,  covered  with  an  opossum  skin  rug,  over  the  steam  until 
the  peg  became  loose,  and  could  be  turned  round.  It  did 
this  every  night  and  morning  till  the  place  was  healed. 

The  perforation  was  not  made  by  the  Yuin  till  the  boy 
had  been  initiated,  and  was  permitted  to  return  to  the  camp 
from  his  probation  in  the  bush.  The  nose -hole  is  called 
Guraiu,  and  the  nose-peg  Kurt-bagur. 

At  Port  Stephens  the  blacks  used  to  pin  their  blankets 
across  their  chests  with  the  bone  nose-peg.  When  not  in  use 
it  was  kept  in  the  nose.^ 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe  the  perforation  was  made  with  the 
point  of  a  spear.- 

Formerly  the  Chepara  bored  the  septum  of  the  nose  with 
a  pointed  kangaroo  bone,  the  perforation  being  kept  open  by 
a  rounded  piece  of  wood,  which  was  frequently  turned  round 
in  the  hole,  water  being  allowed  to  trickle  through.  This 
practice  has  died  out  now,  quite  old  men  being  seen  without 
the  nose  bored.-^  These  are  only  a  few  instances  of  a  very 
wide  Australian  practice. 

Opossum  Skin  Rugs 

The  Kurnai  in  their  primitive  state  usually  went  about 
without  any  covering.  But  they  made  what  are  now  called 
"  opossum   rugs."      These  were   made  of  the   dried   pelts  of 

1   W.  Scott.  -  Tom  I'etrie.  ^  J.  Gibson. 

3  li 


742 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


the  opossum  sewed  together  with  sinew.  They  did  not 
dress  the  skins  but  merely  dried  them,  and  to  make  them 
more  ph'able  cut  markings  on  the  skin    side  by  means  of 


1  k;.  50.  — m.\kkin(;s  wlich  wkrk  madk  i  i>on  thk  skin  sidks  of  oi'ossum; 

SKINS    BY    TIIK    KIKNAI    WHEN    THEY   SEWED   THKM    'rCX;KTHER    AS   COVERINGS, 

mussel  shells  {iianduwung).  These  markings  are  called 
waribruk,  and  each  man  had  his  own.  In  Fig.  50  are 
given  examples  of  the  waribruk  used  by  men  known  to  me. 


Flattening  the  Nose 
A   curious   practice  obtains  in  some   tribes,  namely,  the 


VARIOUS  CUSTOMS 


743 


flattening  of  the  child's  nose  by  its  mother  to  improve  its 
appearance.  This  v/as  done  in  the  Yuin  tribe,  as  I  was 
informed,  to  make  the  children  look  nice  ;  also  in  the 
Wiimbaio,  and  in  the  tribe  about  Maitland  fifty  years  ago.^ 
It  is  possibly  more  common  than  one  might  have  expected, 
showing  that  this  marked  feature  of  the  aboriginal  physiog- 
nomy is  thought  to  be  beautiful. 

Raised  Scars 

The  practice  of  causing  raised  scars  on  the  upper  parts  of 
the  body  seems  to  be  universal   in  Australia,  but  among  the 


KIG.    51. — KLRNAI    WOMAN,    SHOWING    KAISKD    SCARS   ON    HACK. 


exceptions  to  the  practice  was  the  Kurnai  tribe.  Before  the 
occupation  of  Gippsland  by  the  whites,  the  young  men  were 
not  scarred,  excepting  a  very  few,  who  had  met  the  Manero 
Brayerak  and  had  followed  their  fashion  of  ornamentation. 
One  of  the  earliest  settlers  in  North  Gippsland  "  told  me 
that  when  he  first  saw  the  blackfellows  at  Buchan  {Bukkmi- 
niunji)  they  were  tiot  scarred  as  was  the  Manero  blackboy 

1  C.  Naseby.  ^  John  C.  ^^flcleod. 


744        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

he  had  with  him,  according  to  the  custom  of  his  tribe.  On 
making  friends  with  the  Kurnai,  one  of  them  was  per- 
suaded to  be  similarly  ornamented  ;  he  was  gashed  on 
each  arm,  and  subsequently  a  number  of  others  followed 
his  example. 

After  rain  has  fallen — following  one  of  the  rain-making 
ceremonies  of  the  Dieri — there  are  always  some  who  undergo 
the  operation  called  Chiu-bari^  which  is  the  cutting  of  the 
skin  of  the  chest  and  arms  with  a  sharp  piece  of  flint. 

The  wound,  which  is  through  the  skin,  is  then  tapped 
with  a  flat  stick  to  increase  the  flow  of  blood,  and  red  ochre 
is  rubbed  in,  producing  raised  scars.  The  operation  does 
not  appear  to  be  very  painful,  as  the  patient  laughs  and 
jokes  all  the  time.  The  reason  given  for  this  practice  is 
that  they  are  pleased  with  the  rain  and  that  there  is  a  con- 
nection between  the  rain  and  the  scars. 

Even  little  children  crowd  round  the  operator,  patiently 
waiting  for  their  turn,  and  after  they  have  been  operated  upon, 
run  away,  expanding  their  little  chests  and  arms,  and  singing 
for  the  rain  to  beat  on  them.  However,  on  the  following 
day,  when  their  wounds  are  stiff  and  sore,  they  are  not  so 
well  pleased.^ 

Although  it  is  generally  said  that  the  raised  scars  do  not 
indicate  the  tribe  and  are  merely  ornamental,  there  are  some 
instances  which  show  that  there  are  certain  cases  in  which 
the  contrary  is  the  case.  In  the  Yerkla  tribe  the  cicatrices 
are  made  at  the  initiation  ceremonies  by  the  medicine-men, 
and  a  legend  relates  how  these  scars  came  to  be  made  first.^ 
This  legend  is  given  in  the  chapter  on  the  initiation 
ceremonies  of  the  western  type,  Chapter  X. 

A  somewhat  different  version  of  the  legend  says  that 
long  ago  an  immense  bird,  larger  than  the  brown  eagle-hawk, 
killed  and  devoured  all  the  tribe,  except  two  men  and  one 
woman,  who  to  save  themselves  went  out  at  night  and  killed 
the  bird.  Afterwards  they  were  attacked  by  a  hostile  tribe, 
but  could  not  be  speared,  because  they  would  jump  up  and 
appear  somewhere  else.  Finally  they  jumped  so  high  that 
they  never  came  down  again,  and  the  two  men  are  dark 
*  S.  Gason,  ^  D.  Elphinstone  Roe. 


VARIOUS  CUSTOMS 


745 


spots  seen  in  the  Milky  Way.  It  is  not  known  what  became 
of  the  woman.  This  version  was  given  by  Mr.  H.  WiUiams, 
who  informed  me,  in  answer  to  an  inquiry,  that  the  scars 
have  no  meaning,  and   are  merely  ornamental.      Assuming 


FIG.    52. — YUIN    MAN    WITH   RAISED    SCAKS   ON    CHEST,    IN    CEKEMONIAL    DRESS 


that  the  first  given  legend  is  correctly  reported,  the 
cicatrices  are  significant  of  the  sub-class  names,  and  are  as 
follows. 

In  the  Budera  sub-class  there  are  three  cicatrices  running 
from  breast  to  breast,  and  three  on  each  shoulder.      In  the 


746        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Kura  sub-class  there  are  one  horizontally  between  the  breasts 
and  three  vertically  on  the  side  of  the  biceps  of  each  arm. 
In  the  Budu  sub-class  there  are  three  horizontally  between 
the  breasts,  and  below  a  line  which  would  pass  through  the 
nipples.  Two  above  these  inclined  at  an  angle  from  each 
other  like  the  letter  V,  and  five  horizontal  lines  on  each 
biceps.  In  the  Wenung  sub-class  there  are  three  perpen- 
dicular between  the  breasts.  The  scars  are  cut  by  the 
medicine-men  {Mobunbai)} 

In  the  Yuin  tribe  the  scars  cut  upon  the  body  were  not 
made  until  after  the  initiation  ceremonies.  In  the  case  of 
one  man  who  had  cicatrices  vertically  round  the  upper  arm, 
he  said  that  they  were  made  in  that  manner  to  cause 
boomerangs  to  glance  off.  This  is  of  course  merely  a 
preventive  charm.     Scars  are  cut  on  both  boys  and  girls. 

In  Frazer's  Island  (Queensland),  a  boy  of  the  White  Cliff 
tribe  was  marked  with  five  vertical  scars  down  the  centre  of 
the  chest,  and  he  pointed  out  to  me  that  he  differed  from 
those  at  Bundaberg  in  so  far  that  they  had  three  horizon- 
tally round  the  front  of  the  body 

In  the  Moreton  Bay  tribe  scars  were  cut  when  the  boys 
were  made  Kippurs.  The  scars  are  two  or  three  inches  apart, 
just  below  the  nipples,  and  extending  across  the  breast. 
When  the  boy  is  older,  other  scars  are  cut  lower  down. 
While  these  cuts  are  being  made  by  one  old  man,  another 
one  claps  his  hands  over  the  ears  of  the  patient  to  keep  the 
pain  away,  and  roars  out  a  chant.  In  the  Bunya  tribe  there 
are  three  horizontal  cuts  above  each  nipple.  The  Ipswich 
tribe  had  cuts  vertically  on  each  arm  below  the  shoulder. 
Each  tribe  was  differently  marked.  There  were  also  marks 
made  on  the  back  in  all  of  these  tribes,  but  these  were 
mostly  done  when  mourning  for  death.  The  cuts  were 
rubbed  in  with  the  charcoal  of  the  Bloodwood  tree.^ 

Mutilations 

In  the  coastal  branch  of  the  Turrbal  tribe  each  woman 
had  the  two  joints  of  one  little  finger  taken  off,  when  a  girl, 
^  D.  Elphinstone  Roe.  ^  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  747 

by  tying  a  cobweb  round  it.  When  the  joint  mortifies,  the 
hand  is  held  in  an  ant-bed  for  an  hour  or  so,  for  the  joint  to 
be  eaten  off.  This  is  the  fishing  branch  of  the  tribe,  and 
this  is  done  to  distinguish  its  women  from  those  of  the 
other  branches.  It  is  not  done  to  give  them  any  power  of 
catching  fish.^ 

This  practice  of  mutilating  the  little  finger  of  the 
woman's  hand  is  recorded  by  Mr.  H.  E.  Aldridge  as 
obtaining  far  along  the  coast  both  north  and  south  of 
Maryborough,  and,  according  to  him,  it  always  indicated  a 
coast  woman.  But  the  custom  has  evidently  a  much  wider 
range,  for  in  writing  about  the  Port  Stephens  tribe,  Mr. 
Robert  Dawson  says,  "  A  mother  amputates  the  little  finger 
of  the  right  hand  of  one  of  her  female  children  as  soon  as  it 
is  born,  in  token  of  its  appointment  to  the  office  of  fisher- 
woman  to  the  family." 

In  the  Dalebura  tribe  several  instances  were  noticed  in 
which  the  little  finger  of  the  left  hand  had  been  severed  at 
the  second  joint,  but  no  reason  for  it  could  be  ascertained.^ 

The  Children 

A  Bunya-Bunya  woman  practises  the  following  custom 
on  her  little  boy.  She  lays  him  on  his  back  on  the  ground, 
puts  her  two  hands  on  his  shoulders  and  pulls  his  hands 
gently  down  to  his  heels,  making  a  peculiar  clucking  noise 
with  her  mouth.  This  is  to  make  him  grow,  and  is  done 
three  or  four  times  a  day,  especially  when  he  wakes  in  the 
morning.  A  woman  with  a  boy  child  on  her  lap  or  close 
to  her  is  liable  to  severe  punishment  if  she  does  not  see  that 
the  child  is  turned  away  from  a  man  who  is  walking  towards 
it.  Should  she  not  be  looking,  and  a  man  is  coming 
towards  the  front  of  the  boy,  the  man  will  stop  and  say 
pretty  sharply,  "  Turn  that  boy ! "  and  the  woman  at  once 
turns  the  boy  with  hLs  back  to  the  approaching  man.  This 
is  to  prevent  illness,  the  man  being  supposed  to  be  able,  if 
he  wishes,  to  put  a  "  stone  "  into  any  one.  A  woman  will 
also  rub  her  hand  under  her  arm   and  then   rub  her  son's 

'  Tom  I'etrie.  ^  Op,  cit.  p.  314.  ^  R.  Christison. 


748        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 


eyes  with  her  hand  to  give  him  good  sight.  She  will  also 
plait  a  hair  cord  to  put  on  her  son  when  about  three  years 
old.  It  is  put  under  each  arm  and  round  the  neck,  being 
fastened  together  on  the  chest  and  between  the  shoulder- 
blades.  This  is  done  that  he  may  develop  muscle  and 
strength  in  the  back  and  chest,  and  it  is  generally  kept  on 
till  he  is  made  into  a  man,  at  about  the  age  of  puberty.^ 

A  curious  method  of  counting  the  children  obtained  in 
the  VVakelbura  tribe.  A  father  having  five  children  would 
in  speaking  of  or  calling  them  use  the  following  terms  : 
first  born,  Tayling  (thumb)  ;  second  born,  Burbi  (first 
finger);  third  born,  Y outgo  (second  finger);  fourth  born, 
Baljinbura  (third  finger) ;  fifth  born,  Nallembrew  (little 
finger).  The  exceptions  to  the  above  are  that  if  there  is 
only  one  child,  and  it  be  a  boy,  and  if  he  happen  to  be 
small,  the  mother's  brother's  and  sister's  children  may  call  him 
Nallemhrezi.\  as  a  joke  ;  but  his  parents  do  not  join  in  this 
humour.  They  call  him  Walbali  (boy)  till  initiation,  when 
he  becomes  Kaula  (young  man) ;  if  a  girl,  she  is  called 
Umbel  (girl)  till  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  when  she  is 
called  by  them  Ungiiie  (young  woman)." 

Infanticide 

Infanticide  is  practised  by  the  Mining  to  some  extent, 
the  mode  of  killing  being  by  starvation.  After  a  few  days 
of  short  commons  the  child  becomes  peevish  and  trouble- 
some, and  in  consequence  more  neglected,  being  placed  by 
itself  away  from  the  camp  and  fires,  and  is  said  to  be 
afflicted  with  Muparn  (magic).  When  death  ends  its 
sufferings,  Muparn  is  the  cause.  The  reason  they  give 
for  this  practice  is  that  if  their  numbers  increased  too 
rapidly  there  would  not  be  enough  food  for  everybody. 
Yet  they  are  very  fond  of  their  offspring,  and  very  indulgent 
to  those  they  keep,  rarely  striking  them,  and  a  mother 
would  give  all  the  food  she  had  to  her  children,  going 
hungry  herself. 

Infants  are  kept  well  greased,  and  much  fat  is  used  by 
1  H.  E.  Aldridge.  2  J.  C.  Muirhead. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  749 

the  adults  on  their  own  bodies.  A  woman  kisses  her 
children  by  placing  her  lips  upon  it  and  blowing,  making  a 
loud  noise.^ 

In  hard  summers  the  new-born  children  were  all  eaten 
by  the  Kaura  tribe  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Adelaide  ;  this 
might  be  inferred  from  the  remarkable  gaps  that  appear  in 
the  ages  of  the  children.- 

In  the  Tongaranka  tribe  the  practice  of  infanticide  was 
common,  because  a  baby  was  frequently  too  much  trouble 
to  look  after,  and  it  was  often  the  mother  who  killed  it. 
But  it  was  not  done  until  the  family  consisted  of  three  or 
four  ;  but  after  that  too  much  work  in  hunting  had  to  be 
done  to  keep  the  family  in  food.'^ 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  infants  were  killed  in  the  old 
times,  no  difference  being  made  between  boys  and  girls.  If 
a  couple  had  a  child,  either  boy  or  girl,  say  ten  years  old, 
and  a  baby  was  then  born  to  them,  it  might  be  killed  and 
cooked  for  its  elder  brother  or  sister  to  eat,  in  order  to  make 
him  or  her  strong  by  feeding  on  the  muscle  of  the  infant. 
The  mother  killed  the  infant  by  striking  its  head  against 
the  shoulder  of  its  elder  brother  or  sister. 

In  the  Mukjarawaint  tribe  the  children  belonged  to  the 
grandparents,  though  the  parents  had  the  care  of  them.  If, 
for  instance,  a  boy  was  born  and  then  a  girl,  the  father's 
parents  might  take  them,  or  the  mother's  parents,  and  so 
also  with  another  couple  of  children.  If  then  another  child 
was  born  and  one  of  the  grandparents  took  it,  it  would  be 
kept.  If  not,  it  was  killed,  there  being  too  many  children. 
The  grandparents  had  to  decide  whether  a  child  was  to  be 
kept  alive  or  not.  If  not,  then  either  the  grandfather  or 
the  father  killed  it,  by  striking  it  against  the  mother's  knee, 
and  then  knocking  it  on  the  head.  Then  the  child  was 
roasted  and  eaten  by  the  grandparents,  their  brothers  and 
grandchildren,  but  its  parents  did  not  eat  of  it.  Occasionally 
friends  were  invited  to  join  in  the  feast.  The  father  could 
not  order  the  child  to  be  killed  ;  for,  if  he  did  so,  the  grand- 
parents would  raise  a  party  against  him  and  he  would  have 
to  fight  them. 

'   H.  Williams.  ''  Dr.  M'Kinlay.  3  J.  W.  Boultbee. 


750        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

In  all  the  tribes  of  the  Wotjo  nation,  and  also  the  Ta- 
tathi  and  other  tribes  on  the  Murray  River  frontage,  when 
a  child  was  weak  and  sickly  they  used  to  kill  its  infant 
brother  or  sister,  and  feed  it  with  the  flesh  to  make  it  strong. 

According  to  Buckley,  if  a  family  increased  too  rapidly 
in  the  Wudthaurung  tribe,  as,  for  instance,  where  a  woman 
had  a  child  within  twelve  months  of  the  previous  one,  there 
was  a  consultation  in  the  tribe  as  to  whether  it  should  live 
or  not.  If  the  father  insisted  on  it  being  spared,  they  did 
not  persist  in  its  destruction,  particularly  if  a  female.^ 

Infanticide  in  the  Kurnai  tribe  arose  through  the 
difficulty  in  carrying  a  baby  when  there  were  other  children, 
especially  when  the  next  youngest  was  not  able  to  walk. 
According  to  the  statements  made  to  me  by  the  Kurnai,  it 
sometimes  happened  when  a  child  was  about  to  be  born 
the  father  would  say  to  his  wife,  "  We  have  too  many 
children  to  carry  about — best  leave  this  one,  when  it  is 
born,  behind  in  the  camp."  On  this  the  new-born  child 
was  left  lying  in  the  camp  and  the  family  moved  elsewhere. 
The  Kurnai  drew  this  distinction,  that  they  never  heard  of 
parents  killing  their  children,  but  only  of  their  leaving  new- 
born infants  behind. 

In  the  tribes  about  Maryborough  (Queensland)  infanticide 
was  practised  by  leaving  the  child  behind  when  born,  either 
on  the  ground  or  on  a  sheet  of  bark.  But  infants  were  not 
killed  by  violence,  and  no  difference  was  made  between  boys 
and  girls.  This  leaving  behind  or  deserting  the  new-born 
infant  was  because  of  the  trouble  it  caused  where  a  woman 
had  other  children,  and  it  was  almost  always  done  as  regards 
a  girl's  first  child.  If  one  saw  a  baby,  within  a  day  or  two 
of  its  birth,  to  have  been  rubbed  over  with  red  ochre  and 
burned  bark  of  the  Bloodwood  tree,  one  could  be  quite  sure 
that  it  was  safe.  Otherwise  it  would  disappear,  being 
abandoned  somewhere.^ 

Cannibalism 
In  speaking  of  cannabalism  in  these  tribes,  a  distinction 

'   Morgan,  op.  cit.  p.  52.  ^  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  751 

must  be  drawn  between  the  eating  of  the  flesh  of  slain 
enemies  of  another  tribe  and  of  those  of  the  same  tribe. 
The  former  appears  to  have  had  in  it  an  element  of  revenge, 
while  the  latter  is  mostly  ceremonial.  But  a  further  distinc- 
tion may  be  drawn  as  to  the  eating  of  the  caul  and  kidney 
fat,  in  which  an  element  of  magic  usually  was  present,  and 
which  was  practised  on  both  the  slain  and  the  tribesman. 

The  cannibalism  practised  by  the  Dieri  is  part  of  the 
burial  ceremonial.  I  have  already  described  these  ceremonies, 
but  may  here  repeat  what  has  been  said  as  to  the  eating  of 
part  of  the  corpse.  When  the  body  is  lowered  into  the 
grave,  an  old  man  who  is  the  nearest  relation  to  the  deceased 
present,  cuts  off  all  the  fat  adhering  to  the  face,  thighs,  arms, 
and  stomach,  and  passes  it  round  to  be  swallowed  by  the 
relatives.  The  order  in  which  they  partake  of  it  is  as 
follows  : — The  mother  eats  of  her  children,  and  the  children 
of  their  mother  ;  a  man  eats  of  his  sister's  husband  and  of 
his  brother's  wife  ;  mother's  brothers,  mother's  sisters,  sister's 
children,  mother's  parents,  or  daughter's  children  are  also 
eaten  of;  but  the  father  does  not  eat  of  his  child  nor  the 
children  of  their  sire.  The  relatives  eat  of  the  fat  in  order 
that  they  may  be  no  longer  sad.' 

The  Dieri,  Yaurorka,  Yantruwunta,  and  Marula  eat  only 
the  fat  of  the  dead,  but  other  tribes  eat  of  the  flesh  also. 
Such  are  the  Tangara,  who  carry  the  remains  of  the  deceased 
with  them  ;  and  whenever  they  feel  sorrow  for  the  dead,  eat 
some  of  the  flesh,  until  nothing  remains  but  the  bones.^ 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  the  arms  and  legs  of  enemies 
were  cut  off,  cooked,  and  eaten,  no  other  part  of  the  body 
being  used.  In  the  raids  on  other  tribes  by  the  Wotjobaluk 
the  skin  was  eaten. 

The  Kulin  tribes,  for  instance  the  Jajaurung,  cut  the 
flesh  from  off  the  legs  and  arms  of  killed  enemies  and 
carried  it  on  their  spear-points  to  the  camp  to  be  eaten. 

The  Bunurong  not  only  did  this,  but,  according  to  their 
neighbours  the  Wurunjerri,  they  also  drank  the  blood  of  their 
slain  enemies. 

*  S.  Gason,  O.  Siebert, 


752        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

Mr.  Hugh  Murray,  who  occupied  country  near  Colac  in 
South-western  Victoria  in  1837,  says,  that  some  of  the 
Witaurong  tribe,  that  is,  the  Wudthaurung,  having  murdered 
an  old  man  and  a  child  of  the  Colac  tribe,  brought  with 
them  on  the  ends  of  their  spears  portions  of  their  flesh, 
which  he  saw  them  eat  with  great  exultation  during  the 
evening.' 

The  Kurnai  ate  the  flesh  of  their  enemies  only  if  they 
were  of  other  tribes,  for  Kurnai  did  not  eat  Kurnai.  It  was 
not  the  whole  of  the  body  that  was  eaten,  but  the  muscles 
of  the  arms  and  legs,  and  the  skin  of  the  thighs  and  of  the 
sides  of  the  body. 

Several  of  the  Kurnai  have  told  me  of  occasions  when 
this  occurred.  My  informants  said  that  once  when  they 
were  young  men  they  accompanied  others  in  a  raid  on  the 
Manero  Brayerak.  One  man  was  killed,  and  his  legs  were 
cut  off  and  carried  to  their  camp,  where  the  old  men 
roasted  them,  and  shared  the  flesh  among  the  party.  They 
said  that  the  flesh  tasted  better  than  beef.  Among  the 
Thcddora  and  Ngarigo  it  was  the  custom  to  eat  parts  of 
those  they  killed  in  raids,  but  not  of  those  who  were  killed 
in  any  ceremonial  combats  between  sections  of  the  same 
tribe.  The  parts  eaten  were  the  hands  and  feet,  and  this 
was  accompanied  with  expressions  of  contempt  for  the 
person  killed.  Those  were  their  real  enemies,  and  in  eating 
them  they  acquired,  as  they  thought,  some  part  of  their 
qualities  and  courage." 

In  the  Turrbal  tribe,  when  in  one  of  their  ceremonial 
combats  which  follow  the  initiation  ceremonies  some  man 
was  killed,  he  was  eaten  by  those  of  his  tribe  who  were 
present,  each  tribal  group  sitting  at  its  own  fire.  A  great 
medicine-man  {Kundrt)  singed  the  body  all  over  with  a  fire- 
stick,  causing  the  skin  to  turn  copper-coloured.  The  body 
was  then  laid  face  downwards  and  opened  down  the  back 
with  a  stone  knife,  then  opened  down  the  front,  and  skinned. 
All  the  entrails  with  the  heart  and  lungs  were  buried,  and 
blackened  sticks  tied  with  grass  were  laid  over  the  burial 
place,  which  henceforth  was  so  sacred  that  no  one  went  near 

1  Letters  of  Victorian  Pioneers.  ^  J.  Bulmer. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  753 

it,  unless  it  were  some  one  of  the  old  medicine-men.  The 
medicine-man  who  skinned  the  body  cut  off  pieces  of  the 
flesh,  which  he  threw  to  the  several  parties  sitting  round,  who 
cooked  and  ate  it.  The  principal  medicine-men  rubbed  the 
fat  over  their  own  bodies.  The  reason  given  is  that  they 
eat  him  because  they  knew  him  and  were  fond  of  him,  and 
they  now  knew  where  he  was,  and  his  flesh  would  not  stink. 
His  mother  carried  the  skin  and  bones  for  months  with  her, 
and  when  one  tribal  group  met  another,  the  old  woman 
would  lift  the  opossum  rug  off  the  skin,  which  was  placed  in 
a  "  humpy "  (hut).  The  friends  of  the  deceased  mourned 
and  cut  themselves  with  tomahawks,  while  the  others 
restrained  them  from  injuring  themselves.^ 

When  a  man  is  killed  in  one  of  the  ceremonial  fights  in 
the  tribes  about  Maryborough  (Queensland),  his  friends  skin 
him  and  eat  him.  He  is  skinned  by  one  of  the  old  men  (his 
father,  if  alive),  or  his  father's  brother,  or  some  other  relative. 
The  body  is  first  of  all  prepared  by  passing  a  burning  fire- 
stick  all  over  it,  after  which  the  outer  skin  peels  off,  leaving 
the  corpse  nearly  as  white  as  a  white  man.  This  appearance 
seems  to  have  caused  the  blacks  to  think  the  first  white  men 
they  saw  were  their  friends  returned  to  life. 

The  skin  is  then  taken  off,  with  the  nails  and  hair  left  on. 
The  body  is  distributed  among  the  male  friends  of  the 
deceased  and  the  old  women  as  far  as  it  will  go,  who  roast 
and  eat  the  flesh.  The  meat  looks  like  horseflesh,  and 
smells,  when  being  cooked  on  the  fires,  like  beefsteak.  The 
little  fat  there  is  on  the  kidneys  is  rubbed  on  the  points  of 
the  spears  of  his  relations,  and  the  kidneys  are  stuck  on  the 
points  of  two  spears.  It  is  thought  that  this  will  make  the 
spears  extremely  deadly  when  thrown,  and  the  deceased  is 
eaten  in  order  that  his  virtues  as  a  warrior  may  go  into  those 
who  partake  of  him. 

These  people  never  eat  any  part  of  their  enemies  whom 
they  kill.  Blackboys  belonging  to  my  correspondent,  who 
had  been  killed  by  them,  were  chopped  up  into  little  bits 
and  left  lying  on  logs.^ 

Mr.  Andrew  Lang  in  his  work  The  Making  of  Religion  ^ 
>  Tom  Petrie.  '^  Harry  E.  Aldridge.  ^  P.  235. 


754        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

notes  a  passage  from  Dr.  Dunmore  Lang/  who  gives  it  on 
the  authority  of  his  son,  Mr.  G.  D.  Lang,  who,  as  the 
former  puts  it,  "  happened  to  reside  a  few  months  in  the 
Wide  Bay  district."  The  passage  is  as  follows :  "  At 
certain  triennial  gatherings  of  some  tribes  of  Queensland, 
young  girls  are  slain  in  sacrifice  to  propitiate  some  evil 
divinity,  and  their  bodies  likewise  are  subjected  to  the 
horrid  rite  of  cannibalism.  Girls  are  marked  for  sacrifice 
months  before  the  event  takes  place  by  the  old  men  of 
the  tribe." 

When  I  read  this  I  remembered  that  some  forty  years 
ago  I  had  heard  a  "  bush  yarn  "  that  when  tribes  met  at  the 
Bunya  feasts  the  people  became  so  meat  hungry  after  a  long 
course  of  feasting  on  the  fruit  of  the  Bunya  tree,  that  they 
killed  a  "  fat  gin  "  and  ate  her.  Mr.  G.  D.  Lang's  statements 
appeared  to  me  to  be  an  embellishment  of  this  "  bush  yarn," 
moreover,  I  disbelieved  the  *'  sacrifice  to  propitiate  some  evil 
divinity  "  as  being  contrary  to  all  that  I  know  of  the  native 
tribes,  and  I  thought  that  the  statements  probably  rested  on 
the  distorted  account  of  the  eating  of  those  persons  who  arc 
killed  in  the  ceremonial  combats  that  take  place  at  these 
triennial  gatherings. 

I  have  also  found  the  following  reference  to  canni- 
balism at  these  meetings.  R.  Brough  Smyth  says,'^  "  When 
tribes  assembled  to  eat  the  fruit  of  the  Bunya-Bunya,  they 
were  not  permitted  to  take  any  game,  and  at  length  the 
craving  for  flesh  was  so  intense  that  they  were  impelled  to 
kill  one  of  their  number  in  order  that  their  appetites  might 
be  satisfied." 

Mr.  E.  M.  Curr  makes  the  following  statement  ^  about 
what  occurred  at  his  station  called  Gobungo  in  the  Bunya- 
Bunya  country.  The  season  of  the  Bunya  nuts  was  then 
at  its  height,  and  the  maj6rity  of  the  blacks  present  were 
strangers  invited  by  the  Kabi  to  feast  on  the  plentiful  harvest 
of  nuts.  But  they  were  forbidden  to  help  themselves  to  any 
fish,  flesh,  or  fowl  within  the  territory.      After  some  weeks 

'    Queensland,  1864,  p.  385. 

2   The  Australian  Aborigines,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxviii 

^   Op.  cit.  vol.  iii.  p.   120. 


VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  755 


of  unbroken  vegetable  diet  an  intense  craving  for  animal 
food,  it  seems,  came  on.  Some  of  the  men  killed  a  woman 
and  satisfied  their  wild  hunger  by  eating  her.  Shortly 
afterwards  he  heard  of  a  little  girl  being  killed  and  eaten. 

In  order  to  obtain  some  further  information,  I  sent  the 
above  extracts  to  Mr.  Tom  Petrie  and  Mr.  Harry  Aldridge, 
both  of  whom  have  an  intimate  acquaintance  not  only  with 
the  tribes  who  assembled  at  the  Bunya  feasts,  but  have 
themselves  been  at  these  meetings. 

Mr.  Tom  Petrie  in  reply  said  that  he  never  in  all  his 
experience  came  across  such  a  thing  as  sacrifice.  Strangers 
at  feasts  were  always  treated  well,  and  looked  after,  and  had 
lots  of  game,  eggs,  etc.,  in  fact,  just  what  the  others  had.  If 
any  one  died  in  good  condition,  or  if  some  one  was  killed  in 
a  fight,  then  they  were  most  surely  eaten.  That  "  flesh 
hunger  "  spoken  of  was  absurd.  Such  things  did  not  happen 
in  the  part  of  the  Bunya-Bunya  country  he  had  been  in. 
Mr.  Petrie  considered  that  the  woman  who  Mr.  Curr  says 
was  killed  and  eaten  was  probably  killed  in  a  fight,  and 
under  such  circumstances  would  most  certainly  be  eaten. 

Mr.  Aldridge  informs  me  he  had  seen  men,  women, 
and  children  eaten  at  the  tribal  meetings  in  the  Bunya 
country.  The  men  and  women  had  been  killed  in  a  fight, 
the  children  generally  by  some  accident.  In  fact,  any  one 
killed  in  a  fight,  or  by  accident,  or  dying  in  good  condition, 
was  eaten. 

The  idea  of"  flesh  hunger  "  is  absurd,  because  at  the  feasts 
all  sorts  of  game  was  eaten,  and  the  guests  had  the  same 
meals  as  their  hosts,  and  were  always  treated  well.  He  says 
that  he  knows  the  Mary  River  side,  and  Mr.  Petrie  the 
Brisbane  side,  and  with  their  knowledge  of  the  language  and 
habits  of  the  nat'ves,  he  considers  that  it  would  be  impossible 
for  the  alleged  human  sacrifices  to  have  occurred  without  their 
cognisance. 

It  seems  clear  that  even  if  cases  did  occur  of  women  and 
children  being  killed  for  cannibalistic  reasons,  such  cases 
must  have  been  most  exceptional,  and  the  statement  that 
young  girls  were  marked  for  sacrifice  by  the  old  men  and 
sacrificed   to   propitiate  an   evil   divinity  may  be   put    aside 


756        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

as  absolutely  without  foundation.  The  Australian  aborigines 
do  not  recognise  any  divinity,  good  or  evil,  nor  do  they 
offer  any  kind  of  sacrifice,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  goes. 

Food  Rules 

When  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the  Kurnai  tribe,  I 
observed  that  a  man  provided  food  for  his  wife's  father. 
This  custom  is  called  Neborak.  The  food  consists  of  a 
certain  part  of  the  daily  catch  of  game  procured  by  him.  I 
found,  for  instance,  that  when  he  caught  say  five  opossums, 
he  gave  two  to  his  wife's  father,  and  two  to  her  brothers. 
On  making  inquiries  and  observing  further,  I  found  that 
food,  including  in  that  term  all  game  caught  by  the  men 
and  all  vegetable  food  obtained  by  the  women,  was  shared 
with  others  according  to  well-understood  rules.  Thus  there 
was  a  certain  community  in  food,  and  there  was  an  acknow- 
ledged obligation  to  supply  certain  persons  with  it.  The 
following  particulars  which  I  ascertained  and  noted  will  show 
how  it  worked  among  the  Kurnai  and  other  tribes. 

It  is  assumed  that  a  man  kills  a  kangaroo  at  a  distance 
from  the  camp.  Two  other  men  are  with  him,  but  are  too 
late  to  assist  in  killing  it.  The  distance  from  the  camp 
being  considerable,  the  kangaroo  is  cooked  before  being 
carried  home.  While  the  first  man  lights  a  fire,  the  others 
cut  up  the  game.  The  three  cook  the  entrails  and  eat  them. 
The  following  distribution  is  made.  Men  2  and  3  receive 
one  leg  and  the  tail,  and  one  leg  and  part  of  the  haunch, 
because  they  were  present,  and  had  helped  to  cut  the  game 
up.  Man  number  i  received  the  remainder,  which  he  carried 
to  the  camp.  The  head  and  back  are  taken  by  his  wife  to 
her  parents,  and  the  remainder  goes  to  his  parents.  If  he 
is  short  of  meat,  he  keeps  a  little,  but  if,  for  in.stance,  he  has 
an  opossum,  he  gives  it  all  away.  His  mother,  if  she  has 
caught  some  fish,  may  give  him  some,  or  his  wife's  parents 
may  give  him  some  of  their  .share,  and  they  al.so  would  in 
such  a  case  give  her  .some  next  morning.  The  children  are 
in  all  cases  well  cared  for  by  their  grandparents. 

The  giving  of  food  by  the  wife's  parents  on  the  following 


VARIOUS  CUSTOMS 


757 


morning  is  founded  on  the  assumption  that  their  son-in-law 
provided  for  his  family  on  the  preceding  day,  but  may  want 
some    food    before    going    out    to    hunt    afresh.      The    food 


FIG.    53. — A    KURNAI    MAN    CLIMBING    A    TREE    IN    SEARCH    OK    AN    OPOSSUM. 


received  by  the  wife's  parents  and  by  the  husband's  parents 
is  shared  by  them  with  their  family. 

If  a  wombat  were  killed  at  a  distance  from  the  camp,  its 
intestines  would  be  taken  out  and  the  animal  skewered  up 
and  carried  home.      If  it  was,  however,  close  at  hand,  help 

3C 


758        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

might  be  obtained  and  the  game  carried  whole.  All  the 
animal  is  sent  to  the  wife's  parents,  this  animal  being  con- 
sidered as  the  best  of  food.  The  wife's  father  distributes  it 
to  the  whole  camp,  but  he  does  not  give  any  to  the  hunter 
unless  the  animal  has  been  carried  in  whole,  for  otherwise  he 
is  expected  to  have  eaten  of  the  entrails,  and  therefore  not  to 
be  hungry.  On  the  following  morning,  however,  he  sends 
some  of  it  by  his  daughter  to  her  husband. 

A  native  sloth  bear  is  either  cooked  where  caught,  or 
carried  home  raw,  according  to  the  distance.  If  one  is  killed, 
it  is  given  to  the  wife's  parents  ;  if  two,  one  to  the  wife's 
parents,  and  one  to  the  man's  parents.  If  three,  then  two  to 
the  wife's  parents,  and  one  to  the  man's  parents,  and  so  on. 
The  hunter  will  probably  keep  the  liver  for  himself  and  wife. 
On  the  following  morning  the  wife's  parents  will  give  her 
some  if  she  has  no  food. 

An  emu  is  cooked  where  killed  unless  it  is  near  the 
camp.  The  intestines,  liver,  and  gizzard  are  eaten  by  the 
hunter.  The  legs  go  to  the  wife's  father  as  Neborak^  and 
the  body  is  the  share  of  his  parents. 

A  lace-lizard  is  shared  with  all  in  the  camp. 

If  a  man  kills  one  opossum,  he  keeps  it  for  himself  and 
his  wife.  Any  others  go  to  the  wife's  father.  I  remember 
a  case  where  a  man  caught  ten,  of  which  he  kept  one,  and 
all  the  others  became  Neborak. 

If  several  swans  are  killed  by  a  hunter,  he  keeps  one  or 
more,  according  to  the  wants  of  his  family.  The  remainder 
go  to  his  wife's  parents,  or,  if  many  have  been  procured, 
most  of  them,  and  the  lesser  number  go  to  his  parents. 

A  conger-eel  should  be  sent  to  his  wife's  father,  who 
will  probably  share  it  with  his  family. 

In  all  cases  the  largest  share  and  the  best  of  the  game 
is  Neborak.  The  grandchildren  are  fed  by  their  grand- 
parents. The  supply  of  vegetable  food  obtained  by  the 
woman  is  all  devoted  to  her  children  and  herself 

The  following  instances  will  show  what  would  be  the 
distribution  when  members  of  the  group  other  than  the 
wife's  and  the  man's  parents  are  in  camp. 

A   kangaroo   killed    by   a    married    man    assisted    by    a 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS''  759 

Brewit  (unmarried  man)  would  all  go  to  the  wife's  parents 
except  the  left  leg  to  his  brother,  and  the  right  leg  to  the 
Brewit. 

If  a  catch  of  eels  were  made,  the  following  might  be  the 
division  of  them,  if  the  individuals  were  camped  together. 
Man  and  wife,  a  large  eel.  Mother's  brother  and  wife,  a 
large  eel.  Children  of  mother's  brother,  a  small  eel  ;  and 
to  married  daughter,  a  small  eel. 

Similar  rules  obtained  in  the  Ngarigo  tribe,  of  which  the 
following  may  be  taken  as  an  example  : — 

Of  a  kangaroo  the  hunter  would  take  a  piece  along  the 
backbone  near  the  loin.  The  father  would  have  the  back- 
bone, ribs,  shoulders,  and  head.  The  mother  the  right  leg, 
the  younger  brother  the  left  foreleg.  The  elder  sister  would 
have  a  piece  alongside  the  backbone,  the  younger  sister  the 
right  foreleg.  The  father  shares  his  portion  thus  :  to  his 
parents,  tail  and  piece  of  backbone  ;  and  the  mother  shares 
her  portions  with  her  parents,  giving  them  part  of  the  thigh 
and  the  shin. 

A  wombat  is  cooked,  then  cut  open  and  skinned.  The 
skin  is  cut  into  strips  and  divided  with  parts  of  the  animal 
thus  : — The  head  to  the  person  who  killed  the  animal.  His 
father  the  right  ribs  ;  mother  the  left  ribs  and  the  backbone, 
which,  with  some  of  the  skin,  she  gives  to  her  parents.  Her 
husband's  parents  receive  some  of  the  skin.  The  elder 
brother  gets  the  right  shoulder,  the  younger  the  left.  The 
elder  sister  the  right  hind  leg,  the  younger  the  left  hind  leg, 
and  the  rump  and  liver  are  sent  to  the  young  men's  camp. 

A  native  bear  is  divided  in  the  following  manner : — Self, 
left  ribs  ;  father,  right  hind  leg  ;  mother,  left  hind  leg  ;  elder 
brother,  right  forearm  ;  younger  brother,  left  forearm.  The 
elder  sister  gets  the  backbone,  and  the  younger  the  liver. 
The  right  ribs  are  given  to  the  father's  brother,  a  piece  of 
the  flank  to  the  hunter's  mother's  brother,  and  the  head  goes 
to  the  young  men's  camp. 

An  emu  was  divided  as  follows : — The  backbone  to  the 
hunter  ;  left  leg,  left  shoulder,  and  left  flank  to  his  father. 
The  neck  and  head,  right  flank  and  right  ribs  to  his  mother. 
To  his  elder  brother,  the  left  rib  ;  younger  brother,  part  of  the 


76o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

backbone;  elder  sister,  part  of  the  right  thigh;  younger  sister, 
the  right  shin.  The  left  thigh  and  left  shin  went  to  the 
young  men's  camp.  The  father  and  mother  shared  their 
part  with  their  parents. 

A  lace-lizard  is  divided  thus  : — The  left  leg  to  the  hunter; 
the  father  and  mother,  the  upper  part  of  the  body  ;  the  elder 
and  younger  brothers,  the  right  hind  leg  ;  the  elder  sister,  part 
of  the  lower  half  of  the  backbone.  The  tail  goes  to  the 
younger  sister.  The  father  and  mother  share  their  portion, 
by  giving  to  the  hunter's  father  the  foreleg,  and  to  her 
father  the  backbone.  The  remainder  goes  to  the  young 
men's  camp. 

In  this  last  the  brothers  and  sisters  are  supposed  to  be 
grown  up,  and  to  be  married.  If  these  people  were  not  all 
in  the  camp  at  the  same  time,  the  division  would  be  made 
on  the  same  lines. 

As  I  had  not  an  opportunity  of  checking  this  list,  by 
further  personal  inquiries,  and  as  the  Rev.  John  Bulmer  had 
Manero  blacks  at  the  Aboriginal  Station  under  his  control, 
I  requested  him  to  do  so  for  me.  This  he  very  kindly  did, 
and  his  reply  was  that  he  found  the  food  to  be  divided  as  I 
have  described.  He  found  that  when  a  kangaroo  was  killed, 
the  whole  was  sent  to  the  hunter's  father,  if  he  was  at  the 
camp,  the  former  only  eating  a  small  piece  himself.  But,  if 
he  had  no  meat,  his  father  would  send  him  the  head  and 
part  of  the  backbone.  His  wife  would  have  to  rely  for  a 
share  of  meat  on  her  relations,  or  on  that  part  to  which  she 
was  entitled  by  custom. 

Speaking  of  the  custom  of  Neborak,  Mr.  Bulmer  said  he 
had  observed  that  it  was  strictly  kept,  and  that  a  man  had 
to  keep  the  parents  of  his  wife  supplied  with  the  best  parts 
of  the  game,  and  if  possible  with  wombat  flesh,  that  being 
considered  the  best  of  all.  He  had  seen  the  whole  of  the 
right  side  of  a  wombat  sent  by  one  of  the  men  as  Neborak. 
This  was  always  carried  by  the  wife  to  her  parents,  as  well 
as  to  the  other  camps  for  her  husband,  where  it  was  mostly 
thrown  down  near  the  fire,  and  not  given  by  hand,  as  they 
object  to  take  it  direct  from  any  one's  hand,  lest  some  harm 
should  come  to  them  thereby. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS-  761 

In  the  old  time  the  Kurnai  made  fish-hooks  of  bone, 
and  it  was  the  province  of  the  women  to  fish  with  the  line, 
while  the  men  caught  fish  by  spearing  them.  The  fishing- 
lines  were  made  of  the  inner  bark  of  the  Blackwood  {Acacia 
melanoxylon)} 

The  following  particulars  relate  to  the  Yerkla-mining 
tribe.  Their  food  consists  principally  of  wallaby  and 
kangaroo,  but  they  will  eat  snakes,  iguanas,  wild  dogs, 
native  cats,  etc.,  but  not  some  small  varieties  of  lizards.  All 
kinds  of  fish  they  will  eat,  except  shark.  A  berry  they  call 
Ngura  is  much  esteemed,  and  furnishes  a  quantity  of  food, 
as  does  also  the  Quandong  or  native  peach,  which  grows 
very  plentifully  in  their  country.  Another  article  of  diet 
eaten  by  the  Mining  is  the  bark  of  a  kind  of  mallee.  It  is 
prepared  by  baking  in  hot  ashes,  and  afterwards  pounding 
between  hot  stones.  They  relish  this  pulp  mixed  with  white 
ants,  though  the  bark  is  often  eaten  unpounded,  and  is  said 
to  have  a  rather  agreeable  flavour. 

The  weapons  used  by  the  Yerkla-mining  are  very  primi- 
tive, though  effectual  in  their  hands.  They  have  two  kinds 
of  spears.  One,  with  a  simple  round  point,  is  used  to  throw 
at  animals,  and  is  about  nine  or  ten  feet  in  length  ;  the  other 
is  thirteen  or  fourteen  feet  in  length,  and  is  pointed  with  one 
short  barb  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long. 

When  on  the  war-path  they  arm  their  spears  with  a  piece 
of  bark  let  into  the  point.  The  bark  remains  in  the  wound, 
and  keeps  it  open,  causing  much  pain  and  suppuration. 

When  the  men  go  out  hunting,  one  is  employed  in 
carrying  a  large  bunch  of  long  feathers  tied  to  the  end  of 
the  longest  procurable  spear.  This  he  holds  high  in  the  air, 
waving  it  about,  while  another  man  walks  with  him  carrying 
the  jag-spear,  with  which  he  spears  the  small  game  that  have 
been  frightened  by  the  hawk-like  hovering  of  the  bunch  of 
feathers,  and  have  nestled  in  the  bushes  for  protection.  When 
hunting  larger  game,  such  as  kangaroo,  the  hunter  stalks  it 
with  great  skill,  making  use  at  the  same  time  of  various 
signs  when  it  is  not  looking,  with  the  object  of  charming  it 
to  stay  within  reach  of  his  spear. 

1  Rev.  John  Bulmer. 


762        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

They  use  the  Wordan,  or  spear-thrower,  also  as  a  chopper 
for  cutting  up  animals  cooked  and  uncooked,  it  being  pointed 
with  a  sharp  piece  of  flint.  The  women  have  the  usual  stout 
stick  for  digging  purposes,  sharpened  at  one  end,  and  it 
also  serves  as  their  weapon.  The  men  have  a  short  throwing 
weapon  about  fifteen  inches  long,  sharpened  at  one  end,  with 
which  they  are  very  expert. 

Physically  the  Mining  are  a  medium-sized  people,  small- 
boned,  slender  in  build,  athletic  and  smart-looking  ;  the 
complexion  of  a  dark  copper  colour,  and  the  hair  black, 
bushy,  and  curly. 

A  pigment  called  Wilgey  is  used  by  the  Mining  to  paint 
themselves  on  various  occasions,  and  is  obtained  far  north  of 
the  head  of  the  Bight.  They  also  use  white  ashes  to  paint 
themselves  with  when  on  the  war-path. 

In  this  tribe  food  is  always  shared  equally  among  all 
present.  For  instance,  if  a  wallaby  has  been  killed,  and 
there  happen  to  be  ten  or  twelve  in  the  party,  each  one 
receives  a  share  of  the  animal.  No  one  touches  the  animal 
or  part  of  it  until  given  by  the  killer.  Should  the  man  who 
killed  it  be  absent  while  it  is  being  cooked,  no  one  would 
touch  it  till  he  came  to  share  it.  Women  share  equally 
with  the  men,  and  children  are  carefully  looked  after  by 
both  parents.  When  a  kangaroo  was  killed  by  a  native 
servant*  of  a  white  man,  with  the  gun  of  the  latter,  none  of 
the  blacks  present  would  touch  it  until  the  latter  cut  off 
portions  of  it  and  ordered  them  to  eat  it.^ 

The  Narrang-ga  tribe  rules  are  as  follows.  If,  in  hunting, 
a  man  kills  a  kangaroo,  he  gives  to  the  man  on  his  right 
hand  the  head,  tail,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  hind  leg,  some 
fat  and  some  liver.  The  second  to  the  right  receives  the 
hinder  part  of  the  backbone  and  the  left  shoulder.  The  man 
to  his  left  receives  the  right  shoulder,  and  some  from  the 
right  side,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  left  leg.  His  mother 
receives  the  ribs,  his  brother  has  part  of  his  father's  portion, 
and  his  sisters  receive  the  flank.  The  kangaroo  is  cooked 
before  being  distributed.^ 

When  the  men  of  the  tribes  of  the  Karamundi  nation 
1  H.  Williams.  2  T.  W.  Sutton. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS-'^  763 

are  hunting,  those  who  are  successful  share  their  catch  with 
those  who  have  been  less  so,  but  there  is  not  any  rule  by 
which  certain  individuals  receive  certain  parts.^ 

Among  the  Narrinyeri,  when  an  emu  is  killed,  it  is  first 
plucked,  then  partly  roasted,  and  the  skin  taken  off.  The 
oldest  men  of  the  clan,  accompanied  by  the  young  men  and 
boys,  then  carry  it  to  a  retired  spot  away  from  the  camp, 
all  women  and  children  being  warned  not  to  come  near 
them.  One  of  the  old  men  undertakes  the  dissection  of 
the  bird,  and  squats  near  it,  with  the  rest  standing  round. 
He  first  cuts  a  slice  off  the  front  of  one  of  the  legs,  and 
another  piece  off  the  back  of  the  leg  or  thigh  ;  the  carcase 
is  turned  over,  and  similar  pieces  cut  off  the  other  leg. 
The  piece  off  the  front  of  the  legs  is  called  Ngemperumi ; 
that  off  the  back  of  the  leg  or  thigh,  Pundarauk.  The  bird 
is  then  opened  and  a  morsel  of  fat  taken  from  the  inside  and 
laid  with  the  sacred  or  Naruvibe  portions  already  cut  off  on 
some  grass.  The  general  cutting  up  of  the  whole  body  is 
then  commenced,  and  whenever  the  operator  is  about  to 
break  a  bone,  he  calls  the  attention  of  the  bystanders,  who, 
when  the  bone  snaps,  leap  and  shout  and  run  about,  return- 
ing in  a  few  minutes  only  to  go  through  the  same  perform- 
ance when  another  bone  is  broken. 

When  the  carcase  has  been  cut  up  into  convenient 
pieces  for  distribution,  it  is  carried  by  all  to  the  camp,  and 
may  then  be  eaten  by  men,  women,  and  children,  but  the 
men  must  first  blacken  their  faces  and  sides  with  charcoal. 
The  sacred  pieces  Ngemperumi  and  Pundarauk  can  only  be 
eaten  by  the  very  old  men,  and  on  no  account  even  touched 
by  women  or  young  men. 

If  the  men  did  not  leap  and  yell  when  a  bone  is  broken, 
they  think  their  bones  would  rot  in  them  ;  and  the  .same 
if  any  but  the  deputed  person  should  break  a  bone. 
This  ceremony  was  practised  by  all  the  clans  of  the 
Narrinyeri." 

I  may  mention  here  that,  when  in  the  Narrinyeri  country 
in  1859,  I   placed  some  wood  of  the  native  cherry  on  my 
fire.      One  of  the  Narrinyeri  who  was  standing  by  took  it 
1  J.  W.  Boultbee.  =  F.  W.  Taplin. 


764        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

off,  saying  that,  if  I  did  that,  all  the  fish  would  leave  the 
Coorong  Inlet  and  they  would  be  without  food. 

In  the  Wolgal  tribe  the  game  was  divided  as  in  the 
Ngarigo  tribe.  When  a  married  man  caught  a  kangaroo 
or  other  large  game,  he  sent  it  all  to  his  father's  camp,  and 
would  himself  eat  small  game  ;  but  if  he  had  no  other  meat, 
his  father  would  send  him  the  head  and  part  of  the  back- 
bone. His  wife  would  have  to  rely  on  her  relations  for  a 
share  of  their  meat.  There  was  no  rule  in  the  Yuin  tribe 
as  to  sharing  game,  but  if  a  man  had  more  than  he  wanted, 
he  would  give  the  excess  to  some  relative  or  friend,  for 
instance,  to  his  parents,  or  his  wife's  parents.  But  he  was 
not  under  any  obligation  to  do  so. 

The  Wiradjuri  divide  the  food  on  the  rule  of  the  com- 
munity of  goods,  a  general  distribution,  or  sharing  alike.^ 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe  all  game  was  divided  by  one  of 
the  hunters,  who  parcelled  it  out  in  certain  portions, 
leaving  a  part  for  himself  As  an  instance,  when  a  man 
killed  a  kangaroo,  and  there  were  in  the  camp  his  mother's 
brother,  an  old  man,  his  wife's  parents,  a  married  man,  and 
two  young  men,  he  gave  the  body  of  the  kangaroo  to  the 
old  man,  who  gave  some  to  his  sister's  son  who  was  with 
him  ;  the  head  and  forequarters  to  his  wife's  parents ;  a 
leg,  the  tail,  and  some  fat  to  the  married  man,  and  the  young 
men  had  the  remainder. 

Among  the  Mukjarawaint,  if  an  unmarried  man  killed 
a  kangaroo,  and  a  Garchuka  or  some  other  man,  say  a 
Wurant,  were  with  him,  the  game  would  be  first  cooked, 
then  they  would  eat  .some  and  afterwards  divide  it  into 
three  parts.  The  hunter  would  take  his  part  home.  If 
the  hunter  lived  with  his  grandparents  (there  being  no 
young  men's  camp  there),  he  would  give  his  grandfather  all 
his  share.  If  married,  he  would  send  some  to  his  wife's 
parents  by  her,  because  he  could  not  go  near  her  mother,  or 
her  father  might  come  himself  for  some.  If  the  hunter's 
parents  were  there,  she  would  take  them  some,  or  his  mother 
would  come  for  it.  There  is  no  rule  as  to  which  part  of 
the  kangaroo  is  given. 

1  A.  L.  P.  Cameron. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  765 

If  he  killed  an  emu,  he  would  share  it  with  all  in  the 
camp.  Porcupine,  that  is,  the  spiny  ant-eater,  is  only 
shared  with  the  hunter's  own  family.  The  division  of  game 
was  on  the  same  lines,  unless  a  very  small  animal  was 
caught,  not  more  than  enough  for  himself  and  his  wife,  if  he 
were  married. 

In  the  Gournditch-mara  tribe  game  caught  was  divided 
amongst  those  present.  Supposing  a  kangaroo  had  been 
killed,  the  hunter  gave  one  hind  leg  and  the  breast  to  his 
most  esteemed  friend,  and  kept  the  other  hind  leg  himself. 
The  remainder  was  divided  amongst  the  other  companions. 
There  was  no  rule  as  to  the  distribution  of  cooked  food  in 
the  camp,  for  each  family  ate  together,  and  each  wife  was 
obliged  to  sit  beside  her  own  husband,  and  not  near  any 
other  man,  unless  her  husband  sat  between  them.^ 

In  the  tribes  of  South-western  Victoria,  as  described 
by  Mr.  Dawson,^  there  are  strict  rules  regulating  the  dis- 
tribution of  food.  "  When  a  hunter  brings  game  to  the 
camp,  he  gives  up  all  claim  to  it,  and  must  stand  aside  and 
allow  the  best  portion  to  be  given  away,  and  content  him- 
self with  the  worst.  If  he  has  a  brother  present,  the  brother 
is  treated  in  the  same  way,  and  helps  the  killer  of  the  game 
to  eat  the  poorer  pieces,  which  are  thrown  to  them,  such  as 
the  forequarters  and  ribs  of  the  kangaroo,  opossums,  and 
smaller  quadrupeds,  and  the  backbones  of  birds.  This 
custom  is  called  Yuurka-baawhaar,  meaning  'exchange.' 
The  women  also  divide  the  food  they  collect,  which  is 
mainly  vegetable." 

If  a  Wurunjerri  man  killed  a  kangaroo,  it  was  divided  in 
accordance  with  tribal  rules.  Assuming  that  the  man  had 
some  one  with  him,  they  would  take  out  the  entrails,  and 
unless  the  skin  was  required  for  some  purpose,  roast  the 
kangaroo  whole.  One  forequarter  was  kept  by  the  man 
for  himself  and  his  wife  and  children.  A  leg  or  the  other 
forequarter  was  taken  by  his  comrade,  and  the  head  and  a 
foreleg  went  to  the  man's  father  and  mother.  A  hind  leg 
and  the  loins  went  to  the  hunter's  wife's  father  and  mother, 
the  caul  and  the  tail  to  some  one  else. 

1  J.  H.  Stable.  2  Op.  ctt.  p.  22. 


766        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

But  if  a  man  only  killed  enough  game,  or  procured 
enough  other  food  for  himself,  his  wife,  and  children,  then 
he  need  not  divide  with  others  ;  but  if  he  found  that  his 
father  had  no  food,  he  would  give  them  what  he  had  pro- 
cured, and  go  out  and  look  for  more.  Similarly  if  his  wife's 
father  had  no  food,  and  no  son  to  provide  for  him,  he  would 
give  him  some,  and  seek  more  himself.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  he  had  none,  and  his  wife's  father  had  a  supply,  the  latter 
would  send  him  some  by  his  daughter.  The  old  people 
used  to  say  to  the  young  that  people  should  divide  their 
food  with  others,  and  particularly  with  the  old  people  and 
the  young.  They  said  that  Bunjil  was  pleased  when  he 
saw  that  the  old  people  and  the  children  were  provided  for. 

The  care  displayed  in  these  people  for  the  aged  is 
shown  in  other  ways.  In  this  tribe  when  a  man  became  so 
old  that  he  could  not  travel,  his  son,  or  his  wife's  brother,  or 
his  daughter's  husband,  carried  him  from  camp  to  camp.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  these  arc  not  merely  individuals, 
but  a  group  in  each  case,  who  would  recognise  the  liability 
individually.  I  have  known  many  instances  of  this  kind, 
including  several  cases  among  the  Kurnai  of  men  carrying 
their  wives  about  the  country  when  too  old  or  too  sick  to 
walk. 

In  the  tribes  within  fifty  miles  of  Maryborough  in 
Queensland,  people  were  very  good  to  their  old  or  sick 
relatives,  carrying  them  about  on  stretchers.^ 

In  the  Dalebura  tribe  a  woman  who  had  been  a  cripple 
from  her  birth  was  carried  about  by  the  tribes-people  in 
turn,  and  this  was  done  until  her  death,  when  she  was  over 
sixty  years  of  age. 

On  one  occasion  several  of  them  rushed  into  a  swollen 
stream  to  rescue  an  old  drowning  woman  whose  death 
would  have  been  a  relief  to  herself. 

There  was  also  an  instance  of  a  mother  watching  her 
sick  child  and  refusing  all  food,  and  when  it  died  she  was 
inconsolable." 

There    is    a    passage    in    Protector   Thomas's    report    to 
Governor  La  Trobe  which   is  worth  quoting  as  giving  the 
1  Harry  E.  Aldridge.  ^  R.  Christison. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  767 

customs  of  the  Wurunjerri  and  other  neighbouring  tribes 
when  the  State  of  Victoria  was  first  settled.      He  says : — 

"  In  the  Kulin  tribes,  they  seldom  travel  more  than  six 
miles  a  day.  In  their  migratory  movements  all  are 
employed.  Children  are  getting  gum,  knocking  down  birds  ; 
women  are  digging  up  roots,  killing  bandicoots,  getting 
grubs  ;  the  men  hunting  and  scaling  trees  for  opossums. 
They  are  mostly  at  the  encampment  an  hour  before  sun- 
down ;  the  women  first,  who  get  fire  and  water  ;  by  this 
time  their  spouses  arrive.  They  hold  that  the  bush  and  all 
it  contains  are  men's  general  property  ;  that  private  property 
is  only  what  utensils  are  carried  in  the  bag ;  and  this 
general  claim  to  nature's  bounty  extends  even  to  the  success 
of  the  day ;  hence  at  the  close,  those  who  have  been 
successful  divide  with  those  who  have  not  been,  so  '  that 
none  lacketh  while  others  have  it,'  nor  is  the  gift  considered 
as  a  favour,  but  as  a  right,  brought  to  the  needy  and  thrown 
down  at  his  feet."  ^ 

So  far  as  I  know,  the  throwing  down  of  food  on  the 
ground  arises  out  of  the  fear  of  receiving  anything  from  the 
hand  of  another  person  and  thus  being  infected  by  evil 
magic. 

In  the  Gringai  tribe  game  taken  in  hunting  is  usually 
divided  equally.^ 

All  the  males  in  the  Chepara  tribe  are  expected  to 
provide  food,  if  not  sick.  If  a  man  is  lazy  and  stays  in 
camp,  he  is  jeered  at  and  insulted  by  the  others.  Men, 
women,  and  children  leave  the  camp  in  the  early  morning 
for  the  purpose  of  hunting  for  food  where  they  think  that 
game  will  be  plentiful.  After  hunting  sufficiently,  the  men 
and  women  carry  the  various  catches  of  game  to  the  nearest 
water -hole,  where  fires  are  made  and  the  game  cooked. 
The  men,  women,  and  children  all  eat  together  amicably, 
the  food  being  distributed  among  them  by  the  old  men 
equally  to  all  the  men,  women,  and  children.  After  the 
meal,  the  women  carry  what  is  left  of  the  cooked  food  to 
the  camp,  the  men  hunting  by  the  way.  In  this  tribe  a 
man  is  not  bound  to  provide  his  wife's  parents  with  food, 

1  Letters  from  Victorian  Pioneers,  p.  66,  '^  J.  W.  Boydell. 


768        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

unless  the  old  man  is  sick,  or  too  feeble  to  hunt,  or  unless 
the  wife's  mother  is  a  vvidow.^ 

At  the  Bunya  feasts  which  the  Turrbal  attended,  the 
strangers  on  a  visit  did  not  climb  the  Bunya  trees  for  the 
cones,  all  the  trees  belonging  to  the  people  of  the  place.  A 
father  gives  certain  trees  to  his  sons,  who  can  invite  their 
friends  to  come  and  eat  of  the  fruit.  The  visitors  purchased 
bags  of  the  seeds  when  they  returned  home.  The  Bunya 
feast  lasted  about  a  mouth.' 

In  the  Dalebura  tribe,  when  on  a  march,  those  who 
have  been  unfortunate  in  the  chase  are  invited,  when  all 
are  camped  for  the  night,  to  partake  of  the  game  of  the 
successful  ones.' 

The  Bunya-Bunya  tribe  had  a  curious  custom  which  they 
practised  when  an  inland  and  a  coast  tribe  met.  It  was 
considered  a  great  honour  to  send  word  to  a  man  on  the 
other  side  that  you  would  like  him  to  pull  your  beard  and 
whiskers  out.  Of  course  there  was  only  a  small  quantity 
left  to  pull  out,  the  rest  being  burnt  off  too  .short  to  catch 
hold  of.  A  meeting  generally  took  place  about  mid-day, 
and,  with  a  little  bees'-wax  on  the  fingers,  the  operation  was 
soon  gone  through,  fat  and  burnt  bark  being  rubbed  in.  As 
a  rule  the  young  bark  of  the  Bloodwood  tree,  which  makes 
a  very  fine  white  ash,  was  used.* 

Mr.  Christison  tells  me  that  when  he  has  been  out  on 
expeditions,  accompanied  by  his  blackboys  only,  and  the 
food  ran  short,  and  the  division  of  rations  was  very  scanty, 
they  have  refused  to  take  their  share,  intimating  that  he 
stood  more  in  need  of  it.  On  previous  occasions,  when  he 
had  his  own  countrymen  with  him,  the  contrary  was  the 
case,  for  the  ration-bags  were  broached,  and  when  in  any 
difficulties,  grumbling  was  the  rule.  In  their  wild  state  the 
Dalebura  seemed  to  live  peaceably  enough.  He  had  seen  a 
camp  of  three  hundred  live  for  three  months  without  a 
quarrel. 

As  supplementary  to  the  rules  under  which  food  was 
distributed  in  common  in  the  groups  to  which  the  individual 

^  J.  Gibson.  3  j^^  Christison. 

2  Tom  Petrie.  *  Harry  E.  Aldridge. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  769 

belonged,  or  to   which   he  was   related,   I   may  add  a  few 
instances  of  prohibition  of  certain  food  to  certain  persons. 

In  the  Wotjobaluk  tribe,  boys  are  forbidden  to  eat  of 
the  kangaroo,  or  the  padi-melon,  or  the  young  native  com- 
panion. If  they  transgress  these  rules,  they  are  told  that 
they  will  fall  sick,  break  out  all  over  with  eruptions,  and 
perhaps  die. 

The  man,  until  about  forty,  is  under  certain  restrictions. 
If  he  eats  the  tail  part  of  the  emu  or  bustard,  he  will  turn 
grey  ;  he  will  be  speared  by  some  one  if  he  eats  of  the  black 
duck  ;  will  be  killed  by  lightning  if  he  eats  the  fresh-water 
turtle;  for  that  reptile  is  connected  with  the  thunder.  To 
eat  of  the  padi-melon  would  cause  him  to  break  out  all  over 
with  sores.  As  to  the  turtle,  it  may  be  mentioned  here 
that  the  Wotjobaluk  think  they  can  smell  something  after 
lightning  which  reminds  them  of  the  smell  of  the  turtle. 

In  the  Yualaroi  tribe  the  old  men  have  a  great  influence 
over  the  females  and  the  young  men  as  to  the  regulations 
of  their  food,  preventing  them  from  eating  such  food  as  emu 
and  their  eggs,  wild  turkey  and  eggs.^ 

Young  men  are  not  allowed  in  the  Bigambul  tribe  to 
eat  the  female  opossum,  carpet-snake,  honey  taken  out  of 
certain  trees,  wild  turkeys,  certain  fishes.  These  prohibitions 
are  got  over  after  they  have  been  at  the  Bora^  or,  as  the 
Bigambul  call  it,  the  Muer 

If  a  young  man  or  young  woman  of  the  Wakelbura 
tribe  eats  forbidden  game  such  as  emu,  black-headed  snake> 
porcupine,  they  will  become  sick,  and  probably  pine  away 
and  die,  uttering  the  sounds  peculiar  to  the  creature  in 
question.  It  is  believed  that  the  spirit  of  the  creature 
enters  into  them  and  kills  them.^ 

Mr.  M'Alpine,  whom  I  have  already  mentioned,  said 
that  he  had  a  Kurnai  blackboy  in  his  employ  about  1856- 
57.  The  lad  was  strong  and  healthy,  until  one  day 
Mr,  M'Alpine  found  him  ill.  He  explained  that  he  had 
been  doing  what  he  ought  not  to  have  done,  that  he  had 
"  stolen  some  female  'possum,"  before  he  was  permitted  to 
eat  it ;  that  the  old  men  had  found   him  out,  and  that  he 

1  K.  W.  Crowthers.  -'  J,  Lalor.  3  J.  C,  Muirhead 


770        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

would  never  grow  up  to  be  a  man.  He  lay  down  under 
that  belief,  so  to  say,  and  never  got  up  again,  dying  within 
three  weeks. 

Ball-playing 

A  game  of  ball-playing  was  a  favourite  pastime  of  the 
Victorian  tribes,  of  which  Wotjobaluk,  VVurunjerri,  and  the 
Kurnai  will  serve  as  examples.  The  ball  used  by  the 
former  was  made  of  strips  of  opossum  pelt  rolled  tightly 
round  a  piece  folded  up  and  covered  with  another  bit  sewn 
tightly  with  sinews.  The  ball  used  by  the  Kurnai  was  the 
scrotum  of  an  "  old-man "  kangaroo,  stuffed  tightly  with 
grass.      This  was  called  Turta  jiraua. 

The  VVurunjerri  called  their  ball,  which  was  like  that  of 
the  Wotjobaluk,  Mangurt.  In  playing  this  game  the  two 
sides  were  the  two  classes,  two  totems,  or  two  localities. 
For  instance,  in  a  case  which  I  remember  in  the  Mukjara- 
waint  tribe,  the  Garchukas  (white  cockatoos)  and  the  Bat- 
yangal  (pelicans)  played  against  each  other.  But  this  was 
in  fact  the  class  Krokitch  against  Gamutch.  The  Kurnai 
played  locality  against  locality,  or  clan  against  clan,  their 
totems  being  merely  survivals. 

Each  side  had  a  leader,  and  the  object  was  to  keep  the 
ball  from  the  other  side  as  long  as  possible,  by  throwing  it 
from  one  to  the  other.     Such  a  game  might  last  for  hours. 

The  Ngarigo  played  with  a  ball  made  of  opossum  pelt, 
and  when  many  people  were  present  the  women  and 
children  took  part  in  the  game. 


FiRE-MAKING 

The  Dieri  obtained  fire  by  drilling  with  a  straight- 
pointed  stick  on  the  edge  of  the  shield.  The  shields  are 
obtained  from  the  tribes  to  the  eastward  by  barter.  I  do 
not  know  what  the  wood  is  of  which  they  are  made.  It  is 
light  coloured  and  soft.  I  frequently  saw  shields  with  a  row 
of  small  holes  burned  in  the  side  edge  by  this  process.  The 
same  remarks  apply  to  the  other  tribes  of  the  Barcoo  delta. 


VARIOUS  CUSTOMS 


771 


The  Wurunjerri  method  of  making  fire  was  by  drilling 
on  a  flat  piece  of  the  dry  wood  of  the  Djel-wuk,^  which 
grows  plentifully  in  the  gullies  of  the  Dandenong  Mountains 
and  of  the  Yarra  River.  The  drill-stick  is  one  of  the  young 
shoots,  about  thirty  inches  in  length,  which  is  carefully  dried. 
The  thicker  end  is  pointed,  and  is  inserted  in  a  small  cavity 
in    the    flattened    piece.       A    small    notch    is   cut   from   the 


lie.     54- — UKABLNNA    MAN    MAKING    KIKK. 


cavity  to  the  edge  of  the  lower  piece.  The  drill  is  rapidly 
turned  in  the  cavity,  thus  producing  fine  dust,  which  first 
turns  black  then  falls  on  to  some  frayed  bark  fibre  which 
has  been  placed  below  the  groove  to  receive  it.  Finally  the 
abraded  dust  takes  fire,  and  being  folded  up  in  the  fibre,  is 
blown  into  a  flame.  I  have  seen  fire  produced  in  this 
way  in  a  minute,  and  I  once,  and  once  only,  succeeded  in 
doing  it  myself  in  a  minute  and  a  half 

The     blacks     of     the     Manero     tableland     and     their 

1  Hedicaria  Cunninghami ,  the  "  Native  Mulberry." 


772        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

neighbours  the  VVolgal  make  fire  after  this  method.  A 
piece  of  grass-tree  stem  is  laid  down,  and  another  piece  is 
twirled  on  it.  Two  men  work  at  it,  and  a  little  charcoal 
is  put  in  as  they  drill,  and  when  the  dust  ignites,  teased-out 


FIG.    55. — KUKNAl    USING    FIRE-DRILL. 

bark  is  added.  Another  method  is  as  follows.  A  spear- 
thrower  is  laid  on  the  ground,  and  on  it  a  piece  of  grass- 
tree  flower-stalk  with  a  flattened  side.  On  either  side  of 
this  a  spear-thrower  is  put  on  edge,  and  between  them 
vertically  a  piece  of  grass -tree  stem,  which  is  twirled. 
When    smoke     comes    the     two     side     spear-throwers     are 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  773 

removed,  their  use  only  having  been  to  confine  the  fire- 
drill  stick.  Twirling  is  continued  until  smoke  arises  out  of 
each  side  of  the  horizontal  grass-tree  stem,  and  the  dust  and 
chips  are  turned  over  on  to  some  teased-out  bark  which  is 
blown  into  flame. 

The  method  of  producing  fire  by  drilling  used  formerly 
by  the  Kurnai  is  shown  in  the  accompanying  illustration. 
The  flower  stem  of  the  grass-tree  was  mostly  used. 

Camping  Rules 

In  forming  their  camps,  the  aborigines  were  careful  to 
place  them  in  a  favourable  position,  as  regards  the  weather, 
and  in  many  cases  facing  the  morning  sun.  As  I  have 
mentioned  before,  the  Paritiltya-kana,  or  men  of  the  Paritiltya 
division  of  the  Dieri  tribe,  fix  their  camps  close  to  a  creek  in 
a  valley,  so  as  to  be  near  to  water,  while  the  other  Dieri 
camp  on  the  higher  ground.  This  is  an  instance  of  the 
local  and  tribal  variations  of  a  common  custom.  But  in  all 
cases  they  formed  their  camps  as  experience  had  taught 
them,  and  the  departure  from  these  rules  has  not  a  little 
contributed  to  the  mortality  which  has  attacked  them  since 
the  advent  of  the  white  man.  Before  that,  they  lived  in 
harmony  with  their  environment  ;  since  then,  they  have  been 
in  discord  with  it. 

The  rules  of  the  camp  not  only  in  most  cases  fixed  the 
positions  of  the  several  camps,  of  the  married  men,  the 
single  men  and  of  visitors,  but  also  of  the  individuals  in 
each  camp.  As  an  instance,  I  take  the  Kurnai  and  their 
rules. 

Not  only  did  custom  regulate  the  position  in  the  Bun, 
or  hut,  but  it  also  indicated  the  situation  of  the  respective 
Buns  in  the  encampment.  When  an  encampment  was 
formed,  the  relative  positions  of  the  several  camps  depended 
in  the  first  place  to  a  great  extent  on  where  the  Giveraeil- 
kiirnai^  or  Headman,  placed  his  own.  Then  in  fixing  the 
others  the  people  faced  their  Buns  if  possible  towards  sun- 
rise, and  sheltered  from  the  winds.  If  there  were  any 
strangers   from   a  distance,  they  placed   their  camps  at  the 

3D 


774        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


side  of  the  encampment,  facing  a   direction   in  which   their 
country  was  situated. 

In  order  to  fix  as  accurately  as  possible  these  positions 
of  the  camps  of  a  related  group,  I  got  some  of  the  Kurjiai 
to  point  out  on  a  piece  of  ground  where  various  members 
of  a  family  group,  whom  I  would  name,  would  camp.  From 
their  statements  I  formed  a  diagram,  and  from  it  I  extracted 
the  following  particulars.  The  starting-point  is  supposed 
to  be  the  camp  of  a  man  and  his  wife.  The  directions  are 
given  approximately  by  compass  bearings,  and  the  distances 
by  pace.s.  The  nature  of  the  ground  required  that  the 
encampment  should  extend  in  a  certain  direction. 


Diagram   XXXII 


,(2 

/ 
/ 
/ 

/    ^  ^ ' 


(3 


(4 


\8 


-(5 
(6 


Man  and  wife. 

Married  son  of  i.  5  paces  from  i. 

Father  and  mother  of  I.  20  paces  from  i. 

Brother  of  i  and  wife.  20  paces  from  i. 

Father  and  mother  of  the  wife  of  l.  100  paces  from  i. 

Married  son  of  5.  The  same  distance. 

The  married  brother  of  the  mother  of  i.  1  ,   , 

„,,  •    1    •  .        f  iU    f  .u        f  .  I   10  paces  each  from  i. 

The  married  sister  of  the  father  of  i.        J        ' 

If  the  sister  of  the  wife  of  I  had  Ijeen  present  with  her  husband,  they  could 
have  camped  anywhere  near,  so  long  as  not  actually  close  to  i. 

If  there  had  l>een  a  married  daughter  of  I  there,  her  husband  would  have 
l)een  in  the  same  position  as  regards  her  mother  as  the  wife  of  5  was  as  to  i,  and 
must  have  camjied  at  a  similar  distance. 

A  Brogan  who  stands  in  the  relation  of  brother  to  i  could  occupy  a  position 
suitable  to  that  relation.  Owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground  all  the  huts  could 
face  the  sunrise,  which  is  a  favourite  aspect. 

In  the  camps  of  the  Kurnai,  custom  regulates  the 
position  of  the  individual.  The  husband  and  wife  would 
sleep  on   the   left-hand   side  of  the  fire,  the  latter  behind  it, 


VARIOUS  CUSTOMS'  775 


and  close  behind  her  the  children  ;  nearest  to  them  the 
little  boy,  if  any,  next  to  him  the  little  girl.  In  the  event 
of  the  man's  father  and  mother  being  with  them  for  a 
night,  the  grandfather  would  occupy  the  right-hand  side, 
the  grandmother  behind  him,  farther  back  in  the  hut ;  and 
the  son's  wife  and  children  would  move  to  a  corresponding 
position  near  their  own  "  house-father." 

It  would  be  a  rule  that  the  wife's  sister,  although  called 
wife  by  her  brother-in-law,  and  also  calling  him  husband, 
would  not  sleep  in  his  hut,  but  somewhere  near  at  hand. 
Different  rules  would  apply  to  other  persons  visiting  him.  A 
Brogan,  that  is,  a  man  who  had  been  initiated  the  same  time 
as  the  husband,  and  who  therefore  addresses  the  wife  as 
"  spouse,"  and  is  so  addressed  by  her,  would  not  stay  at  their 
camp,  but  would  go  and  stop  in  the  "  young  men's  camp." 

In  the  Wurunjerri  tribe  people  formed  their  camps  some- 
what in  the  following  manner,  taking  Berak's  wtilam,  or  hut, 
as  the  starting-point. 

The  following  diagram  is  from  the  positions  he  marked 
on  the  ground  for  me  : — 

Diagram   XXXIII  (2 


)4| 


^'  0 


(6  (5 

1.  Berak,  his  wife,  and  child. 

2.  Berak's  brother,  his  wife,  and  child. 

3.  lierak's  father  and  mother. 

4.  Berak's  wife's  father  and  mother. 

5.  Visitors  from  the  Bunurong  U\\x. 

6.  Young  men's  camp.     [ 

The  camp  is  supposed  to   be  in  Berak's  country,  say  at 
Heidelberg.     Each  hut  faces  the  east. 


776        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA        ch. 

That  of  the  parents  of  Berak's  wife  is  behind  a  screen 
of  boughs.  The  hut  of  Berak's  father  is  between  theirs 
and  his. 

The  Bunurong  people  camp  at  that  side  nearest  to 
their  country,  which  is  to  the  south-east.  The  willam  of 
the  young  men  is  farthest  from  those  of  the  married  men. 

In  the  Wolgal  tribe,  the  grandparents  would  occupy  the 
following  places  in  their  huts.  Father's  father  on  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  fire  ;  father's  mother  on  the  right-hand 
side  of  the  fire.  The  maternal  grandparents  would  not  in 
any  way  occupy  a  place  in  their  son-in-law's  camp,  but 
would  make  a  camp  for  themselves,  behind  that  of  their 
son-in-law. 

A  married  man  would  never  stay  in  the  young  men's 
camp  when  travelling,  unless  he  were  without  his  wife,  when 
he  would  be  considered  as  being  single.  The  married 
people  and  the  single  young  men  camp  entirely  apart. 

Huts  in  a  VViradjuri  encampment  are  arranged  according 
to  the  localities  from  which  the  respective  occupants  have 
come.  Those  from  the  east  occupy  an  eastern  position, 
and  so  on.  The  wife  always  looks  after  the  camping 
arrangements.' 

With  the  Kaiabara  the  Headman,  when  encamping, 
places  his  camp  in  the  centre  of  the  encampment ;  the 
single  men  on  the  one  side,  and  the  single  women  on  the 
other.  The  old  women  keep  an  eye  on  the  young  people 
to  prevent  improprieties.' 

There  is  a  regulation  relating  to  camps  in  the  Wakelbura 
tribe  which  forbids  the  women  coming  into  the  encampment 
by  the  same  path  as  the  men.  Any  violation  of  this  rule 
would  in  a  large  camp  be  punished  with  death.  The  reason 
for  this  is  the  dread  with  which  they  regard  the  menstrual 
period  of  women.  During  such  a  time,  a  woman  is  kept 
entirely  away  from  the  camp,  half  a  mile  at  least.  A 
woman  in  such  a  condition  has  boughs  of  some  tree  of  her 
totem  tied  round  her  loins,  and  is  constantly  watched  and 
guarded,  for  it  is  thought  that  should  any  male  be  so 
unfortunate  as  to  see  a  woman  in  such  a  condition,  he 
'  J.  )\.  Gribble.  ^  Jocelyn  Brooke. 


XII  VARIOUS  CUSTOMS  777 

would  die.  If  such  a  woman  were  to  let  herself  be  seen  by 
a  man,  she  would  probably  be  put  to  death.  When  the 
woman  has  recovered,  she  is  painted  red  and  white,  her 
head  covered  with  feathers,  and  returns  to  the  camp.^ 

At  the  Herbert  River  (Queensland)  the  camps  are  so 
arranged  that  the  entrance  of  each  commands  an  approach 
to  the  encampment.  Thus  in  whatever  direction  one 
comes,  the  entrance  to  a  hut  faces  one.^ 

The  instances  given  in  this  chapter  of  the  division  of 
food  among  the  kindred  and  relations,  and  the  special 
provision  for  old  people,  give  an  entirely  different  idea  of  the 
aboriginal  character  to  that  which  had  been  usually  held. 
This  latter  is  derived  from  what  is  seen  of  the  blacks  under 
our  civilisation.  The  oft-repeated  description  of  the  black- 
fellow  eating  the  white  man's  beef  or  mutton  and  throwing 
a  bone  to  his  wife  who  sits  behind  him,  in  fear  of  a  blow 
from  his  club,  is  partly  the  new  order  of  things  resulting 
from  our  civilisation  breaking  down  the  old  rules.  But  it 
is  also,  in  part,  the  old  rule  itself.  I  have  shown  that  in 
some  cases  the  wife  is  fed  by  her  own  people,  and  the 
throwing  of  food  to  another  person  is  not  an  act  of  dis- 
courtesy. Its  reason  is  that  there  is  a  deep-seated 
objection  to  receive  anything  which  can  convey  evil  magic 
from  the  hand  of  another  person,  and  in  many  instances 
that  applies  to  the  two  sexes. 

Such  contrasts  between  the  old  and  the  new  condition 
of  things  struck  me  very  forcibly  at  the  Kurnai  Jeraeil^ 
where  the  people  lived  for  a  week  in  the  manner  of  their 
old  lives,  certainly  with  the  addition  of  the  white  man's  beef 
and  flour,  but  without  his  intoxicating  drinks,  which  have 
been  a  fatal  curse  to  the  black  race.  That  week  was 
passed  without  a  single  quarrel  or  dispute. 

'  J.  C.  Muirhead.  2  J.  Gaggin. 


APPENDIX 

SOME    LEGENDS    OF    CENTRAL    AUSTRALIAN    TRIBES 

The  origin  of  the  Murdus  and  the  Kana — How  the  Mura-nmra  Paralina  perfected 
mankind,  a  Mardala  legend  —  Madra  -  mankana,  a  Dieri  legend  —  The 
wanderings  of  the  Yuri-ulu,  a  Wonkangaru  legend — A  circumcision  legend 
of  the  Eastern  Dieri  and  the  Yaurorka — The  Pirha  and  the  Wapiya  legend  of 
the  Wonkamala  tribe  —  The  Anti-etya  and  the  Ngardu-etya  legends  —  The 
Minkani  ceremonies — The  Darana  legend  of  the  Dieri — Kakakndana  and  the 
origin  of  the  mound  springs,  a  legend  of  the  Urahunna — Tayi-tampana  or 
Ngura-tulu-tulu-ru,  a  Yaurorka  legend  —  Xgura- wordu-punnuna,  a  Dieri 
legend. 

These  legends^  relate  more  or  less  to  the  initiation  and  other 
ceremonies  of  these  tribes,  at  which  they  are  repeated  by  the  old 
men,  and  are  thus  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation. 
They  form  the  precedents  for  the  ceremonial  proceedings. 

Taking  I^^ke  Eyre  for  the  central  point,  the  range  of  these 
tribes  extends  northwards  to  the  Wonkamala,  and  southwards  to  the 
Parnkalla,  who  occupied  the  country  on  the  west  side  of  Spencer 
Gulf,  as  far  as  Port  Lincoln,  and  inland  to  the  Gawler  Ranges. 
This  is  about  seven  hundred  miles  north  and  south.  To  the 
north-west  it  extends  to  where  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  southern 
part  of  the  tribes  of  which  the  Arunta  is  the  typical  example.  To 
the  west  its  range  is  not  known  to  me,  further  than  the  Kukata, 
Tangara,  and  Willara,  which  are  west  of  the  Urahunna  and  Wirangu 
tribes  which  border  Lake  Eyre  on  that  side. 

To  the  north-east  and  east  it  would  include  the  tribes  which 
attend  the  ceremonies  of  the  Mura-mura  Minkani,  from  a  consider- 
able distance  within  the  State  of  Queensland.  On  the  east  the 
Grey  and  Barrier  Ranges  make  the  boundary  of  the  Lake  Eyre  tribes. 

The  Origin  of  the  Murdus'-^  and  of  the  Kana 
In  the  Beginning,  the  earth  opened  in  the  midst  of  Perigundi 

'   I  am  indebted  to  the  Rev.  O.  Siebcrt  for  these  legends. 

-    This  word  is  properly  Mada,  but  as  I  have  written  it  in  former  works  Murdu. 
I   have  retained  the  same  form  of  orthography.      Kana  is  the  term  applied  to  them- 
selves by  the  Dieri  and  other  tribes. 
♦ 

779 


78o        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


lake,^  and  there  came  out,  one  murdu  after  the  other,  Kaualka 
(crow),  Katatara  (shell  parakeet),  IVarnkati  (emu),  and  so  on. 
Being  as  yet  incompletely  formed,  and  without  members  and  sense 
organs,  they  laid  themselves  down  on  the  sandhills,  which  then,  as 
now,  surrounded  the  lake.  There,  lying  in  the  sunshine,  they  were 
after  a  time  invigorated  and  strengthened  by  it,  so  that  at  last  they 
stood  up  as  Kana  (human  beings)  and  separated  in  all  directions. 

The  Dieri  point  out  an  island  in  the  middle  of  Perigundi  lake 
as  the  place  where  the  Murdus  came  out.  The  legend  not  only 
accounts  for  the  totem  animals  but  also  for  the  Kana,  that  is,  the 
native  inhabitants  of  the  Lake  Eyre  district.  It  also  accounts,  by 
the  dispersal  of  the  Murdus,  for  the  fact  that  the  totem  names  are 
scattered  over  the  country,  but  in  such  manner  that  some  are  more 
prevalent  in  one  part  than  in  another. 

How    THE    MURA-MURA    PaRALINA  -    PERFECTED    MANKIND  : 

A  Yaurorka  Legend 

The  Mura-mura  Paralina  was  out  hunting  kangaroos.  While 
following  one,  he  saw  four  incomplete  beings  cowering  together. 
Without  noticing  them  further,  he  followed  the  kangaroo  till  he 
came  to  where  there  were  two  Mura-mura  women,  who  had  already 
killed  the  kangaroo,  and  covered  it  with  Paua?  When  he  asked 
whether  they  had  killed  the  kangaroo,  they  denied  having  done  so. 
Then  Paralina  thought  of  a  trick.  He  unwound  his  belt  (body- 
string)  into  an  immensely  long  cord,  at  the  end  of  which  he 
fastened  an  ant,  which  at  once  smelled  out  the  meat,  and  with  its 
comrades  fell  upon  tlie  dead  kangaroo  hidden  under  the  Paua. 
Paralina  now  followed  the  cord  and  discovered  the  kangaroo,  and 
having  cleared  the  ants  from  it,  he  carried  it  away  on  his  shoulders. 
Then  he  went  back  to  the  place  where  he  had  seen  the  cowering 
beings. 

Going  up  to  them,  he  smoothed  their  bodies,  stretched  out  their 
limbs,  slit  up  their  fingers  and  toes,  formed  their  mouths,  noses, 
and  eyes,  stuck  ears  on  them,  and  blew  into  their  ears  in  order 
that  they  might  hear.  Lastly,  he  perforated  the  body  from  the 
mouth  downwards,  and  projected  a  piece  of  hard  clay  {Daka) 
through  it  with  so  much  force  that  it  passed  through   the   body, 

'  Perigundi  is  "  a  crooked  place. "  Peri  is  a  locality ;  gundi,  more  prQperly  kunii, 
is  "crooked"  or  "  twisted."  This  lake  is  so  named  from  its  irregular  shape.  It  is 
now  known  as  Lake  Buchanan. 

^  From  Para,  "hair."  His  girdle  was  made  of  human  hair.  The  legend  is 
current  in  the  west  and  south  of  Blanch-water,  that  is,  in  the  country  of  the  Mardala, 
in  which  kangaroo  are  plentiful.  The  Paralina  Creek,  which  rises  on  the  east 
side  of  the  Flinders  Range,  appears  to  have  been  called  after  this  Mura-mura. 

'  The  seed  of  an)'  plant  which  is  used  for  food. 


APPENDIX  781 


forming  the  fundament.     Having  thus  produced  mankind  out  of 
these  beings,  he  went  about  making  men  everywhere, 

Mandra-mankana,  also  called  Bakuta-terk  ana-tar  an  a,  or 
Kanta-vulkana  :  A   Dieri  Legend  ^ 

Mandra-mankana  once  came  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Pando.^ 
Two  girls  who  saw  him  jeered  at  him,  because  his  back  was  just  the 
same  as  his  front.  He  told  their  mother,  who  was  his  Noa,  to  send 
her  two  daughters  to  his  camp  the  following  night.  When  she  told 
them  of  his  demand,  they  ridiculed  him,  but  yet  they  went  there, 
and  lay  down  one  on  each  side  of  the  sleeping  old  man,  their  Ngaperi. 
Then  they  heaped  up  a  ridge  of  sand  on  either  side  of  him,  so  that  he 
thought  to  have  his  Ngatatnura-ulu  there.  But  these  had  meanwhile 
crept  away  out  of  the  sand  and  lay  down  to  sleep  in  the  camp  of 
their  mother.  When  the  Pinnaru  woke  in  the  night  he  rose  upright, 
and  saw  that  he  was  quite  alone,  and  that  the  girls  had  cheated  him. 
Hence  his  name  of  Bakuta-terkana-tarana.  He  went  forth  thinking 
of  revenge.  Through  his  songs  he  caused  plants  to  grow,  some 
with  bitter  and  some  with  pleasant-tasted  fruit.  The  two  girls  found 
these  plants,  and  ate  first  of  the  bitter  and  then  of  the  good  fruit. 
Delighted  with  the  latter,  they  sprang  from  one  bush  to  the  other. 
Thus  after  a  time  they  came  to  a  Tanyu  bush  laden  with  its  red 
and  yellow  fruit,  where  lurked  Mandra-mankana  in  concealment,  to 
destroy  them.  .As  they  came  near  to  him,  he  threw  his  boomerang 
at  one  and  broke  her  ankle,  and  then  rushing  up  he  killed  her  by  a 
blow  on  her  head.  The  other  sister  ran  away  to  save  herself,  but 
he  followed  her,  and  killed  her  also.  He  then  cut  off  the  breasts  of 
the  dead  girls  and  carried  them  with  him  as  he  went  farther. 
Coming  to  a  camp  where  some  young  boys  were  amusing  themselves 
in  a  plain  by  throwing  boomerangs,  he  hid  himself  behind  some 
bushes,  and  watched  them  at  their  play.  Then  one  of  the  boys  threw 
his  boomerang  so  far  that  it  fell  near  the  old  man.  The  boy  sought 
for  it,  and  was  about  to  take  it  up,  when  the  Pinnaru  seized  him  by 
the  hand.  He  was  frightened,  but  Mandra-mankana  calmed  him 
by  giving  him  a  lizard.  He  soon  became  friendly  with  the  boy,  and 
promised  at  his  request  to  make  a  new  song,  and  called  to  all  the 
people  to  come  and  hear  it.  They  assembled,  even  the  sick  and 
the  women  with  child.  The  boy  began  to  sing,  and  the  Pinnaru 
came  out   of  the   bushes,  painted  and   decked  with  feathers,  and 

'  Mandra  is  "  belly  "or  "  body,"  and  Manka  is  "  hind-l)efore. "  Bakuta-terkana- 
tarana  is  "  the  one  who  rises  upright  fruitlessly,"  from  Baku,  "  fruitlessly,"  "  without 
avail,"  also  "  free"  or  "  unburdened."  Terkana  is  "  to  stand,"  and  Tarana  is  "  to 
rise  up,"  "to  fly."  frequently,  in  combination  with  a  verb,  it  forms  our  preposition 
"up,"  as  Terkana  taranato,  "stand  up,"  Nayina  taranato  "  to  look  upwards." 

*  Pando  is  Lake  Hope.     Sometimes  it  is  called  Pando-pirna,  Big  Lake. 


782        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


carrying  the  breasts  of  the  girls  hanging  on  his  chest.  He  danced 
to  the  onlookers,  in  the  front  ranks  of  whom  two  young  men,  the 
Noas  of  the  girls,  were  sitting.  These  immediately  recognised  the 
breasts  of  their  ^^oas,  and  when  the  Pinnaru  retired,  dancing,  they 
stuck  their  Kandriy  in  the  ground  before  them.  When  he  again 
danced  near  to  them,  each  seized  his  Kandri,  and  struck  him,  so 
that  both  his  legs  were  broken.  Then  they  split  his  head  open,  and 
at  the  same  time  all  the  people  fell  upon  him,  and  even  the  children 
struck  him.  Then  they  buried  him,  and  laying  his  bag  at  the  head 
of  the  grave,  they  went  elsewhere.  One  day  a  crow  perched  itself 
on  the  grave  of  Mandra-mankana.  Three  times  it  knocked  with  its 
beak  on  the  wood  which  was  lying  on  the  grave,  and  cried,  "  Ka ! 
Ka  !  Ka  ! "  Then  the  dead  man  woke  up,  and  came  out  of  the 
grave,  and  looked  round,  but  no  one  was  to  be  seen.  Then  he 
looked  for  footprints,  and  found  that  the  people  had  all  gone  in  the 
same  direction,  but  by  three  different  ways.  While  the  strong  and 
hale  ones  had  gone,  some  to  the  right  and  some  to  the  left,  hunting 
as  they  went  along,  the  old  and  the  sick  had  gone  straight  on, 
between  the  two  other  tracks.  These  he  followed  till  he  came  to 
the  neighbourhood  of  their  new  camp,  and  he  concealed  himself  in 
the  bushes  near  where  they  were  busy  in  the  creek,-  driving  the  fish 
together  to  catch  them.  They  had  pulled  up  bushes  and  grass,  and 
with  them  were  driving  the  fish  before  them  in  heaps.  Mandra- 
mankana  kept  himself  concealed  in  the  water,  and  opening  his 
mouth  he  sucked  in  and  swallowed  the  water,  fish,  grass,  and  men. 
Some  few  who  were  at  a  distance,  observing  that  their  comrades, 
and  nearly  all  those  who  were  fishing,  had  disappeared,  and  looking 
round  to  see  where  they  had  gone  to,  saw  with  alarm  that  the 
monster  in  the  water  had  surrounded  them  with  his  arms.  Only  a 
few  of  them  escaped  by  jumping  over  them.  The  Mura-mura 
Kanta-yulkana,'^  looking  after  them,  gave  to  each,  as  he  ran,  his 
Murdu  name. 

Those  who  ran  to  the  north  were — 


Kanangara 

Karabana 

Maiaru    .... 

Palyara    .... 

Katatara 

Malura    .... 

seed  of  the  Manyura. 

bat. 

marsupial  rat. 

a  small  marsupial. 

shell  parakeet. 

cormorant. 

'  The  Kandri  is  a  round  boomerang-shaped  weapon,  with  pointed  ends,  used  by 
the  Dieri  and  other  tribes.  There  is  another  Kandri,  which  is  a  gummy  substance 
obtained  from  the  roots  of  a  plant  called  Mindri,  called  also  Kandri-moku,  or  bone- 
Kandri,  which  is  used  for  cementing  chips  of  stone  to  wooden  handles. 

2  At  the  Cooper,  north  of  Lake  Hope. 

'  "  Grass-swallower, "  from  Kanta,  "grass,"  and  Yulkana,  "  to  swallow  "  or 
"  gobble  up." 


APPENDIX         -                                      -) 

Karawora          ....     eagle-hawk. 

Warukati 

emu.^ 

Kaualka 

crow. 

Padi         .          .    * 

a  caterpillar. - 

Karku 

red  ochre. 

Woma 

.     carpet  snake. 

Pitcheri  . 

Duboisia  Hopwoodii. 

Those  who  ran  to  the  south-east  were  the — 

Chukuro            ....     kangaroo. 

Kintala    . 

.     dingo. 

Kani 

.     jew  lizard.' 

Kaperi 

iguana. 

Kokula    . 

.     marsupial  rat. 

Punta 

.     a  small  marsupial. 

Karabana 

a  small  marsupial. 

Puralko  . 

the  native  comi-ianion. 

Kuraura  . 

rain. 

Malbaru 

a  crane. 

Tundu-bulyeru 

a  water-rat. 

Pira-moku 

native  cat. 

Kaladiri  . 

a  frog. 

Tidnamara 

a  frog. 

Wilyaru  . 

curlew. 

Wataii    . 

kangaroo-rat. 

Those  who  ran  to  the  southwards  were  the — 

Makara a  fish. 

Kirhapara 

? 

Vikaura 

native  cat. 

Ngarumba 

box-tree.* 

Kanunga 

rabbi  t  -band  icoot.  * 

783 


The  Mura-mura  came  out  of  the  water  and  vomited,  so  that  he 
threw  out  all  his  teeth,  which  are  to  be  seen  at  Manatandri.  Having 
done  this,  he  went  a  little  farther  and  sat  down  and  died. 

This  place  is  pointed  out  by  the  Dieri  on  the  Cooper  north  of 
Pando,  and  the  body  of  the  Mura-mura  is  to  be  seen  there  also, 
turned  into  stone,  in  the  form  of  a  rock. 


The  Wanderings  of  the  Yuri-ulu  :   A  Wonkanguru  Legend 

After  the  Yuri-ulu  were  circumcised  at  Mararu  they  went  off  on 
their  wanderings  alone,  and  came  to  the  Kadia-lumpa  '•  Creek,  where 

'   From  IVaru.  "grey,"  and  A'afi,  a  "covering"  or  "pelt."     Thus  a  bird  with 
a  grey  covering. 

■^    Ihe  witchetty  grub  of  Spencer  and  Gillen. 

*  Amphibolurus  barbatus  {Narrative  of  the  Horn  Expedition,  p.  28). 

*  Eucalyptus  microtheca, 

*  Paragale  lagotis. 

"  Kadla,  "rushes,"  and  lutnpa,  a  "spring"  or  "well." 


784        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

they  refreshed  themselves  witli  the  water  which  bubbles  out  of  the 
earth.  They  collected  emu  eggs  at  that  place,  and  the  bird  attacked 
them,  but  was  driven  off  by  their  shouting-  and  throwing  sand  and 
dust  at  it.  The  sand  and  dust,  however,  which  they  had  thrown 
up  into  the  air  came  upon  them  as  a  cloud, — the  Nilla-nilla  ^ — which 
raised  the  sandhill  on  which  they  stood  high  up  in  the  air.  But 
through  fear  they  threw  themselves  down  on  the  ground,  and  lay 
there  for  some  time  insensible.  When  they  recovered  they  found 
that  the  Nilla-nilla  was  gone,  and  putting  the  eggs  in  a  bag  they 
went  on  to  Urakuroka,'-  from  whence  they  saw  great  columns  of 
smoke  rising  up  and  spreading  out  wide  and  far,  from  the  place  of 
circumcision  at  Mararu.  Wandering  further,  they  came  to  a  place 
where  they  found  a  great  number  of  lizards ;  and  at  another  they 
collected  stone  for  knives,  which,  however,  were  not  good.  Then 
at  Kalilte  they  observed  that  they  were  inflamed  from  the  circum- 
cision, but  the  inflammation  left  them  at  Kalpinta  and  Laratjilkira, 
and  they  rejoiced  that  they  were  now  full  men.  At  Nalpawira  they 
caught  a  small  li/ard,  the  pilta,  which  lived  under  the  bark  of 
the  tree,  and  they  killed  it,  but  then  regretting  this,  they  swung 
it  round  their  heads  to  bring  it  to  life  again.  Feeling  very  cold 
at  Kurampa,  they  threw  glowing  coals  in  the  grass,  which,  taking 
fire,  drove  the  cold  away.  From  this  place  they  went  to  Kililti,^ 
where  small  kidney-shaped  stones  are  plentiful,*  with  which  they 
filled  their  bags.  Then,  placing  themselves  a  long  distance  apart, 
one  threw  putidra^  which  the  other  tried  to  hit  and  break  with  a 
stick.  Having  finished  this  game,  they  collected  the  small  fragments 
for  tulas  and  placed  them  in  their  bags. 

Still  travelling  on,  a  great  rainbow  appeared  after  a  shower. 
Alarmed  at  this,  they  halted,  but  thought  that  it  was  only  a  gigantic 
kadi-markara.  Then  having  given  names  to  the  rainbow  and  to 
its  colours,  they  went  on,  but  with  caution,  fearing  that  the  portent 
might  again  come  upon  them,  and  looking  back  at  it  till  it  dis- 
appeared. On  their  way  they  saw  the  footprints  of  the  Mura-mura 
Markanyankula,"''  but  as  he  must  have  passed  the  previous  day  and 
reached  Antiritya,  they  could  not  overtake  him. 

On  their  further  wanderings  tliey  collected  yaua,^  at  one  place ; 
at  another  they  killed  a  water-hen  ;  and  at  a  third  they  dug  out  some 
kapita,  and  then  found  a  nest  with  a  young  eagle-hawk  in  it.  At 
length  they  reached  the  other  side  of  the  ranges,  where  it  became 
darker  and  darker,  and  feeling  round  with  their  hands,  they  found 

'  Mirage. 

2   '  •  To  spread  itself  out. 

*  The  names  have  not  been  explained. 

■*  Ciilletl  Pundra-pundra,  from  Pundrn,  a  kidne)'. 

'  This  relates  to  the  wanderings  of  another  Muraniura. 

*  Yaua  is  a  grass-like  plant,  with  small  bulbs — the  Cyperus  rotundus. 


APPENDIX  785 


a  continuous  hard  surface.  They  struck  it  with  their  fists,  and  with 
their  boomerangs  and  spears,  but  in  vain.  Then  the  elder  of  the 
Yuri-ulu  pushed  the  obstruction  with  his  finger  and  it  opened,  and 
they  saw  a  new  country  covered  with  trees  and  bushes.  Looking 
back  at  what  they  had  passed  through,  they  recognised  it  as  being 
the  edge  of  the  sky,  but  they  did  not  wander  long  in  this  country, 
for  the  younger  of  the  two  died.  The  elder  still  went  on,  but  after 
a  time  he  also  died.  Then  they  both  returned  to  life,  and  called 
to  their  father,  with  the  voice  of  thunder,  that  they  had  died  in  a 
strange  land,  and  could  not  return  again.  He,  hearing  their  voices, 
mourned  for  them.^ 

These  two  Wonkanguru  legends  might  be  well  divided  into 
three  :  first,  the  preparation  for  the  ceremony  ;  second,  the  ceremony 
itself;  and  third,  the  wandering  of  the  Yuri-ulu  after  circumcision. 

The  mention  of  the  pirha  in  these  ceremonies,  and  the  dances 
of  the  two  sets  of  women,  the  elder  and  the  younger  sisters  of  the 
Yuri-ulu,  connects  it  with  the  legend  in  which  the  wanderings  of 
the  elder  and  younger  girls,  with  their //>//«  song,  is  given. 

Antiritcha,  which  may  be  identified  with  a  mountain  in  the 
M'Donnell  Ranges,  fixes  the  limits  of  the  wanderings  of  the  Yuri-ulu 
as  being  somewhat  beyond  the  termination  of  these  mountains. 


A  Circumcision  Legend  :  Eastern  Dieri  and 
Yaurorka  Tribes 

A  girl  met  her  brother,  and  observed  on  him  the  effect  of 
circumcision.  Hastening  to  the  Pinnaru,  her  father,  she  told  him 
what  she  had  seen,  and  asked  him  how  it  had  been  done.  Instead 
of  replying  to  her  question,  he  became  enraged,  and  scolded  her, 
saying,  "  Why  did  you  meet  your  brother,  and  see  his  wound  ? " 
He  sent  his  wife  away,  and  with  his  friends  dug  a  long  and  deep 
hole.  Then  he  called  the  people  together  from  all  quarters.  The 
old  men  threw  fire  into  the  hole  till  it  was  red  hot.  Then  they 
called  all  the  women  and  children  to  the  side  of  the  pit.  They 
obeying  the  call,  the  Phinaru  ordered  them  to  place  themselves  in 
groups  round  it,  and  to  dance  when  the  song  began.  This  they  did, 
a  man  dancing  with  his  wife,  a  Pirrauru  with  his  Pirrauru,  three 
youths  together,  and  so  on,  till  the  Pinnaru  pushed  them,  one  group 
after  the  other,  into  the  pit.  Only  a  few  remained  alive  of  all  those 
people,  and  the  Tidnamadukas,-  who  lived  in  that  locality,  observed 

*  Even  now  the  thunder  is  said  to  be  the  voice  of  a  dead  person  who  announces 
that  he  has  returned  to  life. 

^  From  Tidna,  a  foot,  and  Madiika,  a  mother,  or  grandmother,  or  ancestress.  A 
Tidnamaduka  is  a  man  who  claims  a  certain  tract  of  country  as  his,  and  whose  mother 
and  her  brothers  claim  it  for  him.      Tidnamaduka,  or,  shortly,  Madtika,  is  the  com- 


786        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


that  the  Pinnaru  and  his  party  intended  to  throw  all  of  them  also 
into  the  pit  Running  together  hastily,  they  threw  their  boomerangs 
at  the  old  men  and  broke  their  legs,  so  that  they  coula  not  escape. 
Then  they  threw  them  into  the  same  pit  which  they  had  intended 
for  them. 

The  intention  of  this  legend  appears  to  be  to  account  for  the 
taboo  which  exists  between  the  boys  after  circumcision  and  the 
women  of  the  tribe,  and  especially  between  them  and  their  sisters, 
who  are  forbidden  under  penalty  of  death  to  see  them  until  their 
wounds  are  healed. 

The  two  following  legends  recount  the  wanderings  of  two  parties 
of  young  Mura-mura  women,  carrying  a  dance  and  a  song,  which 
is  shown  in  the  wanderings  of  the  Yuri-ulu  to  be  connected  with  the 
ceremonies  of  circumcision. 

The  wanderings  commence  at  some  place  far  to  the  south-west 
of  Lake  Eyre  in  the  country  of  the  Kukata  tribe,  if  not  near  to  the 
coast.  They  extend  thence  to  the  south-west  of  Lake  Eyre  at 
Coward  Springs,  and  continue  round  the  south  of  the  Lake  to  the 
Lower  Cooper.  Here  there  are  petrifactions  which  mark  the 
localities  mentioned,  and  which  are  recognised  as  Mura-muras 
turned  into  stone.  These  are  the  girls,  who,  however,  are  yet  said 
by  the  legend  to  w^ander  further.  They  are  also  seen,  as  petri- 
factions, where  they  concealed  themselves  from  their  Mura-mura 
follower,  and  ridiculed  him.  Also  where  they  threw  the  Wona 
there  are  stones  commemorating  them.  The  traces  of  this  Wona 
game  are  pointed  out  in  straight  rows  of  petrifactions,  which  are 
held  to  be  Mura  or  sacred  things  which  no  one  may  injure. 

The  first  legend  is  composed  of  two  parts,  which  are  conjoined 
for  convenience  of  narrative.  The  first  part  is  the  Firha-malkara,  or 
the  Bowl-song,  which  belongs  to  the  Urabunna,  the  Tirari  section 
of  the  Dieri,  and  other  neighbouring  tribes,  and  ends  at  a  place 
called  Palaunkina.  The  second  commences  at  Pnndu-worani,  and 
belongs  to  the  Wonkanguru.  The  third  part  is  from  the  death  of 
the  Mura-mura  Madaputa-tupuru,  and  introduces  another  travelling 
group  of  young  women,  who  also  carry  a  song,  that  of  the  Wapiya, 
or  boomerang. 

This  latter  part  was  obtained  from  an  intelligent  old  man  of  the 
Wonkamala  tribe,  to  which  he  belonged,  and  was  subsequently 
confirmed  by  one  of  the  Wonkanguru,  who  had  lived  for  a  long 
time  among  the  Wonkamala,  and  whose  wife  was  of  that  tribe. 
The    second    part    of    the    legend,    namely    that    commencing   at 

plement  of  Pinlara.  Maduka  includes  everything  belonging  to  the  maternal  line, 
as  Pinlara  includes  everything  belonging  to  the  paternal  line.  For  instance,  a  father's 
Mura-mura,  together  with  his  "fatherland,"  is  his  Pinlara,  while  the  mother's 
brother,  sp)eaking  of  his  mother's  Mufa-niura  and  his  "  motherland,"  calls  it  his 
Maduka. 


APPENDIX  787 


Pundu-worani,  was  obtained  from  his  brother  and  other 
Wonkanguru  men. 

The  Wonkamala  man  came  to  the  Dieri  as  the  head  of  a  party 
bringing  the  Molonga  dance  from  the  north  :  and  subsequently  he 
went  away  southwards.^  Later  on  he  returned  northwards,  but 
became  ill,  and  died  near  Killalpanina.  He  was  considered  to  be 
a  great  medicine-man,  and  it  is  said  that  a  party  from  his  tribe  is 
to  come  down  to  take  his  bones  back  to  his  own  people  as  powerful 
naagic.  After  his  death  some  of  his  party  carried  the  Molonga 
dance  to  the  south,  and  the  others  travelled  round  the  .south  end 
of  Lake  Eyre  to  the  north-west. 

This  is  an  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  wanderings  still  take 
place  among  the  native  tribes  of  the  interior,  by  men  whose  mission 
accredits  them  to  the  tribes  to  which  they  come. 

The  PiRHA-MALKARA :  A  Legend  of  the  Urabunna  Tribe 

A  number  of  girls,  the  "  Mankara-waka-ya-pirna,"  ^  once  made 
a  journey,  accompanied  by  their  Ngaperi,  the  Mura-mura  Mada- 
puta-tupuru,  who  was  foolish  about  women,  and  closely  followed 
them.  They  started  from  Ala/kuma/ku,  and  marched  from  place 
to  place,  singing  and  dancing.  The  Fin  nam  followed  with  his 
many  dogs.  Then  they  marched  through  the  Midlaleri  country,^ 
and  at  the  south  end  of  I^ke  Eyre  they  found  many  Yelka,*  and 
called  the  place  Yelka-bakana,  where  many  girls  joined  them. 
Then  they  went  southwards  round  the  I.ake  to  the  lower  reaches 
of  the  Cooper,  where  at  Ditjiminka  ■'  other  girls  joined  them. 

Meanwhile  the  Pinnaru  had  fallen  behind  in  his  watchful 
pursuit,  and  saw,  when  seeking  to  follow  them,  that  there  were  the 
tracks  of  many  strange  girls,  who  had  traversed  the  whole  place  in 
search  of  mice.  He  followed  these  from  Nidli  barkuna,''  to  Palaun- 
kina,^  where  he  found  all  the  girls  hidden  from  him  behind 
bushes.     To  mock  him  each  only  showed  her  hair  tied  to  a  pointed 

*  See  Roth,  op.  tit.  pp.  120,  125. 

'  Miinkara  is  ' '  girl ,"  I  Vain  is  ' '  little, ' '  and  Pima  is  ' '  big. "  Vais"  and. "  These 
girls  are  by  another  legend  transferred  to  the  sky  as  stars,  the  former  being  the  Pleiades, 
and  the  latter  the  stars  in  the  \xh  of  Orion.  The  Pinnaru  Madaputa-tupuru  in  the 
first  part  of  this  legend  is  also  called  Marukadlana,  and  is  the  principal  star  in 
Scorpio.     The  name  means  "  thick  smoke,"  in  which  it  is  said  he  sat  by  his  fire. 

'  .l/jrf/rtoril/W/rtis  "nose,"  "  point,"  or  "  promontory,"  and  Arrt  is  "  steep. "  It 
refers  to  the  fact  that  at  that  place  the  sand-ridges  are  very  steep.  This  place  is  in 
the  country  of  the  Wimberinya,  a  small  horde  of  the  Kukata  trilje  on  the  west 
side  of  Lake  Gairdner. 

■*    Yelka  is  a  grass-like  plant  with  small  bulbs. 

*  From  Ditji,  the  sun,  and  Minka,  a  hole  into  which  he  went  at  night.  It  is 
situated  about  twenty  or  thirty  miles  from  Killalpanina,  near  Lake  Eyre. 

*  Nidli  is  "  a  mouse,"  and  liarkuna  is  "to  dig." 

7  So  named  from  the  shameless  behaviour  of  the  Pinnaru  towards  the  girls. 


788        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


shape  called  JViiburu,^  so  that  he  could  not  distinguish  one  girl  from 
the  other. 

From  here  they  marched  to  the  north-east,  where  at  Pundu- 
worani-  they  made  nose-pegs  for  themselves  of  Kuyamara  wood.^ 
With  these  the  septum  of  the  nose  was  bored,  and  the  peg  left 
therein,  till  they  arrived  at  Paia-mokuni,^  and  replaced  them  with  the 
quills  of  pelicans.  At  Dulderana,''  they  observed  a  wild  dog,  which 
they  enticed  to  come  to  them  by  calling  to  it,  "  Duldera  !  Duldera  ! 
Pa  !  Pa  !  Pa  I  "  The  dog  Duldera  came  to  them,  and  became  their 
faithful  companion. 

Because  of  the  great  cold  at  Ngunku-purunani''  they  caused 


FIG.    56. — Kt'LUA  (HAKEM  I.EUCOPTERA). 


FIG.    57. — PAIA-MOKU 

( DIDISCVS    OLA  UCIFOUUS) 


dense  bushes  to  grow  up,  behind  which  they  cowered  close  together. 
Again  marching  on,  they  saw  a  cormorant's  nest,  after  which  they 
named  the  place  Tantaniwirrinani.^     Having  killed  and  eaten  the 

*  This  is  the  word  applied  to  the  universal  practice  of  tying  up  the  hair. 
2  Pundu  is  the  name  for  the  nose-peg,  and  Wora  is  th6  plural  postfix. 

^  Kuyamara  is  a  bush,  the  twigs  of  which  are  used  in  the  funeral  ceremonies  of 
the  Dieri.      Kremophila  longifolia. 

*  Paia  is  "bird,  "and  J/o^«  is  "  bone  "  in  the  usual  senseof  the  word,  but  is  also  used 
for  something  hard  in  contrast  with  something  soft.  Thus  in  the  Dieri  language 
Punga-moku  means  the  beams,  that  is  the  "  bones,"  of  the  house,  as  at  Killalpanina, 
and  Pita-mokti  is  "  wood- bone  '  or  "tree-trunk."  The  Paia-moku  is  Didiscus 
glaucifolius. 

'  Dulderana  is  "  light  coloured  "or  "  white,"  thus  applied  to  alight-coloured  pelt. 

*  This  "  cowering  together  in  a  mob  "  is  from  Puruna,  to  cower,  and  Ngunku,  a 
mob  or  number  of  people. 

'  7rt«/rt/«"  is  in  Wonkanguru  a  cormorant ;  \x\Yi\^r\,  Malura.  Wirnnani  inDieri 
is  to  go  into  something. 


APPENDIX  789 


cormorant,  they  again  marched  on,  and  came  to  a  place  where  there 
was  a  great  abundance  of  Piltai  ^  growing  on  the  sandhills,  and  they 
named  the  place  after  it,  Piltakali.  Another  place,  where  they 
made  a  hut  of  the  Kulua^  they  called  Kuluantjudu.  At  a  place 
where,  by  reason  of  the  great  cold,  they  made  a  fire  to  warm  them- 
selves, they  called  it  Makatira,^  because  when  marching  they 
carried  a  piece  of  lighted  wood.  They  came  to  Kakurawonta,* 
where  a  hawk  flew  off  its  nest  when  they  broke  some  twigs,  and  the 
girls  were  so  startled  that  they  all  shrieked  out,  and  each  wished  to 
be  the  first  to  find  the  eggs,  which  they  shared  between  them. 
This  place  was  named  from  the  Kakura  bush,  the  fruit  of  which 
they  plucked  as  they  travelled.  Their  next  halt  was  at  Tindi-tindi- 
kupa-worana,"*  where  they  tried  to  catch  a  Tindi-tindi  and  its  young, 
but  without  success,  and  then  went  on  to  Warukati-walpu,*^  where 
they  collected  the  bones  of  an  emu  which  a  wild  dog  had  killed. 
From  them  they  prepared  some  paint  with  which  they  painted  their 
faces,  breasts,  and  arms. 

By  this  time  the  cold  season  had  passed  over,  and  the  sun 
became  very  hot.  It  had  not  rained  for  a  long  time,  and  they 
suffered  very  much  from  the  great  drought.  To  save  themselves 
from  perishing,  they  dug  holes  at  Pul-yudu,"  throwing  the  earth  out 
backwards,  and  so  travelled  underground,  in  the  damp  earth.  The 
Pinnaru,  who  had  marched  on  in  advance,  wondered  that  he  had  not 
seen  any  of  his  daughters  following  him,  and  went  back  to  seek  them, 
but  without  success.  At  Ningkaka,**  where  he  stood  on  a  sandhill 
looking  round  about  for  them,  the  summit  of  the  hill  was  flattened 
and  widened  by  his  steps.  Still  keeping  on  the  watch,  he  observed 
that  the  girls  appeared  at  the  surface  at  Dityina,"  where  they  played 
about  actively,  and  at  Wonamidlanina,^*^  where  they  threw  the  W'ona 
in  competition  with  each  other.  They  then  let  the  wind  carry  away 
bunches  of  the  Mindri  plant,  and  running  after  theni  caught  them 
again.  As  the  Pinnaru  persisted  in  watching  them  with  longing, 
they  covered  themselves  for  the  sake  of  modesty  with  Karpana,^^  at 

^  Piltai  is  in  Dieri  Wirha,  the  Acacia  salicina,  the  leaves  of  which  are  burned 
by  the  blacks  and  the  ashes  mixed  with  Pitcheri. 

■•*  The  Kulua  is  the  Needle-bush,  Hakea  Leucoptera. 

'  Makatira  is  a  fire-stick  ;  in  the  Dieri,  Turumanya,  i.e.  "make  a  fire,"  from 
Turu,  fire. 

■•  Kakura  is  a  bush  which  bears  edible  fruit. 

*  The  Tindi-tindi  is  probably  one  of  the  Fly-catchers,  called  by  the  whites 
"  Wagtail."     Kupa  is  "  child,"  and  Worana  is  the  plural  postfix. 

••    XVarukati  is  "emu,"  and  Walpu  is  "  lx)ne." 

^  Pul-yudu  is  a  burrow  made  by  any  animal  which  throws  the  earth  out  behind 
it,  such  as  the  Madura,  the  kangaroo-rat. 

"  To  look  out. 

"  To  appear  shining  ;  in  Dieri,   Yirdinato. 

*"  The  IVona  is  an  instrument  used  by  the  women  in  sport  and  for  fighting. 

*'    To  wesive  together.     Kanta-karpalina  is  to  weave  grass  for  aprons. 

3E 


790        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

a  place  called  Mankara-limpiworana.^  In  the  lake  at  that  place 
they  disported  themselves  in  the  water,  by  striking  it  with  the  flat  of 
the  hand  and  thus  raising  themselves  up  and  again  sinking  down  in 
it.     Then  the  Pinnaru  involuntarily  said  these  words  '^ : — 

^^  Aftto  niipa         kairi  balanpa  pitaira" 

My  wives         they         sliding  (in)         water  strike  (it). 

The  girls,  hearing  this,  cried  out,  "  What  do  you  want  ?  "  to  which  he 
replied,  "  Nothing,  I  was  only  calling  my  dog  Uulderana." 

At  the  next  resting-place,  at  Nipatakana,'^  the  older  girls  told  the 
younger  to  spread  out  the  skin  rugs  to  dry,  so  that  they  should  not 
be  spoilt.-*  The  Mankara-waka  did  this,  stretching  them  out  with 
wooden  pegs. 

After  that  they  remained  at  Nipatakana  for  some  time,  then 
marching  farther  to  Kalyara-kodiangu,-'  wliere  the  Pinnaru  brought 
all  the  girls  before  him,  and  wished  to  take  the  youngest  for  his  wife. 
Here  an  immense  flood  overtook  them,  extinguishing  their  fires, 
covering  their  camp,  and  driving  them  on  to  the  sandhills.  The 
Pinnaru  endeavoured  to  stay  the  flood,  but  was  driven  by  it  to 
Kaliriwa,*^  where  the  whole  of  the  flat  land  was  covered  by  water. 
He  took  refuge  on  a  sandhill  called  Yendada,'^  but  the  water  rose 
higher  and  higher  until  it  was  covered,  and  the  Pinnaru  fell  on  the 
ground  exhausted,  from  which  the  place  was  named  Madaputa-kuda- 
kun.^  Hastily  rising,  he  made  a  mound  of  earth  at  Wadlupirpaka  ;" 
but  all  in  vain,  as  was  also  his  attempt  to  stay  the  waters  at  Wolka- 
wolka^°  by  driving  stakes  into  the  ground,  fastening  cross-pieces  to 
them,  and  covering  them  with  grass  and  bushes.  The  current  broke 
through  and  carried  it  all  away. 

It  was  only  at  Kirha-kudana  ^^  that  the  Pinnaru  succeeded  in 
stopping  the  further  spread  of  the  flood -waters,  by  sticking  his 
boomerang  in  the  ground  wiih  its  back  toward  the  current.  Then 
having  brought  the  waters  to  a  standstill,  he  converted  them  with 
his  hand  into  a  wide-spread  layer  of  salt  at  Mara-karaka.^- 

'   Timpiwora  is  a  plant,  which  has  not  been  identified. 
'■'  In  the  Wonkanguru  language. 

*  Nipa  is  "  clothing,"  and  takana  is  "to  peg  out." 

♦  As  the  Wonkanguru  have  not  any  skin  rugs,  the  context  suggests  that  as  the 
Mankara  started  from  the  Kukata  country,  they  had  obtained  skin  rugs  from  the 
coast  tribes. 

"  Kalyara  is  "quick,"  Kodiangu  is  "to  flow"  or  "run  like  water." 

•  To  overflow,  to  blot  out,  to  cover  the  ground.  ''    Yendada  is  ' '  ridicule. " 

'  Madaputa  is  the  Wonkanguru  word  for  Pinnaru,  and  Kuda-kudana  is  "to  fall 
down. " 

»    VVadlu  is  a  sandhill ;  in  Dieri,  Dako.  ^^    Wolka-wolka  is  any  young  animal. 

'•'  Kirha  is  "  boomerang."  If  the  natives  at  Killalpanina  wish  to  stop  the  flood- 
waters  from  spreading,  they  stick  a  boomerang  in  the  ground,  especially  that  kind 
that  returns  when  thrown — Kandri  or  Wanamaru.  Thus  the  Kopperamana  and 
Killalpanina  blacks  think  when  the  flood -waters  do  not  extend  to  them  that  the 
people  at  Pando  and  Perigundi  have  stopped  their  flow  in  this  manner. 

"    Mara  is  "the  hand,"  and  Karaka  is  "to  touch." 


i 


APPENDIX  791 


The  next  three  stations  on  their  march  received  their  names 
from  the  dances  which  the  Pinnaru  taught  the  girls,  namely  Ngapar- 
alyerki,  from  the  waggling  of  their  breasts  in  dancing;  Wirintyangura,^ 
from  the  great  fire  round  which  they  danced  ;  and  Kinyindi,  from  the 
quivering  of  their  thighs  in  dancing. 

The  Pinnaru  beat  time  to  the  dance,  and  sang  to  it.^  From 
Wirintyangura  they  went  to  other  places,  where  they  danced ;  and 
the  girls  being  fast  asleep  at  one  place,  were  wakened  by  Madaputa- 
tupuru  making  a  great  noise  by  striking  his  Pirha.  When  the  girls 
started  up  in  alarm,  he  said,  "  Madagura  yidliyidli  madagura"  ^  and 
then,  "  Did  I  not  think  that  you  would  keep  the  Madagura  from  me, 
and  eat  it  all  up  ? "  The  girls  could  not  say  anything  to  this, 
because  they  had  eaten  the  Madagura  as  a  dainty  morsel,  leaving 
the  Pinnaru,  who  was  almost  helpless  by  reason  of  his  increasing 
weakness,  to  the  sole  care  of  his  own  daughters.  With  difficulty 
they  brought  their  father  to  Kumarina,^  where  he  died,  from  loss 
of  blood. 

The  blacks  say  that  the  colour  of  the  water  of  this  lake  is  a 
proof  of  the  death  of  the  Mura-mura,  and  that  his  body  is  still  to 
be  seen  there  in  the  form  of  a  great  rock,  while  his  spirit  is  a  star, 
which  is  identified  as  Antares. 


The  Wapiva  Legend  of  the  Wonkamala  Tribe 

When  the  Mura-mura  Madaputa-tupuru  died,  his  daughters 
mourned  for  him  and  buried  him.  Then  leaving  the  neighbourhood 
of  Lake  Kumarina,  they  travelled  farther  north,  gathering  the  mulga 
apples ''  by  the  way,  some  of  which  they  roasted,  and  carried  the 
remainder  with  them  in  their  bags. 

After  a  long  march  they  reached  Ukaralya  Creek,"  on  the 
opposite  bank  of  which  they  saw  the  Wapiya  girls. '^  They  greeted 
each  other  across  the  Creek,  and  questioned  each  other  about  this 
and  that. 

"  What  do  you  eat  ?  "  said  the  Wapiya  girls  ;  to  which  the  others 
replied,  *'  Turutudu  ;  and  what  do  you  eat  ?  "  **     Then  they  asked 

'    Wirintya  means  "fire,"  and  Xgitra  is  "camp." 

'■*  Tht  time  is  marked  in  the  singing  of  this  song  by  striking  on  the  Pirha  with  the 
hand,  hence  the  name  Pirha-malkara. 

3  Madagura  is  a  small  marsupial,  and  Yidli-yidli  is  "fat-fat,"  that  is,  "very 
fat."  *  A'u mart  is  "blood." 

*  The  Xfalka  is  the  Mulga,  Acacia  aneura. 

*  Ukaralya  means  "  girls"  ;  in  the  Dieri  language,  Mankara. 
^    11 '(7/ y/i/ is  "  boomerang. " 

*  In  Wonkamala  this  is  "  Munukudu  takatyi  ngana  tadyirif"  or  in  the  Dieri, 
"  Muniikudu  ngaiani  inyiif"  Munukudu  is  a  plant  with  grass-like  foliage  and 
bearing  tuliers,  which  arc  not  in  clusters,  but  under  each  other.  The  plant  grows  on 
the  sandhills,  under  bushes. 


792 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


about  their  respective  Mura^  or  sacred  songs,  and  the  Mankara- 
waka-ya-pirna  said  theirs  was  the  Pirha,  while  the  other  girls  said 

that  theirs  was  the  Wapiya.  Then, 
being  still  separated  by  the  creek, 
they  gave  a  representation  of  their 
respective  songs,  the  Mankara- 
pirna  singing  their  Pirha  song, 
while  the  other  girls  beat  time 
with  two  boomerangs.  Then  the 
Wapiya  girls  asked  how  they  in- 
tended to  cross  the  creek,  and 
the  others  said,  "  We  will  dance 
straight  across."  This  they  did, 
and  landed  on  the  opposite 
bank,  where  they  abandoned  their 
.language  and  took  that  of  the 
Wapiya  girls,  their  future  fellow- 
travellers,  namely  the  VV^onkamala. 
Then  the  whole  group  of 
girls,  dancing  together,  wandered 
farther  to  the  north.  Their  way 
led  them  to  Paridikadi,-  where 
they  were  bitten  by  ants,  and  then 
to  I^kuramantyi,^  finally  to  Wil- 
pukudiangu,"*  where  they  thought 
they  saw  some  Duntyi ''  at  a  dis- 
tance. Hastening  forward  to  tear 
it  up,  they  found,  on  coming 
nearer,  that  the  supposed  bush 
was  a  very  old,  bald-headed  man, 
whose  long,  straggling  beard, 
blown  by  the  wind,  gave  him  the 
appearance  of  a  bush  of  Duntyi. 
Laughing  at  his  appearance,  and 
at  their  mistake,  they  went  on, 
and  in  the  well-wooded  Ngamara "  they  found  much  gum,  which 
they  gathered  in  their  Pirhas,  and  mixing  water  with  it,  drank  it, 
enjoying   its   sweet   flavour.       Having   filled    their   bags   with    this 

^  Mura  is  something  hallowed  or  sacred,  as  for  instance  a  tree  under  which, 
according  to  some  legend,  a  Mura-mura  slept. 

'^  Ant-path,  from  Paridan,  ant,  and  Kadi,  a  way  or  path. 

"'  The  actual  meaning  of  this  is  not  known  to  me  ;  all  that  can  be  said  is  that  in 
some  way  it  is  connected  with  the  male  member  of  the  dog. 

*  Wilpu-kudiangu  is  to  twist  a  thread  or  cord. 

*  Duntyi  is  a  plant  which  has  a  silvery  appearance — Crotalaria  sp. 

*  Ngamara  is  probably  the  equivalent  of  the  Dieri  word  Buka-ngandri,  which 
may  be  rendered  as  "  bread-mother,"  in  other  words,  a  thick  forest. 


KIG.    58. — DUNTYI    {CROTALARJA    SP.  ). 


APPENDIX  '  793 


gum,  they  went  farther,  till  they  heard  a  strange  noise  in  the 
distance.  "What  is  that?"  they  said  to  each  other;  but  still  going 
on  with  caution,  they  came  to  Paltjura,  a  vast  sheet  of  water  with 
high  tumbling  waves.  Their  fear  was  changed  into  joy,  and  they 
hastened  forwards  and  bathed  in  the  waters.  Then  they  followed 
the  shore  till  they  were  stopped  by  a  steep  hill,  which  rose  up  from 
the  water  with  impassable  rocks.  Some  were  for  going  back,  but  others 
were  for  going  on.  The  former  returned  homewards,  meeting  with  a 
youth,  whom  they  circumcised.  Then  they  sent  him  to  a  neighbouring 
camp  to  fetch  some  wood  for  their  fire ;  but  when  there  he  wished 
to  have  access  to  the  women  and  girls,  though  his  wound  was  still 
unhealed.  They,  being  enraged  by  his  immodest  behaviour,  killed 
him.  The  girls  waited  for  some  time ;  but  as  he  did  not  return, 
they  believed  that  he  was  dead,  and  went  on  their  journey.  After  a 
time,  they  came  to  a  place  where  a  number  of  men  had  assembled 
for  the  Wodampa  dance. ^  These  people,  being  enraged  because 
these  girls  had  seen  what  it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to  see,  strangled 
them. 

Meanwhile  the  other  girls,  who  had  not  feared  the  steep  hill, 
danced  to  it  in  a  line ;  and  the  oldest  one  of  them  struck  it 
with  her  IVona,^  so  that  it  split,  and  they  all  danced  through  the 
opening.  Having  passed  through  the  hill,  they  came  to  where  the 
old  Ankuritcha  was  sitting  by  himself  in  front  of  his  camp,  twisting 
string.  They  seated  themselves  in  a  circle  round  the  old  man,  who 
was  astonished,  and  to  whom  they  gave  their  pet  dog,  Dulderana. 
Then  as  he  sat  listening  to  them,  with  his  ear  turned  to  the  sky, 
Arawotya,  who  lives  there,  let  down  a  long  hair  cord  and  drew  them 
up  to  himself,  folding  up  the  cord  as  he  did  so ;  the  dog  Dulderana 
being  first,  and  the  old  Pinnaru  Ankuritcha  being  the  last.  But 
one  of  the  girls  in  climbing  up  the  cord  cut  her  hand  with  her  IVona, 
and  let  her  Pirha  fall.  She  climbed  down  to  get  it,  but  was  not 
able  to  climb  up  again,  because  the  cord  had  been  drawn  up  out  of 
her  reach  by  Arawotya,  Therefore  she  remained  below,  and  met 
with  two  young  men,  who  threw  their  weapons  at  her.  She  being 
covered  with  shining  scales,  the  weapons  glanced  off  her  harmlessly, 
and  returned  to  them.  Finally  one  of  them  surrounded  himself 
with  tree-stems  so  that  he  also  was  invulnerable.  Then,  while  the 
girl  endeavoured  to  strike  him  with  her  Jf'ona,  the  other  youth 
sprang  towards  her,  and  burst  her  covering  of  scales  with  the  stem 
of  a  tree,  so  that  she  was  without  covering.  Then  she  gave  herself 
up,  and  became  his  wife. 

.All  that  I  have  been  able  to  learn  of  Arawotya  is  that  he  at  one 

'  The  Wodampa  dance  is  the  most  sacred  dance  that  the  Wonkamala  and  the 
Ngulubulu  have.      It  recounts  the  origin  of  mankind. 

*  A  Wona  is  the  woman's  digging-stick,  and  is  a  formidable  weapon  of  defence. 


794        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

time  wandered  over  the  earth,  making  the  deep  springs  which  are  to 
be  seen  in  otherwise  waterless  parts  of  Western  Queensland.  After 
he  did  this  he  went  up  to  the  sky. 

Paltjura  is,  in  the  Wonkamala  language,  "  an  expanse  "  ;  in  Dieri, 
Palara.  According  to  the  statements  of  the  naiive  informants, 
Paltjura  is  to  be  understood  as  being  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  a 
distance  of  over  five  hundred  miles  from  the  Wonkamala  country 
in  a  straight  line.  The  wanderings  recorded  in  these  several  legends 
are  mainly  in  a  general  north  and  south  direction.  Thus,  including 
those  of  the  Yuri-ulu  and  of  the  Mankara-waka-ya-pirna,  the  total 
range  is  from  the  country  west  of  Spencer  Gulf  in  the  south  to  the 
Gulf  of  Carpentaria  in  the  north. 

Anti-etva  and  Ngardu-etya^ 
Part  I 

This  legend  consists  of  ,  three  parts.  The  first  and  second 
belong  exclusively  to  the  localities  Kadri-pairi  and  Innamincka,^  and 
are  in  the  Yantruwunta  language.  The  third  is  in  Dieri,  but  is 
found  also  in  the  Yaurorka  and  Yantruwunta.  The  songs  belonging 
to  this  legend  are  sung  at  the  ceremonies  held  near  Kudna-ngauani, 
which  are  referred  to  later  on. 

Two  Mura-muras  lived  together  at  Kadri-pairiwilpa,'*  one  being  a 
Nardoo-^7i.\}c\^XQx,  and  the  other  a  hunter,  and  both  were  in  the 
relation  of  Tidnara.^  One  day,  when  they  returned  to  their  camp  at 
eveniog  with  food,  the  hunter  undertook  to  grind  the  Nardoo,  while 
the  other  prepared  the  game  The  latter  observed  that  his  Tidtiara, 
while  grinding  the  Nardoo,  ate  some  of  it,  and  upbraided  him  with 
doing  so.  But  as  he  denied  having  done  it,  the  other  thrust  his 
hand  down  his  throat  into  his  stomach  and  brought  up  a  lump  of 
Nardoo,  which  he  then  ate  himself.  Then  he  ate  the  remainder  of 
the  Nardoo  which  his  Tidnara  had  ground,  and  finally  devoured  all 
the  game,  so  that  the  other  Mura-mura  had  to  remain  with  an 
empty  stomach. 

*  Anti  or  Nganti  is  ' '  flesh,"  and  etya  is  ' '  recurrence  "or  "  jjersistence. "  Ngardu, 
or,  as  it  is  usually  spelled,  Nardoo,  is  the  Marsilia  sp. ,  on  which  the  explorers  Burke  and 
Wills  endeavoured  to  support  themselves  at  Cooper's  Creek.  Anti-etya  is  one  who 
eats  much  game  ;  he  who  is  often  in  connection  with  game  ;  a  hunter.  Ngardu-etya 
is  one  who  collects  Nardoo  and  lives  mainly  upon  it. 

'■^  Innaminka,  or  properly  Yidni-minka,  means  "You  (are  a)  hole,"  from  Yidni, 
' '  you, "  and  Minka,  ' '  a  hole. " 

^  Kadri-pairiwilpa  is  the  Milky  Way,  the  "river-bed  of  the  sky,"  Kairi  being 
' '  river. ' ' 

*  That  both  could  be  Tidnara  is  to  be  understood  when  one  considers  the  peculiar 
system  of  relationship  of  the  Dieri.  Ego  being  a  Dieri,  my  mother's  mother  [Kaiiini) 
is  equally  my  elder  sister  [Kaku),  so  that  her  son  (my  mother's  brother)  is  my 
Tidnara,  for  he  is  my  sister's  son.  In  an  analogous  manner  two  such  men  may  be 
both  Kaka,  that  is,  mother's  brother. 


APPENDIX  795 


On  the  following  morning  he  considered  how  he  might  manage 
not  to  be  defrauded  by  his  companion.  He  went  out  in  company 
with  him,  but  always  lagging  behind,  until  at  length  he  saw  him 
disappear  over  a  distant  sandhill.  He  then  hastily  turned  back,  and 
making  an  immense  number  of  footprints  as  of  men,  women,  and 
children,  he  went  to  his  camp.  There  he  built  up  a  great  number 
of  huts,  as  if  many  people  had  arrived  and  camped.  Then  he  set  to 
work  to  grind  Faua,  which  he  had  gathered  on  his  way  back,  but 
when  he  began  to  grind  it  the  stone  broke,  and  he  sought  another; 
but  it  also  broke.  Then  he  took  his  shoulder-blade  and  smoothed 
it  into  a  Ngurtu  ;  ^  and,  cutting  off  the  point  of  his  tongue,  he  used 
it  as  a  Marda-kuparu  ^  to  grind  with.  He  placed  the  larger  stone 
over  a  hole  in  the  ground,  in  which  he  had  placed  a  Pirha  ;  and, 
dropping  the  seed  on  the  stone,  he  ground  it  with  the  other,  and  let 
the  meal  fall  into  the  bowl  below. 

In  the  evening,  when  the  other  Mura-mura  returned,  he  observed 
the  numerous  footprints,  and  following  them  saw  at  his  camp  a 
great  number  of  new  huts,  and  was  much  frightened,  thinking  that 
his  Tidnara  must  have  been  killed.  Weary  and  sad,  he  lay  down 
and  slept,  but  was  awakened  by  the  noise  of  a  great  rushing  wind. 
Again  he  slept,  and  again  he  was  roused  by  it,  but  at  length,  overcome 
by  weariness,  he  slept  till  morning. 

The  other  Mura-mura  had  ground  a  mass  of  Paua^  and  baked 
a  number  of  cakes  of  it.  He  then  threw  one  cake  after  the  other 
towards  the  hut  of  his  Tidnara,  so  that  a  complete  path  was  made. 
At  daybreak  the  latter  was  wakened  by  the  smell  of  the  newly-baked 
cakes.  He  collected  them  one  after  the  other  until  he  saw  where 
his  Tidnara,  whom  he  did  not  recognise,  was  sitting  on  the  Ngurtu, 
which  he  had  placed  on  the  ground.  He  then  walked  round  the 
hut  till,  recognising  his  Tidnara,  he  rushed  to  him  and  embraced 
him,  shaking  him  in  his  joy,  till  both  of  them,  with  the  Ngurtu,  sank 
into  the  ground.  Then  they  came  out  again,  and  one  said  to  the 
other,  "  Where  do  you  wish  that  I  should  go  to  ? "  "  That  way," 
said  the  other,  pointing  in  a  certain  direction.  He  went  that  way, 
and  the  other  sent  him  still  farther,  until,  when  he  had  gone  a  long 
distance,  he  said  to  him,  "  Remain."  Then  in  the  same  manner  the 
latter  sent  the  former  to  a  distant  place. 

Part  II 

Anti-etya  lived  at  Kadri-pairi,  but  Ngardu-etya  remained  at 
Innamincka  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.     Long  after  that  time, 

^   Ngurtu  is  a  large  slab  of  stone  on  which  the  Paua  or  Nardoo  is  ground. 

■*  Marda-kuparu  is  a  smaller  and  harder  stone,  with  which  the  seeds  or  Nardoo 
are  ground  upon  the  Ngurtu.  It  is  named  from  Marda,  "a  stone,"  and  Kuparu, 
' '  young  "  ;  thus  the  young  of  the  stone,  a  small  stone. 


796        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

strangers  came  to  that  place  and  found  the  bones  of  the  Mura-mura 
Ngardu-etya.  They  collected  them  and  placed  them  in  a  Bili- 
milki}  and  put  it  up  in  the  branches  of  a  tree,  covered  with  leaves. 
In  time  people  settled  there,  but  they  sickened,  and  a  great  number 
died.  In  this  emergency  a  Pinnaru  sent  his  wife  out  to  call  the 
people  together  from  all  quarters,  to  hold  a  great  ceremony  to  put 
a  stop  to  the  mortality.-  They  came  from  all  round,  and  decorating 
themselves  with  emu  and  Katatara  ^  feathers,  the  ceremonies  com- 
menced. The  bag  containing  the  bones  of  the  dead  Mura-nmra  was 
taken  down  from  the  tree,  and  two  of  the  Pinnarus  danced.  Then 
they  took  the  backbone  of  the  dead  Mura-mura,  and  each  wound  a 
piece  of  cord  about  it.  Two  other  people,  a  man  and  his  wife,  also 
wound  the  cord  once  each  round  the  bone.  Then  all  the  people 
did  likewise,  in  pairs,  until  the  bone  was  quite  hidden  from  sight.* 
Having  thus  strengthened  the  backbone  of  the  Mura-mura,  they 
were  now  protected  from  the  sickness. 

Part  III 

While  Ngardu-etya  went  to  Innamincka  in  the  east,  Anti-etya 
lived  at  Kadri-pairi.  The  Nidla  and  Punta  were  his  food,  and 
there  were  such  numi)ers  of  the  Kauri'^  there  that  he  could  hardly 
protect  himself  from  them.  One  day,  when  a  fierce  hot  wind  blew 
and  there  was  a  sand-storm,  trees  were  broken,  and  twigs  were 
carried  by  the  wind,  and  one  of  these  struck  the  Mura-mura  on  the 
face.  When  the  storm  was  over,  he  looked  round  to  see  where 
the  tree  was  from  which  it  had  been  carried.  He  observed  it 
in  the  far  distance,  and  hastened  towards  it.  After  a  time  he 
arrived  where  it  stood  at  Nyulin-yanira.^  He  determined  to  uproot 
it ;  and  rubbing  it  with  the  sweat  of  his  armpits,  lifted  it  slightly  up. 
Again  rubbing  the  sweat  into  the  butt  of  the  tree,  he  seized  it,  and, 
as  if  of  its  own  account,  it  rose  out  of  the  ground,  roots  and  all. 
He  freed  it  from  its  roots  and  branches,  removed  the  bark,  and 
carried  it  on  his  shoulders   to   Kadri-pairi,  where   he  pointed   the 

'  This  is  a  bag,  Bili  or  Pili  ;  Milki  is  the  ' '  eye. "  There  are  ' '  eyes  "  worked  on 
this  kind  of  bag,  which  is  thereby  distinguished  from  another  kind  of  bag  without 
eyes  and  of  a  different  kind  of  texture. 

"^  Women  are  still  employed  as  messengers,  especially  in  the  Mindari  ceremonies. 
In  cases  where  it  is  supposed  that  some  man  has  been  killed  "by  the  bone,"  a 
woman  is  sent  to  the  supposed  culprit,  and  is  expected  to  obtain,  by  her  favours,  the 
knowledge  where  the  bone  is  hidden,  or  even  to  obtain  it. 

•'  The  shell  parrakeet. 

*  When  this  ceremony  is  held  at  Innamincka,  small  staves,  thickly  wound  round 
with  string,  are  used  to  represent  the  backl)one  of  the  Mura-mura. 

'  Nidla,  Punta,  and  Kauri  are  small  marsupials.  The  latter  named  is  at  times 
migratory.  I  have  not  been  able  to  identify  them.  Locally,  the  white  settlers  call 
them  "  rats." 

'  At  Farrar's  Creek,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  Kadri-pairi. 


APPENDIX  797 


upper  end,  then  bent  it  somewhat,  and  made  it  into  a  Turu-kuntyi.^ 
In  the  night  the  rats  came  in  such  numbers  that  they  destroyed  his 
camp,  and  prevented  him  from  even  lying  down,  so  that  he  sat  the 
whole   night   through   holding   the   Turu-kuntyi  before   him.     The 
next  morning  he  went  hunting  Kauri,  following  their  footprints  to 
the  hiding-places  in  which  they  had  concealed  themselves  at  day- 
break.    Thrusting  his  Turu-kuntyi  into  a  hole,  he  twisted  it  about, 
and  thought  that  he  heard  a  sound  of  scratching  at  the  other  end 
of  the  burrow.     Then,  as  the  rats  came  out,  he  killed  them,  and 
collected  them  in  three  great  heaps.      At  last  a  Kapita  came  out, 
which  he  caught  by  the  neck  instead  of  by  the  tail,  and  it  bit  him 
in  the  finger.     Then  he  let  it  go,  and  he  saw  it  escape  into  another 
hole.     The  blood  having  stopped,  and  the  pain  abated,  he  returned 
to  the  three  heaps  of  rats,  but  did  not  roast  them,  because  by  doing 
so  he  would  lose  all  the  fat.     He  therefore  swallowed  them  raw, 
one  after  the  other.     Then  he  suddenly  became  aware  that  a  tail 
was  growing  out  of  him,  longer  and  longer,  until  the  end  of  it  stuck 
into  one  of  his  eyes  and  blinded  him.     For  three  days  he  remained 
sightless,  until  a  film  came  off  his  eye,  and  he  could  see  that  his 
whole  body  was  coloured  like  a  rainbow.     Then  he  sought  for  a 
shelter  to  live  in,  and  coming  to  a  suitable  sandhill,  he  said   to 
himself,  "  Shall  I  live  upon  the  top  of  it,  where  people  might  be 
afraid  of  me,  or  shall  I  make  a  cave  in  it  ?  "     Then  he  made  a  cave 
in  the  sandhill,  and  lived  therein.      Meanwhile  a  man  came  there 
who   was  a  hunter  of  birds,  and  Antietya  told  him  to  take  emu 
feathers  and  other  things,  and  carry  them  to  the  Mura-mura  Andru- 
tampana,-  who  lived  farther  to  the  north.     He  was  to  tell  him  that, 
after  the  death  of  Anti-etya,   the  Yetikit  (son's  son)  of  the  former 
should  have  these  things,  and  should  bring  down  the  sacred  song 
of  Andru-tampana  to  be  joined  with  that  of  tiie  Mura-mura  Minkani. 
Thus  it  happened  that  while- Anti-etya,  as  the  Mura-mura  Minkani, 
burrowed  in  his  sandhill  deeper  and  deeper,  the  man  carried  the 
presents  and  the  song  to  the  Mura-mura  Andru-tampana  ;  and  since 
that  time  the  two  songs  have  been  combined. 

This  legend  identifies  Anti-etya  with  the  Mura-mura  Minkani, 
whose  ceremonies  are  held  periodically  by  the  Dieri,  Yaurorka, 
Yantruwunta,  Marula,  Yelyuyendi,  Karanguru,  and  Ngameni,  at 
Kudna-ngauana,  on  the  Cooper.  All  that  I  have  been  able  to  learn 
so  far  as  to  the  ceremonies  is  as  follows : — 

*  This  implement  is  usually  made  out  of  the  root  of  the  Mulga  tree,  and  is  used 
for  digging  the  Kauri  and  other  small  animals  out  of  their  burrows. 

^  The  meaning  of  this  name  has  not  been  ascertained,  nor  the  legend  relating  to 
him  obtained. 


798        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


The  Minkani  Ceremonies 

The  object  of  the  meeting  of  the  tribes  is  to  obtain  a  plentiful 
crop  of  IVoma  and  Kapiri  by  their  ceremonies. 

The  Mura-mura  Minkani  is,  as  mentioned  in  the  legend,  hidden 
in  his  cave,  deep  in  a  sandhill.  To  judge  from  the  description 
given,  his  remains  seem  to  be  those  of  one  of  the  fossil  animals  or 
reptiles  which  are  found  in  the  deltas  of  the  rivers  emptying  them- 
selves into  Lake  Eyre,  and  which  the  Dieri  call  Kadimarkara. 
When  the  actual  ceremony  takes  place,  the  women  are  left  at  the 
camp,  and  the  men  proceed  alone  to  the  place  where  the  Mura-mura 
is  to  be  uncovered.  They  dig  down  till  damp  earth  is  reached,  and 
also  what  they  call  the  excrement  of  the  Mura-mura.  The  digging 
is  then  very  carefully  done  till,  as  the  Dieri  say,  the  "  elbow  "  of  the 
Mura-mura  is  uncovered.  Then  two  men  stand  over  him,  and  the 
vein  of  the  arm  of  each  being  opened,  the  blood  is  allowed  to  fall 
upon  the  Mura-mura.  The  Minkani  song  is  now  sung,  and  the 
men,  in  a  state  of  frenzy,  strike  at  each  other  with  weapons,  until 
they  reach  the  camp,  distant  about  a  mile.  The  women,  who  have 
come  out  to  meet  them,  rush  forward  with  loud  outcries,  and  hold 
shields  over  their  husbands  to  protect  them,  and  stop  the  fighting. 
The  Tidnamadukas  collect  the  blood  dropping  from  their  wounds, 
and  scatter  it,  mixed  with  "excrement"  from  the  Minkani's  cave, 
over  the  sandhills,  so  that  they  may  bring  forth  the  young  Woma 
and  Kapiri  (carpet-snake)  lizard  hidden  in  them.^ 

This  ceremony  is  undoubtedly  similar  to  the  Intichiuma  cere- 
monies performed  by  the  men  of  the  Kangaroo  totem  described  by 
Spencer  and  Gillen,'*'  and  the  intention  is  the  same,  namely,  to  pro- 
duce a  crop  of  the  totem  food-animal.  In  this  case  the  men  who 
assemble  for  that  purpose  should  be,  according  to  all  similar  practices, 
of  the  totem  animal  which  they  intend  to  produce,  and  therefore  of 
the  Woma  and  Kapiri  Murdus.  This,  however,  I  have  not  been 
able  to  ascertain. 


The  Darana  Legend  of  the  Dieri  Tribe 

This  is  one  of  those  legends  which  relate  to  the  production  of 
rain,  and  the  Mura-mura  Darana  is  one  of  the  most  highly  con- 
sidered of  the  rain-making  Mura-muras  at  Pando  (Lake  Hope). 

When  no  rain  had  fallen  for  a  long  time,  and  the  land  was  desert 
and  waste,  Darana  produced  rain  by  singing  continually,  while 
looking    towards   the    north.-''      The   rain   fell   and   the  water  rose 

'  As  to  Tidnamaduka,  see  footnote  2,  p.  785.  ^  Op.  cit.  195. 

^  The  great  rains  come  from  that  quarter. 


APPENDIX  799 


steadily,  till  it  was  up  to  his  knees,  then  to  his  hips,  and  finally  to 
his  neck.  He  waded  through  the  waters  to  the  sources  of  the  river, 
where  he  fixed  his  Kandri  in  the  ground,  and  the  rain  ceased. 
Then  vegetation  grew  luxuriantly,  and  the  Mulurtt  ^  settled  them- 
selves in  it  in  enormous  numbers.  The  Mura-mura  drove  them 
together  by  his  songs,  dried  them,  and  packed  them  in  bags,  and 
hung  these  on  the  trees.  Being  invited  by  a  friendly  Mura-mura 
to  visit  him  and  eat  Faua,  he  went  with  all  his  following,  among 
whom  were  a  number  of  cripples,  who  travelled  along  on  their  knees, 
elbows,  and  ankles.  Two  youths,  however,  the  Dara-ulu,  remained 
behind,  and  seeing  the  bundles  hanging  on  trees,  threw  their 
boomerangs  at  them.  He  who  stood  on  the  right  hand  hit  his 
mark,  and  the  dust  from  the  dried  Mtiluru  flew  far  and  wide,  and 
obscured  the  sun,  while  the  bags  shone  brightly  to  a  great  distance. 
The  Mura-muras  seeing  this  as  they  travelled,  turned  back  in  haste, 
those  with  feet  running  on  the  surface,  while  those  without  travelled 
underground.  Arriving  at  their  home,  they  strangled  the  Dara-ulu, 
who  were  at  once  restored  to  life  by  the  old  Mura-mura  Darana,  to 
be  again  strangled  by  the  unanimous  decision  of  the  people.  Their 
bodies  were  then  rolled  up,  and  it  was  decided  that  the  first  child 
born  should  be  the  guardian  of  the  Dara. 

The  Dieri  show  two  heart-shaped  stones,  which  are  carefully 
wrapped  up  in  feathers  and  fat,  as  the  Dara-ulu,  to  scratch  which 
would,  they  say,  cause  the  whole  people  to  suffer  perpetual  hunger, 
and  never  to  be  satisfied,  however  mvch  they  might  eat.  If  these 
stones  were  broken,  the  sky  would  redden,  the  dust  which  formerly 
rose  up  from  the  dried  Aluluru  would  spread  itself  from  the  west- 
ward, and  men,  when  they  saw  it  cover  the  whole  earth,  would  die 
of  terror. 

The  Dara-ulu  are  believed  to  be  the  senders  of  rain,  and  in  the 
rain -making  ceremonies  these  stones,  which  represent  them,  are 
smeared  with  fat,  and  the  Dara  song  is  sung,  the  commencement 
of  which  is  as  follows  : — 

Warpi  pirna  yella-yella 

The  warpi  the  great         together  tc^ether  {i.e.  tightly  bound  together) 

luonti  piti  tankara  yella  ngamali  bakn 

the  cords  ends  crossed         together         with  the  breasts  (the  free  breasts) 

ngamali  wiltyi  ngama         mira-anura-yelli         warumbara  kuyu  mani 
with  the  breasts  moving  with  rapid 

tidna  wiri-wiri  wora  kupa         Nunga  tunka  nttnga  tunka  tapayuru. 

The  arm  (wing)  shows  itself  of  the  tapayuni. 

This  song  is  of  great  length,  and  as  the  version  obtained  is  in 
'  Muluru  is  the  witchetty  grub  of  Spencer  and  Gillen. 


8oo        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

the  Yaurorka  language,  Mr.  Siebert  has  not  yet  been  able  to  make 
it  out  completely.  The  translation  of  part  of  the  third  and  fourth 
lines  has  not  been  obtained.  IVarpi  is  a  kind  of  covering  for  the 
arms.  It  is  ornamented  with  Tunka,  which  is  a  cotton-like  substance, 
and  is  tied  on  with  a  hair  cord  which  is  crossed  over  the  arm.  By 
the  movement  of  the  arms,  which  accompany  the  song,  the  arm- 
covering  simulates  the  waving  of  the  wings  of  the  rain -bringing 
Tapayurtt,  which  is  a  bat.  The  whole  song  will,  I  hope,  be  prepared 
at  some  future  time  by  my  valued  correspondent,  the  Rev.  Otto 
Siebert. 

A  Legend  of  the  Tirari  Horde  of  the  Dieri  Tribe 

Two  young  men  outraged  a  young  woman,  who  then  gave  water 
to  her  husband,  with  a  splinter  of  wood  in  it,  as  a  sign  of  what  they 
had  done.  He  poured  out  the  water,  with  the  splinter  in  it,  on  the 
ground,  and  all  the  people  agreed  that  the  young  men  should  be 
strangled.  This  was  done,  but  they  revived,  and  were  again 
strangled,  the  ground  being  coloured  with  the  blood  which  flowed 
from  their  noses  and  mouths.  The  place  where  this  happened  is 
called  Midla-kumari.^  There  were  a  great  number  of  people  there, 
who  by  the  order  of  the  Mura-mura  Palungopina  -  dug  an  immensely 
long  and  deep  grave,  in  which  the  two  young  men  were  laid,  and 
this  was  where  the  lake  Tauian-ngaritiangu  now  is.  Palungopina 
then  ordered  the  earth  to  fall  in,  and  thereby  all  the  people  who 
were  there  .were  swallowed  up  in  it.  He  then  ordered  them  all  to 
rise  up  in  the  form  of  Miri-wiri,"'  which  flew  up  with  wings  to  the 
sky,  and  Palungopina  followed  them.      This  was  at  Padiminka.* 

The  Tirari  and  Dieri  believe  that  they  will  themselves  go  up  to 
the  sky  from  a  place  called  Palkatra-karanti.^ 

Kakakudana*'  and  the  Origin  of  the  Mound  Springs: 
A  Legend  of  the  Urabunna  Tribe 

This  legend  professes  to  account  for  the  origin  of  the  fossilised 
marsupials  and  other  creatures  which  are  found  in  several  places  in 
the  Lake  Eyre  district,  and  also  for  that  of  the  mound  springs  which 
are  so  marked  a  feature  of  that  part  of  Australia.  These  fossils  are 
called  by  the  tribes-people  Kadimarkara,  creatures  which  in  the 
Mura-mura  times  descended  from  the  sky-country  to  the  earth,  by 

^  Midla  is  "  nose,"  and  Kutnari  is  "  blood." 

"^  The  meaning  of  this  name  is  not  known,  but  Palu  means  "  naked." 

^  Miri-wiri  is  "maggot." 

■•  Padi  is  the  witchetty  grub  of  Spencer  and  Gillen. 

*  This  name  means  "  CHmb  up  in  the  darkness." 

®  The  meaning  of  Kakakudana  is  not  known. 


APPENDIX  8oi 


means  of  great  trees  which  grew  on  the  eastern  shores  of  Lake  Eyre, 
and  supported  the  sky. 

The  Dieri  and  the  Tirari  both  speak  of  these  great  trees.  One 
of  them  stood  at  the  Clayton  River,  the  middle  one  at  the  Cooper 
about  twenty-five  miles  west  of  Killalpanina,  and  the  third  at  Salt 
Creek. 

Kadimarkaras  are  also  spoken  of  as  IVomas,  as  in  this  legend. 
The  Mura-mura  Minkani  is  also  said  to  be  a  Woma,  and  in  this 
aspect  has  a  remarkable  similarity  to  the  totem  ancestors  of  the 
Alcheringa  time  of  the  Arunta  legends. 

Kakakudana  lived  to  the  west  of  Lake  Eyre.  Leaving  his  wife 
behind,  he  went  on  his  wanderings  alone.  At  Piialina  he  dug  after 
a  Kadimarkara,  which  he  killed  underground,  and  then  dragged  to 
Woma-dirkana,^  where  he  cooked  it  in  a  Dirka,'-  and  ate  it.  The 
place  where  he  killed  the  Kadimarkara  is  marked  by  springs.  He 
cut  off  its  head,  and  threw  it  away,  which  caused  the  hill  called 
Woma-kata-yapu  ^  to  rise  up.  Having  eaten  the  flesh  of  the  Kadi- 
markara, he  collected  the  bones  for  his  wife,  and  took  them  back  to 
her.  While  she  was  busy  pounding  them  in  her  lap,  he  went  off 
again  in  the  belief  that  she  would  follow  him.  Looking  round 
when  he  got  to  Wilpandrina,^  he  could  not  see  her,  and  therefore 
called  for  her  to  come,  but  she  did  not  hear  him  ;  and  not  knowing 
where  he  was,  she  continued  to  wander  looking  for  him.  Sad  and 
wearied  by  searching  for  him,  she  rested  at  Wolkararana,''  and  then 
wandered  on  to  Wulyua-purali,"  where  she  died. 

Kakakudana  noticed  that  his  body  continued  to  swell  larger  and 
larger.  He  had  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding  country 
brought  to  him,  even  the  weak,  the  sick,  and  the  women  with  child. 
When  they  were  all  gathered  together  at  Kuda-ngampana,^  his 
enormous  body  burst  and  the  people  ran  away  affrighted.  At  this 
place,  as  at  all  other  places  where  Kakakudana  or  his  wife  rested, 
there  rose  up  a  spring. 

'  From  the  Urabunna  word  Pitanda,  to  strike  ;  in  the  Dieri,  Xandrena. 

"  Dirka  is  a  hole  in  the  ground  heated  by  a  fire,  in  which  Womas  ( carpet-snakes ^ 
are  cooked.      Woma-dirkana  is  the  mound  spring  called  Blanch  Cup. 

'^  From   IVo/na,  and  Katayapu,  a  head. 

■•  From   Wilpandra,  to  wliistle  ;    in  Dieri,    Wilpina. 

*  From  the  Urabunna  word  Wolkaratyinda,  meaning  "longing";  in  the  Dieri, 
Wolkarali.     This  is  the  spring  called  Anna  Spring. 

'  Wulyula-puruli  is  "old  woman  dead";  in  the  Dieri,  Widlapirna-purani. 
P II rani  is  "to  die." 

^  'i"he  stomach.  The  Urabunna  word  is  derived  from  Kudna,  "excrement,"  and 
Ngampa,  the  stone  with  which  they  pound  Nardoo.  The  Dieri  call  the  stomach 
Kudna-ngandri ,  the  excrement- mother. 


8o2        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


Tayi-tampana^  or  Ngura-tulu-tulu-ru^: 
A  Yaurorka  Legend 

A  Mura-mura  belonging  to  Kilyalpa,^  named  Ngura  tulu-tulu-ru, 
started  on  his  wanderings.  He  came  to  Paia-tira,*  where  he  saw 
women  beating  out  Paua  and  cleaning  it.  As  he  came  nearer  to 
them,  they  saw  him,  and  surrounded  the  stranger.  They  looked  at 
him  inquisitively,  and  could  not  help  laughing  at  his  crooked  legs 
and  arms.  Nor  could  they  help  being  surprised  at  the  light-coloured 
flies  which  accompanied  him,  because  those  with  them  were  black. 
Then  they  began  to  discuss  where  he  came  from,  and  who  he 
was,  for  not  one  of  them  knew  him.  But  they  thought  of  one 
old  woman  who  was  a  little  distance  away,  and  called  to  her, 
thinking  that  she  might  know  who  he  was.  Hastening  to  them,  she 
recognised  him  as  being  her  Ngaiat/iura,  and  took  him  on  her  lap, 
and  sobbed  unceasingly,  crying,  ''Palingif  fa/inj;^//"  (my  brother's 
son).  When  she  had  wept  over  him,  she  sent  him  to  her  husband, 
his  Venku  (father's  father),  who  was  in  the  camp  with  other  men 
eating  Paua.  Before  he  reached  the  camp  he  could  hear  the  men 
grinding  the  seed  which  the  women  had  collected  and  cleaned. 
He  thought  to  himself,  "  That  must  be  a  good  stone ;  I  wish  I  had 
it."  Then  he  went  to  his  Yenkiis  camp,  and  after  he  had  spoken 
to  him,  made  his  own  camp  close  at  hand,  and  lay  down  as  if  to 
sleep.  As  he  lay  there,  the  whole  camp  collected  there  and  made 
themselves  merry  over  his  crooked  legs  and  arms.  He,  however, 
secretly  watched  where  they  had  put  the  wonderful  Tayi  stone, 
which  with  so  little  rubbing  had  ground  so  much  Paua.  When  all 
the  people  had  gone  to  sleep,  Ngura-tulu-tulu-ru  rose  up,  and  taking 
some  glowing  coals  and  a  piece  of  fungus,''  he  powdered  botli  and 
scattered  them  over  the  whole  camp,  to  make  every  one  unconscious. 
To  make  sure  that  every  one  was  fast  asleep,  he  shouted  "  Bai I  Bail 
Bail''  loudly,  after  he  had  spoken  his  spell,  but  no  one  moved. 
Then  he  touched  each  one  with  a  burning  coal,  to  try  and  wake 
him,  but  without  effect,  and  then  took  the  grinding-stone  out  of  the 
damp  earth  where  it  had  been  hidden,  washed  the  mud  off  it,  and 
walked  away  quietly,  about  midday,  with  it  on  his  head.  W^hen  he 
had  gone  a  long  way  from  the  camp,  the  people  woke  up,  and  to 

'  Tayi-tampana  means  a  grinding-stone  in  mud.  Tayi  is  the  name  for  the  slab 
of  stone  on  wJiich  the  Paua  is  ground  ;  in  Dieri  called  Ngurtu.  Tampa  is  damp 
earth  or  mud  ;  in  Died,  Afitta-pada,  Afif/a  being  earth,  and  Pada,  damp  or  moist. 

2  Ngura-tulu-tuluru  \s  "  \eg-CTo6ked,"  Ngura  being  "leg,"  Tulu-tulu-ru  being 
"crooked,"  and  in  Dieri,  Pira-pira. 

'  The  name  of  this  place  is  derived  from  Kilyera,  a  loose  sandy  land  without 
vegetation. 

*  Paia  is  a  bird.     The  word  Tira  is  not  explained. 

"  This  fungus  is  called  Wona-waru,  white  mound.  It  grows  near  to  Eucalyptus 
trees. 


APPENDIX  803 


their  sorrow  found  that  the  stranger  Ngura-tulu-tulu-ru  and  their 
Tayi  had  both  disappeared. 

Then  they  formed  a  Pinya  (blood-revenge  party),  and  having 
found  the  track  of  the  thief,  they  followed  him  hastily. 

At  Ngapa-kangu  ^  they  met  with  a  man  whom  they  killed, 
thinking  him  to  be  Tayi-tampana,  and  it  was-  only  after  he  was 
dead  that  they  found  out  their  mistake.  Then  they  again  followed 
Tayi-tampana's  tracks  to  Malka-malkara,-  where  they  overtook  him, 
and  came  upon  him  from  two  directions.  When  he  saw  himself 
suddenly  surrounded  by  a  Pinya,  he  took  the  Tayi  from  his  head, 
and  using  it  as  a  shield,  stopped  all  the  boomerangs  thrown  at  him. 
These  he  collected,  and  then  attacking  the  Pinya,  he  pursued  them 
as  far  as  Pinya-maru,^  where  he  killed  them,  and  turned  them  into 
stones,  which  are  black  because  the  men  of  the  Pinya  were  painted 
of  that  colour.  Going  back  for  the  Tayi,  which  he  had  left  behind, 
he  was  attacked  by  the  remainder  of  the  Pinya,  whose  weapons  he 
stopped  with  the  stone  for  a  shield  ;  and  having  gathered  them  up, 
he  followed  his  enemies,  and  killed  them.  So  deeply  did  he  strike 
them  into  the  ground  that  a  deep  pit  was  formed,  from  which  that 
place  has  been  called  Yidni-minka.* 

Having  done  this,  he  went  back,  and  on  his  way  he  again  slew 
a  number  of  those  sent  against  him  at  Madra-yurkuma.'*  Then 
taking  his  Tayi  under  his  arm  he  went  to  Meriwora.  The  Pinya 
had  by  this  time  again  collected  against  him.  When  they  began  to 
throw  their  boomerangs  against  him,  he  threw  himself  on  the  ground 
face  downwards,  and  placed  the  stone  in  such  a  manner  on  his  back 
that  no  weapon  could  injure  him.  But  he  was  buried  under  the 
Tayi  and  was  turned  into  stone. 

Ngura-wordu-punnuna  ® :  A  Dieri  Legend 

A  Mura-mura  named  Ngura-wordu-punnuna  lived  at  Pando,  and 
caught  rats  and  mice,  which  were  there  in  great  numbers,  for  his 

'  Ngapa-kangu,  in  Yaurorka  and  Dieri,  is  "  Hax-in-water. " 

*  Malka  is  the  Mulga  tree  ;  the  name  means  a  freshly-shooting  Mulga  tree. 

*  Maru  is  "  black." 

*  Now  shown  on  the  maps  as  Innamincka.  Another  version  of  this  legend  says 
that  it  was  Ngura-tulu-tulu-ru  who  gave  it  this  name,  by  saying  to  the  men  he  had 
killed,  "  Yidni  minka  (nganamai)/"  that  is,  "Thou  (shalt  Ije)  a  hole!"  The 
legend  which  follows  this  says  that  it  was  the  Mura-mura  Ngura-wordu-punnuna 
who  named  this  place. 

"  Madra  is  Yaurorka  for  a  stone  ;  in  Dieri,  Xlada.  Yurkitma  in  Yaurorka  and 
Dieri  is  "to  carry  under  the  arm."  The  place  is  so  called  because  the  jDetrifactions 
referred  to  api)ear  to  the  narrators  to  be  carrying  bags  under  their  arms  after  the 
custom  of  the  Pinya. 

^  Nura  is  ' '  tail,"  Wordti  is  ' '  short,"  and  Punnii  is  the  place  where  a  creek  enters 
a  lake,  in  this  sense  meaning,  "  He  with  the  short  tail,  at  the  embouchure"  into 
I'ando,  that  is.  Lake  Hope. 


8o4        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

food,  and  of  their  skins  he  made  water-bags.  One  day  he  saw  a 
Mari^  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his  camp;  and  on  the  following  day 
he  followed  its  tracks  until  he  found  it.  Armed  with  his  spear  and 
boomerang,  he  was  preparing  to  kill  it,  when  the  animal  spoke  to 
him,  saying,  "  Wherefore  dost  thou  come  to  as  a  stranger  ?  Put 
down  thy  boomerang  and  spear."  Doing  this,  he  then  wrestled 
with  the  Man  and  strangled  him,  and  then  made  a  large  water-bag 
of  his  skin.  After  a  while  he  saw  a  still  larger  animal,  which  only 
showed  itself  occasionally.  "  I  must  have  that  one,"  he  thought  to 
himself;  and  filling  all  his  water-bags,  he  hung  them  over  his 
shoulders  and  carried  one  in  each  hand.  The  great  bag  which  he 
had  made  of  the  Mans  skin  he  put  on  his  head  on  a  pad  he  made 
with  his  hair,  which  he  also  tied  over  the  top.  Being  thus  prepared, 
he  then  set  out,  following  the  tracks  of  the  great  animal  farther  and 
farther  away  from  his  home,  until  his  water-bags  were  emptied  one 
after  the  other.  At  length  he  saw  a  great  animal,  but  it  was  not  the 
one  he  was  looking  for,  and  he  still  went  on  into  country  altogether 
unknown  to  him.  Then  he  saw  many  great  animals,  and  marched 
through  them,  seeking  the  particular  one  he  had  been  following. 
At  length  he  found  him,  and  was  about  to  throw  his  boomerang  at 
him,  and  pierce  him  with  his  spear.  But  the  animal  spoke  to  him, 
saying,  "  If  thou  comest  to  me  as  a  friend,  lay  down  thy  Kirha  and 
Kalti "  (boomerang  and  spear).  Much  surprised,  he  said,  "  Yidni 
harkana  nganti !  Yatani-mara  ui^anaiV'  He  laid  down  his 
weapons,  and  each  grappled  with  the  other.  The  animal  tried  to 
seize  his  throat,  but  he  threw  it  down  and  strangled  it.  Having 
done  this,  what  was  he  to  do  ?  He  could  not  cook  it,  because  it 
was  Mura  to  him.''  He  could  not  carry  it  home,  because  he  was 
worn  out  with  his  long  marching.  Then  he  decided  to  swallow  it 
whole  and  raw,  and  lying  down  on  the  ground,  opposite  to  it  and 
face  downwards,  he  began  at  the  head,  slowly  drawing  it  into  himself. 
Then  he  noticed,  when  he  turned  himself  round,  that  his  body  was 
becoming  longer  and  longer,  until  at  length  he  had  become  an 
animal.  When  he  had  swallowed  the  whole  animal,  excepting  the 
tail,  this  suddenly  struck  him  in  the  eye  and  blinded  him.  He  was 
.  bent  double  with  pain,  and  did  not  know  how  to  find  his  way  back, 
because  he  could  not  see.  Then  he  remembered  that  the  wind  had 
been  blowing  from  the  north ;  but,  when  he  drew  in  a  breath  and 
smelled  it,  it  was  a  strange  wind.  Then  he  smelled  to  the  east,  but 
that  was  also  strange  to  him.  After  waiting  for  a  time  he  drew  a 
breath  from  the  west,  and  recognised  it  as  a  wind  blowing  from  his 

'  Mari  is  a  wallaby. 

2  ' '  Thou  also  animal  sf)eech  gifted  art  ?  " 

'  This  is  certainly  a  taboo,  possibly  connected  with  the  totem,  but  as  yet  not 
ascertained. 


APPENDIX  805 


home.  He  then  got  up  and  went  up  the  wind.  When  it  ceased, 
he  rested  himself.  When  it  again  commenced  to  blow,  he  travelled, 
until  after  a  time  he  opened  his  eyes  and  could  see  that  his  body  was 
wonderfully  marked. 

The  way  which  Ngura-wordu-punnuna  went  to  his  home  is 
marked  by  the  course  of  the  Cooper,  and  its  bends  and  curves  were 
made  by  the  Mura-mura's  serpentine  movements  as  he  travelled. 

Directly  the  scales  had  fallen  from  his  eyes,  his  sight  became 
stronger  and  clearer,  and  the  markings  on  his  body  were  brighter 
and  more  distinct.  Thus  it  was  that  at  Kalyumaru  ^  he  became 
covered  with  a  new  skin  from  head  to  tail,  beautifully  marked  and 
shining,  and  he  saw  himself  as  he  had  never  seen  himself  before. 
But  even  now  he  was  dependent  upon  the  wind.  When  it  blew 
from  the  west  he  wandered  on,  when  it  blew  from  some  other  direc- 
tion he  rested,  and  at  those  places  Kadimarkara  were  produced  from 
his  excrement. 

According  to  some  versions,  there  were  at  that  time  two  Kadi- 
markara living  at  Yidni-minka,  who  hid  themselves  in  their  burrows 
out  of  fear  of  him.  At  Ngapa-ngayimala  -  the  Mura-mura  Ngura- 
wordu-punnuna  found  the  way  blocked  by  two  Kadimarkara,  which 
had  laid  themselves  down  with  their  heads  towards  him.  As  they 
would  not  let  him  pass,  he  threw  them  aside  with  the  Kunya,  with 
which  his  head  was  armed,  and  passed  on.  Two  great  trees,  grow- 
ing there,  one  on  each  side  of  the  channel,  are  the  Kadimarkara.* 
He  passed  between  them,  and  beyond  that  place  came  to  another 
Kalyumaru,  where  there  were  many  Kalyu  bushes.  Many  Mura- 
muras  were  assembled  there,  but  he,  being  now  a  Kadimarkara, 
could  not  remain  with  them.  At  Kunyani  *  he  saw  the  great  Pirha 
of  the  Mura-mura  Pampo-ulu,  who  had  filled  it  with  Tuna-worin- 
yalka,'''  to  produce  rain  by  placing  it  in  a  water-hole,  secured  by  sticks. 
Then  at  Nganli-wokarana  he  saw  the  Mura-mura  of  that  name, 
with  his  long  Tippa,**  and  going  farther,  he  came  to  Ngura-wordu, 
which  he  named  after  the  Kadimarkara  which  were  produced  from 
his  excrement.  Thence  he  went  to  Xari-wolpu,"  the  place  where  an 
assemblage  01  Mura-mura  was  broken  u|)  by  reason  of  the  bones  of 

'  Kalyumaru  is  a  large  sheet  of  water  in  Cooper's  Creek,  near  the  Queensland 
boundary,  where  I  established  my  def)6t  on  my  second  expedition  in  1863.  Kalyu 
is  an  acacia  ;   Maru  is  a  wide  ex|>anse  of  country. 

-  Ngapa\%  "water,  "  and  A^rt/zwrt/a  is  "throat,"  "swallow."  Part  of  the  Cooper, 
where  it  is  confined  between  narrow  b;inks,  is  thus  named  the  Throat  of  the  Water. 

"  Fronj  what  I  remember  of  this  place,  these  trees  are  probably  Eucalyptus 
rostrata. 

*  Kunya  is  in  Dieri  a  longish-pointed  bone  or  piece  of  wood,  such  as  the  point  of 
a  sp)ear,  which  is  used  in  evil  magic. 

■*   Tuna  is  "gypsuqji." 

•  Tippa  is  a  tiissel  worn  by  the  men,  made  of  the  tails  of  the  rabbit-bandicoot. 
"  This  name  means  "  Dead  bones." 

3   F 


8o6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 

Kuyi-mokuna,i  and  leaving  there,  he  came  to  Wokadani,  where  the 
female  Mura-mura  Wari-lin-luna  '•'  came  forth  out  of  the  earth  and 
gave  birth  to  her  many  children,  the  various  Murdus,  who  ran  away 
to  different  districts  and  settled  themselves  there. 

At  Ngapadia  ^  the  favourable  wind  which  had  led  him  homewards 
ceased  to  blow,  and  he  moved  himself  round  and  round,  smelling  the 
wind,  and  stretching  out  his  neck,  thus  forming  a  wide  shallow  depres- 
sion, and  also  the  creek  leading  to  Kapara-mana>  The  south  wind 
now  blew  from  his  home ;  and  as  he  went  onwards,  the  movements 
of  his  tail  formed  the  curves  of  the  creek,  at  the  same  time  drawing 
the  flood-waters  after  him.  He  passed  by  Mandikilla-widmani,^ 
where  the  Mura-mura  Darana  caused  the  rain  by  the  songs  of  his 
friend  the  Mura-mura  Wonna-mara.  Finally  Ngura-wordu-punnuna 
came  to  Yulku-kudana,*^  where  he  stretched  out  his  neck  to  look 
round  for  his  camp  at  Pando,  where  he  had  left  his  wife,  who  was 
also  a  Kadimarkara.  Then  hastening  to  it,  he  sank  deeper  and 
deeper  into  the  ground. 

'  As  to Kuyi-mokuna,  see  "Some  Native  Legends  from  Central  Australia,  "  Mary 
E.  B.  Howitt.     Folk-Lore,  vol.  xiii.  p.  403. 

•  This  is  a  version  of  the  first  legend  of  this  series,  and  is  an  equivalent  of  that  of 
the  Alcheringa  ancestors  giving  birth  to  spirit  children. 

•  At  Ngapadia  a  channel  leads  off  from  the  main  channel  to  Pando  (Lake  Hope). 

•  This  place  is  shown  on  the  maps  as  Kopjieramana. 

•  From  J/rt«d'/it/7/<i,  in  Dieri  meaning  "waves,"  and  Widmani,  "to  put  into."  So 
called  because  the  Mura-mura  is  supposed  to  have  slopped  the  flood  by  putting  the 
waters  into  the  ground. 

•  Yulku-kuJana  is  letting  the  throat  become  lower,  or  fall  down.  While  Yerkala 
is  in  Dieri  the  neck,  yulku  is  specially  the  lower  part  of  the  throat ;  the  word  means 
also  ' '  to  swallow. " 


INDEX 


Aboriginal  implements,  discovery  of,  15 

Adelaide  tribes,  burial,  451 

Adultery,  punishment  for,  207,  233,  245, 
258 

Aged  and  infirm  jjeople,  respect  for,  313, 
316  ;  kindness  to,  766  ;  treatment  of, 
by  Wurunjerri,  Kurnai,  Maryborough 
tribes,  Dalebura,  766  ;  Chepara,  767- 
8 

Aldolinga  tribe,  gesture  language,  727- 

32.  733.  734-5 
Aldridge,  H.  E. ,  116,  148,  231,  232-6, 

323.  333.  402,  418.  431.  432.  441. 
445,  471,  498,  600,  691,  694,  695, 
740,  748,  750,  753,  755,  766.  768 

All-father,  the  tribal,  488-508 

Annan  River  tribe,  class  system  of,  118  ; 
intentional  change  of,  140 

Arunta  tribe,  class  system,  119;  system 
deliberately  altered  by  Urabunna,  139; 
marriage  rules,  238-9  ;  diagram  of 
Arunta  class  system,  238  ;  diagram  of 
marriages  and  descents,  239  ;  legend- 
ary beings,  482-4 

Aurora,  see  Beliefs 

Awabakal  tribe,  84 

"Bad  Country,"  the,  403 

Hadjeri  tribe,  50 

Hall-playing,  770 

Haluk-mernen  tribe,  55 

Banapa  and  Bida  tribes,  643 

Bangal,  see  Medicine-man 

Bangerang  tribe,  53  ;  marriage  rule,  257 

Baraba-baraba  tribe,  52, 56  ;  class  system, 
107  ;  sub-class  marriages,  211 

Barkinji  tribe,  50,  97  ;  class  system,  99  ; 
marriage  rules,  194 

Barn,  see  Magic 

Barter,  714-17  ;  Wurunjerri,  312  ;  to 
avoid  Pinya,  328-30,  715  ;  Yantru- 
wunta,  714  ;  at  Kopperamana,  714  ; 
for  skins  by  Dieri,  714  ;  at  Wilyaru 
ceremony,    715 ;    at    Kani-nura  cere- 


807 


mony,  716-17  ;  by  Wiimbaio,  Wotjo- 
baluk,  717  ;  Jajaurung  and  Jupagalk, 
Kulin,  Yuin,  Wudthaurung,  718 

Barumbinya  tribe,  50 

Barunga  tribe,  50 

Bathalibura  tribe,  classes  and  totems  of, 
113;  message-stick,  113 

Beliefs,  as  to  the  stars,  128,  369,  429-30, 
432  ;  aurora,  277, 430 ;  rainbow,  398-9, 
431,  784;  sky,  426-7;  a  flat  earth, 
426,  432  ;  the  sun,  427-8,  432  ;  moon, 
428-9  ;  thunder,  431,  541  ;  Milky 
Way,  431-2,  645,  666  ;  the  seasons, 
432  ;  sky-land,  432-8  ;  human  spirits 
and  ghosts,  434-42  ;  dreams,  435-7, 
441  ;  the  white  man  as  a  ghost, 
442-6  ;  in  legendary  beings,  475- 
88 

Bennett,  Samuel,  16 

Berri-ait  tribe,  57 

Betrothal,  by  Dieri,  177  ;  Kurnandaburi, 
192  ;  Wiimbaio,  194  ;  Ta-lathi  and 
Keramin,  195  ;  Ya-itma-thang,  Thed- 
dora,  196;  Wolgal,  197-8;  Ngarigo, 
198  ;  Wiradjuri,  210  ;  Geawe-gal. 
216;  WoUaroi,  Unghi,  217;  Kuin 
murbura,  219  ;  Wakelbura,  221-2  , 
in  Maryborough  tribes,  232  ;  Wide 
Bay  tribes,  236  ;  Turrbal,  237 ;  by 
Wotjobaluk,  241  ;  Mukjarawaint,  243; 
Jupagalk,  244  ;  Gourndilch-mara,  249  ; 
tribes  of  South-west  Victoria,  251  ; 
Buandik,  252  ;  Wurunjerri,  253  ; 
Yerkla-mining,  257  ;  Narrinyeri,  260  ; 
Yuin,  262  ;   Murring  tribes,  262-3 

Biduelli  trilje,  79-80  ;  totems,  102-3 ; 
blood-feud,  352-3 

Bigambul  tribe,  58  ;  compared  with 
Emon  and  Ungorri  tribes,  109  ;  tribal 
government,  304  ;  burial,  469  ;  smoke 
signal,  721-2  ;  personal  names,  739  ; 
food  rules,  769 

Billi-billeri,  71,  309,  312,  340-1 

Blood-feud,    Kurnai,    348-52 ;     Biduelli, 


8o8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


353  ;  Theddora,  353-4  ;  Onieo  tribe, 
374 

Bonwick,  J.>  3,  15 

Bora,  see  Kamilaroi ;  see  Chepara 

Boultbee,  J.  W.,  98,  194,  301,  380, 
332,  360,  397,  451.  676,  692,  749, 
762 

Boydell,  j.  W.,  85,  97,  267,  315.  343, 
469-71.  571.  689,  767 

Bret,  or  dead  hand,  Kurnai,  277,  459- 
60 

Breton,  Lieut.,  576 

Bridgeman,  G.  F. ,  64,  445 

Brooke.  Jocelyn,  60,  116,  228,  231-a, 
324.  333.  385.  445.  469.  607,  722. 
776 

Brother  and  sister  marriage,  how  pre- 
vented, 284  Sl/. 

Buandik  tribe,  68  ;  class  system,  123  ; 
marriages.  251-a  ;  widow,  252 

Buckley,  as  to  Kulin  government,  307  ; 
on  punishment  for  elopement,  340 ; 
white  man  as  ghost,  442  ;  barter  in 
Wudthaurung  tribe,  718 

Bugin,  or  Bukin,  see  Medicine-man 

Bulalli  tribe,  49,  98 

Bulk,  see  Kurnai ;  see  Magic 

Bull-roarer,  punishment  for  showing,  to 
a  woman,  354  ;  discovery  of  use  of, 
509-10  ;  by  Yuin,  517  ;  Wolgal, 
Ya-itma-thang,  565  ;  Geawe-gal,  569  ; 
Gringai,  571  ;  Port  Stephens  tribe, 
572  ;  Dungog  tribe,  575 ;  Chepara, 
578-9  ;  Turrbal,  582,  596  ;  Wiradjuri, 
583;  Wonghibon,  589  ;  Wathi-wathi, 
592  ;  Kamilaroi,  594-5 ;  Maryborough 
tribes,  606 ;  Bunurong,  613 ;  Dieri, 
659;  Parnkalla,  669;  Narrang-ga, 
672  ;       Itchumundi,       676 ;        Dieri, 

715 

Bulnier,  Rev.  J.,  100,  102,  195,  301,  302, 
366,  368,  380,  428-9,  437,  717,  739, 
752,  700-61 

Bundaberg  cicatrices,  746 

Bunjil,  Kulin  class  name,  126-7;  "boys" 
and  "sons"  of,  128;  Wurunjerri 
legend  of,  484  ;  as  tribal  All-father, 
491-2  ;   Kurnai  use  of  name,  738 

Bunjil-baul,  see  Kurnai 

Bunjil-yenjin,  see  Medicine-man 

Buntamurra  tribe,  64  ;  class  system,  113- 
14  ;  marriage  rule,  226-7  ;  Diagram 
XV. ,  Buntamurra  sub-class  and  totemic 
marriages  and  descents,  227 ;  tribal 
council,  324  ;  punishment  of  offences, 
333  ;  rain -makers,  399  ;  medicine- 
man, 399  ;  messenger,  691  ;  message- 
stick,  691 

Buntine,  J.,  373-4,  461,  566 

Bunurong    tribe,    71  ;    class  system   of, 


127  ;  marriages,  257  ;  expiatory  com- 
'^t,  338-40 ;  Talangun  ceremonies, 
612-13  ;  cannibalism,  751  ;  camping 
rules,  776 

Bunya-Bunya  tribe,  52 ;  mutilations,  746  ; 
treatment  of  child,  747-8  ;  private 
property,  768  ;  curious  custom  of  hair- 
pulling,  768 

Bura-bura  tribe,  52 

Burbung  ceremonies,  see  Wiradjuri  ;  see 
Wonghibon,  and  Wathi-wathi 

Burial  practices,  Dieri,  446-9  ;  Ngura- 
wolla,  449  ;  Kukata,  Narrang-ga,  450  ; 
Adelaide  tribes,  Tongaranka,  451  ; 
Wiimbaio,  451-2  ;  Wathi-wathi,  452  ; 
Wotjobaluk,  452-3  ;  Mukjarawaint, 
453 ;  Wotjo  nation,  453-5  ;  Gourn- 
ditch-mara,  Jupagalk,  455  ;  tribes  of 
South-west  Victoria,  455-8  ;  Wurun- 
jerri, Port  Phillip  blacks,  458  ;  Jajau- 
rung,  458-9  ;  Kurnai,  459  ;  Theddora, 
460-1  ;  Ya-itma-thang,  461  ;  Ngarigo 
and  Wolgal,  461-2  ;  Yuin,  462-3  ; 
Port  Jackson,  463-4;  Geawe-gal, 
Gringai,  464  ;  Dungog  tribe,  464-5  ; 
Port  Stephens,  465;  Wiradjuri,  465-6; 
Kamilaroi,    466-7  ;    Yualaroi,    Unghi, 

467  ;  Maranoa  tribe,  467-8  ;  Chepara, 
468-9  ;  Higambul,  Kaiabara,  469  ; 
Turrbal,  469-70  ;  Maryborough  tribes, 
470-1  ;  Kuinmurbura,  471  ;  Wakel- 
bura,  471-4  ;  Dalebura,  474  ;  Herbert 
River  tribes,  474-5 

Cameron,  A.  L.   P.,  50,   51,  56-7,  99, 

100,    107-8,    125,     147,    150,    195,    211, 

213,  214,   215,  218,   304,    402,   467, 
493-4,  588,  591,  764 
Cam-mer-ray  trilx;,  83 
Camping  rules,  773-7 
Canciani,  287,  288,  290,  291,  292 
Cannibalism,     Jupagalk,     247  ;     Wot- 
jobaluk,  247,   749,   751  ;    Dieri,   448, 
751 ;     Yaurorka,    449,    751  ;    Yantru- 
wunta,  449,  751  ;   Marula,  449,  751  ; 
Tangara,  449-50  ;  Mukjarawaint,  749  ; 
Wotjo  nation,   Ta-tathi,    750  ;    Wud- 
thaurung, Kurnai,  Ngarigo  and  Thed- 
dora,    Turrbal,     752  ;     Maryborough 
tribes,  753 
Ceremonies,  see  Initiation,  and  Magic 
Chepara    tribe,    86,    87,    136  ;     female 
captives,      280  ;      marriages,       280  ; 
mother  -  in    law,    280-1  ;      Headmen, 
318-19  ;  council,  326  ;  punishment  of 
offences,  354  ;  Ya-gul-kubba( medicine- 
man), 385  ;   Bugerum  (medicine-man), 

468  ;  burial,  468-9  ;  Bora  ceremonies, 
578-83  ;  messengers,  690-1  ;  me.ssage- 
stick,   707-9  ;    nose-perforation,    741  ; 


INDEX 


809 


feeding  the  sick,  767  ;  distribution  of 
food,  767-8 

Child,  treatment  of,  in  Bunya-Bunya  tribe, 
747-8 

Children,  naming  of,  by  Kurnai,  736-7  ; 
Yuin,  Wiimbaio,  Bigambul,  739  ; 
'I'urrbal,  Maryborough  tribes,  740  ; 
method  of  counting,  748 

Christison,  R. ,  64.  227,  304,  386,  474, 
709,  747,  766,  768 

Cicatrices,  meaning  of,  313  ;  Kurnai, 
743,  744  ;  Dieri,  Yerkla,  744  ;  Yuin, 
While  Cliffs  tribe,  Bundaberg,  More- 
ton  Bay  tribes,  Bunya-Bunya  and 
Ipswich  tribes,  746 

Clairvoyance,  belief  in,  before  death,  see 
Magic 

Clan,  definition  of,  44 

Class  divisions,  88  ;  legends  as  to,  89 

Class  names,  equivalence  of,  109,  137- 
42 

Classificatory  system,  156 

Codrington,  Rev.  K.  H.,  25,  27 

Collins,  Col.,  75,  83,  84,  268,  315,  382, 
438,  442,  445,  461,  464,  509,  567 

Combat,  of  women,  197  ;  ordeal  by,  333  ; 
expiatory,  334-48 

Commune,  Undivided,  142-4,  173-4 

Council,  tribal,  Wiimbaio,  301  ;  Kami- 
laroi,  302  ;  Wiradjuri,  303  ;  Dieri, 
320-2  ;  Turrbal,  Maryborough  tribes, 
323  ;  Kaiabara,  Buntamurra,  Wot- 
jobaluk,  Kulin,  Narrang-ga,  324  ;  Nar- 
rinyeri,  Yuin,  Geawe-gal,  Gringai, 
Kurnai,  325  ;  Chepara,  326 

Crawfurd,  John,  26 

Crawley,  E. ,  on  exogamy,  285  sij. 

Crowthers,  R. ,  58,  108.  217,  384,  445, 
467,  694,  769.  770 

Curative  practices,  Kurnai,  379  ;  Wur- 
unjerri,  379,  387  ;  Tongaranka, 
Wiimbaio,  380;  Ngarigo,  381,  382; 
Yuin,  Port  Jackson  trilxis,  382  ;  Geawe- 
gal,  Dungog,  Port  Stephens  tribe, 
383  ;  Kamilaroi,  Vualaroi  and  Bigam- 
bul, Turrbal,  384  ;  Chepara,  Kaiabara, 
Dalebura,  385  ;  Jupagalk,  386  ;  Wakel- 
bura,  402  ;  Kurnandaburi.  Wilya, 
411 

Curr,  E.  M.,  5,  53,  158,  296,  501, 
503.  504,  754 

Dalebura  tribe,  64  ;  remarriage  of  widow 
227  ;  tribal  government,  304  ;  Head 
men,  304;  rain-makers,  386  ;  Bubiberi 
(medicine- men),  386;  burial,  474 
mutilations,  747  ;  kindness  to  infirm, 
766  ;  division  of  food,  768  ;  generous 
(jualities.  768 

Dance,  Molongo,  330,  416 


Darling  River  tribes,  49-51  ;  punishment 

of  offences,  194 
David,  T.  W.  E. ,  17  ;  see  Etheridge,  and 

Grimshaw 
Davis,  R.  H.,  i 
Dawson,  James,  17,  69,  125,  150,  250, 

251,  306,  336,  442,  444,  455,  456-8, 

503,  615,  690,  765 
Dawson,    K. ,   84,    268,    316,    398,    431, 

496,  726,  747,  765 
Dead,  reluctance  to  speak  of,  440-1 ,  469  ; 

burnt  by    Kulin,   443  ;    by    tribes    of 

South  -  west  Victoria,   444  ;    treatment 

of,  by  Yerkla,  450 
Descent,    effect    of   male,   269  ;    change 

from  female  to  male,  283-4  ;  maternal, 

in  Salic  Law,  286-94 
Diagram    I.     Kamilaroi    marriages   and 
descents,  115 

II.  Kaiabara  marriages  and  descents, 
116 

III.  Dieri  marriages  and  descents,  163 

IV.  Kurnai  marriages  and  descents, 
171 

V.  Dieri  classes  and  totems,  175 

VI.  Dieri  marriages  and  descents,  176 

VII.  Dieri   class  and    totem   relation- 
.ships,  179 

VIII.  L'rabunna    marriages    and    de- 
scents, 189 

IX.  Dieri  marriages  and  descents,  189 

X.  Four    sub-class  system  of    Kami- 
laroi, 200 

XI.  Kamilaroi  marriages  and  descents, 
201 

XII.  Kamilaroi  and  Dieri  compared, 
201 

XIII.  Wiradjuri    marriages    and   de- 
scents, 309 

XIV.  I.Achlan    River   tribe    marriages 
and  descents,  213 

XV.  Buntamurra  sub-class  and  totemic 
marriages.  227 

XVI.  Kamilaroi   and    Kaialxira  com- 
pared, 229 

XVII.  Muruburra  marriage  law,  230 

XVIII.  Arunta  class  system,  238 

XIX.  Arunta  marriages  and  descents, 

239 

XX.  Waramunga   marriages  and  de- 
scents, 239 

XXI.  Waramunga  marriage  rule,  240 

XXII.  Wotjobaluk  marriages  and  de- 
scents, 242 

XXIII.  Wurunjerri  marriages  and  de- 
scents, 253 

XXIV.  Kurnai marriagesand descents, 
270 

XXV.  Exogamous   sections  .  of    com- 
munity, 285 


8io        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


Diagram  XXVI.    Exogamous  sections  of 
community,  285 

XXVII.  Do.         do.  286 

XXVIII.  Descent   under   Salic    Law, 
288 

XXIX.  Do.         do.         291 

XXX.  Plan    of  burial    arrangements, 
Wotjo  nation,  454 

XXXI.  Vuri-ulu  legend,  654 

XXXII.  Kurnai  camping  rules,  774 

XXXI II.  Wurunjerri    camping  rules, 

775 

Dieri  tribe,  44  ;  Murdus,  91  ;  Perigundi 
legend,  95-6 ;  distribution  of,  96  ; 
tabulated  marriages  and  descents, 
158-9  ;  relationship  terms,  160-8  ; 
diagram  of  marriages  and  descents, 
163  ;  diagram  of  classes  and  totems, 
175  ;  marriage  rules,  175-81;  diagram 
of  marriages  and  descents,  176  ;  be- 
trothal, 177 ;  diagram  of  class  and 
totem  relationships,  179  ;  group  mar- 
riage, 179-87  ;  elopement,  183  :  ab- 
horrence of  irregular  unions,  187;  dia- 
gram of  marriages  and  descents  com- 
pared with  Urabunna,  189  ;  diagram 
of  Dieri  and  Kamilaroi  marriages  and 
descents,  aoi ;  tribal  government,  297  ; 
Pinya,  297,  326-32,  680  ;  Headmen, 
297-300;  tribal  council, 320-23;  Kunki 
(medicine-man),  358-9  ;  "pointing the 
bone,"  359  ;  rain-makers,  394-6;  cere- 
monies to  influence  food  supply,  399, 
798  ;  Milky  Way,  431  ;  Kutchi,  446  ; 
burial  practice,  446-9  ;  cannibalism, 
448  ;  Mura-muras,  475  ;  legends  of, 
476-82 ;  initiation  ceremonies,  655-64 ; 
knocking  out  of  teeth,  655-6  ;  Kara- 
■weli-wonkana  ceremony,  656-8  ;  Wil- 
)raru  ceremony,  658-61 ;  Mindari  cere- 
mony, 661-2;  Kulpi  ceremony,  662-4; 
Wilpadrina  ceremony,  664  ;  mes- 
sengers, 679-85  ;  Pitched  expedition, 
710-11;  red-ochre  expedition,  711-12; 
Yutchin,  713-14;  barter  for  skins,  714; 
smoke  signals,  720  ;  widow,  724  ; 
gesture  language,  727-35  ;  cicatrices, 
744  ;  cannibalism,  750-1  ;  fire  drills, 
770  ;  camping  rules,  773  ;  Murdu 
legend,  779-80 ;  legend  of  Mandra- 
mankana,  781-3  ;  legend  of  Anti-etya, 
796-7  ;  legend  of  Darana,  798-800  ; 
Tirari  legend  of  Palungopina,  800  ; 
legend  of  Ngura  -  wordu  -  punnuna, 
803-6 

Doenbauraket  tribe,  55 

Dora  ceremonies,  see  Maryborough 
tribes 

Doyle,  Cyrus  E.,  104,  200,  207,  208, 
362,  439,  467,  494,  595 


Dreams,  see  Beliefs 

Dungog  tribe,  burial  custom,  464-5  ;  cere- 
monies, 574-6 

Earl,  Geo.  W. ,  26 
Earth  believed  to  be  flat,  426,  432 
Elopement,  Dieri,  183 ;  Kurnandalmri, 
193  ;  Wiimbaio,  194  ;  Theddora,  196  ; 
Ya-itma-thang,  197  ;  Ngarigo  and 
Wolgal,  198  ;  Wiradjuri,  211 ;  Geawe- 
gal,  216  ;  WoUaroi,  217  ;  Wakelbura, 
222-5;  Maryborough  tribes,  233; 
Wide  Bay  tribes,  236  ;  Wotjo  nation, 
245  ;  Gournditch-mara,  249  ;  Wurun- 
jerri, 254-6  ;  Yerkla-mining,  258  ;  Nar- 
rang-ga,  259;  Narrinyeri,  261  ;  Yuin, 
264  ;    marriage   by,   in    Kurnai   tribe, 

273-9 
Emon  tribe  cljiss  s3'stem,  109  ;  compared 

with  Bigambul  and  Ungorri,  109 
Encounter  Bay,  ceremonies  of  tribe,  6'72-3 
P'numeration,  of  Bunjil's  sons  by  Kulin, 

128  ;  Wotjobaluk,  697-8  ;  Wurunjerri, 

701-2  ;  of  stages  of  a  journey,  702-3  ; 

Wudthaurung    and    Jajaurung,   702 ; 

Yuin,  718  ;  of  children  by  Wakelbura, 

748 
Etheridge,  R. ,  jun.,  6,  13,  17.     See  also 

David,  and  Grimshaw 
Eucla  tribe  gesture  language,  727,  732, 

733.  734.  735 

Everett,  A.,  19 

Evil  l)eings,  WuUe  of  Chepara,  354  ; 
Brewin  of  Kurnai,  356  ;  Ngarrang 
of  Wurunjerri,  356  ;  Kutchi  of  Dieri, 
446  ;  Tulugal  of  Yuin,  462  ;  Coen  of 
Port  Stephens  tribe,  496 

Exogamy  deliberately  instituted  to  pre- 
vent incest,  284  sqq. 

Expeditions,  tribal,  see  Dieri  and  Yantru- 
wunta 

Eyre,  E.  J.,  3 

Eyre,  Lake,  tribes,  44-49 

Fat,  human,  used  in  magic,  Wiimbaio, 
367-8;  Wotjobaluk,  368-9  ;  Jajaurung, 
369  ;  Mukjarawaint,  Jupagalk,  372  ; 
Kurnai,  372-3  ;  Wurunjerri,  373-5  ; 
at  Omeo,  373;  Yuin,  373,  376-7; 
Wolgal,  373;  Wiradjuri,  374-5;  Kami- 
laroi, Dungog,  376;  belief  as  to,  410- 
II 

Father,  care  of  wife's,  Wurunjerri,  256  ; 
Kurnai,  279-80,  756,  758,  760 

Feehan,  M.  J.,  99 

Female  captives,  Ta-tathi,  195;  Keramin, 
195  ;  Kamilaroi,  208  ;  Geawe-gal,  216  ; 
Kuinmurbura,  220  ;  Wakelbura,  225  ; 
ceremonial,      233  -  4  ;     Maryborough 


INDEX 


8ii 


tribes,  233,  235,  236  ;  Wotjobaluk, 
247-8  ;  Wurunjerri,  256  ;  Narrang-ga, 
260;  Narrinyeri,  261;  Gringai,  Port 
Stephens  tribe,  267  ;  Port  Jackson 
tribe,  268  ;  Chepara  tribe,  280 

Fire  drills,  770-3 

Fish,  Narrinyeri  superstition  as  to,  763 

Fish-hooks,  Kurnai,  761 

Fison,  Dr.  Lorinier,  43,  67,  88,  103.  144, 

199.  203.  5".  557 
Fitzroy,  Capt.  R.,  2 
Flowers,  W.  H.,  31,  60,  iii,  218,  399, 
471,  710 
I       Food,  rules,   756-70  ;   fear  of  magic  in, 
f  767  ;  charms  and  ceremonies  to  influ- 

ence supply,  see  Magic 
Fowler's  Bay  tribe,  ceremonies  of  initia- 
tion, 667 
Fraser,  Dr.  John,  7,  84,  204,  267,  502 
Frazer,  J.  G. ,  on  exogamy,  284  si/</. 

CJaggin,  J.,  431,  474,  499,  720,  777 
Ganitch  ceremonies,  see  Wotjobaluk 
Garside,  Capt.,  384,  452 
Gaskell,  F. ,  450,  667,  720 
Gason,  S. ,  186,  297,  300-1,  320-3,  326, 
354.  358-9.  394-6,  427-8,  434,  448-9, 
476,  480,  503,  655-7,  660-1,  662.  664, 
683,  711,  714,  727-32,  744,  751 
Gaura,  see  Kurnandaburi 
Geawe-gal  tribe,  84,  105  ;  betrothal  and 
elopement,  216;  marriage  rules,  216-17; 
female  captives,   216  ;    tribal  govern- 
ment,   316;    Headmen,    316;     tribal 
council,  325  ;   punishment  of  offences, 
343  I  burial,  464  ;  ceremonies  of  initia- 
^  tion,  569-74  ;   messengers,  689 

I      Gesture  language,  723-35 
Ghosts,  see  Beliefs 

Gibson,  James,    136,    280-1,    319,   326, 
354.   385.   437.   469.   498.    581.   691, 
i  709.  741.  770 

;*      Giglioli,  E.  H.,  4.  9 

Gillen,  F.  J. ,  67.     See  a/so  Spencer  and 

Gillen. 
Gommera,  see  Yuin 

Ciournditch-mara  tribe,  69;  class  system, 
124  ;    marriages,    249  ;    burial,    253  ; 
Headmen,   306  ;   message-stick,   699  ; 
food  rules,  765 
Grangema  tribe,  52 
Grihble,  J.  H.,  105.  466,  776 
Grimshaw,  J.  W. ,  17.   See  also  Etheridge, 

and  David 

Gringai    tribe,   85  ;    marriage  rules  and 

ceremony,     266-7;    female    captives, 

267 ;  elopement,  267  ;  mother-in-law, 

i         267  ;   Headmen,   315  ;    tribal  council, 

:  325  ;   punishment  of  offences.   343-4  ; 

burial,     464  ;     initiation     ceremonies. 


570-2  ;   messenger,  689  ;  signal,  721  ; 

food  rules,  767 
Guerno  tribe,  50 
Guillemard,  F.  H.  H.,  12 
Gurildra,  see  Narrang-ga 

Haddon,  Dr.  A.  C. ,  on  totemism,  152, 
154 

Headmen,  Dieri,  297-300;  Yantruwunta, 
299  ;  Yaurorka,  300 ;  Tongaranka, 
Wiimbaio,  Theddora,  301  :  Yuin.  302, 
314;  Ngarigo  and  Wolgal,  Kami- 
laroi,  302  ;  Wiradjuri,  303  ;  Dalebura, 
Bigambul,  Kaiabara,  Wotjo  nation, 
304;  Mukjarawaint,  304-5;  Gourn- 
ditch-mara,  306  ;  Wurunjerri,  307  ; 
South-west  Victoria,  308-11;  Kulin, 
308-11  ;  Yerkla- mining,  Narrang-ga, 
313;  Narrinyeri,  314;  Port  Jackson 
tribes,  Gringai,  315  ;  Port  Stephens 
tribes,  Geawe-gal,  316;  Kurnai,  317. 
18  ;  Chepara,  318-19 

Hearn,  Dr.  W.  E.,  81 

Helms,  Richard,  196,  302,  566,  693 

Herbert  River  tribes,  beliefs,  431  ;  burial. 
474-5  ;  tribal  All-father,  499  ;  heredi- 
tary occupations,  720  ;  camping  rules, 
776 

Hilleri  and  Willuri  tribes,  47  ;  signals, 
720 

Hogarth,  J.,  93,  187 

Holmes,  C.  F. ,  per  Dr.  John  Fraser,  267 

Hook,  A.,  325,  464,  571 

Horde,  definition  of,  44 

Hospitality  to  friendly  stranger,  234-5, 
725 

Howitt,  M.  E.  B. ,  360,  398,  428-9, 
43p-i.  433.  478.  485-6 

Howitt,  Richard,  309.  458,  49a 

Hunter,  Stanley,  16 

Individual  ownership,  Bunjil-baul,  73-4  ; 
at  Port  Jackson,  75  ;  stone  quarries, 
311,  689;  Bunya-Bunya  trees,  768 

Infanticide.  748-50 

Initiation  ceremonies,  eastern  type,  509- 
64a  ;  western  type,  643-77 

Ipswich  tribe,  746 

Ita-ita  tribe,  56 

Itchumundi  nation,  49,  97 ;  marriage 
rule.  194  ;  ceremonies,  675-6;  message- 
sticks,  68a 

Ithi-ithi  tribe,  50 

Jack,  Dr.  R.  L.,  13,  14 

Jajaurung  tribe,  71  ;  Bangal  (medicine- 
man), 369  ;  burial,  458-9  ;  Jibauk 
ceremonies,  613-14  ;  messengers,  689 ; 


8i2        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


method  of  enumeration,  702  ;  barter, 
718  ;  cannibalism,  751 

James,  Frank,  446,  449 

Jeraeil  ceremonies,  see  Kurnai 

Jibauk  ceremonies,  see  Jajaurung,  and 
VV'urunjerri 

Johnston,  R.  M.,  22 

Jupagalk  tribe,  243  ;  betrothal,  244  ;  evil 
magic  with  roasting,  244,  365  ;  fat- 
taking,  372  ;  Bangal  (medicine-man), 
386;  burial,  455;  tielief  in  clairvoyance 
before  death,  466  ;  ceremonies,  614  ; 
messengers,  689;  barter,  718 

Jurobaluk  tribe,  55 

Kabbarah  ceremonies,  see  Port  Macquarie 
tribe 

Kadri-pariwilpa-ulu,  see  Legends  of  ini- 
tiation 

Kaiabara  tribe,  60;  class  system,  116; 
diagram  of  marriages  and  descents, 
116;  marriage  rules,  228-30;  com- 
pared with  Kamilaroi,  229 ;  totemic 
marriages,  229  ;  old  men  instruct  boys, 
230 ;  record  of  class  names,  231  ; 
government,  304 ;  Headman,  304  ; 
tribal  council,  324 ;  punishment  of 
offences,  333  ;  burial,  469  ;  initiation 
ceremonies,  607  ;  smoke  signals,  722  ; 
camping  rules,  776 

Kamilaroi  nation,  56-7,  84;  class  system, 
104,  200 ;  diagrams  of  marriage  and 
descent,  115,  300-2;  diagram  of  class 
system,  200  ;  diagram  of  class  systeni 
compared  with  Dieri,  201  ;  anomalous 
marriage  rules,  203-4  ;  marriage  rule, 
205-7 ;  remarriage  of  widow,  207  ; 
mother-in-law,  208  ;  female  captives, 
208  ;  punishment  of  offences,  208, 
332,  343  ;  diagram  of  Kamilaroi  and 
Kaiabara  marriages  and  descents,  229  ; 
tribal  government,  302  ;  Headman, 
302  ;  alleged  use  of  poison,  362-3  ; 
fat-taking,  376  ;  burial,  466-7  ;  tribal 
All-father,  494  ;  Bora  ceremonies,  593- 
595  ;  messengers,  687,  688-9  '<  smoke 
signals,  721 

Kamiri,  see  Yantruwunta,  and  Yaurorka 

Karamundi  nation,  49-50,  97  ;  marriage 
rule,  194 ;  tribal  government,  301  ; 
rain-makers,  396  ;  food  rules,  762-3 

Karaweli-wonkana  ceremony,  see  Dieri 

Kaura  tribe,  infanticide,  749 

Keane,  A.  H.,  31,  32 

Kempe,  H. ,  727,  728-35 

Keramin  tribe,  195 

Kerinma  tribe,  52 

Kirkham,  J.  H.,  64,  113,  226,  324,  333, 
399,  691,  729-34 

Knopwood,  Rev.  — ,  313 


Kombaingheri  tribe,  84 ;  class  names, 
105  ;  marriage,  268-9 

Kongait  tribe,  49,  98 

Kongulu  tribe,  class  system,  111-12; 
marriage  rules,  220 

Kreft,  Gerard,  17 

Kiihn,  Julius,  67,  416 

Kuinmurbura  tribe  and  nation,  60,  64  ; 
class  system,  1 1 1 ;  marriages,  2 1 8  20 ; 
betrothal,  219  ;  remarriage  of  widow, 
220  ;  rain-makers,  399  ;  burial,  '471  ; 
message-stick,  709-10 

Kukata  tribe,  47,  66  ;  burial,  450 

Kulin  nation,  54,  70 ;  class  system,  126-7  '< 
marriage  rules,  252-3  ;  tribal  govern- 
ment, 308-9  ;  Headmen,  309  ;  stone 
quarry,  311  ;  tribal  council,  324;  evil 
magic  and  roasting,  365  ;  legends, 
485;  tribal  All-father,  491-2;  initiation 
ceremonies,  609  ;  method  of  enumera- 
tion, 702-3;  barter,  718;  cannibal- 
ism, 752  ;  food  rules  and  daily  life, 
767 

Kulpi  ceremony,  see  Dieri 

Kumbukabura  tribe,  63 

Kundri,  see  Turrbal  tribe 

Kunki,  see  Dieri 

Kurbin-aii  ceremonies,  see  Turrbal 

Kuringal  ceremonies,  see  Yuin,  and 
Wolgal 

Kuriwalu  tribe,  gesture  language,  727-34 

Kurnai  tribe,  73-6,  134  ;  Bunjil-baul, 
73-4  ;  totems,  135  ;  sex  totems,  147- 
50;  relationship  terms,  168;  marriage 
and  descent,  171,  272  ;  Diagram 
XXIV.,  marriages  and  descents,  270  ; 
intermarrying  localities,  271-2  ;  elope- 
ment, 273-9;  mother-in-law,  279; 
wife's  father,  279-80  ;  Headmen,  317- 
18;  tribal  council,  325-6;  nungi- 
nangit,  345-8  ;  blood -feud,  348-52  ; 
Brewin,  356;  magical  roasting,  361-2; 
belief  in  clairvoyance  before  death, 
371  ;  fat- taking,  372  ;  evil  magic, 
376-8;  Mulla-mullung(medicine-man), 
379-80,  408-9;  song-charm,  388; 
Birraark  (medicine-man),  388-93,  416- 
18  ;  rain-makers,  397  ;  burial,  458  ; 
bret,  459-60  ;  legend  of  Lohan,  485  ; 
Muk-kurnai,  487;  tribal  All-father, 
490,  492-3  ;  Jeraeil  ceremonies,  616- 
38  ;  bull-roarers,  628  ;  messengers, 
690,707;  message-stick,  706-7;  signal, 
722-3  ;  gestures,  725  ;  names  from 
youth  to  age,  736-9  ;  nose  perforation, 
741;  op)ossum-skin  rugs,  742;  cica- 
trices, 743-4  ;  infanticide,  750;  canni- 
balism, 752  ;  food  rules,  756-9  ;  kind- 
ness to  wives,  766  ;  consequence  of 
eating    forbidden    food,     769  ;     ball- 


INDEX 


813 


playing,  770;  fire  drill,  773  ;  camping 

rules,  773-4 
Kurnandaburi  tribe,  49,  96  ;  Gaura,  97  ; 

betrothal  and  marriage,  192 
Kuurn-koppan-noot  tribe,  69 

Lachlan  River  tribes,  class  system,  107  ; 
marriage  rules,  211-13  ;  DiagramXIV., 
marriages  and  descents,  213 

Lake  Eyre  tribes,  44-9 ;  reception  of 
messengers,  685  ;  legends  of,  see  Ap- 
pendix, 779-806 

Lalor,  J.,  58,  io8-io,  304,  432,  439, 
469,  722,  739,  769 

Lance,  T.  E. ,  103,  199,  203 

Lang,  Andrew,  143,  152-3,  753 

Lang,  Dr.  Dunmore,  754 

Lang,  G.  D.,  754 

Latham,  R.  M.,  2 

Legendary  1>eings,  475  ;  Mura-muras, 
475  ;  legends  as  to,  476-82  ;  Arunta, 
482-4  ;  Yerkla-mining.  484  ;  Wotjo- 
baluk,  484,  485  ;  Wunmjerri,  484, 
485;  Kurnai,  485-6  ;  Mnk-kurnai,  487 

Legends,  Perigiindi,  95-6  ;  of  Loan,  134, 
485  ;  sacred,  486-8  ;  of  initiation,  645- 
55  ;   Lake  Eyre  tribes,  779-806 

Leitchi-leitchi  tribe,  52,  689 

Lethbridge,  K.  C. ,  468 

Life,  daily,  of  Kulin,  772 

localities,  intermarrying,  Yuin,  262 ; 
Kurnai,  271-2 

Logan,  W. ,  709,  727-9,  731-4 

Lucas,  William,  274,  278 

Luebben,  A.,  289 

Lyddeker,  R..  31 

M'Alpine,  J.,  134,  274,  769-70 

Macdonald,  D.,  no 

M'Gillivray,  J.,  3,  10,  26 

M'Keachie,  A.  M. ,  693 

M'Kinlay,  Dr.  E.  M.,  85,  334.  367,  376, 
380,  381,  383-4,  401,  404,  451,  452. 
465,  485,  496,  572,  574,  644,  686, 
721,  725,  749,  785 

M'Kinlay,  J.,  685 

M'Lean,  Hon.  A.,  440 

M'Lennan,  J.  F.,  on  Levirate,  281 

Macleod,  J.  C,  743 

Macquarie,  Lake,  tribe,  legendary  being, 
496-7 

Magic,  evil,  projecting  magical  substances, 
357-8,  365-7- 371.  400,402;  "pointing 
the  bone  "  orotherwi.se,  359-61  ;  u.seof 
human  fat,  see  Fat ;  roasting  or  burn- 
ing substances,  360-1,  362,  364,  365-6; 
clairvoyance  liefore  death,  Ixjlief  in, 
371,  466;  Barn  and  Bulk,  376-8, 
439  ;    charms  and   ceremonies   to    in- 


fluence food  supply,  399-400,  798  ; 
omens  and  warnings,  400.  402  ;  in- 
herent to  tract  of  country,  403  ;  fear 
of  transference  by  food,  767  ;  c-ffects 
of,  in  forbidden  food,  769-70 

Maiden,  J.  H.,  432,  471 

Maitland  tribe,  nose  flattening,  743 

Malku-malku-ulu  legend,  see  Legends  of 
initiation 

.Maiming,  James,  501 

Maranoa  tribe,  burial,  467-8 

Maraura-speaking  trites,  ceremonies  of, 

675 

Mardala  tribe,  74;  stone  axes,  312; 
skins,  714 

Marriage,  by  capture,  see  Female  captives ; 
ceremony,  Dieri,  18 1-2  ;  Kuinmurbura, 
193  ;  Wide  Bay  trilie,  237 ;  Wotjo- 
baluk,  Mukjarawaint,  245  ;  Wurun- 
jerri,  255  ;  Gringai,  267  ;  by  ex- 
change, Dieri,  177  ;  Wiradjuri,  211  ; 
Wide  Biiy,  237  ;  Wurunjerri,  243  ; 
Gournditch-mara,  249  ;  Yuin,  264  ; 
group,  Dieri,  179-87  ;  Parnkalla,  191  ; 
Kurnandaburi.  192-3;  Wiimbaio, 
195  ;  Geawe-gal,  216  ;  Kuinmurbura, 
219  ;  Wakelbura,  224  ;  N'arrang-ga, 
260;  rules,  Dieri,  175-81  ;  Urabunna, 
176,  188;  Yenda-karangu,  187-8; 
Urabunna  totemic,  188  ;  Dieri  and 
Urabunna  compared,  189;  Kurnanda- 
buri, 192-3  ;  Darling  River  trilies, 
Wiiml>aio,  194  ;  Ya-itma-thang,  196  ; 
Wolgal  and  Ngarigo,  197;  Kamilaroi, 
200- 1  ;  compared  with  Dieri,  201  ; 
anomalous,  Kamilaroi,  203-4  ;  Wirad- 
juri, 208-11;  Raraba-baraba,  211; 
Liichlan  River  tribe,  211-13;  Wong- 
hibon.  213-16  ;  Geawe-gal,  216;  Big- 
ambul,  Wollaroi,  217  ;  Unghi,  Kuin- 
murbura, 218  ;  Kongahi,  220  ;  Wakel- 
bura, 221-2;  inter-tribal  marriages, 
225-6  ;  Buntamurra,  226-7  ;  Kaiabara, 
228-30  ;  Muruburra,  230 ;  Mary- 
borough tribes,  233-4  ;  Wide  Bay 
tribes,  236-7  ;  Arunta,  238-9  ;  Wara- 
munga,  239-40;  Wotjolwluk,  240-3; 
Mukjarawaint,  243 ;  Gournditch-mara, 
249 ;  trilK's  of  South-west  X'ictoria, 
250-1  ;  Buandik,  251-2  ;  Kulin,  252- 
3 ;  Wurunjerri,  253-5  ;  Bunurong, 
Bangerang,  Yerkla-mining,  257  ;  Nar- 
rang-ga,  258-60;  Narrinyeri,  260; 
Murring  trilies,  261-2;  (jringai,  266-7  ; 
Port  Stephens  trilx:,  Port  Jackson 
tribes,  268  ;  Komlmingheri,  268-9  ; 
Kurnai,  272  ;  Chepara,  280 

Marriages,  Tippa-malku.  177;  Parn- 
kalla equivalent,  191  ;  Kurnanda- 
buri    equivalent,      192-3  ;      unhinful. 


8i4 


NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


punishment  of,  183,  194,  196,  208, 
217,  222-4,  232,  246,  247,  255,  264, 
332  ;  inter-tribal,  185,  225-6,  248-9, 
252-3  ;  limitation  of,  186  ;  summary 
of  limitations,  282-6;  Pirrauru,  181  ; 
Parnkalla  equivalent,  191;  Kurnanda- 
buri  equivalent,  192-3 ;  Wakelbura 
equivalent,  224  ; 

Marula  tribe,  449  ;  cannibalism,  449, 
751  ;  food-supply  ceremonies,  797-8 

Maryborough  tribes,  58-9,  60,  117  ;  class 
system,  117;  marriage  rules,  231-4; 
betrothal,  232 ;  unlawful  marriages, 
232  ;  elopement,  233 ;  female  captives, 
233.  235-6  ;  hospitality  to  friendly 
stranger.  234-5;  remarriage  of  widow, 
236;  mother-in-law,  236;  tribtal 
council,  323  ;  punishment  of  offences, 
333 ;  burial,  470,  498 :  Dora  cere- 
monies, 599-606  ;  messengers,  691  ; 
message -stick,  694-5;  names  from 
youth  to  age,  740  ;  nmtilations,  747  ; 
infanticide,  750  ;  cannibalism,  753 ; 
kindness  to  aged  and  infirm,  766 

Mathew,  Rev.  J.,  5,  24-5,  27,  143 

Medicine-man,  definition  of,  355-7,  410- 
13;  use  of  quartz  crystal,  357-8; 
magical  practice,  358-67  ;  alleged  use  of 
poison,  362-3;  use  of  human  fat  and 
fat-taking,  367-76  ;  curative  practices, 
378-386 ;  alleged  power  to  fly,  359, 
374  ;  to  visit  sky-land,  386-98  ;  animal 
familiars,  387-8 ;  alleged  power  to 
assume  other  forms,  374  ;  the  Run- 
jil-yenjin,  274-6;  rain-makers  and 
weather-changers,  394-9  ;  the  making 
of  medicine-men,  404-10  ;  songs  and 
song-makers,  413-25 

Message-sticks,  69i-7io;  of  Bathalibiira, 

"3 
Messengers,    678-91  ;    inter -tribal,    83, 

686-7,  689-90 
Meyer,  H.  E.  A.,  672 
Milky  Way,  see  Beliefs 
Milpulko  tribe,  50  ;  class  system,  98 
Mindari  ceremony,  see  Dieri 
Mining  tribe,  see  Yerkla-mining 
Minkani  ceremonies,  798 
Moatatunga  tribe.  68 
Mogullum-bitch  tribe,  77 
Moon,  see  Beliefs 
Moreton  Bay  tribe,  cicatrices,  746 
Morgan,  J.,  307,  340,  443,  702,  718,  750 
Morgan,  Lewis  H.,  103  ;  theory  of  classi- 

ficatory  system  of  relationships,    156, 

199 
Mother-in-law,  avoidance  of,  by  Ngarigo, 

Wolgal,    and    Ya-itma-thang,     199; 

Kamilaroi,  208  ;   Maryborough  tribes, 

236  ;  Wide  Bay  tribes,  237  ;  Wurun- 


jerri,  256-7  ;  Narrang-ga,  260  ;  Yuin, 

266 ;    Gringai,    267  ;     Kurnai,    279  ; 

Chepara,  280-1 
Moths,  gathering  of  tribes  to  eat,  793 
Muirhead,  J.   C. ,   62,    112,   148,   221-6, 

303.    399.   402.   474.   609,    691,    694, 

748,  769,  ^^^ 

Mukjarawaint  tribe,  69 ;  betrothal,  243-4 ; 
marriage,  245  ;  tribal  government, 
304  ;  Headmen,  304-5  ;  punishment  of 
offences,  334  ;  magic,  369  ;  fat-taking, 
371  ;  clairvoyance  before  death,  371  ; 
I^ngal  (medicine- man),  371,  393  ; 
burials,  453;  tribal  AH  father,  491  ; 
Ganitch  ceremonies,  615  ;  infanticide, 
749  ;  cannibalism,  749  ;  food  rules, 
764-5  ;  ball-playing,  770 

Muk-kurnai,  see  Legendary  beings 

Mundainbura  tribe,  message-stick  of,  ex- 
plained by  Dalebura  men,  709 

Mura-muras,  see  Legendary  beings 

Murdu  legend,  by  S.  Gason,  476 ;  by 
Otto  Siebert,  48 1 

Murdus,  Dieri,  91  ;  Wonkanguru,  92  ; 
Yenda-karangu,  93  ;  Urabunna,  Nga- 
meni,  94  ;  Wonkamala,  95  ;  distribu- 
tion of,  96 

Murray,  Hugh,  752 

Murray,  R.  A.  F. ,  17 

Murray,  Stewart,  20 

Murray  River  tribes,  51 

Murring  tribes,  79 ;  marriage  rules, 
261-2  ;  betrothal,  262-3  ;  elopement, 
263-4 ;  gesture  language,  734 ;  in- 
fanticide, 748-50 

Muruburra  tril^e,  class  system,  117  ; 
marriage  rule,  230 ;  food-supply  charm, 
400  ;  cicatrices,  746 

Mutabura  tribe,  63-4 

Muthi-muthi  tribe,  50,  52 

Mutilations.Turrbal,  Maryborough  tribes, 
Port  Stephens  tribe,  Dalebura,  747 

Names  from  youth  to  age,  736-9,  740  ; 
personal  names,  739  ;   Bigambul,  739 

Narrang-ga  tribe,  67  ;  class  system,  130  ; 
marriage,  258-60  ;  elopement,  259  ; 
female  captive,  260  ;  mother-in-law, 
260  ;  exchange  of  wives,  260  ;  tribal 
government,  313  ;  Headmen,  313 ; 
tribal  council,  324;  Gurildra  (medicine- 
man), 405  ;  burial,  450 ;  initiation 
ceremonies,  671-2;  message-stick,  703, 
704-6  ;  smoke  signals,  722 ;  food  rules, 
762 

Narrinyeri  tribe,  68 ;  totems,  131  ; 
marriage,  260  ;  betrothal,  260  ;  elope- 
ment, 261  ;  female  captives,  261  ; 
tribal  council,  325  ;  Headman,  314  ; 
punishment    of   offences,    341  ;    food- 


INDEX 


815 


supply  charm,  399-400  ;  evil  magic, 
362  ;  the  tribal  All-father,  488  ;  initia- 
tion ceremonies,  673-5  <  message-stick, 
706  ;   food  rules,  763,  764 

Naseby,  C,  57,  204,  303,  332,  343,  376, 
401,  466,  594,  688,  721,  743 

Nation,  definition  of,  44 ;  Itchumundi, 
49  ;  Karamundi,  49,  50  ;  Barkiiiji,  50; 
Wotjobaluk,  55  ;  Kamilaroi,  56-57 ; 
Wiradjuri,  56,  105  ;  Kulin,  70  ;  Kuin- 
murbura,  1 1 1 

Naualko  tribe,  50 

Nauo  tribe,  47 

Ngameni  murdus,  94  ;  food-supply  cere- 
monies, see  Dieri 

Ngarigo  tribe,  77-8  ;  class  system,  loi, 
102  ;  marriages,  197  ;  betrothal,  198  ; 
elopement,  198;  remarriage  of  widows, 
199  ;  tribal  government,  302  ;  Head- 
man, 302  ;  burial,  461-2  ;  initiation 
ceremonies,  563  ;  messenger,  686-7  '• 
message  -  stick,  693;  smoke  signal, 
720-1  ;  gesture  language,  732  ;  canni- 
balism, 748  ;  food  rules,  759-60 ; 
ball-playing,  770 ;  Ngarigo  and  Wol- 
gal  fire  drill,  771-2 

Ngurawala  tribe,  graves,  449  ;  reception 
of  messengers,  685-6 

Nose-perforation,  Kurnai,  740  ;  Wift-un- 
jerri,  Yuin.  at  Port  Stephens,  Turrbal, 
Chepara,  741  ;  flattening  nose,  Yuin, 
Wiimbaio,  Maitland  tribe,  743 

Occtipations,  hereditary,  in  Herbert  River 
tribes,  720 

O'Donnell,  W.,  93 

Offences,  punishment  of,  by  Dieri,  183, 
326-32  ;  Tongaranka,  Kamilaroi, 
Wiradjuri,  332  ;  Maryljorough  tribes, 
Buntamurra,  Kaiabara,  Turrbal,  333  ; 
Wiimbaio,  334  ;  Wotjobaluk,  334, 
370 ;  Mukjarawaint,  334  ;  tribes  of 
South-west    Victoria,    335-6  ;    Yuin, 

342  ;   Kamilaroi,  Gringai,  Geawe-gal, 

343  ;   Kurnai,  344-8  ;  Chepara.  355 
Omens  and  warnings,  400-2 

Omeo    tribe,     see    Ya-itma-thang ;     see 

Theddora 
Organisation,  local  and  social,  42 
O'Rourke,  J.,  197,  354 

I'ainchunga  tribe,  69 

Palmer,  E. ,  105,  no,  236,  268 

Pardnappa,      initiation     ceremony,      see 

Parnkalla 
Parent    and    child    marriage,    how    pre- 
vented, 284  St/f. 
Parker,  Protector  E.  S. ,  443,  459,  49a 
Parnkalla  tribe,  47,  67  ;  betrothal,  191  ; 


Warrara  ceremony,  667-8  ;  Pardnappa 
ceremony,  668-9  ;  Wilyalkinyi  cere- 
mony, 669-71 

Paruinji  tribe,  50  ;  class  system,  99 

Peek-whuurong  tribe,  69 

Perigundi  legend,  see  Dieri 

Petrie,  Tom,  137,  237,  323,  333,  385, 
399,  401,   418,    445,    470,    581,   740, 

741.  747.  753.  755.  768 
Physical  features  of  South  east  Australia, 

34-40 

Pinya,  see  Dieri 

Pirrauru,  see  Marriage 

Pitcheri  expedition,  see  Dieri 

"Pointing  the  bone,"  Dieri,  359-60; 
Tongaranka,  360;  Wotjobaluk,  361, 
368  ;  Kurnai.  361  2  ;  Jajaurung.  363  ; 
Mukjarawaint,  369  ;  Wiradjuri,  magi- 
cal pointing,  361 

Poison,  alleged  use  of,  362 

Port  Jackson  triljes,  marriage  rules,  268  ; 
Headmen,  315;  burial,  463-4;  initia- 
tion ceremonies,  566-9 

Port  Macquarie  trilje,  Kabbarah  cere- 
monies, 576-8 

Port  Phillip  blacks,  burial.  458 

Port  Stephens  tril)e,  marriage  rules,  268  ; 
Headmen,  316;  rain-dispersers,  371  ; 
burial,  465  ;  legendary  beings,  496 ; 
Coen,  496;  initiation  ceremonies,  572- 
4;  gestures,  726;  nose -perforation, 
741  ;  mutilation,  747 

Projecting  evil  substances,  see  Magic 

Punishment  of  offences,  326-48  ;  for 
transgressing  class  laws,  183,  194,  196, 
208,  222,  332 

Purbung  ceremonies,  see  Ta-tathi 

Quartz  crystal,  use  of,  by  medicine-men, 

357-8 
Queensland  tribes,  some  of,  58.  59,  60 
Qiieenslandcr,  the,  n  1 ,  220 

Rainbow,  see  Beliefs 

Rainfall,  tables  of,  39 

Rain-makers  and  weather -changers,  see 
Medicine-man 

Red-ochre  pigment  (Wilya),  762;  ex- 
peditions, see  Dieri.  and  Yantruwunta 

Relationships,  classificatory  system  of, 
156;   Dieri.  158;   Kurnai.  168 

Ridley,  Rev.  William,  4,  103,  199,  202, 
203,  494,  502-3         ^ 

Roasting,  see  Magic 

Roe,  D.  Elphinstone,  129,  258,  313,  484, 

744.  746 
Roth,  H.  Ling,  4,  8,  31 
Roth,  Dr.  W.  E.,  42.  65,  118 
Rugs;  opossum,  of  Kurnai,  742 


8i6        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


Rusden,  G.   W.,  7,  84.  105,  216.  316, 
335.  344.  383.  441.  464.  569,  570,  689 

Sacrifice,  alleged,  at  Bunya-Bunya  feast, 

754-6 
Salic  I^w.  maternal  descent  in.  286-294  : 

diagrams,  288,  291 
Sandstone,  expeditions  for,   see  Yantni- 

wunta 
Scars,  raised,  see  Cicatrices 
Schmid,  Dr.  Keinhold,  283 
SchCirmann,  C.  W. .  191,  667 
Scott.  William,  151,  383,  465,  496,  572, 

574.  741 
Scisons.  see  Beliefs 
Sex  totems.  147-151 
Shaw,  James.  128,  427,  436 
Siebert,    Rev.    Otto,    182,    187,   328-30, 
359.    427.   428,   431.   433.   434.    448i 
449.   450.    475.    655.   657.   658,   683. 
.685,  715,  717,  725,  748.  751 
Signals,  720-3 
Sky.  see  Beliefs 
Smith,    Mrs.   J.   S.,   68,    123,   251.  252, 

434.  490 
Smith.  Dr.  William.  293 
Smyth,  R.  Brough.  5,  15,  754 
Songs  and   song-makers,    Kurnai,    275, 
377.  388.  397,  437  ;  Jajaurung,  369  ; 
Wolgal,  414,  424  :   Molongo  song  and 
dance,     416;     Woeworung.    420-22; 
V'uin,  423  ;   Wiimbaio,  428 
Spencer,  Professor  Baldwin,  14,  94 
Spencer  and  Gillen,  38,  42,  88,  93,  119, 
144.   IS'.    152.    188,   238-40,  410-13, 
475-  482,  506.  510 
Spirits,  see  Beliefs 
StJihle.    Rev.   J.    H.,   69,   124,  249,  306. 

455.  699,  765 
.Stanbridge,  W.  E. ,  427.  440,  459 
Stars,  see  Beliefs 
Stewart,  D.  U. ,  123,  146 
Stokes,  J.  Lort,  11,  26 
Stone  a.xes,  Kuiin  quarry,  311  ;  making 
of  by  KuIin  and  Kurnai,  311-12;  by 
Mardala,    312;    quarry    at    Charlotte 
Plains,  340,  689 
Sun,  see  Beliefs 

Sutton,  T.  M.,  67,   260,   316,  325.  401, 
434,  451,  672.  705,  722,  762 

Tableland  tribes,  jj 

Taloinjunga  tribe^  68 

Talungun  initiation  ceremonies,  see  Bun- 

urong 
Tangara  tribe,  49  ;  cannibalism,  449-50, 

75.1 
Taplin,  F.  W^,  68,  130,  147,  260-x,  314, 

325.  341.  706,  763 


Taplin,  Rev.  G.,  68,  130,  260-r,  314, 
325,  362,  434,  488,  673 

Taruinbura  tribe,  61 

Tarumbul  tribe,  62 

Ta-tathi  trilie,  50,  52  ;  totems,  100 ; 
betrothal.  195  ;  marriage  rule,  195  ; 
female  captives,  195  ;  Purbung  cere- 
monies, 590  ;  infamicide,  750 

Tate,  Professor  R. ,  18 

Theddora,  77-8,  marriage  rule  and  be- 
trothal, 196  ;  elopement,  196  ;  tribal 
government,  301,  302;  blood-teud, 
353-4;  burial,  460-1  ;  tribal  All-father, 
493 

Thomas,  William,  252-3,  308-9,  430, 
484,  492,  612,  766 

Threlkeld,  Rev.  L.  K.,  25,  84.  496-7 

Thunder,  sec  Beliefs 

Tidni  or  Hillori  tribe,  47 

Tikovina  of  HerlKTt  River  tril)es,  499 

Tilbabura  tribe,  63 

Tippa-malku,  see  Marriage 

Tirari  legend,  800 

Tongaranka  tritie,  49,  98  ;  tribal  govern- 
ment, 301  ;  Headmen,  301  ;  punish- 
ment of  offences,  332  ;  "  pointing  the 
bone,"  360;  burial,  451;  message- 
stick,  692  ;   infanticide,  749 

Torrance,  Rev.  Dr.,  418 

Totems,  of  Kongalu,  112;  Bathalibura, 
1x3;  trib<?s  of  South-west  Victoria, 
125;  Yerkla.  129;  Narrinyeri.  131; 
Kurnai,  135,  146;  Wiradjuri,  Arunta, 
144  ;  Wotjobaluk,  144-5  I  Buandik, 
146 ;  sex  totems  of  Kurnai,  147  ; 
Yuin,  133,  147,  150;  Wurunjerri, 
Port  Stephens,  'I'urrbal,  150;  Wotjo 
nation  mortuary  totems,  453-5 

Totems  and  totemism,  144-7  '<  totemism, 

151-5 

Travis,  J.,  19 

Tribal  government,  295  ;  Dieri,  297  ; 
Yaiirorka,  300 ;  Tongaranka,  Kara- 
mundi,  Wiimbaio,  301  ;  Theddora, 
301,  302  ;  Yuin,  Kamilaroi,  302  ; 
Wiradjuri,  Wakelbura,  303;  Dalebura. 
Unghi,  Higambul,  Kaiabara,  Wotjo 
nation,  Mukjarawaint,  304 ;  Gourn- 
ditch-mara,  305;  tribes  of  South-west. 
Victoria,  306-7;  Wurunjerri,  307; 
Kulin,  307-9;  Narrang-ga,  313; 
Narrinyeri,  Yuin,  314;  Port  Jackson 
triljes,  315  ;  Geawe-gal,  316 

Tribe,  definition  of,  41 

Tribes  with  two  classes  and  female 
descent,  90,  175  ;  four  sub-classes  and 
fepiale  descent,  103,  199  ;  four  sub- 
classes and  male  descent,  114,  228  ; 
eight  sub -classes  and  male  descent, 
118,  237  ;  anomalous  class  system  and 


INDEX 


817 


female  descent,  120,  240  ,  two-class 
system  and  male  descent,  126,  252  ; 
anomalous  social  organisation  and  male 
descent,  129,  257  ;  without  class 
systems,  134,  269 

Tribes,  coast,  65,  81 

Turrbal  tribe,  86,  136  ;  betrothal,  237  ; 
marriage,  237  ;  mother-in-law,  237  ; 
remarriage  of  widow,  237  ;  tribal 
council,  323  ;  punishment  of  offences, 
333  ;  weather-changers,  398  ;  Kundri 
(medicine-men),  399;  burial,  469-70; 
Kurbin-aii  ceremony,  595-9  ;  message- 
stick,  694  ;  names  from  youth  to  age, 
740;  perforation  of  nose,  741;  mutila- 
tions, 747  ;  caimibalism,  752-3 

Tylor,  Dr.  E.  B.,  8,  29 

Umba  ceremonies,  see  Wakelbura 
Unghi    tribe,    57 ;    class    system,    108  ; 

betrothal,   217  ;  marriage  rules,  218  ; 

tribal  government,  303  ;   burial,  467 
Ungorri    tribe,    58;    class   names,    no; 

compared  with   Bigambul  and  Emon, 

109 
Universe,  see  Fteliefs 
Urabunna  tribe,  48  ;  nmrdus,  94  ;  Arunta 

class  system  ahered  by  Urabunna,  139  ; 

marriage  rules,  175;  totemic  marriages, 

188  ;    comparison    with     Dieri,     189 ; 

legend  of  I'irha-malkara,   787-91  ;   of 

Kakakudana,  800-1 

Vernon,  E.  R. ,  689 

Victoria,  tribes  of  South-west,  54,  69  ; 
totems,  121,  125;  betrothal,  251; 
marriage  rules,  250 ;  tribjil  govern- 
ment, 306-7  ;  Headman,  306  ;  punish- 
ment of  offences,  335-6  ;  burial,  455-8  ; 
cannibalism,  457  ;  tribal  Ail -father, 
489  ;  ceremonies  of  initiation,  615  ; 
messengers,  690  ;  message-sticks.  699  ; 
food  rules,  765 

Vogelsang,  H.,  727-35-  737.  745 

Waang,  Kulin  class  name,  126,   127 

Wakelbura  trilje,  62  ;  class  system,  112; 
marriage  rules  and  descent,  221  ;  elo|>e- 
ment,  222-5  '<  punishn\ent  of  unlawful 
marriage,  222-3  ;  female  captives,  225  ; 
tribal  council,  302  ;  tribal  govern- 
ment, 303  ;  rain-makers  and  weather- 
changers,  399  ;  burial,  471,  474  ; 
Umba  ceremonies,  607-9;  messengers, 
691  ;  message -sticks,  694  ;  counting 
of  children,  748  ;  food  rules,  769  ; 
camping  rul(!S,  776-7 

Wallace,  Dr.  A.  K.,  12,  13,  15 

Wamba-wamba  tril)e,  52 


Waramunga  tribe,  class  system,  239  ; 
marriage  rules,  240;  Diagram  XXL, 
Waramunga  marriages,  240 

Warrara  ceremonies,  sec  Parnkalla 

Water,  obtained  from  roots  of  Mallee,  51  ; 
customs  connected  with  drinking,  402 

Wathi-wathi  tribe,  50,  52  ;  burial,  452  ; 
tribal  All-father,  493-4  ;  Burbung  cere- 
monies, 590-3 

Weapons,  various,  265;  murriwun,  277; 
.stone  a.\es,  311 -12;  shields,  337; 
boomerangs,  339  ;  used  in  nungi- 
nungit,  347  ;  spear- throwers,  457  ; 
of  Yuin,  718-19;  of  Verkia- mining, 
761 

Wengen-marongeitch  tribe,  55 

White  Cliffs  tribe,  see  Muruburra 

Wiantunga  tribe,  69 

Wide  Hay  tribe,  marriage  rules,  236  ; 
elopement,  236 

Widow,  remarriage  of,  Kurnandaburi. 
'P3  ;  ^'g^rigo,  199  ;  Kaniilaroi,  207  ; 
Wollaroi,  217;  Kuinmurbura,  220; 
Wakelbura,  224  ;  Dalebura,  227  ; 
Maryborough  tribes,  236  ;  Wide  Bay 
tribe,  lurrball,  237  ;  Wotjoljaluk. 
248;  triljes  of  South-west  Victoria, 
250;  Buandik,  252  ;  Wurunjerri,  257  ; 
Yerkla-mining,  258  ;  Yuin,  266;  Dieri, 
period  of  mourning,  724 

Wife's  father,  care  of,  see  Father 

Wiimljaio  trilje,  51-3;  class  system,  100; 
l)etrothal,  194;  marriage,  194;  elop>e- 
ment,  194;  female  captive.  195;  trib-al 
council,  301  ;  Headmen,  301  ;  punish- 
ment of  offences,  334  ;  Mekigar  (medi- 
cine-man). 366-8,  380,  404;  evil  magic 
by  projectile,  366  ;  human  fat  in  magic, 
367-8  ;  food-supply  superstition,  399  ; 
burial,  451-2  ;  tribal  All-father,  489  ; 
messengers,  686  ;  barter,  717;  names 
from  youth  to  age,  739  ;  nose  flatten- 
ing, 743 

Wilkinson,  C.  S. ,  16 

Williams,    H.,   65,  450,  667,  728,  729- 

35.  745.  749.  762 
Wiipadrina  ceremony,  see  Dieri 
Willuri  and  Hilleri  trilies,  smoke  signal, 

720 
Wilya  tribe,  49  ;  class  .system.  97,  98 
Wilyalkinyi  ceremony,  see  Parnkalla 
Wilyaru  ceremony,  see  Dieri 
Wiradjuri  tribe  and  nation,  55,  56  ;  class 
system,  106  ;  marriages  and  descents, 
208-11  ;   betrothal,   210;  exchange  of 
sisters,    211  ;    Headmen,    303;    tribal 
council,  303  ;  tribal  government,  303  ; 
punishment  of  offences,  332  ;   magical 
pointing,  360-1  ;  tx;lief  in  clairvoyance 
before   death,    371;    Wulla  -  mullung 


8i8        NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA 


(medicine-man),  373;  Milky  Way,  432; 
burial,  465  ;  Burbung  ceremony, 
583  -  8  ;  messenger,  687  ;  message- 
stick,  693  ;  food  rules,  764  ;  camping 
rules,  776  ;  Diagram  XIII.,  Wiradjuri 
marriages  and  descents,  209 

Wirrarap,  see  Kulin  ;  see  Wurunjerri 

Wives,  exchange  of,  by  Wiimbaio,  195  ; 
Narrang-ga,  260 ;  Kurnai,  266 

Woeworung  tribes,  53,  71  ;  class  system, 
127 

Wolgal  tribe,  77-8  ;  class  system,  102  ; 
marriages,  197  ;  betrothal,  197  -  8  ; 
elopement,  198  ;  Headman,  302  ; 
tribal  government,  302  ;  Bukin  (medi- 
cine-man), 373;  burial,  461-2; 
Kuringal  ceremonies,  563-5  ;  gesture 
language,  729-30,  733,  734-5  '<  food 
rules,  764  ;  camping  rules,  776 

WoUaroi  tribe,  57-8  ;  classes  and  totems, 
108;  betrothal,  217;  elopement,  217; 
remarriage  of  widow,  217  ;  messenger, 
688 

Wonghibon  tribe,  50,  56  ;  class  system, 
108  ;  marriage  rules,  213-16  ;  Bur- 
bung  ceremonies,  588 

Wonkamnla  murdus,  95 ;  Wapiya  legend, 
791-4 

Wonkanguru  tribe,  murdus,  92  ;  legend 
of  the  Yuri-ulu,  783-5 

Wotjo  nation,  punishment  of  offences, 
246  -  7  ;  Headmen,  304  ;  mortuary 
totems  and  burial,  453-5 

Wotjobaluk  tribe,  52,  54-5;  class  system, 
121  ;  marriage  rules,  241,  243;  mar- 
riage ceremony,  245  ;  elopement,  245- 
7  ;  punishment  for  unlawful  marriages, 
246  ;  female  captives,  247-8  ;  canni- 
balism, 247,  749.  751  ;  remarriage  of 
widows,  248  ;  tribal  government,  304  ; 
tribal  council,  324;  "pointing  the 
bone,"  361  ;  roasting  the  guliwil,  363- 
5;  Bangal  (medicine-man),  365,  393, 
404,  412  ;  use  of  human  fat,  368-9  ; 
beliefas  to  falling  star,  369  ;  vengeance 
party,  370 ;  evil  magic,  371  ;  rain- 
makers, 398 ;  burial,  452-3 ;  legendary 
beings,  484-5  ;  the  tribal  All-father, 
489-90, 491 ;  Ganitch  ceremonies,  615  ; 
messengers,  690  ;  message-stick,  695- 
9  ;  method  of  enumeration,  697-8  ; 
barter,  717 ;  infanticide,  749 ;  food 
rules,  764  ;  prohibited  food,  769;  ball- 
playing,  770;  Diagram  XXII.,  Wotjo- 
baluk marriages  and  descents,  242 

Wudthaurung,  70  ;  stealing  stone  from 
quarry,  340 ;  punishment  of  offences, 
340  ;  evil  magic,  366 ;  method  of 
enumeration,  702 ;  infanticide,  750  ; 
cannibalism,  752 


Wurunjerri  tribe,  53,  71  ;  class  system, 
126  ;  local  distribution  of  Bunjil  and 
Waang,  127  ;  sons  of  Bunjil,  128  ; 
marriages  and  descents,  253  ;  be- 
trothal, 253  ;  elofjement,  254  ;  female 
captives,  256 ;  widow,  257  ;  Headman, 
307;  tribal  government,  307-11; 
punishment  of  offences,  336-40  ;  Nar- 
rang,  356  ;  evil  magic  by  projectile, 
365-6;  Wirrarap  (medicine- man), 
365-6,  380,  387,  412  ;  fat-taking,  373  ; 
food-supply  charm,  400  ;  Bunjil  and 
Waang  sticks,  401  ;  burial,  458  ; 
legendary  beings,  484-5  ;  Jibauk  cere- 
monies, 610-12;  message-stick,  700; 
method  of  enumeration,  701-2  ;  mes- 
senger, 702  ;  gesture  language,  727- 
35  ;  nose-p)erforation,  741  ;  food  rules, 
765-6  ;  customs  of,  767  ;  ball-pl.iying, 
770  ;  fire  drill,  771  ;  camping  rules, 
775-6;  Diagram  XXIII.,  Wurunjerri 
marriages  and  descents,  253 

Ya-itma-thang  tribe,  77-8 ;  elopement, 
196  ;  female  combat,  197  ';  feud,  374  ; 
burial,  461  ;  initiation  ceremonies, 
565-6  ;  see  Omeo  tribe  ;  see  Theddora 

Yakunbura  tribe,  message-stick,  709 

Yankibura  tribe,  64 

Yantruwunta  tribe,  48  ;  Kamiri,  92  ; 
Headmen,  299;  food-supply  ceremony, 
see  Dieri  ;  cannibalism,  449,  751  ; 
messengers,  685  ;  red -ochre  expedi- 
tion, 713  ;  sandstone  expedition,  713  ; 
barter  for  shields,  714 ;  gesture  Ian- 
gauge,  728-34 ;  legend  of  Anti-etya  and 
Ngardu-etya,  Parts  I.  and  II.,  794-6 

Yaurorka  tribe,  Kamiri,  95  ;  tribal  govern- 
ment, 300 ;  Headmen,  300  ;  food- 
supply  ceremony,  see  Dieri ;  messenger, 
684 ;  cannibalism,  780-1  ;  circumci- 
sion legend,  785-7 ;  legend  of  Tayi-tam- 
pana,  802-3 

Yelyuyendi  tribe,  food-supply  ceremony, 
see  Dieri 

Yenda-karangu  tribe,  murdus,  93  ;  mar- 
riage rules,  187-8 

Yerkla-mining,  65  ;  totems,  129 ;  be- 
trothal and  marriage,  257-8 ;  Head- 
men, 313 ;  Mobungbai (medicine-man), 
313;  disposalof  dead,  450  ;  legendary 
beings,  484  ;  initiation  ceremonies, 
664-7  ■>  cicatrices,  744-6  ;  infanticide, 
748  ;  food  rules,  761-2  ;  hunting  and 
weapons,  761 

Yetti-maralla  tribe,  61 

Yoohlang  ceremonies,  see  Port  Jackson 
tribes 

Yualaroi  tribe,  57 ;  burial,  467  ;  message- 
stick,  694  ;  prohibited  food,  769 


INDEX 


819 


Yuin  tribe,  81,  82  ;  totems,  133  ;  mar- 
riages, 262-3  ;  betrothal,  262  ;  elope- 
ment, 264  ;  remarriage  of  widow,  266  ; 
avoidance  of  mother-in-law,  266;  tribal 
government,  302  ;  Headmen,  314 ; 
tribal  council,  325  ;  punishment  of 
offences,  342-3  ;  Gommera  (medicine- 
man), 371,  376,  382,  405,  412  ;  belief 
in  clairvoyance  Ijefore  death,  371  ; 
projecting   magical    substances,    371  ; 


evil  magic,  377-8  ;  belief  as  to  thunder, 
431,  541  ;  burial,  462-3  ;  Kuringal4  u2i 
ceremonies,  516-62  ;  belief  as  to  Milky 
Way,  665  ;  barter,  718-19  ;  weapons, 
718  ;  smoke  signals,  721  ;  jjersonal 
and  family  names,  739  ;  nose  flatten- 
ing, 743  ;  cicatrices,  746 

Yuri-ulu   legend,   see   Legends   of  initia- 
tion 

Yutchin  custom,  see  Dieri 


O 


r 


THE    END 


I'rinted by  R.  &  R.  Clahk,  Li.\riTEi),  Edinburgh. 


I 


^) 


BIN»in«i   Ll«>i 


JUM    1955 


Bniversify  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 
FROM 
THIS 
POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  Limited 


